THE Habitable World DESCRIBED.

Inscribed by Permission to His Royal Highness Frederick DUKE OF YORK, etc. etc.

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

blazon or coat of arms

LONDON: Published as the Act directs, by the Author. No. 62. Wardour-Street*
Soho.

1788.

THE HABITABLE WORLD DESCRIBED, OR THE PRESENT STATE OF THE PEOPLE IN ALL PARTS
OF THE GLOBE, FROM NORTH TO SOUTH; SHOWING The Situation, Extent, Climate,
Productions, Animals, etc. of the different Kingdoms and States; Including all
the new Discoveries: TOGETHER WITH The Genius, Manners, Customs, Trade,
Religion, Forms of Government, etc. of the Inhabitants, and every thing
respecting them, that can be either entertaining or informing to the Reader,
collected from the earliest and latest Accounts of Historians and Travelers of
all Nations; With some that have never been published in this Kingdom; And,
nothing advanced but on the best Authorities.

WITH A great Variety of MAPS and COPPER PLATES, engraved in a capital Style,
the Subjects of which are mostly new, and such as have never yet been given in
any English work.

BY THE REV. DR. JOHN TRUSLER.

VOL. III.

LONDON. Printed for the AUTHOR, at the Literary-Press, No. 14,
RED-LION-STREET, CLERKENWELL; and sold by all Booksellers.

M DCC LXXXVIII.

TRAVELS THROUGH Siberia and Tartary, PROVINCES OF THE RUSSIAN EMPIRE.
By S. PALLAS, M. D. PROFESSOR OF NATURAL HISTORY, etc.
PART I. CONTINUED.
IN my way from Kalmykowa, on the 19th of August, 1769, to the next station on
the line, I met with a number of tarantulas, which every Cossack was acquainted
with, and one and all declared, that their bite was harmless. Not many miles
distant, on a tract of the high shore of the river Jaik, before we reached the
heights of the Inderskoian mountains, which extend themselves to the river, we
saw, almost every where, large flocks of antelopes feeding, which, as the wind
was in our faces, did not fly before us, the sight of this animal being
imperfect, or rendered obscure, by four spungy excrescencies on the eye;
nature, however, has favored them in the organs of smell, and made them much
superior to other animals in it is quickness and extent, for they will scent a
man or animal, if the wind is favorable, at two or three miles distance. Yet
it is wonderful that the antelopes, which seem to be constructed for swift
running, having wind-pipes almost two inches in diameter, large lungs and wide
skinny nostrils, should be soon out of breath, more so than any other animal.
This I have often observed in tame ones, which have neither been scared or
alarmed. The Inderskoian mountains, which are full of stucco, are always
crowded with them, till the Kirguese make their appearance, who hunt them
incessantly. This animal is very fond of the small, white wormwood, which grows
here in abundance. They were, now, so numerous, that the little escort, which
attended me, shot above twelve of different ages. We saw here, also, in
quantities, a peculiar species of uncommonly beautiful lizards, running about
in the sun, and a number of race-hares and marmots.

In a salt district, situated upon the heights of Tschornoijar, about 110 miles
from the Wolga, where there is not only a strong salt-lake, but, also,
stone-salt; and, again, about thirty miles east of it, are two clests in the
mountains, which the Kalmucks hold as sacred, as do the Kirguese the Jlezkian
mountain, and offer to them, as vows, harness, arms and other things, and give
this fictitious story as a reason for their so doing; -- that their Delai-Lama
had once passed a night on one and dined upon the other. In the cleft of one is
said to be some water, and the Kalmucks say, that one of their countrymen,
having once fallen into it, came out again in the Wolga, safe and unhurt.

The Inderskoi mountains are so full of salt, that the Cossacks, who set out in
spring, to fetch salt from this place, take as much fresh water with them as
they think they shall have occasion for, there being no fresh water springs.

I no sooner reached the top of this mountain, than I was struck with a large
lake, resembling an extensive plain, glittering with snow and encompassed with
heights, which, on a calculation I made, is above the level of the river Jaik.
This lake may be justly called a wonder of nature. It lies in a straight line
scarcely seven miles from the Jaik, about 125 miles south from Jaizkoi-Gorodok.
I could not determine it is extent, but the Cossacks say it is sixty miles
round; it is, apparently, about ten miles in circumference. It wears a round
form and has many bays. The water is not very deep, for I rode into it near a
quarter of mile and was not up to the girths of my saddle. The water of this
lake is so saturated with salt, that large cubic grains are constantly forming
upon the shore, when not prevented by moist weather, and it is borders seem to
be sowed with salt. From the constant evaporation of this lake, the land, all
round, is covered with a crust of salt, seven inches thick. This crust is as
hard as stone, of a pure white, and, when broke, exhibits an extraordinary
chrystalization in irregular bodies. Underneath this crust, lies a gravelly,
gray and loose salt, which may be easily pierced. I ran a Cossack lance, which
was ten feet long, down into it, without finding any bottom; of course, to what
depth this salt lies, cannot be determined. This is the salt which the Cossacks
gather, being small and fit for use, loading their little wagons in the lake
itself. They wash it with salt water, on the spot, till it loses it gray
color. I dare not venture a supposition respecting the formation of this loose
salt. I must also confess my ignorance about the origin of that fine, white
cubic salt, called, by the Cossacks, Tamosa Kaja Sol. It resembles small and
large hail, promiscously scattered on the muddy shore and touching the ground
only in one point. The largest cubes were about the size of a small walnut, the
chief no larger than peace and many not so large as the smallest hail. Their
whiteness is dazzling to the eye and they are so solid, that it was with
difficulty I could squeeze them between my thumb and finger. Their substance
seems to be a sort of alabaster-like stone, the parts of which are almost
invisible with a magnifying glass. I could not discover any chrystalline
configuration. This salt keeps itself very dry, and, notwithstanding it is soft
consistency, dissolves slower in water than stone-salt. If you pour into the
salt water a dissolved alkali, it milks very much, but, if suffered to steam
away, by boiling, without any mixture, it has the appearance and quality of
kitchen-salt, though adhering much, in crusts, about the vessel in which it is
boiled. This generation of cubic-salt, is only found after a long drowth
accompanied by storms. When I was at the lake, on the 20th of August, it was
plentifully to be met with, but on my return to it, in September, some
tempestuous rains had swept it quite away. From these circumstances it may be
concluded, that the cubic pieces of salt, are formed by some attractive power
from the particles of salt evaporated from the lake.

This mountain is full of a variety of minerals, coals, stucco, alum,
marcasites, belemnites, oyster-shells, etc. The Cossacks pick up these shells
and prepare them as a medicine for children, against acidities, pouring water
into the shell and scraping off some of it is inside substance with a knife.
They suppose, that where a flash lightning falls, such a shell will grow in the
space of three years after. The Kalmucks fetch, also, from this place, a kind
of deep-red marle, in dust, of which there are whole hills on this mountain,
and with which they paint their tent-poles red.

Of the vegetable kingdom, this mountain boasts of the bushy orach, (Atriplex
Glauca); the pretty salt-wort, (Salicornia Arabica); and, another species of
this plant, not yet discovered by botanists, (Salicornia Strobilacea). The
latter grows on the low and moist part of the borders of the salt-lake, and
both the former on the higher. Besides these, the thorny glass-wort and
(Salsola arbuscula): also, the thrift (Statice Suffruticosa).

As to the animal kingdom, I could have gathered plenty of insects from the
flat borders of the lake, brought here by storms on it is wide waters, washed
ashore dead, and perfectly preserved by the salt water. Among them were several
rare species, peculiar to the hotter parts of Asia, the large, wandering
grass-hopper, a smaller species (Gryllus Italicus), the scorpion-spider
(Phalangium Araneoides), and many more.

On the 21st of August I continued my journey along the line to the next
station, and met, in my way, with a plant which the Kalmucks drink as tea. At
Kulagina-Gorodok, a little fort, on an arm of the Jaik, more spacious indeed
than the fort Kalmykowa, but not better built, though it has a church and a
garrison of Kalmuck and Tartar soldiers, under an ataman, who commands the
whole line, but who is, himself, subordinate to the commander of Gurjef. Some
of the Tartars have, here, water-melon gardens, where this fruit thrives
uncommonly well, and from whence they supply other stations, who are in want of
this production. Among the Kalmucks lived a Sungorian priest or gellung, who
had ten scholars (Mandschi). His burchans were Ajuscha, Dshak-dschimmuni, and
another figure resembling the former, which was holding his hands across before
him, having, in the right, the sacerdotal scepter, and, in the left, the bell;
he called him Odschirrdarr. All were neatly cast in copper and strongly gilt. I
will give my readers two other Kalmuck stories, which may serve as proofs of
their auspices.

I have already mentioned that the white owl is much looked up to and
considered as a sacred, prophesying bird. To the flamingo (Phoenicopterus
ruber) known in Russia by the name of krasna, or red goose, they show an absurd
antipathy, whilst they almost make a burchan of the other. They believe the
latter to be possessed of an evil spirit, look upon it as a bird ominous of
ill, turn away their faces from it and load it with imprecations; but, of the
red duck, which is also a sacred bird, they say it is the purest of all the
winged tribe. The crane is also held to be one of the purest of birds and is,
therefore, never killed.

Near Kulagina, is a piece of Russian antiquity, worth notice. It is a
considerable intrenchment, known to the Cossacks by the name of
Marinkin-Gorodok. Marinka, it is said, was a woman, who, in former times,
committed robberies from this place. Nothing is more probable than that it owes
it is fortification and name to Marina of Senomir, spouse to one of the false
Demetriuses. Marinkin-Gorodok, lies about a mile north-east of Kulagina, where
the Jaik once had it is course, though now at the distance of three-quarters of
a mile. The intrenchment represents a direct angle with oblique sides: from one
end of the intrenchment to the other, it is 335 paces. Within the intrenchment
are, here and there, turf-hills, arising from subterraneous habitations, which
the Cossacks affirm to be there.

Before I quit this place, permit me to mention the condition of a patient
afflicted with the leprosy, a youth of twenty. -- From his infancy, he was
always said to be of an infirm constitution, but never had any distemper till
the age of fifteen; at that period, two red blotches were observed upon his
face, as broad as two thumbs. He continued, however, in good spirits and the
blotches disappeared before the year had elapsed. In the second year came
forth, by degrees, over his whole body, reddish and blue spots, accompanied by
a density of skin, with which he was afflicted when I saw him. With the leprosy
he felt a weakness in all his limbs and a smart pain in the joints. This
weakness and pain frequently attacked him to such a degree, that he was unable
to move either hand or foot, yet his joints were not the least swelled. He was
once blooded, and his blood was thick and of a high-red color. The pains were
not always equally violent, but remitted for some days and were easier: rubbing
the joints with oil of turpentine relieved him. In the third year, his mouth
and throat became full of little boils, which affected his voice, and made him,
as it were, shortbreathed. He had, also, a continual cough and dryness of
mouth. Even before the leprosy, he seemed to have the itch and it continued
with it. Notwithstanding this disorder, he had a good appetite and when the
cough and pains in his limbs did not prevent him, performed his accustomed
labor. His urine was reddish, but not unnatural. He never experienced any
inclination to venery; the palms of his hands and soles of his feet were free
from the leprosy, but the skin hardened and peeled off from them; to remedy
this, they were often anointed with fish-fat. The cause or the distemper is
unknown, but several of his mother's relations are said to have been afflicted
with the same. His parents never refused to attend him; they did not drink out
of the same vessels, but lived with him, went into the same bath and never
experienced the least of the disorder.

In my way to Gurjef, I took notice of the caperbean, (Zygophyllum fabago),
which is, in that salt quarter, a common weed and in great plenty. It was now,
the 22d of August, full of ripe seeds of which they make capers, about
Astrachan. As it was quite decayed, I could not determine it is species; so far
I could gather, that it belongs to the star-flowers, (Compositiflorae), and
it is leaves are of middle size, like those of purslain. It grows up with
straight and branching stalks, about an ell high, and bears flowers on the
point, which are said to be blue. The calix seems like that of the hawk-weed,
(Hieracium), and the seeds hairy, (pappus pilosus sessilis).

Near the station Saratschik, on the eastern side of the river Jaik, are the
ruins of a mausoleum and the remains of a Tartarian town, probably the asylum
of a Tartarian horde, which time has obliterated. The bulwark and ditch is
still to be seen, and appears to be from three to four miles in circumference.
In the middle of this area is a canal, which served as an aqueduct. Within the
bulwark are many traces, foundations and vaults of brick-buildings, which show
that in the middle of the town must have stood some considerable edifices. The
bricks are oblong and tolerably large: there are, also, some pieces of brown
stones, with impressions of shells, no where else to be seen in this
neighborhood: likewise broken pieces of china-vessels, some white, some a
beautiful yellow and highly glazed. As the whole soil of this town is extremely
wet and salt, all the iron-work, which has been found, is so much covered with
rust, as scarcely to be known what it is. It is the same with the copper and
silver found; the copper almost consumed with verdigrease and the silver
changed almost to the innermost part of the metal. I saw there, in some of the
Cossack houses, several coral-beads of diverse colors, some little, ground and
polished topazes, and some stones like cornelian. The sepulchers made here, are
of brick, and often little articles of value have been found in them.

In this place, also, was a leprous Cossack, about forty years of age, who had
been six years afflicted with this disorder. His first symptom of leprosy, was
a large, high-red spot upon his forehead, which presently disappeared; soon
after, his body became red, all over, with terrible blue spots, which made his
skin so painful that he could not bear it to be touched. Even this disappeared
in six months. After this, he felt, by degrees, a pain, but without any
swelling, in his arms and hands, which are now so much withered, as to be
useless. During the ensuing years, he felt the most violent pain in his legs
and feet: his legs swelled and the skin became thick and hard, but he never had
any ulcers in his mouth or throat. After some time, the spots disappeared
again, and have not broke out since. Other matters, were as I described in the
boy. This man had a relation who died of this disorder; yet no one is afraid to
nurse him or be about him. They all take care, however, not to eat or drink,
out of his vessels. The livid color in his face and swelled appearances, began
with the disorder and continued till I saw him.

On the 22d of August, I reached the new-erected redoubt of Gurjef. The Jaik,
here, winds and bends so much, that it would be difficult to represent it on a
map, and, after all one's trouble, it might be looked on as questionable and
unauthentic, particularly as the stream so often changes by inundations in the
spring. The whole district is a salt-mine and, in summer, the flies are
insupportable. I do not know a, more suitable punishment for malefactors than
to transport them here, and make them burn ashes of the salt-plants. Since I
have been out, I never spent so disagreeable a day, as in this redoubt, waiting
for a carriage. Among other salt-plants, I found the two following, new ones,
Polycnenum oppositi-folium and Salicornia foliata, and a species of fly that
crowded the air and tortured us exceedingly, met with about the Caspian sea,
but new and unknown in Europe.

On the 23d, arrived from Gurjef, two boats, with Mr. Lepechin, whom I met
here, but a south west wind, which continued all this day and the next,
prevented my departure for Gurjef till the 24th, in the afternoon, for, it was
impossible to cross the Jaik on horseback, there being no bridges; I went,
therefore, by water, and, by this means, avoided the flies and other vermin.
The road to Gurjef, by land, does not exceed fifteen miles, but, by water, it
was near thirty. We reached Gurjef about two o'clock in the morning, where I
found Professor Lowitz busy in his astronomical observatory. Gurjef was now the
rendezvous of scientific pilgrims, for, besides Professor Lowitz, his Assistant
Inochodzof was there and Lieutenant Euler. We could not have chosen a more
disagreeable place for this purpose, but the hospitality of the commandant,
Brigadier de Vegesak, and his social disposition, put us at our ease and made
it pleasant.

Gurjef, though small, is about seven miles from the mouth of the Jaik, which
empties itself into the Caspion sea, is one of the most regular and well built,
little forts about the river Jaik; it is works consist of a strong, square
brick-wall with bastions on it is angles. The place has but one gate facing the
river, which flows, near it. Except the house of the commanding-officer, there
is scarce a good habitation in the place. The church, like the houses, is built
of wood, except the powder-magazine, which is of stone. The garrison consists
of a company of infantry and sixty Cossacks, and here live a few merchants,
from Astrachan. The place might become flourishing, if they would encourage a
trade with the Kirguese and the situation, itself, was not so unwholesome. The
few merchants here, carry on a lucrative commerce with the Kirguese, but it
might be rendered far more considerable. There is scarce so unhealthy a place
to be met with, from spring to autumn. The fort lies in the middle of a
saltmarsh, mostly overflown in spring by seawater, driven by the southern
winds into the mouth of the Jaik. Within the fort, they have raised the ground
by art, yet the whole is so salt and loamy, that it is never dry; of course, we
breathe constantly a soul air, rendered stinking by sea-mud, even though the
weather is stormy. Within doors, one is covered with wood-lice and tarakans,
and as soon as we leave the fort, the ox-flies, (Tabanus bovmus et
occidentalis), make their attack upon us in swarms. It is no wonder that the
inhabitants sicken under such torments, yet their disorders are not so general
and mortal as one would suppose, and the garrison bill of mortality for six
years, though they have no regular surgeon, has been extremely small.
Incautious strangers generally pay the tribute of sickness at first coming, and
the scurvy in the spring here is a universal complaint; but the inhabitants
cure themselves by the leaves of the rapontic and the roots of the reed-mace,
(Typha).

The saltness of the mires is to be attributed to those most remarkable
salt-dews which, in summertime, are common about Gurjef. This, to many, will
appear an incredible phenomenon, but I am able to confirm it is truth by many
credible witnesses. It would be nothing surprising to find a salt-dew upon
flowers and plants in salt-ground, as they commonly perspire a great quantity
of salt, but even the drops of dew that gather in the free air on smooth bodies
and the moistness which enters our clothes, have a considerable degree of
saltness. Why then should it be surprising, that chemists, by a reiterated
dissolution and evaporation of salt, have found a certain diminution of the
quantity, and hence conclude, that salt may be dissolved into earth and water,
and apparently united with both? I must also take notice, that salt-dew may be
observed higher up the Jaik and, undoubtedly, the pernicious dews are of the
same kind in other hot and sultry climates.

It appears that the saltness of the soil, round Gurjef, ought not solely to be
ascribed to the seawater, for it is only the detained water of the river that
overflows this district, and the Jaik, near Gurjef, is scarce, perceptibly
salt, though the sea-winds blow. Besides, a little, stucco rock, lying not
above a mile and a half from Gurjef, westward, to every one's surprise, in a
low and miry ground, seems a confirmation of these remarks, to indicate some
hidden salt, and which may, also, be concluded from the strong saltness of the
water, which collects itself in holes made in this ground. The stucco, here, as
mostly on the Inderskoian mountains, is of the nature of selenites and from
this little hill, situated between Tschernaja Retschka and an arm of the Jaik,
runs a bank of muscle-shell ground, toward the sea. The Kirguese hold this
hill, like those of Ilezkaja, sacred. They do not assemble here to celebrate
feasts, but believe that some saint is interred therein and, therefore,
frequently there bury their dead.

The supposition of concealed salt here is more rational from the salt-lakes in
the Kirguisian step, on the opposite side of the river, where the garrison of
Gurjef may supply itself with salt, gratis.

Every species of fish found in the Jaik, crowd all the bays here and also the
lake; but, the privilege of the Jaikian Cossacks prohibits the garrison from
fishing with nets, yet the soldiers have a method of catching plenty,
especially barbel, in the shallows, with a two-spiked harpoon.

All the side-waters of the Jaik are full of frogs, among these there is a huge
species, which is also found in the Wolga, whose voice resembles the loud laugh
of a man. It might, perhaps, be of service to the French nation to send a
colony of these frogs into the rivers of France, for there is more flesh on the
hindpart of one Jaikian frog, than ten common ones, and they are equally as
delicate. The miry bottom of the Jaik breeds also a great many river-crabs, and
they are larger here than I remember to have any where seen, yet empty, lean
and of a bad flavor, and as the crabs of the Wolga, when boiled, are but of a
pale-red, those of the Jaik become only of a yellow-grey. Here are, also,
plenty of water-serpents, (Coluber Hydrus et scutatus), and the common otter,
with red spots about his neck.

There is here an undescribable quantity of wild-fowl. The bittern, several
species of sea-ravens, the least not less in size than a pidgeon; the
spoon-bill heron, brown, red, white and little white herons, and every other
kind; night-ravens, among which is the large Tantalus niger, the sea-lark,
(Hiaticula) in great abundance; but the most curious bird they have, is the
long-legged plover (Himantopus). The yelper, or Italian avosetta
(Recurvirostra), several species of gulls, (Larus cinerarius et naevius), also
terns, (Sterna hirundo, naevia, nigra); and, among the birds of prey, the
following hawks; Falco Lanarius, Pygargus, acruginosus et Nisus: among the
small birds, the rush-thrush, (turdus arundinaceus), and the tit-mouse, (parus
biarmicus), and quantities of all sorts of night-birds. In the fort itself, are
many large bats, in such quantities under the roofs, that we may hear them
scream every where. We meet also, here, with all kinds of owls, particularly
the churn-owl, (Caprimulgus), and the strix pulchella. The cause of their abode
here, is an abundance of nocturnal insects, which affords them a rich
subsistence. Swans and flamingos, (Phoenicopterus), are only seen wandering in
spring; these birds are too shy to live here, but in the more distant bays,
they are knocked down with cudgels, at moulting time, by the Cossacks, having
no wing feathers to fly and protect themselves. Here are, also, plenty of
wild-boars, which the Cossacks hunt with hounds, but not without danger, and
kill them with guns and lances. These animals frequent the rushy districts,
live on rush-roots and attain so prodigious a size, that the males shall,
sometimes, weigh above 600 lb. their color is a yellowish-brown, but their
heads and feet of an iron-grey or black. The bodies of the cubs are iron-grey,
with yellow-white spots, and are so wild as scarcely to be tamed; the fat of
the wild-boar is a hand deep, but it wastes almost all away in boiling; the
flesh, however, is sound and has not the least taste of a wild, ravenous animal.

Otter-hunting is a fine diversion in this country, and catching of sea-dogs,
which sometimes come up the river from Astrachan. Their heads and fore-feet are
so overgrown with fat, that they resemble rather bottles of fish-oil than
animals. A great deal of sea-dog oil is exported from Astrachan in the Russian
trade, and is used in the preparation of Russian hides, about Casan. With the
addition of pot-ash, they make of it, at Astrachan, a gray soap, allowed to be
incomparable for cleaning of woolens. It is sold in small, soft, flat cakes, by
the name of Astrachan or Tartarian soap.

As to the vegetable kingdom, we find, about Gurjef, the same kind of plants as
are the natives of all salt soils. One would scarcely suppose that, on such a
soil, any kind of culinary herbs would grow, but we see the reverse. The
commandant has a garden, in which grows well, melons, cucumbers for pickling,
beet, horseradish, colewort, cole-rape, parsley; and it would bring forth
tobacco, celery, cauliflowers, potatoes and water-melons.

I went down the river, between the 25th and 30th of August, to the Caspian
sea, which, at the mouth of the Jaik, is of a grey-green color, but further
out, sailors say, it is of a black-green, and that they often observe a
phosphoric splendour in it is waves.

In the Caspian-sea fisheries, the beljuga-stone, which has always, remained
problematical, is often found in the larger species of this fish, and commonly
sold at the cheap price of a few rubles. According to fishermens accounts, this
stone is always found in a sack of the rectum, or fundament-gut, through which
the fish deposes it is excrement and spawn. They are sometimes found, also, in
the largest sorts of sturgeons. I have known such stones weigh from one to
three ounces; they may, with difficulty, be scraped with a knife. Among the
Russian domestic medicines, the beljuga-stone is of great importance, though it
does not merit it. It is given to expedite hard travail, in disorders of
children and obstructions of the urethra, in small doses, scraped and mixed
with water. They ascribe these and some other inconceivable virtues to a stone
often found in the bladder of wild-boars, and sold dearer than that of the
beljuga, by the name of Kabannoi Kamen.

That the beljuga-stone is to be reckoned among animal-stones, and should not
be taken as an auricular bone or other natural parts of a fish, is proved,
besides the confirmed situation in which it is found, and their different
shapes; for, sometimes, they are quite oval and smooth, and sometimes rough and
sandy, triangular and more or less flattened; their color is bone-white and
they are of a uniform texture.

'The Caspian sea,' says Took, is, at present, no more than a great lake
confined within the land, but it is supposed, formerly, to have had a
communication with the Euxine-sea and to have spread over all those vast steps,
or deserts, of the Jaik, the Wolga and the Kalmucks. The multitude of shells
scattered over all these steps, such shells as are found in the Caspian sea
alone and are never to be met with in rivers, the uniformity of soil in all the
parts of these steps, consisting, with a very few exceptions, of a pure sand,
the general saline quality of the soil, that continued equality of country, and
that universal want of wood, etc. favor this opinion.

Not to say something of the city of Astrachan, when we are treating of places
so near it, would be unpardonable. Dr. Pallas did not visit this place himself,
but Mr. Gmelin did, in 1769, and he tells us, that this city is situated in the
midst of meadows that border the Wolga, where the river divides into a number
of branches, about sixty miles from it is entrance, into the Caspian sea; and is
built on several hills that lie within the compass of it is walls. It has a
fortress; the city is surrounded with walls, contains 2,541 houses, twenty-five
Russian churches and two convents. The Armenians have two churches, the
Lutherans one, the Roman-catholics one, and the Indians have a small
idol-temple. It has a large metropolitical church, built of brick, an
archiepiscopal palace and an archbishop. Here is a large, botanical garden and
a chemical laboratory, where they prepare salts extracted from plants, the
bitter salt of Astrachan, the juice of liquorice, distilled waters, etc. Every
Apothecary's shop, throughout the empire, belongs to the crown and they obtain,
from this place, every medicinal plant they want; the apothecary here
established, supplies all Russia with liquorice-juice and glaubers-salts, and
being near Persia, and, of course, able to procure curious simples from thence
at a cheap rate, he is frequently ordered to supply the drug-warehouses with
them, at Petersburg and Moscow. In one part of Astrachan, is the imperial
comptoir of the gardens, which contain above 300 persons. These furnish the
court of Petersburg with every kind of fruit, and are now establishing
vineyards.

In the gardens of Astrachan, grow all sorts of European, culinary herbs,
except the potatoe and the artichoke. They plant a great quantity of pimento.
Pears, apples, cherries, peaches and mulberry-trees thrive exceedingly well;
but, as caterpillars destroy most of the blossoms, they bear but little fruit.
They lay their vines underground, all-winter, and, as the heats in summer are
exceedingly sultry and showers rare, gardens are watered by wind-mills, which
raise the water from running streams into trenches, that run through the
grounds and sufficiently refresh the plants without throwing it over them.

This city having suffered prodigiously by a late fire, the court of
Petersburgh has ordered the bank to advance 170,000 rubles for building
brick-houses, which the inhabitants were to be put in possession of, on paying
the net cost of the building. The poor to be allowed ten years to pay the
money, but these buildings are carried on so slow, that many generations will
pass away before Astrachan is finished.

I returned to Gurjef on the 31st, and, though we had a dreadful storm before
us, not a single drop of rain fell upon us. As I went further on, I found that
the rain had fallen like a torrent and rendered the roads so bad, that our
horses and wheels sunk upon the salt-spots so deep, that we could not get them
out for half an hour. This violent rain had extended itself further than the
Inderskoi-mountains, for, on the 1st of September, I paid a second visit to the
salt-lake there. It was, at this time, full of Kirguese, either encamped or
wandering about with their herds, yet, though I had an escort only of four
Cossacks, they behaved most friendly and sociably. These guests had entirely
driven away the antelopes, whose arrival here is always considered as the
approach of the Kirguese, for they constantly fly before a Kirguisian
encampment.

On the 2d of September, toward night, I came to Antenowa, in my way back to
Jaizkoi-Gorodok, and, the same moment as I left it, arose a violent, hot
hurricane, called, by the Tartars, Buran, from south-west, and continued during
the whole night. The air was so close and sultry, that we had almost lost
respiration. De L'isles' thermometer was, the whole night, at 110 degrees. and,
after sunrise, when the wind was abated, at 115 degrees. Such sultry storms rising
from east and south-east, especially in autumn, in these districts, are not
rare, and are looked upon as forerunners of heavy tempests. We had just
reached Koscha-Charof on the 5th, at night, as the air was calm and somewhat
cooler, when some dreadful, tempestuous clouds, from south-east, gathered over
us and broke in showers and uninterrupted flashes of lightning, which rent the
elements, and continued, for some seconds, in form of fiery columns. On this
account, we advanced but slowly. At break of day, September 6, we reached
Budarin and, in the afternoon, Jaizkoi-Gorodok, at the distance of 361 miles.

'These winds,' says Took, are as hot as if they proceeded from the mouth of a
furnace; they generally rise about two o'clock in the afternoon and blow till
after midnight. During the time they blow, sheep will often fall down dead in
numbers: the blood foams out at their mouths, and they swell and putrify so
fast, that it is not possible to save their skins. A wind of this sort was felt
at Antibes, in Provence, in the year 1756. It happened during the greatest heat
of summer, which is well known to be very intense in that country; and the
woods, at a few leagues distance from the town, having taken fire, whereby more
than a thousand acres were consumed; it appeared to those who were exposed to
the wind, as if scalding water was thrown over them. The typhons of Egypt are
of this kind.

Jaizkoi-Gorodok. The tempest I have just now mentioned, put an end to the
present summer, and we had not one perfectly agreeable day after it. It was
time, therefore, to go to Ufa, where I designed to pass my winter; but, being
desirous first of satisfying my curiosity, by taking a view of some remarkable
things in the step-mountains here, I went, after writing down my observations,
on the 15th, to that mountainous district, from whence springs the brook Derkul
and flows more than fifteen miles above Jaizkoi-Gorodok, on the right, into the
Tschagan; and I sent two students on before me, to another brook.

A mile or two from the town, I passed the burial-place of the Tartarian
Cossacks, which is on one of the steps. Here is a wooden house of prayer and
many grave-hills, having at each southern end a pole. Several such ancient
burial-places are to be met with between both Tschagans and the Jaik, derived,
perhaps, from the Nogayans that formerly resided here, for they are not
Kirguisian tombs.

About eighteen miles from Jaizkoi-Gorodok, on a dry, hilly-step, is a high
tumulus. Several Tartars were here encamped with their herds. A salt-plant,
which I had not yet seen, was here in full bloom, (Astragalus Cornutus). Whole
flocks of bustards were here on the step and departing for warmer climes.

On the 16th, we saw many wild goats roving at some distance, Toward night it
began to rain and grew so dark, that I was obliged to spend the night in the
middle of a step, where we could scarcely gather as much brush-wood and reed as
was necessary to warm and dry ourselves. On the 17th, we returned to
Jaizkoi-Gorodok, during a continual rain. Larks, wild pigeons and other
wandering birds repaired, in great numbers, to the southern climates, which
foreboded an early winter.

On the 21st of September I set out for Ufa; but, the day before I left
Jaizkoi-Gorodok, a violent storm rose from the south-east and brought, about
night, tremendous thunder and such heavy rains as could only be compared to a
spout; so that, within an hour, the fields were covered with water six inches
deep, and, in the course of the night, the wind changed to the north-east, and
brought snow and frost so severe as to freeze the waters and make every place
around us a scene of ice. During this weather, crowds of cranes and bustards
traveled downwards along the Jaik, and vast flights of small birds, a species
of Ortolan and equal to ours in flavor, (Emberizapasserina), ran about the
roads without being the least shy.

The village Kargalinskaja, through which we passed, not many miles from
Orenburg, is delightfully situated on the north and right bank of the Samara.
The houses, which are mostly well built with stone-foundations and provided
with airy rooms, are in number 300, and the metsched or house of prayer, is a
fine and pleasing edifice. Most of the Tartars here settled are of Casanian
origin, but differ a little from the Casanians in their manners and customs,
and are a trading and substantial people. It will not then be wondered at, that
they should study their persons and have a little Tartarian gallantry among
them. These people, like our modern Turks, clear away the hair from every part
of their bodies, with an ointment of lime and arsenick; and the women, in
imitation of Oriental nations, paint their eyes and nails. The Tartarian ladies
make use of a certain plant called Kina or Kna, dry it and reduce it to powder,
which being mixed with alum and fresh goose-dung, they bind, for one night,
over their nails and it gives them a yellow-red color, which, among our
European beauties would surely, as an ornament, be rejected; though it be an
instance of Oriental taste. Spanish-paste is an imitation of that used by the
Tartars and Moors, for extirpating their hair.

They grow a great deal of wheat about Kargalinskaja, of which they make a fine
flour, notwithstanding the soil and situation is more unfavourable to this
grain here, than in some other places; for, according to farmers theory, wheat
will do well in very open countries, where wood will not grow, and here there
is little else than birch and white poplars. The country along the Samara, is
so rich with metalick ores, that one cannot travel half a mile without seeing
some mineral enclosures, belonging to different manufactories at Orenburg.

The badness of the weather and the snow, which began to cover every part of
the ground, would not permit me to make many useful observations, I therefore
passed Orenburg and made the best of my way to Ufa, through many Baskirian
villages and stations. The Baskirs were now assembling themselves with their
hordes about their winter quarters. They differ from other nomades, by living,
during the winter, in huts built of wood, in the Russian way. Near these huts,
they lay stores of hay in high stacks round about trees, to feed their cattle,
in case of necessity. Most of their houses are very small and the room within
is provided with wooden benches to sleep on. The Baskirians have a chimney on
the right hand of the door, resembling a cylinder, which grows narrower at top.
It is open below about the height of a man, made with wooden stakes and
brush-wood, well plaistered with, mortar. In this chimney they burn faggots,
set up an end. Near the chimney is a little hearth, whereon they set a boiler
to dress their victuals, and this boiler has a particular pipe to let out the
steam. Their chimneys are well-contrived, but as the wood burns well and very
bright, it hurts the eyes more than the smoke, of course, they labor
constantly under some ocular disorder.

The principal piece of household furniture in the filthy hovels of the
Baskirians, is a high bottle, like a leathern vessel, fastened on a wooden
frame and always full of sour milk, or arjan. Whilst the cattle yield milk and
they have store of honey, the Baskirians live jovially and use no other drink
than sour milk or mead; but, as they seldom like to clean these vessels, the
offensive smell may easily be conceived. In winter, or when traveling, they
supply the want of this drink by little cheeses (krut) made from very four milk
and dried in the smoke; this they bruise and soak in water, which makes a
sourish drink. Their usual food is thin broth, which they send with wooden
spoons partly down their throats and partly over their beards. They sow no more
wheat than they want for their own use, and this is but little. Indeed it is
little to be expected that they ever will become good husbandmen, as they are
so much taken up in breeding bees and horses, which enriches them sufficiently
for the indolent manner of life established among them. They do not eat bread
every day and are said to bake it like the first men. Their women kneed, with
unwashed hands, a cake with water and salt and bury it in the hot cinders of
the hearth; they then put a stick into the cake and toast it before the fire,
till it is brown.

The dress of the Baskirian women, differs little from that of the women of
Tschuwa. The most essential difference is in the head-dress, where, instead of
that long latchet, beset with silver-coins, which flows down the back, being
fastened to the cap; it is here fixed to a quadrangular conical plate, fastened
on the opening of the cap on the top of the head, the whole richly decorated
with little silver-coins, or plates. Both sexes wear shirts of coarse linen,
made of hemp, or from a thread spun from the large nettle, very wide trousers,
buskins or slippers. The poor wrap their legs in rags and wear shoes made of
the bark of a tree. The nettles which they spin for lines, grow in a fat soil
near their habitations, and are dried in autumn with the hemp. After this,
being watered, the outside rind is taken off with the hands, by breaking the
stalk, and then beaten in a wooden mortar, till they are reduced to tow. As to
their persons, they are, without exception, the filthiest and worst behaved of
all the Tartarian or Tschuwan nations; but I shall have an opportunity of
speaking of them again,

Before I could reach Ufa, I was obliged to pass the Uralian mountains, which
are full of minerals and many of which are covered with wood, and the
neighborhood inhabited by Tartars, Tschuwanians, etc. I passed a copper-mine,
worked by the Baskirians.

Upon the rocky mountains, along the Belaja, which I passed in great haste,
grows the savin-bush, used by the Baskirians, to smoke their sick children
with. They also put it over their doors, from an idea that it has a particular
virtue against witchcraft. It differs not in the least degree from the common
savin, (Sabina), except that it is bluish berries generally contain but one, two
or three seeds. The forests here produce considerable larches, which, like the
savin, is not to be seen westward of the Uralian mountains. On the old trunks
of this tree, we find not only the medicinal larch-mushroom, (Agaricus
Officinarum), which the Baskirians bruise and strew upon the wounds of cattle,
but, also, a rosin oozing out, which sometimes is resinous and sometimes gummy,
and dissolves perfectly in water. By order of the imperial college of
physicians, a great deal of this gum has been gathered in the province of Ufa,
which, in pharmacy, may be used instead of gum-senega or Arabian-gum. It Is
color is not so clear, but it has such a degree of viscidity or adhesion, that
it may answer all the purposes of foreign gums, in mechanics and manufactures.
It is remarkable that a certain tree, a species of the resin-tree, similar to
this, produces sometimes resin and sometimes gum; and I have now an opportunity
of confirming an observation of the learned Dr. Rinder, respecting the
larch-tree, that in spring it produces a gum, in winter, a degenerated juice,
but, in autumn, a real resin. The same naturalist has assured me, that in
April, when the larch issues forth bladders, a fluid resin may be gathered from
it, in every respect similar to the balsam of Mecca. Nay, some pretend it may
be extracted from the white fir.

It may readily be supposed, that in the neighborhood of the Ural, there are
many noble birds of prey. Here is a kind of vulture-hawk, and other beautiful
species of hawks, (Falco barbarus et arborarius), also diverse kinds of eagles.
A large species of owls, (Stryx Uralensis), is also very common here, though I
never saw them described any where.

Ufa. I reached Ufa, after traveling 370 miles from Jaizkoi-Gorodok, on the 2d
of October, wintered there very disagreeably and did not leave it till April.
In the vicinage of this place, on the high roads, are three or four houses of
accommodation for travelers, kept by Russians.

Ufa is an ill-built city and very much decayed. The neighborhood being richly
peopled with Baskirians, it is situation would be a bad one, if it was not a
place of security against the invasions of these Baskirians and others. It
contains about six or seven hundred houses, dispersed in irregular lines, on
the bank of the Belaja, and, owing to a bend of that river, forms a kind of
crescent. Torrents of snow and rainwater rushing down from the heights above
it, encompass the city all round, and, the houses, being built on the declivity
of a hill, have a good effect and contribute to it is safety, which now, indeed,
seems established, by the peaceable disposition of it is neighbors and the
fortification of it is frontiers. The ancient works of Ufa are mostly decayed,
and there is scarce a trace to be seen of that line of palisadoes, that ran
near five miles along the town and covered the fields and pastures belonging to
this place, in any trouble or commotion: there remains only, now, some relics
of an old watchtower.

The situation of the city, it is six churches in several quarters of it, and
particularly it is stone-built cathedral, standing with many other public
buildings on an elevation, surrounded with palisadoes, give it the appearance
of an amphitheatre and make it look better than it is; but it is dreary enough
in spring when a traveller comes and at other wet times. The corrupted manners
of the people render an abode here the more disagreeable, for there is scarce a
substantial or civilized inhabitant, except those persons who belong to the
office of mines and manufactures, the city not being able to boast of a regular
trade or a good manufactory, except a few tanners, who have here a tanmill,
worked by one horse. Indeed they have no workmen. As to their trade, it has not
been extended further than to travel to Casan, to fetch goods to sell to the
Baskirians, whom they supply at an exorbitant rate, and who come here to buy or
to attend the court of justice. The inhabitants indeed are so careless and so
indifferent about improving their state and situation, that they suffer the
Casanian and Ufian Tartars to run away with the lucrative trade of honey and
wax, and a few more important articles, as marten and boar-skins, horses and
cattle. But this inactivity is the more deploreable, as Ufa, by it is situation,
might become the chief magazine of the whole regency of Orenburg, if the
inhabitants had the least spirit of trade in them; the transport by water being
practicable through the Rama and Wolga, to the innermost parts of the empire,
even to seaports. By the communication of the Belaja with the other rivers and
the arms or side-waters running from the Uralian mountains, rock-salt is
conveyed to great distances; for vessels are built here for this purpose and
always lying at anchor at Ufa.

The district of Ufa, is inhabited on the west, south and north-west, by Ufian
Tartars, related to the Casanians, but settled here long since. They are very
numerous, throughout all the land lying between the Belaja and the river Ik,
which falls into the Rama. The Tartars are, of all the inhabitants of the Ufian
district, the most industrious husbandmen and generally men of property; and,
indeed it is no wonder, that by their economy, they should prosper well in a
country abounding in excellent pasturage and woods profuse with all the
advantages that may be derived from hunting, fishing and breeding of bees.
Their method of husbandry is this: they cultivate all the land round their
habitations and divide a field into three parts, one of which lies fallow every
year, in which fallow part they let their cattle run, which is as good as a
dressing. Thus are their fields fertile for years and fit for wheat, which they
do not neglect. Should the fertility of such spots fail, and they cannot find a
step near enough to their villages, they will remove their wooden houses to
some other place; on this account, they do not hedge in their huts, but, in
wintertime, keep their cattle in enclosures, and, when the cattle are abroad
on the step, in summertime, sow those enclosures with hemp.

In their way of living, they are tolerably neat. Men of property have, besides
their usual habitations, a summer-residence, with a Baskirian chimney and a
large bench to sleep on. The way from one to the other is laid with timber. Few
marry more than one wife, none more than two. In all their villages, they have
clerical schoolmasters, who teach their youth to pray.

The female-dress differs not very much from that of the Casanian Tartars.
Their common dress is, like that of the Baskirians and the people of Tchuwa,
made of coarse linen, worked slightly with the needle about the neck and
wrists. Girls are never seen but in their best head-dress. The woman's cap sits
close to the head, is cut out in front, fastened underneath the chin and
buttoned on the top of the head, the greatest part of which is covered with old
silver coins, or pieces of tin cut out to resemble coins; but the front border
of the cap is ornamented two inches broad with red coral beads, narrower about
the cheeks, and another row of the same beads runs from the top of the cap down
to the part that binds the cheek. From behind the cap hangs down a band, above
three fingers broad, which passes through the girdle and so far is decorated
with small coins and tin plates, but further down to the joint of the knee,
with corals and fringes. Two other small bands, similarly ornamented, go from
the cap to the girdle, to which last they are fastened by their fringeends.
Behind the ears, is fastened to the cap, a breastplate, beset with
silver-coins, proportionably ornamented, and large or small, according to the
wealth or rank of the wearer, hanging from underneath the chin down upon the
bosom. Over the head is a veil, the tops of which hang down on the back. Girls
caps are quite round and not cut out upon the forehead; the breast plate is
very small and narrow, no large band hanging down on the back, only the two
small ones, and sometimes not these. They wear their hair, like the women,
braided into two tresses hidden in the nape of the neck, and upon it they
sometimes pin a little escutcheon, ornamented with coins and fringes. Commonly,
their head-dress consists only of coral-beads, as the best and rich head-dress
is the gift of the bridegroom, when a young couple is going to be married. But
among the more wealthy of these people, girls caps are also ornamented with
coins. I saw a girl, the front-point of whose cap was much lengthened and
carved in wood. I also saw a girl who wore, as an ornament, two triangular
flaps beset with coins, and made round on the lower-part, which were fastened
together on the forehead, behind and underneath the chin, and covered only the
sides of the head, leaving the whole head of hair bare. Except these little
changes in dress, there is no difference between the Ufian and Casanian
Tartars. Their language and manners are the same, for, in the district of Ufa,
they live promiscuously together.

The environs of Ufa rise by degrees in considerable hills, which, at some
distance from the city, are overgrown with woods of mixed trees, and higher up
the Ufa is still more woody. The mountains are limestone and stucco, with, now
and then, a mixture or bad alabaster. This district has no ores, except a few
veins of a copper that is not worth the digging. Petrifactions are very rare
among the lime, yet I found some madreporites up the Ufa, and they showed me,
in Ufa, a very large knuckle-bone of an elephant, which had been found with the
head, etc. and some other bones of this animal, in a washed bank of the Belaja,
above Ufa, and was in a tolerably sound state.

There are also upon the heights, west of this city, some large overgrown
tumuli, which have been opened many years. Three of these tumuli, situated on a
very elevated spot, strike very much a scrutinizing eye. Some say, these were
the tombs of governors, who resided here before this district submitted to the
Russian scepter, and it is also said that all neighboring Baskirians paid
tribute to these governors. Indeed there are many monuments of antiquity above
Ufa, which show that this place was inhabited by a people very different to the
present. There are, on the other side of the Diouma, not thirty miles from Ufa,
erections that certainly were not built by the present people; these are a kind
of sepulchral chapels, built of brick, and have round them many Arabian or
Koptian tomb-stones, with inscriptions. Mr. Krafft has given us many. The
inscriptions contain the name and quality of the person interred, the year he
died and some moral sentence beneath. Here follows a translation of two.

This Stone

is placed for

MINKA ARTSOF

in the 1112th year of the Hegyra.

All men are mortal,

God only is eternal.

He that worships God, says the Prophet, and abstains from sin, is one of
Mahomet's nearest relations.

GHAS HOUSYAM BYATH,

Learned in the Law,

And

By the rules of Justice, a Judge,

Lies here dead.

To thee, our only God,

We offer up our prayers,

That thou may have mercy on him,

And grant him favor,

By remitting him his sins.

He died in the year 744,

In the 7th night of the sacred month.

He labored, and would have continued so to do,

But Death who frustrates the designs of men,

Has cut him off.

None of us find here a lasting home.

On viewing this tomb

Think on

His last hour.

The present winter was not very rigorous, yet it was disagreeable, on account
of it is dark and stormy weather. The most violent frost was felt in the third
week in November, and, on the 23d, we had storms in which many travelers, on
the deserts, lost their lives. These storms continued the whole month of
December, almost without interruption, yet the cold was not very severe. The
month of January was moderate, that of February very temperate, but the month
of March concluded the winter with a still greater frost, that continued to the
middle of the month, accompanied by a deep and universal snow, which was the
principal cause of the late inundation.

The birds of passage appeared with the end of March, flying toward the south;
from which quarter, after the river was freed from the ice, we saw a great many
common geese, (Anser Erythropus), seeking a colder climate. Wood-cocks and the
sea-pye remained in great numbers, even before the ice broke, and sought their
food on those heights that were not covered with snow.

Having sent some of my retinue, in the month of February, back to Gurjef, near
the Caspian sea, in order to spend the spring there, I will, from the
observations they made, add here several remarks concerning the arrival of
birds of passage, in that more southern district, not quite useless to natural
history. The river Jaik began to break on the 5th of March. Long before this
and in the latter end of February, all sorts of sea-mews were seen in flocks
upon the ice, which had not left the Caspian sea during the whole winter. With
the last of February arrived large flights of swans, geese, ducks and bitterns,
evidently from the west. Bitterns come from the south, but never from the
north-west. The heron was the only bird seen singly, after the water was clear
of ice: but the latest, and about the middle of March, appeared the spoon-bill,
heron and sea-ravens, (Pelecanus Carbo et Pymeus). Land-birds and birds of
prey, were at hand with the end of February. There was also straying, at this
time, a fine species of large and black larks, (Alauda Persica), which,
commonly, do not exceed the 50th degree, but seemed to seek their home, which
is, probably, Persia and India. The hawk of passage, (Falco barbarus), seemed
to come the latest among all other birds of prey; yet there was one shot, near
Gurjef, on the 4th of April, though this bird seldom frequents those flat
countries, but inhabits the famous high mountains in the province of Ufa, where
they build their nests and pass the summer. The last arrival of all birds of
passage, was a beautiful species of quite green bee-eater, (Merops Tartarica),
in the beginning of May: these dwell only in the vicinage of the Caspian sea
and are never seen higher up the river Jaik.

Swallows were seen on the 15th of April, whilst the weather was warm and
serene; but as, on the 17th, the south and west-wind began suddenly to blow
north, and caused a sharp frost till the 19th at night, these birds and other
little ones disappeared, yet became visible again on the 20th, when the weather
grew mild. This circumstance occasioned a curious observation. On the 18th of
March, I received, by one of my people, whom I had sent to Gurjef, a common
swallow, which a Tartar had found lying in a field, apparently dead and stiff
with frost. This swallow had scarce been a quarter of an hour in my room, which
was moderately warm, than it began to breathe and at last it fluttered about
the room, where it lived some days, till it died by an accident. There remains
not a doubt, therefore, but that those swallows which have been found in winter
in fishing-nets, clefts and hollow trees, apparently dead, may be made lively
again by warmth; there being reason to believe that they are only benumbed by
accident, perhaps by some sudden autumnal frost, and passed thus the winter in
so torpid and extraordinary a state, which seems to run counter to the laws of
nature; and indeed we should find here, in winter, many more swallows than we
do, if they did not retire with other birds of passage to a warmer climate.

The budding of trees and their bloom was, this year, a whole month later than
it was last spring, about the Samara, even some weeks behind the trees of
Orenburg, of which I had an account. The apple tree, in the neighborhood of
Ufa, began to bud on the 20th of April, and was in bloom the beginning of May;
not not much sooner, the wild, black cherry, (Padus). and service tree,
(Sorbus); much later the plane, the hazel, the wayfaring tree, (Opulus), the
cornelian cherry, (Cornus Sanguinea), the elm, the linden and the oak.

END OF PART I.
TRAVELS THROUGH Siberia and Tartary, PROVINCES OF THE RUSSIAN EMPIRE;
By S. PALLAS, M. D. PROFESSOR OF NATURAL HISTORY, etc.
Part II.
I Now prepared to set out to cross the Uralian mountains, in my way to the
province of Isetta; dispatched a soldier on the 10th, with necessary orders to
mend the roads and bridges, and followed, myself, on the 16th. Some few miles
from Ufa, on the right hand of the road, is a deep hole, called by the
inhabitants, Besdonnaja Jama, (bottomless pit). Three years ago a murrain among
the horned cattle raged dreadfully, and great numbers died. They carried the
carcases of these and threw them into this pit, which occasioned a large troop
of mad dogs to assemble about it, and rendered the district so dangerous, that
a company of armed soldiers were sent out to clear them away.

At the distance of about twenty-five miles from Ufa, I slept, for the first
night, in a village that contains but ten houses, it is inhabitants are of that
sort of people called Tepterei. These pay but a small poll-tax to what others
pay, but must furnish the crown, gratis, with carts and horses, to transport
the rock-salt of Jlezkaja, and the number of this people, in the province of
Ufa alone, exceeds 30,000, consisting of Tartars, Tscheremissians and those of
Tschuwa. The Tartars, residing here, are the offspring of the Casanians and
differ from the Ufa Tartars. I occasionally met with some of these people. The
common dress of their women is a shift of died linen or cotton; they wear on
their head the veil Tastar, with a blue and green ribband, laid round the head
in form of a garland, as do the Casanian Tartar women, putting on the rich
head-dress only at festivals and on solemn occasions.

They are here so industrious in breeding bees, that some families have above
400 stocks in the woods, which yield them annually upwards of 1600 lb. of
honey. Their method of breeding them is the Baskirian. They hollow the trunks
of all sorts of trees, (but prefer BASKIRIAN BEEHIVES
those of hard wood), twenty or twenty-five feet from the ground, if the height
of the tree will admit it. When hollowed, they work it smooth on the inside.
The Baskirians are very clever at this work. All the branches below the hive
are then cut off, to prevent the bears from climbing up, and notwithstanding
this care, and various means are used to keep them off, and destroy them, these
animals are very hurtful to the hive in the Uralian forests; they frequently
fix sharp knives, sickles, and other iron weapons, etc. on several parts of the
tree, the cutting part turned upwards, so that a bear will go up without
hurting himself, but in coming down again, he wounds himself in such a manner
as to lose his life. They have a contrivance also, by which a bear climbing up
touches a cord, which shoots an arrow at him, and pierces his heart. Others
hang on the most distant branches with long ropes, a large board, so that it
will reach to the hive, and there tie it with bast: the bear finds his seat on
this board convenient for opening the hive, sets to work, gnaws through the
bast to get at the hive, which lets loose the board, and off he swings, when,
if he is not immediately thrown down by the violence of the motion during his
fright, he must resolve at a dangerous leap, or patiently remain. If he falls
or jumps, sharp-pointed wooden palesare placed underneath to receive him; if he
stays where he is, he is killed with arrows or firearms. Sometimes a bear is
watched and killed either upon trees, or at night about the stocks he has begun
to molest, or near some carcass. In winter, they trace bears in the snow, hunt
them with hounds, and kill them with lances.

Another enemy to bee-hives, is the bee-eater, which they strive to keep off by
surrounding the hives with all kinds of thorns. Nay, the Tartars believe there
are persons whose very looking on a hive is injurious to the bees. To guard
against this, they suspend, especially before such hives as are near their
houses, the bones of a horse's head, or other bones, that the eye may first
fall on these objects, and thus avoid the superstitious influence of magic
looks.

This whole district is rich with martens of a good kind, whose skins will sell
from 2s. 6d. English, to 3s. and 4s. 6d. each, according to the goodness and
the number of buyers. This therefore is an encouragement to the Baskirians, and
other inhabitants, to hunt, and their method is, to trace the animal in the
first fall of the snow, and when they meet with it, pursue it with their dogs,
or bring it down from the trees by a gun or an arrow. In many of the brooks
there is fine otter-hunting. Indeed there are so many of this animal, that they
catch them with beam-traps, laying some fish or a crab for a bait. They kill
also a great number of squirrels, whose skins are sold with other furs, to the
Tartars, who travel among them for the purpose; but marten skins are by far the
most valuable. They catch now and then a bad sable in the Uralian forests, but
it is seldom. Elks and roes, are to be met with in the upper districts of the
mountains, but there is scarce a wolf or fox to be found, on account of the
thickness of the forests.

The only insect here worth notice, is the crane-fly, (Tipula polygama) and
this for its extraordinary mode of copulation. About each female assemble ten,
twenty, or more males, which lay entangled together with their legs. If one
separates them, never less than two, but often three, or even four males, are
found in close connection with the female. These crane-flies fly but little, but
they run about like spiders, and are a prey to the glowworm, (Cicindela
hybrida, et Sylvatica.)

On the 19th of May, I reached the Symskoi ironmills, the situation of which is
uncommonly beautiful, being a little plain betwixt two woody mountains. The
works are erected on a branch of the river Sym, where salmon are caught six or
seven feet long, and a fine sort of trout. On the water are two mills, six
forges, and three hammer-mills, each mill working four hammers. Here is also an
anchor-forge, and a furnace. The Sym is not navigable on account of its
rapidity, of course they transport their iron some distance on sledges during
the winter. They manufacture here from 50 to 60,000 puds of iron annually, each
pud 36lb. English. The workmen are all slaves, but are paid a sufficient salary
to live comfortably with their families. The workmens houses are 160; a
stone-built church stands on a vacant spot near them, and a good wooden mansion
in which the minister lives, who has a country house and a garden, the whole
fortified with a breast-work of timber laid on each other, 2100 feet one way
over, and 1050 feet the other.

In changing of horses at one of the villages, the Baskirians brought one of
those which they said was of the breed of Schaitan Kudei, and would draw me
well through any difficulty. On enquiring into the nature of this breed, they
told me, that the first fire or father-stallion, married the daughter of a
mountain spirit or devil (Schaitan) whom he met with in a cavern he made in an
adjacent mountain, and that from this alliance this breed of horses sprang.

About forty-three miles further on, on the Uralian mountains is another
iron-manufactory, established in 1757. The number of houses here are 470. The
church and fine mansion of Jacob Twerdischef, who is principal director of all
the numerous iron-manufactories erected by his relations in the district of
Orenburg, are built only of wood, but the storehouses and forges are built with
stone. The works here are all fortified, consist of a double furnace, four
forges, fifteen hammers, and an anchor-forge; besides these, there is a common
forge, two furnaces to heat the bars, and a saw-mill. They melt here annually
200,000 puds of raw iron to supply the hammers. They fetch the ore thirty miles
in the wintertime, and it yields fifty-six puds per hundred and more of raw
iron: of this they manufacture here 80,000 puds in bars, and the rest is
conveyed to the other manufactories I have mentioned. All these are conveyed
together to a newly erected manufactory of three hammer-mills, and a saw-mill,
with 120 houses on the river Jurjus, where in spring it is put on board vessels
built on purpose, and carrying each 6000 puds.

Dr. Pallas now proceeds to describe two or three caverns in the lime mountains
of Ural, which he visited, and this he does with the knowledge and accucuracy
of a philosopher, but as they are not by far so wonderful and curious as our
caverns in the peak of Derbyshire, which have been often described, I trust my
readers will consent to pass them over.

On the 20th of May, says our author, I arrived in the village of Nissebasch,
upon a brook of the same name. Here are a people called Mestscheraks, who, as
often as required, are obliged to do the same military duty with the Cossacks;
these emigrated eight years since from a station on the river Ufa, into this
district, and prosper exceedingly well, having a tract of fine, arable land,
situated between the mountains about the river Jurjus. Having settled among
some Baskirians, they pay them an annual rent of twenty-five copecks, or 18.
English each family, for as much land as they can or will cultivate, besides
pasture and wood. On the same footing are all other Tartarian villages that are
established in the country of the Baskirians. The soil is here quite black and
fertile to the utmost degree, and never needs manuring. These Mestscheraks
enclose their fields with hedges, and let their cattle run upon the lay fields.
They turn up every new piece of ground with a Tartarian plough, but if the
weather be dry, they put from four to six horses to it. In moist weather, and
on all other occasions they use the Russian plough. In such new ground, the
first year they sow hemp, and bear-barley. This barley produces ten or fifteen
fold. Every ten or twelve years they leave a field and seek a new one. They
carry on a considerable corn trade with the iron-manufactories, and breed a
great many cattle and bees. The country here abounds with foxes and martens,
and I saw a particular invention for catching woodcocks in winter, which
deserves notice.

They stick forks here and there in the ground near trees in thin birch woods,
where these birds mostly retreat, and upon these forks lay a cross pole, one
end of which is tied to the tree, the other resting on the fork, to which they
tie bunches of corn. At a little distance from this they make a funnel of
birch-rods about five feet high, by sticking the rods in the ground as close to
each other as the wires in a cage, leaving one end of the funnel open at the
top, and about an ell in MEDSCHERAKS CATCHING WOODCOCKS
diameter. In the opening or mouth of this funnel, they fix a wheel, which
moves round an axis, and consists of two hoops crossing each other, and wound
round with straw and ears of corn. Now the birds fly first upon the cross pole,
placed near the tree, and if they fly on the ears of corn fastened about the
hoops of the wheel, they can settle no where but on the hoop, when the wheel
immediately turns with them, and lets them fall into the funnel, from which
they cannot escape.

Before I leave these Metscheraks, I must observe that the women differ in
dress from the Tartars, with whom they have the same language, the same
manners, and the same Mahomedan religion. I speak not of the men, for all the
men in this country dress nearly alike. The reader I trust will form a better
idea of their dress from the plate, than from any description I can give. I
shall only remark, that the form of the cap, ornamented in front with silver
coins, and beads of coral, is the same with that of the Ufian Tartars; the
principal difference is in the veil which hangs down from the hind part of the
head, and in the wide sleeves.

Having heard of a burning mountain in the adjoining district of the
Mursalarskian Baskirians, I went twelve miles to see it. This mountain is
situated on a bend of the river Jurjusen. It is a very steep one, and covered
with wood, but on three of the highest parts, near a southern precipice, are
several, bare, reddish spots, which spots are burning, and we drew near the
place by a very dangerous path. Every thing here was flourishing, to which
(...) burning of this mountain, and the heat it spreads around, must
undoubtedly contribute.

On the eastern side which is now the burning side, the mountain seems to be
100 fathoms in perpendicular height. It has burnt on the eastern side only for
the last three years, and that less violently than in the middle height, the
whole southern side being burnt out; for the subterranean fires have existed
about twelve years. A sensible Baskirian gave me the following cause of it.
Eleven or twelve years since, a tall pine tree that stood westward, quite at
the bottom of the middle part of the mountain, was fired by lightning, which
consumed the very roots of the tree, and thus penetrating the body of the
mountain, it has since burnt inwardly, without interruption; yet so that the
fire has ceased at the bottom, and yet is far from having reached the top. The
whole southern side, now bare, he told me was once, like other parts, overgrown
with trees and bushes, which have been consumed as far as the fire reached;
namely, a space, of which the smallest diameter must be 70 fathoms, the
greatest 100 and upwards. The fire also communicated to an adjacent spot on the
western side, but is there extinguished, and the place is now overgrown with
all sorts of plants, particularly the fragrant dame's violet (hesperis
Siberica) the lupin, after and wild liquorice (astralagus), The eastern part to
which the fire passed three years ago, through a small part of the valley, then
covered with birch-trees, is now quite green again, but yet burns with great
violence, and exhibits almost as large fire-spots as the middle part of the
mountain.

The stone of which this mountain consists, especially in those spots which are
burnt out, is partly a reddish slate, and sonorous, yet seems to be a kind of
limestone, and partly a soft, consumed stone, divided into thin, foliaceous
layers, between which there appears to have been some other matter, now burnt
to ashes. In the eastern part, where I ordered, the men to dig, as deep as the
heat would allow, I found the stone in coarse layers, but the deeper we went,
the finer and looser it was. The layers seemed to incline from west to east,
though in general I could find no determinate order, owing to the sinking of
the ground in such consumed spots. In many places I met with a yellow ochre
iron-stone, and at the bottom of the eastern part lies every where, between the
stones, a light, red, friable marle. The burning spots are full of large clefts
and crevices, so that it was dangerous to walk on them. In some places the men
sunk into the soft, burnt ground up to the knees, and could scarce get out
again, without feeling the fire. From the open clefts rises continually a
burning, hot vapor, which no one could put their hands near, and which on
throwing birch-bark, or dried chips into it, they immediately caught fire.
During stormy and gloomy nights, red, thin flames or fiery vapors, rise to
some height, yet there is no sulphurous smell, or coal-like vapors; the
exhalation which rises communicating, no other sensation than that suffocating
heat, which issues from a hot glowing oven, after the embers have been cleared
out. As deep as we dug, there was no smell, though we dug till the stones were
hot enough to hiss with any moisture, and burn the wooden spades.

Not only on the outside, but within the burnt spots, the ground was cold, and
the common orach was growing on the places. The bottom of the middle part of
the mountain was covered with luxuriant herbage, which, as the Baskirians told
me, was not the case, before it is burning. We saw a great number of adders
about the place, which were here before it caught fire. The Baskirians assured
me, that, during winter, no snow would lie on it, that the soil was always
green, and had plants in flower through the whole winter.

On the opposite shore of the Jurjusen, is another curiosity. A little brook
comes down a height adjacent to the river, and throws itself, after a course of
sixty fathoms, with a steep fall into the river, and in that little space of
sixty fathoms, turns four mills.

In passing over a woody mountain, I could not but take notice of the vast
number of large and tall pine-trees and asps, either broke, leaning, or torn up
by the roots by a hurricane, that had raged for five days together. The wool of
the asp might be gathered here in great abundance, if the people were not so
indolent; the branches might be lopt and carried to the houses, and when dry,
the wool will shake off. It may be worth the attention of a speculator, whether
asp-wool in the common way, would not be a good substitute for foreign cotton,
and as it has a much better gloss, and is considerably finer than cotton, it
deserves an attentive trial. I mentioned this to a learned friend, and he told
me he had tried a similar experiment, with the wool of the willow (Epilobium)
and it had succeeded beyond his expectations.

I next passed an extensive manufactory of iron, where they make bars, and cast
vessels, belonging to a merchant, who employs 1800 men constantly, and 500 more
occasionally. The ore they use here is at the distance only of twelve miles,
and produces half it is weight in good raw iron, which does not lose a third
part under the hammer. The bar-iron here manufactured, is so tough, that it
will bear the hammer without heating, and they send away annually above 100,000
puds, in barges that carry 7000 puds each, to different seaports and places of
the empire. Here I saw them catching vultures by means of fall-traps, fastening
live pigeons as baits. These vultures are sent in great numbers to the
Imperial court.

Traveling on, the chief of a neighboring village came up to us with a large
body of armed Baskirians, to serve as an escort, but we declined his polite
offer, as unnecessary. On account of the troubles which arose this spring on
the frontiers of the Kirgnisians, every Baskirian had been ordered to be armed
with lances, bows and arrows, for they are not allowed to carry any fire ^^ms.
Those who inhabit the eastern part of the Ural and most of the provinces of
Iserskaja, are much more substantial than any I have met with before. The
excellent pasture in this district, gives them a fine opportunity to breed
horses; and it is not rare to see some persons who possess from 2 to 4000
pieces of this land. In short, this step is so rich in wholesome and nourishing
pasture-plants, that it is pity but such as sow artificial grasses, and make
meadows, could get the seed from this part of the world. The Esparcette, and
Redysarum of the Alps, besides innumerable species of trefoil, codded plants,
mugworts, and starworts, are universal here, and they will agree with every
climate.

The natural indolence of the Baskirians prevents their providing any stock of
hay for the winter, of course they turn out their horses on the step, and
oblige them to search for their food, by scraping off the snow, and if, as it
often happens, a thaw should follow the first snow and cover the ground with
ice, these poor creatures are almost without food, and become miserably lean;
so that it is wonderful that under these circumstances, they should breed so
fine horses as they do; especially when it is considered that they deprive the
colts of great part of their nourishment, by milking the mares for kumyss, and
tying the colts all day to a stake.

In many parts of this province the Baskirians keep camels, but in small
numbers, as these animals were taken off by a distemper that raged among the
great cattle a few years since. The fact is, that the pasture of the country,
and the severe winters, do not agree with the constitution of this animal. They
breed also very fat sheep. Besides their wealth in cattle, they are great
husbandmen; they sow nothing however but summer-corn, barley and oats, and
seldom more than they want for their winter-provision, added to their smoked
cheese or krut; for as their cattle yield but little milk at that time of the
year, and they have no kumyss, they would do very ill without krut. They
assured me, in general, that if a person gets drunk with good mare's milk,
kumyss, he will not have the least appetite till the third day after; for this
reason, they use it in summer, as their chief food.

The dress of the Baskirian women on this side of the Ural, has something more
elegant in it than the customary dress of this nation. The habit is made of
linen worked about the neck and wrists, the cap or Tschaschbau decorated with
silver coins, and other parts of their dress are the same with that of other
Baskirian women, but the broad ornament which hangs like an order on the
shoulders, and consists partly of coins, partly of coral beads, and several
little toys, I never observed among other Baskirian women. Here the women wear
it from morning to night, and do all sorts of work with it, though it is
inconvenient and much in their way. Indeed they do not like to be seen without
it. They call this part of their heavy dress, Dilbuga, and men cover the reins
of their horses with the same stuff; from which one cannot form a very
favorable idea of the respect which the Baskirians pay to their ladies. Indeed
it is but little.

I now passed over the east side of the Ural, which is very steep, and
alternately clothed with birch-trees and larches. We found here several
streaks of ore, of which the mountain is rich, and most of the ores contain
some mixture of noble metals.

At the bottom of the mountain is a village consisting of 100 houses, inhabited
by Baskirians, and sent here to form a colony. They are substantial husbandmen,
and sow all sorts of corn, except buck-wheat: the environs of this place
exhibit many mineral curiosities, which, though not very considerable, deserve
notice. On some spots on the borders of the lake have been found some fine
yellow topazes. Round the village one finds every where, on digging, an
ochreous and shining stone, containing a small alloy of gold. North-eastward of
the village is a height of bare rocks, thinly overspread with wood. The rock is
in a soft state, and full of gold and silvery brilliancy, the layers of which
run almost east and west. On the report of some Baskirians, people were set
here to work, and a soft vitrifiable matter overspread with large purple-brown,
irregular granates, and some other black mineral have been found. -- The latter
produced a gold alloy of five 8ths of a Solotnik, or dram, per 100 puds of ore.
A little further westward, lies a black iron-stone, and at the distance of two
miles, in a low, marshy and salt district; underneath the ground is dug a very
white, though coarse, earth, samples of which have been sent to the Imperial
China-manufactory.

On the first of June I set off from the Sawod, in pursuit of an allum-rock I
had heard of, and crossed a little brook in a ferry, which, though very narrow
and shallow, is so rapid, that we were carried a great way down: we should have
passed it without a boat, but our horses could not keep their feet, and when we
got on the other side, they carried us over a step, but were too weary to climb
a mountain beyond it, and it growing dark, we were obliged to put up with a
very bad night's lodging. We chose the upper rocks of the height we were in, as
the driest spot of the whole district. We thought to have made a fire, but, by
ill luck, had not materials to strike a light. Vainly did we try to produce
fire by rubbing two pieces of wood together; of course we were obliged to be
contented with a dry spot without fire, and by means of our clothes, and
branches of trees, we formed a Baskirian, traveling tent; underneath this we
stretched ourselves on our saddle-felts, and though this bed was very wet, the
rain having penetrated through it, yet we slept perfectly sound till the next
morning.

At dawn we rose briskly from our rest, and breakfasted on a glass of water
from an adjacent brook, which would have been an excellent relish, if we had
had a fire to dry and warm ourselves; we therefore hoped to do it by quick
riding, but even that could not be done, owing to the steep and stony ways, and
the felled trees that lay in our way. At last we reached the allum-mountain,
which was beautifully decorated with linden-trees, and all sorts of fine
plants, especially three different species of lady's slipper. To follow Pallas,
in the description of this mountain, would answer no good purpose.

From this allum-mountain, we went to another, where is an isinglass pit. It
lies on an elevated, rocky tract, consisting of a reddish or white, dry, and
very brittle quartz, singularly ornamented with isinglass, and covered with a
glittering sand, mixed with a red loam. In this very quartz we found the
isinglass in nests, in various positions, forms and layers, commonly very
impure, and of moderate transparency, about a yard in length. The pit is in
sundry places fourteen feet deep, and the works are carried on at the expense,
and for the profit, of the magistrates at Ufa.

From this place I turned back to take a view of the china-earth manufactory,
erected since the year 1752, where the porcelain earth is washed and cleaned,
and from thence carried to Petersburgh, to be made into china. This manufactory
is surrounded with a wall of timber, and has two cleansing-houses, a house for
drying the china, one for the master, ten dwellings for his eighteen
apprentices, and a necessary storehouse to deposit the unwashed earth. A
description of this must be agreeable to every reader. To wash this earth,
which is dug about six miles off, and brought here, they have a number of
vessels, each about seven feet deep. The raw earth is first put into the large
tubs with water, to soak, divide, and dissolve; here it is left seven or eight
hours, that all coarse and sandy parts may be separated from it, which is
sooner done if the weather is fine and serene, than when it is gloomy. After
this, the earth is poured into other tubs, through fine hair-sieves, where it
is to settle again, and there the thin matter is strained through taffety
sieves, into the deep tubs, in which the pure, white china-earth settles by
degrees at the bottom, and the water is drawn from it by tap-holes, which are
made at different heights in the tubs, till there remains a fine sandy,
sediment; this sediment is afterward passed through three tubs, standing upon
each other; it is first poured into the upper one, and the earth there
settling, the watery part that remains, is let into the one next under it; here
it settles again, and lastly into the lower tub. This is done that all the fine
sand may be deposed from the water. This sandy sediment is next brought into a
hot-house, and spread over a sail-cloth, fastened upon several cords on frames,
in order that all the water may run out, and when the white, porcelain earth is
become solid, it is made into large tiles of about twelve pounds weight each.
Of fifty puds of raw earth, they make about eight and a half of pure
china-earth, and they prepare here, monthly, between three and four puds. Every
winter the prepared earth is sent to the regency of the province of Isetskaja,
from thence to the mine-office of the iron-manufactory of Blagodat
Kuschwinskoi, and from that place transported with the iron barges of the
Imperial manufactories, on the rivers Kama and Wolga, to the cabinet at
Petersburgh.

The china-earth of this district, known by the name of the earth of Isetskaja,
is of a beautiful white, and possesses every requisite quality to make fine
porcelain.

My road led me along the borders of the river Mias, where we saw great numbers
of bustards, and beautiful red ducks feeding, which build their nests in holes
under ground. The latter bird quits this climate in July, as soon as it is young
ones are grown up, and returns in spring with the first birds of passage.

I staid some days in the fort Tschiljabinskaja, which is the most capital
place in all the province of Isetskaja, in order to secure my wagons and
baggage in this place, which I designed for my winter quarters, at the close of
this season. I shall therefore give a description of it at the end of the year.

Having left this fort, I went to visit the mines belonging to Catherineburg,
and began by the most southern ones, directing my way to two silver-mines
lately discovered in the province of Isetskaja. Having heard that one called
Senarskoi, whose works had been discontinued for four years past, was opened
afresh, by a person deputed by the supreme office of miners at Catherineburg, I
went to it over Etkulskaja Krepost. This step is covered with trees, and bears
the finest pasture, containing grasses only proper to Siberia. The whole step
of Isetskaja is full, in June and July, of large, yellow flies, different from
the common ones, only in being twice as large, and of a pale, yellow color.
They covered almost all our horses, and in the neighborhood of pools and
lakes, the air is filled with them, especially in sultry weather, or when
tempestuous clouds trouble the sky. About six miles to the westward from the
abovementioned fort, lie two lakes, called by the Russians Gorkje (bitter
lakes) on account of the bitterness of their waters, which formerly are said to
have been sweet. Both lakes have reedy borders, in which we met with a great
many curious ducks, not seen in any other inland waters of Russia. Among them I
remarked some quite black, called turpani, of which there are numbers here, and
a very little, brown duck, with a light-brown bill, that swims with it is hind
parts entirely under water. These are very good diverse, idle flyers, and very
bad walkers. This latter bird, called from its voice, Sawki, is no where
described; I have therefore given a representation of a young one and an old
one, (anas mersa). See the plate, and also the description at the end of this
volume.

I continued my journey along the line of intrenchment, from fort to fort, up
the river Uwelka, and passed several Cossack villages, where the inhabitants
are substantial farmers. At one of these I was told that the Kirguisians had,
on the 8th instant (June) made an attack on one of the forts, only 45 miles
distant FERULA ANAS MERSA PTEROCOCCUS.
from this place, and had put every body into fear, and that of course all had
put themselves into a state of defense, and kept a continual look-out. I was
even told that these troubles had driven all the officers from the mine of
Sanarskoi, and that, two days past, all the workmen had been dismissed. Being
so near, this did not interrupt my going; but the people representing my
journey as very dangerous, I took with me a little escort of armed peasants,
and sent to the fort of Sanarskoi, for a detachment of Cossacks, to wait my
coming at the mine; yet I afterward found that all my prudence was
unnecessary, and that I might have done very well without any escort.

The heat on the 12th of June was almost insupportable, and De L'isle's
thermometer rose in the afternoon from 110 to 105. The first cause of the
discovery of this mine, was some pieces of a massive verdigrease, which were
sound here by a Tartar, who showed the spot to a custom-house director, in
1761, whose zeal induces him to find out all sorts of useful minerals in the
province of Isetskaja. He began that very year to dig upon the spot, and made a
regular mine-opening; and as soon as they came to a certain depth, they found
whole masses of lead; whereupon the proprietor made a report to the supreme
mine-office at Catherineburgh, and solicited for a privilege to continue the
works, engaging to send all the ores which had any alloy of silver, to the
manufactories belonging to the crown. Further I know not. The mine-office, that
year, deputed some officers from Catherineburgh, and the mine was worked till
the year 1765, at the expense of government, when the death of the director,
and other unknown reasons, caused an entire suspension, and nothing since has
been done. The miners sent here, stopped only a few days, and did but very
little; of course, I could see but little, but shall communicate all I was able
to gather respecting the qualities of the ores.

On the whole, it appears that this is merely a clay mountain, in which the ore
lies, sparingly scattered in thin layers, and therefore no constant ore is to
be here sought as in the mountains higher up the river Oi. In this mine they
have made but three shafts and a water-gang which runs to the depth of several
fathoms. As the mountain is quite loamy and soft, to dig it was easy, but
timbering it was more necessary, and of course more expensive, for the men
could not go on a step without it. In the hard iron-stones there is a
gold-coloured brightness, and whole streaks of a beautiful verdigris, also
masses of solid copper. In the blue loam here dug, they wash out massive veins
of copper ore, sometimes a fine glittering lead, and silver streaks, which
amount to a tenth part of the earth. Though the whole showed no great alloy,
yet they found a sufficient quantity of ores, to make it pay for working.
Springs, indeed, prevented their digging very deep, as they could not be
sufficiently turned off with engines, but the water that was taken out from the
mines served to wash the ore.

From the alloy of the ore we dug here, the following is a specification. The
coarse, glittering lead with some verdigrease, produced 56lb. of lead per cwt.
one pound of copper, and one ounce and a half of grains of silver; the fine,
glittering lead 61lb. of lead, and one and three eighths of an ounce of silver;
the best copper-ore yielded 23lb. of copper, and four fifths of an ounce of
silver, in eight pounds of lead. The small ore yielded but from two to four
pounds of lead, the eighth part of an ounce of silver, and six pounds of
copper, per cwt.

The other silver mine, called Kuckuscha, is situated at Kukuschefskoi, upon a
height that makes part of the mountain Akembet-tau, which is rich with ores,
gently rising, and without much wood, and runs along the Ui. The mine lies
about two miles and a half south-east from the river, and makes part of the
Uralian mountains. The ores were discovered here about ten years ago, by a
Baskirian Sotnik, who revealed them to the late possessor of the iron and
copper-manufactories at Kosodurskaja, who during all this time continued the
works, and ordered all ore to be mixed and melted together. But another
Baskirian took the ores of silver alloy into consideration, and upon his
report, the supreme mine-office sent two deputies, who are empowered to keep
all silver-ore for the use of the crown, and they pay a certain sum to the
proprietors, to pay the miners. As the water was very high in the gangs, I
could not enter the mine, but had an opportunity afterward of inspecting them
properly. Between two shafts is an open pit, in which the works were first
begun, and through which the miners go in and out. The business is done by
horses, and some little dwellings are erected here and there for the master and
the workmen. The biggest shaft was near seventeen fathoms deep, but since they
have improved the works, they have penetrated (in January, 1771) to a depth of
twenty fathoms, and there found the ore richer in silver, and purer in copper.
The ore is dug in a shaft that runs very regular from east to west, and it is
length above thirty-three fathoms. The streak is sometimes eight or ten feet
strong, and consists of a white and sat quartz, lying in a gray chertz, and
cannot be got out, but by blowing it up with gunpowder. In the middle of the
metalick streak, the ore chiefly consists of a beautiful lazuli and verdigris,
and in these ores we find a blackish, glimmering, silver-ore, overshot here and
there with a copper-colour, which upon trial yields from ten to twenty-four
pounds of copper, and one of quartz, to one ounce and a half of silver, per
cwt. consequently 100 puds of the better sort yield almost two pounds of
silver. There is also among this ore another brown substance, which may be
supposed to contain gold. During the latter months of this year, by constantly
working, they collected from seventy, eighty, to 100 puds of the silver ore,
and the pud might be valued on the spot, at from eight to ten copecs, each
copec one halfpenny English.

There is little doubt, but this mountain might become more productive, if it
was opened with a search-shaft, which certainly would lead to some fertile
discovery, but as the matter depends only on the present proprietor, who seeks
his own interest in procuring a sufficient quantity of copper, of which there
is no want, and at a little expense, he has not spirit enough to go further,
unless he could see his advantage in so doing. It is therefore the business of
government to take it in hand, and that it is their interest, is past a doubt,
for, according to the opinion of a mine-officer, the whole, adjacent mountain,
is full of silver-ore; and many other places within a little distance.

On the 15th of June I continued my journey toward Catherineburg. The usual
way to that place, chosen by the copper and money-caravans from the
manufactories at Orenberg, go first to the village Karassy, but I went a mile
out of my road to see the pits from which they prepare the porcelain earth of
Tschebarkulskaja. Since the establishment of the china-earth manufactory, I
have already mentioned, which is now about seventeen years, they have fetched
the earth from this district, which is found an ell deep under the salt, black
mire that covers the surface. They find sometimes spots quite pure, yet full of
yellowish veins, but cleansing it with their hands, and little, wooden spades,
the remainder goes off in the washing. The white parts lie about in an
ocherous, yellow and soft clay, Both the white and yellow earth when dug, look
as if composed of little scales and folia, and when touched are very soapy, yet
do not ferment with acids.

Each apprentice is expected to dig every day, in summer, ten puds of pure,
white earth, which cannot always be done. They begin digging in the middle of
June, as in these soils, adjacent to the mountain, the ground is often frozen
an ell deep till toward the end of June.

In our way to the village where we meant to sleep, we had to cross the river
Miass. There was no bridge over it, but as the river is commonly very shallow,
our design was to ford it. However, when we came to it, we found it impassible;
for the storms and showers had increased it so much, that it had transgressed
it is banks, was rapid, and near ten feet deep. Our business then was to make a
float, and a Baskirian hut which stood near the river, answered our purpose;
the float was made, and we got over. When we came to the village, the
Baskirians had left it, had retired, with their flocks, into the cool
mountains, and had locked their doors; but as a lock was no bar to us, we soon
had possession of a house or two, and settled ourselves at pleasure. Near each
house, was a little, round oven, built with brick, with horizontal pipes,
communicating with the oven at one end, and a hollowed pine tree, or cylinder,
about seven feet long, set up on end. This is a contrivance to smoke sheep and
colt-skins. They hang a skin up across a pole, on this cylinder, and then, by
heating the oven with pine-apples, and foul-wood, the smoke issues through the
pipes into the cylinder, and smokes the skins; done prior to tanning them, in
order to make them impenetrable by rain, and give them a fine yellow color, on
the inside.

Traveling on, we came to the enormous lake Uweldi in Baskir-Ujalde-Kuly.
According to the general and unanimous calculation of the people, who inhabit
these districts, this lake, in circumference, is between thirty-five and
forty-five miles, its length fifteen miles, and it is breadth nine miles, and
they reckon seventy-seven islands on it, nine of them having lofty woods.

Here are two other iron-manufactories in our way, supplied with workmen who
are obliged to work here for not paying the poll-tax to the crown of Russia;
the proprietors of the manufactories pay that tax for them, and have their
labor. Four thousand, six hundred and thirty-eight men are employed in these
two manufactories, and they make, annually, 15,200,000 puds of bar-iron, which,
in winter, is conveyed by the Ural to the river Ufa, and from thence
transported at high water, in twenty or more flat vessels, to the Wolga.

The district in which these manufactories stand, being, on account of the
woody mountains, many lakes, bogs and springs, cold and wet, it is exceedingly
unhealthy, entirely unfit for agriculture, and seldom a year passes but they
have a distemper among their cattle and sheep, terminating by an internal
inflammation. Against this disorder, they fumigate with the gum of the larch,
and with success. Every larch, by wounding it is bark, will ooze out a clear
resin, tough and yellowish, which, if fresh, possesses all the virtues of
Venetian turpentine, and might be gathered for the apothecaries in all the
mountainous parts of Siberia. This resin fills so much of the bark, and the
young wood of the larch-tree, and renders it so combustible, that there is
scarce a young larch-tree to be found here, which has not received some hurt by
fire, either by the burning of grass, or some other accident; and in such
trees, the gum has a brown color, dissolves in water, is very like
gum-arabick, and is known in Russia by the name of Orenburg gum. The
country people gather no more of it than they want for their own use, and
assured me they made use of it as an emetic in cold fevers, and as an
astringent, in long and obstinate cases of the fluor albus.

Sisertskoi. On the 19th of June I reached the manufactory of Sisertskoi,
erected in the year 1733, on account of several, rich iron-ores discovered in
the neighborhood and then called Imperatrizi Anni Sawoda. Here are an
anchor-forge, where bar-hammers, and all large manufacturing tools are made, a
saw-mill, two new hammer-mills, containing five bar-hammers, and one steel
forge; another with three hammers, two plate-furnaces, one for copper, the
other for iron, and a high furnace which contains a foundery, and covered with
an iron roof. Also a copper-mill, with two furnaces, and a bar-hammer, and two
other furnaces for iron and steel; a well built ballance-office, and several
warehouses for smiths. Here is also a fine freestone mansion house for the
proprietor, an orangery, parterres, and flower-gardens, and the house elegantly
furnished. Besides these places, there is also a work-shop where the neatest
joiner's work is made, not inferior to any made in England, and a manufactory
where several sorts of artists work in rooms allotted to them. One for drawing,
in which designs, plans and models are made; one for locksmiths, and coarse
workmanships in copper and steel. For steel they use here crocus martis, and
though they have no polishing frame, yet the workmanship seems almost to excel
the English. There is also another place for grinding and polishing-stone, and
two others, for fine engravings, and other delicate workmanship, in colored
metals, brass, silver and gold.

The proprietor of these works has also a stud, in which there are eight,
select old, and five young stallions, and the tame and governable behavior of
these animals, which are elsewhere quite wild and untamed, is surprising.
Opposite the stalls is a bathing-room to wash the stallions in winter. Among
his horses is one remarkable for his elegant whiskers, which rise on the upper
lip, just underneath the nostrils, and is a fine mark of nature. He has also a
menagerie, a collection of animals, containing fifteen of those tall stags,
called in the country marali, and caught in the upper district of the river
Irtisch, some elks, roes, and camels which breed here, besides a great variety
of wild-fowls. I must lastly mention his herd of select bulls, which are kept
for work, and though of Kirguisian race, are, notwithstanding, remarkable for
their size, strength, and beauty.

The place consists of near 300 dwellings, and a church, surrounded with a
fortification of wood. The proprietor is allowed 300 peasants for felling of
wood, and burning of coal for the mines. The iron annually brought here is
1,000,000 puds, very good and solid, and may be cast, raw as it is; it yields
one-half pure iron, and is dug close by. The bar-iron manufactured here is
conveyed in winter along Tsckussowaja, to the warehouse established about
seventy-five miles from hence, and there shipped in barges, and conveyed down
the rivers Kama and Wolga. Notwithstanding the antiquity of this manufactory,
the woods round it are in a very good state, and it seems as if the moist
districts, north of this place, along the mountains, were selected by nature
for the production of resin-wood.

The first establisher of this extensive manufactory, was Lieutenant General De
Henning, who was, at that time, chief president of the supreme mine-office, at
Catherineburg, and has been since one of the most considerable manufacturers
for the state, till the year 1759, when the trade seemed to diminish and was
given up by him to the present proprietor, Mr. Turtschaninof, for the moderate
sum of 200,000 rubles, with all the iron-pits and mines belonging thereto, and
a considerable district of wood, besides the masters and workmen.

On the 20th of June, I made a little excursion to an asbestos mountain,
situated in a straight line, about eleven miles from this manufactory, though
the summer-road, which I traveled, was near twenty-three miles. It was
discovered by accident, about five years since. The asbestos, found here, is a
genuine plume-asbestos and lies together in lumps of three, four, or more puds,
(each pud thirty-six pounds), consisting of sibrous cones, exceeding three feet
in length. The plume-asbestos, is a white-grey, very heavy and sometimes has
the insterstices of it is fibrous cones filled with a yellow earth, or earth of
a lucid green. In the air, it becomes very soft and almost like hemp, and in
the pit, as if rotten. I found some pieces quite yellow, and soft as rotten
wood. That which is exposed to the air, a day or two, is soft and fine enough
to make paper with; and I speak it from experience, having tried it.

On the 22d of June, I visited the famous, old and rich copper-mine,
Gumeschesskoi, which might justly be reckoned as the most important and
remarkable of all private mines in Siberia, had it not been surpassed by the
immense richness of some new ones discovered in the mountain Werchoburtskoi, of
which I shall give my readers a description; yet, on account of the number of
works here carried on and it is fine ores, it is the best worth seeing.

It being impossible to give a circumstantial detail of the innumerable works
which extend to a depth of twenty-five fathoms underground, and consist of
shafts, stream-works and different branches and tracts, I shall describe only
the general situation and quality of the mountain, the different sorts of ores
dug here and the chief works of the mine; and I shall be the more particular,
as few of my readers, I presume, are acquainted with the contents of a
gold-mine. This mine, then, is situated three miles from the iron-manufactory
of Poleskoi, which is a similar one to that I have mentioned above. The ore
lies, generally, in a clay or loam, which, being very soft, is attended with
little trouble and expense in digging. The different kinds of loam here met
with are, a yellow, white gray, one penetrated with vermilion, a brown earth,
and, on some spots, a snow-white loam, much like pure, porcelain earth. It has
been also observed, that there runs through the middle of the one containing
loam, a small mountain of the most excellent, snow-white and beautifully
half-transparent marble, very fit for polishing, and running, according to the
miners' language, from noon to midnight. This mountain will produce excellent
marble for ornamental architecture and is the more valuable, as none equal to
it has yet been discovered in Russia. Excellent ores are here found and dug up
in large masses, either in soft or hardened loams. On the right-side of the
mountain, they dig only copper-ore, but on the left, chiefly a heavy and rich,
vitreous, steel-stone, mixed with green and other copper substances,
which-render it unfit for any thing, The glassy substance, which composes most
part of the iron-ore, is talcous and it is clefts full of a tin-coloured, soft
blind and often overshot with verdigrease. They never dig this iron-stone,
except when it lies in the way and it is necessary to remove it.

The marks they follow are, first, the cinnabar seen in the loam, next, a
brown-black, copper sort of earth, found in form of kidneys or eyes, very
similar to garden-earth, and which appears sometimes solid, like black chalk,
and sometimes smooth, like white lead, and, lastly, the loam's appearing of a
green color. The abovementioned vermilion, which is mixed in the greatest
abundance with the white-grey loam, makes it look like red marble, and contains
so much copper, that when the tools, used in it, are brought to the forge for
repair, it is impossible to harden them properly, on account of the copper
substance which adheres to the iron, until the hearth has been swept and
entirely cleaned. If this vermilion is looked at with a candle or light in the
mine, one may see on it reddish spots and intermixed, massive copper-dust.

The most common and finest ore found in the mine of Gumeschesskoi, besides
this coppery clay, is a solid malachites of two different sorts like
verdigrease: one is crusty and, though but moderately hard, is susceptible of
an excellent polish, exhibits a most beautiful deep green and turcois-like
stripes, wanting nothing but more solidity. This green crust forms itself very
often about a grain of ochre and the clefts of large solid pieces often include
a natural, chrystaline verdigrease. The other sort is plumy and like
plume-allum externally, tenderly rayed, of a deeper color, heavier and richer
than the former, and velvet-like on it is natural surface and, in digging, wears
the appearance of satin. Both are found together in lumps, like large and small
kidneys, often weighing above eighteen pounds and taking on various forms. In
the green crust, we may often observe a sparry, stalactical structure and the
spars are, commonly, bored through longways, in the middle. Between the crust
and the white, overshot surface of this species, one sees black dendrities,
like figures of uncommon beauty.

Besides this incomparable ore, which renders the mine more noble, one meets,
often, with a loam-ore of a paler green, having the appearance and solidity of
limestone; also, some quartz-like nests, containing ores. Here, they dig a
very curious violet, black, or granite-coloured, rich, copper-glass, shooting
in short, quadrangular pyramids, partly spread upon the quartzlike stone, or
found in the clefts, and is one of the purest ores of the mine. On the red and
hardened loam, is a beautiful, violet and reddish sediment of lazuli, sometimes
accompanied with plumy, copperknots or massive tracts of copper. Once they
found a pure and soft copper, resembling a web and formed in flat, thin
threads, like plume-moss. Fine, massive copper-veins, are not uncommon, as I
have remarked, in the loam, but, to my knowledge, they never found any large
lumps.

It now remains to speak of the works. The space hitherto worked out, from the
northermost to the southermost shaft, is about 150 fathoms. Within this tract,
they have thirty-one shafts, to the depth of from sixteen to twenty-five
fathoms. As this mine is much troubled with water, there are always eight
engines going, worked by horses, for drawing it off. These machines are of a
peculiar construction and cannot be kept a moment out of motion, or the deepest
works would be drowned in a minute's time, and, for this purpose, they keep 400
horses, six to each machine, relieved eight times every twenty-four hours. The
stream-work, from the middle of the works, runs from the depth of nine fathoms
to that of 350 fathoms, and above is thoroughly timbered, and every year
repaired. Through this stream-work, a timbered canal of about fifty fathoms
long, carries off the water. There are here many shafts and pits filled up, and
it seems probable, that they are the remains of the ancient works: for this
very rich mountain has been worked by that nation unknown to us, whose industry
and knowledge in mineralogy, I have had occasion to mention before; and the
southern parts of the Ural are an evident proof of the same. The proprietor has
a glove and a ragged, leather knapsack in his possession, which was found last
month in this mine, between white stones at the depth of nine fathoms. Both
consist of reindeers skin. The glove is so made of the head of that animal,
that the ears serve as a reception for the thumb, but both ends are open, so
that the glove may be put on the right or left hand. Notwithstanding the humid
situation, this glove has preserved it is natural hair; but the knapsack, which
is above two feet long and one broad, has suffered more from the ground.

In this mine 200 men are constantly employed, and, besides these, there is
employ for 150 others, such as overseers, smiths, harness-makers, stable-men,
and carters, who bring here hay, grass, and timber, for they use here annually
5500 pine-beams. Besides this, they employ, in winter, above 100 peasants, who
are obliged to work for their poll-tax.

Not far from this mine, are two quarries of marble, which have been opened a
few years since, and from which the most beautiful columns and pedestals are
made to embellish the imperial palaces.

A few miles from these quarries, are some old mine-shafts, running deep into a
mountain, from which there was formerly dug some gold-alloy; but as it did not
yield sufficiently, when other mines were discovered, this was deserted. But
adjoining a fortified village, in the neighborhood called Gornoi Stschit, upon
the river Uktus, where was an iron-mill, and next to Catherineburgh, the oldest
belonging to the crown, but now neglected to give the young timber, in the
vicinage, time to grow, is erected some buildings for washing of the gold-ores,
brought from Beresosskoi, consisting of two stamping-mills, and contrivances to
separate the gold from the earth with which it is dug. In these places the
workmen, are watched and guarded, that they may not purloin any of the gold
sediment. With this sediment, after frequent washings, there is a mixture of
silver and iron; the iron-dust is taken from it by loadstones, but the silver
and gold are sent to Petersburg together, and there separated. They prepare
here, annually, upwards of 70 lb. of gold from the best ore.

Catherineburgh, June 23, 1770. I arrived at Catherineburgh on the 23d of June,
toward night. This is a fine city, the residence of a supreme mine-office,
belonging to the mines in Siberia and the districts of Orenburg, Casan, etc. I
shall not enter into any description of this place, it having been accurately
and faithfully set forth by Mr. Gmelin, in his travels through Siberia; nor
shall I say any thing of the manufactories there established for the benefit of
the state; I will only observe, that the place has been since embellished with
many fine, private buildings, a church elegantly built of stone, that a
copper-mint, which was then suspended, is now at work again, and, that the
ironworks of Werch-Jsetskaja, which formerly belonged to Catherineburg, are now
in the possession of Count Woronzof. I will proceed then to give a description
of the gold-mines, at a little distance from the city, which I inspected on the
25th and 26th.

In my way there, I passed another manufactory for washing of the gold, which
consists of two stamp-mills and other conveniences. Here are employed
thirty-five men, who prepare, every year, 90 lb. of virgin-gold. This place is
near six miles from the mines, but they are obliged to submit to this
inconvenience, there not being water any nearer. There are two other
washing-places, besides these, but not much nearer to the mines.

Gold-Mines. The mines of Pyschma are, by far, the oldest of any gold-mines in
this district, and were discovered in the year 1745. The first of these has
eight shafts, but as the ore became wanting, without any farther hope, it was
deserted in 1765. A second was then begun, but as the ore here is inconstant,
they seldom work in it, except when the miners can be spared from other mines.
There is a third here, which has now five shafts and is very productive.
Besides these there are two other considerable works, which are not much
attended to, owing to the inconstancy of the ore; but it is not so with the
mine Kljutkhessko, which was opened in 1763, with one shaft, and has been
increased with five others. The works run here very deep and are very much
exposed to water. This mine is very rich in gold-streaks, one of which is
computed to run upwards of sixty fathoms, and it is side-gangs, or shafts, from
twenty to thirty fathoms long.

Under the name of the mines of Beresofkoi, is understood those four mines
situated in the neighborhood of the brook and manufactory of the same name,
and now in work since 1752. That which promises best has thirteen shafts, the
second has ten shafts, the third has six and the fourth, four. All these mines
are most actively worked and with the greatest order and regularity. The
shafts, stream-works and side-shafts are very spacious, clean and well-timbered.

The general situation and condition of the gold ores found here, are as
follow. The metallic streaks of the mountains are full of little, standing
veins, which run from noon to morning and fall into the depth in different
angles, from sixty to eight degrees, from midnight toward noon. It is not
uncommon to find streaks which form a cross, but most of them are direct. These
streaks which consist of a thick quartz with clefts, are very disproportionate
in length and strength. Some are scarce an inch, when others are more than two
yards in thickness. It has been remarked, that a streak, narrow in the
beginning, increases further on, but those which begin large, diminish soon
after. They are, commonly, from eight to ten fathoms long, except in the mine
of Kljutschesskoi, where they are much superior and extensive, and the
principal streak found in the engine-shaft, runs from sixty to seventy fathoms
through the mountain, and is found equally constant in depth. The little
streaks are, usually, during the first fathom, the richest, and at seven, eight
and ten fathoms, are always poorer in depth, though they run much deeper. Such
an observation appears rather extraordinary. Where the streaks end, it is in
small filaments. It is generally observed, that the ores lie in a white or a
white-yellow gray, mild, somewhat fibrous, and glimmering loam, running from
midnight to noon, from five to ten fathoms broad, and their length often
extending to 200 fathoms into the mountain. This loam separates readily from
the veins, but sometimes the streaks are environed with a greyred, spotted
chertz, which causes a great deal of trouble to separate them, and cannot be
broke other, wise than by gunpowder. In this chertz or loam, the streaks are
sometimes scarce half an ell, sometimes three or four else and sometimes four
or five fathoms distant from each other. On all sides in the depth, the streaks
are bounded by a beautiful, minium-like, white and spotted, dry clay, which is
here called the robber of ores. This clay yields a good, red color, but when
they come to it, no farther trace of the ore is to be hoped for; yet, there are
some exceptions: for, in the mines of Beresoskoi, the ores are usually found in
the abovementioned chertz, and it is attended with much trouble to knock them
off. In the large streak of the mine Kljutschesskoi, which I have mentioned, a
reddish, sandy and variegated stone-loam is the distinctive mark of the ores,
and in the same mine, the gold-ore, in another shaft, lies in sand-layers,
mixed with quartz fossils, but the fossils themselves show not the least alloy
of gold.

I will now describe the gold-ores and other curiosities dug therewith. The
most common ore in all the mines, consists in a dark or blackish brown, solid
iron-stone, a spungy species, full of curious cubes, like dice, of which I
shall give a further description, accompanied with, a fine, brown-yellow, rich
ochre, wonderfully mixed and confused with quartz. In this brown matter and the
ochre which accompanies it, the gold is interspersed like a fine dust. Even
those ores, wherein the gold-dust is so small as scarcely to be distinguished
with a magnifying glass, are not without gold-alloy, and with such gold, the
washing houses or lavatories are chiefly supplied. The gold-alloy of the
streaks is not always uniform, but the richest ore breaks in nests, though
there is no visible change in the appearance and condition of the streak. There
are also found in these streaks, some very curious gold-ores of a particular
species; among these, that which they call pumice-ore, deserves a description,
as it often occurs. This is dug in large and small cakes, or masses, in the
midst of the gold-streaks, from which it is separated by it is yellow-brown,
sandy rind. The internal parts of these cakes resemble, at first, fine, spungy,
white bread or pumice-stone, or, more properly, the tender, foliaceous texture
of spungious bones, and is uncommonly light; for the matter consists of the
purest and most tender folia, which cross each other and form little cavities,
sometimes larger, sometimes smaller, and which, like pumice, will often sloat
in water. The color of this substance is white or yellowish, here and there
overshot with brown; and, sometimes, it is found as gray as pumice-stone and of
the same thick texture, and this is the richest sort. Within the cells of this
ore, the foliaceous substance of which seems to be of a quartz-like nature, a
great deal of gold-dust, as if powdered, lies so loose, that if the stone was
broke it might be shaken out. Of all gold-ores this is, in proportion to it is
weight, the richest, and the gold-dust may be plainly seen in it and washed out
without any other trouble, and thirty-six pounds of this ore will yield from
two to six drachms of pure gold-dust. It is to be lamented, that it is not
found very abundantly in lumps or nests. Among the same ore, I found some
consisting of a coarse texture, here and there flowing together in genuine
quartz and exactly resembling worm-eaten quartz; and, among the spungy
substances, some pieces contain, instead of gold, small particles of blind or
mock-lead.

But the common, brown, blackish ore is, in some places, of a very similar,
light, spungy texture, and it is spungy parts overrun with lead-colour, but,
nevertheless, of gold-alloy. This ore breaks away in small, regular, cubic
pieces, like dice, of a spungy substance, a rust-brown color internally, but,
hard and shining on the surface, and each of their six sides is slightly
furrowed with parallel lines; but so that the sides in contact have their lines
always athwart or across each other, whereas, the lines of the opposite sides
lie in a similar position. These dice break away readily from the ore, and are
found from one quarter of an inch and less, to two, but seldom three inches
large. I saw some, the rind of which, or even part of the whole dice, resembled
a water-pebble. Sometimes streaks of gold-ore are observable on their surface
and gold-dust in their substance.

Besides these quartz-substances, there is found, in the gold-streaks, topazes
of various goodness and value, either single or in clusters. They are,
sometimes, several inches thick in sexagonal chrystals, (the points of which
are obliquely clipped,) which are either transparent as water, smoke-coloured
and more or less dark. In the engine-shaft of the mine of Kljutschesskoi, there
is said to lie an enormous mass of topazes, which could not be got at on
account of the water, but I saw some considerable sherds knocked off with
breakers, which appeared very clear and beautiful. They sometimes dig, in the
gold-streaks, plenty of water-pebbles, lying in quartz and, sometimes, forming
dice, and also a tin-coloured, radiant, quartz-like substance.

Besides the gold-streaks there are, in the mines of Beresofkoi, some copper,
lead and silver-streaks, which, though divided from the gold-ore, run quite
close to it. They also dig, in these mines, a number of water-pebbles, overshot
with an excellent, dark-blue lazuli, and also a remarkable lead-spar, which
never has been found in any other mine of this or any other country, and of
which the ingenious and learned Mr. Lekmann, has written a treatise. This spar
is heavy, demi-transparent, sometimes vari-coloured, sometimes of a
cinnaba-red, and found in great, small, short and long chrystals, in the clefts
of quartz and also in the sand, stony matrixes, and in places where the space
would allow it, in a flat, cubic, prismatic figure, with unequal truncated,
two-sided ends. Sometimes it is found on quartz, in short, oblique and
irregular pyramids, like little rubies. If bruised, it makes a fine,
high-yellow fermentation, that may be used in miniature painting. After all the
experiments made in the physical laboratory, at Catherineburg, they have
extracted from it a rich alloy of lead, amounting to half the substance and a
very small quantity of silver.

There is also found in these mixed quartz-streaks, wherein this rare mineral is
brought forth, some little oblong chrystals, pointed at both ends, of a
sulphur-yellow color, resembling massive sulphur and taken as such by the
miners, but it will not burn in fire nor burst in flame, like the red
lead-spar. This little chrystalization is found both upon quartz and sand-stone.

In all these mines they employ 500 miners, which are scarce sufficient in
winter, when the works are mostly going. Many more hands are required for
selecting and separating the ores, which is done not in the mine, but above,
with hammers, and in this work some thousands of peasants are employed, who
work for their poll-tax and, according to their age and capacity, earn from
three to six copeeks a day. These cannot complain against their master's
oppressive conduct, a great number perish by the scurvy and most return home
sick and heart-broken. They are only employed when they have no husbandry to
engage them, of course, assistance is most wanted in summertime, when there is
most work to do. The ore, which is separated, as much as possible, from the
substance it is connected with, is divided into three sorts and sent to the
stamp-mills, where it produces from forty pounds to half a pound of pure
gold-dust, in every 1000 puds of ore. In these mines are annually dug 200,000
puds of ore, the best of which produces a tenth part of the whole, and the
three lavatories, or washing-houses, extract annually from five to seven puds
of pure gold-dust, each pud thirty-six pounds, English.

On the 26th of June, I returned to Catherineburgh and set out, the next day,
for Newjanskoi, a distance of forty-eight miles, to see the oldest
iron-manufactory in all Siberia, and which has been in constant work since the
year 1701, where there is a wooden church with a stone-built steeple, 189 feet
high, with harmonious chimes, an old-fashioned but fine and spacious
stone-built house, with wings in which the proprietor lives, and many other
buildings. Near the steeple, stands a great, cast-iron column, as a monument
erected to the founder of these works. In a circumference of about six miles,
here are 1200 dwellings and only 4000 inhabitants, the chief of them old,
faithful servants and substantial people. Through the streets run little
canals, with a number of bridges over them. In these streets are many shops
where all sorts of iron and copper-ware are sold. Here is a foundery and two
high furnaces, one of which is twenty else high and has four double bellows,
and can cast 700 puds of raw iron in twenty-four hours, which is the largest
furnace in the whole Russian empire; near it are two hammers, under which the
iron-stone is broke and carried, in pails, to the high furnace, where it is
wound up into it; a bar-forge, with a hammer, and another where the large
instruments, here used, are made; a building with two bar-hammers, another with
four, two others with three each, an anchor-forge, a water-bellows and three
others; a mechanical contrivance to draw out iron between rollers, and plate
it; sundry large hearths to heat iron, several tin working places, another
barforge, where are four bar-hammers, a saw-mill, a corn-mill; a
polishing-mill, where they polish bells and iron-ware; a house where bells are
cast, two buildings for tinning iron-plates, one where copper-vessels are made,
one for forging mine-instruments and tools, and twenty-four forges where all
sorts of iron-ware is made, as kettles, pots, pans, etc. and most of these
works are worked by water. It is a delightful sight to see boys, ten or twelve
years old, working with their parents and earning a good salary. There is also
here an old wire-factory, a new place for lock-smiths and sundry other
erections, all surrounded with a fortification.

This manufactory was founded by Akimfi Demidovf, a counselor of state, and
remained in that family till it was sold to the assessor Sawa Jakowlef Sabakin:
it manufactures, annually, 200,000 puds of bar-iron, besides a vast quantity of
all sorts of iron-ware. The proprietor of these works is the sole proprietor of
many others, nearly as capital, in the neighborhood.

There are many more iron and copper manufactories in this district, some whose
works are more extensive than others, all of which Dr. Pallas visited, but, as
they are all upon a similar plan, it will be tiresome to an English reader to
repeat them, and, on this consideration, we will pass them over.

At one of these manufactories, is a kind of beautiful Siberian cedar-trees, or
cedar-firs, which have been planted upwards of forty years and are only five
inches diameter in their trunk; but have born fruit many years. This year, they
bore no fruit, and the peasants told me, that their bearing is periodical, but
I could not learn, what this period was; some said every fourth or fifth year,
others every tenth year, so that I could not credit the assertion. This tree
thrives best in the pathless mires of the mountains, and I am of opinion, that
it is fruiting depends much on the moistness of the weather; for, proceeding
farther in the country, I found, that, even in the present barren year, these
trees, in the most watery places, bore the most fruit, and that it requires two
wet years together to make them bear well. Of all inland resin-trees, none, not
even the larch, grows so slow as the cedar-pine; from hence one would conclude
it must surpass every other tree of it is genus in hardness and solidity of
wood, and in beauty of growth and appearance. But, notwithstanding this, it is
most certain, that the wood of the cedar-fir, if compared with that of other
firs and larches, is soft and perishable; but, in appearance, color, veins and
lightness, it is similar to the pine and, of course, must be excellent for
joiners use, and there are trunks to be met with in the mountains from which
planks might be cut more than two else in breadth; and I think they would make
excellent masts. There is no tree that can be imagined of more beautiful growth
than the old cedars of this kind, no eye being able to determine the loftiness
of their tops. The best idea of it is growth will be formed, when I say that,
upon a young tree, the trunk of which was five Paris inches and four lines in
diameter, I counted sixty rings or marks of annual growth, the diameter of
these of the fiifth and sixth year were only one and one-third of a line, and
those of younger growth, were no more in diameter than the thickness of a piece
of paper four times folded. How many years old then must such a tree be and how
lofty, whose diameter is more than two else? I saw also a larch-tree there,
only five inches, nine lines in diameter though, by it is rings, it, was
fifty-nine years old.

From the manufactory of Newjanskoi, we had in sight the abestos mountain,
which I determined to see. I accordingly rode there during a continual rain and
was wet to the skin, it being at the distance of six miles. It is a long,
steep, narrow, rocky tract, rising in the middle of a wood, and the number of
it is pits and openings made it dangerous to ride on; however I made shift to
reach it is summit, and found it consisted of a hard, loamy chertz, the layers
of which fall into it is depth under an angle of fifty-four degrees, from north
to south, and is chiefly dug up in pieces like a cuboides or trapezoides:
within the layer of this hard rock is interspersed, a great deal of greenish
amianthus, which in the mountain remains firm and indissoluble, but by
decomposition, splits into stiff bristles. Near this amianthus lies, generally,
a fine silk-like asbestos, (indeed the natives call it, in their language, the
silk-mountain) of a yellowish-green color, uncommonly glittering, it is threads
running in a perpendicular direction. There was formerly a woman, in
Newjanskoi, who had the art of weaving this asbestos into incombustable linen
and gloves, and also made paper of it. I am told that in India, they make
sheets of it in which they burn the dead and thus collect the ashes, by
unfolding the sheet again when cold. Linen made of this mineral, will burn
clean in an oven, like tobacco-pipe clay. However hard and difficult it is to
dig it, yet it is flexible fibers may be rubbed into a soft and silken wool,
which can be twisted into a thread and woven by means of oil, and be afterward
cleaned from any oiliness by fire. But as the whole seemed to have no other
object in view than to gratify human curiosity, those who opened the pits, left
off working them and it is scarcely existing in remembrance.

Before I leave Newjanskoi, I must not omit to mention two manufactories that
have rendered this place famous in Siberia, and do honor to the memory of
Demidorf. One is for the making of frames and wheels, two articles very much
sold here, and made of field-birch, having no oak in this country. It is indeed
curious to the mind of a naturalist and worthy to be remarked how far this
field-birch is superior to forest-birch, in hardness and solidity of wood. I
weighed a cubical piece of each, exactly of the same size, and found the wood
of field-birch two seventeenths heavier than that of forest-birch. Such a
difference may be felt with the hand. The wood of the former, when dry, even
surpasses the oak. The second manufactory is that of varnishing and japaning
copper and iron tea-vessels, wooden bowls, waiters, ctc. This is a very
profitable branch of business. There is some part of this furniture to be seen,
which rivals the varnish of the Chinese, and almost surpasses the French,
except in paintings. The method they use is kept a secret among the workmen,
and they take no apprentices unless they are well paid; but I know, from
authority, that the whole secret consists in common linseed-oil, boiled thick
and blackened with wood-soot. They let the oil stand some time in a hot oven,
in order to mix it well with the soot, and lay it thin over their work with
their fingers; but do this eight or ten times successively, and after every
time set it to dry in a hot oven; the finer and thicker the varnish or japaning
is wanted, the oftener it is to be done over. In order to put on the ornaments,
they cut out flowers, fruits and landscapes in paper, lay these figures on the
varnish, cover them with gold-colour, and then with the clear, linseed oil
again, without the soot, several times, drying the vessel each time as before.

My next visit was to a tannery, where having no oak, they use willow-bark and
the inner, brown birch-rind; but they prefer the former, and it takes a chord
and a half to tan ten hides. I was also informed that the purest and most
odoriferous birch-oil, which is almost as clear as linseed-oil, is chiefly used
to soak the skins: and this oil is drawn from such pure, white birch-rinds, as
are taken from old birches, partly rotten at the root, so that there remains
little but the outward, oily bark. All the oil burnt from fresh birch-rinds, to
which a great deal of the black, bark substance adheres, is generally very
impure with soot and very unfit for tanning. It is a wrong notion to suppose
any wild rosemary or other bush is burnt with the birch to give it a fragrancy;
the purer and cleaner the birch-rinds are, the more fragrant will be the oil,
without any other addition.

In my way on, I could not but take notice, with astonishment, that the horses
we had with us, being hungry and toward night, wherever they met a hellebore
plant, (Veratrum), which was not yet in bloom, stooped and eat it greedily. The
drivers of our wagons assured me, that their horses eat this plant in spring
without the least hurt, and though it was hurtful to cattle in other places, it
had no other effect on theirs, than sometimes to purge them gently. Some
country people, fond of chattering, who accompanied us from Newjanskoi, made us
spend the night very agreeably in discoursing on the strength and efficacy of
wild herbs and plants, one of whom seemed to possess an uncommon knowledge. He
praised the Greek valerian, (Polemonium), as efficacious against the falling
sickness, and called it Troizwetki, (three-coloured flower); the sage-tree,
(Phlomis tuberosa), as a remedy against swelling of the glands in the groin;
the aconite, (aconitum lycoctonum), against singing or hissing in the head; the
devil's bit, (Succifa), which grows very tall, as high as a man's head, and
which he called pupownick, (navelwort), he said was a sure remedy in pains of
the belly, somnolency and giddiness of head. But his greatest secrets, this
country doctor seemed unwilling to reveal, however, with much persuasion and a
good reward, he communicated the following, which, highly absurd as they are, I
will give my readers for their entertainment. The root of the sky-flower,
(Cineraria Sibirica), which grows in all the marshy woods and consists of many
thick threads, under which name the marsh-marygold (Caltha) is also known among
the country-folks as a domestic remedy, he declared would bring a man, dead
drunk, to himself and quite sober him, provided he drank no strong liquor the
day, he took the medicine, and that he had often tried it. His second secret,
most pernicious to health, is said to be in use and fashion among the common
women in Russia and Siberia; this is to prevent pregnancy, by taking a certain
dose of ceruse, or white-lead, which is used as a paint, at a time a woman
expects her menstrual courses, which checks them and destroys conception. It
may answer the purpose, but the effect will certainly cease, as soon as she
leaves off this dangerous remedy.

About twenty-eight miles from Newjanskoi, I reached, on the 1st of July, the
iron-manufactory of Inshno Tagilskoi, where all sorts of iron-work are made, by
water-mills, also joinery and turner's work. In this town, there is a
beautiful, stone-built church, with a fine cupola and lofty steeple, having a
complete ring of bells and harmonious chimes. The whole edifice is covered with
iron-plates and divided into a summer and winter-church, embellished with the
highest degree of splendour and a variety of precious ornaments. Among the
curiosities of this place are two enormous cubical magnets, which form the
altars of each church; the one is five yards high, four and a half broad and
almost as thick; the other seven yards high and five yards broad and thick,
much penetrated with verdigrease. They began to build this church in 1764. Here
are also, a court of Justice, a comptoir, a fine, wooden mansion for the
proprietor, a foundling hospital, a drawing-school, several neat apartments for
the reception of strangers and 1034 houses. The male inhabitants are 2579, but
they are all slaves, except 121. Among them are many excellent workmen and the
proprietor may boast, that if there is any manufactory well supported with
clever people, it is his.

The great blessing of this manufactory, is a magnet-mountain, within a mile of
the place, added to a rich iron-stone soil all round, covered with timber. This
mountain was discovered in the year 1702, by the Wogulians, and was opened in
1721. The manufactory was established here in consequence of it. The mountain
extends itself from north to south, yet is, in the whole, conical, steep and
it is perpendicular height about forty fathoms, or 280 feet. It is full of
iron-ore, 100 lb. of which yield 60 lb. of fine, pure iron. The magnets which
are here found abundantly are chiefly among the meanest iron, about thirty
fathoms deep and, in their clefts, overshot with verdigrease.

The mountain is, at present, divided into three different manufactories, those
of Tagilskoi, Newjanskoi and Rewdinskoi. Since the establishment of the
manufactory of Tagilskoi, it has dug many millions of puds for it is share, and
a great deal from the bottom of the mountain. They continue the works with
great regularity in the form of streets, and having taken off the upper ore,
the under is easily dug, and they employ three or four hundred little boys and
girls, who earn three copeeks, or three halfpence a day each, besides men. The
ore is collected in large heaps, curiously underlaid with timber so as to burn,
fired and roasted on the spot. Such a heap will contain 400,000 puds of ore,
will often burn forty days and require eight or ten weeks to get cold again.
The ore is rendered fluid by this strong burning, and is knocked in pieces with
short-helved hammers. The whole mountain is covered with firs and birches, and
at it is marshy bottom grow young cedars, carefully hedged in.

I left Tagilskoi in a delightful, serene night, to visit other manufactories,
that lie more to the northward, down the river Tagil, and passed an
intrenchment, said to be thrown up by Jermak Timofejef, who is generally known
to have been the first conqueror of Siberia, and who, after penetrating the
country from the Tschussowaja into the Serebrjanka, as far as the brook Kokui,
is said to have erected here winter-tents; but after he had marched over the
mountains to the Tagil, halted and threw up this intrenchment, resting here in
order to build new vessels. There, however, is nothing to be seen but a
rectangular ditch, two fathoms broad, constructed on an elevated cape, scarce
five fathoms from the river. It Is northern flank is fourteen fathoms long and
it is eastern not much above ten, with two or three caves or subterranean
dwellings within.

A few miles from this is a copper-mine and also an iron one, and a manufactory
established near them, now belonging to the crown. The number of houses is not
very great, and the works are performed by peasants, who labor for their
poll-tax. But three neighboring towns are obliged to send 7,500 people, who
are employed in felling of wood, burning of coal, digging, etc. as the
manufacturers cannot be spared for such kind of labor.

Adjoining, is a mountain full of iron-ore, with a summer house on the top, to
which I went on the 3d of July, to see the prospect, which was extensive and
beautiful, commanding the view of many mountains and the course of the Ural, at
about fifteen miles disstance. This mountain produces annually 2,000,000 puds
of iron-stone, and yet this quantity is considered as very trifling.

Of all the Siberian manufactories, Kuschwinskoi is the first where agriculture
has taken place. By the laudable regulations of Assessor Alexey Moskwin, the
inhabitants, for some years, have grown their own wheat, and the crops here
were very promising, notwithstanding the cold, woody and mountainous situation
of this district. About the Kuschwa, the cedars begin to be very abundant, and
the forests, on the uninhabited mountain, full of wild animals. Sables are
seldom caught here alive, as the peasants take them quite young from their
nests; but there is plenty of boars, hyaenas and wolves. They catch here a
great many striped ground-squirrels, which dwell every where throughout the
fir, pine and cedar-woods, and chiefly live on the seeds of trees; they climb
the trees, but make holes and provision-chambers in the ground, in which they
lie in winter, carrying thither, by means of the bags in their cheeks, all
sorts of seeds. Notwithstanding the beauty of their furs, and they might easily
be caught by children, they care little about them. This animal is to met with,
in summertime, in all the resin-woods, from the Kama throughout Siberia, and
is a prey to sables and other species of weasels. During winter, they hide
themselves in holes underground, live there on the provisions they collect in
summer, and though covered with deep snow, are never benumbed by the cold or
thrown into a torpid state as the marmottes. The mole is common in this
district and remarkable for it is uncommon great size, and, sometimes, for it is
snowy whiteness.

The roads in this country are, in some places, very passable, in others,
almost impassable. Round the manufactories they are kept in repair, and bridges
are thrown over the rivers; in other places, they are to be crossed only by
fording, or on rafts. Dr. Pallas rode chiefly on horseback, his baggage
following him or meeting him at certain places, sometimes in wagons and
sometimes on pack-horses.

The Siberian plough, which is here used and throughout Siberia, is without
wheels, like the Russian, and has only a cross pole with handles, a pair of
shafts, within which the horse walks, and a bent plough-handle fixed before,
with a double or single coulter. It is a heavy instrument and far from a
convenient one. They use the Finland harrow as being strong and fit for stony
ground. Husbandmen, in winter, are chiefly employed in hunting sables and
martens, with snow-shoes and terrier dogs, and commonly shoot them with balls
and blunt arrows, from trees. Hunting the sable is more difficult than that of
the marten, which, as soon as pursued by the hounds, climbs up a tree and is
easily killed, but the sable runs for it and endeavors to deceive his pursuers
like a hare and, at last, when he sees no other refuge, takes to the trees and
there meets his destruction.

In my journey I arrived, on the 5th of July, at a place called Jelkina,
settled by Woguls, on both sides of the Tura. These people neither practice
husbandry nor breeding of cattle, but live merely by hunting. In other
respects, they perfectly imitate the Russians, in their habitations, dress and
way of living, and rather make use of the Russian language than their own;
indeed they seem ashamed to speak their mothertongue before a Russian. They
have, for many years, been converted to the Greek church, but yet remain very
dull and ignorant christians. I changed horses here, (but had some difficulty
to do it, as some of the inhabitants keep only one horse between two) and took
with me some guides to show me the places where they dig jasper and
vari-coloured marble. Close to this place I was obliged to ford the river Iss,
called, in Wogul language, Ass, and soon after having crossed a lofty mountain,
rode through a tract, along the river Tura, where the grass stood so high as to
pass over the horse and it is rider. When we reached the marblequarry, it became
dark, but as the spot was dry, I resolved to spend the night here, which was
very serene and, of course, we had no covering but the vaulted sky: yet, as the
night was frosty and we were exposed to the wild boars, it was necessary to
light a fire, which our Wogulians did with uncommon agility; not with
brimstone, for it is vapor and smoke is apt to drive away wild animals to a
great distance, and injurious to to the hunter, but they carry with them a
handful or two of that soft, faded grass, which the rivers throw out, dried in
their bosom, lay the kindled birch-spunk upon it, (which is a kind of fungous
that grows on the birch tree and holds fire), and lift it toward the wind, or
blow it with their mouth, till it flames. The Russians have adopted the same,
and call the grass Puischekcha.

Rising in the morning from my airy couch, I consulted my guides, and they led
me through a marshy pine-wood, where the trees were so thick and the ground so
miry, that our clothes were torn, our faces scratched and our horses, every now
and then, up to the saddle in mire. There was no plant to be seen here, except
the mountain chickweed, (Moehringia and Linnaea), which I often cursed in this
district, it is bloom being always here a token of most impervious mires and
impenetrable pine-woods.

In this unpleasant situation I rode the whole forenoon, and at last, past,
with a great deal of trouble, two miry brooks and came into a woody tract,
burnt out to the distance of some miles square, where a tempest, or as the
Woguls call it, an evil spirit had raged in such a manner, that it could not
have looked more terrible had it been done by an enemy; but the worst was, that
we lost our path among the felled trees, that laid across the road, and the
swampy mire that scarce had a bottom; yet the Woguls trusted to their
geographical knowledge and were convinced they should find the right path
through this wilderness: Not disposed to return back, I allighted and led my
horse by the bridle, skipping and jumping over the trees, and sometimes up to
my knees in mire; but as there was no danger of breaking our necks or bones, we
continued wandering through this wood, with axes in our hands, clearing a way
before us for a mile and a half. At last, the courage and strength of my whole
retinue of Woguls and soldiers left them; this obliged me to halt, and I sent
two Woguls on before, to see whether they could find away out, but they came
back frightened at the scream of an owl which they heard, without doing what I
ordered them. At last, they confessed they had not passed through this forest
for many years, and that they were entirely ignorant of it is extent and
situation. Necessity, therefore, obliged us to go back and we crossed the Tura,
where the water came up to our saddles and, at last, got to a village, quite
spent by this miry expedition.

The forest, along the Tura, has, here and there, some cedars and a great
number of tall larches, where I met with the gum of old, burnt trunks, which I
have mentioned. On one tree, I found a peculiar kind of gum and on it is rind a
sort of turpentine resin, but on all other young wood, I could only meet with
the resin. The Woguls gather this gum and use it as glue, or chew it on account
of it is sweetish taste, as a dentifrice for cleaning and preserving their
teeth. In this, they are like the Greek girls, who chew mastick for for the
same purpose.

Next morning I proceeded on my journey and crossed the Tura again, and passed
two little villages. Every one was now busy making hay, at which the women and
girls made a great parade. On account of the flies and gnats, which are very
troublesome, each takes with them a pot full of lighted birch, spunks or foul
wood, which is rotten like touch-wood, fastened on a board, in order to prevent
their clothes from catching fire. They prefer the smoke of birch-spunks in
their houses here, as it drives away the insects and does not hurt their eyes.
Without this smoke, there would be no rest in these woody and northern
districts. They kindle also such things and create a smoke in their yards, to
which the cattle repair at night, in order to be free from the torture of the
flies: as, at this time, it rains almost every day, and the cut grass cannot
get thoroughly dry on the ground, they do not make it into cocks, but in long,
small walls, erected between wooden poles stuck in the ground or run across; in
such walls the wet hay gets dry presently and does not heat. Their scythes are
like most Siberian ones. Their form is like a long, narrow and bent knife,
fastened on a crooked club, with which the mower, at each step, cuts to the
right and left, by swinging the club about in his hands.

Going on, we saw an impending hail-storm before us, and I had just time to
have a felt-tent raised, to save us from the wet. In our way to another
iron-manufactory, we had to pass such a wood, as that in which we were lately
lost. The horses sunk, every now and then, up to their breasts in mire, and
though we went very slowly on, were, every moment, in danger of being
overthrown or losing our eyes by the projecting pine-branches. The proprietor
leaves the road in this bad condition for political reasons, to deprive
searchers of ore or inquisitive travelers from coming to his mines. Some of
the horse and soot-paths are laid with birch timber and may be rode on with
pleasure, and suchlike roads might be made throughout the forest, at a little
expense; but he took care to leave the most miry spots, where the mud is almost
bottomless, without any improvement. It is in these very soft marshy places
that pines, poplars and cedar-firs grow best and most handsome, particularly
where the mine is bottomless. In this forest, I found the spurge laurel,
(Daphne Mezereum), the red berries of which are here known by the name of wild
pepper. The berries are used for different purposes; internally, as an emetick
for coughs in children; and, externally, to rub the cheeks with in the bath,
which become red, as if inflamed by the sharpness of the juice, so that the
lower class of women use it as paint. The kernels of the berries are bruised
and taken, by the peasants, as a purge; a proof that their intestines cannot be
sound. The root, which is sharper than the plant, is used as a remedy for the
toothache.

Wood-cocks, hares and sables, are here caught by means of traps, called
Slopezi, which, to break off a tedious narrative, I shall here describe. A spot
is chosen where the pines do not grow thick, and where two young trees stand at
about seventeen feet from each other. From these trees they cut off all the
lower branches. Near one of these pines a pale or post, about eight feet high,
is driven into the ground. To this they fasten a pine-pole horizontally, so
that one end shall be fixed to one tree and the opposite end between the post
and the other tree. Over this pole they fasten another, as a beam, almost
parallel with it, so loosely fixed to one tree, at one end, that the other may
be moved up and down between the post and the other tree, which is hewn smooth
where the beam falls. This end of the beam is raised by a slight lifter,
supported in a notch at the top of the post and it is end brought down by a
piece of bast, to the lower beam, where it is fastened, with a wood-cock or a
piece of meat, by way of bait, so, as that when the bait is moved, the lifter
loses it is hold, and the upper-beam falls down on the sable or marten, creeping
on the lower-beam and catching at the bait, and thus kills it with it is weight.

Having inspected all the mines and mountains in this district, I will now give
my readers some account of the Woguls, who inhabit the forests on the northern
side of mount Ural and are settled about the brook Targa, where I was on the
15th of July, and took up my night's lodging among them. The Woguls inhabit
these forests in single families, and each family reckons it is distance and
claims the land of the adjacent neighborhood as far as they can reach in
hunting. Having no other resource to live on, necessity keeps them at as a
great a distance from each other as possible, for were they to live together in
villages, they would not be able to find sufficient game for their subsistence.
Though most of them acquire a handsome property by catching of sables and other
animals, yet they keep no horses, partly because they have no pasture for them,
are unable to secure them from the bears and partly because they can better
pursue their game in these pathless and marshy forests on foot. The richest
among them keep a few cows, which always remain with the women near the huts,
and these are all the domestic animals they have, except a few dogs and of
these a very few. Yet nature has assigned them a sufficient property in the
beasts of the forests. The elks are their chief subsistence. Each family of
Woguls makes an enclosure in it is district on some commodious spot, which often
extends to a distance of seven, nine or more miles, through the solitary
forest, fenced in with pales made of split firs and pines. They are very
careful of these enclosures, and will not suffer any one to make hay, fell wood
or take the game within them. At certain distances, these enclosures have
openings, provided with pits and spring-bows, that kill the game as soon as the
bait is touched, and catch whatever passes through. It frequently happens, that
they catch, in these pits, female elks and their young ones, and sometimes
reindeer, though such are very scarce in this district. Their meat, which they
never eat fresh, is cut out into long slices, and dried without salt, either in
smoke or in the air. This is their usual food, which they eat either boiled or
dry, out of their hands. Should they have the ill luck not to catch any game
for a long time, and should their provision be consumed, they break the
elk-bones, which are laid aside, boil them in water, and make with them a kind
of broth. But they are seldom reduced to this necessity, for, besides bows and
arrows, and guns, with which most are provided, they catch wood and water fowl;
and those that live near a river fish, with nets and baskets, and, for this
purpose, make boats of hollow trees, like the Russians, or with birch-rinds, in
their own way, sewing them together with elk-sinews and tarring them. They know
of no other meat, except cedar-nuts and berries, which grow in the marshes.
Notwithstanding this, they are healthy and have not the least symptom of
scurvy, though living in a swampy and cold, woody climate. They are ignorant of
the use of plants and domestic remedies; perhaps eating no salt and being
accustomed to the climate, may contribute not a little to their health, yet
they seldom reach an old age. They are fond of purchasing from the Russians,
flour, all sorts of things baked and strong liquor. They barter with the
Russians, skins for clothes, so that they are entirely ignorant of tanning.
They work, indeed, elks claws with their hands and the fat of boiled fish, till
they become soft, and of these they make gloves. They also convert the skin of
the elk into long snow-shoes, or skates, like the Laplanders, with which they
hunt in winter, gluing the wet skin upon them either with larch-tree gum, or
some other glue, prepared by them from reindeer blood and flour, or elk-horn
powder, which, mixed, is to stand one night in a warm oven.

The Woguls are, generally, a short people, feminine and have something in
their faces resembling the Kalmucks, except that their complexions are whiter;
their faces are commonly round, and the women, whose favorite passion is love,
are highly voluptuous. Their hair is generally long, black or dark-brown; few
men only have a thin, reddish beard and light-coloured hair.

The womens' dress consists in white, upper-shifts, made of coarse linen, which
reach to the ground, and are tied round the waist. They hang a cloth, worked
with the needle, over their head, hanging down the back, under which is tied,
round the forehead, a black frontlet, decorated with beads. Their shoes are
made of the bark of trees. Girls go bare-headed, wearing their hair, according
to the present Russian fashion, braided into tresses. In winter, the women wrap
themselves up in skins, like the men.

They have adopted many of the Russian manners, even to their dances. Their own
consist in short motions of their feet set close together, and two persons
dancing make little steps to the music in opposite circles; so that one turns
his back to the other, holding a handkerchief between them, using impassioned
gestures and expressive movements. The musical instrument they use for this
purpose, is a kind of harp, in form of a little boat, called, by them,
Schongourt, strung with six gut-strings, twisted at one end round a piece of
cross wood, and tuned by other little slips of wood. The player takes this
instrument on his knee, beats the base with his left hand, and the treble with
his right. Their melody is simple but harmonious, and in the Tartarian taste.
The Woguls are of Finnish origin and their language, as far as I could see by a
dictionary made therefrom, is similar to that of Finland. But they have many
different dialects among them, and even the pronunciation, with many of the
expressions of the Woguls, in the environs of the Soswa, are already
distinguishable from that of the Woguls about the Tura.

The winter-huts of this people, are square and made of timber, with a flat
roof, in which they make an opening to let in the light, with a door-way to the
north or east. On the left from the door, in the middle of the side-wall,
stands a low oven and near it a chimney, over which the smoke goes out and the
light comes in. Opposite the oven is a broad bench for sleeping on, and against
the south-wall a bench to sit on. They have, commonly, a little vestibule to
this hut, in which stands all sorts of household furniture and vessels; these
consist mostly of troughs, and barrels of hollowed birch-trunks or birch-bark,
which they use for a hundred little necessaries. Of the birch-bark, they make
drinking and eating-vessels, and the women make oblong cradles of it, which are
little more than boxes, and suspend their children in them, within the hut, or
carry them on their backs. Of the upper, fine, birch-bark they make smart,
little boxes, by boiling and cleansing it, sewing the parts together with
sinews and embellishing them with fine shavings of wood, and in these they keep
their needle work. In summertime, they BASKIRIANS, A TARTARIAN TEMPLE and THE
WHITE CRANES.
are seldom to be found in these habitations, but live in open huts, marde of
birch-bark, (Balagani), before which they keep a continual fire, to keep off
the flies and horse-stingers, which are almost insupportable in these districts.

'Some authors,' says Took, pretend that these Woguls are the brethren of the
present Hungarians, and found their conjecture on the situation of the Wogul
territory and the striking resemblance there is between the language of the two
nations. This people was subjected to the dominion of Russia at the same time
with Siberia.

The Woguls, Christians as well as Pagans, purchase their wives, and the latter
have often two at a time. A tolerably handsome one may be bought for the value
of five rubles, and those who cannot afford this, endeavor to steal a wife.
Marriage takes place without any ceremony, the young man pays the price, takes
the girl to his hut and goes to bed to her, and the next day she is his wife. A
lying-in woman is held to be impure for the first six weeks, all which time she
remains alone. The first comer gives a name to the newborn child, without any
other ceremony.

Their burial-places are in the woods. They dress the deceased, put him between
four boards and lay him with his head to the north. The grave they call Vanka,
and in it they lay a bow, arrows and other implements, without any other form.

I could obtain no accurate or positive account respecting their ancient,
religious opinions, because they obstinately deny the superstitions wherewith
they are still infected, and call themselves Christians. It is certain,
however, that they still persist in their ancient idolatry, worshipping several
idols, and particularly for the sake of hunting. It is said that they call on
different idols for elk-hunting, sable-hunting, etc. and even bring offerings
to the images of these animals. There is an elk-calf, (Wolenn), roughly carved
in stone, near the habitation of the rich Wogul Denischkin, upon the Soswa, of
which they relate many fictitious stories, about it is being petrified. Over it
they have built a hut, to which the Woguls repair from the most distant parts,
in order to obtain a lucky hunting-day, by their prayers and little offerings.
They have, also, idols of human shape; some of them are carved in wood and have
shot or coral-beads instead of eyes. About a year since, some ore-searchers
found, in a tract of wood, between the Soswa and the Loswa, on a high pine, a
cast, brazen image of a human form, with a hunting lance, and this certainly
was a Wogul idol. Before they were converted, they used to place their idols on
steep, rock-walls, in rock-caverns or on high pines, that their worship might
excite a sacred awe. Near the Loswa, just above the brook Schaitanka, is a
cavern, in a chalk-mountain, renowned, to this day, for being a temple or
sanctuary of the Woguls. Several bones of victims and sometimes little images,
copper-rings with carved figures, etc. have been found in it, which the Woguls
purchase from the Russians, and secretly adore as idols. Numberless brooks,
mountains and places are called, in this part of Siberia, Schaitanka, or
Ichaitanskaja, because the Woguls held there, their idolatrous worship and
their idols, and are called indiscriminately, by the Russ inhabitants,
Schaitan, or the Devil.

'Torim,' says Took, is a divinity, under whose symbol they convey the idea of
a universal god, the merciful Sovereign of the world. They have diverse deities
inferior to him and in subordination, and distinguish them by various names.
The sun they conceive to be the abode of Torim; but that orb itself is, with
them, a divinity, as is the moon, the clouds and principal phenomenon of
nature. The Devil, whom they call Koul, is, with them, of very little
consequence; they consider him as a contemptible being, and scarce bestow a
thought on him.

The chief festival of the Woguls is called Yelbola, and held at the
commencement of the year, which is at Easter, and the feast is said to be that
at which God descends upon the earth, by which they mean the return of spring.
Another festival is Cenkobo; celebrated on the second new moon after Yelbola.
At these festivals, they sacrifice victims, either a horse, cow, sheep, goat,
or wild-fowl. Sacrifices for the sick, everyone performs at home.

On the 22d of July I visited another magnet mountain, that which lies near the
river Iss. The magnets here are mixed with gray blind, and are often found of
many puds weight. I saw magnets of seven pounds that would lift and bear above
thirty-six pounds weight; small magnets that would raise twenty or twenty-five
times their own weight, have been found here.

On my return to Newjanskoi, and not far from that manufactory, I met again
with that beautiful red-lead spar, which I saw in the gold-mines, and which has
never been seen in any other corner of the world; and had now an opportunity of
finding out the quantity of lead it contained. I made an assay and found that
100 lb. would produce about forty-three pounds of lead and about one grain of
silver; whereas the raw clay, from which the spar was dug, yielded but six
pounds of lead per cwt.

August 17, 1770. There is nothing further in our Author's travels, that would
entertain our readers or be any ways useful to them, till he arrived at
Troizkaja Krepost, on the 17th of August. This is a fort lying on the left of
the river Ui, which springs from the Ural, not far from the sources of the
Jaik. The Uwelka unites with the Ui, about three quarters of a mile from the
fort, and is much broader than the latter, which here does not exceed seven or
eight fathoms. This place, where the chief officers and men of the line reside,
is pretty enough; it is built in a square form, with bastions in the angles of
it is wooden wall and ravelins, also four towers with gafes upon the flanks,
besides a ditch, chevaux-de-frize and competent ordnance. Of public buildings
there is a fine stone-built church, a wooden church, a mansion for the general,
and sundry pretty buildings, in which the several officers live. The rest of
the houses are not in good condition, except that of the custom-house-director
and some new dwellings belonging to merchants. All the houses, which amount to
some hundreds, are built in regular streets and the name of each street wrote
on the corner, in black tablets. Here is a bridge over the Ui, whose opposite
side, belonging to the Kirguese, has a well built market, where trade
flourishes with the Asiaticks. It is an extensive square, built of wood,
divided into a piazza and Bucharian marketplace, on the left; another on the
right, for the natives, and a large place, encompassed with great booths, for
the trade of the Kirguese, besides some bastions and a wooden watchtower,
which commands a view over the Kirguisian step. It is also fortified with
chevaux-de-frize and on three sides, from the river, surrounded with ditches.
About the river are inns, built with wood, and eating-houses, for the trading
people and merchants.

I can say little about the trade here, which has been reckoned more extensive
and advantageous than that of Orenburg, there having, for a year past, been a
misunderstanding between the whole horde of the Kirguese, who inhabit the
neighboring step, and come here to trade; which misunderstanding has not only
estranged them from these boundaries, but also determined them to render the
road of the Asiatic caravans, to this place, unsafe; and it is but a few weeks
since they sent a detatchment of regular light horse into the step, which went
a great way without getting a sight of a single Kirguisian; so that a
reconciliation with this people is not soon to be expected.

During my stay here, the chief of the horde, called Ablai Sultan, sent some
deputies, but their proposals and pretensions were so excessive as not to be
granted. Here is a strong garrison of Baskirians, and a report of warlike
preparations has made the Kirguisian warriors so shy, that there is none to be
seen in the whole step, as far as the mountains. This has been confirmed by
merchants who traveled from thence, and who were so lucky as not to meet a
single Kirguisian: but another caravan arriving soon after, had not the same
good fortune, but was stopped and detained by the Kirguese till late in autumn.

As far as I could learn, most of the caravans come here from Taschkent. There
are but few Bucharians, and those of Chewinzka are seldom to be met with. The
goods, brought by the caravans, are spun and new cotton, coarse and fine
cotton-stuff, callico of different qualities, of which that of Taschkent is the
best; they seldom bring India ones. Cotton and silk-girdles, printed
cotton-curtains, table-cloths and shirts; a kind of bad velvet, curled and
striped lamb-skins; Turkey worm-seed and dried fruits; also Chinese silver and
Bucharian, or Persian, gold-coins. The goods they carry back, are red and
scarlet cloths, foreign velvet, camblets manufactured about the Jaik, all sorts
of light furs of different goodness, furs of the Wolga-musk sewed together,
otter and beaver-furs for trimmings, Russian-hides, black and red; of small
wares, iron-locks, needles, vari-coloured glass-beads, loaves of sugar, paper,
and colors, as, alum, vitriol, cochineal, brazil, indigo, orpiment, ceruse,
common paper, etc. etc.

The trade here, with the Asiatic merchants is, in general, less than at
Orenburg, and the goods brought here are of less value; but the barter-trade
with the Kirguisian Cossacks of the middle horde, is far greater and of more
consequence. These latter are not so much versed in trade as the Kirguese of
the little horde, who trade at Orenburg; their horses and the rest of their
cattle are better, and the merchants here established gain on both sides; and
add to this, that all Kirguisian cattle are cheaper at Troizkoi than at
Orenburg. Oxen are more plentiful in this horde and, therefore, bought here in
great numbers, and there are large and handsome bullocks among them. Horses
here are larger and stronger, but as wild and untamed as those of the little
horde. Sheep and goats are of the same form and nature; besides these the
Kirguese bring furs of wolves, red foxes, step-foxes and little ground-foxes;
lamb, sheep and oxen skins, coarse camels-hair, colt-skins, hair-lines, etc.
etc.

In order to give the reader some idea of the luxury of these Asiatic nomades
and to show their wants, I will add here a list of all wares and toys, which
the merchants of this realm barter with them, at a great price, and for which
they receive cattle, furs, and Chinese silver, which the Kirguese get by their
cattle-trade. These goods are, scarlet and red cloths, from the finest sort to
the soldier's coat, camblets manufactured in the country about the Jaik,
calimancoes, white and parti-colored stuffs; napkin-cloth, Chinese
cotton-stuffs, nankeen, Chinese and foreign velvets, old and new furs covered
with silk and half-silk stuffs; good fox, otter and beaver-furs, for bordering
of caps; thin silk clothes, striped and figured linens for clothes; cotton and
silk-girdles of Astrachan; hides and cordovans; all sorts of female ornaments;
tresses, tassels, fringes, breast-pendants, turned and polished glass-beads;
pearls, a kind of snail-shells, called Serpent-heads; looking-glasses, combs,
razors, needles, silk-yarn and silk-thread; ceruse, rouge; all sorts of
iron-wares, as cast and hammered boilers, ladles, trevets, chains,
horse-harness, locks, pad-locks, iron-traps, axes, knives of all sorts, sizars,
fire-steels; buckles, iron, copper and tin-buttons; funnels, needle-cases,
snuff-boxes, pipes, tobacco, horn-cases; also copper and tin-ware, raw and in
plates; iron-wire, tin-vessels, varnished and common cups; little trunks, with
iron-bands; carts and wagons; materials for dying, as alum, vitriol, red-wax,
sealing-wax, pitch; groats, rye-bread and wheat, common tea, hay, etc. All
these articles being mostly inland goods, are sold at a considerable price to
the Kirguese, and make a commercial intercourse with that nation very important.

It being well authenticated that the adjacent districts of the step were free
from Kirguese, I would not neglect the opportunity of viewing some remarkable
places there; I therefore went, on the 17th of August, to a Koschena, or
Tartarian temple, kept sacred both by the Kirguese and Baskirians, and situated
in the middle of the desert, upon a little river which flows into the Ui, about
seventy-five miles from this place. My escort consisted of twenty Cossacks,
from the district of the river Ui, and eighty Baskirians, Mestscheraks and
Tartars, with the Baskirian Starchin Schoker. Having traveled unmolested the
whole day, I ordered my tent to be erected in the evening, and slept quietly on
the step. The night was gloomy, yet without dew, and the next morning was fine
and serene. The day after, we reached the Tartarian temple, to see which, I
undertook the journey. It stands on an elevated, open, level ground, in perfect
good condition, and the wooden-work, within shows, that it is not so very
ancient as reported; yet there is no Baskirian or Kirguese that remembers it is
being erected. Round about it, is a circular ditch, 100 fathoms in
circumference, which, on account of the sandy soil, is not very deep. Within
this ditch is the place where the Kirguese, if in the neighborhood, bury their
dead.

The lower part of the building, of which I have given a representation, is
square, thirteen Russian else in breadth and seventeen in length: the front and
entrance are toward the south, and raised above the lower part by a wall of
two else and a half; the three other sides are ornamented with a cornice,
consisting of nine rows of outstanding bricks, of which the three middle ones
turn their angles outward. On the whole front, runs a chamsret, as an
ornament, and two others on both sides of the porch. This porch is of Gothic
construction. It is three else and three-quarters wide, and rather more than
seven else high. Within, on both sides, there are arched niches, four else high
and two and a half broad and deep, in each of which is a little, square
air-hole through the wall. The inner-door is also arched, but the inside of the
arch is filled up with a thin wall, resting on a cross-beam, of course, the
height of the gate, from the sill to the cross-beam, is but three else and a
half, and the breadth, seven-fourths. As the bottom or floor of the building
within is somewhat raised, there are a couple of brick-steps before it, and on
the upper-step lies a sill of firwood, not in the least decayed, but worn in
passing in and out. The chapel within is just nine else square and the walls
are two else thick; the roof, within, is vaulted, flat in the middle and built
in a workman-like manner, and the center of the roof is ornamented with a ball
of argill and white earth; the angles of the roof are rounded off and decorated
with bricks, placed in in the form of scales and supported by pilasters; in the
middle of each side, within, are niches and a circular place left in the center
of each niche, half way through the wall. To give light to this chapel, there
are, in the west side, some window-holes; underneath the windows, within, all
round the building, is a hollow cornice, where it is evident lights were burnt,
and wherein are three air-holes in the southern wall, and two in the
side-walls. In the corner are some blind holes, the use of which I could not
conceive. Near the floor is another hollow cornice all round, which renders the
walls thinner in these places, and, at the bottom, seems as if it had been
gnawn and some stones fallen out in sundry places. Above this square building,
which is eight else and a half high, stands, not directly over the center but
straight over the arch, a funnel, resembling a twelve-angled cupola, on a
perpendicular brick-work, five else and a half high, with a plain cornice round
it. The cupola is eight else high, open above, within which are many
cross-beams, so that a person may climb up to the top, and that it may more
easily be done, there is a birch-trunk within, with short cut branches, serving
as a ladder.

The whole building consists of red-bricks, similar in shape and form to
European ones. The stones, of the inside floor, are square and of a cubic form,
and laid in mortar, which seem quite fresh; the roof only is thinly overgrown
with moss.

Within the porch, are birch-poles leaned on both sides, hung and covered with
tufts of horses hair, manes and tails, and some rags of silk-cotton. The
Kirguese believe it salutary to their horses, if some of their tails and manes
is left in such a sacred place, and it is generally a Tartarian custom, when
passing before such holy places, to leave something of what they have with
them. Within the porch also, in part of the wall, we found all sorts of little
stones, some lead balls, an arrow, gunpowder, etc. Some of the Tartars of my
escort, having said their prayers, made an addition to these things, among
which were a few small copper-coins. Probably the blind angle-holes within were
designed for the deposit of such little offerings.

Within the ditch was a variety of old and new graves, close together. The old
ones, on account of the sandy soil, were almost fallen in, and it was clear
that they were cased to a considerable depth, with birch-pales and wood covered
with little boards. At every grave, at the north or head-end was stuck,
upright, a birch-pole, seven feet high, or one or two wooden lances, with
ribbands or rags tied on the top, by way of flag; and the latter is said to be
peculiar to the graves of men. On some, the turf was beaten smooth and covered
with mats of thin reed-grass, sewed together. About many were some old
latticed-work of their felt tents, which encompassed the grave like a hedge.
Upon some, lay old saddles, wooden bowls, ladles, etc. One was covered with a
frame, on which they weave narrow pieces of camblets; on many was a wooden
spade, with the handle stuck in the earth, and about most were twisted, round
the trellis or enclosures, long girdles or ropes of horse or camels hair. On
one grave, lay a kind of coffin, in form of a little boat, and turned on it is
flat cover, but it is size shows it would have held only a child. On one, was
placed part of a cart of Kara-Kalpakskoi, with it is two wheels seven feet high,
which, perhaps, was used in carrying the body. This appeared to be one of the
handsomest graves, or tombs. Round the temple, grew a great deal of kali, and I
remark this, because I saw it no where else afterward, either in these
districts or those of the Samara or Irtish.

My drawing and description was not so soon finished as the prayer of the
Baskirians who accompanied me. I see out on my return at five o'clock, encamped
on the road and reached Troizkaja the next night, without any disaster, but
that of our horses being almost knocked up.

On the 23d. of August, I set out from Troizkaja to trace the river Ui, up to
the Uralian mountains, and in my way, toward night, was obliged to sleep at a
guard-station, owing to a rising thunder-storm in view. Scarce had I arrived,
but such a dreadful storm broke out, as I had never seen in any country I had
passed through. It lasted three full hours, and during all this time, one could
scarce count six seconds and generally but two or three, without seeing the
most fiery flashes of lightning and hearing the most tremendous roars of
thunder. The thunder-cloud had formed in the western sky, a broad, dark girdle,
which stood immovable, and underneath this cloud it flashed without
interruption; at last, a violent shower followed, and the next day was warm and
serene again, except a few wandering thunder-clouds.

One of these forts was attacked this summer by 1000 Kirguisian robbers, who
had hidden themselves in the neighboring pine-wood, and during a blind attack
upon this small garrison, carried off from the step all the horses belonging to
the fort, that were there feeding, and the sentinels with them, who were placed
to watch the horses; some of whom were killed on the first onset, and the
garrison, then deprived of horses, was unable to pursue them.

But this was a trifling disaster to the air-plague, which raged here in the
neighborhood at this time, and might, perhaps, be owing to the situation of
the place, the morasses of a mountainous district, exposed to the burning heat
of the sun. It was with difficulty my horses could gain admittance into the
fort, an edict having been issued by the commanding-officer, that no strange
cattle should be admitted into an infected place. But my opinion was, that it
was proper to admit them and not suffer them to be exposed on the ground, which
was the source of the disorder. I shall here dwell a little on the nature of
this distemper, which makes a great ravage in this district, in moist and hot
summers, where there are open steps or deserts, with numberless, fresh, bitter
and salt water lakes, and annually along the Siberian line, by destroying a
number of regimental horses, there quartered.

A description of this plague may be thought useless to an English reader, but
when it is considered, that the same cause may operate in this and other
countries, a little enquiry into it may not be unacceptable.

Notwithstanding all the pains I took to be an eyewitness of the effects of
this plague, I could not get an opportunity to open a fallen horse, and examine
into it as I could wish. The plague had raged during the hot summer-months,
especially when the sultry south-winds blew, but as soon as contrary winds
succeeded, the evil relaxed; but if these contrary winds do not continue, the
disorder rages as before, and will even attack those men, who, in these
districts, are more or less exposed to it. But this evil seldom shows itself in
towns or forts, either on men or cattle. The former commonly feel it in the
field, or when they go into the country, hay-making, attending their herds,
etc. especially where the district is swampy. It has been observed by a
detachment lately in the Kirguisian step, and also upon many other occasions,
that there are certain low grounds, in which this distemper is generally to be
met with. When this detachment had passed the night on such places, it commonly
happened, that not only many horses fell the next day, but that the infection
spread itself to men. All these are very strong proofs of what I heard in other
places, during the winter, of a similar plague, that used to show itself in
malignant tumors. I even know that a gangrenous inflammation of the throat,
about the river Irtish, has been considered as the same plague as that which
raged here. From the above circumstances and other symptoms of the disorder, it
seems plain, that it is principal cause is certain insects hovering in the air,
and almost invisible to the eye. Add to this, that it seizes men, horses and
cows, whose skin is not much sheltered from their attacks; whereas sheep, whose
bodies are defended by their wool, never suffer in this calamity, let it rage
ever so violently; and also, that cooler spots are quite free from this evil,
at a time when it is prevalent in others. About the Irtish, there seldom a year
passes without this plague, but near the water Burla, situated only
seventy-five miles from the Irtish, where the air is always cool, this scourge
to men and beasts is unknown. Here the inhabitants drive all the cattle they
can spare, from the forts and stations, to feed during the unwholesome season.

I will now describe the symptoms of this disorder in men. The first is, that
the soundest and most healthy persons, of any age or sex, are suddenly troubled
with an itching, followed by a hard tumor in some particular part, which seems
to arise from the sting of a fly, or horse-stinger. This swelling breaks out in
the covered or uncovered parts of the people, but generally in the face, and,
among horses, in the groin and abdomen. It rapidly increases in size and
hardness, and grows so insensible, that one may prick the swollen part with a
needle, till we reach the sound flesh under it, and the patient not feel it. In
the center of this hard tumor is commonly discovered, in the external part, a
red or bluish point, similar to the sting of an insect, and if remedies are not
applied, the gangrenous putridity will extend itself farther. During this first
stage of the evil, the patient feels no internal indisposition, but with the
increase of the boil, he is afflicted with head-achs, anxiety and restlessness,
which are, perhaps, but the natural consequences of his fear of danger; though
the same anxiety, even to sadness, is visible in cattle, but not till the
distemper has reached it is highest degree and seems incurable. Some peasants,
who accompanied me and had been afflicted with this disease, told me, that,
after the first symptoms had shown themselves, whenever they rode through a
brook or within sight of water, they felt themselves very faint, feeble and
ready to swoon.

Cattle generally die of this distemper, partly because the boil is discovered
too late, and partly because the common people do not like to meddle with the
cows; but men presently get free from it, as soon as proper remedies are
applied. Dr. Gmelin has, in his Siberian travels, described the method of
curing it. The common people, after pricking the hard swelling in several
places with a long needle, rub into it a mixture of sal ammoniac and tobacco,
enjoining the patient not to drink any thing cold and to refrain from certain
food. About the Irtish, they prick the tumor and bathe it with a strong lie of
wormwood-ashes, and a decoction of tobacco and sal ammoniac, or alum. On the
line of the river Ui, infallible cures are said to be performed by a hot
application of nightshade, reduced to powder, sal ammoniac, levain and
oatmeal. Yet the generality of the lower-class of people, prefer rather the
old, painful remedy, and even surgeons have adopted it. In some places, they
apply a living frog to the part, but I cannot say with what success. The
remedies I have mentioned, often successfully applied to horses, are of such a
nature, that they will kill any species of insect, and corroborates my opinion
of their being some venomous insect, which, during the sultry summer days,
rises in the air of certain, swampy spots and finds it is way into the skins of
animals, thus causing that dangerous, gangrenous and deadly swelling. Perhaps
this is an insect similar to that observed by Swedish naturalists, and which
Linnaeus calls furia infernalis, or the hellish fury, of which we have had but
very few accounts; but it is not, probably, of the same species, it having been
remarked in Sweden, that this insect causes a much more rapid and most
torturing death, Linnaeus Systema Naturae. Edit. 12. Vol. II. p. 1325.
whilst this of Siberia operates slowly and almost without pain; but the
experiment may be tried, which was successfully used in Sweden, whether an
application of turned milk, or fresh, white cheese, would not extract the
insect from the infected part. In such disorders, it would be of great use to
keep the cattle all together, in a particular pasture, and make a great smoke
round them, all the time the plague rages, with every sort of roots, dried turf
and dung; which would, in all likelihood, keep off the insects from troubling
them.

This country, as far as Dr. Pallas has hitherto traveled, seems to be
inhabited only by nomade nations, except at the sorts and manufactories. The
old boundary of the Russian empire, before it is territory was extended as it
is, was fortified by a line of redoubts, and properly garrisoned to keep the
Tartar nations from encroachments. These garrisons are still kept up, and he
traveled from one to the other, making excursions from each, on both sides the
line, where he could hear of any thing worth his inspection. It appears that
the roads, from place to place, are beaten and, in summertime, tolerably
passible; near the forts and manufactories, they are kept in some degree of
repair, and where there is no permanent, Tartarian village, and the distance is
too great between fort and fort, post-houses, for the accommodation of
travelers, have been erected, where horses are kept in readiness for their
use.

From the 26th of August to the middle of December, 1770, he was detained, by
an inflammation of his eyes and swelling of the eyelids, occasioned by the
burning heat of the sun and the salt dust, during his journey through the step
or desert of Troizkaja; but, having some young gentlemen with him, who studied
under him, he sent one to explore the country in the neighborhood and another
to take an account of the fisheries in the Caspian sea. The one was employed in
searching the depth of caverns, which are not of sufficient magnitude to claim
the attention of an English reader; but, the Caspian fisheries, we shall give
an account of, as Dr. Pallas has related them from the last gentleman's
account.

September. The weather was so favorable in the beginning of September, that I
wished to have been able to have profited by it, but the least air made my eyes
exceedingly painful. I was able, however, to take notice of the wandering
birds, and it was delightful to see them crowd here from the northern
districts, where, according to accounts received by travelers, the month of
September had begun with snow and frost. These took up their abode in the
numberless lakes of this step, which afford them plenty of food. Every spot was
full of wild-geese, ducks and all sorts of waterfowl, which are never wanting
in autumn, in the province of Isetskoi. In spring, these ultra-marine birds
direct their flight, first to the warm southern steps, which the snow soon
forsakes, and there stay till the northern rivers are free from ice. They then
draw northwards, commonly with the end of April; particularly the north-goose
(Anser Erythropus), the ice-duck (Anas hyemalis), the large, vari-coloured
diver (Colymbus arcticus), the white snow-goose and many others. Great numbers
of these remain and people the lakes, namely, the large wild-goose, common
ducks, diverse, the several species of gulls, the gray and white crane, herons,
woodcocks, etc. yet most of them fly also northward. Several species, however,
remain in these warmer districts and never go farther north, particularly the
bergander (Tadorna), and the red duck (Anas rutila), which arrives the soonest
of all others, (having it is abode in the neighboring, southern districts and
lakes of the Asiatic desert) and returns again with the beginning of August, as
soon as it is young are fledged. Those birds which build their nests northwards,
return to the south in autumn and feed in these watery districts, till the
general approach of winter drives them more to the south or across the sea. The
first that return are the common, wild geese and many species of ducks; soon
after these, the north geese and cranes, and, last of all, the ice-duck,
especially on the salt-lakes.

On the arrival of the geese, preparation is made by the Cossacks and peasants
to catch them, a diversion they are fond of, when harvest is over. The manner
of catching is worthy description, as they are taken flying, in nets of the
following form.

They fix on a lake, pretty well encompassed with birch-wood; such a lake this
bird prefers, as sheltered from the wind and affording a more peaceful retreat,
and greater plenty of food. Every morning, at sunrise, the geese leave these
lakes to feed in the open desert or step, and return at night. On that side of
the lake, or in the place through which the geese are accustomed to return,
they hew down the birches, so as to leave a straight passage or alley about
sixty feet broad, through which the geese will afterward take their flight,
which is not very high, when so near home. When there are more lakes than one
near each other, they open such a passage from one lake to the other; and, as
the ducks will cruise through this passage often in the course of the night,
they are caught also. At twenty-five or thirty fathoms from the lake, they
leave, standing, two very high birch-poles, whose distance is so studied, as to
fit the net which is spread across the avenue from side to side. These nets are
made of strong, hempen cord, from thirty-six to sixty feet long, and from
fourteen to twenty feet broad. The upper part and short sides are bound with a
rope, and at both the upper-corners they fasten a small cord. On the top of the
two tall trees, converted into poles by cutting off the branches, they fasten a
stake perpendicularly with a fork at the end; and, climbing up the trees, carry
the cords, fastened to the corners of the net, up, and fix them over these
forks. This enables them to draw up the net to the top of the poles and expand
it, so that the upper part shall be twenty-four or twenty-eight feet high, and
the lower-part within six or eight feet of the ground. The net is then strained
tight and kept so by strings fastened by pegs to the ground. The end of the
ropes that draw up the net, are fastened also in the ground, at some distance
behind, and the fowlers lie down on the grass, near them, one on each side,
waiting till the morning for their game. The geese generally rise from the lake
an hour before the sun, and, of course, do not see the nets in the dawn, and as
they fly with their necks right forward, their heads are soon through the
meshes. The fowlers, who have the ends of the ropes in their hands in
readiness, no sooner find the geese touch the net, but they immediately let go
the rope, the net falls by the weight of the geese, and they are entangled and
caught. Sometimes they will catch ten, sometimes twenty at a time, but they
always catch some. Besides the large, common goose and north-goose, which is
the most delicate bird, roasted, to be met with, they take, in the same manner,
different sorts of ducks and diverse. When the net is removed in the morning,
they leave the draw-ropes over the forks on the top of the trees, to prevent
climbing a second time, and never remove them wholly, till the season of
catching is over.

At the latter end of this month, arrived here, Capt. R. De Rytschkof, the son
of the learned counselor of state and author of the same name. I left him in
the spring at Ufa, with directions to travel over the northern districts of
Casan, and as he employed himself chiefly in the topography and history of the
people, which will be printed distinct from this tour of mine, it is
unnecessary to say any thing about it here.

For the information of our readers, we will endeavor to supply this
deficiency, from that author. The government or regency of Casan, now
comprehends Permia and the provinces along the Viaitka, neither of which made
any part of the ancient kingdom of Casan, till it was subdued by the Russians.
The greatest number of the Tartars, dispersed by the war, have since collected
and are settled in the environs of that city. They are estimated at above
10,000 males, and occupy two considerable slabodes or suburbs of the city of
Casan, one of which is embellished with two stone-built mosques and several
misgirs or very high, round towers, the remains of the old city. The other
slabode contains two medscheds, or houses of worship, built of wood. All the
other Tartars of this regency, dwell in separate villages, at small distances
from each other, and bounded by those of the Russians.

In the little town of Kargala, thirteen miles from Orenburg, is a colony of
Casanian Tartars, settled in 1755, who, in 1773, paid the tax for 2160 males.
The place is rich, having four medscheds, or places of worship, and what is
very uncommon in this part of the country, a number of pretty large,
stone-built houses.

The mien, etc. of the Tartars of Casan, may serve as the characteristic marks
of all the mahomedan Tartars in their neighborhood, they are, in general,
short, lean; have a small face, a fresh complexion, little nose, small mouth
and small, black eyes; a sharp look and deep, chesnut-coloured hair, which is
lank and turns gray long before they are old. They are, in general, well-made,
and their sprightly manner, straight shape, and modest or timid mien, give them
a very agreeable air.

Their capacity is but moderate, but they are haughty and jealous of their
honor, negligent, but not lazy, clever at all sorts of handicraft-work, neat,
sober, frugal and humane. These virtues they acquire by education and the
precepts of their religion, to which they are zealously devoted. They take a
very particular care to educate their children well, teach them to read and
write the Arabic language, and bring them up very religiously, so that each
school has a chapel and a priest. It is not uncommon to find collections in
manuscript of historical anecdotes, in the huts of the peasants, and their
merchants are extensively acquainted, not only with their own history, but that
of adjoining states, and with the antiquities of each.

The Tartarian women are rather of a wholesome complexion than handsome, of a
good constitution, TARTARS of CASAN.
and, from their infancy, are accustomed to labor, retirement, modesty and
submission. They habituate their youth to labor, to sobriety and a strict
observance of the other manners of their ancestors.

The men shave their heads, leaving only whiskers, and a little beard upon the
chin. They wear linen-shirts, wide trowsers and buskins of skins; but the poor,
wear shoes made of bark. Their other cloth- is a loose and light gown, a long
and wide upper-coat, made after the eastern mode, with long sleeves ending in a
point, generally open within the elbow to pass the arm through; and, on the
outside of all, they wear a belt, to which hangs a sabre, a knife and a
tobacco-pipe. They wear, on their head, a leather cap, over which they have
another sort of cap, flatter and turned up all round, with a padded stuff. The
under-garments of the poor, are made either of linen or nankeen, whilst those
of the rich are composed of silk, gold and silver-stuffs. The outer ones are of
fine or coarse cloth, according to the wealth of the wearer, sometimes faced
and sometimes not; some wear lace on them, and those who can afford it, face
their caps with gold embroidery and mount their sabres with silver.

The dress of the married women, in all the nations where they purchase their
wives, is more costly than that of the girls, because the ornaments of the wife
do credit to the husband, whereas those of girls, would be a needless expense.
The women dress like the men, as to shirts, trowsers, stockings, buskins,
slippers, upper and under-garments; only that the half-boots of the women are
pointed at the toes and the cut of their clothes are somewhat different. In
summertime, their clothes are like those of the Tscheremisses. Instead of
stockings, they wrap their legs in linen rags, tied on with pack-thread, wound
several times round the calf. Their shoes are made of the bark of trees, cut
into shapes and matted. In summer, they wear nothing over their shift, which is
not tucked into their trowsers, but hangs over them, all round. Their shift is
close at the neck and wrists, cut into shape and reaches to the knees. The
neck, wristbands and seams, are covered with a whimsical embroidery of
different colored worsted, a large buckle keeps it together at the bosom, and
a girdle round the waist. When they would be more dressed than ordinary, they
put over this shift a habit like a morning-gown, made of vari-coloured cloths,
tolerably fine, and edge it with beaver-fur. Their caps are very high and in
the shape of a cone, made of birch-bark, covered with skin or linen, ornamented
with glass-beads, little, white shells and silver-coins. From this cap, a
ribbon three inches broad, ornamented in the same manner, falls down on the
back. Some wear a broad ribbon on the forehead, covered with pieces of money
and glass-beads, instead of the conical cap. They wear, also, a number of
rings, thimbles, and all sorts of clattering pendants, at their girdles, which
ornaments reach down to the joint of the knee behind, and in walking, they
gingle as they go.

In their food, they differ a little from their ancestors. Gruel and various
messes of flour have been introduced, and vegetables of the garden. They eat
unleavened bread, baked on the hearth, riceporridge and the Kourmatsch, or
parched corn of antiquity, spoken of in Scripture, Ruth, iii, 14. This is
either wheat, rye, barley or Turkish corn, (Zea mays Linnaei), parched at the
fire and then bruised in a mortar, and either eaten in that state or boiled, or
in porridge with milk and water. This Kourmatsch, kneaded with butter and fried
or baked in an oven, is called Tolkan, and is a delicacy with the Tartars.

Of meat, they are at liberty, by the alcoran, to eat camels, horses, horned
cattle, all sorts of great game, fallow-deer, sheep and goats, mountain-rats,
birds, poultry and fish, but they must eat nothing that dies of sickness or is
strangled; on which account, they cut the throats of the animals they catch,
and cover the blood they shed with earth. But of all flesh, they prefer the
colt, and among all the dishes made of meat, they are fondest of the bisbarmak,
or the five-finged dish, so called, because they eat with the fingers, without
fork or spoon: it is a hash made of fat meat, chopped and stewed. They use no
seasoning; but when they would make a mess uncommonly nice, they add to it
grease or butter. They drink milk alone, or mixed with flour or oatmeal, and
make butter or cheese. On a journey, they have bags, into which they put sour
milk, in order that the whey may run off and enable them to turn the curd to
various uses.

Water is the common drink of the Tartars of Casan; though the rich drink,
sometimes, milk, tea and broths. They cannot dispense with tea, but prepare it
different from ours. They boil it in open pots with milk and water, and, having
seasoned it with butter and salt, drink it hot, out of china or wooden cups.
The alcoran prohibits the use of wine, spirits or beer, but all, without
exception, drink mead, thus made -- The common sort is made of oatmeal, flour
and honey, fermented together, and put into a solution of honey and seven times
the quantity of hot water, filling up the cask with the solution, as they draw
it for use, so that a cask will last a long time; -- this they call Ase-bab.
Another kind of mead, made of honey, whey and wild cherries, beaten together,
they call Eiran.

Only a small number, even of the rich, sleep on feather-beds; the usual manner
is to put a piece of felt or carpeting on the bench which goes round the room,
and to lie down upon it. Very few have pillows, and they never take off their
clothes at night.

The koran enjoins a cleanliness, which they carry to excess. They wash
themselves, all over, several times every day, and, least they should contract
any impurity from the natural excretion of urine, they make water sitting on
their heels.

They commonly eat four times a day. The bench on which they sleep, serves them
for table and chairs, each sitting on his legs, after the eastern manner. They
wash and pray before and after each meal.

In wealthy families, the women lodge and eat apart, and are veiled when they
go abroad, and even at home they are never seen, but when the husband wishes to
show particular respect to his guests. The lower class of women and servants
are less retired, and walk abroad publicly.

Old men, of good character, are held in great veneration, and as the beard
turns gray very early in life, with them Akschakal, or grey-beard, is an
honorable title, which they confer on such men as are wise and prudent. These
are always consulted in matters of importance, supply the place of priests,
have always precedence and are arbitrators in all disputes.

The alcoran admitting of polygamy, every man is allowed four wives, but the
greatest part have but one; the rich often take two, some will go so far as
three, but very few venture upon four. These wives all enjoy the same right,
each having a claim to the caresses of her husband in her turn. The purchase
and maintenance of wives being expensive, and more than one creating
disturbance in a family, they consult their interest rather more than their
pleasure, and do not run to the end of the line allotted them. The custom is,
to marry a second wife when the first ceases to be young and loses the power of
pleasing; yet this first is the principal wife, though the new one is in
possession of her husband's affections. Merchants, who travel, have a wife at
every place where they have a house. Should a merchant's wife intrigue, he
gives her up to her gallant and takes another. A Ghivinsian, at Orenburg, who
had thus disposed of his eighth wife, was already promised to a ninth. Parents
urge their sons to marry whilst boys, but do not so with their daughters. In
the regency of Casan and Orenburgh, the kalym or price of a wife is from twenty
rubles to 500; but the bride generally brings a fortune with her, equal to a
fourth-part and, sometimes, to the half of what she costs.

The evening before marriage, the part over the os pubis is shorn by women, and
the espousals consist in a public declaration of the agreement between the
parties contracting; a priest then repeats a prayer, pronounces them to be man
and wife, and the festival is closed with music and dancing. They have an
instrument, peculiar to them, called Koba, a kind of violin, open at top, in
shape something like a gondola, having two hair-strings and played on with a
fiddle-stick; the notes stopped by the fingers of the left hand, like a violin.
The songs of the Tartars are commonly in blank-verse, but very poetical and
full of expression. Lovers compare each other to the sweet crane and tender
turtle-dove, and present them with their eyes, their eyebrows, etc. Their music
is martial, the dancing of the men, brisk and lively; but that of the women,
slow and trailing, with the hands always held before the face.

Barrenness in a wife is a great disgrace, especially if a man has but one
wife, and the barren women is always despised by those that have children. A
woman, after childbirth, is held impure, till the customary signs of health
return, at which times she purifies herself by prayer and bathing. The child is
carried to the priest within seven days of it is birth, who whispers a prayer
into it is ear, gives it a name and then prays aloud. The name given, is
generally that of the month in which it is born, so that the whole nation would
have but thirteen names, if the father did not give the child the additional
one of some relation, which is always done at the festival-dinner, given on
this occasion. Among the Nogayan Tartars, settled about Astrachan, they
endeavor to facilitate the delivery of women, by fixing a belt under their
arms, hoisting them up by this and letting them fall successively. Boys are
circumcised between the age of six and fifteen, by a man who makes it his
profession, and, as it is dishonorable not to have undergone this ceremony
before the age of fifteen, the rich always pay for the poor.

When persons are dangerously ill, they are visited by the priest, who prays
with them. When dead, the corpse is washed, wrapped in a linen or cotton
winding sheet, so as to have the face only uncovered, and then sprinkled with
camphire. This done, the priest fastens a label on the breast of the deceased,
with this sentence written on it, in Arabic, There is but one God and Mahomet
is his Prophet.

The body is carried to the grave in a coffin, but put into the earth without
it. The graves are five or six feet deep, made north-west and south-east, with
a space on one side within it, large enough to hold the body. Here it is
placed, so that when the earth is thrown on, it does not touch the corpse; for
they conceive, that after a short time, two angels take it to the
judgment seat. For the first three days, it is not lawful to light a fire in
the house of the deceased; and, during the first month, solemn prayers are said
twice a day for the dead, under an idea, that his trial is going on in that
time. One passage in their ritual is, O God, give him not over unto Hell, but
transplant him shortly into Paradise!

The graves of the rich are distinguished by erecting over them a little hut of
balks, or by placing stones round them; for the splendid times are past in
which the stately mausoleum was erected to the dead. Others place only a post,
with a short inscription on it, whilst others have a head-stone and an epitaph
on it. A specimen of these epitaphs, we have given when speaking of Ufa.

Not to enter into a detail of all the Mahomedan doctrines and opinions, it
will suffice to show the accustomed ceremonies and general belief of the
followers of Mahomet, in the Russian empire. Modertion, in religious matters,
being held to be a mortal sin, every village has it is medsched, or chapel. In
cities, mosques are spacious and neat, but without ornament, and, within, is an
elevated place where the koran is read and explained. The floor is covered with
carpets, and before the door is a small vestibule, where every person leaves
his shoes, on entering the house of prayer. So say the Scriptures. Take thy
shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou stand is holy ground.
The medscheds of small villages are poor, little huts, badly constructed, with
a gallery instead of a steeple, from whence the sexton calls the people to
devotion. The clergy are composed of agouns or highpriests, and moulas or
priests. One of their agouns has his seat at Casan, another at Astrachan and a
third at Tobolsk. The clergy have no settled income, but are often obliged to
get a living by trade.

According to their faith, a mahomedan becomes impure, by touching a dead body,
eating unclean food, coition, all the natural excretions and many other
actions; but bathing and prayer will purify the polluted body, of course, they
are always at it, for piety and good, they say, deserve heaven. They have
several ways of bathing, but the most common is merely washing their hands;
their good works consist chiefly in fasting and alms; 205 days of the year they
neither eat nor drink, till after sunset.

The Tartars are strong predestinarians. They believe that the destiny of every
man is fixed. and that the angel of death calls him at his appointed hour; a
belief that supports them in adversity and guards them from suicide. Numbers
indulge a piety bordering on enthusiasm and imagine it is possible, by
religion, to become a saint, and that departed saints receive the prayers of
the living. Five times a day are they called to worship, by the sexton, who
sings out their creed, namely, There is but one God and Mahomet is his prophet.
Nothing interrupts them in their devotion, which they always perform with
fervency, turning their face toward Mecca, or, if at home, toward the word
Alla, which is the name of God, and written up in some part of every man's
house.

The prayers of the Tartars are written in Arabic. Every one has a rosary, by
which he makes his petitions. The priest sits cross-legged facing the
congregation, reading the prayers in a soft and pathetic tone of voice, and the
assembly repeats them, or answers Amin! When the word Alla is pronounced, every
one heaves a profound sigh, stops his ears and puts hands over his eyes and
beard, as if sensible of his unworthiness to hear the glorious name, or lift up
his eyes to Heaven. During the prayers that are addressed to tutelary angels,
they cast their eyes about to the right and left. At other parts of the
service, they sit down cross-legged, rise often up, bend the body profoundly
forward, remain so bent a a long time, and frequently throw themselves
prostrate. Every one is without his shoes; the rich, in prayer-time, put on a
Turkish turban. The agouns wear them always, and the moulas keep on their
common cap, during the service of the mosque.

They wash themselves prior to their taking an oath, then striking the koran,
three times, against their breast, say, May thy curse smite me, if I swear
falsely!

The other gentleman, who had been at my desire, continues our Author, to
inspect the fisheries in the Caspian sea, and whose name is Sokolof, had an
opportunity, in the course of six months and a favorable season, of making
many observations on animals, birds, insects and plants, which I had not an
opportunity of doing myself. By his indefatigable zeal, he sent me six species
of mice, hitherto unknown to naturalists, and some of them remarkable. These
are the mus tamariscinus, meridianus, migralorius, socialis, lagurus and
subtilis. I received, also, from the Caspian sea and southern step, a variety
of birds, remarkable for their beauty and rarity, being also new in natural
history. Among them was a very large species of black steplark, (Alauda
Tartarica), which remains in the deserts during summer and comes southwards
during winter, about the districts that are inhabited, which otherwise they
would never approach; also an unknown parrot-green species of bee-eater,
(Merops Persica); a very small species of sea-raven, (Pelicanus pigmeus), the
largest black-headed sea-gull, (Larus Icthyactus), a species of large sea-duck,
with a red, copped head, (Anas rufina), a most superbly beautiful,
yellow-crowned heron, with a long head and nape feathers, (Ardea comata), and
many other rare species of herons; also, two new species of serpents, and a
number of insects and plants.

In July, Mr. Sokolof stretched away westward from the Jaik into the Kalmuck
step and saw there, at a distance, those little wild, Kirguisian horses, called
Kulan, but could not get near them, as they took slight at the approach of the
hunters. He traveled near fifty miles over this salt-step, without being able
to find a drop of fresh water: at last, he reached a low plain overspread with
salt-lakes, abounding with glauber-salts, which form beautiful chrystals in the
water and leave, at the bottom, a sediment of the same mixed with common salt.
Some have the wonderful property of deposing a salt, quite red and smelling
like violets, consisting chiefly of glauber-salts, with a very small mixture of
kitchen-salt; the chief reason of this seems to be the soil, which consists of
a great quantity of sea-muscles, converted into chalk.

After traversing near forty miles over this plain and a distance of thirty
more over a sandy desert, without a tree and scarce a plant, he reached the
Caspian shore. In this sandy desert, he met with a plant and a bush, peculiar
to these sands; the plant is a fennel, (Ferula), described at the end of this
volume: the bush grows six feet high, in a dry quicksand, and never has been
known to botanists; as such, it deserves particular notice. I have given a
drawing of it; see page 66; and also, at the end of this volume, a description;
and as this plant is, by it is whole structure, visibly different from every
known genus, I think I am at liberty to give it a generical name, and have
called it Pterococcus Aphyllus. See the plate. The Kalmucks and Bucharians call
this bush, Torlok, and say, it is to be met with in the sandy deserts of the
Kirguese, and that they use it is knotty stem, which, near the root, is about
one inch and a half diameter, to make tobacco-pipes of, which it is very fit
for, on account of the hardness of it is wood. The fresh roots of the bush, if
split through, yield a great deal of clear gum, which in quality is almost
similar to the traganth, swells very much in water, and yields a brown-yellow
and sweetish jelly, and if it stands warm, will in a few days, take on a vinous
fermentation. After this bush has dropped it is octagonal seeds or nuts, it
remains till autumn bare and leafless, like rushes, which shoot up longer and
longer, till they divide into new branches. These fall toward winter, leaving
nothing but the wooden branches, which produce again young twigs, and blossom
in spring. This plant I shall speak of further hereafter.

Mr. Sokolof's description of the Caspian fisheries is of great importance, not
only to the Russian empire but to other European powers, and as such I have
given it to my readers in his own words.

The fishery along the northern coast of the Caspian sea, is held on lease, by
the merchants of Astrachan, in which their chief wealth consists. The nearest
place from the mouth of the Jaik, where this fishery is carried on, is a bay
about fifty miles distant, formerly called Bogatoi Kultuk, (the rich bay), on
account of the multitude of fish there caught. At the end of March, the Caspian
sea is clear from ice. The fishery begins in April, and Mr. Sokolof set out on
the 20th of that month, to take a view of it. He went in a boat to the said
bay, as the way was impassable by land. Near the bay are five fishing towns and
magazines. The bay is so full of fish, that they fish it, with success, at five
different times in the year. For 100 miles to the west of this bay, there is no
fishing carried on, except in the middle of summer, and the shad and
barbel-fishing, with nets, in spring and autumn, there being no other fish, on
account of the different species of sturgeon, with which the bay and shallows
of the coast abound, owing to the water being freshened by the flowing of some
rivers into it. In these places they depose their spawn, or go up the river to
pass the winter; besides, the quantity of sea-weeds here harbors shoals of
little fish, which serve as food to fishes of a larger species.

On the coast, as far as the fishery extends, there are watagas or magazines
erected, where are salted only large fish, such as the different species of
sturgeon, sewrjugs, salmon and barbel. Each wataga has boats of different sizes
and structure, fit to go out to sea with a few men. The largest are manned with
five men, the smallest with two, and are equipped with sails. Near each wataga,
is a large vessel, with provisions, instruments and salt for salting the fish,
which is brought from the Imperial magazine, at Astrachan. These vessels sail
to and fro, from Astrachan to the fisheries, bring salt and other materials,
and return loaded with fish, which is landed on wharfs, near the watagas. The
fish is cut open, cleaned, washed, etc. on floats, which are sometimes covered,
and the vessels from these floats are laden and unladen. The workmen are all
hired from the interior parts of Russia and the towns situated along the Wolga:
they are sometimes engaged for the whole year, sometimes only for a spring,
autumn or winter-fishery. Some of them are Kalmucks of the uluss of Bambar, who
had taken up their winter quarters about the Caspian sea, before the greatest
part of the Kalmuck hordes had left this district. Each wataga employs from
fifty to 120 men, as the tenant can afford. Some are engaged as steersmen, some
as rowers, some to salt the fish, some to dress the roe and others to prepare
the fish-glue, etc. all according to the different branches they have served an
apprenticeship to, for which they have a salary, never exceeding forty or fifty
rubles for each fishing-season; but the general pay is twenty rubles. Old
steersmen, who have acquired more skill in the fishery, by long practice and
experience, are appointed as directors, and these have better pay.

Besides these men, there are many merchants and citizens, from Astrachan, that
reside here, during the fishery. These people agree with the proprietor, or
tenant, and fish for him, at a certain price for all the fish they catch, using
their own boats and implements. The price paid for each sewrjug, is from four
to six copecs, each copec one halfpenny, English; and each bjeluga, from eight
to twelve copecs; but, fishes of extra size, are counted as two or more.

Besides the houses of the fishermen, near every wataga, are many sheds and
covered places, where the roe is prepared, the fish-glue and back-sinews dried,
and all the materials kept for fishing. For the salted fish, they have caves
and subterraneous ice-cellars of different sizes. These contain a wooden floor
and large wooden troughs, in which the salt-pickle is prepared. On each side of
the pickling-troughs are divisions, where the fish is laid after it has been
taken from the salt, and is again strewed over with fresh salt; and behind
these divisions the space is filled with ice, in order to keep the fish fresh.

The watagas are situated in places where the sea is deep enough to carry
vessels and where the shore, by it is elevation, is sheltered against the
south wind, which swells the waves and makes them lash the shore. These spots,
then, are commonly high capes, where the sea forms deep bays, and from which
the step is separated by rushy sea-marshes, passable only in boats. On these
capes, grows as much grass as is necessary to feed the horses kept for the
winter-fishery. The duties which the watagas pay to the state, are in
proportion to the quantity of fish-glue and roe they prepare. Each pud of
fish-glue pays five rubles, and each pud of roe, two rubles, eighty copecs.

In spring, the bay is crowded with beljugas, sewrjugs and Wolga sturgeons, at
this time, without roe, coming here only to feed; but sewrjugs depose their
spawn at this season, and do not return the whole year. In winter and autumn,
they catch only beljugas, which collect here to spawn and pass the winter.

The spring-fishery begins as soon as the sea is free from ice, which often
happens in the middle of March. Then large shoals of small fishes approach the
coast; of these, one little fish, (Cyprinus Griflagine), called, in Russ, Obla,
about an inch long, is the most favorite food of the beljugas, who, soon
after, follow them in great multitudes. As soon as the obla appears, they catch
a great many of them, in drag-nets, put them alive into reservoirs and preserve
them as baits for the hooks, as the beljuga bites at nothing so soon. When the
beljugas enter the bay in troops, which is generally a fortnight after the
appearance of the obla, the fishery begins. If this time is passed over, the
tenant loses his advantage. Then the fishers are at work night and day, and as
soon as they have brought one boat-load ashore, they push off for another. In
brisk sea-gales, there is the best fishing, for it has been observed, that such
gales drive the fish upon the coast; but if the wind blows from the land, it
always impoverishes the fishery. In good seasons, a boat will catch upwards of
fifty large fishes in two hours.

The beljuga is caught here with lines and hooks. The tackling consists of
seventeen ropes, 144 feet in length, to which they tie 125 cords, each cord ten
feet long, with hooks fastened to it, at the distance of eighteen inches from
each other. Thirty of such tacklings compose what they call a Snast, which
consists of some hundred fathoms of line. Between every snast, is tied a stone,
weighing many pounds, and also a buoy of dried reed-mace, which floats on a
rope fourteen feet long. To all this tackling, are fastened two anchors. Such
an anchor consists of two split pieces of a tree, each of which has a strong
branch at one end, that gives it the form of an anchor, and this is loaded with
bricks, to give it weight. Each anchor has a cable of about twenty-fathoms
long. When the anchors are cast, they tie an obla to each hook, and the whole
is thrown into water three or four fathoms deep, so that the tackling lies at
the bottom, giving the baits a liberty of swimming; and, the beljugas greedily
swallowing them, are caught on the hooks; and as the anchors keep the tackling
in it is situation, the largest fish cannot escape. The whole is raised twice
a day and drawn, with the fish, into the ship. When taken off the hooks, to
prevent their fainting by lying together, a rope is drawn through their gills
and they are let down the ship's side into the water, in order to be brought
ashore alive. When ashore, they are drawn by hooks upon a scaffold, and cut up
one after another. First, they split the head with an ax, then cut open the
belly and take out the entrails, roe, glue-bladder and, last of all, the dorsal
sinews. The lower part of the abdomen and the bowels, are thrown away, but the
wide and fleshy snout is salted, and sold at five or six copecs each. A
middling sized beljuga, has a stomach that will contain two whole sea-calves or
seals, besides a great number of small fishes. In spring, the beljuga has
seldom any roe, but most are milters. After having taken the roe out, they tear
out the glue or air-bladder, which occupies the whole back, put it into a pail
and prepare to extract the ising-glass; they next cut open the cartilages of
the back, draw out the back-sinews, wash them and hang them up, over poles, to
dry.

When all the bowels are taken out, the fat, which lies plentifully about the
milt, in milters, is scraped off with knives, collected in a pail and
afterward boiled and cleaned. This fresh fat is good-tasted, and may be used
instead of butter or oil. In Astrachan, it is sold from forty to fifty copecs
per pail.

The fish, thus cleaned, is washed and carried into the abovementioned caves,
where it lies for twelve hours, or more, in a strong pickle or brine; it is
then put into boxes and covered with salt. Beljugas are here caught of an
enormous size. In the winter, 1769, one was taken seventeen feet in length and
it weighed seventy puds, that is upwards of 2500 lb. from which they took
twenty puds of roe, or 720 lb. The largest sewrjug never exceeds nine feet in
length, from the point of the snout to the end of the tail-fins. Large beljugas
will swallow young seals, geese and wild-ducks, whole.

Soon after the beljuga fishery is over, and often before, that of the sewrjug
begins. This does not last above a fortnight and is but once a year, as they
come up into the fresher water to spawn. This first is caught in nets and, if a
favorable gale blows, they come in such quantities, that the vessel will not
contain the draught, but they must be brought to land by ropes. Each wataga
will catch, in a short time, sixty or seventy thousand; but if contrary winds
blow, only half the quantity. This fishery is important on account of the roe,
or cavear, which is prepared two ways; one is called granular, the other
bag-cavear. The granular, is pressed through a coarse sieve, to cleanse it from
the skins and blood vessels, and then salted in troughs. One pud of roe, will
take five pounds of salt. It remains in these troughs about an hour, is then
spread over fine sieves, that the superfluous brine may drain away, and after
this, it is barrelled.

The bag-cavear, after being cleaned from the skins, is put, for half an hour,
into strong brine, then taken out and drained, by laying it on sieves; after
this, it is put into pointed bags, like those used in apothecaries' shops, each
bag containing eighteen pounds. In these bags it is squeezed till all the brine
is out, and then put into barrels and trod down, by a man in leather stockings;
afterward, the casks are closed and well done over with tar, to prevent any of
the roe running out. Bag-cavear, is sold at two rubles the pud; the granular,
at one ruble, eighty copecs.

Fish-glue, is made from the internal membrane of the air-bladders. These are
cut open lengthways, laid to dry a little in the sun, the internal membrane
then separated from the external, pressed with heavy weights, in a wet cloth or
mat, one whole day, then cut into pieces, rolled up and dried in the shade.
Sewrjugglue sells, at Astrachan, for thirty-five rubles the pud; beljuga-glue,
for twenty-five or thirty-rubles. Sewrjugs, they salt and dry in the sun, for
the table.

When the fishery is over, the cavear, glue, etc. and salt-fish, is brought to
Astrachan by land, and there slowed away in cellars, till sold. The proprietors
of the fisheries do not sell retail, but dispose of their whole property, or
employ the merchants of Astrachan to sell it by commission, at so much a
hundred; not the hundred weight, but 100 pieces, according to the size of the
fish: each fish from eighteen to thirty-six inches long, from eye to tail, is
reckoned as one piece; those under eighteen inches count two for one piece; a
fish of thirty-six inches, counts as two pieces, thirty-nine for three pieces,
forty-two for four, and so on. A hundred such b ljugas, at the first hand, will
sell for seventy or seventy-five rubles. Sewrjugs, without being measured are
sold from ten to fifteen rubles per hundred. Barbels are valued at sorty rubles
per 1000. All kinds of sturgeon, caught in rivers, are considered as better and
more delicate, and will sell ten per cent. dearer than seafish. The dried
back-sinews sell, at Astrachan, for one ruble and a half per pud; but, when the
fish is sold wholesale, these sinews are given in, according to the quantity.

In the winter-fishery, they break the ice in places where they fish, bring to
the wataga what they catch, on sledges, and send it, frozen, to Astrachan,
where 100 such fresh beljugas, will sell for 120 rubles. Shads weigh, here,
eight puds and barbel one and a half. The former are uncommonly fat in summer
and are then called Sharkoi Some, (hot shads). They like it is fat hinder-parts
and tail, but the head and forepart is thrown away. Barbel-roe is also thrown
away, but they make a kind of bad glue of it is air-bladder.

Tjumen. My eyes getting better I sat out, in the middle of December, and,
after traveling about 170 miles, reached the town of Tjumen, situated on the
Tura, on the 19th. This town, after being destroyed by fire, is new-built, in
regular streets. Here I had the pleasure of conversing with Dr. Lepechin, a
member of the Imperial academy of sciences, for some hours. He resolved to pass
his winter here. At night I continued my journey over the Tura, near the
burial-place of the famous Steller, well-known for his tour to Kamschatka. In
nineteen hours, I reached Tobolskoi, a distance of 191 miles. This road is very
well regulated, for, at every twenty-four or thirty-six miles, there are places
erected for the accommodation of travelers and changing of horses. The
district between Tjumen and Tobolskoi, which I traveled over, is an open
plain, with here and there a small wood.

I shall not take up any time in describing the city of Tobolskoi, however
important it is to the government of Siberia, it having been fully done by
Gmelin, in his tour to Siberia. The few observations I made, relate to natural
history, and will be better spoken of in another place. I met here with Captain
Islenief, who, afterhaving made his observations on the transit of Venus over
the sun, at Jakuzkoi and other geographical business in Siberia, proposed
passing the winter here. His Excellency, Chevalier De Tscbitscherin, governor
of this place, showed me every civility in his power, and provided me with
every thing necessary for the prosecution of my journey.

Tobolskoi is the capital of Siberia, has an archbishop and was built in 1587,
by the government of Russia, just at the confluence of the Tobol with the
Irtish, in the room of the ancient city Sibir, that was burnt down, and stood
twelve miles lower down the river, on the right hand shore of the Irtish.
Sibir, by it is ruins, seems to have had the form of a fortified camp and to
have been built with unburned bricks, like the Bulgarian cities. This part of
the country was the principal seat of the Tartars, before the Russians added
that vast territory to their dominions. When Yermak had penetrated as far as
the Irtish, in 1582, and driven from thence the Khan of Siberia, Sibir was
demolished, and the Tartars of those parts were in general dispersed. This
Yermak was a robber, who, at the head of some thousands of Cossacks, pillaged
the cities on the borders of the Wolga and the Caspian sea, and took possession
of them, but finding himself not able to keep them, made an offer of his
conquests to the Czar Ivan Vassilievitsch and desired his assistance. Yermak
obtained it, and also a pardon for himself and his people, and since this time
the Russians have had possession of Siberia.

The present Tartars of Tobolskoi, are descended from the ancient Tartars of
Siberia, who kept their ground. They take their name from the Tobol, both sides
of which they occupy, from the Kirguese frontiers to the mouth of that river.
Their villages contain from ten to fifty farms, and they are in number about
4000 males. They are Mahomedans, and resemble altogether, in their manners and
customs, the poorer sort of the Tartar villagers of Casan. Their poverty keeps
them from luxury and debauchery, and few have but one wife, as a marriageble
girl fetches from twenty to fifty rubles.

I remained in Tobolskoi from the 20th to the 30th of December, when I
proceeded on my return, which was rendered very disagreeable by a violent
hurricane and snow. I sat out with Dr. Lepechin for Catherineburgh, at the
distance of 240 miles; we arrived there, in nine stages, on the 1st of January,
early in the morning, and I continued my journey alone the same night, sixty
miles further, and took up my winter quarters at Tscheljabynskaja, which I
reached in the night of Jan. 2d. 1771.

Hitherto the district of the regency of Orenburg and the adjacent provinces
had been the object of my enquiries; but they having all been visited and
examined either by me, Dr. Lepechin, or Professor Falk, the chief end of the
Imperial academy of sciences was attained and the few remaining objects, worth
notice, would be inspected on our return, or by the mission of some of our
learned assistants. Much more, however, being to be done in the natural history
of these dominions and the extensive kingdom of Siberia, and the northern
districts of the empire promising many discoveries, having not yet been
thoroughly explored, and many accounts of Gmelin's and Steller's tours through
Siberia, having been lost, the Imperial academy agreed to a plan, sormed by me
and Dr. Lepechin, which was, that he should travel, on his return, to the
norther-most districts of the regency of Casan, the whole of Archangel and the
coasts of the White Sea, and, that I should extend my journey even beyond the
districts of the sea Baikal, to view and describe such places, which had been
slightly passed over by the late Mr. Gmelin, or had undergone an alteration
since he was there, especially the distant Siberian mines and manufactories,
and the inhabited southern frontiers, to collect carefully every remarkable
plant, and do the same in Zoology, thus fulfilling perfectly, what preceding
travelers had accidentally only taken up in their way, and whose labors were
devoted to botanical views and, of course, but little had been transmitted to
the scientific world. To accomplish this plan, it was necessary not to lose
time, but to dispatch the most learned of my assistants to different districts.
On the 24th, then, of February, I sent Mr. Basil Surjef through Tobolskoi, to
the northern town Beresowa, situated on the Ob or Oby, from whence he was to
proceed, in the beginning of summer, as far as Obdorskoi Ostrog, down the Ob,
and, if passable, as far as the Icy Sea.

In the middle of march, Professor Falk arrived here from Orenburg, with the
last sledge, having fixed upon a Siberian tour and wishing to consult me on the
subject. He had made, along the line, a very pleasant journey, but a very
dangerous one, and came here a fortnight later than his assistant Mr. Georgi,
celebrated by his translations and other works of merit, and who came the
straight road over the Ural. The arrival of these gentlemen made my residence,
in Tscheljabynskaja, more agreeable than it had hitherto been, and I had only
to lament that the sudden arrival of spring obliged us to part company.

Capt. Ritschkof, who had been with me most part of the winter, seemed
disinclined, on account of his delicate constitution, to travel with me into
Siberia, and requested me, to procure leave from the academy at Petersburg, to
return home, taking some districts of the Ural in his way, that had not been
visited. This leave was obtained; but, it being just determined to dispatch a
body of light horse, from the fort Orskaja, under the command of Colonel
Traubenberg, into the Kirguisian step, in order to pursue the removed Kalmuck
hordes, this excellent opportunity thus offering itself, Captain Ritschkof
could not withstand, and as he wished to accompany them, I consented to his
going. He went, and the success of his difficult journey, with his
observations, may be read in his own journal.

I prepared for my own journey, but, before my setting out, thought proper to
pen down some general account of the province of Isetskoi, where I wintered. Of
all the ports that belong to the regency of Orenburg, this is, incontestably,
the happiest for fertility and tillage, and tolerably well peopled; yet, not so
much as it deserves for the richness of it is soil. They reckon here 57,391 male
inhabitants, among which are 4,352 that trade and pay no head-tax. The
different Baskirian ulusses, settled eastward from the Ural, consisting of
4,118 habitations, belong to this province, besides 456 habitations of
Medscheraks and Tartars. If this population is compared with the extent of the
province, which is near 225 miles long and broad, it will naturally occur, that
even this great number of people is not sufficient to cultivate the country. At
present, they sow, annually, near 100,000 dessatins of land, each dessatin one
hundred square fathoms, and they commonly reap ten-sold of what they sow. Rye
and wheat are the chief grain here, but they sow, occasionally, barley and
oats, not only supplying a great part of the line of Orenburg, but all the
manufactories situated on the Ural and part of those of Catherineburg. In the
general failure of the crops, in 1769, when even in many places of this
province, they scarce reaped as much as they sowed, on account of the long, dry
weather; yet the crops here were so great, as not only to supply the
abovementioned places, but also the adjacent provinces of the whole regency or
government of Orenburg, and absolutely saved them from famine.

Besides the great growth of corn in this province, the soil, which is black
and rich throughout, even to the depth of two feet in some places, yields not
only the finest grass, but is fit for gardens. All common vegetables prosper
here exceedingly, especially turnips, which grow to an enormous size. Yet,
through the negligence of the inhabitants, here are only sown, coleworts,
turnips and parsneps. They cultivate a few hops, but these growing so
plentifully wild, every where in the Uralian mountains, raising them is
unnecessary, Flax and hemp is also sown here, but not being a saleable article,
the farmer never sows more than is necessary for his own use. In a garden, in
the midst of a desert, which has been many years abandoned, I saw, with
astonishment, spontaneously growing, the mallow-flower, the turnsol, the French
marigold, (Tagetes), and the holy thistle. Garden strawberries and the
dwarf-cherry, (Cerasus pumila), grows wild every where, and shows, that the
soil is fit for any production that can be expected from a temperate clime.

There are no other manufactories in this province than a bad hat, and a glass,
manufactory, some few tanneries, two brandy-distilleries belonging to the
crown, and the iron-manufactories that have been mentioned.

The game here, is not of any great moment: two sorts of martens are caught and
some bad wolves and foxes. When the Kirguese are peaceable, sportsmen go, with
the leave of the commanding officers of their step, and return loaded with the
skins of ground-foxes, wolves, beavers and otters. In the step of Isetskoi,
they catch plenty of ermines of a fine size, and, during my slay here, the
Tartars caught a sable, not far from Tscheljabynskaja, which they looked upon
as a great rarity.

In summer, there is plenty of water-game, and, in winter, a great abundance of
wood-cocks and wild-geese. The mountains produce noble birds of prey, a fine
species of falcons and sparrow-hawks. In the woods about the Iset, we meet,
sometimes a species of sparrow-hawk, (Falco palumbarius), which grows quite
white when old and is much prettier and larger than the common ones.

On account of the numberless lakes, here are vast quantities of fish; the
common sort are sold from twenty-five to thirty-five copecs per pud. If the
bottoms of the lakes are sandy, the place is crowded with the Cypr. Idbarus,
which are cheaper still. They catch now and then a kind of Siberian trout, but
they have neither bream nor crabs, though they are found in great plenty in the
Jaik, almost up to it is source.

I must not omit speaking of the air, which about the mountains is wonderfully
healthy, and it is inhabitants live to a great age. Many countrymen are here met
with, 100 years old, and I saw a soldier, at Troizkoi, who was 120; but the low
part of the province, among the salt morasses and foul lakes, is subject to
fevers and scorbutic disorders; not so much, however, as to shorten the life of
the inhabitants. The bitter salt-dust, dispersed by the wind, causes great
inflammations of the eyes and boils upon the eyelids, and, in this district,
the air-plague rages very much among horses and destroys many, but does not
insect the people.

During the first week of March, we had a continual thaw and the air was so
mild, that on the 24th, (Holy Thursday), many of the common people, bathed
themselves, (according to an old custom derived from slavish heathenism), in
the river, though covered still with ice. They say, that, in former times, this
was the feast of Kupal, the god of waters. So, on the Thursday before
Whit-sunday, the country lasses honor, even now, with poetical songs and
garlands, Lada, the ancient goddess of love, and her son Dida, their feast
having been celebrated on that day, in the times of heathenism. From the 24th
to the 27th, fell a great deal of snow, but, directly after, the weather became
so warm, that the Mjass was freed from the ice by the end of the month and
over-flowed it is banks. On the 7th of April, the waters sunk and I thought
proper to proceed on my journey, before the snow from the mountains swelled the
rivers again. Several wandering birds appeared on the 19th of March, such as
jackdaws and cranes, and soon after, to the 24th, swans and all sorts of ducks;
and these, after the last snow on the 28th of March, were followed by geese,
starlings, larks and many wood and waterfowl. On the 4th of April, came the
cuckoo, also a species of buntling, and a bird called Fringilla calcarata,
which runs about the fields in numbers, and is no where seen but in Siberia. On
the 14th of April appeared the first insects.

On the 16th, I left Tscheljabynskaja, which is a fort that was erected against
the troubles among the Baskirians and Kirguese. The place is fortified in the
usual mode with timber-works, and it is streets are regular; it is situated on
the sleep and rocky bank of the river Mjass, has a stone-built and a wooden
church, and many good public and private buildings. Most of the dwelling houses
are built in the country style, and the occupation of most of the inhabitants
is husbandry.

The night before our departure, on the north side of the river, I saw the
whole horizon in fire, owing to the st^p which had been burning three days;
and, had not a heavy rain quenched the flames, the town would have been in
danger, as the wind blew right toward the suburbs. Such step-fires are very
often seen in these districts the whole latter half of April.

The first night we lay out on the field, but, at the next port we reached, we
heard they had lost several horses, and examining them the people told me, they
discovered a deep-seated boil on their buttocks, hidden under the skin, in
which there was a short worm, as thick as one's finger. They described this
worm as too large for one to suppose it to be the Swedish Curculio
par^plecticus, yet the circumstances, that caused the boil, were here the very
same.

As soon as we crossed the river Mjass with our horses, I continued my journey
along it, where are a number of villages, but the road struck off through a
hilly district. Our eyes were charmed the whole day with the Siberian
wind-flower, (Anemone patens), that grew every where, where the lands were not
very salt. It is here and throughout Siberia called Wetriniza, (wind-flower),
and is well known by the countryman, as the young peasants often raise false
boils on several parts of their bodies, with the bruised herb of this flower,
in order to be declared incapable of military service, when there is any press
or levying of soldiers. In want of this herb, they make use of a kind of sharp
garlic, which will raise boils, but which are readily cured again, by covering
them with wax. The peasants also use a decoction of the wind-flower, against
all convulsive complaints of their children. The fields were also embellished
with the pheasants-eye, (Adonis Apennina), and the Adonis verna, which blooms
sooner. Both species here go by the same name. They preserve the roots as the
most important of all domestic remedies; and petulant girls use it occasionally
by way of revenge to bring on miscarriage.

In my way on I crossed, on the 21st of April, the river Kurtamysch, on the
banks of which, stands the market town Kurtamysch^fkaja, on an open, sandy
hill, round which, the river makes an extensive bend. This town was erected
twenty years ago, with all the villages that belong to it. It has a
commissioner and a townhouse, subordinate to the regency of Isetskoi, and to
it is jurisdiction belong twenty-four villages, situated on this river and on
some little lakes, consisting of 1850 men, the market town Talofskaja, with
it is dependency, 2365 men, and Kaminskaja 1935 men, the last two add 243 noble
families, so that the male inhabitants of this whole district amount to 6393.
This place, besides the townhouse and a wooden church, has only sixty-eight
dwelling-houses. Before the line of Ui was erected, this was a fort, and it is
still surrounded with the old works. The district is not very good for
husbandry, on account of the saltness of the soil, the best soil growing barren
every three or four years, and wheat never thriving here at all. Formerly, here
were a great many elks in the hilly woods, but they have deserted the place
since it has been inhabited. They catch, however, a great many ermine, foxes,
etc. sometime the race-hare, (jaculus), and sometimes stags, that wander here
from the Kirguisian step.

The low-lands, are abundantly covered with a nitrous salt, which lies over the
moist ground, puffed up like foam. It contains a mixture of glauber-salt and so
much alkali, that it effervesces with acids. In general, all the salt-tracts
here are so impregnated with a bitter and common salt, proportionably nitrous,
that it may be squeezed from the ground in spring, in form of a spungy, very
moist, white paper foam, which in long, dry weather breaks down into a
snow-white flour. The cattle gather round this salt in great quantities, yet
will eat but little of it, it having a urinous taste.

Having sent on my wagons to Kaminskaja, when I had examined this salty
district sufficiently, I followed them, and was there on the 22d of April. This
place consists of 130 houses of substantial families, and lies on an arm of the
Tobol, which abounds with all sorts of fish, particularly barbel and roach,
which are often near 18 inches long. In winter, this place is very watery and
abounds with waterfowl, particularly large, white cranes, of which further
mention shall be made. With all other sorts of game the country abounds, and is
rich even in elks and wild boars. Ducks are here taken flying, in such nets as
I described were erected in other parts to catch geese, and they also make
snares of horse-hair, fastened in rows on a rope extended over the surface of
the waters, in which ducks and other waterfowl are abundantly caught. The
country-folks here, by a strange superstition, incense these snares with the
curled galls, that form themselves on wormwood and southernwood, idly
conceiving that it will prevent evil eyes bewitching the snares.

I sat out from this place in order to cross the Tobol, at twenty-six miles
distance, but found that a storm, the day before I arrived, had sunk the
ferry-boat and they had only a slight raft, much too slight to carry my two
heavy wagons; besides, I met with a party, on my way, of 500 dragoons, which
were marching against the Kirguese, who had lately committed several robberies
and seized some travelers, and as I could not get a sufficient escort at this
place to pass safely, I returned to this, determining to proceed by another
route. But, to add to my mortification, one of the gentlemen with me, Mr.
Sokolof, was attacked with an ague; my draftsman, who had sunk into a lowness
of spirits some months past, was now worse, and an attendant, who had been
afflicted with the scurvy, all the winter, fell sick, and another had been
thrown from a wild, Kirguisian horse, and lay in a very shocking and shattered
condition; I could proceed only, therefore, in that slow way which the state of
my patients would admit.

On the 25th of April, I proceeded down the Tobol and picked up, in my way, a
species of a little, gray dormouse, with a black stripe on it is back, and a
very long tail, (mus subtilis), very common in the birchwoods, near this place.
This little animal falls asleep in the least cold, and creeps into small chinks
of the earth or holes in the ground, where it rolls itself up like a ball, till
enlivened again by the warmth.

On the night of the 27th, we had a sharp frost, so as to freeze the water, and
yet the flowers and flowerbuds stood it well; for the plants in this climate
agree well with it is different changes of weather. Downwards, along the Tobol,
there are many villages, and the district is as much inhabited as the most
populous district in all Russia.

About fifty miles below Kaminskaja, on the river Tobol, is situated the hill
called Larew-Kurgan, a hill of an enormous height, raised by hand. But no
certain tradition has been left of it. It appears doubtful whether it is not a
monument of some extraordinary event, or the tumulus of some person of
distinction, erected by the ancient inhabitants of this district. The
circumference of the hill is 480 feet, and is at sixteen feet distance
encompassed with an overgrown, circular bank, ten feet and a half high, and a
ditch, which, in it is whole circuit, measures 700 feet. The form of this hill
was conical, pointed at top, and was higher than at present, but a certain
prince caused the top to be taken off and a deep pit to be dug into it, in
order to discover it is contents; nothing, however, was found. The whole hill is
richly covered with grass and stands near a village, where they are erecting a
stonechurch, but as they are obliged to fetch their mortar a great way, it goes
but slowly on. The inhabitants have here begun to erect their ovens with brick
instead of those which they used to build with clay, and which so often fired
their malt-kilns. The ovens they now build are well vaulted, with vent-holes on
the sides, just underneath the roof, and a chimney closed at top, having a
smoke-hole on each side. Through these smoke-holes no spark can get, so as to
set fire to the straw spread about it, and the whole kiln is thus preserved
from taking fire, owing to the chimney's being closed at top.

On the first of May, my patients being better, I crossed the river Ik, which
is here 105 feet over, and deep. The villages are small, but stand, in this
country, very thick, and a commissioner, who resides in one of them, has the
command of twenty or more according to their situation. They sow here a great
deal of rye, wheat, oats and millet, which is bought up by commissioners from
the crown, and carried away in barges, in summertime, and on sledges in
winter. On the night of the 2d. we had a violent storm, accompanied with a fall
of snow, which covered the ground a foot thick, and interrupted my journey,
till the next day. We had scarce traveled twenty-three miles further, but my
attendant, who was so ill with the scurvy, grew worse. The great frost had done
him harm, and this added to clandestine intemperance, carried him off, with a
mortification in his bowels. I gave him every assistance in my power, but it
was all in vain, he expired on the 3d of May, when he little expected it. I
left some of my people to bury him, and continued my journey the same afternoon.

Thirty miles lower down the Tobol, is a considerable brandy-distillery,
erected twenty years since, by two merchants, but belonging now to Count
Schuwalof. Above three hundred houses are here built along the Uk, which
empties itself into the Tobol, and there is a fine wooden church and mansion
for the director, with a garden, 'compting-house and storehouses. Opposite to
this are the distilleries, one of which has ten tubs, forty common coppers,
three alembics and several receivers; another, thirty-five coppers and another
thirty-one, with sixty-three tubs, and each tub two receivers. Each tub
contains ten tschetwerts of malt, mixed with a fifth or seventh part of oats or
barley. The common coppers contain forty-two Russian gallons each, and are all
filled with the wash of one tub, and these distillations come round in
succession once in four days, of course the business is carried on without
interruption; so, that if thirty coppers of forty-two gallons each, are filled
from one tub, that holds ten tschetwerts, we may easily know what a tschetwert
is. Near each distillery is a large copper, from which the hot water is led by
pipes into the tubs; and here are granaries and a large malt-kiln. They distill
here from 30 to 40,000 tschetwerts of malt, which is conveyed here in winter,
and from each tschetwert, they draw three or four gallons of Russ brandy or
spirits, which always goes through a second distillation. A great deal of corn
is raised about this place, and a number of people are constantly felling wood,
etc. They cut the wood here very imprudently, for one may go through a tract of
two or three miles long, and not see the vestige of a tree left, except the
roots. In the still-houses there is such a thick vapor, that a stranger cannot
stay a quarter of an hour in them, without being intoxicated, and the vapor is
so spirituous, that it might be kindled with a light. I endeavored to persuade
the proprietors of the loss they sustained, in passing their spirit through a
second distillation, in which it loses a third of it is strength, but it was to
no purpose; they said it was strong enough, and were unconcerned at the loss:
but, it should be considered, that the loss is not only to them, but to the
country at large, as it wastes a considerable quantity of corn.

The people whom I left to bury their fellow-traveller, joined me on the 5th of
May, and we sat off the following day together, early in the morning, and after
traveling 225 miles past many villages, that contained nothing more remarkable
than what I had seen before, and many tumuli. I found myself in a district of
the Ischimian step, full of uncommon large lakes, and, therefore, abounding
with waterfowl, and particularly that large species of white cranes, of which
I was desirous of knowing some particulars. I resolved, therefore, to stay a
couple of days in this place, Krataja, and to send out for some of these birds.
One of the lakes in this step is twenty-two miles long, and seven miles broad.
All of them are very full of fish and feed great quantities of waterfowl,
which, as the inhabitants are thin, build their nests here in tolerable safety.
About one of these lakes, called Mangut, which is almost inaccessible, on
account of it is swamps, are many wild boars, and about the lake Saltaim have
been built, within these ten years, several villages, colonized by persons who
have been transported into Siberia for little misdemeanors.

On the 11th, the persons I sent to bring me some of those white cranes,
returned with several, (Grus Leucogeranus). It was with difficulty they could
get them to stand so as to have a shot at them, for these birds are much more
cautious than other cranes, and if they once see a man, even at the greatest
distance, soar up into the air with a music equal to that of the swan. Their
height, standing upright, is five feet, and this enables them to see a great
way, and they are so timid as to suspect every, the least, motion of a reed. It
is, therefore, necessary that a gunner should approach them quite covered,
whilst they are feeding on small fishes on the banks of the lakes, which is
their customary food. Timid as they are before men, they are bold enough
against dogs, whom, as soon as they see, they will attack with great fury
forgetting the lurking sportsman, who is with them. If any man approaches their
nests, they are equally bold, will never fly, but protect their abode to the
last, and, on account of their large size and the sharpness of their bills, are
formidable enemies. They build their nests in solitary, rushy morasses and
fens, on hillocks of sea-weed and twisted rushes. The male and female guard the
nest by turns. They lay but two eggs, which are as large as a goose-egg and
spotted with yellow, green and brown. This was just the season of their
breeding. In one year's time, the young crane is almost as large as the old
one, and his body is covered with ochre-yellow feathers, whiter under the belly
and about the head, and his bill is blackish. In the second year, he becomes
white and keeps only the outermost wing-feathers; the head grows red above the
eyes, where there are no feathers, but only small, red hairs. At this time, the
bill-skin and feet are red. and the neck continues yellow, but deeper and more
fiery, which, as the bird grows older, becomes white as a swan. This bird flies
from over the Caspian sea, in the spring of the year, commonly single and very
high in the air, but is no where so frequently to be met with as are the common
cranes.

The next thing I enquired for, was the flying squirrel, and sent some hunters
abroad into the birch-woods in search of some. This wonderful little animal,
(Sciurus volans), is common from the Uralian mountains, throughout all northern
Asia or Siberia, where there are any birch-woods, with or without firs; is
always seen on high and builds it is nests in the trunks of trees, from whence
it does not go out but at twilight or night, to feed upon the birches, it is
food being the fruit that grows upon the birch, small and brown in winter,
blooming in spring and filled with seeds in summer, thus serving as aliment to
this animal throughout the whole year. Where there are fir trees, it eats their
buds and it is entrails have, then, a very resinous smell; but, otherwise, they
have a birch-smell. It seldom runs upon the ground, and yet is in the habit of
dropping it is dung at the bottom of those trees where it lives. When it leaps
from one tree to another, it spreads out the solds of it is fur, with all it is
feet, which from the fore-feet to the ham, may be extended on both sides by a
bone, like wings, with which it will quiver in the air, something like flying,
and can direct itself in it is flight by it is woolly and broad tail. In this
manner it will fly or leap to the distance of 140 feet, not horizontally, but
in an oblique direction downwards from the top of one tree to the middle or
trunk of another. When it climbs the birch-tree, it is scarcely
distinguishable, by it is white-grey color, from the bark of these trees; thus
has Nature wisely protected this animal from nocturnal birds of prey. This is
the season in which the flying squirrel drops it is young; they commonly bring
forth only two, sometimes three and but rarely four: they are first callow and
blind. I kept a nest, that was brought me, a long time. The mother sat the
whole day over her young ones, and wrapped them up in her wing-skin; but at
night, as soon as the sun was set, she covered them with moss and went to
search her food. The young ones grew very slowly, and did not get their hair
and fore-teeth till after the space of six days. They remained blind to the
thirteenth day, when I found them all dead, and one almost devoured by the
mother. If these animals, when brought to me, were but two days old, and, by
their size, they appeared to be of that age, they must remain blind for a
fortnight after their birth, which is not the case with any quadruped we know
as yet. The mother died soon after, notwithstanding all attempts were made to
save the little creature's life. I might have had better success in winter, but
then it is hard to catch them. They often fall into those bruising traps, set
on trees to catch squirrels with.

On the 15th of May, the heat of the weather was equal to 105 degrees. and a half
of De L'Isle's thermometer, had increased one degrees. and a half within the last
three days, and was attended with a violently hot, southern storm, that blew
hard and carried with it a great deal of salt-dust, which hurt our eyes much.
Toward night, we heard a great bustling and the noise of a vast quantity of
waterfowl, such as swans, ducks, herons, diverse, etc. which continued till
midnight. This was the second prognostication we had, by aquatic music, of an
approaching frost; for, after twelve o'clock at night, the wind changed to the
north, and blew all the next day so cold, that we were obliged to look for our
furs; yet, we found in bloom, the oalerian (Valeriana officinalis), the
chichling vetch, (Lathyrus pisisormis), the sky-slower, (Cineraria, palustris
and Alpina), and several little bell-flowers; and, the more southward we
traveled, the more plants we met with in bloom.

Having given no description of a particular way of catching sturgeon, in the
river Wolga, with a tackling they call snast; as I met with the same here, in
the river Irtish, under the name of samolowi, somewhat different from the snast
of the Caspian sea, the reader shall have it now. The whole consists of a bast
rope, well tarred, between twenty and forty fathoms long, on which they fasten,
at the distance of six inches from each other, if for small fish; but at twelve
inches, if for large fish, small cords, likewise besmeared with tar; on these
strings, they tie strong and sharp hooks, four or five inches long, greased
with tallow to prevent rust; in the middle of the curve of these hooks, is a
line of horsehair, twisted, having a small float at it is end, of willowbark, as
light as cork. After each tenth hook, they fasten a stone on the last rope,
sufficient to sink it, and, at one end, a wooden anchor to secure the whole, at
the other, a rope with a basket, or some other thing that will (...) and serve
as a buoy. In this state, the tackling is cast into deep places in the stream,
letting the anchor first down, that the current may not carry it off. By means
of the floats to each hook, the hooks are kept from touching the bottom, and
the sturgeon and husos, which rove about the bottom, beating the water with
their flanks and tails, are sure to hook themselves in one part or other: so
wounded, they are more agitated, beat and lash the water more, and are, by this
means, hooked in several other parts, so as not to be able to escape. The
fishermen draw up these ropes every day, take off the fish caught, and replace
the rope in the water at night. This fishery is continued all the summer. In
the Wolga, they stretch such ropes across the whole arm of a river; and, in the
Caspian sea, bait the hooks with a small fish called an obla, which bjelugas
bite at, and are caught by the throat, as I have had occasion to speak of.

In the banks of the Irtish, are sometimes found, teeth and other bones of
elephants, brought forth by the water. These have lain buried in the earth a
long time, and denote some extraordinary change in it, as I shall speak further
of hereafter. I met here, also, with a species of large, yellow-headed lark,
(Calandra); they are fond of flying about the road, singly, but do not fly high
nor sing near so well as the fieldlark, but, like the latter, build in the
grass and feed upon grass-hoppers and other small insects.

On my arrival at Omskaja, a fort on the river Irtish, on the 17th of May, I
went to Major Stanislasky's, to see some maps that had been made of Siberia,
convinced there were such things in his possession, left by the late General
Springer, who died just before we arrived, and who was a lover of the science
of geography. After waiting two days I was informed, that, without special
orders from Petersburgh, I could not be shown any of them. Notwithstanding all
I could say, I could not get a sight of those which I wanted to see, and from
this I collected that the commanders here disliked my tour and the business I
was entrusted with. Indeed, till the day of my departure, I could obtain
nothing but an order for a change of horses at different places, and these, the
worst in the garrison; and, in this order, they left it to the option of those
officers who commanded the forts I was to travel through, whether they would
supply me with regimental horses or not. I dreaded, therefore, every possible
obstacle, and this cold and ungentleman-like reception the more surprised me,
as I had been, every where else, loaded with all imaginable civility and
kindness, by the governors and commanding-officers where I passed. I considered
this, however, as a new proof of the old truth, that the God of War is no
friend to the Muses.

I remained, however, at Omskaja, to repair and refit till the 22d. Omskaja has
it is name from the river Om, being situated near it is mouth into the Irtish. A
new fort has been here erected by Lieutenant General Springer, the old one
having been entirely decayed, and is well fortified, according to the rules of
modern fortification. It was begun in 1768, and in great forwardness when I was
there. Within it, is a handsome mansion for the governor, with a stone
foundation; a court martial and a military storehouse, with artillery; a house
for the chief priest, and several streets of wellbuilt houses; a fine
stone-built church, a military-academy, a house for the reception of strangers
of distinction and one for the protestant preacher of the Siberian division,
besides other houses for officers, etc. On the Irtish lies, within the fort,
the magazine of provisions, and, in the chief square of the fort, are several
fine fountains. In short, it has the appearance of a fine city. Part of the old
fort will be demolished with the old cathedral and the churchyard only left,
where a monument has been erected to General Springer.

Forty miles from Omskaja, where I arrived on the 23d of May, is a guard
station, where a new fort is built, and the place is colonized with a number of
exiled Tartars, sent here to carry on the works at Omskaja. Near this post, an
English officer, who formerly commanded here, has made a fine kitchen-garden.
The sand, taken out from the ditch of the redoubt, is ^^^ed with Tellin^
muscles, half calcined, often met with on the higher shores of the Irtish, but
never in the river itself, and are incontestably a marine production. Put the
most remarkable circumstance is, there being only this single species of
muscle-shells, to be found throughout the sandy steps upon the Irtish, without
any other trace of petrified sea-bodies; and, it is no less worthy the notice
of a naturalist, that they are found abundantly, quite near the surface of the
earth, whilst the borders of the river, which consist of sand and loam, and the
other steps, wherein they are found, are six, eight, my even ten fathoms above
the highest level of the water.

I never met, any where, with so great a number of water-swallows, as about the
high-shores of the Irtisch. In many places their holes and nests are so near
each other, that if one stands on the brink of the shore and treads a little
hard, they will swarm out in crowds and hover about like flies. Here, also,
builds the house-swallow her nest, with the water-swallow. The former makes a
hole in the land, but not so deep as the latter. The house-swallow's hole is
merely large enough for ner nest. These two species of swallows, are found here
in abundance, but they do not like to mix. One spot shall be found full of the
nests of the water-swallow and another of the house-swallow.

In our way from Omskaja, we passed many scattered tumuli, about ninety miles
from that place; these tumuli are not raised so high as in general; they are
flat and of mean appearance, and the body not buried more than eighteen or
twenty inches deep: the bones, however, that we found, were quite sound. The
head lies to the west and they are, probably, the graves of the idolatrous
Barabynian Tartars. Valuable things are not commonly found herein, but, in
some, they have found copper, and in some few, better metals.

The high, sandy shores of the Irtisch, which are mixed with loam, lie mostly
in layers and seem to have been carried there by the deluge. One layer, near
eight fathoms, or more, above the highest watermark, is mixed with the tellinae
I have mentioned. Most of them are calcined, but have preserved something of
their outward, horn-like, upper-skin. These very layers, in which the muscles
are dispersed, contain all sorts of bones, some of elephants and some of other
animals, nay, even the bones of fish-heads; of course, they must have been
brought hither by some vast inundation; or it is a proof that the sea,
formerly, stretched itself entirely over these plains. It is not the river,
that causes here such great sinkings or excavations of the ground, as we meet
with, but strong, subterranean springs, that gush forth in inconceivable
streams, from underneath the high, sandy layers, and from a gray clay, that
does not lie much higher than the level of the water. These streams are of a
brackish taste, and it leads me to think they must proceed from the great lake
I have mentioned. Indeed it is very dangerous to travel over many spots of the
low-shore, as one often sinks suddenly into a bottomless swamp.

Between thirty and forty miles from the Irtisch, are three large salt-lakes,
where the purest and finest common salt lies at the bottom of the whole lakes,
a foot in thickness; but, in less quantity near the shore. The largest of these
lakes, is about two miles long and about 450 fathoms over; in serene weather,
the water has a blood-red appearance, though it is perfectly transparent. A
guard of Tartarian Cossacks is placed here, to prevent the salt being taken
away to the injury of the revenue, and have habitations adjoining them. Here I
met with, in the wet low-lands, a weed called the Acorus, which is dug up by
travelers, in order to preserve furs from the moth, and which they assured me
was very efficacious.

Traveling on by the Irtisch, I met with more elephant-bones and a
shoulder bone, which seemed to belong to a buffalo; also, some large, animal
skulls, of which there is now no animal so large in all Asia. I passed over a
step, where a number of horses lay about dead, which died of the air-plague.
They lay in such numbers as to resemble a field of battle.

In the fort Korjakofskoi, which is one of the most populous on the Irtisch and
the best built, commanded by a Lieutenant Colonel, are two salt-magazines,
belonging to the crown, and always containing a provision of some hundred
thousands puds of salt, for a supply in case of want. These stores lay in large
heaps, covered with mats, ready for transportation, in barges to the Irtisch,
which lies at the distance of about sixteen miles. Each barge will carry from
17 to 18,000 puds, and down the Irtisch it is conveyed to the Imperial
salt-office, not far from Tobolskaja.

If it was not for several plants that grow on these sandy steps, such as the
Axyris ceratoides, the Siberian centaury and the wonderful wild liquorice,
(Astralagus) the sand would not be sufficiently solid to pass over: but this
astralagus grows between the sand-hills, creeping with numberless thin, divided
twigs, through the sand, gathering itself round it and thus forming hillocks,
from four to six feet in diameter; the small, gray leaves of this plant
covering the sand entirely. The bloom scarce rises above the ground, but it is
directly covered with sand and the little cods, that hold the seed, ripen under
the sand. I believe this fine plant, hitherto unknown to botanists, is very
useful in rendering the quicksands firm. And here we saw, first, that fine and
new species of mice, (Mus arenarius). The cods of the wild liquorice is their
natural food.

In some spots of these sandy deserts, I saw such crowds of grasshoppers as
covered the earth quite black, in tracts from fifty to sixty fathoms. These
were unwinged, but I could see by crowds that were winged and whose wings were
of a pale-red, that they were the Cryllus Italicus of Linnaeus. This insect was
here in such vast abundance upon whole tracts of dry and sandy hills, as to
have devoured every green plant and herb, except the sandwort, the sharp
pasque-flower, (Pulsatilla), and old wormwood-stalks: they had even eat the
milk-thistle.

I could not but take notice, (and I mention it on account of it is rareness),
of a large wolf advancing near the road and starting before us a breeding duck;
this animal looked at us a little while, with a great deal of phlegm, without
being in the least dismayed at our noise; after this, went slowly on behind us,
and crossed the road with equal coolness. The conduct of such an animal, so shy
in the sight of men in summer, is remarkable.

Wherever we passed, during the hot days of June, we were dinged with the noise
of little crickets, and I could not help thinking with enthusiasm of the Poet's
description.

Strident arbusta Cicadis. "The shady groves with crickets chirp."

The 15th of June was sultry, almost to suffocation; yet De L'Isle's
thermometer, in the shade, pointed at 104 degrees. But we rode along some very dry
and stony mountains, that reflected the rays of the sun and added to the
natural heat. Nothing green could be seen but bushes of wild roses, the thrift,
(Spirea), and the scarlet Convolvulus frutescens. The mountains consist, here,
of a solid chalk-stone, which is broken and burnt on the spot, by transported
miscreants. Here, also are 100 Cossacks employed in felling wood, which number
is changed every three years. Among these, a Tartarian Orpheus, who played us a
tune on a Kirguisian fiddle, but not with sufficient charms to move the stones.
This instrument is a monochord of two unequal strains, in form of a lute, the
belly of which is narrow from below and but half covered with a sounding
bottom. The strings are horse-hair and it is played with a horse-hair bow, and,
when sounded, resembles the singing of swans; indeed the instrument bears much
the similitude of a swan.

On the 21st, I was at the sort Semipalatnaja, where Dr. Gmelin has described
as situated some ruins of ancient buildings. Some of these I saw, but one or
two which he describes, I could not meet with, or they must have been
obliterated since he was there. I slopped here in order to make an excursion
and take a view of them. About seven miles from this place, we drew near the
Irtish, and about a mile further, we saw these ruins on a high border, which
consists of slate-rocks, and on which is a picket-guard. Here are the remains
of three buildings, the structure of which is mean and appears to be Bucharian,
and the buildings are disposed without any order. The first is a wretched,
quadrangular hut, 260 fathoms distant from the others, without windows, built
with unburnt bricks, nineteen feet square, with a very low and narrow gate on
the western side, toward the river, and three air-holes on the southern side.
The roof is planks, overspread with loam, and broke in. Of the other two, the
walls only are standing, part of which is built of those thin slates of which
the mountain consists, fitted together as well as possible, and cemented with
loam instead of mortar.

Seven miles from the guard-station, on the Irtish, is the bartering market,
where trade is carried on between the Asiatic merchants and the Kirguese. This
place consists of a certain number of little, wooden houses, or booths, divided
into several streets, and encompassed with a ditch and chevaux-de-frize, and
are inhabited, or destined for storehouses, by native Russian or Tartarian
merchants, or such Bucharians as arrive with caravans. Over the Irtish is a
ferry, and on the opposite shore are some huts, erected purposely for
Kirguisian commerce. Most of the Bucharians come from Taschkent, in Little
Bucharia; and there were, when I was there, some caravans with ordinary cotton
goods. This people is more obstinate and uncivilized than those from Great
Bucharia. The bartering trade carried on with the Kirguese, is most
advantageous to the inland merchants, because these Kirguese, being of the
middle horde and living on the Irtish, are very simple and take trifles, at a
high rate, for their cattle; so that the merchants, notwithstanding their long
journey to this place, get a great deal by what they purchase. The Kirguisian
sheep are here of two kinds, a large species and a smaller one, like those of
the Kalmucks. Horses are sold here from four to fifteen and twenty rubles each,
horned cattle, from two to four rubles each, and sheep, from thirty to seventy
copecs a-piece.

On the 22d I set out, in the afternoon, and our horses were so bad, that they
could scarce draw our wagons over the sand-hills. It was night when we passed
the last, at seven miles from the fort. Two of the wagons were obliged to stop
at the first sand-hill, the horses being knocked up, whilst I took up my
lodging in the woods, and was unable to proceed any further till noon, the next
day. The rest of the road to Osernoi Staniz, where I was going, is tolerably
level, and we met with nothing worth notice in our way but a tumulus, on which
stood a stone with the principal features of a man's face carved on it. It was
thirteen inches broad, fifteen long and four and a half thick.

The many changes of heat and cold which I subjected myself to, when I left my
wagons in order to search for plants, and the daily cold and stormy showers to
which I was exposed, brought on a dysentery and made me so weak, that I could
get scarce up and down from the wagon; but, as I determined to rest myself at
Krasnojarskaja, I made the best of my way there, and with as much expedition as
my painful situation would admit. It was at the distance of twenty-seven miles,
and I got there on the 30th of June. In my road, I passed an enormous tumulus,
raised on the highest spot of the whole district, and was told, it had once
been opened by a body of 150 peasants, and these diggers of hidden treasures,
found in it no less than forty-six pounds of gold, which they shared among them.

The gold found in these graves, the many mines that have been here opened, and
the scattered tumuli representing the beds of rest of the ancient Teutonic
heroes, with the fashion of their tools, arms and furniture found within, puts
it beyond a doubt, that the metallic mountains of the Irtish and Jenesei were
formerly worked by one and the same nation.

Krasnojarskaja was a bad place and a very unfit abode for me, in my disorder,
to halt at, as the water was unwholesome and the refracted heat of the adjacent
mountains injurious, but I could get no further, and was confined to my bed for
three weeks. However, that I might lose no time, I sent Mr. Sokolof off, in
company with my draftsman, on the 6th of July, in order to describe the
districts on both sides of the Irtish, with orders to meet me on the
serpent-mountain, where I hoped to be able to wait for him.

Krasnojarskaja is a new-erected village, like many others, that have been
built since the year 1764, and colonized partly with Polish emigrants of
Russian extraction and of the old Greek religion, partly with peasants from the
innermost parts of Russia, or such who, for little misdeamesnors, have been
here exiled; partly, also, with voluntary colonists, from the more populous
parts of Siberia. This village has been erected but three years and has, at
present, only twenty houses; most of the inhabitants are exiles, to whom the
Empress has been pleased to restore their liberty, and enable them, once more,
to enjoy the sweets of domestic life, by peopling this desert part of the
world. The clemency and philanthropy of the Mother of this country, has
extended so far as to supply these wretches, like other colonists, for the
first three years, with money and provision, monthly; and such wise proceedings
will, doubtless, render these districts, in time, as populous as other parts of
Siberia. Indeed, most of these new villages are so happily situated for
agriculture, that the inhabitants cannot but be prosperous. The only complaint
of this and other villages, situated on the Uba, is the unwholesomeness of it is
water, which is apt to cause fevers, especially to strangers, and, as the
country folks, here, imprudently nurse such fevers by astringents, it brings on
lameness and other nervous effects. And yet the people seem rather disposed to
use this water, than search for good wells. My whole retinue suffered by
drinking it. Every man, except one, was afflicted with a fever so irregular,
that no remedies could cure it. After we left the place, the disorder lurked
about them for three weeks.

July, 17, 1771. We left Krasnojarskaja on the 17th, traveled up the Uba and
visited the leadmines, in which is found copper and a small quantity of silver,
and, on the 27th, Mr. Sokolof joined us. He had traveled down the Uba, and
brought me an account of a great curiosity, in the district of
Ustkamenogorskaja, to be seen, in the remains of a fortified, Kalmuck Pagoda,
which goes by the name of Ablaikit.

The Pagoda Ablaikit, lies out from the frontiers of the Russian empire, on the
left side of the Irtisch, in a desert formerly inhabited by the Dsungorian
Kalmucks, but now by the middle horde of the Kirguese. The history of it is
building, by Ablai, a Prince of the Kalmucks, and it is destruction may be seen
in a remarkable treatise, written by counselor Muller, and published among the
works of the Imperial Academy of Sciences, at Petersburgh, and, also, in the
tour of Mr. Gmelin. It is in ruins, but the ruins show, that all the
magnificence of an uncivilized, Asiatic people is capable of, has been lavished
upon it.

After having taken Mr. Sokolof's baggage into my wagons, we set off; on the
27th of July for the Serpent-Mountain. We crossed the river Alei, and came into
a deep valley, encompassed on all sides with steep and rocky mountains a vale
delightfully cool and refreshing, in arid, sultry weather, enamelled with
flowers and frequented by all sorts of wild fowl; which renders it, throughout
the year, an agreeable place to the neighboring people, must furnish their
tables with the most delicate productions, and afford them comforts which even
a prince might envy.

The mountains here are covered with birch and poplars, wild roses and
rasberry-bushes, a fruit the bears are very fond of, and will very often take
them from women and children, who go out to gather them, without doing them any
harm; neither will they, in summer, attack any man, unless much provoked. From
the heights of Ossinowa Gora, we had an awful sight of the steep and rocky,
towering clifts of the adjacent mountain, called, in Russ, Bjelki, whose top
was covered with snow, and which may be seen at seventy-five miles distance.
This mountain is called the Snow-Mountain, is much torn, and it is ascent so
steep, as to have one precipice, or rock-wall, 150 fathoms in perpendicular
height, each fathom seven feet English, down which tumbles the river Tigerak,
with a tremendous roar. This river is, here, fifteen fathoms wide, and
prodigiously rapid. Before we reach this precipice, which is accessible only in
two places, we descry, at a distance, another enormous mountain, whose conical
summit rises in a stupendous, rocky pyramid, far above the clouds. These
mountains and their gigantic brethren, appeared now more dreadful, as many
gloomy thunder-clouds gathered round their tops and brought on continual rain,
till the 2d of Aug. when the sky cleared up. (See the plate.)

THE SNOW MOUNTAIN and STONE HARE


As we rode from the mountain Ossinowa Gora to the next post, the open valleys,
on our left, exhibited a delightful and unexpected change in the vegetable
kingdom. We had not seen a remarkable plant for some time, and all the grass
had lost it is verdure; but here, the mountains and valleys were covered with a
vernal green, like spring, and numberless planes were in bloom. The most
remarkable were the fellwort, (Gentiana verna), the catmint, (Nepeta
multifida), the dragon's head, (Dracocephalum peregrinum), the bitter vetch,
(Orobus lathyroides), the French honey-suckle, (Hedysarum Alpinum), the
liquorice, (Astragalus Syriacus), the John's-wort, (Hyperycum Ascyron), the
rhubarb, (Rheum undulatum), which often grows out from the bare clefts of the
rock; the milkwort, (Polygala Sybirica), and the cinquefoil, (Potentilla
fruticosa), which grew like bushes, with high rods, and decorated the valleys
every where: also many species of Abrotonum, several sorts of wild leeks and a
small species of swordgrass, which Linnaeus has taken no notice of; it is a
common plant and has very few flowers. Among other plants in this district, an
elegant one and hitherto unknown to botanists, is the Spirea, with thick rods,
which the Cossack hunters make use of as ram-rods to their firelocks.

This district was, in every respect, so very remarkable, that I wished to have
been here a month sooner, to have climbed up the ^ountains myself, which my
illness had now rendered me too infirm to do; indeed, I was so weak as not to
be able to walk half a mile. I dispatched, therefore, Mr. Sokolof, with a
huntsman and an escort of Cossacks, to the high mountains, and visited the
lower ones and their caverns myself, in which I found a number of
stone-swallow's-nests, (Hirundo alpestris), the pellitory (Parietaria), and
little, stinking figwort (Scrophularia), with white blossoms, growing upon the
stones. In one cavern, whose entrance was twenty-six feet broad and sixteen
feet high, somewhat wider in it is continuation, and running 160 feet right into
the mountain, I found many human bones and some few, little trifles carved in
wood, perhaps some superstitious ornaments of the Kalmucks. Here I met with
three Kalmuck skulls, and I will declare them to be Kalmuck, as from the
flatness of the skull they are distinguishable from those of any other men.
These bodies were, perhaps, here placed by a peculiar order of the priests, or
some Kalmucks might have been killed, in this cavern, by accident. On the rock,
without, grew plentifully the sasifrage, (Saxifraga crassifolia), vulgarly
called, there, the Mongalian tea; for, as the trade with China was, for some
time, interrupted, and the tea, that was imported at Petersburgh and Archangel,
too dear, in these remote districts; this plant was introduced by the name of
Tsahagirian tea, and the people learned, from the Mongols and Siberian Tartars,
to boil it like common tea. It Is leaves do not fade and die in one year, but
become only dry and brown, afterward blackish, and it is four years before
they drop off entirely. It gives the water a red tea-colour, with a taste like
that of bad bohea, which, if the plant is not too much boiled, is tolerable;
but not so good, that any one would take it in preference to other tea. The
fresh leaves, like the roots of this plant, are uncommonly bitter and styptic,
of course, are not fit to be taken. It is, however, worth trial, whether this
plant, which I found antiseptic in the highest degree, is not a good remedy in
fevers. I am confident it possesses some medicinal virtue. It is found here, on
the north side of all rocky mountains, in vast quantities.

On the 1st of August, Mr. Sokolof returned from his troublesome tour, his
companion, not knowing his way. They climbed up a mountain covered with
larches, firs and pines, and so much bewildered with bushes, that their clothes
were torn to rags. The most curious thing he brought me, was a species of
stone-hare, (Lepus Alpinus), which lives about the rocky brooks of the high
mountains, and is common in all the eastern mountains of Siberia. They are not
much larger than a guinea-pig, weigh about fifteen ounces, are of a yellowish
color, have large, round ears and, instead of a tail, a little lump of fat.
(See the plate and the description, at the end of this volume). They inhabit
the clefts of rocks; if the weather be soggy, will set the whole day in the
open air, but, toward night, retire on the outside of those clifts that
project from the grass, and whistle. They will then suffer a person to approach
them very near, but, if shot at will throw themselves into their clefts, yet
appear again, soon after. A wonderful quality of this animal, is their mowing
the grass, after the month of July, with their teeth, and carrying it, as a
winter-provision of hay, in heaps, into their clefts, so that one may discover
the dwellings of these animals by the heaps of grass on the rocks. This animal
reminds me to observe, that though they abound in the wild frontier-mountains,
they are almost lost within the frontiers, as the country, there, is more
populous. For this reason, sportsmen, in the favorable season for catching
them, go, with the leave of the commanding officers, without the frontiers,
into desert and woody districts, where they find them in plenty. They catch
here, also, a number of fables, whose skins are short-haired, but very fine and
black; and, also, a great quantity of martens, which, further northward in
Siberia, are not to be met with, and are very rare in the upper district of the
river Jenisei. Another species of little, forest-animal, whose reddish fur is
but of little value and costs, here, four or five copecs each, is what they
call Kulonki, a species of weasel not yet described, which is very abundant
about the Jenisei and no where else to be seen, but in the woody districts of
Siberia. It Is name is of Tartarian origin, and implies a glutton, it having
been observed that this animal, if caught in a snare or trap withot her
animals, and not soon taken out, will devour all that is with it. It steals,
like the pole-cat, into villages and robs the peasants of meat, butter and
other provisions. The Cossacks quartered here on the lines, catch stags, elks
and bears, in covered pits; they also kill them with firearms. They fix the
gun upon a fork, cock it, and to the trigger fasten a string, which is turned
round a peg in the ground behind it, and put across the spot where the animal
must pass; which if it does, it touches the string, discharges the piece and
shoots itself. There are, also, wild boars in the miry districts of the high
mountains; and abundance of good foxes, lynxes, and squirrels, and along the
mountain-waters, otters, and beavers. The stone-rams (musimon) dwell only on
the highest and most inaccessible rocks, never feeding in inhabited places. The
chamois seems to be wanting here; but probably a few may be found on the
mountains, as I received a horn of one from the Jenesei: and on the copper
pieces dug out of the tumuli, the figure of the chamois is very common.

It occasionally happens, that for some bad trick, and through a love of
independence, miners will run from the mines, and dwell a long time in the
woody mountains, thriving and growing rich by hunting. Such runaways have been
discovered, who have built huts in the wildest places, without the frontiers.
In search of such colonists, detachments of troops are occasionally sent far
into the mountains, where they have found hermits, who, from fantastic zeal,
have left their villages, and settled in these inaccessible parts.

It is plainly visible that, on chalk mountains, all wild plants become much
finer, and more perfect; which may be attributed to the nature of this species
of rocks, which strongly attracts the moisture of the air, clouds and fogs, and
absorbs that attracted moistness so, as not to let the plants have too much wet.

In this district I passed an old deserted copper-mine, in which silver was
found, that had been worked by Dimidoff; and a manufactory adjoining it, the
dwellings of which were now only inhabited by husbandmen. In my road on, about
54 miles before we reached the serpent-mountain, the banks of the river Alei
are covered with wood, in which there are a great many white poplars; and in
the banks of the brook Beresoska, which falls into the Alei, and which consist
of a kind of loam, and, underneath, layers of sand, we found enormous teeth of
elephants, and some remains of smaller animals. Some peasants that rowed down
this brook a fishing, first discovered this curiosity; seeing a large tooth of
an elephant projecting from the sandy banks, they drew it out. I have seen a
grinder sound here, which seems like the tooth of some large buffalo; but I
cannot give it, by my remembrance, to any known animal, if it be not that of
the rhinoceros.

Serpent-mountain. We reached the serpent-mountain on the 11th of August. It is
so called from the innumerable serpents that were every where crawling about
it, till it was covered with mines. I was showed some sharp, outstanding angles
of rocks, in which I saw smooth excavations, as if polished, which are said to
have been made by these serpents, who have now taken possession of a
neighboring mountain. This mountain, by name Smejefskaja Gora, deserves justly
to be called the crown of all Siberian mines; and if it was to be searched into
with proper care and exactness, would take up more time than a traveller would
be able to bestow upon it. I shall, however, mention circumstantially all the
accounts and information I could gather respecting it, and for which I am
indebted to its, director, Mr. Leube.

Before the year 1732, it was known that this mountain was metallic; for its
old trying pits had been discovered before that time. In 1745, Brigadier Beier
ordered regular works to be undertaken. Its distance from the Irtisch is 71
miles; and from the Oby, which flows east, and north from it, 107 miles. It is
encompassed all round with steep and torn mountains, which form part of the
Altai, and between which the brook Korbolicha flows into the Alei; part of
these torn mountains consists of chalk and state, and contains some good ores;
yet far inferior in extent and richness to those of the serpent-mountain.

The serpent-mountain is divided from all adjacent ones, by a valley which
draws toward the Korbolicha, and rises to the perpendicular height of 30
fathoms. The whole mountain may be considered as a great stock covered with
slates, which consist of rich gold, silver, copper, lead, zinc, arsenic, and
sulphur ores. This stock has two divisions, entirely separated without by a
depression, or dale, running from north to south, and within the mountain, by
slate-rocks, The level part of this stock consists of chertz, which, with
irregular sinuses and shelves, runs northward into the depth; but the hanging
part of the mountain is a heavy and compact spar, over which the slate-mountain
joins. About the chertz, the ores stick in stocks, nests and branches, so that
it is commonly encompassed with a matrix of a richer, and often, nobler alloy
than the ores themelves, and a great deal of massive metals. The chertz in
which the ores lie, is, in substance, mostly like a solid fire-stone; its
color, exposed to the air, is yellowish; further inwards, light gray, or
bluish. In the neighborhood of the ores, it is more like metal in large
pieces, or nests, and impregnated with a silvery black, or enriched with
massive gold, or silver plates. This quartz, chertz, or hornstein, is therefore
a principal part of the works, and contains a good deal of arsenic.

The spar-part is very compact and solid, of a gray or white color, and
uncommonly heavy; great part of it is converted into metal, and mixed with
several ores. The slate which lies on the spar is commonly, at the day,
vari-coloured and soft; but in the depth, solid, thoroughly gray, or blackish.
It often contains marcasites, and pebbles of a very aquatic nature; and care is
to be taken not to advance very far into it. To this care they owe the depth of
the mine, and its being worked with only a few hand-engines.

Betwixt the chertz and the spar, in the upper divisions, lay some rich yellow
ochre, to the depth of 10 fathoms, and in the lower, 38 fathoms in length, 10
in breadth, and 11 in depth; between which, and the chertz, lay some white
argil, to the thickness of an ell. In general, the ores from the day to the
depth of 20 or 30 fathoms, were the richest, and most ennobled with massive
metals; but at a greater depth, the ores were poorer, and less ripe, and very
seldom any traces of massive silver to be met with.

There are many shafts dug in this mine, that have been found very rich with
silver; but the hornstein, or chertz, dug here, is immensely rich, containing
beautiful ores in nests and bunches, which are of considerable alloy. In the
year 1754, they made a great adit which was completed in 1758, and runs to a
depth of 32 fathoms, 585 fathoms long, having five air-holes at a proper
distance, and opens with its mouth near the brook in the valley. By means of
this adit, which intersects the whole structure of the mine, all the numerous
works above it, from which the water was drawn in an expensive manner with
hand-engines, are now not only freed from water, and fresh water procured in
the whole mine, but also the internal quality of the serpent-mountain is still
more known, and a road made to the deepest works. This adit, or road, has gone
through 315 fathoms of clay, through 150 fathoms, further on, of reddish slate,
then 83 fathoms through chertz, 70 fathoms through spar and pebble-ore, five
fathoms, of empty spar, and lastly through 22 fathoms of a gray and black
slate; in the whole, 645 fathoms, or 1505 yards.

The works are here carried on with that regularity, skill and order, as may
serve as an example to all other mines. The deepest part of the works cannot be
continued in any other manner, than by blowing up the ores with gunpowder; and
they use here annually from 5 to 600 puds of powder for the purpose; each pud,
36 pounds English.

The ores hitherto dug in these important works, contain an almost incredible
variety of species. The metals and ores dug throughout the mine, to this time,
are as follow.

Massive gold, which lies mostly in the upper part of the mountain, from the
surface to a depth of 10 fathoms, where the ores are the richest. Its color is
high and pure, and it is found in a matrix of chertz, brown ochre, and lazuli;
more below, it is very pale, and impregnated with silver; so that often one and
the same bunch has three, or more sorts of color. It is found in irregular
grains, and pieces of different, yet small, size: sometimes it is impregnated
with particles of arsenic. In many silver-ores, it is so tenderly sprinkled in,
that it can hardly be discerned with a magnifying-glass; yet if it be true that
no gold is found changed into ore, it must be scattered massively in all ores
of this mine. Most of the massive gold is found here visibly in the chertz, and
the fine sand-rock; also in brown ochre, and rich lazuli: bunches of both the
latter have been found underneath the day ores, quite covered with veins of
massive gold. Massive gold is also here found in veins, and pebble-ores.

Massive silver, which has commonly some gold in it, is found in pieces and
threads of different sizes, in kidney and clefts. It commonly occurs in chertz,
spar, different species of spar-ores, pebble, and silvery copperores; also, in
loam and argyl. The richest chertz-ores, contain a great deal of massive
silver; and plates of the same have also been found, in the upper works, upon
loam and verdigrease. The hair-silver never occurs in very large threads. There
are also black chertz-kidneys, with massive, silver plates in them.

Massive copper, is in metallic and small pieces of irregular figure, only in
the upper part of the mountain. In some places it lies in white and green
loams; in others, in green, silver, and coppery spar-ores, and carries with it
a degree of silver. It is also dug in tender plates, upon spar-ores, nestwise.

Other ores, dug in this mine, as pebble, arsenic, lead, etc. all contain a
degree of silver, and some have gold. In an assay made of 5490 puds of dug ore,
there was found 55 puds of black copper, six puds, nine pounds, and better, of
silver, and upwards of three pounds of gold. Some produce one pound of silver
in 30 pounds of ore; some more, some less. In the lead-ore a number of
beautiful, colored crystals are found.

As a curiosity of the serpent-mountain, it deserves to be mentioned, that a
piece of a grinder of an elephant, also a piece of fungites, were found in one
of the shafts, which plainly prove its origin from the sea. I saw them both;
and I doubt not but other such remains might be found, if properly looked after.

The tracts of the ancient workmen, noticed in these mines, are too remarkable
not to be mentioned. The upper and lower division of the ores of this mountain
were not known to these ancient miners. They made deep, trying pits into the
soft and rich ochre-ores and clays, situated near the surface, and made shafts
upon them to the depth of five fathoms, and more; but to penetrate into the
solid ores, they had neither means, nor tools. Many of their tools have been
found in the modern works; several were cast in copper, which leads me to
think, that iron was unknown to them; and indeed the copper knives, daggers and
arrows, found in the ancient tombs, in the step of the Irtisch, is an
incontestable proof of it. A few years since, they found a half metallized
skeleton of an ancient miner, who was probably squeezed to death by the falling
in of a shaft; about him was a leather bag of the most precious ochre. Between
the mouth of one of the shafts, and the stamping mills, that formerly stood on
the adjoining brook, they found, at the distance of more than 100 fathoms, one
of their washing-places, which still contained so much gold, as to make it
requisite to pass the rubbish through the modern lavatories, in order not to
lose such a treasure.

But notwithstanding this, we can form a conjecture who the ancient nation, so
skilled in mineralogy, may have been. The Russians, in Siberia, call them
Tschudaki, which implies, an old nation. They cannot have been Tartars, or
Mongols, because these nations have been acquainted, time out of mind, with the
melting of iron, and yet are unacquainted with the melting of copper, or other
precious metals; nay even of digging them. Probably this nation might have been
driven from their ancient abodes, which they occupied along the Siberian
mountains; or may have been destroyed by the wandering Mongols, and Tartars.
This is probable, from the fine and delightful mountains about the Jenisei, and
from the many magnificent tumuli, in which gold and other valuable things have
been discovered. All the tools found about the Jenesei, show also more art and
splendour, than those on the Irtisch, which are clumsy and heavy. But no where
do we meet with traces of stone-buildings, or other habitations, which might be
attributed to that people, who were probably Nomades, and whose way of life
gave the best opportunity of discovering ores. What then was that nation, so
skilled in mineralogy? Were they the Parthians, lost in history, or were they
the Germans? Their descendants, perhaps, may think the supposition too romantic.

In the old mine-works of the nation I have been speaking of, some timber has
been found, three or four fathoms deep in the ores, quite metallized, and
converted into copper, with silver alloy; and some that contained little
plates, and threads of massive copper and gold. This serpent-mountain, of all
the discovered mines, has, for the last 26 years, produced the most important
treasures; and the imperial silver-manufactories on the Ob have been chiefly
supported by it. As Mr. Gmelin has observed, it is the first of all Siberian
mines, where the ores, to a prodigious depth, have kept constant. To give the
reader a proper idea of the great production of this mine, I shall briefly tell
him, that from the year 1749 to 1762, they sent annually from two to four
hundred; and since 1763, from 5 to 600, nay, even 800 puds of gold and silver,
each pud 36 pounds: and in all, since the beginning of the silver-works, above
10,000 puds of raw silver; which was converted into 318 puds of gold, and above
9000 puds of refined silver. The transport of the ores to the manufactories, is
done by voluntary wagons, or peasants, working to pay their poll-tax. The
carriage from the serpent-mountain to the manufactories, is from five copecs to
seven, per pud, according to the distance and badness of the roads.

On the top of this mountain is a fortress, to guard it, in form of a polygon,
which encompasses the upper works, and extends itself mostly over the south and
east sides of it; so that the great works, with some adjacent storehouses,
forges, and other watering-places, lie without the sortress, on the western
side. The fortress has two stone-bastions, on the top of the mountain, besides
an earth-wall; with two bastions in the northern angles, and half a bastion in
the southern. The principal buildings are, the house of the commanding-officer;
that of the chief director; the comptoir, where a great train of artillery is
kept; the new laboratory of assays, which contains a curious and beautiful
collection of ores; a school-house, and an hospital. Besides these, there are
storehouses, magazines, and five dwelling-houses for the officers, several
private houses, and stables. The foundation of a beautiful, stone-built church,
upon a modern plan, is laid; but till the building is completed, they make use
of a timber one. The Smei forms a canal within the walls of the fortress; its
water fills the ditches, and the fortress itself, and the suburbs, have several
wells of fine, wholesome water. The suburbs lie on the north and east sides of
the fortress, quite down to the valley, and toward the adjacent heights, and
are laid out in regular sheets, one of which is three quarters of a mile long.
The number of houses amounted to 400; and the place is increasing daily.

The direction of the whole mine, is under the celebrated Colonel Leube, who,
before the year 1759, was the German preacher of this place. Under him is a
captain-director of the works, a master of assays, several other officers, and
clerks. The miners are, in number, 887; and above 300 more, employed in the
lavatories. Several hundred peasants are constantly felling timber; and the
garrison consists of 100 men, commanded by a captain.

As the spar, chertz, loam and other rubbish dug out with the ore, are of a
metallic nature, but not of sufficient value to pay the expense of transporting
and melting; there is established in the neighborhood, five stamping-mills and
five lavatories, for grinding and washing such ores of small alloy; and every
thing is so contrived that the works are not suspended even in winter. To
prevent the canals, that work the mills, from freezing, they are covered with
sprays and hay, and the lavatories are heated by ovens.

The lavatories or washing-houses, produce annually a considerable quantity of
gold-dust, and, sometimes, they find, in the rubbish, small pieces of solid
silver. Since 1760, they have produced 160 puds and six pounds of gold-dust,
which is sent to the Imperial Treasury of Mines, at Catherineburg, and since
the new stamping-mill has been erected, it has produced, in one year, above
thirty-seven puds extra.

Before I quit this mountain, I will mention two remarkable occurrences -- The
one is, that, in the course of this year, several shocks of an earthquake were
here felt; and, the other, that inoculation for the smallpox introduced in
children and adults, was so successfully performed here by a Russian surgeon,
in 1769, whose name is Timofei Andrejef, that out of 469 persons not a single
one died. The greatest number was inoculated on the mountain itself, and the
rest in the neighboring villages. So happy an experiment in Siberia, surely
deserves a reward!

I am indebted to Mr. Leube for the observations on the earthquake, felt here
on the 18th of February of the present year 1771. The motion was like a
fluctuation of the earth, and passed from North to South. On the 17th of
February, the night before the earthquake, the quicksilver of the barometer
fell half an inch; during the whole night, a violent south wind blew, and at
five in the morning fell some snow, to the depth of four inches, and continued
on the 18th in the morning, during a great temperature of the air. Then the
usual winter-weather continued to the 22d, the sky was cloudy and the south and
north wind blew by turns; but on the 22d came such a lasting frost, that the
mercury, in de Lisie's thermometer, stood between 182 degrees. to 196 degrees. till the
3d of March. The shocks shook the works and workmen without doing any damage,
and in the houses at the silver-manufactory, at Barnaul, at the distance of 170
miles, all the instruments and furniture were waved several times backwards and
forwards.

On the 17th of August, I left the serpent-mountain, in my way to the
silver-manufactory, at Barnaul, distant 170 miles, and thence to Tomskoi, 378
miles further.

Traveling on, I passed some tumuli, on the 20th and 21st of August,
consisting of a heap of stones covered with earth, in which were found
shin-bones and back-bones of men of a gigantic size. I crossed the Alei, near
the village Kaschina, about 70 miles from the serpent-mountain, which has a
fine, stone-built church, a bailiff, and several villages dependent on it. I
changed horses here and sent my wagons on, the straightest road, wandering
myself through all the environs.

I reached Barnaulskoi on the 22d. one day after Professor Falk, who arrived so
much indisposed as to take to his bed. Meaning to stop here but a few days, I
was desirous of seeing the works as soon as possible, and Major General
Yhrmann, commander-in-chief of the garrisons, quartered on the mountains, gave
me every assistance in his power; I therefore sat up the whole night, writing
and drawing what I have here communicated.

Rich and important as the serpent-mountain is in ores, is this place in it is
works. Here the chief melting and refining of the gold and silver-ores, brought
from that mountain, is performed. Here also are the headquarters of the
regiments and the chief mine-office of the whole district. It Is first
establishment was when Dimidof possessed all the mines of the Altai. The works
were increased in 1763, and the two manufactories of Nowo-pawlofskoi and
Susunskoi were established in the same year. Barnaul, at first, had only six
blasts and three refining hearths. The ores are conveyed on the rivers Alei and
Tscharysch, to save the great expense of land-carriage.

The manufactory of Barnaulskoi, is built on a brook of the same name, near the
mouth of the river Ob. The head of water, pent up for the mills, is 232 fathoms
long and thirteen broad, and the reservoir has so much water as to supply the
works throughout the year, without the least suspension. All the huts or
covered places for materials, are situated according to the best order and
disposition. They are built of wood, and encompassed with a wall. The principal
street consists of a beautiful townhouse, a mine-office, a school and the
barracks. The places worked by water, are two smelting-houses, one with thirty
blasts; a stamping-mill, a forging and refining hearth, a saw-mill, a
corn-mill, a groat-mill, a polishing mill, and two other stamping mills. The
other offices are, an assay-house, with six blasts, a 'compting-house, a small
forge, a locksmith's work-shop, and a bellows-factory. A treasury is going to
be built, and a place to keep the archives of the manufactory. Near the
dwelling-houses for the workmen, are magazines for provisions, corn, hay, etc.
On the other side of the dam head, is a fine new-built mansion for the
commander-in-chief; and close by, several, fine houses, belonging to the
military officers. Here is also a court of sworn citizens, a market, an
hospital, a stone-built, public apothecary's shop, a botanic garden,
storehouses, powder and artillery magazines, and the caserns of the garrison.
The number of other dwelling-houses amounts to 1000. The place has also two
wooden churches; but they have begun a fine, stone-built church, on a
magnificent plan, which will be one of the greatest ornaments of the country.

The supreme mine-office being here established, there is a council, held by
authority of the Empress, which not only commands all the mines of Altai, and
the silver-manufactories on the Ob, but all the officers and workmen, and above
40,000 peasants, from the districts of Tomskoi and Kusnezkaja, who are obliged
to work here for their poll-tax. These peasants are very liberally paid; and as
their homes are sometimes at a very considerable distance, they receive a
competent allowance for coming and returning, all regulated by the wise
administration of General Yhrmann. The hospital is established on very
philanthropic principles; it has a chief surgeon, and six under surgeons: and,
on account of the German works there carried on, they have a Protestant
preacher. The garrison here quartered, as a guard to the place, consists of a
company of dragoons, and three companies of foot-soldiers, commanded by a
major, who are paid, as if in camp. The number of masters, and workmen, amounts
to 400; and their children are not only instructed in reading and writing, but
in merchants-accompts and geometry.

They use here annually from 28 to 30,000 baskets of charcoal; and to make 80
of such baskets, it takes 20 cubic fathoms of wood; but the price of such a
basket is not more than 25, or 26 copecs; about 13 pence English: and they
sell, annually, from 13 to 15,000 puds of lead. In the last eight months, they
had already past through 15 furnaces, for the melting of raw ores, 2,21,000
puds of ore.

Besides these works in Barnaul, there are others in the neighborhood, close
by; such as nine lime-kilns, a bell-foundery; a brick-kiln, 800 fathoms long;
and also eight other kilns, joined together, in which they burn, with one fire,
which does not last above three or four days, from 45 to 50,000 tiles; also, a
glass-manufactory. At a little distance from Bernaul, is a country house,
belonging to the general, called Charlotte-dale, superbly furnished, with a
park, and extensive gardens, in which are many beautiful cascades, fountains,
and statues. Adjoining Bernaul, is a brew house, belonging to the crown. The
sale of strong beer is prohibited here, but on certain days of festivity; or
the workmen would drink too freely, and neglect their duty. Notwithstanding the
northern situation of this town, it enjoys a milder air, and warmer summers,
than the more southern districts. A proof of which is, that all garden-stuff,
except colliflowers, thrive here amazingly. The sandy and elevated district,
and the shelter of a dry forest, contributes much toward it. The only defect
in the situation is, that the water every where has a bitterish taste.

I lest Barnaulskoi on the 26th of August, and directed my road to the
silver-manufactory at Nowo-Pawlofski, where I arrived the next day; saw, as I
passed, a lake, whose appearance, at a distance, was blood red; and met with,
in the forest, a peculiar species of mice, (Mus Barabensis), various remarkable
agarics, among which there was Lycopendon stellatum, and a particular species
of Hydnum.

Nowo-Pawlofski is one of the manufactories lately established, as an auxiliary
to Barnaul, and promises to be a populous place. It has a convenience of water,
and every work and mill proper for the business; to enumerate them would be
needless. Nothing is here performed, but smelting of raw ores. In the structure
of their furnaces, they keep off the vapors of arsenic, which would be hurtful
to the workmen; but, from the roasting of ores in the fields, the air is so
poisoned by the smoke, that a great number of chicken, and other poultry, are
killed by convulsive disorders.

On the 28th I set off for Tomskoi, and took Susunskoi in my way, which lies
lower down the river Ob, at the distance of 54 miles, and where is a Siberian
mint. The Ob is larger than the Irtisch, and equal to the Wolga, in its
greatest breadth. The villages, and most of the towns, in these districts, are
happily situated along the river, and enriched by agriculture, hunting and
fishing; for they sell their corn at a good price, to the silver-works, and the
fortresses, along the Irtisch. The soil here is uncommonly fertile, though the
black earth is not above six or seven inches deep, yet there is beneath it a
marly loam, that makes the corn thrive exceedingly. The peasants along the Ob,
were, till late, very rich in cattle, especially in stout, laborious horses;
but, within a few years back, the plague has raged among the horses, and large
cattle, and they have sustained great losses. They have a custom here, to turn
great troops, or herds of horses, loose into the forest, without any one to
look after them. In the Barabynian step, situate between the Ob and the
Irtisch, there are also wild horses, called Ditschje, which run in herds; and
the stallions, that keep forward, looking out as spies to explore the enemy,
are commonly shot. They are mostly of a brown, fallow, and dun color. The
peasants get also a great deal of money by catching squirrels, which are very
abundant in the woods of this district; they are large, handsome, and white,
and their furs are purchased by the Chinese, at a price equal to ermine. The
distance from the Ob to the Irtisch, is between 4 and 500 miles.

I reached Susunskoi on the 29th of August. This manufactory was established in
March 1764, for smelting raw ores; but, in 1767, they added to it a mint. It
lies on the river Susun; but they have erected a mill-dam, which is 110 fathoms
long, and 12 broad. Here, with the copper of gold and silver alloy received
from the silver-manufactories, they coin a money, current in Siberia; for, as
in the beginning of the silver-works here they had collected above 30,000 puds
of copper, wherein were about three puds and an half of silver, and about three
puds of gold, which to separate would have cost more than it was worth; her
Imperial Majesty issued an edict, in 1763, that, in future, all such silvery
copper should be coined into a currency, with the Siberian arms on it,
according to its intrinsic value, in the following pieces: viz. griws, or ten
copec pieces; five ditto; two ditto, or groschewiki; copecs, half copecs or
denuschki; and quarter-copecs, or poluschki: of which one part should serve to
pay the Siberian regiments; and the rest the workmen, and other expenses of the
mines, and manufactories. The sum annually to be coined, was fixed at 250,000
rubles.

The court of the mint is encompassed with a high Ostrog Ostrog, is a high
wall, made with the bodies of trees, set upright, standing close together, used
here, formerly, to fortify small places, but, at present, only about
storehouses and prisons.
, and has but one entrance, which is guarded. Within it are, besides the
pay-office, guard-room and coal-house, a forge, with a large hammer and two
furnaces, where the great tools are forged; a smith's work-shop, where the
stamps and punches are made; a smelting-house, with a lathe, worked by water,
to turn cylinders, and the extensive building of the mint, consisting of
several divisions. In the mint, are four divisions, one has three flatting
hammers, with two glow furnaces, two of which beat the copper into plates. In
the second, are three flatting machines, to give the plates their proper
thickness. The third division contains eight machines to cut the plates into
round pieces, and the fourth, six stamping machines: the whole worked by water.

The stamp of the coin is uniform, having, on one side, the Empress's name (E.
II.) surrounded with laurels and palms, and, on the reverse, a crowned
cartouch, borne by two sables, the supporters of the Siberian arms; and, in the
field of the cartouch, is expressed the value of the coin and the year, with
the words Sibirskaja Moneta, round it, in the characters of that country. In
this mint was struck, in the years 1760 and 1767, 278, 954 rubles; in 1768,
170, 070; and, in 1770, 250, 087 rubles, and some copecs: in all 899, 913
rubles, each ruble 4s. 6d. English. Here are a fine church, several, good,
public offices, and about 200 houses; some beautiful meadows; and the place is
truly delightful.

Among all the Imperial manufactories, situated on the Ob, this is the richest
in wood, and will never want any. Though a small part of the forest consists of
poplars and birches, especially near the Ob, yet further on, are very fine
timber trees; and the forest extends to above 48 miles in length, and as many
in breadth, without taking into the account other large forests lower down the
Ob, which are well adapted for new manufactories.

I left Susunskoi on the 30th of August, for Tomskoi. The country between the
two places, is mostly covered with birch-wood, has a fine soil, but not the
hundredth part so well inhabited as it deserves. The field-mice had done a
great deal of harm to the present harvest, and were every where in scores to be
seen. No species of field-mice was more common than the yellow one, with a
black stripe down its back, and some small ones, quite yellow. Siberia produces
two species of field-mice of its own, similar to the common, short-tailed
ground-mouse; the one much larger; with its ears quite concealed, and the other
of a fox-colour.

Having got down from my wagon, on the 3d of September, to gather some seeds,
and endeavoring to get up again, I fell, and dislocated my arm. It swelled so
much, and gave me so much pain, that I could not raise it, and was obliged to
wear it in a sling till winter.

When I reached the river Tom, which was on the 6th of September, I found,
among the pebbles, some beautiful, cornelian stones; and, in Kaltai, a village
18 miles from Tomskoi, I was shown, many very valuable ores, found in the same
river. In this place, its neighborhood, and in and about Tomskoi, are settled,
from six to, 700 families of Mahomedan Tartars. They call themselves Tschaty;
and are, in their dress and manners, as also in their religion, little
different from those of Casan. Their women, contrary to the custom of other
Tartars, wear, over their veil, or tastar, a calotte, which has no opening in
the top of the head, but covers it entirely. Their girls wear the same,
braiding their hair into three, or more tresses, and into 30 tresses on the day
of their marriage. They are fond of being buried on the borders of some forest,
or wood, and erect, over their graves, such durable sheds of timber, that a
burial-place, at a distance, has the appearance of a village. In their houses,
especially in their summer rooms, they have chimnies, like the Baskirs. They
are good husbandmen, and pay their poll, or head-tax, with great cheerfulness.
Instead of tea, they drink an infusion of the roots of the tormentil
(Tormentilla erecta), which, when boiled, dies the water reddish, gives it a
very astringent taste, and is drank without milk. The chopped roots, or stalks
of wild roses, used, instead of tea, by the Tartars of Casan, have a far
sweeter taste. I saw, also, the following species of cinque-foil, used by the
Siberian Tartars instead of tea: Potentilla fruticosa, known, in the remote
parts of Siberia, by the name of Kurilskoi Tschai, and Potentilla rupestris,
which they call Polewoi, or meadow-tea, boiling the whole plant, with the
flower, as some do the sage (Phlomis tuberosa).

On the 8th we crossed the river Tom, in a ferry; and the banks striking my
attention, I directed the watermen to row me to a particular spot, which I
examined, and found the soil to consist of a blue, pirytuous, clay, uncommonly
rich in vitriol. Some of the inhabitants of Tomskoi gather this vitriolic
substance in dry weather, boil from it an impure, yellow vitriol, and sell it
from 60 to 80 copecs a pud, instead, of the genuine, Siberian stone-butter.
Even their yellow clay is of a vitriolic nature; and in it is found kidneys of
a slated stone-ochre, which burns red, and is used by cotton and
callico-printers as a dye. In the same yellow-clay, lay layers, or nests of an
impure, or bluish, but some very fine, snow-white, porcelain earth, which the
inhabitants fetch in quantities, to paint their ovens, rooms, etc. with, and in
these banks I found, in some vitriolic slate-layers, notwithstanding their
perpendicular folia and strata, impressions of little marine bodies.

Tomskoi lies on the right border of the river Tom, about 30 miles from its
mouth, into the river Ob, on a very uneven soil, and spreads itself in length
of the river, from south to north. In the center of the town is a high hill, on
which is a fortress, erected 130 years since, with four towers, two gates, and
a bell-steeple. Within these is the wood-built cathedral, the townhouse, the
house of archives, and the treasury, built of stone; a storehouse, where the
furs, brought as tribute, are kept; a decayed guard-house, and an alehouse,
where the Tartars, bringing their tribute, are regaled with beer. Here are also
several private houses, the house of the waywods, and a public prison. In the
north-east part of the town, is the church of the Resurrection of Christ; and,
without the town, several salt-magazines. The most important part of the town
lay beyond the mountain, along the Tom; but the greatest part thereof, with
three churches, was unfortunately destroyed, last year, by fire. The
inhabitants have been since compelled to erect their new buildings, agreeable
to a certain plan, and uniformly corresponding with the whole; but, before the
fire, the houses stood so irregular, that the windings of the streets resembled
a labyrinth. The mud almost swallowed up the wheels of our wagons, for the
streets will not be paved, till the new buildings are finished. In the burnt
part of the town was the mart, wherein the goods and property of many a citizen
were devoured by the flames. In the southern part of the lower town is a
friary, and a nunnery, with their churches; and the same part of the town has a
church, called the Annunciation, and another, dedicated to the Virgin-Mary.
Here is also another townhouse, a prison, a comptoir of the mine-office, and a
custom-house, for the sale of brandies, brought here from the distilleries on
the Tobol and Iset. The barges and vessels are moored below the town, on
account of the shallows near it; and, without the town, the Koskolnicks, or
Old-Faithful, of which there is a great number among the inhabitants, have
their burial-places; and so have the Tartars.

Here resides the commander of the batallion in garrison; and to him the
commanders of two other forts are subordinate. The court of waywodes is
subordinate to that of Tobolskoi, and commands the most populous district of
all Siberia, except that of Tobolskoi. The inhabitants of Tomskoi live mostly
by trade. Here are no other manufactories, than such as dye Russian hides; and
some few callico-printers. No where have I seen gluttony so prevalent, as in
this place; which, added to other reigning evils, fornication, and its
attendant, the venereal disease, must be a dreadful bar to population:
especially, as for want of regular surgeons, the latter spreads itself
excessively. Was it not for this, the place is happily situated for commerce,
which is carried on here with all parts of Siberia, by the communication of two
navigable rivers. Bread is cheap, meat not wanting; and the Ob and Tom abound
with fish, and supply other towns with it. It is only to be wished, that many
sober and industrious families might truly enjoy these blessings!

Within these three years, the Chinese trade has been settled on a proper
footing; and the merchants have brought here, in the bales, a little, yellow
house-moth (Blatta Asiatica), which has increased incredibly. In all the woods
between the Ob and Tom, they have had an incredible number of squirrels. It has
already been shown, that they emigrate, in summer, from the south-east
mountains, into the district of Tomskoi. Every ruined building of the town, and
the towns of the fortress, were now infested with them; and they were caught
alive by boys, who sold them very cheap.

On the 11th of September, in the afternoon, I continued my journey, and
traveled 18 miles in the evening. This country is pretty well colonized with
Tartars, and troublesomely infested with black crows, which are so rapacious,
that they will, in winter, attack a yard of poultry, in flocks of twenty at a
time, and tear the fowls in pieces. I met here with a species of hedge-sparrow,
or little nightingale, with a fine yellow breast, and a green tail (Motacilla
Cyanurus); also, a wonderfully small species of shrew-mouse, that did not
weigh, when full grown, more than half a dram. They are somewhat browner than
the common shrew-mice, and have, in proportion to their body, a very thick,
full, round tail. They are, therefore, quite different from the Sorex minutus
of Linnaeus, which is also a Siberian animal, and are the smallest of all
quadrupeds ever recorded, in human knowledge. This little animal shall be
fuller described hereafter. It is fond of the water, like the black
water-shrew, and the common shrew-mouse; both of which are very common here.

The passage over the river Ki is by a ferry. The river is stony; and, among
the pebbles, there are pieces of high-red, black, and also black and yellow
spotted jasper. Colonizing this district, will make the farmers comfortable,
and enable them to sell their corn at a good price; which, at present, they are
often compelled, by indigence, to part with, for little, or nothing. They have
not, lately, been able to get more than three or four copecs, or one penny
English, for 36lb. weight; and here are public granaries, where, when bought at
this price, it is stored up, near a navigable river, to be conveyed to places
where no corn is grown. At the time when the poll-tax is to be paid, a good
horse may be bought for two or three rubles; because the indigent farmer can
find no buyers. They have here a method of catching woodcocks, which frequent
the birch-wood; simple, yet effectual. Laying a large plank across two branches
of a birch-tree, they tie ears of corn at both ends, and at the distance of a
few inches from each end, is fastened a circular spring, with a horse-hair
snare, tied on the plank. The wood-cocks sit on this plank, but cannot reach
the ears of corn, unless they put their heads through the spring into the
snare, and, if they try to come back, they draw the snare with them, and,
attempting to fly, are entangled by the head. The peasants call this snare,
Nawori.

I have already mentioned the Chinese moth (Blatta Asiatica), which the Tartars
call Tarakan. Here, in Atschinokoe (about 230 miles from Tomskoi), where I was
on the 19th of September, a village situated on the navigable river Tschulym,
the peasants houses are so full of them, that, in the daytime, every dark
corner, chink and closet, swarms; and, at night, they cover all the walls;
nothing is free from these vermin, for they will enter the smallest clefts. No
vessel, or box, be it ever so closely shut, can remain in these rooms, without
being filled, the next morning, with thousands of big and little Tarakans. They
even thirst after human blood; and, in one's sleep, all the uncovered parts of
the body are bleeding with this insect: they will not touch any provisions, but
bread, sugar, and meat. There is no eating or drinking, in these rooms, without
having one insect dropping, after another, from the cieling, into the dishes,
cups and plates. Various means have been tried to destroy them, without effect.
Shutting up a room, and smoking it with brimstone, and offensive herbs, have
been tried, but to no purpose. The only way to get rid of them, is to let the
rooms freeze, in the beginning of winter, without fire. This will apparently
destroy them; but, by constant warmth, they will soon appear again; and, in
spring, everything crawls with them, as before.

About 112 miles further on, where I was on the 24th of September, I met with
some Christian Tartars, settled on the brook Sulgun, who, in summertime, live
in wretched jurts, or huts, formed with high birch-poles, set up in form of
cones, flatted at top, and covered with strongly boiled, birch-bark, sewed
together; and, in winter time, in hovels, made with birch-poles, laid across
each other, in form of a box. The forepart of this box is left open, and
represents a hall, or antichamber; the other half is shut up by a partition, in
which is a small door, and on the outside covered thickly with turf, to keep it
warm. In the middle of this inner room, they make a Baskirian chimney, of
sprays and loam, with wooden air-pipes; and, on the roof, is left a little,
square hole, to let in the light, which they shut at night, and in very cold
weather.

These Tartars have preserved most of their ancient ways of living and
thinking; for, independent of the crucifix, which they wear tied round their
necks, and suspend also in their jurts, or tents; they know but little of the
Christian religion; and as little of the Russian manners, except an imitation
of the female dress, and some few necessary parts of agriculture. Their girls
go about dressed in the Tartarian fashion; and men wear furs and whiskers. They
are, in general, poor, and have but little cattle; owing, as is said, to the
deep snows, which fall in winter, and will not allow the cattle to look out for
food; and to the great number of beasts of prey, in this district.

Mr. Gmelin gives us a further account of this people, whom he calls, the
Tschoulym Tartars. He says, In summertime, the men are dressed like Russian
peasants; and, in winter, they wear long pelises, made of deer-skins. The women
wear trowsers, and boots, made of the large skins of eel-powts. The other parts
of their dress are like those of the Russian peasants, except that they border
their garments with fur. The girls plait their hair in tresses; and all the
female sex wear veils.

Their table is dirty, and badly accommodated. Fish is their common food; bread
is scarce with them; as a substitute for which, they eat dried fish, reduced to
powder, which looks like a meal. Their greatest delicacy, is parched grain,
fresh stalks of bear's foot, and the Acanthus, which they bruise all together,
and put under ground, till it is sour. In winter they seldom eat any thing, but
dried, or smoked fish. The poor, who have neither milk nor flour, live on
various wild fruits and plants, which they store up against winter; indeed most
Tartars do the same; such as the roots of piony, pimpernel, (Sanguisorba),
fumitory, (Fumaria bulbosa), a sort of thistle, (Carduus serratuloides), and
serpentaria, (Polygon bistorta), a root they call Mikir, (Polygon viviparum),
the root of sagittary, (Sagittaria sagittifol.), and the root of Nymphea. The
membrane under the bark of the pine tree they give to children, as a sweetmeat;
and they chew the root of Calamus acorus, as the Indians do the betel-root. All
smoke tobacco, and drink, besides fish-broth, the liquors used by the Russians,
an infusion of rye-meal, soured by fermentation, called Quas, which is a
pleasant liquor; Braga, a small beer; strong beer, and Russ brandy.

The Tschoulyms wore formerly Pagans, of the sect of the Schamans. In the year
1720, a great number of them were converted to Christianity, by the zeal of
Archbishop Philotheus; but they are now merely nominal Christians, and adhere
chiefly to idolatry, in private. They place, however, an unlimited credulity in
the efficacy of the crucifix, but retain the Pagan ceremonies of their
ancestors, as much as possible. They abhor pork, and eat horseflesh, even that
of diseased animals; and often sacrifice to their idols, in secret.

The baptized Tartars of this tribe solemnize their marriages in churches, but
keep up to the old national ceremonies. He who negotiates the marriage, takes a
new Chinese pipe and tobacco, goes to the young woman, and, having made his
proposals, retires, for some minutes, leaving his pipe and tobacco on the
table, which, if her friends take a whiff or two, denotes, that the proposal is
accepted, if not, the pipe is not touched. If he acquiesces, he settles with
her friends, concerning the quantity of clothes, fur, or cattle, that is to be
paid for the bride, which, in money, amounts generally from five to fifty
rubles. After the marriage-ceremony, the young couple sleep in a new hut, built
along-side of that belonging to the young woman's father; and, between these
huts, a fire is kept up all night. The sports on this festival are, dancing,
feasting, etc. as ATSCHULYM WEDDING.
among other Tartars. The bridegroom is obliged to wrestle, with the male
relations of his wife, by the light of the beforementioned fire. In these
contests, the husband must conquer; and, if he throws his antagonist without
assistance, his strength is very much commended. The nuptial bed is a piece of
felt, spread on the ground, on which the bride refuses to lie down, imploring
the interference of some female friend. This friend, a married woman, gets the
better of her scruples, gives her advice, and is rewarded with a handsome suit
of clothes, for her kindness (See the Plate). If the young lady cannot produce,
the next morning, Mosaic proofs of her chastity, the husband steals away, ties
a parcel of herbs about his head, and, as a punishment to his perfidious wife,
does not return, till he has obtained satisfaction from him who has robbed him
of his honor. This settled, all is forgotten.

When a woman is near her time of lying-in, she calls in the assistance of her
female neighbors; but they have so little knowledge of midwifry, that numbers
of infants are destroyed in the birth, and many others have navel-ruptures. The
priest names the child, though the parents give it a fresh name afterward. The
national names of the boys, are, Ouligueyak, Kouguitsschak, Mischagh, Koulon,
etc. that of the girls, Keguenek, Patan, Paremha, etc. -- Children go by these
names, and not by those given at their baptism.

Their regular manner of life, frugal, hard, and exempt from cares, keeps them
in health; but, when they fall sick, or wound themselves, their sovereign
remedy, both internally and externally, is the gall of a bear, and some
superstitious applications. The smallpox occasionally makes great ravage among
them. They have an extreme dread of death; and, from a persuasion that the soul
of a deceased person returns to seek its surviving relations, and pursues them
in union with the body, on coming from a funeral, they jump several times over
a fire, conceiving, by this precaution, they can prevent the deceased person
from following them.

The language of these Tartars is a mixture of the Tartarian and Mongol; but
has so many words peculiar to itself, that it might be taken for a different
language. They are neither cunning, nor stupid; but tractable, attentive, eager
for instruction, and well-skilled in what they learn. When they have nothing to
dread, they are frank, honest, and complaisant; but when they have any thing to
fear, or apprehend, they are sullen, and deceitsul. They are friendly, and
attentive to one another; but lazy in all kinds of business, and slovenly and
filthy in their way of living.

They keep neither pigs nor poultry. Fishing and hunting is their chief employ;
and the latter enables them to pay their tribute. Every man, capable of going a
hunting, is obliged to pay the state three marten-skins annually; or, in lieu
of them, three elk-skins, three fox-skins, and 24 ermine-skins; or any other
furs, equal in value to three marten-skins. The women are busied in spinning,
weaving, and sewing; and, as this takes up all their time, they seldom stir out
of their huts, and look as if they were smoke-dried.

In our way, we saw several scattered tumuli; which are seldom, if ever, to be
met with, but in the neighborhood of some lake, or river; or on the finest,
and most elevated spots of a field, the bottoms of mountains, and in flat
valleys. Several I saw, that reminded me of the old giant's graves, or beds of
heroes, found in the same form, in some parts of Germany; particularly in
Mark-Brandenburg. These consisted of little hills of earth, round which were
stuck, in the ground, some large, flat pieces of rock, and some had three
little, stone posts, set near each other.

The Tartars who now inhabit these districts, acknowledge the nation from whom
they derive their origin, as their ancestors. It is an old story among them,
that formerly there were two brothers (perhaps only nationally so), one of
whom, with his people, dug a great deal of gold and silver, out of the
mountains; and the other was rich in cattle, and people: that the latter had
often so deprived the former of his treasures, and molested him, that he sought
refuge among the princes of China, who allotted him, and his people, a tract of
country, toward the east; and from these last they sprang. In the graves,
which, differing in external appearance, are probably of one and the same
nation, no other than copper tools and arms are found, and some few gold and
silver ornaments; generally, no other gold than what is beaten out into thin
leaves.

During my stay at Krasnojarskaja, among the old copper, dug out of such
graves, and offered me by the peasants, I found copper points of lances, a kind
of light battle-axe, daggers elegantly wrought, blades of knives, whetstones,
points of copper and bone-arrows, copper scythes, similar to those now used in
Siberia, several flat, cast figures of elks and reindeer, stags, chamois, and
wild sheep. In these graves are sometimes also found wooden frames, in which
the dead bodies have been laid, with the figure of a chamois, fastened on the
fore post of such a frame, and also some little white stones, in form of
snails, called, in Latin Cyprea nodosa. I shall, perhaps, give a further
account of the nature of these tumuli.

In this neighborhood, I passed a farm, belonging to a Tartar of Tomskoi; and
also a country-residence belonging to the same person, elegantly built of
larches, with a terrace on the top. Near this house, are several houses, built
in the Russian manner, belonging to some of his relations. Here will also be
built a church for the converted Tartars, hitherto belonging to the district of
Scheresch, which this patriotic Tartar is taking all imaginable pains to reduce
from their wild, savage state, to agriculture, and more social life.

In ferrying my wagons, in the morning early, over the river Tschoulym, on the
27th of September, the boat which carried my baggage, was unfortunately overset
in the middle; but as the water was not more than seven feet deep, it was, with
some difficulty, drawn out again; all its contents, however, were so wet, that
I was obliged to stop, till noon, to dry them. The next day I halted, among
another tribe of Tartars, called Katchinzi, whose jurts, or huts, were erected
at the bottom of the high mountain Tarbig, where the white river Ujus streams,
and spreads itself along a fine, sandy vale, in which are several bitter lakes,
and salt-spots, which Mr. Gmelin visited, and from which the district of
Krasnojarskaja is supplied with salt. Having spent the night here on the 28th,
I had an opportunity of observing and enquiring into the way of living of these
wealthy Tartars; with whom most others, living on the upper Jenisei, agree, in
many points, and seem to have a common origin.

These Tartars, who distinguish themselves from the rest, by the name of
Katchinzi, do not consist of more than one hundred men, who keep possession of
the fine pasture-grounds between the Yjus and Abakan, on the western side of
the Jenisei. To judge of them by their language, they are true Tartars; but
they are bastards in their features, dress and manners, of which they have
adopted many of the Mongalian; because, probably, they were under the yoke of
the Kalmucks, and had thus a communication, as neighbors, with the Mongols:
otherwise, they have many Mongalian words in their language, which a Tartar of
Casan does not understand, and to whom their expression and pronunciation
appear strange. The men shave their heads, like the Kalmucks; and leave only a
half-circular whisker on the upper lip turned up, and a tust on the under lip,
or chin. Most of them, especially the younger ones, make a tail of their black
hair, on the hinder part of their heads; yet they do not shave, or cut off the
rest, but let it hang, about five or six inches long, about the head.

In winter, they usually wear no shirt; but a long skin, furred within, on
their bare bodies, with narrow sleeves. Most of these furs are deer-skins,
which the women tan with the liver and brains of the same animal, for 24 hours,
then make them soft over their knees, by rubbing them with a piece of wood,
particularly adapted for this purpose. The richer, and more noble among them,
wear sheep or lambs furs; and, at feasts, and public solemnities, upper
garments of cloth, and silken under-ones. But the common people, besides their
furs, and boots, wear nothing but a pair of white, coarse, linen drawers, or
trowsers, which are made by their wives, from the hempnettle, growing in their
valleys, and which they call Kender.

The dress of the women differs little from the common dress of the Kalmucks,
and consists in two tresses of hair, hanging down their shoulders, and a round
cap with a broad, fur border, a knot of fringes on the top, and two pieces of
silk hanging down from behind. Girls, till the day of their nuptials, wear a
little round cap, flatted behind, without any fur border, but with a red
fringe, tassel, on the top. They braid their hair into nine tresses; three of
which hang down the neck behind, and three on each side the head. The women's
garments are elegantly cut out, especially their furs. Some married women wear
a breast plate, or a collar, set with beads. Children run mostly naked about
the jurts, or yourts. I call them sometimes yourts, because, as I have observed
before, the jod, J, in Tartary, is sounded like our Y.

The jurts, or tents, in which they live in winter, are spacious, covered with
felts, and similar to those of the Kalmucks, and Kirgese. All live (the rich
not excepted) in a manner uncommonly filthy and brutish, never washing any
vessels; but, as soon as they are emptied, put them away, and, when they want
them again, use them in the same state. Those who call themselves troublesomely
clean, will only rub them a little with their dirty hands. Their
houshold-furniture consists of iron kettles, wooden cups, and birch-bark
troughs. They make milk-brandy, as do the Kalmucks; and, during summer and
autumn, whilst their brandy lasts, are seldom sober. They are all fond of
smoking tobacco, women as well as men; and they will smoke 20 times out of the
same Chinese pipe. Their greatest dainty, and most common food, next to meat,
is barley, or rye-groats, baked brown in a pan with flour, over which melted
butter is poured. This dish they call Kasch, and eat of it at any time of the
day, when they are hungry. Besides this, they boil, and eat the stalks of
cow-parsnep (Sphondylium), and all sorts of wild roots, as piony-roots,
reed-mace, red lily roots (Lilium pomponium), and the dog's-tooth,
(Erythronium), which they call Bess.

Of all the Tartarian tribes I have yet seen, this is the nastiest, the most
inhospitable, and the most treacherous. They do not spare even one another; are
very ill-behaved when drunk, and often attack the Cossacks, sent, by order of
the state, to restore peace and harmony. They are divided into ulusses, or
which each has a head, whom they call Knaszi, or little princes. They pay their
tribute, or taxes, in furs or a competent sum of money; and, when they pay this
tax, are usually heated with strong liquor, and seldom return without a quarrel
and bloodshed.

Their wealth consists in cattle, which feed, the whole winter, in the fine,
mountainous step they inhabit, and retreat, in summer, to refreshing and
delightful vales; of course, they must thrive. The mountain-air, however,
prevents their growing large. Their horses are excellent hunters,
light-coloured and slender, and carry their slit noses in the wind; for they
always slit the nostrils of their horses. They water them without the least
reserve, though in the most violent heat, except in springtime, when they deem
it hurtful; but no overheated horse will they suffer to eat, for the first two
hours. Their oxen and cows are speckled, lively and strong, but small in size.
Their sheep are a medium between Kalmuck and Russian; their noses are more
bent, and their ears more hanging; have the same kind of wool, and a fat tail:
some have horns, some not; and many rams have four and six horns each. Their
general color is white, with black or speckled heads and breasts. Sheep, quite
white or quite black, are rarely seen.

I could learn but little of the religious ceremonies of this people. They are
true, and very rank heathens. They pray to their good god, turning their faces
to the east; dreading more a bad Being than a good one, and offer it
sacrifices, that it may not hurt them. To this evil Being they offer a horse,
at a spring festival; which must be of a particular color. It is led to the
altar, and incensed with the smoke of the herb Irwen, which is a species of
fragrant wormwood, washed, and sprinkled with milk, which, during their
prayers, they scatter in the air, and throw into the sacrificial fire; and,
after having tied a red and white rag on the forepart of the mane, and on the
tail, they turn it loose among the herd. These sacred horses are called Isik;
and the ceremony abovementioned, is repeated annually; during which a
sorcerer, or Kamno, acts the principal part. The same bad Being, as far as I
could understand, is represented by a house-idol, which they call Tous, and
which we find, on the eastern side of every tent, stuck on a stick, split like
a fork, or tied on, upon a band, across two coarsely carved figures, having the
resemblance of two birds, each bearing a woodcock's feather; so that the whole
has the appearance of a two-bodied bird, with extended wings. Between these
two, little, carved figures, hangs a piece of fox or ermine-skin, and a long
tail of split sinews, interwoven with horse-hair.

In the yourts, or tents of the rich, I remarked, that there was, between these
two pieces of wood, a wooden hoop or circle, with a carved beater tied on it;
probably a representation of the magic drum of the Kamno, who made and
consecrated the idols. Besides the forked stick, are two other sticks, placed
between the ropes that hold the tent together; one carrying a red, and the
other a white rag, commonly accompanied by a blue one. These three colors seem
to be sacred among the Tartars; and the same are chosen by their sorcerers, or
Kamnos, for magic robes and ornaments These sticks and rags are sometimes on
one side the idol, and sometimes on the other. Many tents, especially those of
the poor, have only, in the forked stick, the fur of a fox's tail, and, behind,
the end of a sheep's tail, with its wool. On both sides these ornaments, hang
little rags or blue cloth, and down the band, hangs a thick cord, made of brown
and white sheep's wool, twisted. Besides this, there are sticks, with white and
red rags. Some hang up only an ermine skin, in a stick; these I found on the
east and west sides of the tents; whereas the sticks, with the rags, were only
on the eastern side. They do not suffer any one to touch these sacred things,
and often pray about them, when they are in want of any thing. At the
spring-feast, this idol is also incensed, over the fire, with the herb Iwen;
therefore, looks much singed. In many tents, where I have seen the idol, I have
seen also this herb, fixed up with it.

Their sorcerers, or magic priests and priestesses, make use of small drums,"
says Gmelin, "in their incantations, as do the Laplanders; and are
distinguished, in dress, by a quantity of misshapen idols, rudely cast in iron,
which are fastened on their garments, together with the claws of birds, and
strips of cloth and furs. Their caps are generally ornamented with a border of
lynx-skin, and a bunch of owls feathers.

They have as many wives as they can maintain or purchase; but seldom has one
man more than four. The ceremony of asking in marriage, is like that of the
Tschoulyms, excepting only that with the pipe of tobacco is left a cup of
brandy. If the pipe is smoked, and the brandy drunk, the proposal is accepted.
Six months after this, the bridegroom comes, and courts the young woman in the
same way; the price is then agreed for, which is from five to 100 head of
cattle: but if the suitor be poor, he will work for the father-in-law, for
three, four, or five years, in order to obtain his daughter. During this time,
if any richer, or handsomer gallant, applies for the girl, he carries her off,
seemingly against her inclination; and thus shortens formalities. The injured
lover, who perhaps has waited a year or two, accompanied by her friends,
pursues the fugitive; but as the runaway-couple seldom fails to improve that
time, which the other loses in preparing for the pursuit, and as the girl gives
the preference to the pretended ravisher, all the laboring lover can obtain,
is a competent recompense for his past services. Should the betrothed damsel
die, before the performance of the marriage-contract, the price paid is
withheld, for the purchase of her sister; and if she has no sister, the suitor
loses his money, or his labor. If the young man dies before the wedding, the
girl is the property of his father, who takes her home, and leads her to his
haram.

When all preparations for the wedding are made, and the bridegroom arrives
with his friends to fetch the bride, his parents and relations are introduced
to the bride's father's tent, who sits at the upper end, with the mother; and
all the rest sit round in a circle, or stand out before the tent. The bride
then falls down before her parents, bidding them farewell, with tears; and
takes her leave of her sisters and relations. The cries and lamentations of all
the women present, now become general; and the bridegroom leads the bride away,
by the hand, to another tent prepared for them. The whole day, then, and many
following ones are spent in feasting and diversions. Sometimes, a bride shall
be secretly carried off by a rival; in which case the argumentum baculinum
takes place, and the law of the fist decides between the parties. Should the
bride be unfaithful to her lover, or commit adultery, there are various
proceedings, which end in satisfaction being made to the lover, or the husband.

After the marriage, a father-in-law is not permitted to see a daughter-in-law;
nor she to look on him; and, if they meet by chance, she falls flat on her
face, that she may conceal it. A husband dissatisfied with his wife, may return
her to her friends, without any formal process, though it be two or three years
after marriage; but then he is obliged to maintain the children, and loses the
money he paid for his wife.

There is no disease peculiar to this people; except that a great number of the
girls, in the time of their menses, are in a state of furor, or phrensy, from
which they do not return for many days. The smallpox, whenever it appears,
makes great ravages among them. In cases of sickness, they have recourse to the
magic priest, who performs sacrifices for their cure, even in the venereal
disease, which is no uncommon complaint.

They bury their dead without coffins, and in their usual dress; put some few
necessary utensils into the grave, and cover the corpse with boards, before
they shovel in the earth, that the earth may not touch it. On the grave-hill,
they place a drinking-cup, and leave it there. At the expiration of a year,
from the day of interment, the relations of the deceased visit the grave, first
lament the loss of the deceased, and finish with drinking the strong liquors
they bring with them, out of that cup they left; and each drinks out of it so
often, that they generally return very merry from this mournful visit.

For all their diversions, they have but one musical instrument, called
Jailtaga. It is a box of sir, about four feet long, and three inches broad; the
upper part open, over which six wire strings are stretched. It is played on
with both hands, and produces treble and base; it is used with the left hand,
and little with the right. To tune this instrument, they place a bridge under
each string, and shist it, till it produces the tone they wish. Their maladies
are like those of the Kalmucks; and so are their dances.

On the 29th of September I left these people, passed over a mountainous
district, and got before a great salt-lake, Bylykul, 52 miles in circumference.
There I met with a number of rare plants; and, among these, one that has not
yet been described by botanists. It is a species of madwort (Alyssum), which I
shall give a description of, when I meet with it more in perfection than at
present. Not far from the Bylykul, we changed horses, and continued our road
till we came to the mine Itkulskoi, where we spent the night. The works here
are suspended; but they have dug to the depth of 18 fathoms, and found a fine,
lazuli ore, which contains, in 36 pounds of raw done, 15lb. of copper, nine
drams of silver, and 13 drams and a half of gold. A new mine is opened close
by, and the peasants work here for their head-tax. The Jenisei here is 300
fathoms wide; we crossed it, passing many islands in the middle, where grew a
great quantity of wild hops, and, on the other side, found ourselves, on the 2d
of October, in the fortress, Abakanskoi Ostrog.

This is a wretched, decayed place, has a wooden church, and but few buildings;
but a governor resides here, who has the command of all the district round it.
The climate is however mild; and an inhabitant of Little Russia, here settled,
has begun to cultivate tobacco, and intends to plant fruit trees, and breed
bees. About this place, there are abundance of rare, little birds; the
snow-bird, the cross-bill, the water-wagtail, the titmouse, and wood-pecker;
which continue here the whole winter. The inhabitants told me that, two years
since, a number of white spotted bears had been seen here, who seemed to have
traveled from far, as they were quite lean and weak, and so hungry, that they
ran into some of the neighboring villages, where many had been killed.

During my stay, here, I saw two white sparrows, but none of my hunters could
kill any. I would willingly have spent my winter here; but, there being no
comfortable apartment to be had, was obliged to look out for proper
accommodations in Krasnojarskaja. The winter was fast approaching, and being
afraid of the river's freezing, I thought proper to set out on the 4th of
October, it being necessary to cross the Jenisei, to go to Krasnojarskaja.

On the 5th, being near the river, we saw two floats coming down from the
iron-manufactory established a little higher up, and capable of receiving all
our wagons. I had thus an opportunity of going to Krasnojarskaja by water,
which was at the distance of 75 miles. This manufactory was erected 16 years
ago, by a merchant, whose son is now the proprietor. It belongs to the district
of the supreme mine-office at Catherineburg, though at the distance from it of
1875 miles. Its situation is delightful, and its mill-head 190 fathoms long.
The works here consist of five smelting furnaces, two blasts with double
receivers, and several forges and hammer-works.

All things being ready for our departure, we set off on the floats, October
the 8th, at noon; a third part of this passage, at high water, is often made in
one day; but we were unfortunately delayed, by being stranded on a sand-bank,
by the imprudence of the watermen, and could not get off. With hard labor,
however, we got clear in the space of three hours; and soon after moored along
side of the village Ofscharskaja, where I took up my night's lodging. In the
banks of the river, opposite this place, they collect a great deal of that
which is called stone-butter. It is gathered here every year, from among the
clefts of the black, alum slate, of which this bank consists; and is sold at
Krasnojarskaja, at 15 or 20 copecs per pud. The common people use it as a
medicine in dysenteries; also against hemorrhages of lying-in women; and in
venereal disorders; and likewise, as an emetic, for children. In case of
necessity, they use also the stone-vitriol, instead of vitriol, to dye leather;
and blacksmiths use it, to make steel.

Next morning, the 9th, we unmoored betimes, and continued our passage down the
Jenisei. Toward night, we reached the mouth of the river Mana, and the village
Osjanskaja, and slept there. This village is a rare example of the propagation
of mankind, in the wild deserts of Siberia. The whole village, a few houses
excepted, is inhabited by people originating from one stock. Here are 25
wealthy families, and almost as many others, of the same origin, who are
settled in the villages along the Jenisei. The father of this numerous
posterity, one Juschkof, came, two centuries ago, into this district, from
Russia; and it was, at that time, inhabited, and is molested still, by the
Kirgese. He had seven sons, one of whom was killed by the Kirgese; the rest
settled and increased his progeny, and became fathers of 50 families.

Their indefatigable industry in hunting, seems to be hereditary to the whole
posterity, for they are all people of property. With respect to hunting the
wild uninhabited mountains upwards, the river Mana affords them an excellent
opportunity; not to mention the smaller animals, as weasels, squirrels, etc.
they catch fables, lynxes, and bears, in abundance. The musk is also very
abundant there. They catch it in autumn, and in the beginning of winter, with
snares and traps, in which the animal shortly dies. The musk-bag, which is by
far less fragrant than the Chinese, is sold at from 20 to 30 copecs; and is
used, like their deer furs, as it surpasses every fur, by its softness. The
river Mana supplies them, likewise, plentifully with fish; and, besides this,
they apply themselves to agriculture, and have some extensive farms upon the
river. It is but 15 miles from the village we last slept at to Krasnojarskaja;
we reached that town on the 10th of October, 1771, in good time; and here I
took up my winter-residence.

With this I shall end the second part of my account; and shall give the reader
the observations I made, in the course of this year, in the beginning of the
third part.

END OF PART II.
TRAVELS THROUGH Siberia and Tartary, PROVINCES OF THE RUSSIAN EMPIRE;
BY S. PALLAS, M. D. PROFESSOR OF NATURAL HISTORY, etc.
PART III.
NOT wishing to tire our readers, by following our Author in all his minute and
particular accounts and descriptions, of every wood, lake, and mountain, and
every little village and brook he passed, nor in measuring every inch he
traveled, as he has done, we have contented ourselves with giving the great
outline of the road he journeyed, and circumstantially relating, from his pen,
every thing, even in natural history, worth remarking, and what we could
suppose any class of our readers might wish to be acquainted with. We have,
however, passed over the nature of the roads, and the bad accommodations he met
with. Suffice it to say, that being equipped, at government-expence, with such
passports and necessaries as a traveller, in such a wild and dreary country,
might stand in need of, such as credit, tents, provisions, forage, clothes,
medicines, mathematical instruments, tools, men versed in various sciences,
draftsmen, huntsmen, interpreters, guides, escorts, servants, wagons, etc. he
traced every navigable river, from its mouth to its source, traveled all the
boundaries of the empire, from fort to fort; and at these places got a change
of horses, occasional escorts, and fresh equipment. In some places, he
traversed mountains; in others, forced through woods, almost impervious; in
others, floundered over marshes; and, in others again, forded rivers, or
crossed them in ferries, or on rafts: sometimes encamping in the deserts, and
often sleeping in the open air.

In some parts of Tartary, the roads are tolerably passable; the customary
highways are known from place to place, by the annual passing of caravans:
there he found, occasionally, way-houses, with relays of horses, and some
accommodations. Where there were no such houses, unless he was in the vicinage
or some fortress, where the commanding-officer accommodated him with regimental
horses, and an escort of the troops; he was under a necessity of encamping on
the road, and refreshing the same horses, by food and rest. A number of
difficulties he encountered, as we have seen, and shall see; but an inquisitive
mind, which is panting after knowledge, fears no danger, surmounts every
obstacle in its way, and pursues its end with unremitting ardour.

Krasnojarskaja, Oct. 1771. After my arrival here, the weather was uncommonly
mild and delightful, as it usually happens in this season, throughout the
southern district of Siberia, and almost in all eastern, mountainous countries,
At the latter end of the month, however, winter set in; the whole district was
exposed to storms, between N. W. and S. W. and the rivers drove a great deal of
ice. It rained and snowed till the 18th of November, when a frost succeeded,
and shut up the river Jenisei entirely. The rapidity of this river generally
keeps it open till the middle of November, and the ice dissolves again in April.

In the nights of the 7th and 8th of December, the cold was severely felt; the
thermometer mounted 190 on the 9th in the morning, to 194; on the 10th, 203; on
the 11th, 209; and on the twelfth, 202. It then snowed; but, with the beginning
of the year, the cold became so intense, that, on the 5th of January, the
thermometer pointed at 201, on the 6th, 206; the 8th, 212; and on the 9th, 196.
A violent storm, that blew from the north-west, concluded this severe weather
on the 13th, which brought on continual, western showers that augmented the
snow, and the winter continued moderate. The sun began to shine warm in the
latter half of February, and the snow thawed away from most summits of the
neighboring mountains.

The town, or city, has changed but little in the last thirty years. It is
almost the same as it was when Gmelin was here. The stone-cathedral is not yet
finished; the inhabitants are as few, and it has received no increase of
buildings. Perhaps the indolence and debauchery of the common citizens, nursed
by the low price of corn, and the great plenty of provisions, may be the cause
of the bad progress of this place. In every other respect, Krasnojarsk is most
advantageously situated for commerce. It is, at present, a place through which
all Russian merchants pass to trade with the Chinese; and it is here, and at
Tomskoi, that passengers eagerly buy up common sables, and other furs, wanted
by the Chinese. From the months of November till February, we see many
thousand, hired sledges pass, in caravans, through this town, which do not stop
at all, because the merchant to whom the caravan belongs, rides before, and
purchases the furs he wants, chiefly with ready money; of course, Russia goods
are much dearer here than in Irkuzkaja. Chinese goods are also at a more than
reasonable price in the shops here, because the sale of them is too
inconsiderable, and there are but two or three merchants capable of dealing in
such goods. They, therefore, put such a price on them, as they think proper,
and certainly not to their disadvantage.

The productions of this district are, in general, cheaper than the productions
of any other part of the Russian empire; though no province complains of higher
prices. I shall scarcely be believed, when I declare that, on my arrival in
Krasnojarsk, a pud or 36lb. of rye-flour would sell for no more than from 2 to
3 copecs, each copec a halfpenny English; wheatflour, from 4 to 5 copecs per
pud; beef, from 15 to 20 copecs; a cow, for one ruble (4s. 6d. English); good
horses for three rubles, and sometimes for two; a sheep, from 30 to 50 copecs;
and hogs, at the same price. But the price of corn seems to have risen a great
deal, owing to the great quantities transported on the rivers Tschoulym and Ob,
to the distant manufactories, mines and fortresses; to a brandy-distillery, at
no great distance; and to an Imperial magazine: and yet the price of rye has
not risen more than five or six copecs per pud.

Hence may be seen the great fertility and abundance of this district; for
though, within the town, there is great scarcity of buyers, as most of the
inhabitants grow their own corn, and breed their own cattle, yet the great
exportation of corn, in the barren districts of the regency of Irkuzkaja, and
more to the north about the Jenisei, one would imagine would be sufficient to
raise the prices higher, if the fertility of the country was not so
extraordinary. There has never been an instance of a failure in the crops; and
it is reckoned but a moderate harvest, when summer-rye produces ten-fold the
seed, the winter crops eight-fold, barley twelve-fold. In the worst years,
wheat produces six-fold; and oats, seldom less than twenty-fold. Common
buck-wheat is but little sown here; and, where it is sowed, it must be done in
some worn-out piece of ground, or the extraordinary richness of the soil, would
spoil the crop. In the worst ground, it will bear from twelve to fifteen-fold.
This very rich soil generally in the heights and valleys, is every where black
and light, and forbids the use of all dressing. A fallow of one year will
improve the lands for ten or fifteen years, and sometimes for a longer time;
and should the fertility of this soil decrease, the husbandman has sufficient
land in the steps, that will answer every purpose. The new fields are commonly
prepared after the summer-seed is over. They burn it up first in the beginning
of June, plough it once more at the end of the month, and it is then fit to
receive the seed of the winter-crop in August: or they will sow it with wheat,
the ensuing spring; in which case, such new land is to be ploughed a third
time; for there is no winter wheat throughout Siberia; though it is so common
and useful in the districts of Casan, and on the Kama. After the first crop,
such a field is left, during the next winter, unploughed. In the fourth summer,
they lay it up, after ploughing it twice; and such laylands are sown in the
autumn, or the following spring; for most grounds bear two years out of three,
and high, dry, and sandy spots, at least every other year; and are fit for all
sorts of corn, hemp, and pease.

I have been more circumstantial here than I should have been, in order to give
an account of the mode of agriculture in the eastern parts of Siberia; and to
show how happy the countryman must be in these foreign districts, and how much
they deserve to be better peopled.

The jurisdiction of the regency of this town spreads, in length and breadth,
over 450 miles of ground; and yet is not inhabited by more than 15000 men;
among whom are 3000 Tartars, who live merely by hunting, and breeding of
cattle: yet this district: surpasses the more eastern countries of Siberia in
population. But he who considers that Siberia has not, but within these two
centuries, been much more peopled than North America, and was then as unknown a
wilderness as that, must be surprised at the present state of the country, and
the great number of Russian inhabitants, who far surpass the natives, in skill
and industry. The discovery, and rapid conquest of so vast a territory, unknown
before, extending to the eastern ocean, must be an everlasting monument of
celebrity to the genius, intrepidity and perseverance of the Russian nation;
and its population, now carrying on to the utmost, may be looked upon as a
masterpiece in policy.

The Siberians pay but little attention to culinary herbs, though they thrive
well in Krasnojarsk, and all the southern districts of Siberia. The early,
white frosts in autumn, do less damage even to the most tender plants, than the
later frosts in May; of course, gourds and girkins come to perfection in the
open fields, when melons and water-melons will scarce thrive in gardens. They
have begun to cultivate tobacco, and with great success. This plant finds many
purchasers among the Pagan nations; but they do not know the proper time when
the leaves are to be taken off, or how to prepare them. The tobacco, therefore,
of Krasnojarsk, on account of its greenness, goes by a different name from
other tobacco; and the best price it will fetch, is about 25 copecs per pud,
whilst the common leaves, grown in and about Udinskaja, will fetch 60 copecs.
The inhabitants of this place carry on a good trade in wild hops, which grow
plentifully in the islands of the Jenisei, and bring here a number of buyers in
autumn. They sell at the rate of from 50 copecs to one ruble per pud. They are
chiefly carried to Jeniseikaja, Irkuzkaja, and those districts upon the
Tunguska where there are no hops. What they do not sell, they keep for their
own brewing; and hereby indulge their debauchery.

Among the usual, wild growths of the mountains of Krasnojarskaja, the
rhapontic, or rhubarb, deserves our notice. When the medical college, at
Petersburgh, is in want of any, the people here engage to procure a certain
quantity, and carry it to the townhouse, at a certain price. To do this, they
employ a number of mountaineers to dig the root in autumn, in places beyond the
Abakan. The best is brought from Udinskaja, and is dug in the mountains, about
the rivers Uda and Birjussa. Commonly they are roots of the rhubarb (Rheum
undulatum), and some other such like species, which seems to be different from
what botanists call Rhaponticum. I am at a loss to know whether the moistness
of the soil in which the Siberian rhapontic grows, about the mountain-brooks,
must be ascribed to the climate, especially the wetness of the last summer,
when all the old rhapontic-plants were rotten in the principal knots of their
roots, which are often very large. The innermost parts of the thick root is
always found, there, changed, quite to the peel, into a yellow-brown,
marrow-like matter, bitter, and astringent to the taste: it is only in the
cylindrical continuations of the roots, that there is any good medicinal
virtue; and, therefore, the Siberian rhapontic is vulgarly called, on account
of its form, Tscherenkowoi Rewenn. During the winter, 1771, they sent, from
Krasnojarsk to Tobolskoi, 511 puds; from whence it was conveyed to Petersburgh,
for the use of the college. But these roots might have been gotten better and
stronger, if the rhapontic diggers had more particular directions how to
prepare it: for, as soon as these people have brought the roots home, they
peel, cut them in pieces, and dry them in a gentle warmth; and hereby the root
loses its most efficacious moistness, dries up, and becomes quite spongy, so as
to be very unlike the genuine rhubarb, either in appearance, or strength. On
the contrary, I took several rhapontic roots, which I received quite untouched,
some from Udinskaja, and some from the Sajanian mountains, which I hung up in
the cieling of a warm room, and, when sufficiently dried, I shaved off the
medicinal parts of the root quite clean, and found them compact, and
high-colored, like the best Chinese rhubarb; and it was very little inferior
to that in strength, and far superior, in taste and efficacy, to the rhapontic,
prepared in the common way. Were it possible to find districts in the Siberian
mountains, where the principal stem of the rhapontic is not rotten, I doubt not
but all its roots, if prepared in my way, would be equal, at least very little
inferior, in size, beauty, solidity, and strength, to the Chinese rhubarb.

Krasnojarskaja, like most parts of Siberia, abounds in all sorts of wood; and
the finest timber may be felled, with very little trouble, from the deep
mountains about the Jenisei, and floated down to this town. Except the plane,
the elm, and the linden-tree, which are not to be found in the eastern part of
Siberia, all common species of trees are to be met with in great abundance.
There is also great quantities of cedars in the neighborhood of the river
Mana. About Abakanskaja grows, on the Jenisei, abundance of fragrant poplars,
whose resinous buds afford a delicious winter-repast to woodcocks, and gives
their entrails a fine balsamic perfume. There is also a great deal of
underwood, of various denominations; particularly the hawthorn, and cotonaster.

Krasnojarsk is plentifully supplied, in winter, with game, and all sorts of
furs. A liberty of hunting such animals, properly speaking, is only granted to
the Siberians; who pay a tax for such leave, and who make hunting their
principal occupation: yet the Russian peasant commonly devotes his indolent
winter to the chase. They set traps and snares for all species of game, and
catch a great number of ermines, and other animals. These people will purchase,
from the magistrates, a permission to hunt; and are at liberty to hunt with
such a license; but if they hunt, without obtaining this, run the risk of being
caught by the Tartars, and chastised upon the spot, or put into the hands of
justice, which always rewards the apprehender.

Sables are a common animal in the district of Krasnojarskai; and there are two
species, some long-haired and greyish, and some short-haired and black. Those
caught about this place are of inferior value. Wolves are much extirpated here,
as they are in most parts of Siberia. Foxes, however, are very abundant in the
open districts; and they bring, from the northern parts, black, and black-grey
ones, of great value. Beavers and otters are also abundantly met with; and the
latter are often sold at seven rubles each, and exported to the frontiers of
China. Lynxes are not general, and reach to the same price; their
parti-colored fore-paws are sold separately. Hyenas are more abundant; and a
black one will sell for four rubles. There are still a greater number of
badgers; but as their skins are of little value, they are seldom killed, but
when they are bad neighbors, or when their fat is wanted. Ermines are caught
in large quantities. Whilst they were saleable, in the Chinese trade, a skin
would sell for 25 copecs; but there is no buyer now that will give a fifth of
that price. The yellow weasels may be plentifully caught in the woody
districts, and with little trouble. Those which by accident fall into the
traps, or snares, are purchased by merchant-passengers, at five or six copecs
each; and are a favorite object of sale to the Chinese, who pay a very good
price for them: of course, they are sold much dearer at Irkuzkaja, and are not
carried into Russia at all. The pole-cat is not bought here, at any price;
though its skin is much finer in Siberia, and of a much whiter and more elegant
color, than in Russia.

Larger game, as elks, stags, deer, and musks, are in great abundance;
especially on the other side of the Jenisei. The Tartars pay a good part of
their taxes in elk, and large stag-skins; which the treasury takes for the use
of the cavalry, at 60 and 120 copecs each. According, however, to a new
regulation, the head-tax is no longer paid per head, but by whole tribes; so
that all the Pagan families in the district of Krasnojarsk, pay together 5262
sables; yet the tax goes by the denomination of that species of fur
notwithstanding, though the tribute is paid in other furs, or in money, rating
a sable at one ruble.

Deers are so common here, that the whole animal, slesh and fur, will scarce
sell for 15 copecs: hence their skins are mostly used, and sold for furs to
travel in; and the price for one, is in copecs. Musks, I observed, were here
caught in great numbers. The males are sold, on account of their bags
(Struika), from 30 to 50 copecs each; whereas the female, fur and slesh, will
scarce fetch 10 copecs. They brought me, as a great curiosity, a female musk,
quite white; and, afterward, they sent me the white fur of a male.

Fish is not so abundant in this province, as in some other parts. The Katscha
being shallow, like many other Siberian rivers, becomes stinking in
wintertime, under the ice, and has therefore no fish. The Jenisei has but few
branches; and, on account of its rocky bottom, and the rapidity of its stream,
is very little fit for fishing. Fishes of passage very seldom come into it,
from the north, or glacial sea. It has but one or two species of Russian
salmon, and very few sturgeons; and husos are found in it, which are very
delicious. They are, however, not easily taken; as they select such deep spots,
in winter, as cannot be got at.

The whole district of Krasnojarsk, whose court of Waywods is subordinate to
the regency of the province of Jenisei, and whose governor is subject to the
military-office at Tomskoi, contains, at present, 9228 Russian peasants, 807
colonists, 128 exiled persons placed among the colonists, 2023 citizens and
tradesmen (Posatsky and Zechowye), and 2994 Tartars of different tribes, who
pay tribute, and are divided into six districts, are again sub-divided into
certain classes, and who pay, in the whole, annually, 5161 rubles.

In January, Mr. Surjef arrived at my lodgings in Krasnojarsk, from a tour he
had made, in the course of the last summer, along the river Ob, to the frozen
ocean. I will give my readers an extract of his observations and papers, from
the time of his departure.

He left Tscheljabynskaja on the 26th of February, 1771: his road, as far as
Tobolskoi, produced nothing remarkable. In the latter place, he was most kindly
received by his excellency Governor Tschitscherin, who gave him every necessary
passport for the district of Beresowa; to which place he set forward, on a
sledge, on the 8th of March. His road thither was principally all along the
banks of the Irtisch, which are scattered with Tartarian, Russian, and, farther
north, with Eastjaikian villages, through which he passed. The Tartarian towns
reach only as far as Demjanskoi jam, at the distance of about 195 miles from
Tobolskoi; but the Eastjaikian villages extend beyond Demjanskoi, and occur
frequently. In some villages, the Eastjaiks live with the Russians; and, in
general, as far as Beresowa, are apparently christians, having been baptized.
All the way, as far as Demjanskoi jam, the country is, in a great measure,
under cultivation by the Russians and Tartars. From this place, northwards,
they saw nothing but barley and oats, and very little summer corn, as it does
not thrive, owing to the cold and moistness of the soil: they sow hemp and flax
among it. The colewort gets no heads here, and grows loose in leaves. Leeks,
radishes, turnips, and horseradish, if the weather is tolerable, thrive pretty
well.

Further down the river, into the steps, the country is not habitable at all,
being wholly wood and deep mires, impervious at all seasons. The wood chiefly
consists of underwood, and badly grown trees. The most common trees are,
willows, dwarf-cherries, alders, white cornels, asps, poplars, birches, pines
and firs, which are seldom of a fine growth. The linden is not seen further
north than 27 miles from Tobolskoi. Of small bushes and shrubs, the country
produces red and black currants, the uva ursi, and several others. On both
sides the river are lakes, which have a communication with the river, where the
water is high.

Samarofskoi jam is the most considerable place between Tobolskoi and Beresowa,
and is distant from the former town 412 miles, by water, and situated on the
right of the Irtisch, in a low border, just underneath a higher and more
mountainous country, only 20 miles beyond the communication of the Irtisch with
the Ob. The place was colonized in 1637, with several families from Demjanskoi,
and the northern districts of the regency of Casan; and consists of 100
dwellings, and a church. The inhabitants have no agriculture; and, further
north, up the Ob to the Surgut and Narym, no corn is sown at all, but is
brought, by the Irtisch, from Tobolskoi.

In Samarofskoi, horses do not thrive well; they die, in great numbers, for
want of provision. Last year, the water was so high, that it covered all the
meadows with slime, just before they were to be cut, and spoiled them. This
district, however, is blessed with an abundance of fish and waterfowl, on
which the Russian inhabitants, and Eastjaiks, have their chief subsistence. The
Chinese moths are found, in this place, but no farther north.

Beresowa, called, by the Eastjaiks, Sumytwasch, by the Samojedes, Chucharn,
lies on the river Joswa, at 20 miles from its mouth into the next branch of the
Ob. It is irregularly built, and has not above 150 houses, mostly inhabited by
Cossacks; but there are also two churches, and a cathedral, or mother church,
all built of stone. Without the town is a chapel, dedicated to St. Alexander
Newskoi, of whom they tell a number of miraculous stories; particularly one of
a cedar-tree's growing in the center of the chapel, whilst they were building
it. The inhabitants are substantial, peaceable, and hospitable people, who have
enriched themselves by fishing, hunting, breeding of reindeer, and trading
with the pagan and Russian merchants, who visit them. They pay little attention
to the unwholesomeness of their situation; and, by intemperate drinking, bring
on a great many diseases, and often sudden death.

Beresowa supplies Tobolskoi, and other towns situated on the river Ob, with
frozen fish in winter, and dried fish in summer. From this place are brought
half the blue and white ice-foxes, dressed and undressed elk and reindeer
skins, black and white bear-skins, red foxes, wolves, bad sables, a great
number of beavers and otters, and abundance of other furs. For agriculture the
country is unfit, like all others north of this. The environs of the town are
low and marshy woods, of birch, fir, and cedar; the trees of which are not very
tall. Of garden-stuff, some thrives very well. The fishery is astonishingly
rich; and, from spring to autumn, they have an inexpressible quantity of large
water-fowls, as swans, geese, ducks, etc. The most wealthy of the inhabitants
keep, in the northern districts, large herds of reindeer, under the care of
shepherds; for this is the only domestic animal that will thrive well in the
north. Oxen and horses cannot live there. Few of the inhabitants keep either
sheep, swine, or chickens. Those who keep the latter, are obliged to shut them
up, lest they should be torn by the dogs; for as dogs are employed, in
wintertime, to draw little, traveling sledges, to carry wood, and other
services, a great number of them are kept; and they are the more useful, as
they require little attendance, and will pick up their living on the remains of
fish and fowl that is every where scattered, and particularly as they will feed
on the water-rat, of which there are many in the Ob. But, in another respect,
these animals are a nuisance, as they make an intolerable howling every
morning, throughout the whole town; like the crowing of cocks, as soon as one
begins, all the dogs of the town are sure to follow.

Beresowa lies about five degrees more to the north than Tobolskoi; according
to the oblique direction of the rivers, the distance from it, by water, is 757
miles; by land, in the winter-road, only 675 miles. Notwithstanding the summer
is short, it is sometimes very hot; and the weather, in winter, often so soft
and mild, that the snow melts upon the roads. In 1771, the warm weather
continued all August and September; but the frost followed so suddenly, that
the rivers were frozen in the middle of October. The Ob usually freezes about
that time, and is not open before the end of May.

Birds of passage arrive much sooner than the end of May, and continue in the
lakes till they find, in the rivers, and in the northermost wilds, proper
places to make their nests. Should there be still, on their arrival, any winter
weather in the district of Beresowa, they make up the river into the more
southern and watery districts upon the Irtisch; and, as soon as the weather
becomes milder, draw down in crowds northwards, to people their cold and native
home. Mr. Surjef spent the spring at Beresowa, collecting the rarest species of
waterfowl, and their number is astonishing. The most curious birds he brought
me were as follow: Of the goose kind, Anser pulchri collis; of ducks, Anas
fusca, nigra, marila, hyemalis, and acuta, which were caught in great numbers;
the diver, Colymbus arcticus et immer. Of gulls, Larus minutus; of land-birds,
the falcon, Falco barbarus, which builds its nest in the northermost mountains
in summer; and the wood-pecker, Picus tridactylus. Every species of wild duck,
small and large geese, common plovers and gulls, snipes, and other such birds,
increase the crowd; and their number is above expression.

When Mr. Surjef had completed his collection of water-fowls, he proceeded on
his journey to the seacoast. In summer, there is no way to Obdorskoi-Gorodok,
the most northern place of note, but by water; he therefore set out the 11th of
June, with a huntsman, an interpreter, and six cossacks, in a large barge. The
river had now so much overflown all the low lands and islands, that it looked
like a vast sea; here and there a willow-tree, showing its top above water. He
arrived at Obdorskoi-Gorodok on the 14th, a distance, by water, of 225 miles.
This place is called, by the Eastjaicks, Pulnowat-wasch; and, by the Samojedes,
Sola Chern. It is situated near the 67th degree of north-latitude, and is
erected on a mountain, on the border of the little river Polni, which, at four
miles from thence, empties itself, on the right, into the Ob. Obdorskoi-Gorodok
consists only of five houses, but a number of magazines and storehouses; and
has, at a distance, the appearance of a very extensive village. It has a
church, dedicated to St. Basil. The Russian inhabitants remain there during the
winter, and leave it in summer; but many Eastjaiks repair there in winter, and
live in demi-subterranean dwellings. Here resides an inspector, or Opekun,
placed over the neighboring Eastjaiks and Samojedes: he is a Cossack born, and
commands an Ataman, and 25 Cossacks.

The district on both sides the Ob, is mountainous; and the mountains, which
consist chiefly of a chertzlike slate, are very bare. Near Obdorskaja there are
no other trees than some few willow-bushes on the border of the Polni; higher
up that river are larches, pines, birches, and alders, and some few pine-trees.
Near the icy sea grow some little larches and alders; but they creep upon the
ground, like espaliers, or like the shrubs in high mountains. In Obdorskaja the
summer is very delightful, by the continual presence of the sun, though it be
but short. During the long days, the sun, at night, is but one hour invisible;
hiding itself behind an adjacent mountain, but does not sink below the horizon.
At this time, at night, when near the horizon, it is very large, and its light
so weak, that it may be looked at steadfastly with the naked eye. On the 30th of
July, the sun set, so that the stars became visible. In wintertime, the long
light does not last more than two or three hours, except when the brilliant,
northern lights illumine the nocturnal hemisphere. About Obdorskaja one never
hears the bustling noise which many of these phenomena make in the air. They
commonly appear like bright bows about the horizon, from which issue some very
agile, light columns. Seldom is a tempest heard here in summer; never above
once or twice in the whole district: but thunder is commonly heard, as at a
distance, rolling from north to south. The weather is scarce ever so warm, as
to render a light fur-dress insupportable. On his journey to the glacial sea,
Mr. Surjef felt but five days so warm, that he could say he sweated, or could
go without a fur. In July, the northern winds begin; white frosts, and ice, is
not uncommon, and the plants turn yellow. The largest radishes, and turnips,
they can raise at Obdorskaja, weigh somewhat more than five ounces, but the
leaves grow a foot long. No other garden-stuff thrives at all. The ground thaws
only on the surface; and, near Obdorskaja, the elevated flat soil becomes wet,
nine, twelve, or fifteen inches deep; lower on, it is scarce six inches deep.
Further northward, the ground is higher and sandy, to the depth of six or eight
inches. In watery spots, we see bare ice, underneath the moss that covers them.
No large cattle, brought to Obdorskaja, ever lived so long as five years.
Horses can be kept no where north of Beresowa. Some were once brought to
Obdorskaja, but they did not live a year. For this reason, they keep only
reindeer which are here at home, and multiply very fast, in spite of many
disorders, and the danger of wild beasts. Of course, these animals make a
considerable part of the property, both of the Russian and pagan inhabitants,
of these northern lands.

Preparations for his further journey on the borders the glacial sea, detained
Mr. Surjef till the end of June. He wanted provisions, and attendants, who were
here increased by some Samojedes, and their wives, who offered their service as
guides, and as interpreters; and also a great number of reindeer to change;
for these animals soon grow weary. The northern borders of Siberia, toward the
coast of the frozen sea, is, to the breadth of some hundred miles, a watery,
mossy, and woodless marsh, in which it is difficult to travel, even in
summertime; but, as I have observed, there being, underneath the moss, ice, or
frozen earth, well-trodden by reindeer; the light sledges of the Samojedes
glide easily away on the moist moss surface, which would by no means bear a
wheel.

On the 1st of July, Mr. Surjef proceeded on his journey; and the next day he
went, in a boat, down the Polni, and across the Ob, and some other parts of the
country, to the distance of 52 miles, passing several settlements, to a place
where the reindeer were in readiness, to convey him on. In one settlement,
consisting of yourts, or tents, lives the governor of the Samojedes of
Obdorskaja, and the Eastjaiks. His father was presented, at Moscow, by the
present Empress, with robes, and a diploma; but died there before his return.

On the 3d, Mr. Surjef, and his suite, set out with reindeer, and took the
land-road inwards from the river Ob, straight north, over even, marshy lands,
green with all sorts of reed-grass, and a few plants, with creeping willows,
and large-leaved, dwarf birches (Betula nana), and several others, besides the
Arbutus alpina; the more elevated, yet moist and loamy places, were ornamented
with little, scattered larches. They also passed many lakes, of various extent;
and, the same day, reached the river Chaja, which flows from the mountains,
into the gulf of the Ob. The breadth of this river was 18 fathoms, the stream
very rapid, and the water as bright as crystal. Traveling on, they reached,
on the 6th of July, those mountains which make part of the northern Ural. The
road here was very difficult for the reindeer, some of whom dropped, and could
not be brought upon their legs again, even by bleeding, which operation the
Samojedes perform under their tail. After a good day's journey (which, in
summertime, does not exceed 15 or 18 miles, on account of the frequent
changing of the reindeer, and the loss of time on that account), they crossed
two very rapid rivers, above 20 fathoms broad.

On the 8th, the Samojedes ran, till noon, before they could bring the
reindeer together, 70 of which were to go with them; and which, on account of
tormenting insects, had retreated into cool valleys; of course, they could not
get far that day. From the 19th to the 26th, they passed only a wild, barren
country, full of capes and lakes, the icy sea in sight all the way, and
pitching their tents at night, at which time they made fires to keep themselves
warm; and as they passed through a country where there was no wood, they were
obliged to take wood with them. The water of the frozen sea is so cold, that a
bather, in summertime, could not stay in it a few moments, without being
benumbed; and it would be death to a delicate constitution. Having traveled
along the coast, more than three weeks, the extent of Mr. Surjef's route was
completed; and, as the severity of the weather opposed a farther continuation,
he set out on his return the 28th of July, and reached Obdorskaja again on the
14th of August. In his tour he collected a number of plants and marine
productions, but the names of them would be of little amusement to a general
reader, as none were very curious or new. Who would believe that the remains of
elephants bones, so frequently found in Siberia, should also be met with so far
north? Yet, it is certain, that the Samojedes find them in great abundance.

Before Mr. Surjef left the district of Obdorskaja, he made two other
excursions, in spite of the severe, autumnal weather; one with reindeer,
toward the Uralian mountains; and the other, by water, to the gulf where the
Ob flows into the ocean.

He set out for the first on the 18th of August, and returned to Obdorskaja on
the 22d. In his way he crossed the river Sob, near its mouth, where it was 60
fathoms broad, and came to a granite mountain, whose summit reached the clouds,
and was covered with snow, that fell, between the full and new moon of July.
During the night they traveled along this mountain, where the wolves fell upon
the reindeer, and so dispersed them, that they could scarce get sufficient to
bring them back; for these deer accompany the sledges, though turned loose.

The second tour he undertook, on the 25th of August, in a boat. On the 11th of
September he returned from Obdorskaja to Beresowa; and, on his return to me,
brought me a young sea-bear alive, and an enormous buffalo's skull, which he
found in the earth, the breadth of which, between the horns, is 10 Paris
inches, the breadth, before the horns, 13 inches, the length of the horn-holes,
18 inches, and the circumference, 12 inches.

Having thus given a short account of his tour, I shall speak of the pagan
inhabitants, their hunting and fisheries; and shall begin with the Ostiacks, or
Eastjaiks, of whom I trust I shall give a more complete account, than any that
has been hitherto given.

Eastjacks, At the beginning of the 17th century, says Dr. Gmelin, when the
Russians had extended their conquests as far as the Jenisei, these Eastjaiks
were in possession of the deserts, they now occupy along the banks of that
river, and the rivers that empty into it. They were then near neighbors of the
Samojedes, with whom they were in some measure mixed, In 1608, they not only
submitted to Russia themselves, but their princes gave all their assistance, to
bring the people settled higher up, into the same subjection. Those on the
river Ob, are one of the first Siberian nations that were discovered and
conquered by the Russians; and, like most Siberian tribes, since their
conquest, have very much diminished, by the smallpox, and other diseases,
formerly unknown to them; yet they still make a considerable body of people,
especially in the district of Beresowa, extending up the Ob, as far as the
districts of Narym, and Surgut.

They are, in general, middling-sized people, and short; not very strong, and
particularly thin and lean. Their faces are disagreeable, pale, and flat, yet
without any characteristic form. The ruddy and light-coloured hair that hangs
about the head of the men, renders them still more ugly. Among the women grown
to full age, we scarce meet with a fine face. The Eastjaiks are timorous,
superstitious, and simple; but otherwise have a tolerable share of goodnature.
They are, from their youth, laborious; being obliged to put up with a
troublesome and bad way of living: but as soon as they find themselves a little
above indigence, they are slothful, especially the men; and, in their whole,
domestic management, very disgustful and filthy.

The dress, both of men and women, is singular; and consists chiefly of the
skins of animals, and furs, which they prepare themselves. The richer wear
shirts; but the common people wear their leathern coats next their skin. The
man's dress is first a narrow under-fur, with sleeves (Mauliza), which scarce
reaches halfway the loins, having a hole above to put the head through, close
behind and before. This is commonly made with the skin of a reindeer fawn,
which drops in spring, and is put on, instead of a shirt, with the hair
inwards. The most usual upper-fur, or garment, which is worn also in summer,
when the weather is cold, is what they call Sarga, or Parka, and consists of a
reindeer skin, sewed together, and worn with the hair inwards. It is almost
like the Mauliza, except that behind the opening through which the head passes,
hangs a hood, which occasionally is thrown over the head. They generally border
the hood, and seams of the garment, with dog's-skin; and is often worn, in
summer, without the under fur. In the representation given, is an Eastjaik in
his under-garment, and one in his upper-garment. In winter, they wear a fur
over both; and also a cap, made of long-haired reindeer skin, called Gus. In
summertime, those who wish to appear genteeler than ordinary, make themselves
a Mauliza of several pieces of cloth of various colors, without lining, and
bordered with a white dog's-skin, or the tails of ice-foxes. Some, in the upper
district of the Ob, wear, in rainy weather, fish-skin clothes, which, when they
are hungry, and in want of other food, they put into a kettle, boil, and eat.
The common breeches of the men are made of dyed reindeer skins, or quab-skins;
are cut to sit close on them, but do not reach the knees. On their legs they
EASTJAIKS
wear short stockings, made of the fawn of the reindeer; and, over these,
boots, made of the foot-skin of the same animal: the parts between the hoof,
are fastened together for the sole of their boots, being more solid, and as
preventing their slipping on the snow. Such boots are exported by Russian
merchants; and worn, when traveling in winter, both by Russians, and the
people of Siberia.

The women wear, next their skin, a kind of bed-gown, made of fur, and open all
the way before; they are not very wide, yet sufficiently so as to lap over, and
tie together. This is the only garment they wear: they take care to keep it
close before, but are not permitted to wear a girdle. They never wear any
breeches; and, as they go barefooted in summer, was it not for this
fur-garment, they would be quite naked. In winter, at home, they wear
stockings, like the men; their hair is braided into two tresses behind, which
hang down the back, and are tied together by a string. Added to this, the more
wealthy fasten on the hair behind, two long strips of good cloth, which reach
to the joint of the knee, and are decorated with brass and copper plates,
representing little horses, reindeer, fish, and other figures. Those that have
not much hair, wind a piece of cloth about their heads, which crosses behind,
and hangs down the back in two long strips. Both men and women wear long
pendants, in their ears, of beads of several colors, strung on a wire, or
string; and several men wear rings in their ears. As soon as any one enters
their tent, whether strangers or relations, the women cover their whole heads
with a linen veil, and will not be unveiled, even before their own mother.
These veils are called, Woksche, are worked on the borders, and ornamented with
fringes. This is not an affected, but a real, blushing modesty in the Eastjaik
girls and women; and, is carried so far, that whenever a stranger arrives, they
endeavor to leave the tent, or hide themselves in a corner.

Among the women it is reckoned an ornament to mark the back of the hands, and
the forepart of the arm, with various, bluish figures and points: for this
purpose, they draw the figure they mean to mark, upon their skins, with foot,
and prick it with needles till it bleeds; in so doing, the prick given with the
needle, leaves a blue speck, and the figure being so pricked all over, remains
on the skin in use. Men only prick on their hands that sign, by which they are
registered in the tax-book; and which is considered, by other Siberians,
unskilled in writing, as their signature, in law. The men will also,
occasionally, prick all sorts of figures upon their shoulders, and other parts
of their body, where they have scarified themselves, in case of sickness. As
the Eastjaik women ornament themselves, in this respect, as do the Tunguse, and
some nations in North America, so have they, like the women in Kamschatka,
another ridiculous and peculiar custom; that of wearing continually in the
vagina, a tent twisted together, and made of soft willow-bast scraped, which
they occasionally remove, and often change; and, lest this tent should fall
from its situation, by the motion of the body, they have fancied a girdle
(Worop), formed like those chastity-girdles, invented by the jealousy of our
southern Europeans; from which passes a band between the legs, covering the
whole with a piece of birch-bark, sewed to it; -- a contrivance that, at
certain times, is not without its use.

As other nomades are called shepherds, the Eastjaiks may be called, a nation
of fishermen; for fishing, during the whole summer, and in part of the winter,
is their chief occupation. Hunting, and bird-catching, is an occasional employ;
but deserves a description, equally with their fisheries. Such being the life
of an Eastjaik, it is naturally unsettled; of course, in summertime, they move
their habitations to places most adapted for fishing; but, like the Baskirians,
and some Siberian Tartars, have settled habitations in winter, to which they
annually return.

A summer-tent (Chat) is made without much alteration; the birch-bark which
covers it, is carried with them in boats made of hollow trees, enlarged with
boards fastened on them, as are also the poles with which they form their
tents; these poles are set close together, in form of pyramids, and covered
with the bark. In these boats they go, with their wives and children, and all
that belongs to them -- I speak this only of such Eastjaiks as live beyond
Beresowa; for higher up the country, most of them live in huts built of timber,
have benches to sleep on, and, in many points, conform to the Russian mode of
living.

They choose, for their winter abodes, high and dry spots, or the banks of
neighboring rivers. Here they build, with young timber, regular, square huts,
similar to a Russian house, but low; sometimes half underground, and without a
roof; instead of which, they cover the top with turf and leaves, leaving only a
square air-hole, which they cover, in winter, with a transparent piece of ice.
On each side of this house, is an open passage fenced in, in which are two
closets, where they keep their superfluous furs, and necessaries. Such huts are
inhabited by more than one family; and the place, within the walls, is divided
into as many apartments as there are families. Though narrow and confined, the
mother must put up with one room, for the children and the whole family; who do
their work before a small fire. It may easily be conceived, that there cannot
be the best order in such a room, where all things must lie littered about:
three, four, nay, six families, shall live together in such a hut. Beyond
Beresowa, there are but few huts, or jourts, that have not thirty families in
each. Those mothers who have infants, have a cradle, made of birch-bark, before
their house, and fill it with any fine and bruised rotten wood they can find,
which serves the infant as a bed; and all the wet such infant makes, is
absorbed in this wood-dust. The cradle is covered with a piece of fur, fastened
to it by strings. The beds of such as are grown up, are made on the bare
ground, with reindeer furs and hay; except in such rooms where there are
benches to lie on, underneath which their favorite dogs lie, especially those
who have whelps. Common sledge-dogs lie without the house; yet, when the master
wants to go out, they are admitted within, to be fed. In the center of the
jourt is a common fire, pretty large, where every one dresses his victuals when
he pleases, for they have no regular meals; and here they also roast the
remains of what fish they leave, for the dogs. From this continual roasting,
the cielings of their winter-dwellings are so much covered with foot, that it
hangs down like isicles. One may easily judge of the offensive smell, and
damps, at entering such a hut; from whence no dirt or filth, made by men or
dogs, is removed; and where even children perform their occasional and
necessary wants, without going out.

Beside these winter-huts, they build often, at a little distance from them, in
the woods, places to store their provisions in (Labassy), where they leave all
their furs, skins, and other articles, for which they have no immediate use,
without the least care; and, what the place will not hold, is left without on
their sledges, and is perfectly safe, no theft being ever committed.

The filthiness of this nation cannot be painted sufficiently disgustful.
Washing of hands is unknown among them, except when the women open a fish, or
take it out of the boiler; at which time they wash off the filth, and dry their
hands in their furs. Men and animals eat out of the same vessel, which is never
cleaned. As their felt-like hair swarms with vermin, the most filthy of all
their actions is that of the women, at their leisure, picking such vermin from
their husband's heads, and killing them, with all possible calmness, between
their teeth. The rich Eastjaiks, however, from imitation, are become so
cleanly, as to make a kind of soap, because what the Russians use is too scarce
and dear, and not strong enough to clean their hands, which are, comparatively
speaking, an inch thick with grease. This soap is made by putting a good
quantity of sharp ashes into a kettle of water, and pouring, by degrees,
fish-fat into the lie, which they boil together, till it settles, and becomes
soap. They then take it out in pieces, tie it up in rags, and, when they wash
their hands, squeeze it like a sponge: but the common Eastjaiks, have no such
cleanly thing. One reason of their filthiness is, that the women have too much
domestic business on their hands, and are considered by their husbands rather
as slaves than consorts. The wife erects the tent, pulls it down, dresses the
victuals, drys and mends her husband's clothes, and serves him in every thing;
and when the husband returns from hunting, or fishing, she must clean, and
dress the fish. The men take nothing on themselves, but the business of fishing
and hunting.

The manner in which these women dress their skins, is a good one, as they keep
out the wet; I will, therefore, describe it. Two tools are used for this
purpose; first, a small iron, to the middle of which is fixed a wooden handle,
and whose two ends are crooked and sharp; with these they scrape the raw skins,
first on the flesh-side. This done, they chew fish-roe, or dried fish-bellies,
in their mouths, and spread it over the skin, which is rolled up, and laid
aside, to become moist. They then take another scraping iron, which looks like
a narrow sickle, with two wooden handles, one at each end; through these
handles a rope is drawn, which they sling round their foot, hold the Iron
between their legs, and scrape the flesh-side of the skins clean. After this,
they are dried in the tent, or hut, and worked soft with the hands. It is the
chewed fish-roe that renders them impenetrable, by water.

As it is only the more wealthy Eastjaiks, beyond Beresowa, that keep
reindeer; and we see other domestic cattle only among those who live more to
the south, toward Tobolskoi, most of them must live by fishing. During the
whole summer, both young and old, are so occupied; and even children are kept
to work, according to their strength, in this line. In this season, they have
such an abundance of fish, that they eat nothing else; and they seldom think of
boiling, or roasting them, but cut off the flesh, as it comes fresh out of the
water, sauce it with its blood, which flows plentifully from about the tail,
when pricked with a needle; take one long slice after another, into their
mouths, cutting the bits very skilfully below their lips; of course, in summer,
their mouths and clothes, stink worse than a fish-market. In winter, they are
fond of raw frozen fish; and are imitated in this by the neighboring Russians,
who eat it so, as a preservative against the scurvy.

Far more fish is caught, in summertime, than they are able to eat, or barter
with the Russians. In the lower districts of the Ob, the smaller sorts, which
they do not know how to dispose of, are thrown away, and lie about in heaps
untouched, even by the dogs. They preserve their fish in three different ways:
the whole sides of large whitings are taken from the bones, dried in the wind,
and, to prevent putresaction, are half-roasted, and then tied up in bundles,
and called Poseem. The best of this kind of food is a fish of passage, caught
in the Ob, which they call Muksun. After drying, it is put into a kettle, and
stirred about on the fire till it becomes brown, then stowed away in vessels
made of birch-bark, or the stomach of the reindeer. The bones are dried and
roasted, and given to the dogs. Jutta is a food made like Poseem, of smaller
fishes; and put away in bags, made of the skin of a sturgeon. Porsa is a little
species of scale fish, split, and dried in the wind, and then, with the bones,
pounded, as fine as flour. Poseem is their most usual food; but, to their
guests, they present Muksun and Poseem together; so that one is used as bread
to the other. If these provisions fail, they put up with the Jutta. Porsa is
given dried, and seldom boiled. Fresh fish is only boiled for guests, and what
they leave, the family eats; and, on such occasions, they plunge their filthy
hands into the kettle, up to their elbows. In winter, they make a soup, or
fish-broth, and put flour in it; this they learnt from the Russians, and throw
it down their throats with large spoons. The entrails of fishes, the Eastjaiks
make no use of, but boil out the fat, and dispose of it to the Russians, who
eat it as butter, on their fast-days. The back-sinews are seldom dressed; these
are usually eaten raw, without a knife. Eating with a knife is held ominous of
unsuccessful fishing. The same thing they fear, if a fish's belly is slit
strait down; the women, therefore, cut them across.

They make glue of the sturgeon's air-bladder, by cleaning it from the fat,
drying it in the air, boiling it in water till it swims at top, and then
skimming it, and cooling it in cold water.

Hunting is one of the men's winter-occupations; and, in winter, they fish
underneath the ice. In autumn, when the first snow salls, they hunt elks and
reindeer; and he that kills, makes a feast for his friends. The kidneys,
lights, and other soft parts, are eaten like the melt, raw; part of the flesh
is boiled, and the rest smoked.

In winter, the Eastjaiks travel in their snow-shoes, far into the deserts and
forests, and do not return for some months, drawing their food with them, on
small sledges. Hunting weapons are all sorts of arrows; some with a fork-like
point, others with bone-points, and others clubbed at the end, to kill small
animals with. If they kill any large animals in any great number, they flea
them, bury the flesh in the deep snow, in a spot they can find again, and fetch
it at some other time, with reindeer, or dogs. They will eat the flesh of
bears, foxes, squirrels, and dead carcases, without disgust. When an Eastjaik
is exposed to severe cold, pain and hunger, he has recourse to tobacco, which
does him a great deal of service; so that they are fond of smoking, and taking
snuff: and as their tobacco is not very strong, they quicken it with the most
alkaline ashes of birch, and asp spurges. After filling their nostrils with
snuff, they stop them with scraped willow-bast, so that the pungent, sharp
juice, shall raise a kind of inflammation in the face, which keeps off the
frost. I must not omit, here, their superstition in hunting. When an Eastjaik
goes a hunting, he wishes to sneeze the day before, and considers this as a
happy presage; but should he find himself disposed to sneeze the morning he
sets out, he will make all possible grimaces to prevent it, and should he
sneeze after all, nothing can exceed his vexation, conceiving that, every time
he sneezes, will deprive him of part of his sport for that day; nay, some, on
such an occasion, will not go out at all.

In spring, the birds of passage claim their attention, and afford them
delicious food. Their manner of catching them, shall be circumstantially
related.

Notwithstanding their unnatural food, their drink, (except brandy, which they
barter for with the Russians, and drink on the spot) is water only; I say,
notwithstanding this, they are a healthy people, and, among youth, we seldom
hear of disease. But if, from age and infirmities, they are unable to follow
their occupations, they are commonly attacked with such stubborn, scorbutic and
paralytic disorders, as never to rise again. They know nothing of inflammatory
complaints, except the smallpox, which makes dreadful ravage among children,
when it comes. Their manner of living must needs render this disorder fatal;
and, if it enters a village, grown people seldom escape. Some, however, remain
free all their lives. The venereal disease has also found its way among them;
but is not so infectious, as might be supposed.

Medicines they are unacquainted with. Their best cure in fits, swellings, and
inflammations, is scarification, or burning, on the diseased part, a piece of
birch-spurge; and being of opinion, that the remedy must be applied to the
place where the evil is lodged, they first take a burning coal, and hold it
about the diseased part, on different places of the skin, till they find a part
where the patient does not feel the fire so sensibly; there they apply it, and
keep it till the skin is burnt through, and bursts: the patient suffering this
burning, with the patience of a stoic.

They cure obstructions; with large spoonfuls of fishfat; and, in dangerous
cases, take crow's eyes. Both these are used as an emetic and purge. The gall
of a white sea-bear, and bear's heart, are also medicines of renown among them.
Dried gall is chiefly used in sickness among children, or complaints of the
belly, and the venereal disease.

The Eastjaiks, particularly beyond Beresowa, who adhere still to paganism,
take as many wives as they can afford. It is legal among them to marry their
brother's widow, their stepmother, or step-daughter, and other female
relations. They are fond of marrying sisters of other families; and believe
that, men's marrying with a wife's sister, brings good luck, and, by doing
this, they pay the father only half the price, or kalym, first paid; but they
hold it sinful and disgraceful, to marry relations of the same name: yet they
attend only to the male line. If a woman has married into another family, and
has borne a daughter, the brother of the mother, or his children, may legally
marry that daughter. In short, all marriages are legal, if only the father of
the bride, and bridegroom, are of different families.

When an Eastjaik goes a courting, he chooses, from among his nearest relations
and friends, some companions of his own age, and one to be the negotiator; goes
with them to his sweetheart's dwelling, and enters the hut without ceremony. A
father who has a marriageable daughter, seeing such a company arrive, readily
guesses the reason; therefore, makes no question, but treats them with what his
tent will afford. When the guests have filled their bellies, they retire to
another tent, and from thence the bridegroom sends his suitor with the
proposals, and enquires the kalym, or price to be paid, The negotiation being
entered into, the poor suitor runs to and fro, from one tent to the other, to
settle matters between the two, till the agreement is concluded on; then the
bridegroom goes himself, and pays part of the kalym, the whole being seldom
paid at once, it being proportioned to the fortune the father gives with his
daughter. A rich, Eastjaik girl, is not married, without a gift of 100
reindeer, and an assortment of all kinds of furs. The first instalment being
paid, the bridegroom directs the father to have a bed prepared for him in his
hut, and to have his daughter ready. If the father-in-law agrees to this, and
accepts the first payment, the bridegroom comes, that night, and lays on the
spot, or bed, appointed for him. Some time after the bride lies down near him,
on a separate bench, and covered with a particular fur, till the fires are put
out. Next morning, the girl's mother enquires of the bridegroom, whether he is
satisfied with her daughter. If he replies in the affirmative, he must present
the mother with a garment and a reindeer; and the mother then cuts the
rein-deer's skin on which the young couple lay, into pieces, and spreads it
around, in triumph: but should the bridegroom be dissatisfied, the mother gives
him a reindeer. The bridegroom, after this, sleeps with his bride; but cannot
take her home, till the whole of the kalym, or purchase-money, is paid.
Sometimes, it shall happen, that, when the father is weak or ill, and cannot
follow, the husband shall take away his wife, before the sum agreed on is paid;
in such cases, the father takes the opportunity, at some future time, when his
daughter comes to pay him a visit, to detain her, and force the husband to pay
what is owing.

No married woman can appear before her father-in-law whilst she lives; nor the
bridegroom, before his mother in-law, until he has children. They must avoid
them as much as possible; and, if they chance to meet them, must turn their
backs, and cover their faces. Girls, in Eastjaik families, have no names; the
husband, therefore, calls his consort, wife (Jemi); and the women call their
husbands, man (Tahe).

Though the uncivilized Eastjaik does not consider his wife but as a necessary,
domestic animal, and scarcely favors her with a good word for all her hard
labor; yet he dare not strike her, even for the greatest crime, unless he has
the consent of her father: for, in such a case, the provoked wife would run to
her parents, and persuade her father to return the kalym to his son-in-law, and
she would marry some other man.

These people know little about jealousy; they are much addicted to bestiality;
and their marriages are seldom very prolific. Few fathers have more than three
or four children; probably, a father's neglect of his children, may shorten
their days, and rob him of part of them. Though mothers show a greater
fondness, and will let their infants suck as long as they like, even to the
fifth year. The women here are easily delivered; and the afterbirth, and
willowbast, on which they lie, is put into a box of birchbark, and, with some
meat or fish added to it, superstitiously hung upon a tree, in some distant
wood. It is said, that should a poor, Eastjaik woman be delivered of a child on
the road, when traveling, and where they cannot stop long for want of
victuals, the husband will give her a good dose of fish-glue boiled, and this
will enable her to proceed.

They have particular burying-places of their own, called Chalas. A corpse is
not kept long above-ground; he that dies in the morning, is interred at noon.
Their graves are made, generally, only two feet deep; because, in most places,
the frozen ground is too hard to be dug into deeper. The deceased is dressed in
his best clothes, according to the season of the year; is put on a bench, and
all things near him which he used; for instance, his knife, axe, tobacco-horn
filled, etc. except his flint and fire-steel, which are only given to the dead,
carved in wood. The relations and neighbors of the deceased, assemble in his
jourt, and deplore him with great howling. The women sit together, with their
faces veiled; and the men stand, lamenting over the body. Instead of a coffin,
they bring a little boat, whose fore and hind part is cut off, put the
deceased, with all his things, into it, and carry him to his grave. Men are
borne by men; and women are carried by women only, to the place of interment,
which is usually on some height. In the latter case, the corpse is followed by
some men to dig the grave, and is interred with shrieks of woe. The corpse of a
man is followed by three of the best and most favorite reindeer he possessed,
dressed, and harnessed, in sledges, and led on by men. As soon as the body is
interred, and covered with earth, they put a cord round the hind-legs of the
deer, which two men pull, whilst four others run them through the bodies, on
all sides, with pointed poles. When rich men are buried, they kill many more
reindeer, putting slings about their necks and feet, and beating them about
the back with poles, till they drop down dead. These animals, sacrificed to the
deceased, remain on the grave; their housings are laid on a kind of scaffold,
made over it with bushes, and the sledges are placed slanting up against it.
Near the grave, they dress a funeral meal; and when those who attend are
satisfied, carry the remainder home, and divide it among the neighbors, in
remembrance of their deceased friend; and the relations will afterward
sometimes celebrate such meals of remembrance.

Before the Eastjaiks were subject to the Russian empire, they had little
princes among them, whose dignity was hereditary. Some of their posterity are
still in being, but not much respected, living in the manner of the common
people, by their labor. If these princes left no male issue, the elders and
most wealthy, chose a successor from among themselves. If any dispute happens
among the people, these settle it by arbitration, or refer the matter to their
princes; but if the cause is brought before any Russian court of judicature, it
is adjusted by the evidence of the parties, and the following oath is usually
administered. A wooden idol being brought, the defendant is reminded of the
danger of taking a false oath, and constrained to cut off the idol's nose, with
an axe, or knife, and injure it other ways; during this, he must repeat, after
the interpreter, the following words: If I do not speak the truth, in this
cause, let my nose be cut off in the same manner; let me be hewn in pieces by
an axe; let the beasts of the forest tear me; and every misfortune come upon
me! By the same oath the witnesses are sworn; and, out of superstitious fear,
will rather confess they are in the wrong, than expose themselves to the
punishment of their gods. If they are to swear allegiance to a new sovereign,
they are assembled in little circles, an axe is placed in the middle, with
which a bear, or bear-skin, has been cut in pieces; and each person is
presented with a bit of bread, on the point of a knife; during this, he is to
take the oath of allegiance, as follows: -- If I do not remain faithful to the
Empress, to the end of my life; if I revolt, or do not pay my tribute; or if I
leave my country, or do any other act of perfidy; let me torn by the bear, or
choked with this bread I eat This is the English Corsned oath. Hence the
expression -- "May this morsel be my last!"
; let the axe cut off my head; or let me be killed by this knife. This done,
they kneel down about a bear's skin, and lay hold of it with their teeth,
biting it; and many, to show their zeal, will tear out the hairs with their
teeth. Similar obligations, on oath, are customary, with a bear's skin, among
most of the heathens, in Siberia.

The Eastjaik language is like that of Finland, and the Woguls. There are also
diverse dialects of this language. Among the Finnish dialects, there is none
more like the Eastjaik, than the Mordvine. As an example, I will give a list of
words, in the Eastjaik, Wogulian, and Mordvine languages; and the simiarity
will be readily seen.

ENGLISH. EASTJAIK. WOGUL. MORDVINE. Two. Kat. Kijtti. Kaftta. Three. Cholym.
Chorum. Kolma. Five. Wet. At. Wjette. Hundred. Ssat. Schott. Ssjada. God.
Torom. Torom. Tora. Devil. Kul. Kul. Kul. Wind. Wat. Wot. Warma. Sun. Chat'l.
Chodel. Ko. Mountain. Muu. Mag. Moda. Man. Cho. Ker. Kort. Town. Wasch. Wosch.
Osch. Fish. Chull. Chul. Kall.

The blindest and coarsest idolatry is still the reigning religion of the
Eastjaiks; even of many that are baptized. Those who, among their magicians,
profess paganism, have their idols at home; which are clumsily carved puppets,
with a human face, clothed with rags, and put in the best corner of the tent.
Before each idol, they place a little wooden box, in which the worshiper
presents his god with little presents, and keeps always for him a horn-full of
snuff, and scraped willow-bast; but if this little, wooden god should find
himself disposed to take a pinch of snuff, he may stuff his nostrils with the
bast, in the Eastjaik mode. They industriously smear the idol's mouth with
fish-fat, and do him every honor, in their way. Some Eastjaiks have deified
pieces of logwood, little boxes, and other things, they have bought from the
Russians. Such things they decorate in the best manner they can, with rings and
ribbands, and worship them, as others do their wooden puppets. It is truly
laughable, to see the effect of a Russian traveller's taking out at night, when
they are all asleep, the tobacco from the horn, and leaving the horn in its
place; the simple Eastjaik, in such a case, supposes that the idol has taken
all the snuff, is surprised at it, and thinks that he must certainly have been
hunting. It can scarcely be credited, that such a people could be so blind and
ridiculous, as to knock down the idol from its place, and break it in pieces,
by various methods, when they are in trouble, and the god will not succor
them; though they held the idol in the greatest veneration before. This is
often in use among the Eastjaiks; but scarce ever seen in any other pagan
nation in Siberia.

They also deify, in a certain manner, their deceased relations; making wooden
images, to represent some dead person they respected; and set, at the
rememberance-meals, their portion before them. Women that loved their husbands,
will take these puppets to-bed at night, dress them, and never omit placing
some victuals besore them, when they eat themselves.

The Eastjaiks worship, also, certain trees and mountains, that have excited
devout ideas; or have been considered as such by their magicians. They never
pass such trees, or mountains, without shooting an arrow at them; which is a
kind of worship they pay to these objects. But the greatest adoration, and most
common, great sacrifices, are only made to certain eminent people, consecrated
by their magicians. To these they fly for refuge, in extraordinary cases of
misfortune, or danger; wherein the sorcerers play the principal part, in order
to bring the poor people, by their impositions, under a blind obedience.

The idols, at present worshipped by all the Eastjaiks of the river Ob, and the
neighboring Samojedes, are in the environs of the tents of Wasarskaja, a great
way beyond Obdorskaja. They stand in a woody vale; where they are carefully
watched, and every passage to them concealed from the Russians. Before these
idols, of which there are two, they assemble, in great numbers, to perform
their sacrifices. One is dressed in a male dress, the other in a female; and
both are splendidly decked out in the Eastjaik way, and no cloth, or furs,
spared, to make them complete. Their garments are richly ornamented with brass
and iron plates, in form of animals; and, on their heads, are silver garlands.
Each stands on a selected tree, in his own jurt, or hut; the trunks of the
trees are covered with cloth, and other stuff; and, at the top, decorated with
a white, iron plate, with a bell hanging on it, that is shaken, and rung by the
wind. Quivers and bows are also hung on the tree of the male pagod; and on all
the adjacent trees, a number of skins of reindeer victims, and other sorts of
furs. Round about the idols is a great deal of Eastjaik, household utensils; as
kettles, spoons, cups, tobaccohorns, etc. The men pay their devotions only to
the male idol; but the women sometimes assemble before the female idol, led on
by a magician of their own sex, and bring her sacrifices and presents.

The Eastjaiks formerly had, in many places in the woods, trees, they
worshipped, and presented with skins and sacrifices; but finding that Cossack
travelers made no scruple to save these skins, suspended in the air, from
putrefaction, by putting them to a better use; they contented themselves with
cutting large branches of these trees, dressing them up, and erecting them in
more secure places, and there bringing them presents.

All the districts whose environs are consecrated to an idol, are spared by the
Eastjaiks; so as that they neither fell wood, or make hay, in such places; nor
will they hurt a fish, or drink there, lest they should provoke the anger of
the god. If they pass such a district by water, they take care nor to come too
near the shore, nor touch the land with their oars; and should the district be
extensive, they take sufficient water with them, before they come to it; as
they would rather die with thirst, than attempt to drink any water from such a
consecrated river.

All those places where idols were formerly worshipped by their ancestors, are
now well known to posterity; and if some new place is chosen, it is from the
caprice of those magicians that are most respected. A district full of game,
shall be consecrated, by artful magicians, to an idol; and a tree, on which an
eagle has built her nest for two years together, is declared sacred; and they
dare not molest that eagle. There could be no greater offense, than for a
passenger to kill such eagle; and the teachers and supporters of so absurd a
superstition, are the roguish magicians, or schamans. Any officers; sent by
Imperial command, to make any the least reform, which does not please the
Eastjaiks, puts the whole nation into such terror and consternation, and the
magicians take the advantage of these times, to relate fictitious dreams to the
people, or threaten them with the anger of the gods, or some heavier
punishment; and they get from them as many presents, by way of sacrifice, as
will maintain them a long time. These schamans are commonly so cunning, in the
beginning, as to tread themselves a path to such a respectable situation, as
they stand in with these people, by relations and interpretations of dreams;
and afterward improve themselves, in the arts of knavery and deception.
Superstition has so strong an influence on the minds of some people, that they
are often terrified at the greatest trifles; as I shall have occasion to show.

The opportunities to practice magic knowledge here, are cases of misfortune,
horrid dreams, unsuccessful hunting, or fishing, and other accidents. The
Eastjaik sorcerers make use of a drum, like most Siberian schamans; and, in
their magic spells, make horrible contortions of their bodies and faces, before
large fires; till the devils which they have brought forth, as they pretend,
have given them a proper answer. All those that are present, make, during the
contortions, an uninterrupted noise with kettles, cups, etc. as loud as they
can, and cry out, till they fancy they see a blue smoke, over the magician's
head; who, after the fit, feigns to be, for some time, weak, and out of his
senses.

The other principal occupation of the sorcerers is, ordering the general
offerings, or sacrifices; which they command the timid people to make, as they
please, in all extraordinary cases. I do not speak of little offerings; as the
Eastjaiks, of themselves, often carry the idol small presents and ornaments,
game, fresh fish, and prostrate themselves before it; and, after performing
supplications, boil the sacrifice, and smear the idol's mouth with the fat, or
broth: but I speak of greater sacrifices, where many reindeer are killed for
the gods, and where the schaman is present. -- The following then is the
ceremony: Having bound the rein-deer's legs together, the schaman stands before
the idol, and bawls out as loud as he can, the supplication of him who offers
to the gods; and so do the bystanders. Then some one, with a bent bow and
arrow, stands before the reindeer, and, when the magician, with a staff, gives
the signal on the head of the victim, he shoots it with the arrow, and another
kills it outright, with a pointed lance, or pole. They next take the animal by
the tail, and drag it thrice round the pagod, cut it open, squeeze out the
blood from the heart, and smear the idol's mouth therewith. The head and skin
is suspended on an adjacent tree; and the meat boiled, and eaten with shouts of
joy. Whatever the Eastjaiks think of, serves for a song, if only bawled in a
singing tone; and such are the hymns of these sacrifices. At parting, every one
cries out as loud as he can, waves his arms in the air, and thus gives his idol
thanks, and a farewell. The meat not eaten is taken home, and divided among
their wives, children, and neighbors; first greasing the mouths of their
domestic idols with the fat.

When great and general sacrifices are to be performed, the rich Eastjaiks
drive their best reindeer, in whole herds, to be killed; and scarcely keep
those who are most useful to them. In such cases, they know how to slaughter
the poor victims, barbarously and expeditiously; for the sooner a reindeer
falls and dies, the more acceptable to the idol is the offering supposed to be.
A rich man would blush, on such occasions, to offer less than eight or ten
reindeer. Besides this, they hang up the best furs they have to the idol, as a
present, and leave them a prey to wind and weather. Offerings are also made in
severe sicknesses, according to the number ordered by the magicians. The
victims are placed before the door of the patient's hut, and giving into the
hand of the rich man a rope, tied on the rein-deer's foot, the friends and
relations, standing with the magician, on the outside of the hut, call upon the
idol, till the patient draws the rope, by accident, or intentionally, which is
looked upon as a signal to kill the victim, and he is slaughtered accordingly.
Of such sacrifices, the skin is destined for domestic use, the head and horns
put upon a pale, the flesh eaten, and the forehead and afflicted parts of the
sick man, greased with the sat.

When the Eastjaiks have shown their prowess in killing a bear, the following
ceremony attends it. The skin is hung upon a high tree, all sorts of reverence
is paid it, and the best apologies made to the animal for its being, killed. By
doing this, they hope to avert, in a polite way, the injury which might
otherwise be done them by the spirit of the animal. Some such customs are
prevalent in Lapland. All, or most of these superstitious customs, are the same
among all old Siberian pagans.

Particular mention deserves to be made of the dances of the Eastjaiks, which
are quite national, and truly remarkable. I saw them performed by Russians, who
dwelt long among the Eastjaiks; and their ridiculous attitudes cannot better be
compared, than to a burlesque pantomime. They divert themselves thus at their
entertainments; and particularly when they have obtained a good deal of brandy,
by barter, from the Russians. It is the men only who dance, the women are
merely spectators; and it requires no small adroitness, strength, and agility;
for they always dance till they sweat. In these dances, they represent the
proceedings of their ancestors, in chase of a variety of animals and birds, and
even a fishing. Sometimes, they imitate the conduct and walk of the most
important animals and birds; and satirize the gait of their neighbors, all in
musical cadence; which the player varies, according to the various imitations.
In a very droll and laughable manner, do they represent the chase of the sable,
the manners of the crane and elk, and the flight and preying of the mouse-hawk,
the manner of the Russian women washing themselves, and other pleasant
subjects. The most difficult representation appeared to me to be, that of the
crane; when the dancer squats down, hides himself in a fur, the collar of which
he fastens round a long stick, which at top resembles the head of a crane; and
thus squatting, and almost bent double, he dances, and imitates, with the
stick, all the motions of a crane. At the representation of the elk, the music
imitates the several actions of the animal, walking, trotting, and galloping;
and the dancer makes all the grimaces of that animal, when he is throwing about
his eyes, in search of the huntsman who is after him. No one could suppose so
much skill, and so many well-fancied attitudes, among so rude a nation. Their
most favorite dances are, satyric representations; and they are fond of
ridiculing particular persons in songs, the extemporaneous effusions of their
own brain, when either drunk, or jovial.

Besides these dances and songs, they divert themselves, occasionally, with
stories, which turn sometimes on love-adventures, and sometimes on old,
incredible, boasted feats of heroism. They tell one of a mighty and valiant
Eastjaik, who, going a courting, traveled from Obdorskaja to a distance of 340
miles, beyond the Soswa, in 24 hours, without any change of reindeer; and, not
being able to agree with the father of his girl, carried her off in a little
time; and being, on this account, obliged to fight with her relations, killed,
with his own hand, several thousands of them, and so on. This piece of chivalry
is believed, by the Eastjaiks, as true: some part of it may be so; but it is
converted into fable, by posterity.

The musical instruments of this people are, the Dombra, exactly like the
Wogulian lute; and some few species of little harps, called Dernoboi, which
consist of a long-sounding triangular box, covered on the top with a
sounding-board, and strung with 30 strings; which the player touches boldly,
pressing down the thin-sounding board with his thumb, to give the tones a
wavering motion. To one end of this box, is fixed a swan's neck.

To strangers the Eastjaiks are very hospitable; and do not know how to pay
sufficient honor and respect to their guests. If they have any reindeer, they
will kill one immediately, and set before their friend, the tongue, brains, and
breast, boiled in their way, and considered, by them, as delicacies. After the
meal, they will make their guest such a present as they can afford, without
expecting any return.

END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.
ADDENDA.
ANAS MERSA.
MAgnitudo supra querquedulam. Rostrum magnum, latum, cyaneum, basi supra nares
tumidissima, didyma, inaequali in adultis, extremitate supra striis
divergentibus exarata. Caput usque ad initium colli album, sed area majuscula
verticis et palpebrae nigrae. Collum medium atrum. Corpus antice fusco-luteum,
nigroundulatum; dorsum cinereo atque lutescente nebulosum, fuscoque pulveratum.
Corpus subtus reliquum, uropygiumque fusca, gryseo conspurcata, certoque ad
lucem situ cano-nitentia. Alae parvulae, compositae uropygio breviores, fuscae,
speculo nullo. Uropygium productiusculum; cauda elongata, rigida, angusta,
cuneiformis, ut in Pelecanis, composita rectricibus 18 nigris, angustissimis.
Pedes pone aequilibrium fere ut in colymbis, fusci, antice coerulescentes;
palma elongata.

In junioribus et feminis, qualem tabula simul exprimit, rostrum basi minus
tumidum, totum fuscum; caput fuscum, gula alba, expansa versus nucham albedine.

Non infrequens est in Lacubus majoribus inter Uralenses montes, Irtim et Ob
fluvios, nec unquam in siccum exitura, quippe incedere nescia. Natat
expeditissime, cauda usque ad uropygium aquoe immersa pro gubernalo, contra
congenerum morem. Vox fere ut anatis hyemalis. Nidus flultans ex arundine.

GRUS LEUCOGERANUS.
Maxima in suo genere, ipsa Grue Antigone procerior; stans erecto corpore
quatuor cum dimidio pedes aequat. Rostrum gruino majus, forma simile, rubrum,
marginibus utriusque maxillae versus apicem serratis, ut in Antigone. Facies
ultra oculos nuda, rugosa, rubra, setulis crebris, rufis adspersa. Irides
pallidoalbae. Corpus, totum nivei candoris, cervix in biennibus
longitudinaliter fulvescens. Remiges december primariae, cum tectricibus suis
solae in candidissima ave nigrae. Pennae scapulares minus elongatae quam in
Grue vulgari. Cauda subaequalis, rectricibus 12 latiusculis composita, corpori
concolor. Pedes proceri, rubri, gruini.

Anniculae toto corpore fulvescentes, subtus albidae, rostro, facie,
pedibusque, fusco-virescentibus.

Habitat in vastissimis paludibus, campisque lacuum maxima copia irrigatis
circa Ischimum, Irtim et Ob fluvios et in septentrionalibus. Nidus inter
arundines inacessas, supra cumulos caespitosos majores, herbis congestis
stratus. Ova duo anserinis paria, cinerascentia, lituris crebris fuscis.
Clamores crebri, cygneis similes praesertim subvolantis. Victitat ranis,
pisciculis, lacertis.

LEPUS ALPINUS.
Magnitudo muris porcelli, facies totaque structura Leporis pusilli. Caput
oblongum, ore leporis. Dentes primores superi sulco profundo exarati, acie
incisa, communi tridentata; denticuli palatini truncati. Aures magnae,
suborbiculatae, intur bilamellatae, margin anteriore
infundibuliformi-tubuloso. Corpus ventricosum, artusque breves, ut in L.
pusillo. Palmae pentadactylae, pollice brevi, plantae tetradactylae; volae
omnium lana densissima atra vestitae. Cauda nulla, sed tuberculum pinguedinosum
mole nucis. Color lutescens, supra fusco mixtus. Areola parotica velleris
utrinque quasi detrita, pilis brevibus vestita. Pondus circiter unciarum 15.
Mammae duo inguinales, quatuor thoracicae. Costoe in sceleto 18 parium.
Structura intestinorum mira ut in L. pusillo. Infestatur larvis vestri
subcutaneis.

Vivit in Alpinis, rupestribus Sibiriae, Augusto foenisecans, herbasque siccas
inter rupes congestans. Vox fistulata simplex.

FERULA an nodiflora?
Radix profundissime in sabulo delitescens, caules solitarios, ad superficiem
terrae ramentis muscosos protrudens. Planta dilute viridis, saepe
quadripedalis, erecta, rigida. Caulis crassus, teres, striatus, subslexuosus,
geniculis ad folia tumidulis. Folia rigidiuscula, radicalia pedalia, petiolis
vaginantia, multiplicato-ternata, teretia striata, extremis tantum foliolis
planis, trifidis. Caulina folia alterna, bi-vel triternata, fetaceo-rigida,
fessilia vaginis caulem ambientibus, striatis, margin membranaceis. Umbella
terminalis magna, multiradiata, involucro communi nullo; circa quam e caul vel
nudo, vel intra folia plerumque bina, plurave vaginantia enascuntur umbelloe
pauciorum radiorum, senae, vel pauciores, in macilentis plantis marcescentes
aut imperfectae, in vegetis fastigiatae, imo saepae supra umbellam majorem
elevatae. Umbelluloe particulares involucris circiter decaphyllis, globosae,
flosculis sessilibus velut in capitulum. Flores exteriores plerique abortiunt,
reliqui, praesertim in disco, excrescunt in fructum, diu flore coronatum.
Semina bina, latissima, ovalia, contorta; margin membranaceo. Gustus plantae
Pastinacae fere aemulus, nisi gratior, seminibus satis acer.

Crescit inter colles arenosos, locis humidioribus, copiosissime supra
fortalitium Jamysechewa, Junio florens. Caules sicci cum seminibus maturis
Julio legebat studiosus N. Sokolof in arenis Jaikum inter et Wolgam sitis. Icon
plantam sistit omnibus partibus ad dimidium imminutam; flosculi soli seminaque
naturali magnitudine exhibita.

PTEROCOCCUS APHYLLUS.
Frutex tri-vel quadripedalis, e radice crassa, lignosa, diametri
sesquipollicaris, profundissime in arenam demersa, superius capitato-tuberosa,
proferens truncos plurimos, digiti crassitie, erectos, ramisissimos,
dichotomos. Lignum durissimum, fragile, vestigiis geniculorum interceptum,
vestitum cortice aequali, gryseo, striato. Folia omnino nulla. Sed rami lignosi
e geniculis, tuberibusque passim antiquiorum geniculorum cicatricosis omni vere
pullulant juniis herbaceis, tenuissimis, macris, longissimis, dichotomis,
geniculatis, quorum internodia longa, rectissima, linearia, superius limbo
exili subbilabiato coronata, quo superiora, suscipiuntur ab inferioribus, fere
ut in Anabasi. Horum praecociores firmantur in ramos ligneos persistentes,
herbacei hyeme pereunt. Flores copiosissimi e ramis ligneis junioribus,
praesertim circa tubera verrucosa, et in viminibus herbaceis, ex ipsis
geniculis, intra exilem stipulam membranaceam enascuntur glomerati, albi. Calix
nullus. Corolla pentapetala, albida, persistens; petalo inferiore paulo majore,
duobus oppositis oblongioribus, minoribus. Stamina december, longitudine corollae,
erecta, excrescente fructu cum corolla marcescentia, nec decidua: filamenta
setacea, basi crassiuscula, tomentosa; antheroe subglobosae, didymae. Germen
conicum, tetraedrum, raro triquetrum, angulis bifidis excrescentibus in alas
fructus; styli tres reflexi, stigmate capitati. Fructus nux oblonga, tetraedra,
carinis in tenuem cristam productis, cui adnata ala orbiculata, vel subovalis,
membranacea, coloris cinnamomei, a disco versus marginem striata atque
fiffilis, undulata. Alae quatuor circa nucem undique connivent eamque celant.
Nucleus oblongus, tetraedrus, inter angulos profunde exsculptus, corculo
centrali, per apicem nucis excrescente.

Mira haecce arbuscula, quam ad genera Botanicorum refer non potui,
copiosissime provenit in universo deserto arenoso, quod campos vastos inter
Wolgam et Jaikum sitos clivoso tractu usque ad Caspium lacum percurrit, et sub
nomine Rynpeski accolis notum est. A Kalmuccis desertum illud frequentantibus,
Kirgisiisque in quorum regione pariter arenosis locis provenire dicitur, nomine
Torlok nota est, truncique ad exsculpendas fistulas tatacarias adhibentur.
Radicis truncus recens dissectus in superficiem taleolorum exsudat copioso
gummate, quod adhuc copiosius e rasura radicis emulsione elicitur, Tragacanthae
instar tumescens, primum hyalino-pallescens, admixta calida aqua lutescens,
subdulce, aegre exsiccandum, brevique fermentans. Virgultum supra arenam
eminens gummate orbum. -- Vimina primo vere velut e vaginulis propullulant.
Floret sub initium Junii, fructus maturos spargit Julio.

These botanical descriptions are given in Latin, for the benefit of
naturalists; the plants and animals having been sufficiently described to the
English reader, in the course of the Work.


