THE Habitable World DESCRIBED.

Inscribed by Permission to His Royal Highness Frederick DUKE OF YORK, etc. etc.

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

blazon or coat of arms

LONDON: Published as the Act directs, by the Author. No. 62. Wardour Street,
Soho.

1795.

THE HABITABLE WORLD DESCRIBED, OR THE PRESENT STATE OF THE PEOPLE IN ALL PARTS
OF THE GLOBE, FROM NORTH TO SOUTH; SHOWING The Situation, Extent, Climate,
Production, Animals, etc. etc. of the different Kingdoms and States.

Including all the new Discoveries: TOGETHER WITH The Genius, Manners, Customs,
Trade, Religion, Forms of Government, etc. of the Inhabitants, and every thing
respecting them, that can be either entertaining or informing to the Reader,
collected from the earliest and latest Accounts of Historians and Travelers of
all Nations; With some that have never been published in this Kingdom; And
nothing advanced but on the best Authorities.

WITH A great Variety of MAPS and COPPER PLATES, engraved in a capital Style,
the Subjects of which are mostly new, and such as have never yet been given in
any English work.

BY THE REV. DR. JOHN TRUSLER.

VOL. XVIII.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, and sold by J. PARSONS, Paternoster-Row, and
all Booksellers.

MDCCXCV.

SAVOYARDS.


SARDINIAN STATES.
CHAP. II. Character, Customs, Manners, etc.
THE Savoyards, says Busching, from the nature of their country, are generally
so poor, that a traveller seldom meets any upon the public road, who do not
recommend themselves to his benevolence; and a farmer, with a yoke of oxen, a
couple of horses, four cows, a few goats and sheep, and a small piece of
ground, passes for a man of substance. The bread is generally of rye; with a
mixture of wheat and barley, among the better sort. Their drink is milk and
water; their food chiefly consists of cheese, butter, wallnuts, vegetables, and
what flesh they can spare, of their own breeding; but the generality are rather
under the necessity of disposing, of part of their stock, to purchase the other
necessaries of life. With this way of living the people are cheerful, feed
heartily, have a much better complexion than the Piedmontese, live to a great
age; and being, at the same time, so prolific, that the inhabitants, if at
home, could not subsist upon the products of the country, they may well be
excused in sending their children to seek a livelihood, by showing monkies,
sweeping chimnies, blacking shoes, or as they can. The number of such
Savoyards, at Paris, is computed to be above 18,000; of whom the boys are
shoe-blacks. In the winter time they live very comfortably, forty or fifty in a
room; and, in summer time, the stones at the threshold of the houses serve them
for pillows. They are so honest, that they may be trusted to change gold. If
once they attain to the setting up of a little shop, they are such masters of
the thriving talent, that it is often the foundation of a very considerable
fortune. The rich banker and financier, Croizat, whose daughter was married to
the count D'Evereux, of a noble family in France, was formerly of this
fraternity; yet, so prevalent is the love of their country in them, that when
masters, of any little stock, they generally return home. Every year an old
fellow goes up and down the village, and gets together the boys, to conduct
them out of the country, in some measure, like the rat-catcher at Hamel. It is
not uncommon that some of the children, committed to him, are so small as to be
carried away in baskets. He is also of further service, returning with letters,
needles, and such trifles; and sometimes money, from his countrymen at Paris,
Lions, etc. to their parents, relations, and friends. This encourages the
people at home to trust him with fresh colonies; from whose emigration he also
reaps some little advantage; at least, while he is on his circuit in Savoy, he
is every where welcome to bed and board.

The nobility, both in Savoy and Piedmont, labor under great oppression;
indeed the king's ordinances are, in some respect, advantageous to them, by
having established, in all fiefs, the perpetual right of primogeniture. In
allodial estates, no nobleman can make a feoffment of trust beyond the fourth
degree; but a commoner is divested of all such power. He who takes possession
of the estate, by the right of primogeniture, is obliged to give the younger
children one fourth of the income. Whoever purchases an estate, with the title
of Marquisate, Baron, etc. is thereby ennobled; and such estates are to be had
for six or eight thousand livres. Every nobleman must prove from whence he
derives his arms, else he is deprived of this right; or must be at the charge
of purchasing a new coat of arms. The title is inherent to the estate. Of all
mines, discovered and worked, a certain share belongs to the king. No person is
to fell trees, not even in his own wood, without leave obtained from the
intendant. No money is to be placed at interest, nor lent on mortgages, out of
the country. No pension, or order of knighthood, except that of Malta, is to be
accepted from any foreign prince. There is also a prohibition against
traveling abroad, or entering into any foreign service, without a written
license from the king. None are to be seen with firearms out of their fief; and
a person not possessed of a fief, though an officer in the army, is not to keep
any. Not to mention many other restrictions, the king has declared all fiefs to
be his property; and whoever should undertake to maintain the contrary, must
make proof of it in the patent of investiture.

The high court of justice, or the parliament, as we have already premised,
sits at Chambery. The king being, on account of Savoy, a member of the ancient
kingdom of Arles; and a vassal of the empire has a seat, and vote, in the diet
of the Germanic body.

In Savoy every one speaks French; and most of the names of towns and villages
are of that language; but, in customs and dispositions, the inhabitants have
more of the German in them. It is with pleasure we see in them, what is called,
the old Germanic honesty. They are, one and all, Roman Catholics; but, without
admitting the council of Trent. Their churches are no asylums. Montiers, in
Tarentaise, is an Archbishopric; and Annecy, and Jean de Maurienne are
Bishoprics.

CHAP. III. PRINCIPALITY OF PIEDMONT. Situation, Climate, etc.
PIEDMONT is a part of the ancient Lombardy; and, northward, borders on Savoy
and Italy; westward on France; Southward on the Mediterranean, and republic of
Genoa; and eastward on the duchies of Montserat, and Milan. From South to
North, it is about one hundred and fifty English miles; but much less from West
to East. It is called Piedmont, in Latin Pedemontium, from its situation ad
pede montium, or at the foot of the mountains, or Alps, which separate France
from Italy.

Some parts of it are very mountainous; but it is every where, and even among
the hills, very unfruitful, That part of the country, which is level, is well
watered by rivers and brooks. They have the good sense to make the best use of
these, for the improvement of their meadows. From the Alps to the Venetian
lagunes there is very little uncultivated land. A ridge of low hills, called La
Collina, beginning not far from Turin, and continuing along the banks of the
Po, for forty miles, is covered with houses and vineyards; and enjoys
delightful and extensive prospects. The Val d' Aosta is interesting to a
naturalist; for its copious quartz veins, with plenty of native gold;
fine-grained lead ore, containing silver, etc. red antimony; green lead ore,
etc. The hills produce plenty of wine; which, like all other Italian wines, is
very luscious, whilst new, especially the white. Here is also a tartish red
wine, called vino brisco; and said to be very wholesome for fat people; the
sweet wine, or vino amabile, is, on the other hand, recommended as a stomachic.
The neighborhood of Turin is famous for its fine fruits, and many long walks
of chestnut and mulberry trees, productive both of pleasure and profit. Marons,
or large chestnuts, are a favorite dainty, among the commonalty, which are
thrown into an oven, and, when thoroughly hot, and cooled in red wine, are
dried a second time in the oven. These are called biscuits, and eaten cold.
Truffles grow here in such abundance, as to gain Piedmont the appellation of
the truffle country. Some are black, others white, and marbled with red; the
larger they are, the dearer; sometimes they are found of twelve or fourteen
pounds weight; and many country people earn, from sixty to seventy dollars a
year, by digging only for truffles. The finest part of the king's country is
that from Turin to Coni; which indeed has few to equal it. The fertility of
Piedmont occasioned the old saying, si l'Italie etoit un mouton, le Piedmont en
seroit le rognon; that is, if Italy were a sheep, Piedmont would be the kidney.
The whole country, says Sharp, is extremely fertile; and to such a degree,
that it may be truly said there is not an acre of barren ground, throughout all
the tract of Lombardy which we passed. The earth produces three crops at once;
wine, silk and cotton. The mulberry-trees support the vines; and the corn grows
in the intervals between the trees. This is certainly an instance of
extraordinary plenty; but, probably, either of these products would be more
perfect in their kind, if the soil were appropriated to one or two of these
only.

The chief river is the Po; which flows out of mount Viso, and bathes the walls
of the capital, uniting itself there with the Doria. The Var, anciently called
Varus, rises in the county of Nice; and, after watering it, empties itself into
the Mediterranean.

There are mountains, near Turin, adds Lady Millar, abounding with
petrefactions, crystalizations, and other natural curiosities. Mushrooms, very
large, petrified, whose combs were not in the least injured, are found in them;
likewise sea-shells, sea-fossils, etc. in great abundance, although they are
full thirty leagues from the sea. At about eight leagues from Turin, in the
river Doria, the peasants find very pure gold amongst the sands; which, when
refined, is equal, in beauty and value, to that of sequins; but they do not
find enough in a day, to make it worth their while to apply themselves entirely
to this research. However, I recollect, says Lady Millar, that we were met by a
drove of mules, loaded with small casks, which they said was the minerale,
containing the gold, and was, probably, sand, impregnated with the ore.

CHAP. IV. Cities, Court, Palaces.
TURINO, or Turin, anciently Augusta Taurinorum, is the capital of Piedmont;
and the residence of the king of Sardinia. It is situated in a fine plain,
watered by the Po, and at the confluence of this PLAN of the CITY of TURIN.
References.
A. The Palace B. Old Palace C. St. Charles Place D. Carline Place E. The
Citadel 1. Penitens St. Cross 2. St. John's Church 3. St. Augustine 4. St. Olaire
5. St. Peter 6. St. Delmas 7. The Jesuits 8. Town House 9. Town Tower 10. St.
Roch 11. St. Martin 12. St. T'seve 13. The Carmelites 14. The Capuchin 15. The
Father of the Mission 16. The Arsenal 17. Monastery of Visitation 18.
Conventicle 19. St. Charles 20. Carmelites Convent 21. Monastery of
Annunciation 22. Monastery of Glangrol 23. Quarter of the Jews 24. The Father
of St. Philip 25. St. Francis of Paul 26. The Father of St. Anthony 27. The
Father of St. Suaire 28. The Theatines 29. The Academy 30. Jusinne Gate


map of Turin river with the Doria. The approach to the city is magnificent,
and the environs are beautiful; the neighboring hills and eminences being
covered with villas, convents, and other buildings. The four gates are highly
ornamented. It is divided into the new town and old. The streets in the new
town are wide, straight, and clean, having plenty of water running through
them; they are well built, in a good taste, chiefly of brick stuccoed; and
generally terminating in some agreeable object. No inhabitant can rebuild, or
repair his house, but on a uniform plan, laid down by government for the
improvement of the city. The Strada di Po, leading to the palace, is very
spacious, and has handsome porticos on each side; Strada nuovo and della Dora
grossa are also good streets. The principal square, called di San Carlo, is
large, and decorated, on two sides, with porticos. It is pretty extensive; the
circuit of the ramparts being about four miles and a half. The number of
inhabitants are computed at 80,000. In the city are forty-eight churches and
convents, and seventeen more may be seen from the ramparts. The most splendid
structure is the front of the palace, where the king resides. It is built of
freestone, and superbly decorated with pillars and marble statues, and a
magnificent staircase; where stands a brass statue of Victor Amadoeus, on a
horse of white marble. The rest of the palace is old, and of brick, like the
other palace. The royal library is worth notice. In the court chapel is seen
the principal relic, belonging either to the city, or the whole country; and
that is the sudario, or linen cloth, in which the body of our Savior was said
to have been wrapped in the sepulcher. It is kept in a chest, within a closet
of glass doors.

This chapel, that it may be adapted to the tragical relic preserved there, is
built entirely of a dark gray marble. The model was drawn by Guarini, and is
said to have cost four millions and a half of Piedmontese livres. The sheet,
(as the clergy here pretend) wherein Christ was wrapped after his crucifixion,
has, on both sides of it, imprinted the bloody figure of a man. The supposed
Sudary of Christ is also shown at Mentz, Lisbon, and in about twelve other
Romish churches. To this objection the common answer is, that many pieces of
linen were used for wrapping round a corpse; but this evasion holds good only
as to the smaller bandages, used for the arms, feet, and head; and not with
respect to those large involucra, on which the whole human figure is
represented. As to the great veneration at present paid to it, let it suffice
to say that Philip the Vth. of Spain, even when he married the Princess of
Savoy, could not obtain a copy of that at Turin, till after repeated
solicitations, and then with the greatest difficulty. The performance was also
attended with a great number of superstitious ceremonies. The painter, whilst
at work, was obliged to be continually on his knees, and eight bishops said
masses, at eight different altars.

The most honorable distinction, at the court of Turin, is the order of the
Annonciada; and next to that are the four following posts, called the four
maitrechargen; the great chamberlain, the steward of the household, the master
of the horse, and the great huntsman. These four officers precede all others,
and take place according to seniority.

The order of the Annonciada was instituted in the year 1362. The knights wear
a collar, about three fingers broad, of white and red roses, of enamelled gold.
These letters F. E. R. T. are intermixed with love-knots; which has given
surmise, to some French writers, that this order was instituted only in honor
of a favorite female. In like manner the order of the golden fleece has been
aspersed, as having but a mean origin. The meaning of the four letters is still
a mystery; some interpret them, Fortitudo Ejus Rhodium Tenuit, "his courage
preserved Rhodes," from a conjecture they were inserted in the Savoy arms, by
one of their dukes, on his relieving that island. Others have imagined these
letters were part of the Savoy arms, long before that time. How the vowels A.
E. I. O. U. adopted by Frederic the Third, for the house of Austria have
puzzled the learned, is sufficiently known; and no less have they been
perplexed about the old device of the Margrave of Saluzzo, viz. the letters N.
O. C. H. which some one at last jocularly interpreted thus, Non Omnes Capiunt
Hoc, i, e. all men do not understand this.

Every knight of the Annonciada must previously have been of the order of St.
Maurice, instituted in 1434. The knights of St. Maurice must marry but once;
and then it must not be to a widow. The king is grand master of the order of
the Annonciada; the king's son, and the first prince of the blood, are knights
by birth; and the number of the others is not to exceed fifteen.

Contiguous to the royal palace are several other spacious buildings; among
others the opera-house is accounted a master piece of its kind; the
record-office, with the new royal printing house, with twelve presses, and the
arsenal, which is quite new, and a well contrived structure. This building,
besides the armories usually found in such places, contains a cabinet of
minerals, a good chemical laboratory, a library of books, in mineralogy and
metallurgy, and furnaces for casting cannon; here also are mathematical,
mechanical, and other masters, for the instruction of engineers, miners, etc.

The fortifications of Turin are regular, and kept in excellent repair. The
citadel is a regular pentagon, consisting of strong bastions; and is reputed
one of the strongest in Europe. The glacis is planted with trees, forming three
avenues; that in the middle very wide for carriages, and one on each side for
walking; they extend to the Suza gate, between the fosse and the city.

The university, which was founded in 1405, and re-established on a better
footing by Victor Amadoeus II. is a large quadrangle, and one of the first
buildings in the city. In the inner court is a double row of piazzas, over each
other; and along them several ancient monuments, placed on the walls. The
university library, besides twenty thousand printed volumes, has a very
valuable collection of ancient manuscripts, hitherto unknown, and of great use,
both in civil and ecclesiastical history. Pyrrhus Ligorius's collection of
designs of Greek and Roman antiquities, in thirty volumes, for which 8,000
ducats were given, is an invaluable ornament to this collection. The Jesuits
have a college and a church, adorned with most curious fresco painting, and
marble sculpture. There are five hospitals for the sick, maimed, and poor; that
of St. John, the largest and finest, is, in reality, a magnificent structure.
The Charity, or poor-house, is a most noble foundation. The receptacle for
lunatics is likewise worthy of observation. The streets are kept clean by a
rivulet, brought from the river Doria into the city. It also carries off all
the soil and filth from the kennels, and is very serviceable in case of fire.
The sluices are laid open every night.

This charming town, says Mrs. Piozzi, is the salon of Italy; but it is a fine
proportioned, and well ornamented salon, happily constructed to call in fresh
air, at the end of every street. The arches formed to defend passengers from
the rain and sun, which here might have even serious effects, from their
violence, deserve much praise; while their architecture, uniting our ideas of
beauty and comfort, form a traveller's taste; and teach him to admire that
perfection, of which a miniature may certainly be found at Turin.

The king's palace is in a simple, and noble style of architecture. The
apartments are elegantly fitted up, and furnished; no expense has been spared;
a profusion of glasses, gilding, rich silks and velvets over the walls. The
floors are beautifully inlaid with woods of different shades; and kept, as are
the whole of the apartments and furniture, delicately clean. The frames of the
looking glasses, and of the sconces, are all wrought plate, as well as the arms
that hold the candles, and the shapes of the pier-glasses; large massive tables
of silver stand under each glass, all wrought in bas reliefs; and the
workmanship, for the most part, finely executed. The lustres that hang from the
cieling are of rock crystal. The curtains to the doors have a fine effect; for
when all the doors, which lead through the magnificent suit of rooms, are
thrown open, these curtains are tied back, and their folds form beautiful
arcades. The doors open in the middle, and, folding inward, are received into
grooves made in the thickness of the wall; the pannels are carved and gilt;
and, when the apartment is displayed, no door is to be seen; but in passing
through the door-case, the ornaments of the doors, which cover the sides of the
wall, are very striking. These doors, all answering each other, form a
perspective which has a most beautiful effect. As the suite of rooms form a
rectangle, there is a view, from the same point, of two extensive vistas;
which, being terminated by looking-glasses, seems to have no end. Silk is the
furniture of the summer; that of the winter apartment is of crimson velvet. As
the walls are extremely thick, the windows have a noble air from the inside;
the wall sloping off from them, and the tops arched in covefashion, are
incrusted with looking-glasses set in gilt foliage; which, by their
reflections, produce a brilliant effect. Sculpture and gilding abound in every
room; all the mouldings, architraves, and every (the smallest) part of
wainscoting, is highly ornamented. But what is wonderfully shocking, in the
midst of all this profusion of finery, is, that the panes of the windows are
set in lead, in the same manner with the casements of our English cottages. The
palace contains fifty-three chambers; of which forty-eight are completely
furnished. The cielings are painted by Daniele di Sancterre and others. In the
gallery is a collection of pictures, among which are many good ones, chiefly by
Flemish masters; they are all hung upon black pannels; great part of these were
purchased from Prince Eugene's cabinet, by the late King. The dropsical woman,
with her physician, is, by connoisseurs, valued at L. 10,000; it is finished
with the most exquisite Dutch nicety, by Gerard Dowe. This picture, says
Grosley, is reckoned his masterpiece, both for design and coloring. It
appears on the side like a cupboard; and is shut in by two doors, on which are
painted, by Gerard Dowe, a ewer and a napkin. When these doors are opened, the
picture appears with more eclat, from having been concealed. It represents the
inside of a room; the clair obscure has a beautiful effect; the room is lighted
by an ox-eye over the window, and by the light proceeding from the fire in a
chimney; which is admirably thrown on the furniture and other objects. The
principal figure appears to be a physician, who is standing on the fore-ground,
and holds up a phial to the light, which he looks at very attentively; he is
dressed in a prodigious fine lilac-coloured satin nightgown; the dropsical
woman is very fine also, in white satin; her daughter's dress is not
neglected; she is on her knees near her mother, and holds one of her hands in
hers. There is great tenderness expressed in the countenance of the daughter,
and her attitude is easy and natural; the mother appears to be in the last
stage of illness. A waiting-maid, who is administering a potion to the sick
lady, has a stupid indifference in her manners, that forms a good contrast to
the filial piety, and tender attention of the daughter. This picture may be
said to be too highly finished; the satin, lace, embroidery, are done too
well; which causes a hardness of outline, in many places, by an extraordinary
attention to the finishing of several pieces of furniture in the room.

In a cabinet, highly ornamented with glass, and beautiful gilt foliage, are a
vast number of miniatures; all portraits. These pictures are dispersed in such
a manner, among the glass and foliage, as to have a singular and very pretty
effect. They are incomparably well executed on ivory; none hatched, all dotted,
and bear the test of the highest magnifying glass. They are painted by one man,
named Carameli, a monk; his own picture among them. Instead of using a
camel's-hair pencil, which is universal in miniature painting, this man dotted
all his pictures, with the feathers plucked from woodcocks' wings; and, instead
of finishing as he went on, he began them nearly at the same time, and worked
at each, every day, till they were all completed. It seems no hair-pencils can
be brought to the point that these pencils have naturally. Carmeli took thirty
years to finish them, and had never learnt.

Amongst many remarkable portraits, that of Sir Thomas More is much admired.
There are also two original portraits; one of Petrarch, the other of his
beloved Laura, by Brongino, a famous painter of that day. Her sort of beauty,
says Lady Millar, would never have captivated me, had I been Petrarch. Her hair
is red, her eyebrows extremely narrow and exact, forming a flat arch; her eyes
small, her nose a little hooked, and rising too high in the middle; her mouth
not very small, and lips like two scarlet threads; a very faint color in her
cheeks, the contour in the face more square than oval; her countenance more
demure than engaging. As for Petrarch, he is exceedingly ugly indeed; but he
has a very sensible black and yellow face. It is remarkable that, in this
collection of pictures, there is no Raphael, except some defaced sketches; but
one Titian, and not one of Salvator Rosa, nor Corregio.

The statues and busts are part of the wreck of the Gonzagua collection;
brought from Mantua, on the pillage of that city. The celebrated Isiac table is
in the chamber of the archives; this is one of the most celebrated antiques in
all Italy. This slab, or table, is of copper; it is covered all over with
hieroglyphics. The principal figure is an Isis, sitting; she has a kind of hawk
on her head, and the horns of a bull. Many and various are the conjectures,
formed by the learned, in regard to the meaning of the figures upon the table.
Some have imagined they could prove it to be a compass; others, a perpetual
calendar; and, not a few, have pretended to find principles of philosophy and
and politics in it; while some, still more ingenious, have pretended that it
contains a complete body of theology. I am not impertinent enough to pretend I
discovered any thing more than a strange chaos of men, women, ugly birds, and
other animals, frightfully delineated, by strait lines, sometimes springing all
from a point, like rays, then suddenly turning into angular figures, formed by
silver, incrusted into copper. It is evident much silver has been taken out of
this table, as the grooves remain. Notwithstanding the seeming confusion of the
representations, the silver lines are very neat, and extremely well inserted
into the copper.

The archives are arranged with such method, that, although they are extremely
voluminous, the King can, at a moment, turn to the population, extent, and
productions, of the smallest subdivision of his hereditary dominions; or of
those acquired by him, at the conclusion of the war in 1744, commonly called Le
pais conquis; their present and past revenue, at, or for any given period,
within the two last centuries, by the day, week, or year; their capability of
bearing a further increase of taxes, in cases of necessity; their value and
casual increase, or decrease, in different branches of manufactures, as well as
the number of militia, and of recruits, which each can furnish upon any
emergency.

The King's theater adjoins to the royal palace, and is reckoned one of the
finest in Europe. It is strikingly magnificent. The form is that of an egg cut
across. There are six rows of boxes; narrow indeed in front, but very
convenient within; and holds eight persons with ease. The Italians play at
cards, receive visits, and take all sorts of refreshment in their boxes; they
resemble little rooms, rather than boxes at a theater. There are no benches;
but, what is more convenient, chairs, which are moved about at pleasure. The
king's box is in the second row, fronting the stage; it is thirty feet wide,
Paris measure; and the back part, covered with looking-glass, reflects the
stage in such a manner, that those who happen to have their backs turned to the
actors, either conversing or at play, may see the performance in the glasses.
These glasses form a partition, which can be moved whenever they choose to
enlarge the box; there being room behind. The very great breadth of the stage
produces a most noble effect. The Proscenium measures forty-five Paris feet,
the depth of the stage one hundred and five; beyond which they can add a paved
court of twenty-four feet. A gentle rising is contrived at the sides; by which
may be introduced triumphal cars, for great processions, horses, etc. They can
also throw a drawbridge across, when the scene requires it; and they have a
contrivance for letting in water, so as to present a jet d'eau of thirty feet
high. Sixty horses at a time have been brought upon the stage, and maneuvered,
with ease, in representations of battles; the orchestra is so curiously
constructed, as by having a place left underneath, which is concave and
semicircular, to augment the sound of the instruments very considerably. The
machinery and decorations are magnificent. The King is at the principal expense
of the opera; they who have boxes paying only two or three guineas for the
season, as a kind of fee; money being only taken at the door for sitting in the
pit.

The finest buildings in this city, says Keysler, are Count Paesanes' hotel,
which cost fifty thousand pounds; and the Carignan palace, built by Guarini.
This architect also designed the new building, and alterations, at La Veniere;
besides many others. These expensive improvements are not a little promoted by
an ordinance, which empowers every one, intending to re-build, or enlarge his
house, to oblige his next neighbor, whose house is of less value than it is
proposed the new one shall be, to dispose of the whole, or part of the ground
plot to him, at a reasonable rate. That part of the palace of the Prince of
Piedmont, which is modern, is fronted in the most ornamental manner, by Philip
Juvara; and is in the best style of architecture of any building in Turin. The
staircase is admired here to such a degree, that they assert it to be the first
in the world; it is double, and unites at top; at which is the entrance into
the grand saloon. The apartments are well furnished, and would appear much more
grand and considerable, were it not for the staircase; the noble appearance of
which indicates a more magnificent and extensive suit of rooms.

As to the ecclesiastical buildings in this city, says Keysler, they are much
inferior to the others, for they are very ancient; whereas the finest edifices
at Turin were built in the two last reigns. The city of Asti, in the road to
Genoa, exceeded Turin formerly, and the churches there are in the Gothic taste.

Among the laudable foundations at Turin, the hospital de la Charity merits
being noticed; this building takes up great part of the Rue de Po; and has very
large revenues arising from rents, and the annual subscriptions of the
citizens. The king every year gives to this hospital three hundred sacks of
corn; three of which are computed to make a sufficient quantity of bread to
serve one person a whole year. In this house are generally two thousand, and
often three thousand, poor people, picked out of the streets, and employed in
several sorts of manufactures. Here the young and old, of both sexes, are
furnished with a remedy against idleness; and are provided with meat, drink,
and clothing; and attendance, when sick, or grown decrepid with age. Forty
soldiers in blue, with red bandeliers, are daily dispersed about the streets,
to take up all beggars and vagrants; if they be foreigners, after undergoing a
short imprisonment, they are driven out of the city; and, for a second offense,
besides undergoing a long imprisonment, they are whipped, and banished out of
the country; but the natives are immediately brought away to the hospital. The
main building consists of two quadrangles, with galleries round them; one for
the men, and the other for the women. They dine separately, in their respective
halls, to the number of some hundreds at a time, in each apartment. The two
sexes have also their particular time for hearing mass, and are separated from
the rest of the congregation by an iron grate.

Piedmont will preserve the memory of King Victor, as France preserves that of
Louis XIV. Turin every where displaying that Prince's magnificence. Near half
this city was built by him, on an uniform plan; the better part of the
fortifications, the gates, the hospital, the university, the country college,
several royal seats in the neighborhood, are works of his reign; lastly, for
his burial-place, he has erected a splendid church, where a numerous community
of secular priests officiate. This church stands on the top of a high mountain,
East of Turin, and was built in pursuance of a vow made by him, when Turin was
besieged by the Duke of Orleans, in 1706; that he would, if victorious, erect a
church on that spot, from which, with Prince Eugene, he had observed the
distribution of the operations of the enemy's troops before the town.

It is called the Superga; the ascent to it is so extremely rapid and
difficult, even now, that it seems to have been almost impossible for human art
and address, to have brought together the materials here employed. The front
presents a fine portico, above which, to a very great height, rises a dome,
crowned by a cupola; on each side is a steeple, finished up to a point. The
entrance to the church is noble, and the inside very striking; it is quite
round, and richly ornamented with pillars of the Corinthian order, of gray
marble, four feet and a half each in diameter. Here is a great profusion of
fine marble, the walls being incrusted with it. Piedmont affords a prodigious
variety; one sort, peculiar to this country, is remarkably beautiful, being
veined in shades of brown and yellow, like what is commonly called in England,
Egyptian pebble. From the cupola, a prospect of an amazing extent opens itself
on all sides. In a clear day Milan appears in view; the rivers Po, Doria,
Isturia, meandering along, form islands without number. The variety of tints
this prospect presents is wonderful; the richest green pasturage in the
valleys, hills clothed with vines, mountains covered with snow, together with
the city of Turin and all its environs. The present King said, in viewing
Turin, from this height, -- "It is well strangers do not see Turin, for the
first time, from the top of Superga, or they would have but a mean opinion of
my town." It is wonderful how very inconsiderable Turin appears, though it
cannot be above two English miles distant, in a stra it line. The late King
would not permit the road to be made commodious up to the Superga, in his
reign. Probably his reason might have been, to demonstrate to those who ascend
it, the trouble and expense attendant upon the conveyance of materials for the
building. At present, it is not too good, nor is it as well as it might be,
although much has been done. The soil is a stiff clay, which makes the
ascending of the mountain very fatiguing and troublesome.

The palace most frequented by the royal family is La Venerie; the court
generally continuing there from Spring to December. It is about a league from
Turin. The road that leads to it is well paved, and the greatest part of it
planted with trees on each side; it is not always in a direct line, but runs a
little winding between fine meadows, fields, and vineyards. At a quarter of a
league distance from the city, is the campaign de notre Dame; when, in 1706,
the French trenches, now marked by stones between the fields, were forced. This
palace is much admired by the Turinese, and the French, for its architecture,
gardens, etc. Before the King's palace is a street of houses, built of stone,
and inhabited by private persons. The palace is not yet completed. In two
chambers, adjoining to the King's apartment, are the pictures of thirty of his
Majesty's ancestors, with Latin inscriptions, signifying their most famous
achievements. Beyond these is the chamber of pictures, of the Emperors of
Germany, another of the Kings of France, and another of the Kings of England,
from the Saxon line, down to Queen Anne. The portrait of Elizabeth appears to
be greatly flattered; she appears to be about eighteen years of age, with fine
large black eyes and black hair, and that beautiful complexion, the French call
brune clair. These portraits are all as big as life. In another apartment are a
great many equestrian portraits, chiefly women. These Amazons are dressed in
the Spanish fashion, and mounted on prancing horses. Each lady is drawn
properly dressed for the chase; and, as all their hats and riding-dresses are
much alike, they are distinguished by silk bridles to their horses, of
different colors: this was really an order of the late King, that he might be
able to distinguish them from one another at a little distance. Among others is
the picture of the famous Countess of Verue. This lady was, for a long time,
the reigning favorite at the court of Turin, with the late Monarch; from which
place she had the address to escape, and carried with her jewels and other
valuables to a great amount. Her escape was planned with infinite address, to
avoid detection. The reason assigned was, an apprehension of a change in the
King's affections, in which case she would have been immured in a nunnery for
life. Keysler mentions having visited her afterward in Paris, where she lived
in great splendour and magnificence. It seems, from one or two anecdotes,
related by the above author, in which our countrymen were concerned, this lady
had given no small reason to excite the jealousy of the King: an English
nobleman having been near passing the night under the Countess's bed. It seems
he had been disturbed in in his visits by the unexpected arrival of the King;
and there was no other place so proper for concealment. He was discovered; and
this nobleman's situation, in a country where rivalry is no light offense, was
something more than disagreeable; but his Majesty's generosity scorned to
resent itself on any man, at a disadvantage. Another time, this same nobleman
found the King knew how to get rid of such guests as came without invitation;
for the King intending another unexpected visit to the Countess, used such
precautions, that before she knew any thing of his coming, he was in her
chamber, where he found my Lord sitting with her at table. His resentment,
however, went no further, than taking a light in each hand, and making a sign
to him, who readily complied, fearing worse consequences; he lighted him down
stairs; there the King very coolly said to him, "that he might now boast of
having been lighted down stairs by the Duke of Savoy; but that he advised him,
as a friend, never to show his face there again." Of this advice, says Keysler,
he was so very observant, that he set out the next day to finish his travels.
Another of our young hopeful nobility, being also enamoured with the Countess,
indulged his fancy so far, as to look at her through a spying-glass, during the
whole time of an opera. As little agreeable as this must be to the King, his
manner of sending away this Lors Anglois, cannot be charged with severity. The
next day two men were appointed to follow our young nobleman wherever he went,
whose sole business it was to be looking at him with spying glasses. It was not
till after two days, that he took notice of these new attendants; and, being at
no loss to account for the meaning of their behavior, he thought it advisable
to leave Turin immediately, and look out for adventures elsewhere. When his
Majesty was informed of the Countess's elopement, he was heard to say, that he
never was engaged with any woman who did not deceive him, and avoided the sex
ever after: a speech which seems to be a little severe; as it appears, says
Keysler, from unquestionable authority, that when the allies intended to
deprive the Duke of Savoy of the kingdom of Sicily, he was advised of it by the
Countess, from Paris, sooner than they could have wished.

But to return to La Venerie; the Orangerie is much esteemed for its
architecture; it is 582 feet long, 51 broad, and 40 high; the front is
ornamented with pillars of the Ionic order. The stables also are very
beautiful, and seem to be to the full as large as the Orangerie; they contain
two hundred horses. The gardens were laid out by a Frenchman; one would think,
says Lady Millar, this good man had taken his idea of planting gardens from
some of Euclid's problems. They are of great extent; the walks all strait, and
cutting each other at right angles, leaving square plantations, and quarters of
beech and beech-wood, frequently intersected by narrow alleys, so that they
form triangular figures, wounding the eye by their uniformity. As all these
right lines produce what is called stars, of one kind or other; and in the
coppices are great plenty of pheasants, hares, and chevreuils, where his
Majesty amuses himself with la chasse a fusil. Taking part in the center of the
star, where many of these angles meet, he is secure of much sport; the piqueurs
enter the quarters and drive out the game; who crossing the alley, seek the
opposite problem; mean-time the King lets fly at them, and knocks them down at
pleasure.

What pleased me most at La Venerie, says Keysler, is the royal chapel,
designed by Filippo. The cupola, is of a graceful height; within this chapel
are statues of St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom, St. Augustine, and St. Jerome,
standing on red, green, and yellow marble pedestals. The statues are of white
marble, in the gigantic taste, and were brought here from Rome. The high altar
is a glorious fight; and there is scarce any kind of marble not to be seen in
this chapel, either in the pillars or altars.

Rivoli is another royal palace, about three leagues from Turin, toward Susa.
The whole road runs in a direct line, through fields, meadows, and vineyards;
it was planted since the siege of Turin, in the year 1712; the French, among
other devastations, having rooted up every tree throughout the country. This
walk yields a very beautiful prospect; and at one end, stands the palace of
Rivoli, on an eminence; and at the other, Turin; and about two leagues beyond
that, in a strait line, the stately church of Superga. The air is continually
clear and healthy, and creates a sharp appetite; but, on account of its
subtilty and keenness, is not so agreeable to sleep in.

The palace of Valentin was formerly the scene of most of the court diversions
and entertainments; it lies just without the walls of Turin. This palace is so
called, as may be seen in the memoirs of the Count de Grammont, from the title
given to those gentlemen, who, on St. Valentine's day, wait upon the ladies; it
being a general custom all over Italy, for single women to choose some one,
among their male friends and acquaintances, on that day, who is to gallant them
wherever they go; and who, to discharge his office with honor, must present
them with nosegays, and other bagatelles. This attendance, which expires at the
year's end, is not liable to any exception; and is often terminated by
marriage. The parents, in the mean-time, are very watchful over their
daughters' behavior; and things are generally conducted with so much decorum
and honor, that even the monks themselves make no scruple to take upon them
the office of a Valentine; and, possibly it is nobody's interest so much as
theirs to recommend the innocence of these intercourse between the sexes. But,
as their Valentine gallantries are entirely left off at court, so the palace at
Valentin is also neglected.

About a small league from Turin, by the side of the road, grows a very large
elm-tree; beneath the shadow of whose spreading branches, the late King, when
Duke of Savoy, held a council of war with Prince Eugene, the Prince of Anhalt,
and the Marquis de Pry, a Piedmontese General, on the 5th September 1706, in
which they determined upon the manner and attack of the French lines: this
event took place on the 7th of the same month; in which famous action the
French army was entirely routed, Marshal Marsin killed, and the siege of Turin
raised.

The marshal died two hours after the battle, often repeating these words, Tout
est perdu mais Je n'en suis pas la cause. "All is lost, but not owing to me."
Of fifteen thousand prisoners, most of them died with hunger and hardships.
This siege lasted four months and a half; and the breach on the side of the
citadel was so wide, that a whole battalion in front might have marched into
it; the only resource left the besieged was, to keep a large fire burning
continually in the breach. All utensils, and furniture made of wood, were used
for this purpose; and, in several parts of the city, the roofs of the houses
were pulled down for the sake of the wood for fuel; and, by these means, the
breach was defended till the town was relieved. The King of Sardinia, during
that siege, was at his last gasp; and, after the victory, was reported, in the
first transports of joy, to have said, "He was very near being obliged to dance
attendance in the Emperor's antichamber.

Near the capuchin monastery, on the mountain, a fine villa, called La vigne de
Madame Royale, stands upon an eminence. Bernini, the famous architect and
sculptor, used to reckon this building the best in, or near, Turin. During the
minority, under the regent Christina, both the house and garden were often the
scenes of riot and debauchery. On this account, in the King's advanced age,
when he was as it were inflamed with an eternal zeal for religion, the place
became so odious to him, that, upon the death of Madame Royale, he bestowed it
upon an hospital. The directors, in hopes to make a great deal of money by the
sale of the materials, began to pull it down; but the profits falling short of
their expectations, a stop was put to the demolition of it; so that now the
house makes a very desolate appearance.

In the environs of this city, the first spot visited by every stranger is the
airing-place, or corso, called the Valentin; this is an avenue, formed by four
rows of losty trees, conducting to the palace, which is at the end, and
situated at the borders of the Po. There are also other avenues; one of which
leads to the church, called the Servites. The royal family, and almost every
body at Turin, who are not bedridden, lying-in, or dying, make their appearance
in these avenues every day, from the hours of five or six until seven; when
they change their ground to another avenue, at some distance from these, and
very near the citadel. This they leave at eight, for the theater, or some
private assembly. Those who cannot afford to keep equipages are here on foot;
and, let the weather be fine or rainy, the coaches never fail to come. The
royal family make a noble appearance, particularly the coach of the Duchess of
Savoy, which is very magnificent; she drives with eight horses, and a
considerable cortege, consisting of her ladies, pages, etc. in other carriages;
all conducted with the utmost dignity and tranquillity. The young princes
frequently alight and walk; and the princesses sometimes amuse themselves with
walking in the gardens of the palace of Valentin. The coaches, in general, are
very splendid, and make a brilliant appearance; the ladies, likewise, are
decked out for this daily parade in all their finery.

The setting out of the cavalcade for the royal chase, from the palace of
Stupenige, another of the King's hunting seats, about six miles from Turin, is
a fine sight. The chaises of the court precede all others, agreeable to
established etiquette. The Duchess of Savoy goes first, the elder princesses
next, and so on; then come the ambassadors, foreign ministers, etc. The livery
of the hunt is scarlet, richly laced with silver. Whoever is well-born, (a
gentleman independent of trade, and some of the professions) what is called
here, and in all these countries, noblesse, is permitted to be of the hunt; and
wearing the livery may breakfast with the king at Stupenige. This favor
extends also to strangers, properly introduced at court. There are very fine
ridings cut through the forest, adjacent to the palace, and it is plentifully
stocked with game. The great number of huntsmen, with the gay appearance of the
whole cavalcade, upon a fine day, has, in appearance, the advantage of any
other chase. The gentlemen are on horseback, and the ladies of the court all in
postchaises, with two wheels, conveyed by posthorses; and there are relays, in
different parts of the forest, for a change. The chacers belong to the court,
and are all alike, rather plain than ornamented; but neatly made, and as fit
for the purpose of hunting as any carriages can be. The sound of the
French-horns, repeated by the echos, with the cry of the hounds, and the shouts
of the men, contribute not a little to animate this scene. Upon the conclusion
of the hunt, all the chaises are drawn up in form of an amphitheatre; the
gentlemen of the court and hunt then dismount, and converse with the ladies;
while the stag is embowelled, and the entrails distributed to the dogs. The
duchess then generally sends a foot of the stag, with some gracious compliment,
to any stranger at the hunt, whom she means to honor; as was done to Lady
Millar, from whom we extracted this narration of the royal chase.

No royal family in Europe are more rigid observers of the laws of etiquette,
than that of Sardinia; all their movements are uniform and invariable. The hour
of rising, of going to mass, of taking the air; every thing is regulated like
clock-work. The King gives audiences from six to eleven, every morning; goes to
mass about twenty minutes before twelve; dines at half after twelve; takes an
afternoon's airing; and sups so exactly at ten, that he leaves the opera,
sometimes, a few minutes before it is finished, if it exceeds ever so little
the hour of ten.

The King's table is plentiful, but plain; every article is furnished by
purveyors, at a moderate rate. What remains from his table is served to the
Lords and Ladies of the bedchamber; and, from them, down to the equeries,
pages, etc.

Employments, at the court of Turin, are esteemed as giving consideration and
precedence, rather than for their pecuniary value; no appointment here is
sufficient to support the rank with any tolerable degree of decency.

CHAP. V. People, Character, Customs, Manners, Police, etc.
THE women are extremely beautiful and fair in this country; though, indeed,
the ladies of Milan and Venice almost vie with them, in complexion and
features. They have the whitest skin, says Lady Millar, of any women I ever
saw. They never wear rouge, which is something more extraordinary. They dress
well, and are singulary genteel in their undresses. If they are gallant, they
conduct themselves with the utmost decency; and inconstancy is looked upon as
the greatest of crimes. Friendships of twenty and thirty years are not
uncommon; at the same time it is not to be supposed there are no coquettes; but
the court sets so virtuous an example, that the utmost precaution and
circumspection is necessary to those who have any thing to conceal.

The Piedmontese, says Busching, are accounted lively, artful, and witty; the
inhabitants of the mountains of Aosta excepted, who are further distinguished
by large wens; as are even their dogs, and other animals. There seems to be a
great contrast in character between the two provinces of Savoy and Piedmont; it
being a common observation, that among ten Piedmontese, there may possibly be
one honest man; but that one knave is hardly to be found among ten Savoyards.
This, however, is certain, says Keysler, that the Piedmontese, in general, are
very acute and cunning; and it were to be wished they always made a good use of
their talents; but their schemes are generally so well laid, and attended with
so much contrivance and invention, that one cannot but admire their finesse. In
the year 1695 a Piedmontese, who styled himself Count Curaffa, came to Vienna,
and privately waited on the prime minister, pretending he was sent by the Duke
of Savoy, on a very important affair, which they two were to negociate, without
the privity of the French court. At the same time he produced his credentials,
in which the Duke's seal and signature were exactly imitated. He met with a
favorable reception; and, without affecting any privacy, took upon him the
title of Envoy Extraordinary from the court of Savoy. At a private concert, the
captain of the guard denying him admittance, he had the assurance to demand
satisfaction, in his master's name, and the captain was obliged to ask his
pardon. His first care was to ingratiate himself with the Jesuits, who bore
great sway at court; and, to this end, he went to visit their church; which, at
that time remaining unfinished, as they pretended, from the low state of their
finances; he asked them how much money would complete it. An estimate to the
amount of 2000 louisd'ors being laid before him, Caraffa assured them of his
constant attachment to their order; and that they might immediately proceed in
building their church. In consequence of his promise he sent that very day 2000
louis-d'ors, at which sum the charge had been computed. He was sensible that
this was a part he could not act long, without being detected; and, that this
generosity might not be at his own at his own expense, he invited a great
number of ladies of rank to a supper and ball. Every one of his guests promised
to be there; but he complained to them of the ill returns made to his
civilities, adding that he had often been disappointed; as the ladies, on those
occasions, made no scruple of breaking their words; and, in a jocular way,
insisted on a pledge, from every lady, for her appearance on the day appointed.
One gave him a ring, another a pearl necklace, a third a pair of earrings, a
fourth a gold watch; and several such trinkets, to the amount of between two
and three thousand pounds. On the evening appointed not one of the guests was
missing; but it may easily be conceived what a damp it struck upon the whole
assembly, when it was found that the gay Piedmontese had disappeared. Nor had
the Jesuits any great reason to applaud themselves for their dissimulation; as,
a few days before his departure, the pretended count, putting on an air of deep
concern, placed himself in the way of the Emperor's confessor; who, enquiring
into the cause of his apparent melancholy, he entrusted him with the important
secret; that he was short of money at a juncture when 8000 louis-d'ors were
immediately wanted for his master's affairs, to be distributed at the Imperial
court. The Jesuits, to whom he had recently given such an instance of his
liberality, immediately furnished him with the sum he wanted; and with this
viaticum, and the ladies' pledges, he very prudently withdrew. Some years after
he was taken up for an exploit very different from the last, and the Duke gave
orders for beheading him; but the sentence was mitigated into perpetual
imprisonment, his council having very eloquently enlarged upon a maxim of law,
quod excellens in art non debeat mori; that is, "He who excels in any art,
ought not to be put to death.

Quickness of parts and penetration is not here confined to the great and
learned, but even conspicuous in people of the lowest class; to which, besides
the warmth and serenity of the country, their frequent intercourse with the
French, says Keysler, may not have a little contributed. In the mountains of
Aosta, where neither of these circumstances concur, the inhabitants are an
exception to this general character of the Piedmontese. They seldom travel
beyond their hills and valleys; and scarce think there is any part of the world
inhabited, besides the spot they live upon, and the wens are the consequence of
the mud-water they drink. Such is the power of custom, that a wen by them is
reckoned no deformity; and a story goes about, that a foreign woman, who had no
wen, coming into one of their churches in sermon time, a general laughter was
heard among them, at so uncommon an appearance. It is added, that even the
preacher could not contain himself for some time; but, recovering his gravity,
he represented to his auditory, that though they might not mean any harm, the
natural defects of our neighbor were not a subject of laughter; and that a
christian, on such occasions, should rather be thankful to his Maker for his
bounty to him, than insult his fellow creatures, from whom God had withheld his
blessings.

As to the ladies' behavior at Turin, says Keysler, it must be owned extremely
free; for they are continually talking to the gentlemen, and laughing so
excessively as, in other places, would expose them to censure. Every one has
her gallant, and a confident for carrying on intrigues; and with these they
chiefly converse in assemblies; but a foreigner, who is not disposed to live
extravagantly, must not expect his acquaintance will be much sought for by the
gay part of the fair sex. Vanity, and fondness for praise, induce them to make
a mighty show of politeness to strangers; they rise up to them, at their coming
into an assembly, talk with them of the weather, the opera, and such
indifferent matters; but this is their ne plus ultra. Their behavior of the
first week continues the same for two or three months; but these civilities
decline much sooner, if they imagine a stranger means to make a longer stay at
the court, or in the city.

Piedmont, says Baretti, who was a native of this province, never produced a
single poet; they are even, says he, insensible to the beauties of an Orlando
and a Goffredo; which will instantly warm a Roman, a Tuscan, a Venetian, and a
Neapolitan. It is likewise observable, that no Piedmontese ever attained to any
degree of excellence in the polite arts; but though they are not to be compared
with the rest of the Italians, for brilliancy of imagination and justness of
taste, yet, as warriors, none can equal them. Every one conversant in history
knows the brave stand made by them, for centuries, whenever their territories
have been invaded by France, by Spain, or by Germany. It is true they have
frequently been overpowered by numbers; but they have instantaneosly recovered
from their defeat, and given sufficient cause of repentance to the nation that
has endeavored, in vain, to subdue them. Such is the martial spirit of
Piedmont, that even the grossest peasants are ambitious of appearing in a
military character. Their skill in fortifications is great, and cannot be
exceed by the Vaubans and the Cohorns. Those places, which inferior engineers
would have made only strong, they have made impregnable.

The Turinese nobles are proud of their descent; and disdain all intercourse
with those of their fellow subjects, whom they think a degree below themselves;
or, when admitted to some familiarity, their condescension is such a compound
of urbanity and haughtiness, that proves disgustful to men of spirit. Many of
them have obtained the reputation of skilful politicians; but their aversion to
all scientific acquisitions is so great, that few of them have their own
language; (I do not mean their patois) fewer still the Latin, and perhaps there
is not even one, says Baretti, who can read the alphabet in Greek.

Nor are the first and second rank of women more informed. A few French
romances form their libraries; nor is it in Piedmont one must expect rational
entertainment in the conversation of the fair. Some few of them plunge into
gross immorality; but, for the most part, even when young and handsome, they
give into incorrigible bigotry.

The artisans and peasantry excel all the rest of Italy. No nation can cope
with them for their industry and skill in their manufactures and their
husbandry. Such are the leading traits of their character, as delineated by
Bareiti, who was himself a native of the capital.

We may add, what seems agreed by all writers, that though the government of
Piedmont is arbitrary, the peasants are rich and happy. They pay no diximies,
vingtiemes, nor taille, as in France. They can afford to live comfortably; have
cattle in abundance, as well as implements of husbandry to carry on their
agriculculture; and are, on Sundays, or jours de sete, well dressed in clothes
made of silk. The universal ornament of their women is a necklace, of five or
six rows of gold beads, pretty large, with a cross and earrings of the same
metal; which generally cost them from three to six hundred livres, of Piedmont,
and sometimes more. Every married paysanne is decorated with these ornaments,
more or less expensive, according to their means.

Duels are not very frequent; but, when they happen, they fight with ferocity,
and an obstinacy that shocks humanity. The general place of appointment is a
little ifland, formed by the Po, just within what is called the Port da Po.

The theater is under great restrictions from the police. Before an opera is to
be performed, the King himself takes the pains to read it over; and to erase
every line that can admit of an indecent, or double meaning. This attention is
particularly paid to the theater on account of the morals of the royal family.
The King is so rigidly virtuous, that he never goes to the comic opera, nor
permits any of his own family to attend it. Also in regard to the dances, as
the Italian taste is more inclined to the grotesque, than the serious, the
danseuses jump very high, and kick up their heels in a more surprising, than
graceful manner; but, if their attitudes happen to be unguarded, they have a
sharp rebuke from the police. The delicate Zamperini, after her return from
England, expressed too much licentiousness in her action and manner; for which
she had an immediate order, from the Duchess of Savoy, to quit at once those
airs, which La Signiora instantly obeyed. The black drawers, worn by the
danseuses, have a very disgusting appearance.

The police is so strict here as to prevent any riots in the streets; for if
three or four persons only are seen, conversing together with animation, the
Guet, or guard, comes up; and, if any thing mysterious appears in their manner,
or that they cannot give a good account of themselves, they are imprisoned. The
wine-houses are never free from emissaries of the police. Thus plotting of
every kind is, in a great measure, prevented, by their vigilance, whether
against government, or individuals. No disorderly women are permitted to walk
the streets. The Laquais de place are generally here, as they were in Paris, in
the pay of the police; and inform them of all they can discover, in regard to
the strangers, whom they serve. Each Aubergiste makes two returns every night,
of the strangers lodged with them; their names, professions, country, etc. and,
as far as they can guess, or learn from Laquais de place, couriers,
postillions, or voiturins, where they last came from, their business at Turin,
their intended stay, and their future destination. One of these papers is
carried to the commandant of the town, the other to the Lieutenant de police,
by a person whose business it is to call for the same, nightly, at each
aubergiste; by ten o'clock the next morning the King has all these returns.

In regard to strangers, they scarce utter a word that is not carefully
treasured up; they should therefore be on their guard in speaking their
sentiments, as it has often happened that without any intention to injure them,
says Lady Millar, what they have said in certain companies has been
misrepresented to government; for, unfortunately, some people in Turin have
learned just English enough to qualify them to make capital mistakes, when they
relate something they have heard an Englishman say. Upon the arrival of the
post, the letters are immediately carried to the ministers of state; who open,
read, and send them back to the post office, with permission for their delivery
to the foreign ministers, and others, according to their addresses. Nor does it
unfrequently happen that they are detained, until couriers have been dispatched
with letters of importance, which sometimes occasions a delay of several hours.
The express sent by the minister must necessarily get the start of the earliest
that can be forwarded, by any ambassador, or foreign minister, as no courier,
or other person, can have posthorses without an order from the commandant.
These may certainly be deemed very prudent and political measures.

The inquisition is under excellent regulations; for the present King, finding
great abuses had crept into this holy repository, such as seizing and conveying
away persons, upon various trifling pretenses, often suggested by pique and
resentment; and this holy office having been known to employ its power to
gallant purposes; these, and the like corruptions, have brought this court into
such abhorrence, with the King and people, that no person can now be imprisoned
by order of the inquisitors, until the matter has been made known to his
Majesty; upon which one, or more, of the privy counselors are commissioned to
examine the prisoner, in person, and make their report to the King; and, even
then, the degree of punishment must be specified to his Majesty. Thus, since
the powers of these holy fiends have been contracted, their dungeons are become
almost tenantless; as people are grown too wary to expose themselves to their
snares, for any opinions they may entertain in regard to matters of faith.

No inhabitant can re-build, or repair his house at Turin, but within the great
general plan laid down for the improvement of the town; either he must conform
to the plan, or sell to those who will. Thus must this city daily increase, in
the beauty and proportion of its structures. By ordinance it is prohibited to
breed, or keep silkworms in Turin, their smell being pernicious to health; but
great encouragement is given for their increase in the country round about,
where they thrive prodigiously. A good mulberry-tree will let for, from three
to nine livres per annum; six is a common price, when in a moderate state of
perfection or maturity. The water-meadows, about Turin, are so enriched by
their manner of dressing, that they yield three, and, sometimes, four crops a
year.

The roads near Turin are admirable. In England they can never be like those in
despotic governments, private property with us being sacred and valuable by its
security; once give up our liberty, and we shall have excellent strait roads;
for the monarch of Turin may command the highway to be carried through the
bedchamber of any individual, should it happen to obstruct his intended plan.

No publication is allowed of here, that might tend to give insight into the
revenues, government, or policy of this country; this caution excites
curiosity, and accounts for their being more enquired into and sifted, than the
affairs of other countries where there is less mystery.

Mountebanks and quack-doctors seem to reign here with unrestrained freedom. It
is indeed ordered, under pain of death, by the university of Turin, that none
of these itinerants shall presume to sell any medicines, without a license from
the professor of physic; yet every place swarms with these haranguers; so that
the professor must either be very free of his licenses, or these impostors must
give him another kind of drug, very different to that which they sell to the
people. The place du chateau is never without a stage or two erected for these
quacks; where they emulate each other with music, drolleries, etc. in order to
increase the number of their hearers. The manner in which these empyrics
recommend their medicines has something in it so very extraordinary, that it
deserves to be mentioned. I happened, says Keysler, to hear one who began his
harangue in this solemn manner. "Blessed be the Lord Jesus Christ, of whom I
desire no more than that, according to his righteousness, he will deal with me
at the last judgment, as I shall deal with you this day. I venture my whole
substance out of a tender concern for your health; but the devil, that eternal
enemy to all good, so blinds your eyes, that you look upon a few sous as if
they were an hundred crowns, and thus neglect your own welfare, and that of
your relations; which you might recover and confirm for a trifle. If I take but
a doit from you, against my conscience, I wish I may be swallowing your melted
money in hell, world without end, Amen, etc."

This impostor's panacea consisted of two powders, which were insallible
remedies against the bloody flux, the falling sickness, the cholic, megrim,
consumption and dropsy; and both these powders were sold for so small a price
as a parabajole, or penny; from which one may judge of the excellence of their
ingredients. The tooth-drawers seem to retain some sense of modesty; as they
never fail to assure the person who is under their hands, that they will draw
out the tooth with all imaginable ease and safety, con adjuto di Santa
Apollonia; "with the Assistance of St. Apollonia," the patroness and preserver
of teeth; and every time St. Apollonia is named, the doctor and his audience
take off their hats, in reverence to the saint.

Most of the parts of the body have their particular patrons with the Roman
Catholics; as St. Agatha, for the breast; St. Blasius, for the throat;
concerning whom one patient, by mistake, prayed thus; S. Guttur rogo te ut
liberes me a malo Blasii, i, e. "St. Throat, I pray thee to deliver me from the
pain of Blaise." Many of these saints seem to claim this patronage from the
sound of their name; as St. Clare, for sore eyes; St. Stapinus, for the gout;
St. Pancrace, by the common people called St. Crampace, against the cramp, and
nervous disorders. In like manner among the heathens, Mercury presided over the
feet; Minerva had the care of the fingers; and the eyes were under Apollo's
protection.

To prevent exactions from the peasants in raising the price of wood, during
winter, there are four large storehouses of wood and coal belonging to the
city; and, when the peasants are for taking advantage from the weather, fuel is
sold from this magazine at a reasonable rate.

The late king would take nothing from the report of others, concerning the
police of the city; but examined every thing in person, from the most important
transactions of his subjects, down to the minutiae of the lowest peasants, who
supply the markets, in order to be fully satisfied how far justice was done, by
those entrusted with the execution of the laws; and whether he was himself
imposed upon by his own purveyors. The present King, it is said, pays more
attention to his nobles; places more confidence in the reports made him by his
courtiers; and is, consequently less popular among the lower classes of people,
than his father. However, he treads in the steps of his predecessor, in one
respect, very closely. He has a mortal aversion to, what is called by
connoisseurs, le nud; as three fine antique statues here bear witness, an
Adonis, a Satyr, and a Hercules. The late king, says Lady Millar, showed his
sense of decency at the expense of three very fine Venus's, by Guido, which he
ordered to be cut in two; and, from the breast downward, burnt, by his order.
The face, neck, and shoulders of these goddesses were perfectly beautiful; and,
we may suppose, the rest of their persons were as full of merit, being the
production of so great a master.

The university, besides its spaciousness, is one of the finest buildings in
the city; particularly its front, toward Rue de l'academie, which is very
large, lofty, and magnificent. The professors, of which there are a
considerable number, are called sapientissimi patres. All the learned
professions, throughout the whole country, require a previous examination, by
the university, with proper recommendations. No noisy trade is allowed near it.
The apartment, appropriated for the library, contains a valuable collection of
books, with a museum of antiques. Amongst the remarkable curiosities in this
museum, is a little vellum book, much prized by the dilettanti; it containing a
design of the famous Julio Romano in every leaf. This museum and the library
are open for several hours every day, both morning and evening; not only for
the students of the university, but for strangers to have free access to. The
number of students, at present, is computed to be above three thousand.
Whenever I went thither, says Grosley, I was much surprised to see the library
always full of young ecclesiastics, busied in the study of the fathers, and
other works relating to their profession. This epoch for learning, among them,
was only from the last years of the reign of King Victor. This prince deprived
the Jesuits of the direction of the public studies, and their place has been
supplied by the university.

It is not difficult for a stranger to get admittance into the first circles of
Turin, provided he is disposed to play; but if he plays, he must be very much
on his guard; for though he may have to do with persons of the strictest
honor, and no foul play in the least to be apprehended; yet, if he is not a
very expert gamester indeed, he is certain to come off a loser. The Piedmontese
play at dice, as it were, from their infancy; and thus attain to such
perfection in this art, that very sew are a match for them. A very celebrated
coffee-house here for gaming, was that called L'Academie de Pompeio; in which
the famous projector Law, once playing at dice, promised to return four-fifths
of what he should win; yet, in a short time, his share amounted to ninety
louis-d'ors; upon which he pointed out the faults he had observed in the dice;
and how, from thence, he could infer what sides would come up oftenest, or
seldomest.

Of the inconveniences to be met with in Turin, the most obvious are the thick
fogs; which, in autumn and winter, are continually rising from the Po, and
other rivers; by which the air is rendered thick and moist, and, consequently
unhealthy. These exhalations very much incommode the city, which is often
involved in fogs and rain; while Rivoli enjoys a serene sky, and bright
sunshine.

Another inconvenience, almost as bad, arises from the foul muddy water in most
of the wells in this city; chiefly owing to an unpardonable negligence, in not
keeping them sweet and clean; dead dogs and cats, and other filth, being often
thrown into them.

The inns also stand in great need of better regulation, that travelers may be
well used, and not so intolerably imposed upon. There is not a place, in all
Italy, where the entertainment is so bad, at the same expense.

The manner of burying their dead is also very disagreeable. The corpse is
carried in procession to the ground, with the face uncovered, where it is put
into the grave, without any coffin. This is not only a shocking spectacle, at
all times, but, when the deceased happens to die of the smallpox, measles, or
any contagious distemper, it may cause a very unhappy impression on pregnant
women, and other persons, who are liable to catch the infection. The masked
fraternities, who oftend attend at funerals, of whom nothing but the eyes are
to be seen, make indeed a dreadful, but a very shabby procession. It is also
very disagreeable that, even when there is any contagious distemper in the
city, three or four corpses shall lie a whole day, in the churches, uncovered.
Persons of rank have family vaults, in the churches and chapels; but the lower
sort are thrown into a vault, belonging to their parish church, fifty, or an
hundred and fifty together; and without any coffins. These receptacles, indeed,
are very deep, and have several doors, the passage leading to them being
vaulted; but this cannot prevent the cadaverous smell, and noxious effluvia,
from penetrating into the churches. This impropriety is not peculiar to Turin,
but common to most large cities, especially in Popish countries; yet it is a
practice contrary to reason, and ought entirely to be laid aside in every
country. In this particular, says Keysler, I am mightily pleased with Dr.
Verbeyen, professor of physic and anatomy, at Louvain; who composed the
following epitaph, for himself, in Latin. "Philip Verbeyen, Doctor and
Professor of Physic, ordered his remains to be buried in the churchyard here,
that he might not pollute the church, and infect it, with noxious effluvia. May
he rest in peace!"

CHAP. VI. Commerce, Revenues, and Government.
THE substance of the commerce of Piedmont is raw silk. The Piedmontese
nobility keep large stocks of silkworms, which, under certain restrictions,
they commit to the care of their tenants; the punctual attendance they require
being a work of no small trouble. The proprietor furnishes the eggs; and, in
return, has half the silk. From the number of white mulberry-trees, in any
person's plantation, it is nearly computed how many worms the owner may breed.
The number of worms produced from a single ounce of eggs will consume, from
eighty, to one hundred and forty rubbs of mulberry leaves; each rubb weighs
five-and-twenty pounds. These leaves, when sold, fetch from ten, to
five-and-twenty sols per rubb. The eggs sell from three and a half, to five
livres an ounce. An ounce of eggs will sometimes yield four rubbs of cods, with
the silk on; every pound of which is worth from twenty, to five-and-twenty
sols: these being thrown into warm water, the threads are easily detached, and
wound off to the very last. A pound of fine silk, thus wound, fetches a
louis-d'or.

Grazing likewise turns to such good account, that the profits on this article
are computed at three millions of livres; a considerable part of which arises
from the sale of bullocks, to the Milanese. There are some salt-springs in
Savoy; of which the King has the entire profit; he disposes of the whole profit
to the Switzers.

Many of the manufactures of Turin are carried on for the King's account; as
tobacco, salt, lead, etc. All the salt consumed in the kingdom comes from
Sardinia; every head of a family is obliged to take eight pounds yearly, for
each individual of his family, who has passed the seventeenth year; for each
cow or ox two, for every hog four, at four sols per pound; if he happens to
want more he has it half that price. The farmers here give their cattle salt,
at certain seasons, which certainly succeeds extremely well; it being
impossible too see finer cattle, of every kind, than in this country. The oxen
and cows are nearly quite white; they are shaded with gray and brown, in a most
beautiful manner, and have remarkably pretty faces, with pencilled eyebrows.
There is scarce a table at Turin where a soup made of veal, served with the
bouillie, is not a standing dish; and frequently veal, repeated again, at the
same repast, under some other form; for it is a piece of policy here to cry
down the beef as unwholesome, though as fine as any in Leadenhall market, in
order to persuade the people to consume the veal; the full-grown oxen being
driven to Genoa, where they yield a better price than in the Genoa market.

The chief trade of this city and country, says Martyn, is in thrown silk,
which is sent to England and Lions; they manufacture, however, some of it into
excellent stockings, and good silk for furniture. They are likewise famous for
rosoli, millefleurs, snuff, chamois, gloves, and some other trifles. They
import broad-cloth and linen from Great Britain; some woollen and Lion goods
from France; linens from Switzerland and Silesia: also iron, copper, sugar, and
drugs of all sorts. Their chief export is cattle, some hemp and cordage; they
reckon that upwards of ninety thousand bullocks are annually sent out of
Piedmont. A great deal of wine is made at Piedmont, but it is not good; the
principal attention of government has been bestowed on the cultivation of
mulberry trees. Rice also is a great object of culture in some provinces.

The affairs relating to the finances, in all courts, are kept secret; and,
necessarily, much more so here. A certain statesman, however, says Keysler,
estimates the King's entire yearly revenue at twenty millions of Piedmontese
livres; of which the duties on silk produce five, and those on hemp and rice,
three millions. As to the kingdom of Sardinia, it is evident, that the charges
of the troops and civil officers being deducted, the residue of the annual
income from that kingdom, cannot exceed a hundred thousand livres; and that the
importance of that country, to the house of Savoy, is more on account of its
regality, than its revenue.

In the King's territories, on the continent, are sixteen bishoprics; among
which are the two archbishops of Turin and the Tarantaise. Besides the city of
Turin, above three hundred and forty towns and villages are subject to the
jurisdiction of the former; and as, among the Roman Catholics, every one is
obliged to communicate at Easter, and deliver to the priest an account of his
children and family, the whole number of the inhabitants, of such a country,
may be pretty accurately known; and I have been assured, say; Keysler, from
such computations, the King's subjects in Piedmont and Savoy, and other parts
on the continent, amount to two millions, and some thousands.

The duty on snuff is farmed for four hundred thousand livres; and travelers
should be careful to have no foreign tobacco among their baggage. At first it
was farmed only for twelve thousand; afterward the same person, being a Jew,
paid more than treble that sum for it; and when a friend dissuaded him,
observing it would probably ruin him, he replied, "The use of snuff is a
pernicious custom, and consequently will daily increase; so that there is no
danger to be apprehended from raising the farm, it being the nature of mankind
to be extremely addicted to what is hurtful." The King's revenues, says Martyn,
are estimated at little more than a million sterling; with this his household
is well supported and paid, his troops well clothed, and always complete.

The King's prerogative, in civil affairs, is equal to that of any monarch in
Europe; and, in ecclesiastical matters, few kings, of the Roman Catholic
religion, carry it with so high a hand as his present Majesty, and his late
ancestors have done. Care indeed has been taken to treat the Pope with all
possible complaisance; but the King has obtained from him the disposal of most
ecclesiastical benefices in Savoy and Piedmont; as also the nomination to a
cardinal's hat.

CHAP. VII. Army.
THE situation of the King of Sardinia's dominions, on the continent, oblige
him to be on his guard, in case of any broils between the House of Austria and
Bourbon; but his present Majesty, and his ancestors, have found means to reap
some advantage from all the wars that have happened for above a century past. A
war in Italy being very expensive, both to the French and Germans, the house of
Savoy has shown it knows how to value its friendship accordingly. The duchy of
Savoy lies exposed to the French, and can be taken possession of by them with
little, or no resistance. The King of Sardinia cannot think of being a gainer
by declaring war against France; the great power of that monarchy, and the
mountainous nature of the country, being a bar against his Sardinian Majesty's
extending his dominions on that side; besides, with the assistance of France,
he may face all his enemies. On the other hand, it is not easy to dislodge the
house of Austria from any of its possessions by force; therefore the more
advisable way has always been to procure some little advantages by leagues and
stipulations. This method has answered so well as, by degrees, to transfer
almost the whole country of Mountserat, and some other neighboring
territories, into the hands of the house of Savoy.

His Majesty's regular forces consist of about twenty two thousand men,
exclusive of the horse-guards and artillery; and fifteen well disciplined
regiments of militia. These last have only their clothing, and a sol per day;
they are continually at their own habitations, where they subsist by husbandry,
and other labor; except twice a year, when they are mustered, and exercised
for a few weeks; but, on these occasions, they receive the same pay as the
regulars. He has sour regiments of foreigners, mostly Germans, which make a
body of five thousand men; and not only serve to give a greater weight to his
authority in his own country; but also that the Piedmontese, and Savoyard
soldiers, having before their eyes a pattern of complete discipline, may be
stirred up to emulate them. There is likewise this additional advantage, that
so considerable a part of the forces consisting of foreigners, more hands may
be spared for tillage. The great advantage of peopling a country in peaceable
times, with peasants rather than soldiers, was not unknown to George I. who
issued an order in his German dominions, that every soldier there, who would
undertake the management of a farm, or turn peasant, should have his discharge
for ten dollars. The King of Sardinia has also lately renewed a law of the
regent duchess Christina, calculated for increasing the human species. By this
law it was enacted, that all parents having twelve children, lawfully begotten,
should be exempted, during life, from all taxes. In the number of the twelve
children are included, not only those of the first generation, but likewise the
grandchildren, whose fathers happen to die before their grandfather; as also
those who are killed in the king's service. Each of these foreign regiments
consists of twelve hundred men; and, by virtue of their particular
capitulations, such a regiment brings the colonel in between ten, and twelve
thousand dollars a year. In the year 1710, a great number of protestant
recruits for one of these German regiments coming into Piedmont; several of the
common soldiers used to make a practice, upon entering into any new garrison
where they were not known, of publicly professing themselves Roman Catholics.
The motives were not owing to conscience or devotion; but to the sum of five
livres, which was paid to every one who came over to the Romish church; besides
what they got from monasteries, and people of substance. Among these recruits
was an honest Swabian, of such an open frankness and simplicity, that he went
about all Turin, asking, in his own country dialect, where that monastery was,
that gave five livres to any one turning Catholic.

It contributes not a little to the maintenance of military discipline and
order, that the regiments continually do duty at Turin, as the King's
foot-guards. The presence, and attention of his Majesty, causes such care and
punctuality to be observed among the troops, as would probably be neglected in
any other quarter. The guard is daily relieved by an hundred and twenty men,
and consists of twenty-four grenadiers, thirty troopers, and about one hundred
and thirty musketeers.

The pay of the troop of horse-guards is about twenty-six thousand livres a
year. The private men, who are mostly noblemen, have each five-and-twenty
livres a month. Their uniform is provided by the King. As the king travels very
expeditiously, they are often hard put to it. It is a long hour's journey, from
Turin to La Veniere, on a round trot; and, to go to Rivoli, it takes up three
hours; yet the king runs the former in a quarter, and the latter in
three-quarters of an hour. If a horse dies, the officer to whom the horse
belonged must provide another.

In the other regiments the appointments are still more slender. Officers,
quartered at Turin, have indeed an opportunity of boarding themselves on very
reasonable terms. The king has an exact account of all his officers, observes
every one's good and bad qualities, and, from time to time, makes very
particular enquiries, not only of one, but of several persons, concerning the
behavior of every one of them. From these informations he prefers them,
without any regard to rank or seniority. It is also the King's pleasure that
all offices, in his majesty's immediate disposal, be accounted equally
honorable. A minister of state once petitioning the King to make his son a
lieutenant, or an ensign, comme un petit employ, i. e. as an inconsiderable
post; the King answered, Je nay point de petits employs a donner; I have no
inconsiderable post to give away. It is owing to this that the sons of many, of
the noblest and wealthiest families, are ensigns and lieutenants. Besides, no
person can obtain a place at court, without having served in the army.

The transactions of the last wars have served to inspire the Piedmontese with
a martial spirit; and such actions were performed by their troops, as would
have done honor to the ancient Romans. Toward the close of the last war, when
marshal Catinat invaded Piedmont, it was of the highest importance to the Duke
of Savoy, to march in time for putting Turin in a better posture of defense. To
this end he dispatched the Count de Santena, then a major, and afterward a
general, with a few hundred men, to an old castle, about three German miles
from Turin, which commands the road and valley from Susa. As the French army
was passing by Santena, he fired at them, with what little artillery he had.
Catinat, who was no less surprised than provoked, at this insult, sent to the
castle, threatening to hang up the commanding officer; who returned him for
answer, that he should never have him alive; and that, till the artillery
should be brought before the castle, no surrender was to be expected. Catinat
now still more incensed, ordered a battery to be erected, and the castle
summoned a second time. Santena answered that a breach must first be made;
which being begun, he offered to capitulate. Catinat sent a lieutenant into the
castle to settle the articles of capitulation; but, as a preliminary condition,
demanded that the soldiers should be made prisoners of war, and the officers
hanged. Upon this Santena took the lieutenant into his chamber, shut the door,
and conducted him between two barrels of powder, with two lighted matches lying
by. Santena, taking one of the lighted matches, got upon one of the powder
barrels, and desired the lieutenant to follow his example; adding, that since
he must die, many more of the French should take a spring into the air, before
all the Piedmontese in the castle should lose their lives. The lieutenant so
little relished this compliment, that he begged Santena to lay aside this
desperate design, promising to do all that lay in his power for obtaining an
honorable capitulation. Upon this assurance the commandant dismissed the
lieutenant; who having made his report to Catinat, the marshal said, I must see
this man of such extraordinary spirit and resolution; and allowed that he and
his men should march out with their swords. As Santena passed by him, the
marshal said, that he did indeed deserve well to be hanged; but, to show him he
could esteem courage and bravery in an enemy, he should dine with him that day.
At table some of the officers upbraided Santena, on account of the Duke of
Savoy's forming a league, with heretics, against the Most Christian King.
Santena remained silent for some time; till, at last, he asked the marshal if
he would allow him freedom of speech; Catinat consenting, he replied, "That his
master had indeed, for self-defence, taken arms against the King of France, and
had entered into an alliance with heretics, such as the English and Dutch; nay,
further, that his master was for doing something worse, and had sent to
Constantinople to negociate a league with the Turks; but that his Most
Christian Majesty had been before hand with him." Catenat laughed at the
officers, who had forced this keen repartee from Santena, saying this might
teach them never to insult brave men under misfortunes. However, Santena had
the good fortune to obtain, for his master, a suspension of arms for some days.

The Piedmontese have likewise signalized themselves for their valor in
foreign service; of which, among others, the late general St. Amor is an
instance. When he was made colonel of a regiment, the officers, who valued
themselves upon their birth, were so extremely piqued against him, he being but
a peasant's son, that he was challenged by four of his captains successively,
whom he killed upon the spot; and, upon dispatching the last, said, "There are
now but eight left;" but the others thought fit to let the affair drop. It was
not his valor only which entitled that gentleman to the highest esteem; but
also his prudence and discretion, in never forgetting the meanness of his
extraction. Once, while he was at table in Piedmont, with the chief officers
and generals, whom he had invited to an entertainment, his father happened to
come into the house, and sent up word of his arrival. St. Amor informed his
guests of it, adding, that he was not insensible of the regard due to them, but
begged leave that he might dine with his father in the next room. He
accordingly withdrew, though the company was very urgent with him, that his
father might sit down at their table; and thus acted up to the character of the
dutiful son, and the polite gentleman.

Among the fortifications of most note, in this country, is Fort Brunette;
which stands on the road between Susa and Novalese, and, perhaps, has not its
equal in the whole world. It consists of eight bastions; and, together with all
its outworks, was hewn out of a rock. The bastions, and other works, have a
communication by subterraneous passages, under rocks; which are so large that
carriages, and heavy cannon, with several horses, may very conveniently go from
one place to another. Of the whole fortress, not a single building is to be
seen; and, of the garrison, only some sentinels. Cannons and mines are of no
signification here; and 2000 men, well supplied with stores and provisions,
would easily weary out a numerous army. It commands two valleys. This fortress,
though esteemed impregnable by the Piedmontese, Monsieur Richard, in his tour
through Italy, says, he thinks it to be commanded by two mountains; but,
however, he makes a shrewd restection, and very a-propos, "That it would be
difficult to bring up, and plant a battery of cannon on these mountains;" which
no doubt it is impossible to do.

CHAP. IX. Laws.
AMONG some excellent laws and ordinances made by the late king of Sardinia, is
his care for the security of the roads; by these means one may now travel in
Italy, with as much safety as in any other country. Banditti are those
malefactors who have been banished or have incurred some other penalty, but
have not yet fallen into the hands of justice, or else escaped from it: as
these persons often lurk about on the frontiers, where they support themselves
by rapine and violence; they who infest the roads, or assassins who hire
themselves out to commit murder, likewise, go under the name of banditti. Italy
was formerly overrun by these vermin; but the Duke de Caspi, viceroy of
Naples, demonstrating that they were easily to be reduced by resolution and
severity; all the other states, and particularly the house of Savoy, determined
to pursue the plan.

In order to create a mutual distrust and division among the banditti, any one
of these miscreants delivering up another to the magistrates, convicted of a
like crime with himself, or of a greater, received a full and free pardon. Of
such banditti as were guilty of very extraordinary and flagrant crimes, an
exact list was every year put up in all the public places, signifying, that any
one might kill them with impunity. Whoever delivered such a one alive was
entitled to an exemption from punishment, whatever sentence had been passed
upon him; or, if that was not his case, he might transfer the benefit, and
obtain pardon for another, except in cases of high treason. If the banditti was
delivered up dead, the privilege of pardon extended to the person that
delivered up the criminal, and to his nearest relations. Any one bringing a
banditti to justice, who either will not or cannot take the benefit of the
pardon, receives in lieu thereof a certain sum of money, out of the king's
treasury. At first the extirpation of the banditti was a difficult work, the
principal nobility making use of these bravoes as assassins for their private
revenge, and affording them all possible protection. Two noblemen in particular
sheltered two banditti, who had between them assassinated 48 persons, and even
one of them was so abandoned, that afterward he murdered a father and his two
sons. At that very time Alexandria, with the adjacent country, being ceded to
the king of Sardinia, the third son of that unhappy father, laid his case
before his new sovereign. The king, who was determined to make an example where
it was so highly necessary, sent for the two noblemen to court, under some
alluring pretenses, and upon their arrival ordered them to be taken into
custody. It was then signified to them, that if they did not produce those
villains, or give intelligence how they might be secured, their heads should
answer for it. This menace forced them to comply, and one of these murderers
being surprised, was put to the torture, and executed in the town where he was
born. The neighborhood, and the town itself, swarmed with secret banditti, so
that the king was obliged to send two regiments to attend the execution; and in
the morning proclamation was made, that if any of the inhabitants should be
found out of their respective dwellings before the execution was over, they
should be immediately hanged up. The other made his escape to Genoa, and being
a very enterprising fellow was not easily to be caught; but, as no farther
mischief could be apprehended from him, he obtained his pardon under certain
restrictions and limitations, and now lives, says Keysler, quietly at
Alexandria.

There is another commendable regulation, that from the inferior judge, an
appeal lies to the president of the province, and from him, within ten days
after notice of the sentence, to the senate at Turin. No magistrates or judges
are to take any presents except provisions, and of them only a sufficient
quantity for three days. Every malefactor that is taken up, is to be examined
within 24 hours after he is in custody, under the penalty of ten ecus dor,
payable by the judge. The answer, and the protocal, after being distinctly and
audibly read over to the plaintiff, must be signed by him; or if he cannot
write, he is to set his mark to it before witnesses. Any one knowingly altering
bad money, although not at all concerned with the coiners of it, is condemned
for ten years to the galleys. A person guilty of theft for the first offense,
if it be no burglary, nor exceeding in value two golden crowns, is condemned to
draw in a cart like a horse; but if it exceed that sum, he is punished with a
public whipping. For the second fault, whatever the sum be, the delinquent is
branded in the arm, and condemned for five years at least to the galleys, and
sometimes longer, according to the circumstances of the fact. A third fault
condemns a man to the galleys for life; but a thief is not punished with death,
till he be found guilty a fourth time. A house-breaker for the first fact, if
it be under 25 gold crowns, is condemned to the galleys during life, and upon a
repetition of the same offense is punished with death; a servant stealing, to
the value of 25 gold crowns, is put to death for the first offense. A notary
making a false instrument, or forging a title to an estate forfeits his life.
No person is to carry firearms of any sort, not even upon a journey, under the
penalty of losing them and a fine of 50 gold crowns, which if they cannot pay,
they are condemned for two years to the galleys. This order does not extend to
the officers of the king's household, nor to foreign travelers; yet these, if
they are not noblemen or gentlemen, must part with them during their stay in
any town. Some arms are absolutely prohibited, such as short pocket-pistols,
poignards, Genoese two-edged pointed knives, daggers, concealed in canes, etc.
Any person having these arms only in his house, is condemned to the galleys for
five years, and he on whom they are found, for double that term. By this wise
regulation the safety of travelers is provided for, and tumults and other
disorders generally prevented.

The laws here are particularly severe against the Jews, death being the
punishment for the least contumelious language against the Virgin Mary, or any
of the saints; as also for expressing any contempt of their images. Both sexes
among them entering their 15th year, are to wear on their right breast, by way
of an ignominious distinction, a yellow badge of nine inches long, made of silk
or wool. In the passion-week from Wednesday to Saturday, the Jews must not ring
a bell nor stir out of their houses; their doors and windows also are to be
kept shut under penalty of three days imprisonment, and subsisting on bread and
water during that time; but if any Jew sings or plays on a musical instrument
on those days in the passion-week, they are to be publicly whipped.

The language of the Piedmontese is a mixture of French and Italian; many of
the words are entirely French, but pronounced in the same manner that they are
written, as for example lait milk is pronounced as it would be in English, so
is fait, and many other words.

CHAP. X. The Island and Kingdom of Sardinia.
LIES in the Mediterranean, and is divided from the island of Corsica by the
straits of Bonifacio. From north to south it is 160 English miles; and from
west to cast 80. The soil is fertile in oil and wine, and there are a great
number of oranges, citrons and olives; but it is not properly cultivated, the
inhabitants being little inclined to tillage, and preferring to live upon the
spontaneous productions of the earth, rather than improve it by husbandry. They
are so far from experiencing any scarcity of corn, notwithstanding so much of
the country is uncultivated, that some years, it is said, they export to the
amount of 8 or 900,000 bushels, which is sent for the most part into Spain.
They have also great quantities of cattle as well as game; beeves and sheep, in
particular, are numerous, as well as horses, which are very good for labor,
and for the road. They are fed in the little islands about it, which are
likewise abounding in game. On the coast is a fishery for anchovies and coral,
of which they send large quantities to Genoa and Leghorn. They have also great
quantities of that celebrated Epicurean fish-turtle.

The high mountains on the north side render the air very unhealthy, by
obstructing the wind from sweeping through the whole island. It is to be
attributed, perhaps, to this circumstance that the island is full of morasses.
These mountains contain mines of silver, lead, sulphur, and alum, and they make
a good deal of salt. The inhabitants were formerly so rude and clownish, that
the Romans banished their state-prisoners to this island. It is divided into
two parts; the northern called Cape Logadori, from a cape of that name in the
north; and the southern Cape Cagliari, from the capital city, which stands in
this part of the island.

Cagliari is situated on the declivity of a hill, near the bay, to which it
gives name on the south-east part of the island, and is a large handsome and
populous city, with a tolerable harbor, and very brisk trade. It has also a
university, is the sea of an archbishop, and the seat of the viceroy. This city
was taken by the English in 1708, who transferred it to the Emperor Charles VI.
but it was retaken by the Spaniards in 1717, and about two years after ceded to
the duke of Savoy in lieu of Sicily, and hence he has the title of King of
Sardinia.

Saffari is another large town on the north-west part of the island, situated
in a place about ten miles from the sea. It has a castle, and an archbishop's
see, and contains about 30,000 inhabitants. It is likewise famous for a
fountain called Rossel, which is said to be much more magnificent than any in
Rome. The inhabitants have the following proverb, chi non vide Rossel, non vide
mondo, 'he that has not seen Rossel, has not seen the world.'

This kingdom is of more importance to the house of Savoy as a monarchy, than
on account of its revenues; for the charges of the army and civil officers
being deducted, the remainder, does not bring in above 4 or 5000 a year. It is
governed by a viceroy. Bisani mentions, that having cast anchor in one of the
bays of this island, the inhabitants assembled and fired upon the vessel, and
it was with great difficulty he and his companions were permitted to make a
landing. He bears witness to the unhealthiness of the island, which is noticed
so far back as by Pausanias, who attributes the bad air in this island to the
salt pits, and the violence of the south wind, which is continually raging on
these coasts. The peasants, from his description of their dress and manners,
appear little better than savages. They let their beard grow, says he, wear a
red cap, and are dressed in a doublet of black felt, covered with a kind of
cuirass made of deers skin, which they lace before, and reaches to their knees.
Their breeches and boots are of the same kind, and a girdle goes round their
waiste, with a long stiletto hanging to it. Their manner of living is free and
uncontrouled. They follow no occupation, but live upon milk and game. They are
continually at variance with each other, and their quarrels generally terminate
in a tragic manner. Murderers are secure by going a few villages off, and
uniting themselves with some banditti till they can obtain a pardon from the
friends of the deceased. These people pay so little regard to the king's
edicts, that they frequently commence hostilities against the military, and
massacre the officers, who in revenge, cut them to pieces where they can get at
them, seize upon their cattle, and burn their habitations. In the cities,
however, the inhabitants are less ferocious; they cultivate the lands and are
very civil to strangers. On the seacoast, adds the above author, near Orestan,
are the ruins of an ancient town, among which a soldier had found a
Carthaginian medal that he presented to us.

The first colonies were planted here by the Phoenicians, who erected little
states and principalities in the island, as they had before done in Italy and
Sicily. The Carthaginians then brought the whole island under their subjection,
of which they were afterward dispersed by the Romans.

CHAP. XI. Duchy of Montferat.
THE duchy of Montferat bounded to the west and north by Piedmont; to the east
by Milan, and to the south by the republic of Genoa, is a country abounding in
every thing, particularly in corn and excellent Muscadine wine. It contains
about 200 cities, towns, and villages. In 1631, 75 places of this duchy were
first transferred to the duke of Savoy, in lieu of a yearly income of 15,000
crowns, payable to him by the duke of Mantua. In 1703 the emperor gave also to
the duke that part of Montferat, which the dukes of Mantua had held as a fief
from the emperor, to be held by him pursuant to the same tenure. The most
remarkable place in the duchy is Verua, a town once fortified, which stands
over the river Po, on a steep rock. It was several times besieged and taken,
but in 1705 the French, irritated by the long defense it maintained against
them, blew up its fortifications.

CHAP. XII. Piedmontese Valleys.
LES vallees de Piemont, the Piedmontese Valleys, called also the Valleys
Angrogne, and sometimes simply the Valleys, lie westward, contiguous to the
French province of Dauphine. The valley of Lucerne is 15 miles in length, but
of unequal breadth. This valley forms a vast cavity between the highest
mountains, to which there is no access but with the greatest difficulty. It can
conveniently hold a great number of men, and here it was, that in the severest
persecutions of the christian church, the old Barte or valley preachers, before
the reformation, used to preach without obstruction, and qualify youth for the
sacred ministry. In the southern parts are only chestnut plantations and
pastures; but on the hills toward the north, grow wine, corn, herbs, and
plants. The finest corn is produced amid ranges of vine-espaliers.

The valley of St. Martin is about the same extent. This is the strongest
fortified of any, for besides the prodigious mountains, at least eight or ten
months of the year, covered with snow, and consequently not to be passed, it is
accessible only by a very narrow cavity, called the Tower-bridge, cut through a
rock, and no broader than the rapid river, or rather brook, running through it;
over which is a lofty bridge, which on being broke down, it is impossible to
enter the valley.

In these valleys, especially that of St. Martin, among the highest of the
mountains and impassable rocks, are large woods and thickets, abounding in
white hares, which retain that color all the year round; besides foxes, large
pheasants, and brown and white partridges. These thickets are also remarkable
for being the haunts of wolves and bears. On the highest parts of the Alps, and
in open places, when only a little herbage grows, are found the Marmottes, a
creature something larger than a rabbet, and in color of a mixed brown and
red. The flesh, which is eaten, has much the taste of pork. The animal has a
very shrill cry, and passes eight or nine months of the year, that is, whilst
these mountains are covered with snow, in a profound sleep. Besides the
chamois, here is also an animal very like a goat or chamois. Its constant abode
is in the mountains, which, on account of their height, are ever covered with
snow. It generally sleeps on the ice, is much fleeter than the chamois, and the
flesh, by the inhabitants, is reckoned very strengthening. When any person is
benumbed with cold, or deprived of the use of a limb by the frost, some drops
of this creature's blood are administered in warm wine or broth; which, upon
the patient's being put to bed, throws him into a great sweat, after which he
recovers. Among the tame beasts is the tumar, engendered either by a bull and a
mare, or by a bull and a she-ass: the latter species is considerably smaller,
and called Bif; the former, called Bas, has the upper mandible shorter than the
lower, and both almost resembling those of swine. The head and tail are like
those of an ox, but the former instead of horns, has only small knobs; in all
other respects they are shaped either like an horse or ass. Though not so large
as a mule, they are of surprising strength, eat little, are very swift-footed,
and excellent beasts for traveling. Some rare plants reputed restoratives, and
of very corroborating qualities, such as the Lunaria are found in these
mountains; they yield also, a kind of thistles, not unlike artichoaks, which
are eaten, and reckoned exceeding good against any contagious disorder.

These valleys have always belonged to Piedmont. The Waldenses, their
inhabitants, to whom they have given name, have rendered themselves famous in
history, from the persecutions they underwent on account of their religion. The
number of people in these valleys, scarce exceeds 7000. They have distinguished
themselves very much in all the wars, in which their sovereign has been engaged
during this century; being from their childhood trained up to military
exercises.

CHAP. XIII. Climate, Productions, etc. of Nice.
Nice so much celebrated in this country for the salubrity of its air, extends
about 80 miles in length, but in some places not more than 30 in breadth. It
contains several small towns and villages, all of which (the capital excepted)
are situated among mountains; the most extensive plain in the whole country
being in the neighborhood of the town of Nice. The length of it does not
exceed two miles, nor is the breadth in any part above one. It is bounded by
the Mediterranean on the south. From the seashore, the maritime Alps begin
with hills of a gentle ascent, rising into mountains that form a sweep or
amphitheatre, ending at Montalban, which overhangs the town of Villa-Franca,
divided from Nice by a single mountain, on the top of which there is a small
sort, called the Castle of Montalban. On the west side of this mountain, and in
the eastern extremity of the amphitheatre, stands the city of Nice, wedged in
between a steep rock and the little river Paglion, which descends from the
mountains, and washing the town-wall on the west side, falls into the sea after
having filled some canals for the use of the inhabitants. The channel of it is
very broad, but generally dry in many places; the water (as in the Var, which
falls into the sea nearer Antibes) dividing itself into several small streams.
The Paglion, being fed by melted snow and rains in the mountains, is quite dry
in summer; but it is sometimes swelled by sudden rains to a very formidable
torrent. This was the case in the year 1744, when the French and Spanish armies
attacked 18 Piedmontese battalions, which were posted on the side of Montalban.
The assailants were repulsed with the loss of four thousand men, some hundreds
of whom perished in repassing the Paglion, which had swelled to a surprising
degree during the battle, in consequence of a heavy continued rain. This rain
was of great service to the Piedmontese, as it prevented one half of the enemy
from passing the river to sustain the other.

The city of Nice is built in the form of an irregular isosceles triangle, the
base of which fronts the sea. It is altogether indefencible, and therefore
without fortifications; in the east it is over-hung by a rock, on which we see
the ruins of an old castle, which, before the invention of artillery, was
deemed impregnable. It was taken and dismantled by Marshall Catinat, in the
time of Victor Amadaeus, the father of his Sardinian majesty. It was afterward
finally demolished by the duke of Berwick, toward the latter end of queen
Ann's war. To repair this castle would be an unnecessary expense, as it is
commanded by Montalban and several other eminences.

This little town, situated in the bay of Antibes, is almost equidistant from
Marseilles, Turin, and Genoa; the first and last being about 30 leagues from
hence by sea, and the capital of Piedmont at the same distance to the northward
over the mountains. It contains, though hardly a mile in circumference, 12,000
inhabitants. The streets are narrow; the houses are built with stone, and the
windows, in general, are fitted with paper instead of glass. This expedient
would not answer in a country subject to rain and storms, but here where there
is very little of either, the paper lozenges answer tolerably well. The
Bourgeois, however, begin to have their houses sashed with glass. From a
register of the weather, kept during a residence of 18 months in this city,
says Smollett, there is less rain and wind than in any other part of the world
that I know; and, such is the serenity of the air, that nothing is to be seen
over head for several months together, but a charming blue expanse, without
cloud or speck. Whatever clouds may be formed by evaporation from the sea, they
seldom or never hover over this small territory; but, in all probability, are
attracted by the mountains that surround it, and there fall in rain or snow; as
for those that gather from other quarters, I suppose their progress hitherward
is obstructed by those very Alps which rise one over another, to an extent of
many leagues. This air being dry, pure, heavy, and elastic, must be agreeable
to the constitution of those who labor under disorders arising from weak
nerves, obstructed perspiration, relaxed fibers, a vicidity of lymph, and a
languid circulation. The air of Nice is so dry, that in summer, and even in
winter (except in wet weather) the evening, and indeed the whole night may be
passed sub dio, without feeling the least dew or moisture; and as for fogs,
they are never seen in this district. In summer, the air is cooled by a regular
sea-breeze blowing from the east, like that of the West Indies. It begins in
the forenoon, and increases with the heat of the day. It dies away about six or
seven, and is immediately succeeded by an agreeable land-breeze from the
mountains. The sea-breeze from the eastward, however, is not so constant here,
as in the West Indies between the tropics, because the sun, which produces it,
is not so powerful. This country lies nearer the region of variable winds, and
is surrounded by mountains, capes, and straits, which often influence the
constitution and current of air. About the winter solstice, the people of Nice
expect wind and rain, which generally lasts, with intervals, till the beginning
of February: but, even during this their worst weather, the sun breaks out
occasionally, so as to enable any one to take the air every day, either on foot
or horseback, the moisture being immediately absorbed by the earth, which is
naturally dry. The heavy rains in this country generally come with a south-west
wind, which was the creberque procellis Africus of the ancients. It is here
called Lebeche, a corruption of Lybicus; it generally blows high for a day or
two, and rolls the Mediterranean before it in huge waves, that often enter the
town of Nice. It likewise drives before it all the clouds which had been found
above the surface of the Mediterranean. These being expended in rain,
fair-weather naturally ensues. There are frequent instances of English
valetudinarians, who have passed the winter at Aix on the supposition, that
there was little or no difference between the air and the climate of Nice; but
this is a very great mistake, which may be attended with very fatal
consequences. Aix is altogether exposed to the north and northwest winds, which
blow as cold in Provence as on the mountains of Scotland: whereas, Nice is
entirely screened from these winds by the maritime Alps, which form an
amphitheatre to the land side around this little territory. Another
incontestible proof of the mildness of this climate is deduced from the
oranges, lemons, citrons, roses, narcissuses, July-flowers, and jonquils, which
ripen and blow in the middle of winter. Presents of carnations are sent from
hence, at that season of the year to Turin and Paris; nay, sometimes as far as
London, by the post. They are packed up in a wooden box, without any sort of
preparation, one pressed upon another: the person who receives them cuts off a
little bit of the stalk, and steeps them for two hours in vinegar and water,
when they recover their full bloom and beauty. They are then placed in water
bottles, in an apartment screened from the severities of the weather, and
continue there fresh and unfaded for near a month.

Smollett, describing the cultivation of the country round Nice, says, When
standing on the rampart and looking round me, I can scarce help thinking myself
enchanted. The small extent of country, which I see, is all cultivated like a
garden. Indeed, the plain presents nothing but gardens full of green trees,
loaded with oranges, lemons, citrons, and bergamots, which make a delightful
appearance. If examined more narrowly, there will be seen plantations of green
peace, ready to be gathered; all sorts of salleting, and pot herbs in
perfection; plats of roses, carnations, ranunculuses, anemonies, and daffodils,
blowing in full glory, with such beauty, vigor, and perfume, as no flower in
England ever exhibited.

Amidst the plantations in this neighborhood appear a vast number of bastides
or country houses, which make a dazzling show. They are all built square; and,
being whitened with lime or plaster, contribute greatly to the richness of the
view. The hills are shaded to the tops with olive trees, which are always
green; and those hills are over-topped with more distant mountains covered with
snow.

Nothing can be more unpromising, however, than the natural soil of this
territory, except in a very few narrow bottoms, where there is a stiff clay,
which, when carefully watered, yields tolerable pasturage. In every other part
the soil consists of a light sand, mingled with pebbles, which serves well
enough for the culture of vines and olives; but the ground laid out for kitchen
herbs, as well as for other fruits, must be manured with care and attention.
They have no black cattle to afford such compost as is used in England. The
dung of mules and asses, their only beasts of burden, is of very little value
for this purpose, and the natural sterility of their ground requires something
highly impregnated with nitre and vegetable salts. They are obliged, therefore,
to have recourse to pigeons dung and ordure. Every peasant opens, at one corner
of his wall, a public-house of office for the reception of passengers; and, in
the town of Nice, every tenement is provided with one of these receptacles, the
contents of which are carefully preserved for sale. The peasant comes with his
asses and casks to carry it off before day, and pays for it according to its
quality. The jakes of a protestant family, who eat gras every day, bear a much
higher price than the privy of a good catholic, who lives maigre one half of
the year. The vaults belonging to the convent of Minims, are not worth emptying.

The ground here is not delved with spades, as in England, but labored with a
broad sharp hough, with a horizontal handle; and the climate is so hot and dry
in the summer, that the plants must be watered every morning and evening,
especially where it is not shaded by trees. It is surprising to see in what
manner the productions of the earth are crowded together. Olive and other
fruit trees are planted in rows very close to each other. These are connected
by vines, and the interstice between the roots are filled with corn. The
gardens, that supply the town with sallad and pot herbs, lie all on the side of
Provence by the highway. They are surrounded with high stone-walls, or ditches
planted with a kind of cane or large reed, which answers many purposes in this
country. The leaves of it afford sustenance to the asses, and the canes not
only serve as fences to the enclosures; but are used to prop the vines and
peace: they are further formed into arbours, and wore as walking sticks. All
these gardens are watered by little rills that come from the mountains,
particularly by the small branches of the two sources of the Var and the
Paglion.

In the neighborhood of Nice they raise a considerable quantity of hemp, which
is remarkably large and strong. Part of this, when dressed, is exported to
other countries, and part is manufactured into cordage. However profitable it
may be to the grower, it is certainly a great nuisance in the summer. When
taken, out of the pits, where it has been put to rot, the stench it raises is
insupportable, and must undoubtedly be prejudicial to the constitution.

There is such a want of land in this neighborhood that terraces are built
over one another with loose stones, on the faces of bare rocks, and these being
covered with earth and manured, are planted with olives, vines, and corn.

Notwithstanding the small extent of this territory, there are some pleasant
meadows in the skirts of Nice, that produce excellent clover; and the corn,
which is sown in the open fields, grows to a surprising height. Rye may be seen
here seven or eight feet high. All vegetables have a wonderful growth in this
climate. Besides wheat, rye, barley, and oats, this country produces a good
deal of Indian corn. The meal of this grain goes by the name of polenta, and
make excellent hasty pudding, being very nourishing, and counted an admirable
pectoral. The pods and stalks are used for fuel; and the leaves are much
preferable to common straw, for making paillasses. Myrtle, sweet-briar,
sweet-marjoram, sage, thyme, lavender, rosemary, with many other aromatic herbs
and flowers, which, with us, require the most careful cultivation, are here
found wild in the mountains.

The markets at Nice are well supplied. In autumn and winter, the seasons for
game, hares, partridges, quails, wild pigeons, woodcocks, snipes, thrushes,
beccaficas, and ortolans, are met with in great plenty. The wild boar is
sometimes found in the mountains: it has a delicious taste, not unlike that of
the wild hog, in Jamaica, when meagre the head only is presented at tables.
Pheasants are very scarce. As for the heath game, says Smollett, I never saw
but one cock, which my servant bought in the market, and brought home; but the
commandants cook came into my kitchen, and carried it off, after it was half
plucked, saying his master had company to dinner. The hares are large, plump,
and juicy; the partridges generally of the red sort, large as pullets, and of a
good flavor; there are also some gray partridges in the mountains, and another
sort of a white color, that weigh four or five pounds each. Beccaficas are
smaller than sparrows, and generally eaten half raw. The ortolans are kept in
cages, and crammed till they die of fat, and then eaten as dainties. The thrush
is presented with the trail, because the bird seeds on olives. They may as well
eat the trail of a sheep, because it feeds on the aromatic herbs of the
mountains.

Nice is not without a variety of fish. Here are sometimes mullets both red and
gray. One of the best fish in this country is called le loup, about two or
three pounds in weight, white, firm, and well flavoured. Another no way
inferior to it is the moustel, by some thought to be the mustela of the
ancients or sea lamprey. There is also abundance of the $oepie or cuttle-fish,
of which the people in this country make a delicate ragout; as also of the
polype de mer, which is an ugly animal, with long feelers, like tails, which
they often wind about the legs of the fishermen. They are stewed with onions,
and eat something like cow-heel.

Among the fish of this country there is a very ugly animal, of the eel
species, which might pass for a serpent. The Italians call it murena, but
whether it is the fish which had the same name among the ancient Romans is not
so easy to determine. The ancient murena were counted a great delicacy, and
kept in ponds for extraordinary occasions. Julius Caesar borrowed 6000 for one
entertainment. The sword-fish is also much esteemed at Nice, and called
l'Empereur, about six or seven feet long; it is as white as the finest veal,
and extremely delicate. They are very scarce, and when taken are generally
concealed, because the head belongs to the Commandant, who has likewise the
privilege of buying the best fish at a very low price; for which reason the
choice pieces are concealed by the fishermen, and sent privately to Piedmont or
Genoa. Sea turtle are also often found at sea, by the mariners, in these
latitudes, but they are not the green sort, so much in request among the City
Aldermen. All the Mediterranean turtle are of the kind called logger-head,
which in the West Indies are eaten by none but hungry seamen, negroes, and the
lowest class of people. One of these, weighing about 200lb. says Smollett, was
brought on shore by the fishermen of Nice, who found it floating, asleep, on
the surface of the sea. The whole town was alarmed at the fight of such a
monster, the nature of which they could not comprehend. However, the Monks
called Minims, of St. Francis's order, guided by an unerring instinct, marked
it as their prey, and surrounded it accordingly. The Friars of other convents,
not quite so hungry as those of the order of St. Francis, crowding down to the
beach, declared it should not be eaten, dropped hints of a possibility it might
be something preternatural and diabolical, and even proposed exorcisms and
emersions with holy water. The populace were divided, according to their
attachment to this or that convent; a mighty clamor arose; and the Police, to
remove the cause of their contention, ordered the tortoise to be re-committed
to the waves; a sentence which the Francisians saw executed, not without sighs
and lamentations.

But the chief fisheries of this coast are of the sardines, anchovies and
tunnies. These are taken in small quantities all the year, but spring and
summer are the seasons when they mostly abound. In June and July a fleet of
about 50 fishing-boats put to sea, every evening, about eight o'clock, and
catch anchovies in immense quantities. One small boat sometimes takes in one
night 600 weight. Anchovies, beside their making a considerable article in the
commerce of Nice, are a great resource in all families. The noblesse and
bourgeois sup on sallad and anchovies, which are eaten on all their meagre
days. The fishermen and mariners, all along this coast, have scarce any other
food but dry bread, with a few pickled anchovies; and, when the fish is eaten,
they rub their crusts with the brine. Nothing can be more delicate than fresh
anchovies fried in oil. It is needless to mention that the sardines and
anchovies are caught in nets, salted, barrelled, and exported into all the
different kingdoms and states of Europe. The tunny-fish generally runs from 50
to 100 weight, but some of them are much larger. As soon as taken they are
gutted, boiled, and cut in slices. The guts and head afford oil; the slices are
partly dried, to be eaten occasionally with oil and vinegar, or barrelled up in
oil to be exported. It is counted a delicacy in Italy and Piedmont, and tastes
not unlike sturgeon. The famous pickle of the ancients, called garum, was made
of the gills and blood of the tunny or thynnus.

The vintage begins in September. The grapes being chosen and carefully picked,
are put into a large vat, where they are pressed by a man's naked feet, and the
juices drawn off by a cock below. When no more is procured by this operation,
the bruised grapes are put into the press, and yield still more liquor. The
juice obtained by this double pressure being put in casks, with their bungs
open, begins to ferment, and discharge its impurities at the openings. The
waste occasioned by this discharge is constantly supplied with fresh wine, so
that the casks are always full. The fermentation continues for 12, 15, or 20
days, according to the strength and vigor of the grape. In about a month the
wine is sit for drinking. When the grapes are of a bad, meagre kind, the
wine-dealers mix the juice with pigeon's dung, or quick lime, in order to give
it a spirit which nature has denied.

The process for making oil is equally simple. The best olives are those that
grow wild, but the quantity of them is very inconsiderable. Olives begin to
ripen and drop in the beginning of November, but some remain on the trees till
February, and even till April, and these are counted the most valuable. When
the olives are gathered, they must be manufactured immediately, before they
fade and grow wrinkled, otherwise they will produce bad oil. -- They are first
of all ground into a paste, by a mill stone, set edge-ways in a circular stone
trough, and turned by water. This paste is put into circular cases, made of
grass woven, having a round hole at top and bottom; when filled, they resemble
in shape our Cheshire cheeses. A number of these, placed one upon another, are
put in a press, and being squeezed, the oil, with all its impurities, runs into
a receptacle below, fixed in the ground; from hence it is ladled into a wooden
vat, half filled with water. The sordes or dirt falls to the bottom. The oil
swims on top, and, being skimmed off, is barrelled in small oblong casks. What
remains in the vat is thrown into a large stone cistern with water, and, after
being often stirred, and standing 12 or 14 days, yields a coarse oil, used for
lamps and manufactures. The very finest, called virgin-oil, is made chiefly of
green olives, and sold at a very high price, because a great quantity is
required to produce a very little oil.

CHAP. XIV. People, Character, Customs, etc.
NICE abounds with noblesse. Of these, three or four families are really
respectable, the rest are novi homines, sprung from bourgeoise, who have saved
a little money by their occupations, and raised themselves to the rank of
noblesse by purchase. A man may buy a Marquisate in this country, as in
Piedmont, for 3 or 400l. but letters of noblesse are purchased for 30 or 40
guineas. In Savoy, says Smollett, there are 600 families of nobility, the
greater part of which have not above 100 crowns a year to support their
dignity. In the mountains of Piedmont, and even in this county of Nice, there
are representatives of very ancient and noble families reduced to the condition
of common peasants; but they still retain the ancient pride of their houses,
and boast of the noble blood that runs in their veins. A gentleman traveling
through the mountains, was obliged to pass the night in a cottage of one of
these rusticated nobles, who called to his son in the evening 'Chevalier, as tu
done a manger aux cochons?' This, however, is not the case with the noblesse
of Nice. Two or three of them have about 4 or 500 a year, the rest may have
about 100 pistoles, arising from the silk, oil, wine, and oranges, produced in
their small plantations. Some few of these are well built, commodious, and
agreeably situated. There is a public conversazione every evening at the
Commandant's house. In carnival time there is also a ball twice or thrice a
week. At this assembly every person may dance without distinction in
masquerades, but after dancing they are obliged to unmask, and, if burgeois, to
retire. No individual can give a ball without permission of the Commandant, and
then his house is open to all masks, without distinction.

The poverty of the people of this country, as well as of the South of France,
may be conjectured from the appearance of their domestic animals. The draught
horses, mules, and asses of the peasants are so meagre as to excite compassion.
There is not a dog to be seen in tolerable case; and the cats are so many
emblems of famine, frightfully thin and dangerously rapacious. This great
poverty of the people, says Smollett, is owing to their religion. Half of their
time is lost in observing the great number of festivals, and half of their
substance given to mendicant friars. But if the church occasions their
indigence, it likewise, in some measure, alleviates the horrors of it, by
amusing them with shows, processions, and even those very feasts which afford a
recess from labor, in a country where the climate invites them to idleness. If
the peasants in the neighborhood of any chaple, dedicated to a saint, have a
mind to make a holiday, in other words, a fair; they apply to the Commandant of
Nice for a license which costs them a crown. This being obtained, they assemble
after service, men and women, in their best apparel, and dance to the music of
fiddles, and drums. There are hucksters stands, with pedlary ware, and
knick-knacks for presents, cakes and bread, liqueurs and wine; and thither
generally resort all the company of Nice.

In speaking of their religious institutions we cannot help observing, that the
ancient Romans were still more superstitious than the modern Italians, and that
the number of their religious feasts, fasts, and holidays, were even greater
than those of the Christian church at Rome. The vast variety of their deities,
said to amount to 30,000, with their respective rights of adoration, could not
fail to introduce such a number of ceremonies, shows, sacrifices, lustrations,
and public processions, as must have employed the people almost constantly from
one end of the year to the other. This continual dissipation must have been a
great enemy to industry; and the people must therefore consequently have been
idle and effeminate. It perhaps would be no difficult matter to prove that
there is very little difference, in point of character, between the ancient and
modern inhabitants of Rome, and that the great figure, which this empire
formerly made, was not so much owing to the intrinsic virtue of its citizens,
as to the barbarism, ignorance, and imbecility of the nations they subdued; and
if the most fortunate generals of the Roman commonwealth were again placed at
the head of the armies they once commanded, instead of extending their
conquests over all Europe and Asia, I am of opinion, says Smollett, they would
hardly be able to subdue and retain, under their dominion, all the petty
republics that subsist in Italy.

How they live in their families, says Smollett, I do not choose to enquire, but
in public, Madame appears in her robe of gold, or silver stuff, with her powder
and frisure, her perfumes, her paint, and her patches; while Monsieur le Comte
struts about in his lace and embroidery. Rouge and fard are more peculiarly
necessary in this country, where the complexion and skin are swarthy and
yellow. Most of the females are likewise pot-bellied; a circumstance owing
perhaps to the great quantity of vegetable trash they eat. All the horses,
mules, asses, and cattle, which feed upon grass have the same distention. This
kind of food produces such acid juices in the stomach, as excite a perpetual
sense of hunger. I have been often amazed at the voracious appetites of these
people. But it must not be expected, says Smollett, that I should describe the
tables and hospitality of the Nissard gentry. The Consul, who is a very honest
man, told me he had lived 34 years in the country, without having once eat or
drank in any of their houses.

The greatest fault I find with the fruits of this climate, which, with
vegetables and fish, constitute the principal food of the inhabitants, is that
they are two sweet and luscious, and want that agreeable acid so cooling and
refreshing in a hot country. Nature, however, has not neglected to provide some
agreeable vegetable juices to cool the human body. During the whole summer,
there is plenty of musk melons. I can buy one, as large as my head, says
Smollett, for the value of an English penny; but one of the best and largest,
weighing about 10 or 12 pounds, costs about eight-pence. From Antibes and
Sardinia, is brought another kind, called, water-melons, well known in Jamaica,
and some of our other colonies. Those from Antibes, are about the size of an
ordinary bomb-shell; but the Sardinian and Jamaica water-melons are four times
as large. The skin is green, smooth, and thin. The inside is a purple pulp,
studded with broad, flat, black seeds, and impregnated with a juice the most
cool, delicate, and refreshing, that well can be conceived. One would imagine
the pulp itself dissolved in the stomach; for a person may eat of it, until he
is filled up to the tongue, without feeling the least inconvenience. It is so
friendly to the constitution, that in ardent fevers it is drank as the best
emulsion. At Genoa, Florence, and Rome, it is sold in the streets, ready cut in
slices; and the porters, sweating under their burdens, buy and eat them as
they pass. A London porter quenches his thirst with a draught of strong beer: a
porter of Rome or Naples, refreshes himself with a slice of water-melon, or a
glass of iced water. The one costs twopence, and the other half a farthing;
which ever of them is most effectual, the men are equally pleased. It is
commonly remarked, that beer strengthens as well as refreshes. But the porters
of Constantinople, who never drink any thing stronger than water, and eat very
little animal food, will lift and carry heavier burdens, than any other porters
in the known world. If we may believe the most respectable travelers, a Turk
will carry a load of 700 weight, which is more than any English porter ever
attempted to raise.

Among the other refreshments of these warm countries, are the Sorbettes Soldin
coffee-houses, or places of public resort. These are iced froth, made with
juice of oranges, apricots, or peaches; very agreeable to the palate, and so
extremely cold, that a stranger is afraid to swallow them in this hot councry,
until, from information and experience, he finds they may be taken in
moderation, without any bad consequence.

The people here are not so nice as the English in the management of their
wine. It is kept in flacons, or large flasks, without corks, having a little
oil at top, and not deemed the worse for having been opened a day or two
before; and they expose it to the hot sun and all kinds of weather without
hesitation. Certain it is, that this treatment has little or no effect upon its
taste, flavor, and transparency.

The houses are built of a ragged stone, dug from the mountains, and the
interstices are filled with rubble, so that the walls would appear very ugly if
they were not covered with plaster, which has a very good effect. They
generally consist of three stories, and are covered with tiles. The apartments
of the better sort, are large and lofty, the floors paved with brick, the roof
covered with a thick coat of stucco, and the walls white-washed. People of
distinction hang their chambers with damask, striped silk, painted cloths,
tapestry, or printed linens. All the doors, as well as the windows, consist of
folding leaves. As there is no wainscot in the rooms, which are divided by
stone partitions, and the floors and ceilings are covered with brick and
stucco, fires are of less dreadful consequences than in our country. The houses
in general, have no chimnies, but in the kitchens; and many people, even of
condition, have no fire in their chambers during the whole winter. When the
weather happens to be a little colder than ordinary, they warm their apartments
with a brasiere of charcoal: the beds commonly used in this place, and all over
Italy, consist of a paillasse, with one or two mattrasses laid upon planks,
supported by two wooden benches. Instead of curtains, there is a couziniere, or
mosquito-net, made of a kind of gauze, that opens and contracts occasionally,
and incloses the bed: persons of condition, $word$ have bedsteads and curtains;
but these$ $span$

Though Nice itself retains few marks of ancient splendour, there are
considerable marks of antiquity in its neighborhood. About two short miles
from the town, upon the summit of a pretty high hill, we find the ruins of the
ancient city of Cemenelion, now called Cimia, once the metropolis of the
maritime Alps, and the seat of the Roman President. With respect to situation
nothing could be more agreeable or salubrious. It stood upon the gentle ascent
and summit of a hill, fronting the Mediterranean, from the shore of which it is
distant about half a league; and on the other side, it overlooked a bottom, or
narrow vale, through which the Paglion, anciently called Paulo, runs toward
the walls of Nice. It was inhabited by a people whom Ptolemy and Pliny call the
Vedantic, but these were undoubtedly mixed with a Roman colony, as appears by
the monuments still remaining; which are the ruins of an amphitheatre, a temple
of Apollo, baths, aqueducts, sepulchral and other stones with inscriptions, and
a great number of medals, which have been found by accident in digging and
laboring the vineyards and corn fields, which cover the ground where the city
stood.

The amphitheatre is but very small compared to that of Nismes. The arena is
ploughed up, and bears corn; some of the seats remain, and part of two opposite
porticos; but all the columns, and the external facade, are taken away. About
100 paces from the amphitheatre stood an ancient temple, supposed to have been
dedicated to Apollo. The part called the Basilica, and about one half of the
cella sanctior remain. In the latter chamber, says Smollett, I found a lean
cow, a he-goat, and a jackass; the very same conjunction of animals I had seen
drawing a plough in Burgundy.

CHAP. XV. Commerce, Government, etc.
THE chief commerce of this place is a contraband traffic, carried on to the
disadvantage of France. A great quantity of merchandise is brought here every
week by mules from Turin, and other parts of Piedmont, and afterward conveyed
to the other side of the Var, either by land or by water. The mules of Piedmont
are exceeding strong and hardy. One of them will carry a burden of near 600
weight. They are easily nourished, and require no other respite from their
labor but the night's repose. They are the only carriage that can be used in
crossing the mountains, being very sure footed; and it is observed, that in
choosing their steps, they always march upon the brink of the precipice. If they
are not permitted to take their own way, the rider is in danger of losing his
life, for they are obstinate even to desperation. It is very dangerous to meet
these animals on horseback; they have such an aversion to horses that they will
attack them with incredible fury, so as even to tear them and their riders in
pieces; and the best method for avoiding this fate is, to clap spurs to one's
horse, and seek safety in flight. They always give sufficient warning, by
raising a hidious braying, as soon as they perceive a horse at a distance.

Some very feasible schemes for improving the commerce of Nice have been
presented to the ministry of Turin, but hitherto without success. The English
import annually between 2 and 3000 bales of raw silk, the growth of Piedmont;
and this is imported either from Genoa or Leghorn. Fruit and oil are likewise
sent over in great quantities from the neighboring places, there not being
sufficient depth of water for ships of any burden to approach Nice; the
harbor likewise wants to be made more commodious and secure. There is an
excellent harbor however, it seems, at Villa Franca, not more than a mile and
a half from that of Nice; but the great objection to the improvement of
commerce at Nice, according to Smollett, is the want of money, industry, and
character. The natives themselves are, in general, such dirty knaves, that no
foreigners will trust them in the way of trade. They have been known to fill
their oil-casks half full of water, and their anchovy barrels with stinking
heads of that fish, in order to cheat their correspondents.

The shopkeepers of this place are generally poor, greedy, and overreaching.
Many of them are bankrupts of Marseilles, Genoa, and other countries who have
fled from their creditors to Nice; which, being a free port, affords an asylum
to foreign cheats, and sharpers of every denomination. Here is likewise a
pretty considerable number of Jews, who live in a street appropriated for them,
which is shut up every night. They act as brokers, but are generally poor, and
deal in frippery, old clothes, remnants, and houshold-furniture.

There is another branch of commerce engrossed by the Monks. Some convents, of
which there are many in this town, have such a number of masses. bequeathed
them, that they find it impossible to execute the will of the donors. In this
case they agree by the lump with the Friars of poorer convents, who say the
masses for less money than has been allowed by the defunct, and their employers
pocket the difference; for example, says Smollett, my grandfather bequeaths a
sum of money to a certain convent, to have such a number of masses said for the
repose of his soul, at ten sols each; and this convent, not having time to
perform them, bargains with the Friars of another to say them for six sols
each, so that they gain four sols upon every mass; for it matters not to the
soul of the deceased where they are said, so they be properly authenticated. --
A poor gentleman of Nice, (adds the above Writer) who piques himself much on
the noble blood that runs in his veins, though he has not a whole pair of
breeches to wear, complained to me, that his great-grandmother had founded a
perpetual mass for the repose of her own soul, at the rate of 15 sols,
(ninepence English) a day; which indeed was all that now remained of the family
estate. He said, what made the hardship greater on him, she had been dead above
50 years, and in all probability her soul had got out of purgatory long ago,
therefore the continuance of the mass was an unnecessary expense. I told him, I
thought, in such a case, the defunct should appear before a Civil Magistrate,
and make affidavit of her being at peace, for the advantage of the family.
After musing some time, he shrugged up his shoulders and said, where the
interest of the church was at stake, he did not believe a spirit's declaration
would be held legal evidence." In some parts of France the cure of the parish,
on All Souls' Day, which is called Jours des Morts, says a prayer, for two
sols, at every grave in the burying-ground, for the release of the soul whose
body is there interred.

The citizens of Nice are lazy, needy, very awkward, and void of all ingenuity.
The price of their labor is very near as high as at London or Paris. The
lowest class of people have all the outward signs of extreme misery. They are
all diminutive, meagre, withered, dirty, and half naked; in their complexions
not barely swarthy, but black as Moors. They are, many of them, very hard
favored, and their women in general have the coarsest features imaginable; it
must be owned, however, they have the finest teeth in the world. They are
remarkably respectful and submissive to their superiors.

The populace of Nice are very quiet and orderly, little addicted to
drunkenness, riots are never heard of, and murder and robbery are altogether
unknown. A man may walk alone over the county of Nice, at midnight, without
danger of insult. The police is well regulated. No one is permitted to wear a
pistol or dagger, on pain of being sent on board the galleys. In Nice the
common people retire to their lodgings at eight o'clock in winter, and nine in
summer. Every person found in the streets after these hours, is apprehended by
the patrole, and if he cannot give a good account of himself is sent to prison.
At nine in winter, and ten in summer, the curfew bell is rung, warning people
to put out their lights and go to bed. This is a very necessary precaution in
towns liable to conflagrations, but of small use in Nice, where there is little
combustible in the houses.

The punishments inflicted upon malefactors at Nice are, hanging for capital
crimes; slavery on board the galleys, for a limited term or for life, according
to the nature of the transgression; flaggellation and the strappado. This last
punishment is performed by hoisting up the criminal, with his hands tied behind
his back, on a pully, about two stories high; from whence the rope being
suddenly slackened, he falls to within a yard or two of the ground, where he is
stopped with a violent shock, arising from the weight of his body, and the
velocity of his descent, which generally dislocates his shoulders with
incredible pain. This dreadful execution is sometimes repeated in a few minutes
on the same delinquent, so that the very ligaments are torn from his joints,
and his arms rendered useless for life.

The government of Nice is in the hands of a senate, consisting of a President,
and a certain number of Senators, who are distinguished by their purple robes,
and other ensigns of authority. They administer justice, having the power of
life and death, not only through the whole county of Nice, but causes are
evoked from Onelia, and some other places in the neighborhood, to their
tribunal, which is the dernier resort, from whence there is no appeal. The
Commandant, however, by virtue of his military power, and unrestrained
authority, takes upon him to punish individuals by imprisonment, corporal
pains, and banishment, without consulting the senate, or indeed observing any
form of trial. The only redress against unjust exercise of this absolute power
is, by complaint to the King.

The King is said to draw from Nice, 100,000 livres annually, arising from a
free gift, amounting to 700l. in lieu of the trille, from which this country is
exempted; an inconsiderable duty upon wine, and and the droits de post. These
last consist of anchorage, paid by all vessels in proportion to their tonnage,
when they enter the harbor of Nice and Villa Franca. Besides all foreign
vessels under a stipulated burden passing between the island of Sardinia and
this coast, are obliged in going to the eastward, to enter and pay a certain
stipulated imposition, on pain of being taken and made prizes of. The Prince of
Monaco exacts a talliage of the same kind; and both he and the King of Sardinia
maintain armed cruizers to assist this prerogative: from which, however, the
English and French are exempted by treaty, in consequence of a sum of money
having been paid at once. In all probability, it was originally given for
maintaining lights on the coast, like the toll paid for passing the sound in
the Baltic. The fanal, or lanthorn, to the eastward of Villa Franca, is kept in
good repair, and still lighted in the winter. The toll, however, is very
troublesome to feluccas, and other small craft, who are very much retarded, and
often lose the benefit of a fair wind, by being obliged to run in shore, and
enter these harbors.

The whole county of Nice is said to yield the King half a million of livres,
or about 25000 pounds sterling, exclusive of the revenue he draws from the
city. If we may believe the politicians of Nice, the King of Sardinia's
revenues which he draws from Nice, exceed the double of this sum. It must be
owned, that there is no country in Christendom, less taxed, than Nice; and as
the soil produces the necessaries of life, the inhabitants, with a little
industry, might renew the golden age in this happy climate. In the midst of the
pastoral advantages to be found in it, the peasants are poor and miserable;
they have no stock to begin the world with, nor have they any leases of the
lands they cultivate, but entirely depend from year to year on the pleasure of
the arbitrary land-holder; after all, the ground is too scanty for the number
of families crowded on it.

With respect to the state of the arts and sciences of Nice, there is, in this
particular, almost a total blank. This country seems at present consecrated to
dullness and superstition. It is very surprising to see a people, established
between two enlightened nations, so devoid of taste and literature. Here are no
tolerable pictures, busts, statues, nor edifices, the very ornaments of the
churches are wretchedly conceived, and worse executed. They have no public nor
private libraries that afford any thing worth perusing. There is not so much as
a single bookseller in Nice. Though they value themselves on being natives of
Italy, they are unacquainted with music. The few that play upon any
instruments, attend only to the execution. They have no genius nor taste, nor
any knowledge of harmony and composition. Among the French, a Nissard piques
himself on being provincial; but in Florence, Milan, or Rome, he claims the
honor of being a native of Italy. The people of condition, speak both
languages equally well, or rather equally ill; for they use a low uncouth
phraseology. Their vernacular tongue, is what they call Patois, though in so
calling it, they do it injustice. Patois, from the Latin word patavinitas,
means no more than a provincial accent or dialect. It takes its name from
Patavium, or Padua, the birth place of Livy, who with all his merit, as a
writer, has admitted into his history some provincial expressions of his own
country. The Patois, or native tongue of Nice, is no other than the ancient
Provencal, from which the Italian, Spanish, and French languages have been
formed. This is the language that rose upon the ruins of the Latin tongue,
after the irruption of the Goths, Vandals, Huns, and Burgundians, by whom the
Roman empire was destroyed. It was spoken all over Italy, Spain, and the
southern parts of France, until the 13th century, when the Italians began to
polish it into the language they now call their own. The Spaniards, and French
likewise, improved it into their respective tongues.

MILAN.
CHAP. XVI. Climate, Lakes, etc.
THIS Duchy is bounded on the West by Savoy, Piedmont, and Montferat, on the
North by Switzerland; on the East by the Venetian territories, and the Duchies
of Mantua, Parma, and Placentia, and on the South by the dependencies of the
republic of Genoa. Its greatest breadth, from North to South, is 100 English
miles, and its length, from East to West 120 miles. Scarce any country
throughout Europe is more fertile in a variety of excellent productions. Every
where it is watered either by rivulets or canals; and, after the harvests of
the usual kinds of grain, the people sow Turkey wheat, chiefly on account of
their poultry, which they have in great plenty, and very excellent. The
peasants also make bread of this wheat, and, when mixed with rye, it is even
used by people in good circumstances. It is not above a century since this
vegetable has been introduced into these parts, and in the opinion of some, to
the great disadvantage of the country; for this sort of grain is thought of
such a quality as not only to impoverish the land, and render it barren, but
likewise to be prejudicial to the health, both of the farmers, who sow and reap
it, and of those who eat the Maliga bread. That the cultivation of rice has
done no good either to the soil, or the inhabitants, is a matter of such
certainty in Piedmont, that it is absolutely prohibited. Upon entering the
Milanese, one meets with it in great quantities, where it is allowed, with this
restriction; that it is not to be sown near any town: and about three miles on
this side Novari is a stone set up as a boundary to the sowing of rice. The
whole world does not afford a tract of land so well watered as the Milanese;
and as the ditches and canals, every where divide the fields and meadows, no
place can be better adapted for rice. After it is sown, the ground is laid
under water, and continues so till the rice be ripe; but the pernicious effects
of the deficcation of such a marshy soil, are but too conspicuous in the
violent head-achs, vertigoes and fluxes, with which those persons are seized,
who, in summer, only travel along roads adjoining to the rice-grounds.

The fertility of the soil is so great, in most parts of the Milanese, as to
yield two crops in a year. The corn sowed in the autumn of the preceding year
ripens in June; and this is no sooner carried in, but the ground is a second
time sown with barley, Turkey wheat, etc. which is reaped in the month of
November. The pastures are very rich, especially in the district of Lodi, which
is famous for the breeding of cattle. The cheese made in the country,
improperly called Parmesan, is used all over Italy, in the best soups. Here is
also excellent wine, and all manner of vegetables, and fruit in perfection;
together with a very considerable number of mulberry trees, for silk. The
charms of the country are besides heightened by three large lakes.

The Lago Magiore, or Lago di Locarno, is sixty five Italian miles in length,
and six in breadth in most places, and its depth, about the middle, eight
fathoms. Toward Switzerland, it terminates in a canal of infinite convenience
for commerce. The journey to Geneva, through Sion, takes up four days, but the
road is extremely bad. Near Cesti the lake discharges itself into the river
Ticino, which is properly the eflux of Lago Maggiore; and at its beginning, the
current is so rapid, as with the help of a single oar, to carry a boat thirty
miles in three hours, but this rapidity, when the water is low, makes it
dangerous. The quickness of passage on the river, is balanced by the want of
dispatch on the canal, which is cut from the river to Milan, and is thirty
miles in length. The boat being drawn by horses moves so slowly that it takes
up a whole day to reach Milan. However, this canal is of very great advantage
to Milan, for by means of this, and the Lago Maggiore, it carries on a trade
with several provinces of Germany, Switzerland, and France.

This Lake is every way environed with hills covered with vineyards, and
summer-houses. Above the vineyards are plantations of chesnut-trees, the fruit
of which, in the Northern part of Italy, are consumed in such quantities, that,
when chestnuts are in great plenty, the price of corn falls, especially at
Genoa. They continue fresh and green till Christmas; but the common people eat
them till Easter. Along the banks of the lake are fine rows of trees, and walks
arched with vine-branches. This fine prospect is further heightened by large
cascades, falling from the mountains.

Two leagues from Cesti, the lake begins to widen, and presents to view the two
celebrated islands Isola Madre, and Isola Bella. These two islands can be
compared to nothing more properly, than two pyramids of sweetmeats, ornamented
with green festoons and flowers. In the garden of Isola Bella, are ten
terrasses, and the perpendicular height of these, taken together, is 60 else
above the surface of the water. These terrasses proportionably decrease in
their circumference toward the top of the hill. The oblong area on the summit,
affords a most charming prospect; is paved with fine stone, and surrounded with
a balustrade. It is in length from 45 to 50 common paces, and on every side
stands a range of marble statues in the gigantic taste. Round every terrass is
a pleasant walk, and at the four angles, are large statues and pyramids, placed
alternately. The walls from the bottom to the top, are covered with laurel
hedges, and espaliers of orange, lemon, peach-trees, etc. The annual charge of
these Borromean paradises amount to 40,000 Piedmontese livres: but to raise so
noble a superstructure, on such a foundation, and to bring these islands to
their present incomparable beauty and magnificence, seems an undertaking beyond
even the revenue of a prince to compass.

These islands belong to the Borromeo family; they were, no longer ago than the
middle of the last century, only a barren rock, to which every basket of earth,
and every thing that is found there, must have been brought at a prodigious
expense. The garden of Isola Bella, has a south aspect, and at the two angles
of its facade, are two round towers, with very lofty apartments, adorned with
red and black marble. Near the towers, is an inscription, signifying that Count
Borromeo, by the foundation underneath, and the edifices erected on these
rugged misshapen rocks, imparted a dignity to his leisure, and grandeur to his
amusements, 1671.

In the palace, though not completed, are great numbers of fine pictures,
vases, busts, and other curiosities. Among the paintings, the flower pieces,
some of which are painted upon marble, cannot be sufficiently admired. Several
of the chambers are hung with portraits of the Borromeo family. The vaults, on
which the palace stands, are contiguous to the lake, and, like grottos,
decorated with marble and shell work. The floor is a kind of Mosaic work,
consisting of small stones, so as to represent all sorts of figures. Besides
this assemblage of the beauties of art and nature, the lake, with its
undulating waves, continually washes the entrance of the grottos, so that a
more delightful summer retreat, can hardly be imagined. Toward the south, and
close behind the house, are five lofty cypress trees, of an extraordinary
largeness, equalling the palace in height, and the stems are covered with a
thick foliage of ever-green oaks to the very ground. In going from the house,
toward the garden, the smell is immediately refreshed with the united odors of
fruit and flowers. The first contra espalier, after ascending a few steps,
consists of burgamot, lemon, or citron trees; next to this appears a high range
of orange trees, beyond this is a lofty grotto, adorned with waterworks and
statues: over its center, is a unicorn, of an enormous size, in a springing
attitude, with a Cupid on his back. On both sides there is an ascent by steps
to the oblong area, which terminates the ten terrasses.

From Isola Bella to Isola Madre, is about half an hour's sailing. The latter
has seven terrasses, which are high but sloping, and at a considerable distance
from each other, so that it appears to the eye to be lower than Isola Bella,
but they are of an equal height, according to the original plans. The greatest
part of the foundation of Isola Madre, is a high perpendicular rock, projecting
considerably over the surface of the water. The house is nothing remarkable,
that front only being completeed which looks toward Isola Bella, however, it
is not without fine paintings, flowers, landscapes, etc. The garden also
abounds with beauties; among these, are a fine espalier of citron-trees, with a
low contra espalier of orange trees, an arched walk of cedars, a smaller
espalier of jessamin, an espalier of acacia, and another of rosemary, not less
than eight feet in height. with stems of the thickness of a man's arm. Here are
also several small groves of laurel, with walks cut through them; some of these
trees are of an uncommon thickness. An espalier of laurels, in this climate,
will shoot up to the height of eighteen feet, in six or seven years. There is a
little house built in this island for the pheasants, and near it is a beautiful
grove of very lofty cypress-trees: each row consists of twenty-five trees,
which spread very wide in circumference, and the trunks are of the thickness of
a man's body. This appears the finest part of the island, and is so beautiful,
says Keysler, that it naturally recals to ones mind, the fabulous descriptions
of enchanted islands. He has given views of them.

The Lago di Lugano, is 20 miles in length, and the Lago di Como, 36, with an
arm projecting from the North-west, to the South-East, till at last it becomes
a regular river, called the Adda, which empties itself into the Po. This latter
lake, says Martin, is the pleasantest of all those at the foot of the Alps.
There are large plantations of Agrumi, on the borders of it, particularly in
the sweet environs of Tremenzina, whither many of the noble Milanese retire,
during the heat of summer.

At Casa Simonetta, is an echo, which will repeat the human voice, 40 times,
and the report of a pistol, 56 or 60 times. This is occasioned, says Keysler,
by the reflection of the voice, between the opposite parallel wings of the
building, which are 58 common paces from each other, and without any windows,
or doors, by which the sound might be dissipated or lost. The repetition of the
sound, dwells chiefly on the last syllable, which might have been altered, by
allowing a greater distance between the two wings; but possibly it was
apprehended, that the number of the repetitions would be diminished by that
means. The reverberations of the air, in conveying sounds, are best conceived
by two looking-glasses, alternately reflecting to each other an image, which
gradually fades; but whether the repetition of the sound be direct or
undulatory, I shall not at present discuss. It is certain, that where no
intermediate body opposes the motion of the air, there is no echo; and where
the opposite bodies are at too great a distance from each other, either the air
impelled by the voice or instrument, does not reach them; or the motion is so
weak, that it causes but a faint echo, which cannot be heard. On the other
hand, if the resisting body be too near, it reflects the sound too quick to be
distinctly perceived. If the voice falls on an angular or unequal body the
reflected sound diverges into several different directions, none of which form
a proper angle to reach the ear. A concave or unequal body indeed, reflects the
sound with a stronger echo to one particular place, (as a concave burning glass
reflects and concenters the solar rays into one focus,) which is not heard by
the person who first put the air in motion, but by some others, who happen to
be in the focus where the rays of sound unite. This kind of echo is attended
with no repercussion, and causes only a single repetition of the sound. Two or
more bodies, placed opposite each other, at different distances, are requisite
to form a multiplied echo; or the wall at which the speaker stands must have
another wall, opposite to it, so as to form two parallel planes, which will
alternately reflect to each other the sound communicated to them with as little
dissipation as possible. This last circumstance is found in the two parallel
wings of this seat, which forming right angles, with the main body of the
building, have a very surprising effect. A man's voice is repeated above 40
times, and the report of a pistol above 60 by this echo: but the repetition is
so quick, that it is difficult to tell them, or even to mark them down, unless
it be early in a morning, or in a calm still evening: when the air is rather
too moist or too dry, the effect is found not to answer so well. Pliny mentions
a wonderful echo at Olimpia, where a gallery was contrived, so as to repeat a
word seven times.

The Milanese are fond of rural sports, and pass part of the summer, and the
whole autumn in the country. Monte di Brianza, on which many of their country
houses are situated, is delightful for the variety of landscapes, and for being
well watered. Every part indeed of the state of Milan, except to the northward,
which is mountainous, bears testimony to the beneficial effects of inigation.
There are generally five crops of hay every season in the neighborhood of
Milan and in the province of Lodi, where the meadows are watered once a week
during the summer, if necessary.

CHAP. XVII. City of Milan.
MILAN, the ancient capital of Lombardy, is the largest city in Italy, except
Rome, but though it is thought, says Moore, rather to exceed Naples in size, it
does not contain above one half the number of inhabitants. Like Rome, says
Martin, it has many large gardens, and like Rome too, it is well peopled in the
parts that are built. This city is not to be compared for beauty and
convenience with that of Turin, most of the streets being narrow and winding.
All the houses here are covered with pantiles, and in many of the cross
streets, and at the stations or places, where the public processions stop,
statues are erected, to the number of 60, some of marble, but most of brass.
The inhabitants of this city are computed to be about 300,000. Milan has 12
gates, six of which are larger than the rest, and terminate so many broad
streets, called Gli Corsi; and these are the best in the whole city; but they
are a great distance from the center, and likewise from each other; a daily
market is kept at the six great gates. There are 110 monasteries in Milan, 100
oratories for religious fraternities, 170 schools, and 250 churches, of which
near 100 are parochial.

The cathedral stands in the center of the city; and, after, St. Peter's at
Rome, is the most considerable building in Italy. It ought, by this time, to be
the largest in the world, says Moore, if what they tell us be true, that it is
near 400 years since it was begun, and that there has been a considerable
number of men daily employed in completing it ever since; but as the injuries
which time does to the ancient parts of the fabric, keep them in constant
employment, without the possibility of their work being ever completed,
Martial's Epigram on the Barber Eutrapelus, has been applied to them with great
propriety. That poor man, it seems, performed his operations so very slowly,
that the beards of his patients, required shaving again, on the side where he
had begun, by the time he had finished the other. No church in Christendom is
so much loaded, I had almost said disfigured, with ornaments. The number of
statues, within-side and without, is prodigious; they are all of marble, and
many of them finely wrought.

The greater part cannot be distinctly seen from below, and therefore certainly
have nothing to do above. Besides those which are of a size, and in a situation
to be distinguished from the street, there are great numbers of smaller
statues, like fairies, peeping from the cornice, and hid among the grotesque
ornaments, which are here in great profusion. They must have cost much labor
to the artists who formed them, and are still a source of toil to strangers,
who, in compliment to the person who harangues on the beauties of this church,
which he says, is the eighth wonder of the world, are obliged to ascend to the
roof to have a nearer view of them.

This vast fabric is not simply incrusted, which is not uncommon in Italy, but
entirely built of solid white marble, and supported by 50 columns, said to be
84 feet high. The four pillars, under the cupola, are 28 feet in circumference.
By much the finest statue, belonging to it, is that of St. Bartholomew. He
appears stayed, with his skin flung round his middle, like a sash, and in the
easiest and most degage attitude imaginable. The muscles are well expressed,
and the figure might be placed with great propriety, in the hall of an
anatomist; but, exposed as it is, to the view of people of all professions, and
of both sexes, it excites more disgust and horror, than admiration. Like those
beggars, who uncover their sores in the streets, the artist has destroyed the
very effect he meant to produce. This would have sufficiently evinced, that the
statue was not the work of Praxiteles, without the inscription on the pedestal.
Non me Praxiteles, sed Marcus finxit Agrato. "I am not the workmanship of
Praixteles, but of Marcus Agrato."

The inside of the choir, is ornamented by some highly esteemed sculpture, in
wood. From the roof, hangs a case of crystal, enclosing a nail, surrounded by
rays of gilt metal, and said to be one of those, by which our Savior was
nailed to the cross: near it is a kind of machine by which six persons may be
drawn up to it at once. On the third of May, being the festival of the
invention of the cross, this relic is carried about in grand procession. The
like is also done on any extraordinary irritations, as a long drought, the
plague, and other public calamities. It is then carried by the Archbishop,
under a magnificent canopy.

Among other curiosities in this church, there is a very extraordinary one,
viz. a piece of Aaron's rod. Some pieces of it, are also shown in the
palace-church of Hanover, among those relics which Henry, surnamed the Lion,
brought from the Holy Land; it is also accompanied with a piece of Moses's rod.

The pavement is a kind of mosaic, consisting of pieces of red, black, and
white marble, inlaid; so as to represent circles, festoons, flowers, foliage,
etc. so that when it is viewed from the cupola, it appears like a beautiful
carpet. The pavement of the choir, is said to have cost above five thousand
crowns. The rest of the pavement is only made of tiles, and those laid so
uneven, as to be very inconvenient for people to walk upon them.

The Prebendarie stalls are made of walnut-tree, on which, all the remarkable
actions of the Emperor Theodosius and St. Ambrose, are admirably executed in
sculpture. Every action is represented on a distinct compartment, and though
numerous, are said to be the work of one artist. The canons are divided into
three classes, thirty of which, are nobles; and, like the Cardinals, wear a red
vestment; the second class consists of wealthy citizens, who are clothed in
green; and the rest, wear the common habit of the Clergy.

A marble staircase, carried round one of the main pillars, consisting of 158
steps, leads to the first outward gallery. Here is a marble statue of Duke John
Galeazzo Visconti, on the top of a pyramid, with a flag in his hand, who, in
the year 1386, laid the foundation of this stately edifice. This statue, though
as big as the life, when seen from the ground, does not appear to exceed a span
and a half in length. Many statues of Saints, Dukes, and other eminent
personages, stand round the gallery; several of these images are of a gigantic
size, and some make such an appearance, that reverence for the persons
represented, and a regard to modesty, has occasioned them to be placed at this
height, in order to set them at a proper distance from the public view.

In this church, there are silver votive offerings, to the weight of some
thousands of ounces, representing heads, hearts, feet, hands, ears, and other
parts of the body, which had been hurt or diseased, but supposed to be restored
to their strength and soundness, by the intercession of St. Charles Borromeo.
All silversmiths expose to sale, such votive pieces, of different sizes, ready
made, that a recovered patient may immediately pay his vow, lest his gratitude
should cool by any delay.

The body of this Saint, lies on the altar of a subterraneous chapel, directly
under the main cupola. It is dressed in pontifical robes, and lies in a shrine
of crystal, of almost inestimable value, within a coffin made of wood. The body
is entire, and the face quite perfect, except the tip of the nose, but the skin
is of the color and consistence of parchment; it has a shining appearance,
like a burn or scald newly healed; he has silk gloves on; his portrait is
preserved in a little chapel just by; it is done in embroidery by the famous
Peregina, and exhibits a strong likeness, to what he is at present. There is
but one key belonging to this chapel, which is kept by the Archbishop, without
whose leave, this venerable relic is not to be seen. The walls of the chapel
are almost every where lined with silver. This is the Saint, who sold an estate
for 80,000 dollars, all which money he distributed in one day to the poor.
Every separate compartment of this chapel, is cased, says Piozzi, like our old
fashioned watch-cases, with some story from his life. Every year, the immortal
Carlo Borromeo's actions are rehearsed, and his praises celebrated by people,
appointed in every church, to preach his example and record his excellence.

A sight of the treasury, costs about five or six shillings; it is extremely
rich, and contains a prodigious number of gold and silver vessels, statues,
rings, chalices, crucifixes, of which the metal is the least valuable part.
Some of the most valuable curiosities to be seen here, are a silver image of
St. Borromeo, bigger than life, with a diamond crucifix of immense value,
hanging at his breast. The front of this mitre, which is always put on the
deceased Archbishop's head, when his body is carried in procession, is entirely
covered with pearl. The Archbishop, on these public occasions, carries a
crystal cup, set in gold, with a sapphire of the largeness of a bean, on the
top of the cover. Another jewel, consisting of a cluster of gems, with an
oriental topaz, of the bigness of a large walnut in the center, is worn by the
Archbishop at his bosom. St. Charles Borromeo's ring, has in it a sapphire of
the size of a hazel-nut, and is kissed, with great devotion, by all
ecclesiastics.

A rich merchant of this city, left besides his other charitable foundations,
230,000 ducats, to be expended in building the front of the cathedral only, and
yet the work is not so much as begun. This is supposed to be omitted purposely,
that persons of fortune, and of a liberal disposition, being affected by such a
sight, may be excited to contribute largely, in order to complete the church,
and embrace the opportunity of securing their eternal salvation. Though, as we
observed before, it is near five centuries since this church has been begun:
the whole square behind it, is filled with workmen, employed in sawing,
cutting, and polishing the marble. There is an annual income of 18,000 crowns
levied till the church shall be completed.

Both here, and in other churches in the Milanese, the entrances are crowded
with old women, spinning, or occupied with some other employment; as they do
not beg, they possibly conceive it to be a work of merit, to spend the whole
day, as it were, in the house of God. One also meets here, with women in black
veils, asking alms, supposed to be such, who, from their rank or circumstances,
are not willing to be known; as they beg in public. Formerly, men used this
disguise, but, on account of the many abuses they committed, the Archbishop
prohibited that sex the use of it.

Opposite to the cathedral, stands the Archbishop's palace, a very spacious
building, consisting of two courts. In one of these, are the statues of St.
Charles Borromeo, and St. Ambrose; the latter, with an iron rod in his hand, as
an emblem of his heroic opposition to the Emperor Theodosius, in which
particular, the Clergy, had they power, do not want the inclination to imitate
him.

The Ambrosian college, which stands near the center of the city, is a
foundation for the several branches of literature, where youth are instructed
gratis, by 16 professors. The city is obliged to Cardinal F. Borromeo, nephew
to the Saint of that name, for this institution. The chief thing here, worth a
traveller's notice, is the library, which is upon a very extensive scale. This
library, except in vacation time, is open every morning, from ten to twelve,
and in the afternoon also, for two hours: it contains 45,000 printed volumes;
which, however, are far less valuable than its treasure of manuscripts. In
appearance, it does not seem credible, that the latter should amount to 15,000,
as it is pretended; but, that there are some good pieces among them, is
certain. Here is a voluminous work, treating of the affairs of Italy, entitled,
de Scriptoribus Rerum Italicarum, compiled by the learned Muraton. The most
curious manuscript in the whole library, is a translation of Josephus's History
of the Jews, by Rufinus, in folio, it being reputed to be above 1300, or at
least 1100 years old, and is written on the bark of a tree. Some adjacent
rooms, serve for a museum, where, among other curiosities, is the skeleton of a
woman of great beauty, who directed that her bones should be disposed of in
this manner, and under the skeleton, are these words: Ut aegrotantium saluti
mortucrum inspectione viventes prospicere possint bunc (...). i. e. This
skeleton is placed here, that the living, by a view of the dead, may be the
better enabled to restore health to the sick. If this lady, says Moore, only
meant to give a proof of the transient nature of external charms, and that a
beautiful woman is not more desirable after death, than a homely one, she might
have allowed her body to be consigned to dust in the usual way. In spite of all
the cosmetics, and other auxiliaries, which vanity employs to varnish and to
support decaying beauty and flaccid charms, the world have been long satisfied,
that death is not necessary to put the fair and the homely on a level; a very
few years, even during life, do the business.

But the most valuable thing, among the whole collection, are 12 large volumes
of Leonardo da Vinci's manuscripts, consisting of mathematical and other
designs, which sufficiently manifest the accurate knowledge of that great man
in anatomy, optics, geometry, architecture, sculpture, and mechanics; and that
in the theory of those sciences, he has been equalled by very few. His
mechanical designings are exceedingly curious, and consist of 399 leaves,
containing 1750 original designs. The notes are written in very small hand, and
from the right to the left; so that they cannot be easily read, without a
magnifying speculum, and on this account, there is one always at hand. For this
one volume, James I. King of England, is said to have commissioned the Earl of
Arundel, to offer 3000 pistoles to the person in whose hands it then was; but
he rather chose to make a present of it to the Ambrosian college, that this
part of his works might not be separated from the rest.

Leonardo had his surname of Vinci, from a castle of that name, situated near
Florence. He died at Fountainbleau, in 1520, in the 75th year of his age, with
this honorable circumstance, that he expired in the arms of Francis the Is It.
who had condescended to visit him in his last illness.

In this library, are also volumes of designs by other masters, such as
Raphael, Michael Angelo, Andrea del Sarto, Corregio, Parmesano, and several
books of painted birds and flowers.

Over the great door of the refectory, in the Dominican convent, is the Lord's
supper, painted by Leonardo da Vinci, but with too many marks of the injuries
of time. The story of Vinci's revenge on the haughty Prior, who was incessantly
teazing him to dispatch the picture, in painting the traitor Judas in his
likeness, may, with other particulars, be read at large, in Vasari's Lives of
the Painters.

The following distich on a plain piece of marble, shows where George Merula,
the historian, a native of Milan, lies interred: Vixi aliis inter spinas
mundique procellas,
Nunc hospes caeli Merula vivo mihi,
Lancinus Curtius F. Amticus posit.


"When among the storms and troubles of the world, I, Merula, lived to others;
but now, become an inhabitant of heaven, I live for myself. Lancinus Curtius
his friend, erected this.

In the sacristy of St. Eustorius's church, is a gold medal, said to be among
the offerings of the Magi to Jesus Christ. Whenever this medal is shown to any
person, the Monks insist on a promise of their devoutly kissing it. It seems
there are scarce any traces of an impression remaining. The bodies of the three
Magi, are reported to have been first brought from Persia to Constantinople,
from whence they were conveyed to Milan. But Antiquarians are not a little
divided about their number, some affirming them to have been 12, others 14, and
Epiphanius, 15. Their threefold offering was no proof of their being but three
in number; gold, and myrrh, and frankincense, being the most valuable produce
of their country, and what the Queen of Sheba brought Solomon, as the most
honorable present she could make that monarch. The more modern writers,
agreeable to the opinion of Pope Leo the Great, limit the number of the eastern
Magi to three; but venerable Bede is the first who brought to light their
names, viz. Caspar, Melchior, and Balthazar: and it is a superstitious notion
of some standing, that the following distich, written on a slip of paper, and
carried about the patient, is an infallible preservative against epilepsies:
Caspar fert myrrham; thus, Melchior; Balthazar, aurum,
Haec tria qui secum portabit nomina regum,
Solvitur a morbo Christi pietate caduco.


" Caspar brings myrrh, Melchior frankincense, Balthazar gold; whoever carries
about him the names of these three Kings, will be preserved through the merits
of Jesus Christ, from the salling sickness.

Keysler, who in general is very accurate, has only two lines, and observes,
that something seems wanting to complete the sense.

Near the Porta Orientale, is the spacious Lazaretto, belonging to the great
hospital; the area is let out to poor people, who maintain themselves by
cultivating gardens and vineyards; and this is the only thing worth seeing in
it. The 360 chambers round the quadrangle, are quite empty and out of repair.
The whole building is of stone, and every cell has a window toward the
country, and another toward the gardens in the middle of the Lagaretto, and
its particular chimney and privy. On the outside of these cells, runs a piazza,
with marble pillars. In the time of a pestilence, or epidemic distemper,
foreigners are expelled out of the country, and the infected subjects brought
hither. The compass of ground enclosed in the Lazaretto, may be conceived from
the length of one of its sides, which is 600 paces. Another great convenience
here is, that a swift stream is made to run along under the whole quadrangle,
and thus carries off all the filth. Facing the entrance, is a marble pillar,
with a hole, representing a broken plague sore in the flesh; within, it appears
fresh and bloody, and without, yellow and purulent, and is said to arise from a
miracle of St. Charles Borromeo, who once exorcised the plague into this pillar.

As to hospitals, Lazaretti, and other charitable foundations, protestant
countries can by no means come in competition with those of the Romish
persuasion. However, at Leyden there is still a pesthouse kept up, with 250
beds always in readiness, and, upon occasion, capable of receiving 900
patients. Nothing can exceed the cleanliness and decency observed there, with
this exception only, that every patient has not a particular room, but 20, or
more lie in one ward; which, in a contagious distemper, cannot but be attended
with bad consequences. From this dreadful scourge, Leyden has been free ever
since 1667, and Milan since the year 1630; and it is to be hoped that, by the
precautions lately introduced, the use of more healthy and nutritive aliments,
greater cleanliness in apparel and linen, spaciousness of houses, and breadth
of streets, for freer passage of the air, that Europe will no more be subject
to such pestilential ravages, as in the days of our ancestors.

During the last plague at Milan some villains were found of such execrable
barbarity, as to increase the contagion by poisonous ointments, which they
threw in the streets, or smeared about in several parts of the city. However
their abominable guilt was not long concealed, and two of the ringleaders, a
Barber, and the Commissary of Health, were punished with proper rigor and
severity; as appears by an inscription on a pillar erected where the Barber's
house stood, which is called Colonna infame.

The purport of the inscription, which is in Latin, is, that in this open area
formerly stood the shop of John James Mora, who, together with William Platea,
the Commissary of Health, and others, whilst the city was afflicted with a
dreadful pestilence, spread about poisonous ointments, by which many died in a
deplorable manner. Being by the Senate declared enemies to their country, they
were first sentenced to be torn in pieces with red hot pincers, and to have
their right hands cut off, then to be broke upon the wheel, and to lie six
hours tied down to the same; after which their throats to be cut, and their
bodies to be burned to ashes; and, that nothing might remain of such execrable
villains, their goods to be confiscated, and their ashes to be thrown into the
river; and, that for the perpetual commemoration of their guilt and punishment,
the house, where this horrid fact was concerted, was ordered to be levelled to
the ground, and never to be rebuilt, and a pillar to be erected on the spot,
called the Infamous Column. Approach not this place good citizens, is farther
inscribed upon it, fly far away; lest ye be polluted by this infamous and
execrable spot.

In one of the convents belonging to the Dominicans, the tribunal of the
Inquisition is held; the severities of which are exercised chiefly against the
Jewish religion, and no one of that profession must come into the city without
first making his appearance before this tribunal. The court of Inquisition at
Milan, besides ecclesiastics, consists of 60 noblement, and 150 reputable
merchants. They, whose misfortune it is to fall into their hands, never know
the informer, nor on what account they are imprisoned; and from those nauseous
cells in which they are confined, and other shocking hardships, there is no
deliverance but by becoming their own accusers.

A priest, says Keysler, previous to his visiting this city, underwent a severe
punishment merely for celebrating mass before he received his bull of
ordination. It was in vain for him to plead that the Pope's bull was on the
road from Rome; and the interest of his relations, who were persons of some
note, was to as little purpose. A scaffold being erected before the church
where the crime had been committed, he was sentenced first to read mass; and as
soon as he began, the first leaf was immediately torn out, after which his
canonical robes were pulled off. He was then delivered over to the civil
magistrate, by whose order, the thumbs, with the fore and middle fingers of
both his hands, between which, at the elevation, he held the host, being first
burnt to a coal, he was hanged. This severity is easily accounted for from the
dignity assumed by the priesthood, and the great importance to the Pope, that
none intrude themselves into that office without being properly ordained. It is
a position of Hostiensis that the sacerdotal office, is 7644 times above the
regal, that being the proportion of magnitude between the sun and the moon. In
the eye of the canon law the prerogative of the crown is as much inferior to
that of the mitre, as lead is to gold. But Alanus de Rupe, in his Treatise on
the Dignity of the Priesthood, takes a higher flight, and scruples not to raise
the power of the priest above that of God himself, alleging that God spent a
whole week in creating the world, and disposing it into proper form; whereas a
priest, every time he says mass with a word or two, produces not a mere
creature, but the supreme uncreated Being himself the origin of all things. Le
Gendre, in his History of France, relating that Louis XI wishing that he was as
happy as the Virgin Mary, who carried our Savior in her womb; the Pope gave
that monarch to understand, that the priestly office is still more honorable;
insomuch that a priest may daily, or oftener, carry the body of Christ in his
hand.

Near the Dominican church is a school with this inscription over the door:
Pauperibus pueris primam capientibus artem
En pateo, argentum nolo, sed ingenium.


"I stand open to poor youths, who are desirous of the first rudiments of
learning; I ask not money, only genius."

The great hospital, founded by Duke Francisco Sfortia, is a noble building,
perhaps the first in the world of it is kind. The middle court of this hospital
is surrounded by a piazza, which consists of 80 arches, supported by marble
pillars. Each side of this court, which is square, is 250 feet in length, and
has three galleries: besides this large court, there are eight smaller. The
number of wards for the sick and wounded, are 24, who are distributed into
proper wards, according to their different diseases. The consumptive patients
have their particular ward, another is appointed for fevers, a third for the
small pox, a fourth for the wounded, a fifth for the venereal disease, etc.
There are generally about 400 patients in the fever-ward. Though this ward is
very lofty in respect of the others, and all possible care is taken for the
free passage of air, to keep it sweet and cle$$, yet amidst such numbers of
patients, it is impossible to prevent an offensive smell. The sight of some
hundreds, lying in a fever, must every where be disagreeable, but especially
here, where the black hair of the Italians adds to the ghastliness of their
sallow, meagre visages.

In the admission of exposed foundlings, or of sick and wounded, no regard is
paid to country or religion. The Protestants lie in the same wards with other
patients, but at the other end; and when the Host is elevated, or carried
about, a curtain is drawn between them and the rest. Thus, by a very
commendable and humane indulgence, the adoration of the Host is dispensed with,
and the conscience is free from all compulsion; nor are strangers obliged to
kneel on meeting the Host, either in the churches or streets.

The wounded are brought into this hospital by a particular door, which is kept
open all night for that purpose; but other patients are admitted only in the
daytime. This is a regulation, which if the Governors of our Hospitals in
England, were to adopt, it would redound more to their credit and humanity. We
have the conceit to imagine, that we are the most charitable nation on the face
of the earth; whereas, an attentive insight into the manners and customs of
other nations, will show that there are few, who do not exceed us, in their
benevolent institutions, for the assistance and relief of the distressed.

These foundations are under the continual inspection of 19 of the principal
nobility; one of these governors must attend every morning, in his turn, to
enquire into the management of the hospital, and visit all the wards; asking
the patients, one by one, whether they are well treated, and upon the least
just complaint against any officer, he is immediately removed. The visitor also
enquires if any thing be wanting, and whether any wounded patients have been
received into the hospital, the preceding night; and every morning, an account
of their admittance and condition, is drawn up by a Notary. To this hospital
belong nine Physicians and four Surgeons, who all visit the patients three
times a day, and administer medicines to the sick; the Surgeons indeed live in
the hospital. The dispensary itself takes up a very large hall, where every
afternoon the medicines are made up for the use of the following day. The
prescriptions are regularly entered in a day-book, and, for preventing any
accident or mistake among such a variety of different medicines, every dose is
marked with the number of the bed, and the name of the patient for whom it is
designed.

The plasters are made and spread, in a particular apartment: to this hospital
also belongs a very good physic-garden. For carrying off the filth, a canal or
sink runs under every part of this edifice, and all the tradesmen employed by
the hospital, live within its walls, as the baker, butcher, weaver, tailor,
sempstress, and several others who have their respective shops; so that this
hospital is as it were a little city, or republic within itself, having very
little connection with Milan. In the meadows belonging to this hospital, are
kept bullocks, sheep, etc. and by computation between 5 and 600 weight of
butchers meat is daily consumed here, besides other eatables.

The number of patients generally exceeds 1500: the females are distributed
into nine particular wards; the officers and servants, of all ranks, in this
hospital, are reckoned to be 500. At the charge of the hospital, but at another
place, are likewise maintained 300 idiots and lunatics, and also above 5000
foundlings. Some of these last are kept in the country, and others in the city,
where they are brought up to handicraft trades. None but women of very good
character are admitted as wet-nurses to these children. Two hours after
sunset, at the main entrance of the hospital, a kind of wicket is opened,
within which is a copper machine, in the shape of an oven, which turns on an
axis, and is large enough to contain a child of seven or eight years old. The
machine has a large aperture, which at night is turned toward the street; and
mothers, who have been lately delivered, and are unable to bring up their
children, send them here. The child being put into the machine, the person who
brings it, turns it about, knocks at the gate and makes off; then the porter,
who always sits up in the room, to which the open side of the machine is
turned, receives the infant, and sends it to one of the nurses. Every such
foundling is baptized, unless a note be left to signify that it has been done
already. Formerly, unnatural or distressed parents used to lay down the infants
at the gate, through which the wounded patients were conveyed in the night; so
that often the poor children were deprived of their limbs, and sometimes lost
their lives by some accident before they were found, and taken in. Four or five
children are often brought to the hospital in one night, and seldom less than
three. The apartments of the wet-nurses, and of all the other women belonging
to the hospital, are so contrived that no men can come among them, unless in
the presence of those invested with some authority. The wet-nurses, when either
the weakness or illness of the infants requires them to remain in the hospital,
are allowed a bedchamber, another for feeding the children, and a third for
washing them. What institution in England have we to vie with this? None. In
Ireland there is something similar to it, where numbers of children from the
Welsh and Lancashire coasts are daily sent to be educated and brought up; and
yet how much more consequential do we conceive ourselves, than either the
Milanese or the Irish.

The certain yearly income of this hospital amounts to 90 or 100,000 crowns. No
country in the world, says Keysler, equals Italy in the care of the poor and
sick; and if there be any fault in this particular, it is, perhaps, the want of
due qualifications in the physicians and surgeons.

La Charity, and that famous hospital in Paris, l'Hotel Dieu, says the above
author, receive indeed a great number of patients, but nothing of the
regularity and cleanliness of the Italian hospitals is to be seen there. Only
the lower wards of the latter hospital have single beds for each patient, and
these but few in number, and are paid for; most of the other beds are for two
persons, who also lie one at the head and the other at the feet; and in many of
the beds four patients lie in the same manner. In such a situation it must
necessarily follow, that some patients who are on the mending hand, may be
obliged to lie several hours with others who are in the agonies of death; and
it is no very uncommon case for the dead to lie an hour or longer among the
living, especially if it should happen that the patient dies after ten o'clock
at night.

Besides, the great hospital are several other foundations for the sick and
poor. La Charity is a large building for the support of 200 orphans. St.
Vincentis hospital for lunatics, has seldom less than 200 patients. In that of
St. Celsus some hundreds of foundlings are provided for; and in St. Ambrose's
hospital, aged persons, who are past their labor, are comfortably maintained.
The Broglio hospital is the receptacle for such patients as are infected with
venereal complaints, which in Italy are not only more frequent, but more
shocking and terrible in their consequences than in other countries.

St. Stephen's Church is built on the spot where the first battle against the
Arians is said to have been fought, with this addition, that St. Ambrose, being
at a loss to distinguish the dead bodies of the orthodox from the heretics,
ordered the latter to lie with their faces downwards to the earth, and the
former to look up toward Heaven, which was immediately done. It is further
related that the blood of the faithful, gathering together, conglomerated into
the form of a wheel, until it was totally absorbed by a hollow stone, over
which a brass plate is placed on the ground; and opposite to it is a pillar
with the figure of a wheel, and an inscription cut upon it in Latin, signifying
that this wheel was set up as a memorial of a most bloody battle, fought
between the Catholics and the Arians, when St. Ambrose was Bishop of Milan; by
the prevalency of whose prayers the blood of the orthodox that were slain,
which ran promiscuously with the blood of the heretics, immediately coagulated
in the form of a wheel, (separating what was sacred from the profane,) which
gave the name of La Rota to this church, a name it still retains with that of
St. Stephen's. The inscription further remarks, that the hollow stone, which
lies opposite the wheel, absorbed the blood of the saints, which miraculously
flowed to this place, and requesting the reader to adore the traces of this
miracle and reverence its memory.

A few paces from St. Stephen's Church stands a chapel paved with several
hundred skulls and bones of those that were slain in the abovementioned action,
almost like the chapel of the 11000 virgins at Cologn. The bones constitute the
ground work, and the skulls form the crosses with which it is inlaid: besides
these, on each side of the altar, stands a pyramid of bones, secured with an
iron grate, that none may fall down or be stolen.

Milan, like all very large cities, is of little strength, being only
surrounded by a lined rampart. The Governor General of the Milanese resides at
Milan, in a spacious but old and ill contrived palace, in which also is the
theater for operas and comedies. Mrs. Piozzi, speaking of the theater in this
city, which will hold 4000 persons, says, a receptacle so capacious to contain
4000 people, a place of entrance so commodious to receive them, a show so
princely, so very magnificent to entertain them, must be sought in vain out of
Italy. The center front box, richly adorned with gilding, arms, and trophies,
is appropriated to the court, whose canopy is carried up, to what we call the
first gallery, in England; the crescent of boxes, ending with the stage,
consist of 19 on a side, small boudoirs, for such they seem; and are as such,
fitted, up with silk hangings, girandoles, etc. and placed so judiciously, as
to catch every sound of the singers, if they do but whisper; I will not say,
remarks Mrs. Piozzi, it is equally advantageous to the figure as to the voice;
no performers looking adequate to the place they recite upon; so very stately
is the building itself, being of entire stone, with an immense portico, and
stairs, which for width, a carriage might be drawn up. There is an immense
sideboard at the first lobby, lighted and furnished with luxurious and elegant
plenty; it being the fashion for many people to send for supper to their box,
where they can entertain their friends with infinite convenience and splendor.
A silk curtain defends the closet from intrusive eyes, when dropped down; and
when drawn up, gives gaiety and show to the general appearance of the whole;
across the corridor, leading to these boxes, another small chamber, numbered
like that it belongs to, is appropriated to the use of the servants, and
furnished with every convenience to make chocolate, serve lemonade, etc.

CHAP. XVIII. People, Character, Customs, Manners, Diversions. etc.
THE fair sex, both of the highest and lowest rank at Milan, are but very
indifferent in their persons, whereas the middling or trading class of people,
affords a great many very pretty women: in dress and gallantry, they come very
near the fashions and gallantry of Paris, indeed much nearer than in many of
the provincial cities. At an opera, says Grosley, all the gay world is seen,
and, to the greater advantage; as during the play, the ladies receive visits,
and for this purpose, their boxes are illuminated and set off with
looking-glasses, couches on every side, and sumptuous hangings. These boxes,
which are hired by the year, may be close shut in the front, and very often, a
small part only of them is open, that the play may less disturb the
conversation.

There is no place in Italy, remarks Moore, (he adds, I perhaps might have said
in Europe,) where strangers are received in such an easy, hospitable manner, as
at Milan. Formerly the Milanese nobility displayed a degree of splendor and
munificence, not only in their entertainments, but in their usual style of
living, unknown in any other country in Europe. They are under a necessity at
present, of living at less expense; but they still show the same obliging and
hospitable disposition. This country having not very long since been possessed
by the French, from whom it devolved to the Spaniards, and from thence to the
Germans; the troops of these nations, have at different periods had their
residence here, and in the course of these vicissitudes, produced a style of
manners, and stamped a character on the inhabitants of this Duchy, different
from what prevails in any other part of Italy; and nice observers imagine they
perceive in Milanese manners, the politeness, formality, and honesty imputed to
these three nations, blended with the ingenuousness natural to the Italians.
The company assembles every evening in their carriages on the ramparts, and
drive about in the same manner as in the other cities of Italy, till it is
pretty late. In Italy the ladies have no notion of quitting their carriages,
and using their legs as in England and France. On seeing the number of
servants, and the splendor of the equipages, which appear every evening at the
Corso on the ramparts, one would not suspect the degree of depopulation and
diminution of wealth, which we are assured has taken place within these few
years all over the Milanese; and which is said, to proceed from the burdensome
nature of some late taxes, and the insolent and oppressive manner in which they
are gathered.

Keysler remarks that the vicissitudes this state has undergone, have
introduced a much more social and free way of living than in the South parts of
Italy; to this the fertility of the country, and wealth of the nobility, do not
a little contribute. The ladies can hardly be under less restraint, even in
France, than they are here. During the carnival, women of the first fashion are
accustomed to give magnificent entertainments, even at public taverns; to avoid
the inconvenience and charges, with which such entertainments would be attended
at their own houses. Their husbands seem perfectly easy, with regard to their
festivities, either from pusillanimity or a confidence in their virtue and
discretion; and some are so passionately fond of their wives, as to grudge
nothing that may contribute to their satisfaction and pleasure.

The woman of the lower class, imitate their betters as near as they can, and
indulge themselves in liberties, which in other parts of Italy are denied them;
here also, as in Paris, trade is mostly managed by women, who amuse themselves
with sewing or embroidering; and the shops, though they are quite open, while
the season permits, are the places of rendezvous, for a great deal of company.
Even in convents the austerities of a monastic life are so far relaxed, that a
traveller may not only talk, rally, and laugh with the nuns at the grate, but
join in a concert with them, and spend a whole, afternoon in these
familiarities.

The Lombards possess the skill to please, without feigning; and, so artless
are their manners, they cannot even be suspected of insincerity. They have,
perhaps, for that very reason, few comedies and fewer novels among them; for
the worst of every man's character is already known to the rest; but be his
conduct what it will, the heart is commonly right enough, il buon cuor
Lombardo, is famed throughout Italy, and nothing can become proverbial, without
an excellent reason. Little opportunity is therefore given to writers who carry
the dark lanthorn of life into its deepest recesses -- unveil the hidden
wickedness of a Maskwell or a Monkton -- develope the folds of vice, and spy
out the internal worthlessness of apparent virtue; which from these discerning
eyes cannot be cloaked, even by that early taught affectation, which renders it
a real ingenuity, to discover, if in a highly polished capital, a man or woman
has or has not good parts or principles; so completely are the first overlaid
with literature, and the last perverted by refinement.

No house-account, no weekly bills perplex the peace of a Milanese lady of
fashion. If eight servants are kept, suppose six of these men, (and two of them
out of livery,) the pay of these principal figures in the family when, at the
highest rate, is fifteen pence English a day, out of which they find clothes,
and eating. The dinners dressed at home, are, for this reason, more exactly
contrived than in England, to suit the number of guests, and there are always
half a dozen; for dining alone, or the master and mistress tete-a-tete, as we
do, is unknown to them, who make society very easy, and resolve to live much
together. No odd sensation then, something like shame, such as we feel when too
many dishes are taken empty from table, touches them at all; the common courses
are 11, and a 11 small plates, and it is their sport and pleasure, if possible,
to clear all away. A footman's wages is a shilling a day, like our common
laborers, and paid him, as they are paid, every Saturday night. His livery in
the mean time, changed twice a year, makes him as rich a man as the butler or
valet, but when evening comes, it is the most comical sight in the world, to
see them all go gravely home, and a person may die in the night for want of
help, though surrounded by showy attendants all day. Till the hour of departure
it is expected that two or three of them at least, sit in the antichamber to
answer the bell, which is no flight service, or hardship; for the stairs, high
and wide as those of Windsor palace, run up from the door immediately to that
apartment, which is very large and very cold, with bricks only to set their
feet on, and a brazier filled with warm wood ashes, to keep their fingers from
freezing. In summer these gentry employ their time in cards, which they seem
but little inclined to lay down when ladies pass through to the receiving room.
The strange familiarity this class of people assume, half joining in the
conversation, and crying oibo, or oh dear! when their master affirms something
to which they do not quite assent, is apt to shock one in the beginning; the
more when one reflects upon the equally offensive humility they show, on being
first accepted into the family; when it is expected that they receive the new
master or lady's hand, in a half kneeling posture, and kiss it as women under
the rank of Countess, do the Queen of England, when presented at our court.
This obsequiousness however, vanishes completely upon acquaintance, and the
footman if not very, seriously admonished, yawns, spits, and displays, says
Mrs. Piozzi, what one of our travel-writers emphatically calls, his flag of
abomination, behind the chair of a woman of quality, without the slightest
sensation of its impropriety. There is, however, a sort of odd farcical
drollery mingled with this grossness, which tends greatly to disarm ones wrath;
and I felt myself more inclined to laugh than be angry, when from the head of
my own table I saw the servant of a nobleman cramming some chicken pattes down
his throat behind the door, our own folks humourously trying to choke him, by
pretending his Lord called him, while his mouth was full. Of a thousand comical
things in the same way, says the above lady, I will relate one. Mr. Piozzi's
valet was dressing my hair one morning at Paris, while some man sat at an
opposite window of the same inn, singing and playing upon the violincello, I
had observed the circumstance, but my perrucchieres distress was evident; he
writhed and twisted about like a man pinched with the cholic, and made a
hundred queer faces; at last -- What is the matter Ercolani, said I, are you
not well? Mistress, replied the fellow, if that beast don't leave off soon I
shall run mad with rage, or die; and so you will see an honest Venetian lad
killed by a French dog's howling.

The phrase of mistress is here not confined to servants at all; gentlemen,
when they address a lady, say mia padrona, mighty sweetly, and in a peculiar
pleasing tone. Nothing can exceed, says Mrs. P. the agreeableness of a
well-bred Italian's address, when speaking to a lady, whom they alone know how
to flatter, so as to retain her dignity, and not lose their own; respectful,
yet tender; attentive, but not officious; the politeness of a man of fashion
here is true politeness, free from all affectation, and honestly expressive of
what he really feels, a true value for the person spoken to, without the
smallest desire of shining himself; equally removed from foppery on one side,
and indifference on the other. The manners of the men here are certainly
pleasing, in a very eminent degree, and in their conversation there is a
mixture, not unfrequent too, of classical allusions, which strikes one with a
sort of literary pleasure, not easily to be described. Yet is there no pedantry
in their use of expressions, which with us would be laughable, or liable to
censure; but Roman notions are not quite extinct; and even the house-maid, or
Donna di gros, as they call her, swears by Diana so comically there is no
expressing it. They christen very commonly their boys Fabius, and their
daughters Claudia.

Their uniformity of dress here pleases the eye, and the custom of going veiled
to church, and always without a hat, which they consider as a profanation of
the temple, as they call it, delights one much; it has an air of decency in the
individuals, of general respect for the place, and of a resolution not to let
external images intrude on devout thoughts.

Though family connexions are prized very highly here, no man seems ashamed
that he has no family to boast: all seigning indeed would be useless and
impracticable; yet it strikes one with astonishment to hear a well-bred
clergyman say, gravely to his friend, and that friend eminent both for talent
and fortune, "Yes, there is a grand invitation at such a place to night, but I
do not go because non sono cavaliere, and the master desired me to let you know
that it was for no other reason you had not a card too, my good friend; for it
is an invitation for none but the nobles." At all this no one stares, says Mrs.
P. no one laughs, and no ones throat is cut in consequence of their sincere
declarations.

The women, says the above lady, are not behind hand in openness of confidence,
and what Mrs. P. calls comical sincerity. We have all heard much of Italian
Cicisbeism, says she, and having a mind to know how matters really stood, I
took the shortest way to information, by asking a mighty beautiful and
apparently young creature how that affair was managed, for there is no harm
done, I am sure, said I. Why no, replied she, no great harm to be sure, except
wearisome attentions from a man one cares little about; for my own part,
continued she, I detest the custom, as I happen to love my husband excessively,
and desire no ones company in the world but his. We are not people of fashion,
though you know, nor at all rich; so how should we set fashions for our
betters? They would only say, see how jealous he is! if my husband sat much
with me at home, or went with me to the Corso; and I must go with some
gentleman you know: and the men are such ungenerous creatures, and have such
ways with them: -- I want money often, and this cavaliere servante pays the
bills, and so the connection draws closer -- that is all. And your husband! said
I, -- Oh, why he likes to see me well dressed; he is very good-natured, and
very charming; I love him to my heart. And your confessor! cried I. -- Oh, why
he is used to it; in the Milanese dialect e assuefaa.

Were the crust of British affectation lifted off many a character at home, I
know not whether better, that is, honester hearts would be found under it, than
that of this pretty girl.

Ladies of distinction bring with them when they marry, besides fortune, as
many clothes as will last them seven years; for fashions do not change here as
often as at London, or Paris; yet is pin-money allowed, and an attention paid
to the wife that no Englishwoman can form an idea of: in every family her
duties are few; for household management falls to the masters share of course,
when almost all the servants are men, and those paid by the week or day.
Children are very seldom seen by those who visit great houses; if they do come
down for five minutes after dinner, the parents are talked of as doting on
them, and nothing can equal the pious and tender returns made to fathers and
mothers in this country, for even an apparently moderate share of fondness
shown to them in a state of infancy.

A woman here, in every stage of life, has a degree of attention shown her that
is surprising -- if conjugal disputes arise in a family, so as to make them
become what is called the town-talk, the public voice is sure to run against
the husband; if separation ensues, all possible countenance is given to the
wife, while the gentleman is somewhat less willingly received, and all the
stories of disgust related to his prejudice; nor will the lady, whom he wishes
to serve, look very kindly on a man who treats his own wife with unpoliteness.
Che cuore deve avere! says she; what a heart must he have! Io non mean fido
sicuro. I shall take care not to trust him.

The ordinary people in Lombardy are well clothed, fat, stout, and merry; and
desirous to divert themselves, and their protectors, whom they love at their
hearts. There is however a degree of effrontery among the women that seems
amazing; and of which, says Mrs. P. I had no idea, till a friend showed me, one
evening at the opera, 50 or 100 petty shopkeepers wives, dispersed about the
pit, and dressed in men's clothes, per disempagno, that they might be more at
liberty to clap, hiss, quarrel, jostle, etc. In this city, however, no female
professors of immorality and open libertinage, disgraceful at once and
pernicious to society, are permitted to range the streets in quest of prey, to
the horror of all thinking people, and the ruin of all heedless ones.

In most of the Milanese inns, however, according to Keysler, a young traveller
seldom escapes being asked whether he is for a letto fornito, the meaning of
which is a female bedfellow, who never unmasks till she comes into the
bedchamber. Besides the sin, which alas! is little regarded, to what an
extreme risque is his health thus exposed, while it depends upon the scandalous
choice of the mercenary cameriere or the landlord.

CHAP. XIX. Commerce, etc.
MILAN is to this day the center of a commerce requiring large capitals, and
which some of the wealthiest houses have engrossed as a clandestine company.
Its principal article is raw silk. The company forestalls this at the time of
the crop, from cottage to cottage, and sometimes before. Private houses
carrying on this trade, independent of the company, find it to their advantage
to sell their silk according to the price regulated by the company. All
competition being thus quashed and ruined, and the silk-cultivator, obliged to
accept what price the buyers fix, turns his industry to more profitable
objects: instead therefore of new plantations and new improvements, the old are
neglected and run to ruin.

The chief of the Milan manufactures are gold and silver laces, embroideries in
gold and silver, tinsel and thread laces, these are chiefly kept up by the
Italian sobriety, the low price of provisions, and consequently the low price
of work.

This city also vends a prodigious quantity of silk handkerchiefs, excellently
manufactured; and by the Italians accounted an approved amulet against sore
throats, which from the moistness of the air are very common in Lombardy. These
handkerchiefs are part of the dishabille of the princes and noblemen; but the
trading or lower people are never without them at home or abroad. In the
summertime they have them waving on their shoulders, and use them to wipe the
sweat from their faces; but in the morning and evening they take them in, and
tie them very close and carefully round their necks.

They have also a large manufacture of crystal, which is found, with great
risque, in the Alps, and is made into snuff-boxes, lustres, looking-glasses,
etc. The largest looking-glass that was ever made of one piece of crystal, is a
foot in breadth, and a foot and an half in length. At Milan also, as at Bologna
and Verona, most curious artificial flowers are made of paper, wax, feathers,
cotton, sturgeons skin, exactly resembling nature, and in this art the nuns
particularly excel.

It is observable that in this large city gunpowder is sold only in one place,
and by one person.

The customs and duties are no where on so bad a footing as at Milan; a small
gratuity to the officers who importunately ask it, puts an end to all farther
search and questions; whereas, in Piedmont the extreme severity on this head
often puts travelers to a great deal of unnecessary delay and trouble.

Milan being by its situation the natural staple of Switzerland, part of
Germany, France, and Italy, the distribution of all the goods to be conveyed
from one of these countries into another, makes a secondary branch of business
with several houses. All goods going from France and Switzerland are carried on
mules; and what is sent from Milan into the internal parts of Italy goes by
water. The most valuable goods are carried in chaises or cambiaturas, these
carriages are of such construction, and hung so that they carry a great deal
behind, without any inconvenience to the horses. The waggoners, who swarm on
the great roads of France, are in Italy employed only in carrying the baggage
of the cardinals, or other great men, who have occasion to pass through the
country. The many charges attending any kind of transportation constitutes the
riches of the Milan brokers; and their interest being likely to be affected by
it, is the chief obstacle to the setting up of wagons in Italy; the danger of
the roads is the pretended obstacle; but why should roads be more dangerous for
five or six waggoners traveling in company than for as many chaises?

Another branch of trade is the furnishing travelers with carriages, and this
city lays most of them, even the most cautious, more or less under
contribution; they are told that only crossing the Alps ruins a carriage, that
the French post-chaises, either in winter or summer, will not do for the roads
of Italy, and that they require a chaise so contrived as to be taken to pieces
and put together in an instant, and by any persons; now the Milan carriages,
besides those conveniences, are both light and strong, the wood and leather of
a good quality, together with the advantage of carrying a great deal without
overloading the horses.

Lastly, the produce of the rice-grounds, in the Milanese, is very
considerable. The rice grows in fields all under water, which rises with the
plant, so that during the whole time of its growth only the top appears above
water. The numberless canals which intersect Lombardy, induce the landed men to
this culture, which indeed has been carried so far that all the Milanese is
like to become one rice-ground, that is one continual fen; unless government
puts some limitation to this culture; experience having shown the noxious
effects of the air from rice-grounds, and which daily become more noxious from
their vast increase. Even in times when these grounds were but thinly
scattered, the villages, which lay north or east of them, were every year
visited with some contagious disease; and the greater part of the peasants
employed in this culture become dropsical, and die before they reach forty.

The regular forces now in this duchy amounts to eighteen thousand men, the
greatest part of whose clothing, arms, and other necessaries, come from
Germany, to the no small discontent of the Milanese, who think it hard that as
the money for the payment of these troops is raised among them, it should not
again be laid out and circulated in their country.

The city council is composed of a president and sixty members, all nobles, and
independent of the Governor. The Spaniards are said, in peaceable times, to
have raised two millions of dollars in the Milanese.

In the Milanese territories justice is administered by the Roman law, with
some modification of customs and statutes. Most of these statutes are of the
reign of the good King Lewis XII. whose name they accordingly bear. These
statutes in succession have established the law of equality, which the nobility
itself can elude only by entails, or the acquisition of lands in countries,
where this law is not in force.

Since Milan has been governed only by a secondary authority, justice has lost
much of that vigor, which the sovereigns presence generally secures to it.
Despair, and oftentimes an impossibility of obtaining it, puts people on doing
themselves justice. The magistrate winks at the effects of private vengeance,
and confines himself to the prohibition of stillettos and pocket-pistols. The
dispatch and impartiality in which justice is rendered in France, and the
northern states, remove all apprehensions from such weapons, which in any
country where justice shall become venal, tedious or expensive, would be as
common as in Italy.

CHAP. XX. The Duchy of Mantua.
THIS duchy, encompassed by those of Milan and Modena, the territories of the
Pope and the Venetians, is not more than between 50 and 60 miles in extent, and
about 40 in breadth.

It formerly had dukes of its own, but since the commencement of this century,
the Imperialists overrun the whole duchy, which has ever since been in
possession of the House of Austria, and is at present annexed to the Milanese
government.

This duchy abounds in corn, fruit, flax, silk, and cattle. The soil is
extremely fertile, but its depth and softness occasions the roads to be almost
impassable in winter. In summer the verdure of the fields and meadows, divided
by beautiful rows of trees, with abundances of vines twining round the trunks
and branches, renders traveling delightful. The great number of nightingales
that frequent this tract of land by their plaintive warblings, makes the
charming scene still more enchanting. Indeed, says Keysler, a person who makes
any stay in Italy is so accustomed to fine prospects and enchanting
land-scapes, that in time they grow familiar to the eye, and are less regarded
than when they first presented themselves to view.

Mantua, the capital of the duchy, lies on a lake formed by the inundation of
the Mincio, which is 20 miles in circumference, and two broad. The two chief
bridges leading to this city are defended by citadels, with fortifications at
both ends. The city is divided by the water into two almost equal parts, having
a communication with each other over six bridges, and is about four miles in
circumference. In the heat of summer, when the lake is low and stagnate, the
air becomes so noxious that the better sort of inhabitants retire into the
country. The greater part of the streets are long, broad, and strait, with
handsome stone houses, and stately churches. The population is estimated only
at 20,000. Seven thousand Jews occupy a third part of the city, have a
synogogue, and live after their own fashion. The population was formerly
computed at 50,000, exclusive of the garrison; but since there has been no
court kept here, the number of inhabitants has been gradually decreasing. What
contributes most to keep the city alive at present, is its annual fair, which
is very much resorted to. The theaters are very beautiful, and the small one
especially is on an elegant plan.

There are 18 parish churches at Mantua, and 14 convents. The cathedral is
spacious, and has five aisles. Guilio Romano was the architect, and also
painted the tribuna, with a part of the ceiling. In the upper sacristy is a
night-piece of the temptation of S. Antony, by Paola Veronese. The church of S.
Antony is more famous for relics than any in Mantua; a considerable portion, as
is pretended, of the blood of Christ, being kept in a subterraneous chapel, and
once every year shown to the people.

The ducal gallery and museum, formerly so famous, was pillaged by the
soldiers, when the Imperialists took the city, by storm. At that time a common
soldier was so lucky as to get a booty of 80,000 ducats; but so bad an
economist as to game it all away in one night, for which Colalto, the Imperial
general, hanged him the next day. Some apartments in the castle are still worth
seeing, the ceiling being painted, by J. Guilio Romano.

Mantua is an episcopal see, immediately dependent on the Pope. The silk and
other manufactures, with its general commerce, formerly so flourishing, says
Busching, are now but inconsiderable.

About two miles from this city is La Virgiliana, a ducal manor-house, so
called from the grotto where Virgil is said to have passed the studious hours
of his youthful days.

CHAP. XXI. The Duchies of Parma and Placentia.
THESE have always been united. To the north and the west they terminate on the
Milanese, to the south on the Genoese territories; and to the cast on the Duchy
of Modena. They are between 50 and 60 miles in length, and nearly as much in
breadth.

The soil is exceedingly fertile, especially in the production of olive trees,
large trufles, and chestnuts. The pastures and cattle are also very fine
particularly about Placentia, where the meadows can be laid under water from a
small river, with a slimy water which fertilizes the ground. The celebrated
Parmesan cheese is no longer made in this country; but rather at Lode, Bologna,
and some other parts. The two principal cities in these tetritories are Parma
and Placentia.

Parma is a large populous city, with spacious streets, and a great number of
handsome houses, which the Italians dignify, according to custom, with the name
of palaces. The little river, Parma, which falls into the Po, a few miles below
the city, divides it into two parts, communicating with each other by three
stone bridges. Its circuit is about four Italian miles; the citadel very much
resembles that of Antwerp.

The ducal palace, which has nothing very striking in its architecture, lies on
the south side of the town, and has a communication with the citadel over a
bridge. The gallery, formerly so remarkable for its inestimable collection of
paintings, medals, antiquities, and other curiosities, together with the
library, was stripped by the late King of Spain, when he came to take
possession of this duchy, and every thing of value removed to Naples, where it
still lays in confusion at Capo de Monte; so that the object most worthy of
notice, in this city, is the great theater, built by Duke Renatus, in 1618.
This theater is said to be the largest of any in Europe, and capable of
holding, according to La Land, 12,000 persons. It is built in the form of the
Roman amphitheatre. What is very singular in its construction, and, which,
though remarked by every one, no person has yet been able to account for, is,
that a word spoken ever so low on the stage, may be distinctly heard in every
part of the pit, and yet the greatest elevation of the voice, says Addison,
occasions no echo, to cause in it the least confusion.

The illumination of this theater being very expensive, a smaller one has been
erected for common use, in a saloon adjoining to it; and this has a pit large
enough to contain 2000 spectators.

The gardens of the palace are admired for the grottos, fountains, cascades,
walks, statues, and other embellishments.

Besides the university erected by Duke Rainutius I. in 1599, he also founded,
in 1601, an academy for persons of noble families, in which young students from
their childhood are instructed, not only in grammar, the classics, rhetoric,
philosophy, mathematics, geography, history, divinity, the civil, feodal, and
canon laws; but, likewise in the German, French, and Spanish languages; in
music, painting, fortification, dancing, fencing, vaulting, and riding. The
annual allowance to each student for board, lodging, and tuition, is about 25
pounds a year. The riding-school is furnished with horses from the duke's
stables. The foundation admits of 250 students. Youths of all nations are
received here indiscriminately; but with regard to birth, they must be noble,
and such as are capable of being admitted among the knights of Malta.

The morning lectures generally take up two hours and a half; and those of the
afternoon about three. The students are divided into classes of 10 or 13; each
of which has a servant and a monitor, who must be an ecclesiastic. When they
walk about the city, the students are dressed in black; but in hunting, and
during the festivities, in autumn, they are allowed to wear clothes of any
color. That student who signalizes himself most by his exercises, is styled
Principe, and has a particular respect paid him by the rest. He also wears a
medal hanging to a purple ribbon, with a silver border, on his breast.

There are two elegant theaters in the college, in one of which the students
act plays during the carnival. The autumn vacation they spend at one of the
duke's country seats, in fishing, hunting, and other innocent pastimes; but
under the care of proper directors; nor are their studies entirely laid aside
during this season. The duke and the principal nobility of the city lend their
coaches and horses to carry the students into the country; and at the
expiration of the time allotted them, they are brought back in the same manner.

The situation of Parma, says Grossley, is delightful; and the paintings in its
public edifices afford most exquisite entertainment; being filled with
masterpieces of art, by Corregio, his rivals, and disciples.

The assumption, in the cupola of the dome, cost that immortal artist his life.
Having given himself up to the force of his imagination, he hazarded some bold
flights, which are the astonishment and admiration of the greatest masters of
our days, but displeased the canons, who had bespoke the piece. Though the
price was but slender, they would have it that they had been imposed upon; and,
besides an arbitrary deduction, they paid him the remainder in copper, which
poor Corregio was forced to take on his back, and carry six or seven miles to
an old country house, where he had his workshop. The encumbrance of the
burden, the heat of the day, and the distance, together with the indignation
and fretfulness at being so deceived, brought on a pleurisy, of which he died
three days after, at the age of forty.

The cathedral and several other churches, in Parma, are covered with frescos,
by this artist. Those of the cathedral represent virtues personated by women,
in attitudes very elegantly varied. These figures are attired, but without
hiding any stroke of nudity, and exhibit more graces than seem to comport with
the sanctity of the edifice.

In one of the chapels was formerly that piece so much the admiration of
connoisseurs, and in which Corregio is said to have surpassed himself: It is a
holy family with S. Jerome, and Mary Magdalen grouped into it. The Farnesian
princes showing a strong desire to add this piece to their immense collection,
the canons took it down, and conveying it privately from one to another,
secreted it for 40 years and more from the scrutinizing eyes of the different
sovereigns. On the demise of Anthony, the last Duke, they placed it among the
most valuable curiosities of their treasury, where it is now again visible.

This picture is an assemblage of beauties, engaging to every eye; it speaks to
the mind in its expression, delicacy, and action; and to the heart in its
graces, softness, and tenderness, which are striking even in the most minute
circumstances. Innumerable copies have been made of this sublime performance;
and though by the most capital artists, yet not one of them has been able to
take the smile, which the Virgin Mary has on her countenance; in most of these
copies it degenerates into a sneer.

The fashion of Cicesbeios, says L. Miller, is not banished the polite
societies of Parma; for the sole object of contracting marriage here, as in
France, is interest. Young ladies at Parma are educated in convents, and
brought out to be married when their parents have provided them a husband. The
choosing for themselves is unheard of, and would be esteemed the most enormous
licentiousness. For which reason the state deemed here the most happy, is that
of a young rich widow.

The nobility of this place have a cassino in which they assemble generally
three times a week during the cessation of theatrical amusements. The Duke
provides the cards and lights, and two of his gentlemen do the honors of the
cassino. He sometimes honors the meeting himself with his presence and plays.
This is a very economical, as well as a very agreeable amusement, in a country
where the noblesse are not used to have assemblies at their own houses, and
where the expense would be very inconvenient to them.

The cabinet of medals (since removed to Naples) consists of 18,000 pieces, all
of different dies; though there are no fewer than 500 hundred of the Emperor
Adrian. Over every medal is a little ticket, with black letters on a gold
ground, showing on what occasion it was struck, etc. These medals are inserted
in copper rims glazed, so that by turning them, the reverse may be viewed
without taking them out of the sockets. This collection comes no lower down
than the reign of Heraclius; but the finis is continued in gold, silver, and
copper pieces.

The distance from Parma to Placentia is about 33 English miles. About five
miles from Parma is a ferry over the river Taro. This river is sometimes very
dangerous to pass. What renders it so is its being swelled with heavy rains,
which forming impetuous torrents, force their way through a light soil, and
overflowing the banks of the river, form an unequal bed very difficult to ford,
from the uncertainty of the bottom. This is the case with many of the rivers in
Italy; and to comprehend how true it is that the Italian rivers suddenly change
their bed, one may perceive the vestiges of them now dry, which show the force
of the body of water that has excavated vast precipices and pits; together with
a great quantity of stone and sand, that the water has brought down and thrown
up into ridges. This change of the course of rivers frequently happens in one
night, as the people of the country affirm. A river fordable overnight, has by
the next morning been so increased, from the addition of mountain torrents, as
to render it impassable; and shortly after, has shifted its place, leaving its
old course in heaps of rubbish and deep hollows.

At a little distance from the passage over the Taro, are the two castles
Guelfo and Gibellino. Both these castles derive their names from the two
factions, the Guelphs and Gibellines, by which Germany and Italy were for a
long time made a scene of slaughter and confusion.

The whole of the country, between Piacenza and Parma, is a dead flat; the soil
is exceedingly rich; the ground well cultivated, and planted with strait rows
of elms, at about the distance of 12 or 14 yards asunder. These form the most
delightful vistas imaginable, and what adds greatly to their beautiful
appearance is, that the vines, sustained by the elms, are conducted from tree
to tree, forming the most graceful festoons. The ilex and the mulberry-tree are
frequently planted for the support of the vine, as the elms are, and make a
most agreeable variety. Between these rows of trees, the corn flourishes in the
utmost luxuriance.

Placentia by its situation, the breadth and regularity of its streets and
squares, the architecture of its palaces and public edifices, its noble
paintings and sculptures, and the fountains, that are such embellishments to
these squares and edifices, would be one of the finest cities in all Lombardy,
did not a want of inhabitants deprive it of the principal ornament that a city
can boast. It lies within 200 yards of the Po.

The cathedral and most of the churches are embellished with paintings of the
greatest masters of the Bologna school. But what travelers most admire, are
two equestrian statues, in bronze, which stand in the great square, before the
townhouse.

The best of the two represents that consummate general Alexander Farnese, Duke
of Parma and Placentia, who commanded the army of Philip II. in the
Netherlands. The inscription, on the pedestal, mentions his having relieved the
city of Paris, when called to the assistance of the league into France, where
his great military skill, and cool intrepidity, enabled him to baffle all the
ardent impetuosity of the gallant Henry. He was certainly worthy of a better
master, and of serving in a better cause. We cannot, without regret, behold a
prince of the Duke of Parma's talents and character, supporting the pride of an
unrelenting tyrant, and the cause of furious fanatics.

Except the ducal palace, and some pictures in the churches, it does not appear
that there is a great deal in this city worthy of attention.

On the fifth of April, the annual fair commences here, which is reckoned the
largest in all Italy. It lasts a fortnight. The stands and booths occupy a very
large area, near the ducal palace, laid out in regular lanes or passages, which
are covered with canvass, as a shelter both against rain and the heat of the
sun. The principal entertainment, during this season of bustle, is the Opera,
the admission into the pit of which costs only sixpence. The first singers in
Italy are engaged to perform in it. One inconvenience attending the performance
to those not accustomed to late hours is, that it does not begin till ten
o'clock at night, and finishes about four in the morning.

Piacenza has given birth to some famous men; one of the most remarkable is the
Cardinal Alberoni, who was many years prime minister at the court of Spain: he
was born in 1664, in a miserable cottage belonging to the suburbs: his father
was a gardener, but so poor as to earn his bread by working in the little
gardens belonging to the citizens: however, in process of time, he contrived so
to push his fortune as to procure himself a small cure, which was to him then
the utmost pinnacle of human felicity. The Duke de Vendome accidently coming to
the sight of him took a fancy to him, made him his chief aid-du-camp,
secretary, confident, etc. From thence he rose to be cardinal and prime
minister of Spain. His ambition afterward became his ruin, and constrained
Philip to disgrace and banish him.

After his fall he returned back to Piacenza where so much ashamed was he of
his birth, as never to have assisted, nor even acknowledge, any of his
relations, during his life nor at his death. He here lived in a private manner,
and did no public or private acts of charity, unless the establishment of a
number of missionaries may be deemed as such. He was considerably past eighty
years old when he died. In the year 1746, he had the mortification to see his
seminary battered by all the Spanish and Genoese artillery, which did not leave
a single wall standing. On the Austrians taking possession of his. seminary, he
withdrew to Piacenza in an apartment, the whole furniture of which was a bed, a
table, and four chairs, where, says Grossley, a friend of mine saw him with a
little pot boiling in the chimney, over the small fire of an apricot tree, cut
that very day in the courtyard of the house, to which his apartment belonged;
neither his money nor his interest having been able to procure him a faggot.

The cardinal was, at that time, above fourscore, yet without any of the
infirmities of old age. He spoke Italian, French, or Spanish, according to the
affairs or persons he was talking of; and in these three languages expressed
himself with equal energy and vivacity; his reflections he usually backed with
some maxims of Tacitus, which he always quoted in Latin.

The excellence of the Parmesan cheese, so celebrated at all the elegant tables
in Europe, proceeds from the excellent pastures in this country; particularly
those about Placentia, where the meadows may be watered during the whole summer
at pleasure, by means of sluices which convey water from the Po. Besides the
waters of that river are impregnated with a slimy substance, which proves a
very good manure to the grounds that they overflow. The cows here yield an
uncommon quantity of milk, so that in a good season the milk of fifty cows will
make a rich cheese of a hundred weight every day. But within a few miles of
this fertile track of land, which does not extend above ten Italian miles in
length, the cows do not yield such plenty of milk as they do in the Parmesan:
nor is it so rich. But as in Germany great quantities of Dutch cheeses are sold
which never were in Holland, so likewise many thousand pounds of cheese made in
Lodi, Bologna, etc. pass under the name of Parmesan; especially as the Milanese
peasants about Lodi, have the like advantage of watering their meadows so as to
mow them four or five times a year. There are three kinds of Parmesan cheese:
and it is in its greatest perfection when it is three or four years old; and
that which crumbles, in cutting, is reckoned the best.

At Vianino, near the Apennine mountains, a very palatable cheese is made of
sheeps milk.

The peasants in this duchy appear gay, and not poor; the women are very
prettily dressed, wearing small straw hats, ornamented with knots of ribbon of
various colors, with a bunch of flowers over all, or a large black feather;
and sometimes covering the crown of the hat with a bit of fine fur, which
produces a singular effect. By this means of dressing, they have a fine air of
the head; and being generally well made and handsome, or rather of sensible and
agreeable countenances, their appearance is very different from that of any
other peasants.

By the laws of Placentia, children share equally, even in noble inheritance.
This equality being the palladium of democratical states, and the sinew of
industry in commercial towns, might suit Placentia before it came under the
dominion of the Farnese family; but since that era, the manufactures being
decayed, and the nobility having given over commerce, this equallity, by
sub-dividing the fortunes of the nobility ad infinitum, has deprived the
country of that resource which it would have found in the easy circumstances of
the nobles, and filled the country with a race of counts and titled slaves,
whose dignity is of little weight, without the additional support of wealth.

The inquisition is now suppressed in this duchy, and the churches now no
longer afford an asylum to robbers and murderers. Assassinations and robberies
which were formerly very frequent, are now in consequence, become very rare.
What seems singular is, that the former, according to Lady Miller, are not
always punished with death, unless the provocation has been of considerable
standing, and then pardon seldom follows; but if a man is killed through a gust
of sudden passion, the galleys or long imprisonment is generally the
punishment. They discourage as much as possible, both in Parma and Placentia,
all women of the profession of street walkers, an innkeeper being punishable
for suffering them to lodge in his house. The Governor of Placentia is
extremely vigilant in regard to them, and as soon as they are discovered, has
them driven out of the town.

The police in both these cities, strictly examine all those who enter or go
out of them. They not only take down the name, from whence they came, and
whither they are going, but likewise make a short description of their person,
so that a person may be known by it. They are so clever at this, that the
shortest time is sufficient for their purpose.

The Commis of the gates having taken the names, descriptions, and number of
persons, not excepting the servants, enter them at a bureau or office for that
purpose. The innkeeper also takes the names down, and sends them to the same
bureau, where if the entry made at the gate, does not tally with that sent from
the inn, a bustle immediately ensues, and an examination into the mistake.

We are told, that an English gentleman, tired of repeating his name so often,
by way of fun, chose to vary it, and said he was called Punchinello; this gave
such an alarm to the police, that he was pursued, taken, and imprisoned; it was
at S. Marino, where he remained, till one of our English residents being
apprized of his mauvaise plaisanterie, cleared up the matter, and procured his
enlargement.

The revenues of the Duke of Parma, are computed at between 5 or 600,000
crowns. It is said, the salt works alone, all charges deducted, yield above
50,000. They are carried on at Salso, about 24 miles from Parma, where there
are 12 wells or pits of salt water, which are above 200 else in depth.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Dukedom of Modena.
The dukedom of Modena, surrounded by the duchies of Parma and Mantua, the
ecclesiastical territories, the duchy of Florence, and the republic of Lucca,
is 56 miles in extent from north to south, and from east to west, between 24
and 36.

The territory of this duchy, is a fertile plain, watered by the Po, the
Panaro, the Secchia, and Lenza, and every where planted in almost a continual
quincunx, with stately elms, and on each, one or two large vines. The
extremities of these spreading vines, reaching so as to be interlaced, form in
every interval an ample garland, the natural prominence of which, in the
middle, probably gave the first hint of those garlands or festoons among the
ornaments of architecture.

It has been a custom among the vintagers, time out of mind, when they are
gathering grapes off these trees near a road, to salute all passengers, without
any regard to sex or rank, with every species of foul language and ribaldry,
used in the most abandoned places. An omission of these vociferations would be
accounted a neglect of their privileges; and even those who at other times are
discrete and well behaved, conform to this custom; which may be traced back,
even to the time of Horace, who describes one of these foul-tongued vintagers.

The inhabitants have a method of preserving ripe grapes from the vintage, till
the month of August in the following year, by keeping them in little rooms,
well secured against the external air, and the light of the sun, and they never
go into these store-rooms but with one small candle, and that as seldom as
possible. The bunches are not laid upon the floor but hang separate, being tied
to a great number of small sticks; and when a single grape has the least
appearance of decay or rottenness, it is plucked off to prevent the rest from
the infection.

The horned cattle of this country are very large, and generally white. Six or
eight oxen are here put to a carriage, with a great number of bells hanging
about them, which make no disagreeable noise. The design of this sound is to
cheer the creatures under their labor, and to give notice at a distance on the
road that such a carriage is coming.

This duchy abounds not only in excellent wine, but in corn, garden-fruits, and
other productions. In some parts, particularly near Reggio, is found an
excellent alkaline earth, which, being pulverized, is used as a sovereign
remedy against poison, fevers, dysenteries, and hypocondriac disorders.

The soil of the country, about Modena, says Keysler, is of a singular
constitution, and well deserves the attention of the curious naturalist. It
gives no small weight to the opinion, that petrefactions are chiefly owing to
the universal deluge. In every part, not only of the city, but of the adjacent
country, plenty of good water is to be found; but the ground must be dug to the
depth of 63 feet. For the first 14 feet are found large stones, which seem to
be the remains of paved streets and buildings; and from hence there is
sufficient reason to conclude, that the foundations of this city were anciently
much lower than they are at present. In the lowest stratum, next the water, are
found sea-shells, and other indications of an inundation and deluge. This
stratum is very firm; and by only boring a little way into it, great plenty of
good water immediately springs up. In some of the intermediate strata are found
rushes, leaves of plants, and branches of trees.

Modena, the capital, is situated agreeably in a plain; it is well built, and
ornamented with fountains and arcades, which are really noble to walk under, in
all the principal streets. The churches are, for the most part, in a bad taste.
There is a public library well furnished with useful, though not with very
curious books, and a most comfortable and elegant public room to study in. The
number of inhabitants in this city are estimated at 23,000.

The ducal palace is by much the finest edifice here; it stands alone in a
great piazza, and in the best quarter of the town. The architecture is both
majestic and elegant; the architect was Avanzini. The court is spacious, and
surrounded by colonades, which have a fine effect. The great staircase is in a
noble style of architecture, and makes a striking appearance. The palace is
full of very fine pictures, which to the majority of our readers, would be
tedious to enumerate.

The duke chiefly takes up his residence at Milan: his partiality to the
English is so great that even when at Modena he permits them to see the palace
at any hour they think proper, without previous notice, and quite undressed;
even boots are not objected to: this is an exclusive privilege.

The troops of Modena are well dressed, and make a good appearance; they parade
about with a strong band of music, consisting of drums, fifes, hautboys, and
French-horns. The Duke is said to have 8000 men in constant array, and that
upon occasion he can bring 20,000 men into the field.

The most illustrious families are the houses of Rangoni and Montecuculli.
There are no remains of the families of those petty tyrants who governed Modena
before the house of Est were chosen for their sovereigns.

The Modenese seem a gay cheerful people; have much genius for pantomine shows,
and what is called pleasure, or rather dissipation. They are esteemed gallant,
and the ladies, and other females much inclined to coquetry. The noblesse
imitate the French in their dress. The bourgeoise universally wear the
zendalet, a piece of black silk, with which they cover their heads; and which,
crossing before, is finally tied behind their waists.

The principal employment of the lower class of people in this city, consists
in making masks, for which they are more famous than in any other part of
Italy. What little trade remains is from their fairs.

Modena is a very ancient city, and frequently mentioned in the Roman history.
When Decius Brutus was besieged here, Hertius made use of tame pigeons, (which
by hunger he had trained up to this service,) as messengers, to give the
besieged advice of his intentions, and to receive intelligence from Decius
Brutus on their return. The memory of this device is perpetuated even to this
very day at Modena, where pigeons are taught to carry letters to a place
appointed, and bring back answers. Of what benefit these letter-carriers proved
to the city of Leyden, when hard pressed by the Spaniards, is sufficiently
known from the history of the sixteenth century.

The city of Modena boasts of having given birth to several eminent persons,
among whom they reckon Sigoni, the civilian and historian; Fallopi the
physician, from whom certain tubes in the human body derive their name:
Corregio the painter; Alessandro Tassoni the poet; and the Imperial general
Montecuculli.

In the cathedral of Modena is shown a very uncommon trophy of the valor of
the inhabitants, namely, a wooden bucket, with iron hoops, which the Modenese,
(for what purpose is not mentioned,) brought away from Bologna, and keep as a
memorial of their expedition to the capital city of their enemies. The war was
originally occasioned by the Bolognese refusing to restore some towns according
to compact. As Geminianus was the patron saint of Modena, and Petronius of
Bologna, the contending parties were called Geminiani and Petroniani.
Alessandro Tassoni has ludicrously described the whole course of this war, in
his most ingenious poems, entitled La secchia rapita; and to heighten the
burlesque, he makes the Modenese give rise to that bloody war by stealing this
bucket.

It was from this Modenese poet that the celebrated Boileau took the hint for
the Lutrin. The only fault in Tassoni's burlesque poem, is a want of delicacy
in some of his expressions, which are sometimes so gross as to offend a chaste
ear. The bucket, that has been thus immortalized, hangs in one of the towers of
the cathedral by an iron chain; to come at it, a person must go through no less
than six doors, and give a handsome gratuity besides.

The road between Modena and Parma, is part of the ancient via Aemilia, and
very pleasant. It lies all along through gardens, and is planted on both sides,
with rows of white mulberry-trees. The whole plain consists of plantations and
enclosures, every where separated by rows of fruit trees and vines; so that few
countries can form a richer scene, or yield a more beautiful landscape to the
eye.

GENOA.
CHAP. XX. Situation, Extent, City and Police, Productions, etc.
THE independent Republic of Genoa, besides that long tract of land on the
continent, which lies on the coast of an extensive gulf in the Mediterranean,
anciently called Mare Ligusticum, was, till within these few years, possessed
of the island of Corsica. At present its dominions are confined to the
continent, and are in length, from west to east, about 152 English miles; but,
from north to south, they are very narrow, in some parts only eight English
miles, and in the broadest not above 20. They are bounded by the principality
of Piedmont, the duchy of Milan, and the grand dukedoms of Tuscany.

The land of this little territory, says Baretti, can neither boast pastures
covered with fat oxen, nor fields rich in corn and hemp, like Piedmont and
Lombardy. It is a rocky country, almost without timber, and not abounding in
wine: yet the inhabitants have no reason to envy their neighbors. For besides
their lemons and oranges, which yield a considerable sum, they have a tree
which makes them ample amends for whatever they may want. This tree is the
olive, which thrives here perhaps better than in any part of the known world.

To give some idea of the advantage which the Genoese reap from their
olive trees, we will say, that on the western extremity of their country there
is an independent principality so small that it may be leisurely walked over in
a morning.

This empire, in miniature, is little more $han six miles long, and only half a
one in breadth, where it is broadest. And yet there are upon it two towns
Monaco and Mentone, containing about 5000 inhabitants between them; a village
with about 400 souls in it, and about 600 inhabitants more, who live in single
houses and cottages, scattered up and down the mountains, which limit this
principality on the north as the sea does on the south. It is not a little
surprising that 6000 people should find their sustenance in a tract of land
scarce four miles square, at a distance from all populous towns. Yet it is
still more astonishing, that almost the whole of their support should arise
from their oil, which they make in such considerable quantities, that the
thirteenth part which they pay in kind, as subjects, to their sovereign, brings
herein an income of about 4000 pounds sterling: so that supposing all the
owners of olive trees faithful in giving the full thirteenth part of their
respective produce, the oil produced by so small a tract of land, must be worth
between 50 and 60,000 pounds sterling annually. We are therefore not to wonder,
if the Genoese, many parts of whose territory, along that coast, are still more
valuable than the principality of Monaco, should have many rich subjects: nor
are we to wonder when we are informed, by different writers, that there are in
Genoa several palaces so large and magnificent, as to be residences meet for
kings and emperors; nor to be astonished that so small a state should boast of
several families, such as the Doria, Spinola, Grimaldi, and others whose names
are as well known as those of the most illustrious persons in the western
world. Where intrinsic and real riches abound, great buildings will be raised,
and great families formed on the least concurrence of industry, with a
favorable turn of fortune.

Of the mountains, which occupy a great part of their country, some are covered
with wood, some quite barren and rocky, and others yield good pastures. Though
the Genoese, on account of their want of arable land, are under the necessity
of furnishing themselves with great quantities of corn from Lombardy, Sicily,
Naples, and other countries; yet such is their skill and industry in improving
a mountainous, rocky, and sterile soil, that all the year round, Genoa is
plentifully furnished with pulse and garden-stuff, in their highest perfection.
The country also produces both common and muscadel wine, plenty of excellent
fruit, and particularly in the western part, lemons, oranges, pomegranates,
figs, and almonds; besides many large plantations of mulberry-trees, intended
chiefly for silkworms. The olives generally grow about Spetia bay: and, here
it will not be amiss to observe, that the olive tree pretty much resembles a
willow, and makes but a mean appearance; that the best oil is white and
transparent; that the deep yellow is made from over ripe olives, or from such
as have been kept too long, and that good oil has no smell, and is destitute of
any kind of viscid fatness. The virgin oil, by the ancients called green oil,
is pressed both from ripe and unripe olives; and is the whitest, most
palatable, and in every respect the best.

And this serves, says Keysler, to explain a passage in Suetonius, concerning
Julius Caesar's goodnature and condescension in eating old rancid oil, that he
might not put the person who entertained him to the blush by asking for green
oil which he had not provided. Some commentators are of opinion that David, to
express God's singular favors to him, makes use of the expression in one of
the psalms, 'I am anointed with green oil,' as denoting the best kind of oil.

The oils of Sicily, Greece, and the Levant, are of such a viscid fatness as
renders them much inferior to those of Italy; and this again must yield to the
Provence oil, of which great quantities are used for the tables of persons of
rank, both at Naples and Rome.

Salt so abounds throughout the country, that it can be spared for exportation,
as can also the stone and marble in its quarries.

A great many rivers water these territories, but none are large enough to
deserve notice.

Genoa was the capital of ancient Liguria, and a city of such commerce, that
merchants from all parts of the world resorted to it. Modern writers term it
Janua, and affirm, that it was built by Janus. But the ancients always called
it Genua. It was destroyed by Mago the Carthaginian, but rebuilt by the Romans,
and after them, fell under the power of the Eastern PLAN of the CITY of GENOA
References
1 St Mark. 2 M$$$ Place 3 $word$ St Lawrence. 4 $word$ Place 5 Royal Palace 6
St D$$al. 7 St August$$. 8 $word$ 9 $word$ St James. 10 $word$ $word$. 11
$word$ $word$. 12 St Anthony 13 St Clare. 14 St $word$ 15 The Hospital. 16 St
$word$. 17 St $word$. 18 The $word$. 19 St Cath$rine. 20 The Ann$$$$$tion. 21
The Jesui$$ 22 C$w Place 23 $word$ Bridge. 24 $word$ Bridge. 25 Royal Bridge.
26 Spinola Bridge. 27 $word$ Bridge. 28 The Gall$$ Bridge 29 The Arsenal. 30 St
Thomas Gate 31 The Holy Ghost Con$ent. 32 PP of St To$$. 33 Prince of $word$
Hotel. 34 PP $word$ Mary. 35 $$ the Angel. 36 $word$ of the Chapel. 37 St
$word$ Convent. 38 Light House. $$ Bourough of St Peter. D$$$$$. 40 $.D. of
L$rette. 41 St Barnaba Capuchin. 42 The P$a$$$$$. 43 Great Albert. 44 $word$ St
NIcholas. 45 St $word$. 46 $onception Capuchin. 47 St Mary of the Saint. 48 St
Barthol$mew. 49 St James. 50 St Philip. 51 New Street Gate. 52 D$ Aqua S$$a
Gate. 53 St Etienne Gate. 54 $word$ Gate. 55 Romans Gate. 56 St Aga$$ Bridge.
57 Pill$ Bridge. 58 $word$ 59 The Spa$.


map of Genoa Roman Emperors. In the year 670, it was sacked by the Longobardi,
under whose dominion it continued till Charlemagne expelled them. After this,
Genoa for some centuries acknowledged for sovereigns, the Kings of Germany, and
the Roman Emperors; but by degrees, erected itself into an independent state.
In the twelfth century, the Genoese subjected the city of Syracuse, half the
kingdom of Sardinia, and even made themselves masters of the Black Sea, and all
its parts, and settled themselves in the Crim. In the 15th century, being
extremely weakened by a long struggle with the Venetians for the superiority at
sea, they were entirely driven from the Crimea. They were soon after obliged to
put themselves under the protection of the Kings of France, who, treating them
with intolerable bauteur, that naval hero, Andrew Doria, in 1528, rescued his
country out of their hands, settled it in perfect freedom, and established its
present constitution.

The situation of Genoa, is one of the most inconvenient, yet one of the most
beautiful, of any city in Italy, or as Addison says, in the world: it is seen
to the greatest advantage, at the distance of a quarter of a league at sea; its
stately buildings, which have gained it the name of superba, forming a glorious
amphitheatre, gradually rising along the hill. This declivity, and the
narrowness of the streets, some of which are not above six feet wide, preclude
the use of coaches in Genoa; every body contenting themselves with going on
foot, except the principal ladies, who are carried in chairs. To this
narrowness of the streets, it is owing that this city takes up so little of the
plain before it. Another reason assigned for it is, that the loftiness of the
houses, and the narrowness of the streets, abate the summers excessive heats,
by intercepting the sunbeams, and thus tend to preserve the healthfulness of
the city. This also was the opinion of the old Romans, and there was some
murmuring, when Nero, after the conflagration of the city, altered the former
method, and ordered that the houses should neither be built so high as before,
nor contiguous to each other. Some were of opinion, says Tacitus, that the
ancient mode was more conducive to health, since by the narrowness of the
streets, and the height of the houses, the heat of the sun was in some measure
broken; but that now, by the present open disposition, the city is exposed to
all its violence, without any thing to intercept the solar rays. The streets
are exceedingly well paved, and in some parts with free stone. There being no
coaches nor other carriages in them, conduces not a little to their cleanness;
besides the barrenness of the neighboring soil requiring great quantities of
manure, the dung of horses and mules is very carefully gathered up. What the
Arabs do out of superstition with regard to those camels which have been in the
Mecca caravans, the poor people here do from necessity, carefully picking up
all the horse and mule dung they meet with. This is chiefly observed in the
suburbs, where the breadth of the streets admits the use of all kinds of wheel
carriages.

Genoa, observes Martyn, is built on the side of a mountain, in a semicircle
round the harbor. For magnificent buildings, and beauty of situation, it may
vie with any city. It is surrounded by a double wall, one encompassing it
immediately, the other taking in all the rising grounds that command it. There
is a most agreeable walk round the ramparts, from the convent of S. Antonio, to
the fanale, or light-house. It is supposed to contain about 80,000 inhabitants.
The streets are crowded, the shops well furnished, and the markets abound in
excellent provisions.

The whole range of rocks on the Genoese coast, is either slate or marble, and
very steep. The industry of the inhabitants here, particularly in the environs
of this city, made amends for the want of fertility in the mountains, which are
in general covered with olives, vines, pomegranates, orange and lemon trees;
and adorned with buildings and gardens.

From the rocks projecting into the sea, have been made several bastions, in
some places two or three behind each other, and the length of these
fortifications, with the lower tower, is not less than three Italian miles. The
number of guns mounted on all the works, for the defense of the city, is little
short of five hundred. This city is ten miles in circumference, and such is the
inequality of the country, that it takes up three hours to ride round it. Its
wall is of too great extent to be of any great service, unless perhaps, in
keeping out the banditti. On entering the city, travelers must deliver up
their firearms, for which they receive half a tally; but they may have them
again directly, if they please to accompany their tally with a piece of money,
though properly, this should not be complied with, till the party is going to
leave the city. The west side of the city, is watered by the river Bonzevera,
and on the opposite side runs another, with a stone bridge over each.

The harbor of Genoa is large, but not very safe; and to fence it farther from
the south wind, would make the entrance too narrow, and consequently be a
detriment or inconvenience to the city. In the middle of the harbor, on a
place called the Royal Bridge, is a commodious watering place for ships, the
water being conveyed by pipes from the mountains.

At the bottom of the harbor is the Porto Franco, containing the warehouses of
the merchants, admirably disposed in a separate enclosure, opened only at
certain times. All merchandise must be lodged here, and pays no custom at
entrance; whatever is sold for the consumption of the city, pays eight or ten
per cent upon the value, but all that is exported, pays only a slight duty.
They do not suffer ecclesiastics, officers, women, or livery servants, to enter
without particular permission. Within this harbor, is the Darsena, or wet
dock, for the galleys of the republics. From the formidable figure which the
Genoese fleet made in times past, it is now reduced to six galleys, and all the
use of these is to fetch corn from Naples and Sicily, and to give the ladies an
airing. The complement of the largest galleys, is from 60 to a 100 soldiers,
and 320 rowers, five or six on a bench, which serves them for a bed. The
Darsena abounds with Turkish slaves, who are generally of a surly, fierce
aspect, to which their long whiskers do not a little contribute. In the Darsena
they are at liberty; but in the city one meets them every where chained in
couples, and crying cheese, cotton, cloth, etc. They also keep tipling-houses
and petty shops in the Darsena, their officers giving them all possible
encouragement, and advancing them a small sum of money, with which, in their
trips to Marseilles, Corsica, and other places, they buy all kinds of
knick-knacks at a very cheap rate, and make a good market of them at Genoa,
where every thing is extremely dear; but the officers come in for a share of
the profits: some of these slaves are furnished with goods to trade with, out
of the republics warehouses, part for ready money, and part on credit, at a
stated price. At night none of them are to be absent from the Darsena, for they
are mustered and locked up every evening. Private persons who have been
successful in fitting out ships against the Barbary corsairs, may keep such
slaves; but they are generally sold to the state, which puts them to the best
use, and can best secure them. Their common employment is knitting woollen
stockings and caps. This shows the lenity and indulgence of the Christians
toward the Mohammedan captives, very different from the hardships imposed on
the Christians, who have the misfortune to fall into the hands of the Turkish
corsairs.

The rowers on board the Turkish galleys, generally consist of three classes.
The first class is of indigent people, who sell themselves for a certain term
of years, among whom, are many Italians and Piedmontese, and the common price
of such at Genoa, is 60 or 70 livres for the space of two years certain. The
second class are criminals, who have been sentenced to try at the oar for a
limited time, or during life. The third sort are Turkish or Barbary prisoners,
who, though they become converts to christianity, do not recover their freedom;
but it is not uncommon for them, by means of their godfathers, to be put into a
better way of living, and upon their good behavior, to obtain their liberty.

Those who behave well, are allowed to have little shops or sheds on the quay.
These are all chained to their shops, but the chains being pretty long, they
can move about in them, and even backward and forward before their doors.
Others are permitted to go all over the town, chained in couples, and hawk
about fish, matts, etc. Sometimes it has happened, that these poor creatures,
thus coupled, quarrel, and frequently from such trifling causes as one of them
wishing to go one way, and the other a different one; these disputes at last
have risen to such a height, that the consequences might have been fatal, had
they not been timely separated. On the other hand friendships have commenced
from the similitude of their misfortunes; so that the greatest harmony has
subsisted among some of them. There is one man who has been chained to his
little shop on the quay, where he has vended coffee and liquors for 18 years,
and by his industry acquired upwards of 40,000 livres: he offered 10,000 to
Prince D -- for his liberty, but the Prince demanded 20, and the gallerian
thought that even freedom might be purchased too dear; he therefore remains a
slave, barefooted, his head shaved, and wears a loose short redingotte, of
coarse cloth, lined with shag, nor seems to indulge himself with any
convenience or comfort of life, more than his comrades, though so much richer.
However to prevent Prince D. and the other magistrates from profiting by his
death he has entered into partnership with a younger slave, whom he has made
his heir, which it seems was necessary for the above purpose.

Upon the whole, the idea received in this country of the wretched situation of
a galley-slave is very much exaggerated. To those gallerians, who were
originally poor and hard laboring peasants, the being a galley-slave can
scarce be deemed a misfortune.

The faro, or light-house, a tower which is ascended by 166 steps, stands on
the west side of the harbor, and is situated on a high rock, which is also
fortified. Every night, except about the summer solstice, a lanthorn, with 36
lamps, is hung out at the top of it, toward the sea; and when a number of ships
or any fleet is known to be in these seas, an addition is made to the number of
lamps, which, yet at a distance, appear like a single star.

In the piazza nuova, or new square, before the Doge's palace, is a daily
market, Sundays not excepted for vegetables and other provision; and in the
middle of January here are exposed to sale, green peace, artichokes, and water
melons, in great plenty; besides hyacinths, and most kinds of flowers in full
bloom.

The finest street in the whole city is the strada nuova, or the new street,
which is 12 common paces in breadth, and planned by Galeazzi, an architect of
Perugia, who also built most of the fine palaces in it. Among these are 10 or
12 of most remarkable beauty and magnificence. The first floors of these
palaces open into beautiful gardens and orangeries, like the horti pensiles of
the ancients. Over the entrance of the palace of Doria is written this motto,
Nulli certa domus. 'No one has a fixed habitation.' The very same words stand
over the door of the Republic's palace, and are well adapted to the Doge's
short continuance in it. The palace of Imperiali in Competto, has a very fine
prospect of two streets, of which the owner of this palace is proprietor, who
from one window can look down on a spot of no great extent, which brings him in
4000 pounds a year. The strada Balbi is but little inferior to the strada nuova
in beauty, and exceeds it in length and breadth. Two palaces of the Balbi
family, the Jesuits college, and the palace of Durazzo are great ornaments to
it, the latter being 140 common paces in front, is incontestably the finest
private building in the whole city, and its furniture answerable to its outward
magnificence. In this palace are some exquisite paintings, and on the third
story is an open gallery, decked all round with beautiful urns for flowers,
which affords a grand prospect of the harbor, etc. and leads to a most
charming garden, adorned with fountains, and walks of orange and citron trees.
The palace of Prince Doria, near the light-house, has the same convenience, and
formerly there was a stone key behind the garden, by means of which the family
could step out of the garden into their barge, but that is now altered. Whilst
the Emperor Charles V. once lodged in this palace, apartments were suddenly run
up; at the end of which, to his great surprise, he found a fine yacht ready to
receive him. Prince Doria ordered all the plate, both gold and silver used at
the entertainment, to be thrown overboard, whilst the Spanish noblemen, in the
Emperor's retinue, stood looking at one another with astonishment at this
apparent extravagance, little knowing that care had been taken to spread nets
all about the vessel; and that the Spaniards from the vast quantity of plate,
might not imagine any of it was borrowed, the Prince had the following
inscription in Spanish put on that side of the palace, which is opposite the
light-house: 'Thanks to God and the King; in this house there is nothing
borrowed.'

On the left hand of the entrance into the gardens is the image of a monster,
standing in a fountain, whose fore part resembles a satyr, with two small
horns, but its hind part has a double fish's tail erect. This monster is said
to have been taken alive. In the middle of the garden is a larger fountain,
where among several marble statues is one in the gigantic taste of the famous
Andrew Doria, who died in the year 1560, after a life of the most honorable
successes, and full of days, for he lived 93 years. As a public acknowledgment
of his eminent services to his country, every year, on the fifteenth of
September, the captain of the ducal palace, attended by 200 soldiers, carries
the city keys in a dish, to the Prince of Doria, who, on this occasion,
entertains them with a feast. At these times the most magnificent furniture of
his palace, his admirable pictures, plate, tapestry, looking glasses, tables,
etc. are finely displayed. Another mark of the republic's gratitude is, that
foreigners excepted, the Princes of Dona and their domestics only, are allowed
to wear swords within the city, none of the nobility being permitted to do it,
unless when going on a journey.

From the second story of this palace is a passage over a little bridge into
another garden, laid out in a very agreeable variety along the acclivity of the
hill; and on the top of it, is a gigantic statue of Jupiter, made of plaster,
resting his foot upon a great dog, whose good qualities are celebrated in the
following epetaph:

Here lies the great Rolando, a dog belonging to Prince John Andrew Doria,
whose unshaken fidelity and good nature, entitled him to this monument; and
having when alive, distinguished himself by an uniform practice of both these
good qualities, it was judged no more than justice, to deposit his remains near
Jupiter, as truly worthy of his royal protection. He lived eleven years and ten
months, and died the seventh of September, at five o'Clock in the evening, in
the year 1605.

Those who may think it a prostitution of epitaphs, that one should be bestowed
on a dog, and the hour of his death so particularly set down, will probably
think the legacy of five hundred crowns a year, for the maintenance of that
animal, none of the most commendable. Spartian, in the 20th chapter of the Life
of Hadrian, represents this Emperor as such a lover of horses and dogs, that he
erected monuments to them. Charles XII. the warlike King of Sweden, had such a
regard for his dog Pompey, who every where attended him, that the creature
happening to die in Poland, he had it carried into Sweden, that it might not
lie out of its native country.

The cathedral is dedicated to S. Lawrence, and in a chapel where 30 silver
lamps are continually burning, is kept with great veneration the bones of John
the Baptist. But the principal curiosity in this church, and accounted so
valuable, that it may not be seen without the Archbishop's leave, is an emerald
dish; said to be a present from the Queen of Sheba to Solomon. It is pretended,
that it was afterward used for the paschal lamb, and after that, by our
Savior at the last supper, and lastly came to the republic of Genoa, either by
the generosity of Baldwin, King of Jerusalem, or as its share of the plunder of
the city of Caesarea, in the year 1101. This dish is of a round figure, with an
hexagonical rim, and is eight inches and a half, or near two common palms in
diameter, and about five palms in circumference. It is quite plain, without any
carving or sculpture; but what is most remarkable is, that it is made of one
single emerald, which, for dimensions, is to be paralleled only with that at
the convent of Reichenau, in Baden-see, which we have already noticed.

The sacred edifice of Genoa, like those at Naples, remarks Grossley, are full
of funeral inscriptions, but in general, as plain as those of Naples are,
turgid and bombastical. They have commonly annexed to them, some moral or
prudential maxim, for the use of the traveller who stops to read them. On the
frieze of the magnificent tomb of one of the name of Spinola, is the following,
in large characters: Quod per te facere potes,
Alteri ne commiseris.


i. e. Leave not to another, what you can do yourself.

In some public places are inscriptions of another kind, also consecrated to
posterity, but perpetuating the infamous memory of such as have injured the
state, and whose names are set up in the chief places of the Genoese
territories. The perpetuating monuments of this kind, can scarce be reconciled
with that humane maxim of gratiae ampliandae, odia restringenda, "Favors
should be multiplied, disservices restrained."

Near St. Mary's church is a stone bridge, which joins together two eminences
in the city, formerly separated by a deep valley. This bridge cannot be seen
without astonishment, for it consists of one small and three large arches, of
such a height, as to be elevated ten or twelve feet above several houses of
five or six stories, so that it crosses a large street. The breadth of this
extraordinary bridge is 45 feet, and its length about 160 or 170 paces.

The state palace is an old mean building, the left side of which is assigned
to the Doge, whose table also is defrayed at the public expense; it stands
almost in the center of the city, and has a guard at the entrance. From the
audience room a passage leads to the arsenal, over the entrance of which, is
the rostrum of an ancient Roman ship. It is about three spans in length, and
its greatest thickness is two thirds of a foot. Near it are these words: This
ancient Roman rostrum, the only one which has hitherto been found, was dug
up when this harbor was cleared, in the year 1597, and by order of the states,
set up as a monument of the great naval glory of our ancestors.

The arsenal contains above 25,000 muskets, and among other curiosities is a
shield with 120 pistol barrels fixed in it, which may be fired in three equal
discharges of 40 at a time; likewise the cuirasses of several Genoese ladies,
who, under Pope Boniface VIII. performed a crusade to the holy land. This
armor, says Lady Millar, is nicely contrived for women, yet there are some
ridiculous peculiarities belonging to it. Among other singular warlike matters,
there is a wooden cannon, lined in the inside with a thin plate of brass, and a
sword with a pistol in it.

The public charities of the individuals of Genoa, surpass, perhaps, those of
any other country in Europe, of its extent and revenue; witness the vast number
of churches and convents founded and endowed by private citizens, the great
hospital, by voluntary contributions, the Albergo, the Port Frene, the house
for 300 girls, by one subject; the church and bridge of Carignan, by another; a
foundation for the maintenance of 240 nuns, of the order of S. Theresa, by the
Brignoli family, who are obliged to attend the foundling hospital and the
Albergo. Marcellinus Durazzo's little college for 12 poor boys of noble
parentage: this building joins to his own palace: they are found in every thing
at his sole expense, and have proper masters to qualify them for different
professions, according to their several abilities and inclinations.

The Albergo is a building of great extent, and does honor to the Genoese;
serving at once for charitable uses, and for a house of correction. One wing is
appropriated to the females, the other to the males; that for the females is
divided among illegitimate females, and legitimate orphans, who by having lost
their parents are deprived of the care, education, and maintenance they might
otherwise have been entitled to. The legitimate females consist of about 450,
who are taught embroidery, knitting, and plain-work; are well clothed and fed,
and often marry into rich citizens families. Poor old infirm people, past their
labor, are maintained here during the remainder of their days. Poor people
also, who cannot afford themselves lodging places, having previously proved to
the council their necessitous circumstances, obtain beds for one night, and are
always offered a bowl of soup, and a pound and a half of bread, before they
depart in the morning. All strangers of every country and poor travelers are
allowed to lodge and $at as mentioned above. The boys, who are about 500, are
taught all sorts of handicrafts; and if they have no friends or relations to
protect them when fit to earn their bread, are set up in different trades at
the charge of the fund, which is very considerable.

The Cambeaces, of which there are now five families, originally sprung from
trade, and who are still merchants, give every day a bowl of soup, and a pound
of bread, to each of the poor who present themselves at their gate; if it
should so happen that, at any time, there is not a sufficiency of soup for all,
the grown persons receive each four sous, and the children two, in lieu of it.
The number of poor is generally from 3 to 500: they are generally strangers,
for there are not many natives of the Republic in such necessitous
circumstances as to want bread. They also give once a year to poor women, who
apply for them, a shift, with a corset, and petticoat; to the men, a shirt, a
great coat, with a hood to it, a pair of breeches, and shoes. At the end of the
year those who present themselves in the clothes that had been given them, are
immediately new clothed; but others who show no remains of the former bounty
have their conduct strictly scrutinized. A little of the soup, out of the great
boiler, is always carried to one of the family to taste, before it is
distributed to the poor, lest by the want of attention or neglect of the
servants, it should not be good. It is remarkable that the great expense, which
they are at, has had no tendency to diminish their circumstances, as they have
for more than a century past, been increasing in riches.

The theater of this city is rather large than small, but not beautiful, either
as to architecture or painting. All the boxes below stairs are shut in with
jalousies, except when the owners choose to show themselves to the audience, at
which time they light them up with wax candles, and the jalousies are removed.

Every Sunday evening during the winter, an oratorio or religious opera is
performed in one of the churches, which is succeeded by a sermon; and then the
service concludes with a piece of church music. As the design of this is to
keep people from bad company, and at the same time to incite them, by the most
animated exhortations, to sanctity of life, no great objection can lie against
it; but the summer diversion cannot be looked upon with equal indulgence. Near
Prince Doria's palace, without S. Thomas's gate, these monks have a garden,
with a beautiful edifice in it, where every Sunday, in the afternoon, they
permit several kinds of games, as drafts, chess, billiards; dice and cards are
excepted. It is true, they do not play here for money, but for ave maria's,
pater-nosters, and other prayers; and at the breaking up of a party, the losers
kneel before an image of the Virgin Mary, and there, according to their
losings, discharge themselves to her, or to God, by pater-nosters, etc. In the
evening they leave off playing, and an oratorio is performed; next comes a
spiritual exhortation, and at length this medley of levity and religion closes
with a solemn piece of music. The intent, indeed, is far from culpable, being
to divert the commonalty from riotous meetings; and an excessive fondness for
gaming is gratified without prejudice to their substance and families: but how
this abuse of God's name, in these lost prayers, can be justified is a mystery.

With respect to the police of this city, the Sbirri at Genoa are pretty much
like our constables; they also execute all arrests, collect the taxes, and
guard the port. They are abhorred by the people, protected by the great and by
what is called here the Prince, which means the Government. The officers of
justice here appear in as infamous a light as the hangmen in France. The
meanest wretch of Genoa would deem it a disgrace to marry the daughter or
sister of a Sbirri. They can even have no society but with their own
fraternity, it being ignominious for their neighbors to associate with them.
It frequently happens that the females of these Sbirri are remarkably handsome,
and that their beauty procures them the particular attention and protection of
the nobles, scarce one of whom but what has a favorite mistress among them:
These men run great risks in the execution of their office; 10 or 12 of them,
at least, are killed every year by the populace. Sixty livres is the allowance
for each arrest. At the approach of night they walk the streets in small
parties, to prevent assassinations, which are not uncommon in Genoa. It is
absolutely forbidden that any person should carry a stilletto concealed about
him. Therefore when the Sbirri meet a suspicious person they surround him
immediately, and stroke him down the sides and hips, to discover if he has one
about him. Should they find one, he is hurried away to prison, and there
detained six months, even if his character be unimpeachable; otherwise he is
sent to the galleys for life, or for a considerable term of years.
Notwithstanding this ordinance of government, there is scarce a Genoese who
does not possess and carry one about him. This deadly instrument makes its way
at one stroke through the ribs, the spine of the back, or the shoulder blades,
so well is the steel tempered. The most dreadful accidents, says Lady Millar,
in contradiction to Keysler, frequently happen in the streets; for on receiving
the slightest provocation these weapons make their appearance; they assail each
other with great ferocity, and no unconcerned spectator ever interposes,
fearing a momentary resentment of either combatant might prove fatal to him;
and even though one of them should fall, no one ever thinks of pursuing or
stopping the murderer; a culpo di coltello, that is, a stab with a knife, is
looked upon here as a black eye or a bloody nose in England. Another reason why
spectators do not interpose is, that the family of the guilty person are
implacable toward an informer; and never fail to requite his officiousness
sooner or later with a like return. The manner in which the guilty assassin
secures himself is by going immediately on board a foreign ship in the harbor,
where he remains in safety till the accident is forgot. If the wound is but
slight, the assassin never thinks even of going on shipboard, but walks off to
the nearest church, where in the portico, or on the steps, he is in safety; but
if the wound proves mortal, the church no longer affords him an asylum, and he
can then be taken even from on shipboard. The churches are also very
convenient for all pilferers, who are there in security from the Sbirri; but in
the case of highway-robbers, house-breakers, and assassins, an order is
procured from the archbishop, authorizing the civil power to take them from
thence.

CHAP. XXI. Character, Dress, Customs, and Manners.
THE Genoese are esteemed extremely cunning, industrious, and inured to
hardship above the rest of the Italians; which was likewise the character of
their ancestors, the old Ligurians. The Italian proverb says, of the Genoese,
that 'they have a sea without fish, land without trees, women without modesty,
and men without faith.'

It is true, says Baretti, that the Tyrrhene sea does not greatly abound in
fish, and the rocky tops of the Ligurian mountains are not much shaded by firs
and oaks. But integrity in men and modesty in women are quite as common,
throughout the Genoese country, as elsewhere. The Genoese nobles are in general
affable, polite, and very knowing; and their great ladies much better
acquainted with books than any other set of Italian ladies. They all pique
themselves on speaking Italian and French with great correctness, and men may
converse in their hearing on the belle-lettres, and even on trade and politics,
without any breach of civility; which would not be the case in almost all other
parts of Italy.

With regard to the common people, the Genoese are the most laborious and
industrious of any nation whatever. Nor are they wanting in bravery, as the
Germans experienced to their cost in the last Italian war, when that army which
had defeated 40 or 50,000 French at Placentia, was by the Genoese populace
impetuously attacked, routed, and put to a most ignominious flight.

The Genoese, from their commerce with other nations, says Lady Millar, are
very quick of apprehension, guessing at what you would say, however ill you may
express yourself. Nor do they think a stranger ridiculous for not speaking
their language fluently; rashly confounding words and ideas, and supposing the
want or misapprehension of the former, to proceed from a defect or confusion in
the latter. In dealing with a Genoese the bargain is soon concluded; for they
seldom ask more than they mean to take, and are a people of few words.

The law of gain is so prevalent here, that all ranks give into trade. The laws
have taken care, in many articles, to put a check upon excessive splendour and
luxury. Foreigners, and the eight counselors of state, excepted, no person is
to be attended by above one footman; and she must be a lady of considerable
rank, who, besides such an attendant, is allowed a page; and he must not exceed
14 years of age.

It seems little to agree with the reserve and modesty of the fair-sex, that
most of the married ladies of distinction are every where attended by a
gentleman, who in the streets walks before their chair, and at coming into the
church holds the holy water for them, and does all the other little acts of
complaisance, in a particular manner like a lover. Some ladies are not
satisfied with one such obsequious dangler, but admit several for distinct
offices; one attends his lady when she goes abroad, another provides for the
table, another has the management of parties of pleasure, a fourth regulates
the gaming table, a fifth is even consulted about receipts and disbursements;
and both the beauty and wit of a lady are commonly rated according to the
number of these votaries. They all pass under the denomination of Platonic
lovers; and one would, indeed, almost imagine, the husbands had nothing to fear
from all these familiarities; for the Genoese being true Italians in point of
jealousy, can not be ignorant how far these intimacies may be carried, as they,
in their turn, are cicisbei to other married ladies. Nor is this piece of
gallantry confined to the young women only, but ladies advanced in years, pique
themselves much on having their cicisbeo; however this custom is merely
arbitrary, there being no indispensible obligation here to observe it, and it,
in some measure, now seems to be on the decline.

A very striking instance of the sincerity of their attachment, notwithstanding
the ridicule thrown on them, is related in the history of the wars of Genoa,
which we have made the subject of a plate. Donna Thomasa (a lady of one of the
noblest families of Genoa) having by her good offices contributed to appease
the wrath of Lewis XII. she chose him for her cavalier servante, the monarch
repaying her attachment to him with a mutual return of love. This so won upon
her affections, that on a report which prevailed in Italy of his death, she
immediately secluded herself from all society, and had a mausoleum erected in
her palace, to which she retired every day for many hours, to give free vent to
MADAME THOMASA at her DEVOTIONS.
her grief, in meditating on her deceased friend. When she died the Republic
thought themselves so much indebted to her good offices with this monarch, that
they ordered her a public funeral at the expense of the state.

The Genoese nobility are great economists; and may be worth generally from one
to 5000 pounds a year; though few of them have a revenue equal to this latter
sum, except the families of Durazzo and Doria. They live with great parsimony
in their families, and wear nothing but black in public; so that their expenses
are but small. If a Genoese nobleman gives an entertainment once a quarter, he
is said to live upon the fragments all the rest of the year. I was told, says
Smollett, that one of them lately invited his friends, and left the
entertainment to the care of his son, who ordered a dish of fish that cost a
zechin, equal to about ten shillings in English. The old gentleman no sooner
saw it appear on the table, than unable to suppress his concern, he burst into
tears, and exclaimed, Ah! figliuolo indegno! Siamo in rovina! Siamo in
precipizio! Oh! graceless son; we are ruined! we are ruined!

The pride and ostentation of the Italians in general, however, may be said to
take a more laudable turn than that of other nations. A Frenchman lays out his
whole revenue upon tawdry suits of clothes, or in furnishing a magnificent
entertainment of 50 or a 100 covers, one half of which are not eatable, nor
intended to be eaten. His wardrobe goes to the fripier; his dishes to the dogs,
and himself to the devil; and after his decease no vestige of him remains. A
Genoese, on the other hand, keeps himself and his family on short allowance,
that he may save money to build palaces and churches, which remain to after
ages as so many monuments of his taste, piety, and munificence; and in the mean
time give bread and employment to the poor and industrious. There are some
Genoese nobles who have each five or six elegant palaces, magnificently
furnished, either in the city or in different parts of the environs along the
coast.

Both sexes at Genoa are in general personable and handsome, and affect the
French dress to the utmost extent of the sumptuary laws, by which men are
allowed only to wear black, with a short satin cloak, and their sedans
coursely varnished with black. The same laws prohibit women from pearls,
diamonds, and laces. Their carriage is the same as that of men; and all their
light after dark, is a sorry lanthern, on one of the poles of the leading
chairman. The only persons dispensed from these rigid laws are the spose, or
such as are promised in marriage; and this for six weeks before and after their
nuptials. In this happy interval their love of finery has its full range; they
go in gilded chairs, splendidly glazed, with white wax flambeaux before and
behind; and in the richest full dresses, glittering with jewels and laces.
During this transient period, it is the same with them as with young women
about taking the veil, who are led to the parish church in all the pomp and
glitter which their family can furnish.

The dress of the bourgeois, says Lady Millar, is fine, but singular. Their
heads are wrapped up in a piece of printed cotton, which looks like a
counterpane; it reaches down to their waists, and rolling it round them, they
fold their arms over the ends, bringing it so close together before, that
scarce any part of their faces can be seen. They have strait bodied gowns, with
very long trains of rich satins, damasks, etc. these they do not give
themselves the trouble to hold out of the dirt; so their tails sweep up all the
ordure of the streets. They generally wear long aprons of fine muslins trimmed
with lace.

The poorer sort of women and peasants are wretchedly clothed; they wear a
petticoat of woollen or striped linen, with a corset; their heads are quite
naked, the hair of the chignion rolled round and round at the top of the back
of the head, and several pewter bodkins, as long as skewers, stuck through it
by way of ornament.

There is something very shocking, remarks Lady Millar, in being served
entirely by men, till custom and necessity, in some measure, reconcile one to
it. Not a female is to be seen in an Italian inn. Our expenses are half a
guinea a head per day for eating, and for this they give us three or four
dishes. Their constant use of oil, even in their soups, and which is seldom
good, is extremely disgusting. The manner of roasting their meat is singular;
after oiling the meat with a feather, they suspend it over a charcoal fire,
until it is become so dry and brittle as to admit of pulverization. Fish is
rarely to be had except on maigre days. The great scarcity of fish, however,
according to Lady Millar, is not owing to a want of abundance in the gulf, but
to a tax upon this article, when exposed for sale in the markets, which raises
the price to the buyers above that of butchers meat; although that is sold at
12 sous the pound; the Genoese do not eat much meat. The poorer sort especially
live almost entirely upon chestnuts and macaroni. Bread is excellent here, but
very dear, the corn with which it is made coming from Sicily. Fourteen bakers
work night and day the year round. The price of rolls of the size of those
called French rolls at Bath, is dearer by a halfpenny than in that town.

The inns at Genoa, says Keysler, afford but indifferent entertainment, and
care must be taken always to make an agreement for every thing before hand.
Their houses are furnished with wine from the republic, and in sealed bottles;
yet the wine is none of the best, though it is not adulterated by the
landlords. As the whole profit of the latter, arises only from the empty
bottles, he takes care to make it up in other articles. Besides this monopoly
of wine, which all who have none of their own growth, must buy from the
republic; it is the state only which deals in corn, none being sold in any
market, but all bakers must apply for it to the public granaries.

At the funerals of single persons, a sort of garland, decked with all kinds of
artificial flowers, is placed upon the coffin. When persons of distinction are
buried, the religious fraternities walk in the procession, with their white
hoods drawn over their faces, carrying wax flambeaux in their hands, which they
hold horizontally, that poor boys by catching the wax upon paper as it drops
off, may earn a few sous. The intention is doubtless good; but the sight of so
many ragged boys, mingling in the procession, is no great ornament to the
solemnity.

CHAP. XXII. Of their Government, Revenue, Army, Navy, and Commerce.
THE form of government in this republic, is aristocratical. The chief is
called Doge or Duke, to which dignity, no person is promoted, till he is 50
years of age, and has for 15 years, left off all trade or occupation, not
consistent with nobility. Every two years, a new Doge is chosen, and the former
incapacitated, during five years to hold the same post. On the election day,
which is usually the third of January, the great council meets in the ducal
palace, and by drawing gilt balls out of a box, 50 persons are chosen out of
the lesser council, who write down the names of such persons, as they think
worthy of being promoted to the ducal office. Upon any irreconcilable disputes
in the biennial election, it is adjourned from week to week, and the government
is lodged, in the mean time, in the eldest senator. The vote of a poor
nobleman, says Keysler, is often secured by 50 or 60 louis dors, and there goes
a story, that once a necessitous nobleman, being to go a journey, was for
borrowing a cloak of a wealthy member of the same order, but met with a kind of
repulse; and some time after, coming into the senate, when his ill-natured rich
neighbor who wanted but one to be elected doge, began to solicit and made
great promises for gaining him over, but all was to no purpose, for the poor
senator openly declared, 'That his neighbor had lately suffered him to go a
journey without a cloak, and in return, he might for his part, go without a cap.

The Doge resides in a palace belonging to the republic, with his family, and
eight Senators appointed for his council. He has a guard of 200 men allowed
him, who are all Germans; their uniform is red, faced with blue; but the rest
of the soldiery, which is composed of all nations, are clothed in white, with
blue facings. The first two days after his election, he wears royal robes, but
afterward, only the scarlet gown, common to all the members of the council,
Lady Millar, in describing his ordinary dress, observes, that his robes are
crimson velvet, his stockings, shoes, etc. red; and that he wears a square cap
on his head of a crimson color, with a tuft of flame colored silk in the
middle. He wears also a large cravat of lace, with a prodigious perriwig. The
procurators and senators have robes of black damask.

The particulars of his prerogatives are, that without his consent, nothing can
be proposed, nor can any resolutions of the council be of the least force. In
all important affairs, he makes the first motion, gives audience to
ambassadors, and assembles the colleges. All orders are also issued in his name.

During his administration, he is styled Serenite; but afterward has no other
title than that of Excellenza, common to all the Senators. The other nobility
are styled Illustrissimi. But titles are what the Italians are least sparing of.

The great council in Genoa, is composed of 400, and the little council of 100.
None but nobles, and such as reside at Genoa, can be admitted into either.

The ordinary income of the state, computed to amount only to about half a
million of liri, arises from the duties on imports and exports. When these
revenues fall short of the public expenses, the state borrows from the nobles
and rich citizens, large sums at a high interest, on certain pledges, and even
assignments on branches of the public income, which recourse, in 1407, gave
rise to the famous bank of S. George, so called from St. George's church, the
place where it formerly held its meetings. Its opulence and power are very
extraordinary, whole towns, manors, and territories belong to it. It is not
only to the republic that this company has advanced large sums, but also to
foreigners, by way of mortgage on lands or public revenues in other states; but
it cannot be said, that either this bank or the republic, have met with the
best of treatment in the performance of their contracts. In 1746, in order to
answer the demands of the Imperialists, it was quite drained and brought to the
brink of ruin.

It would have been better for the republic of Genoa, says Addison, if she had
followed the example of her sister of Venice, in not permitting her nobles to
purchase lands or houses in the territories of a foreign potentate. For at
present, the principal families among the Genoese, are in part subjects of the
kingdom of Naples, by reason of their estates which lie in that kingdom. The
Neapolitans sometimes tax them very high, and are so sensible of the advantage
this gives them over the republic; that they will not suffer a Neapolitan to
buy the lands of a Genoese, who must find a purchaser among his own countrymen,
if he has a mind to fell.

Sir John Millar observes, that the possessions of the Genoese out of their own
territory, are nearly equal to the whole income of that state. As to their
being the most likely to give themselves up to Spain or Naples, by reason of
such tenure, that is unnatural: weak in themselves, and unwarlike, they cannot
resist any one power; but their safety has hitherto depended, and must always
depend upon the interest others have, in their continuing a free state: their
acquisition would too much increase the consequence and influence of any
neighboring power. Besides, what bribe can Spain, Naples, or even France offer
to the Genoese nobility, as an equivalent for their liberty? Can they, out of
their own houses, see any thing desirable in the palace of kings? Rich in their
frugality, in the possession of honors, of power, and consideration, can a
noble Genoese envy the prime minister or favorite of any crowned head in
Europe?

In times of peace, the republic usually keeps on foot, a body of 5000 regular
troops, namely, 4000 natives; 200 Germans, who form the Doge's life guard; 500
Swiss; 300 Italians; 100 Corsicans, and 100 Bombardiers. Besides these, it has
also a militia, which, in case of necessity, is obliged to take the field. The
cavalry it raises in war-time, amount only to about 600 who are but little
serviceable by reason of the badness of horses in this country. In the last war
the republic had no less than 18,000 men in pay.

The fleet of this Republic, anciently so celebrated for its victories over the
Saracens, Pisanese, Venetians, Spaniards, and Turks, and for continuing, a
considerable time, master of Sardinia, Malta, Majorca, Minorca, Candia, Cyprus,
and many other islands and places, in and near the Mediterranean and
Archipelago, and even of the Black Sea, the Crim, and other places, is now
reduced to six galleys.

Though the Genoese manufactures are much fallen short of the vogue they were
formerly in, yet velvet, plush, and fustian are still made as well as damasks,
and other silk stuffs; for which considerable quantities of red silk are
imported from Messina, and other ports of Sicily: they also make gold and
silver tissues, laces and gloves; but inferior to those of France and the
Netherlands. The other Genoese merchandise consists of oil, fruit, Parmesan
cheese, anchovies, and drugs, which last are brought from the Levant. With
these goods a brisk trade is carried on, especially to Spain. Ships of most
European nations are constantly seen at Genoa, which is also the great mart for
the trade of Lombardy. The revenues principally arise from the manufactures and
trade, but the state is far from making by them the figure it formerly did; and
the reasons are obvious, considering the increase and improvement of
manufactures in other countries, the dearness of the Genoese, and the dangers
of the harbor. Genoa is noted for the richest bankers in Europe, acquiring
wealth by dealing in bills of exchange.

CHAP. XXIII. Review of the Manners and Customs of the Italians in general,
particularly in their private Life, their Games and Pastimes.
IN perusing the books of travelers we are naturally led, says Baretti, to
expect an account of the domestic life of the people whom they have visited;
few of them, however, are possessed of the first and most indispensable
requisite toward the performance of this task; that is, a competent knowledge
of the language of the country they visit; they cannot therefore easily be
admitted by the natives to that familiarity of intercourse, which might afford
them sufficient opportunities to make remarks on their private life.

We will endeavor to relate a few facts in order to assist the reader in
forming an idea of the manner in which life is commonly passed among the
Italians.

Among people in the highest ranks of life, as well as among those who pretend
to be much conversant with books, there are in all countries many who profess
to be deists and atheists; and of these I have reasons for saying, there are
some in almost all our cities and towns of Italy: but as their number is not
very considerable, when compared with the mass of the people, and as most of
them conform in outward appearance to the established mode of worship, it is
not necessary to notice them particularly, and point out the methods some of
them have taken by means of the press, to spread their pernicious doctrines
through the country.

This little preamble leads me to observe that, in general, when a true Italian
rises in the morning, the first action he performs is that of crossing himself,
and saying his prayers by his bedside.

These prayers commonly consist of a paternoster, an ave maria, and an angele
dei, with the addition of the ten commandments, and the five of the church.

As we are all brought up in the habit of saying these prayers to our mothers
and nurses, who make it a point to din them in our ears every morning, even
before we can well speak; it may be easily believed there are few among us who
leave off the custom, even when infancy is passed; as we are further confirmed
in it by our masters at school, and our catechists at church, who incessantly
recommend and inculcate to young people the indispensable necessity of this
duty. Breakfast is with them very different according to the age and condition
of people. Young persons are seldom or ever permitted to drink any thing hot in
a morning, as is usual in England. Their breakfast is dry bread, or bread and
cheese, or bread and fruit, such as the season affords. Nor are they permitted
to drink coffee and chocolate, which are taken for breakfast by all people of
fashion: it being a prevalent idea in Italy, that any thing hot in a morning
ruins the teeth of young persons, and weakens their constitution.

As to the generality of peasants and working people, they make their breakfast
of polenta, a kind of pudding, made with the flour of Turkey corn, on which,
whilst it is hot, they spread some fresh butter, with the addition of a slice
of cheese, and a few walnuts, if they can afford it. Tea, is never seen among
the lower order of people. Ladies of fashion used formerly to drink a small
basin only when troubled with a cold; but its use is gradually creeping in
among the better sort of people, especially in the maritime towns.

The Italians are in general very early risers, especially in summer. A great
many who have no country houses, in which they spend that season, go very often
at sunrise with their whole family to breakfast in the fields at some distance
from the towns. There they carry cold meat, sausages, cheese, fruit, and wine,
spread a napkin on the grass, near some brook or spring, and make a most
cheerful meal; and then, before the heat of the sun becomes intense, return
home to their respective occupations: this morning exercise is esteemed by them
very salutary and necessary, especially for children. This custom, however,
prevails only among the middle class of people, and does not extend to those of
high rank, who live in Italy nearly after the same manner with their equals in
other countries, always breakfasting at home, except sometimes for a frolic
when they are at their country seats.

Though, in the Sardinian dominions, every person from the King to the meanest
peasant, dines exactly at 12 o'clock, yet in other parts of Italy it is the
custom to dine two or three hours later. The place of distinction is the seat
farthest distant from the door, at which the victuals are brought in; and this
place is generally allotted to the oldest female in company, or to a stranger.
All the rest, both men and women, seat themselves promiscuously. The trouble of
carving is not left to the ladies as in England. At the tables of persons in a
middling sphere of life the men carve; and at those of people of fashion there
is generally a servant out of livery, whose business it is to carve at the
sideboard for the company. A common dinner begins with a French soup, and
sometimes with a large dish of rice, macaroni, or legumes; then follow the
boiled meats; after them the roast meats; and last of all the cheese and fruit;
nor is it usual to dine in any other order. People of fashion have their French
cooks as in England, and their dinners are nearly upon the same scale with
people of rank in all the different courts of Europe.

The ladies in general drink nothing but water at their meals; but the men take
two or three large tumblers of wine during meals: it is not the custom to drink
to the health of any person, whether present or absent, except a foreigner be
invited. In that case, healths are drank once or twice, in compliment to the
custom of foreigners, with which every one is acquainted. Healths are also
drank at bridal dinners, in favor of the new married couple.

As soon as dinner is over, every thing on the table, except the cloth, is
removed, and liquors are brought, of which there are a great many kinds made in
Italy; and these, when the servants have dined, are succeeded by coffee. In
those parts of Italy where the winter is very cold, a fire is kept under the
table all the time of dinner, and I remember the time, says Baretti, when it
was usual in summer for every guest to have water to put his feet in, during
the time of dinner, but this strange custom is now left off.

In summer, almost every one goes to sleep for an hour or two after dinner,
either in an easy chair or on a bed. For this reason it is not the custom to
dress before dinner as in England; but people generally eat their dinners in
their banians or morning gowns; and when they have been obliged to dress after
breakfast, in order to go out, they undress again to be more at their ease at
table: but this custom does not extend to the nobility or people of condition,
who have long adopted the custom of sitting down to table full dressed, which
subjects them to the inconvenience of dressing again, if they sleep after
dinner.

In summer time, few people like to stay at home in the evening, but as soon as
the sun begins to approach the horizon, women, as well as men, go out to walk
till night, as many together as possible for the sake of conversation. Their
place of resort is that where the great people are taking the air in their
coaches. This promenade usually lasts for an hour or so after sun set. When
their walk is finished, they return home to supper, which always begins with
some sort of sallad, and ends with fruit. After supper they again go out and
walk, the nobility excepted, who repair to some house where there is a
conversazione. Those who go out after supper, ramble through the streets, in
large parties, and enjoy the fresh air, listening to the music and singing of
those who divert themselves and their friends with their serenades, of which
there are several, every fine evening, in all the great towns. Thus, the
streets are more thronged by night than in the day. This kind of diversion
generally lasts till midnight, and often till one or two in the morning; these
parties then break up, and people return home, repeat the prayers of the
morning, and retire to rest.

Such is the usual tenor of life in Italy. Few Italians amuse themselves at any
kind of play in summer: but in winter they beguile their cold and long evenings
with cards; and in the eastern parts of Italy with chess, backgammon,
tric-trac, and other such like games. Of their games with cards, which are
peculiar to this country, we shall hereafter speak.

An Italian, though but one degree above the vulgar, never sets down to table,
without having previously washed his hands, especially in summer: and the
water, for this purpose, is administered by a servant. No water-glasses are
used in Italy after meals, as in England; but if any person chooses to wash his
hands or mouth, he quits the table and retires to another part of the room.

As for the article of food, there are not many singularities to notice,
excepting that few Italians can endure beef at their tables. Many English
ministers, at the Italian courts, and many of the English domesticated in the
country, admiring the beef in Italy, have endeavored to bring the eating of it
into vogue, and would persuade the Italians to eat it roasted. One nobleman had
the good nature to send for a butcher from England to show those of Turin how
to cut up an ox. Yet his endeavors proved fruitless, nor was he able to remove
the foolish prejudice, that beef is gross food, fit only for the common people,
by whom alone it is eaten except some of the choice pieces, used for bouilli;
nor will the common people eat it roasted, but either boil, stew, or make it
into pies, highly seasoned with pepper, garlic, onion and other strong
ingredients.

Salted beef is disliked even more than roasted; nor is salt meat of any kind
ever brought to polite tables except tongues and sausages. The principal meat
is veal, and though in some places it is eaten young, yet in general the calves
are not killed till they are six or seven months old. Pork is in great esteem,
and reckoned excellent as well by foreigners as by the inhabitants; and there
are fowls of all kinds in abundance, both tame and wild. Kid and lamb are
frequently eaten, but mutton very seldom; because in general it is not good in
any part of Italy, except that which comes from Switzerland, and the upper part
of the Appennines. The common people eat mutton bred in the level part of
Italy, and it any person above the vulgar, has a mind, for the sake of variety,
to a leg or shoulder, it is always roasted, and plentifully stuffed with
garlic, sage and rosemary. Large joints of meats are never served up at Italian
tables, except in families numerous enough to consume the whole in a day; and
for this reason, because in countries where the heat for many months is so
great, it does not answer to keep victuals for the following day.

On meagre days, which by the bye, are declining very fast in Italy, the sea,
lakes, rivers, and fish ponds, furnish most of the cities with great variety of
fish; as the gardens and fields do with vegetables, which the Italian cooks
dress in several very palatable ways, with the assistance of butter, cheese,
spices, anchovies, capers, and other ingredients, and particularly mushrooms
and truffles; which many provinces of Italy afford in abundance, and of the
most delicate kind. Great quantities of salt-fish are also eaten in Lent,
dressed in different ways not known in England.

Potatoes are not eat in this country. Such is the repugnance that the
generality of mankind have to eat what they are not accustomed to, that the
captain of an English vessel, who brought a large cargo of potatoes to Naples,
during a great famine, was obliged to throw them overboard; as he could not
find persons who would accept them even as a present. And yet there are several
little nations, if they may be so called along the ridges of the Apennines, who
eat scarce any thing else for a great part of the year, except chestnuts, of
which they make even bread; and many of the peasants in other parts, live
almost entirely on polenta.

When the Italians have taken their afternoon nap, their servants attend them
with lemonade, and other cooling drinks kept in ice. Of these they drink
plentifully not only then, but at all hours of the day; nor do they want these
refreshments, great quantities of ice and snow, being preserved in every part
of Italy for the hot months. Should there be a scarcity of them, which happens
but seldom, the inhabitants lament it almost as much as a famine. At Venice
where it would be difficult to have ice-houses under ground, on account of the
sea, ice is brought every evening from the continent: and there are laws,
obliging persons who keep coffee-houses, to provide the town with so necessary
an article; as it would much distress laboring people, could they not cool the
wine at their meals with ice, and quench their thirst as often as they have
occasion with ice water.

Having mentioned the morning prayers, of the Italians, we will now give some
account of the manner in which they acquit themselves, of those duties, imposed
on them by their religion. Like the English, the Italians are not very fond of
going to church on weekdays; yet there are some women especially, who go to
hear mass every morning, and receive the benediction in the evening.

Many of our readers know, or may easily inform themselves, what masses and
benedictions are; it will therefore be superfluous to describe them. We have
likewise, already related how magnificent the churches of Italy are. On
holidays, before daybreak, their bells are in motion, and the lower class of
people, running to hear mass. As every church has at least three altars, and
the priests and friars are numerous; so there are in all churches masses to be
heard, from the very first appearance of the morning, till toward the
afternoon.

A little after ten, the genteel people begin to make their appearance; the
ladies attended by their servants and gallants. A gallant who escorts his lady
to church, on approaching the door, steps forward to hold up the curtain,
placed within the entrance, and advances to the holy water, into which he dips
the extremity of his middle finger, and offers it to her, that she may cross
herself, which she immediately does, not forgetting to return him her thanks,
by a half curtesy.

In the Italian churches are no pews; only benches or chairs, and for the
double purpose of sitting or kneeling. In those churches, where there are only
chairs, the servants or sexton gives one to any lady or gentleman. But where
there are only benches, a lady immediately goes where she sees a place vacant,
or if all are occupied, where a man is seated. On the approach of a woman,
though but tolerably dressed, and no matter what may be her age, a man
immediately rises, and gives up his place to her. She kneels for an instant,
crosses herself; mumbles over a short prayer, generally an ave maria; and if
there be no mass going forward at any of the altars, sits down till one begins.
But if there is one just ready to commence, she continues kneeling, till it is
a little advanced; then sits; and kneels no more, till she hears the little
bell ring, when the priest elevates the host. Her kneeling at this instant, is
accompanied with a very humble attitude, and an air of recollection.

When this mass is over, she sits still a while, then kneels again; mutters
another ave maria, or some other short prayer, crosses herself, takes up the
prayer book, in which she has been reading the greatest part of the mass, gives
it to her servant or gallant, crosses herself again; courtesies to the great
altar, then goes to the holy water, and after again crossing herself, courtesies
a second time to the altar, and then walks out of church, if she has no further
business in it; that is, if she does not go to confess, which devout ladies
make a rule to do once a month.

With respect to the men, they generally stand, while they are at church,
especially the young and gay; and only bend the right knee a little, and
incline the head, at the elevation of the host; and what is still less
exemplary, often whisper to each other, and make their remarks on the ladies,
who come in and go out. For this, they are upbraided in due time by the Lent
Preachers, who point out to them the scandal they offer to religion, by such
preposterous conduct, and remark to them the great decorum observed even by
Turks and heretics, in their acts of devotion.

Though the churches as well as the masses are numerous, yet some are
astonishingly crowded on holidays; it being the custom, for no person to absent
himself from church on a holiday, not even those, who make light of religion;
it being one of the settled modes for filling up of time. In all the great
towns there are two or three churches called alla moda (fashionable) in which
the best company is collected a little before noon.

Contrary to the custom of the French, who are fond of resorting in an
aftertoon to vespers, the Italians do not attend them. But they crowd in the
evening to the benediction, which is rendered a most glorious sight by the
immense splendour of lights, and solemnity of short prayers set to music, and
the great concourse of people of fashion. This last is an inducement not to be
passed unnoticed, as the Italians never like to go to any place not visited by
the ladies. The priests and friars, know very well how to fill their churches
with ladies, at a benediction, by giving them some fine piece of music, as they
return from their evening walk, to the opera, the conversazione, or the play.
The priests, by thus filling the church, are sure to make it turn to their
advantage, as they have one or two persons going round the church collecting
alms by means of a bag, fastened to the end of a long pole.

Few of the very great people are scarce ever seen at church, they having
chapels of their own. This privilege they easily obtain from Rome, at a very
small expense: and when they have a chapel, some poor priest is soon found, who
for a few pence will come to say mass to them, any morning they choose.

Such is the general manner, of spending a holiday in Italy, with respect to
the religious duties attending it. There is no need of observing, that this
account regards only, what is called, the polite part of the nation. As to the
lower class of people, they are in general strict followers of such modes of
worship as are prescribed to them by their ecclesiastical superiors.

It requires the talents of a painter, rather than a writer, to give clear idea
of the variety of dresses, in the several parts of Italy. This variety however,
appears more in the dress of the women, than of the men; and that of the women
too, of the lower rank. The men throughout Italy, dress, as in most other
parts, except the Nobles of Venice and Genoa, whose habits are peculiar to
themselves, and to those few among their subjects in each town, who have the
privilege of dressing like them. Their dress we have already noticed, in our
account of those two republican states. At Rome the better sort of people, and
even married men, dress for the greater part like abbots: and these are all the
deviations from the common fashion, observable in Italy among the men. But with
regard to the women, it is not an easy task to describe the peculiar fashions
of their dress in different cities. In some parts the women cover only their
head; in others their head and shoulders, in others again, all the upper part
of the body; and some their whole figure, from head to foot. In some places the
women cover their gowns from the waist downward with a black petticoat, as if
they wished to conceal the richness or elegance of their dress.

Gentlemen throughout Italy, in the summer months, dress in the thinnest silks,
and wear velvet in winter, besides cloth of different kinds and colors; and
very much laced and embroidered by those who can afford it, the Italians being
as fond of finery as the French. In winter they also line their coats with
expensive furs, and in many parts, when young, adorn their hats with feathers.
They likewise wear large muffs. The men wear swords in all parts of Italy,
except Venice, where the narrowness of the streets and the gondolas would make
them inconvenient. Even strangers at Venice, leave their swords at home, and
put on a cloak.

The poorest peasantry in many parts of Italy, wear neither hat, cravat,
stockings, nor shoes; nay in some of the southern provinces, they only put on a
coarse unbuttoned shirt and trowsers in summer, and wear a very ordinary coat
in winter, but still go bare-legged. Yet it is observable, that upon the whole
they are much larger limbed, and better made than the Piedmontese, Lombards,
and Venetians, who cloth themselves much better. The Apulians, and Calabrians
especially, are spoken of, as the finest race of men in Europe, taking the word
fine in the sense of painters, and not of young ladies.

The Italians are no great fox-hunters. It is not the custom in Italy, as in
England, to go out a fox-chasing. Perhaps the winters are too cold, and the
summers too hot, for such diversion; or it may be the plains are too narrow,
the mountains too steep, and the rivers too rapid, and too many for this
exercise. Yet some of the Italian princes have their hunting-seats, and
sometimes hunt the stag, and the wild boar, and even the wolf. But this makes
no part of the national character, and in general the Italians are not fond of
such dangerous exercises. They take more delight in fowling, and laying snares
for the feathered creation, in which, perhaps, no nation in Europe is so
dexterous as the Italians, who among other inventions for this purpose, have
that of the Roccolo, a short account of which may not be unacceptable.

A Roccolo is a circular piece of ground, generally on an eminence, at some
distance from any wood. This spot of ground is planted with trees, in a
circular direction. The diameter of the circle may be about thirty or forty
feet. These trees are covered on one side with a net, which remains upon them,
as long as the sporting time lasts. The area within the circle is also planted
with trees of a less size, and has in its center, a green bushy hut, containing
many cages full of thrushes, bull-finches, chaff-finches, and such kinds of
small birds. A little distance from these cages, there is an owl placed, which
has been long used to eat his food perching on a short pole, the upper end of
which is formed into a kind of small cushion, stuffed with rags or straw.

On one side of the circular row of trees a tower is built, about 20 feet high,
the brick work of which, is concealed by leaves and branches of vine, ivy, and
other creeping plants.

At that season of the year, when birds are on their passage to other
countries, the Roccolista; that is the man who owns a Roccolo, ascends the
tower two or three hours before sunrise. At the top is a small room where he
stands; and from the window he keeps a sharp look-out, toward that part of the
horizon, from whence the birds come. As soon as he sees or hears any, he gives
a jirk to a long string fastened to the leg of the owl, in the green hut below.
The owl with this sudden jirk falls to the ground, from the pole or cushion on
which he was resting, but presently hops upon it again. The moment however that
he falls, he is perceived by the birds in the cage, who gives a sudden cry,
which sportmen say is for joy, pretending that all birds are rejoiced at the
sight of the owl. This cry is heard by the birds flying in the air, who all
immediately plunge precipitately into the Roccolo, as if wanting to see what
was the matter. The Roccolista who foresees what will be the consequence of the
shricks made by his little prisoners in the cages, stands prepared with several
short pieces of wood, to throw them at the flying birds. These pieces of wood
by the means of some wicker work on each side, very much resemble a kite on the
wing. As soon as the birds approach the ground within the area, without giving
them time to alight on the branches of the green hut, he throws as quick as
possible several of his false kites over their heads, and thus frightens them;
upon which, in order to escape the mock enemy through the circular trees, they
run directly into the net that covers these trees; and are thus caught in great
numbers, sometimes a thousand or more every morning, if their flight was
numerous, and the Roccolo in a favorable situation; nor does the Roccolista
descend from the tower, till the sun becomes so powerful as to restrain the
birds from their flight, and oblige them to seek shelter. The least noise in a
Roccolo would make the birds keep at a considerable distance; therefore the
Roccolista keeps quite still and silent, only whistling from time to time,
through several tin whistles, hanging to his neck, by means of which he mimics
with great exactness, the chirping of several kinds of birds. All birds lie
very still, when they feel themselves entangled in a net, except the kite, who
is often caught in the Roccolo, when too eager in his pursuit of small birds. A
kite as soon as he finds himself entrapped, squeaks out as loud as he can; but
there is always a man attending the Roccolista, at the bottom of the tower,
ready to wring off his neck.

Besides the Roccolo, and the common method of spreading nets, or going out
with a fowling-piece, there are diverse other ways of catching birds. One, which
may be called peculiar to the Italians, is that used on those lakes abounding
with birds of the web-footed sort. There, in the proper season of the year, a
hundred little boats or more, if the breadth of the lakes makes it necessary,
are provided. Each of these besides the rower contains a sportsman, with a
number of hand-guns ready loaded. The boats start all together in a line, from
one side of the lake, and make toward the opposite, where the game is flown,
at the sight of so many boats and people. As the boats approach them, the
affrighted birds all rise in a cloud to a certain height, and fly toward the
side of the lake, from whence the sportsmen started; and as they are passing
over, each sportsman discharges his fowling pieces as fast as he can, and
occasion many of the birds to fall into the water, and frequently in the boats.
As this sort of sport is not less noisy than pleasant, there are many ladies,
who partake of it, and prove excellent marks-women, being not in the least
afraid of the report of a gun. When the chase is over, the dead fowls are
collected, and divided among the sportsmen.

On the lagunas, round Venice, there is also another singular method of killing
great quantities of the palmipedous birds, which are there in great plenty.
Several empty and uncovered tubs are sunk in the shallows, within two or three
inches of the brim, and placed at a proper distance from each other. A great
number of sportsmen, well provided with small fowling pieces, ready loaded, and
cartridges to load again, if necessary, repair in boats to these tubs before
break of day; get into them and send away the boats. As soon as day light
appears, the birds fly about in search of their food. The sportsmen, who stand
peeping over the brim of their tubs, shoot at all those which come within their
reach. This sport lasts a good part of the morning, and when it is over, the
watermen come and fetch the sportsmen out of their tubs; row about collecting
the dead floating birds; then all go merrily together to land, where the game
is fairly divided.

There are many other methods used in Italy for making a prey of all kinds of
birds, though none so singular as these already mentioned.

Though the better sort of people among the Italians are not very fond of
procuring themselves pleasure by violent exercise, it is otherwise with the
common people; and the mentioning some of their diversions, which approach the
nearest to the ancient palestrical games, will possibly not be thought
improper, as tending to give a more complete idea of the manners of the people
of this country.

One of the most general games, and peculiar to Italy, is the Pallone. A
Pallone is a leather ball, filled with hair, about the size of a large pumpkin.
Twelve persons generally play at this game; six against six. No one is reckoned
a good player who cannot throw the ball to the distance of a hundred yards at
least with one blow. The ball is struck with a wooden instrument, called a
bracciale, which, in shape, bears some resemblance to a muff, and is entirely
covered with short wooden spikes, cut in the form of a diamond.

The player introduces his hand and arm into this instrument, almost up to his
elbow, and firmly grasps a peg fixed across in the inside of the bracciale.
Thus armed, and lightly clad, each player being previously posted at a proper
distance from each other, they set to it with great alertness, six against six,
and strike the pallone backwards and forwards, with as much strength and
dexterity as they can, when it comes in their way, or run to it when at a
distance, all endeavoring to make it ultimately fall far from themselves, and
into the ground occupied by their antagonists, much in the same manner as the
players of tennis.

This game, which cannot be played but in some spacious place, and best by the
side of some high wall, or long range of building, is very common in summer,
toward the latter part of the evening, in almost all the towns and villages of
Italy: It is even usual for the players of one town to send challenges to those
of another, though at the distance of a hundred miles or more, and invite them
to try their skill for a stipulated sum. On this occasion great crowds of
people resort to see them play, nor are gentlemen and people of rank sometimes
averse to be enrolled in the list of players.

In the upper parts of Italy they have a custom during the spring months, to
peel off the bark from a high poplar tree, and strip it of all its branches in
such a manner as to make the trunk perfectly smooth. When the tree is thus
prepared, they hang on the top a considerable quantity of hams, fowls, and
other eatables, which are not to be procured, but by ascending the tree. The
most vigorous of the young peasants embrace the trunk vigorously, and one at a
time, as they are drawn by lot: and helping themselves by fastening a rope
round the tree as they ascend, alternately tying and untying, they endeavor to
obtain the proffered premium. But most of them, some from a greater and others
from a lesser height, are successively borne down; and, for want of sufficient
strength and dexterity, slide down with great velocity to the ground, to the no
small diversion of the numerous spectators of both sexes. But he who is so
robust and skilful as to reach the top, and throw down the eatables, not only
has them to himself, but instantly becomes so great a favorite with the young
maidens round the country, that happy is she to whom he deigns to pay his
addresses, and shall ask in marriage.

In some parts of Piedmont the young peasants have another method of amusing
themselves, singular enough; this is to stand erect in their carts, drawn by
oxen, intoxicated with wine. These drunken animals, as it may well be imagined,
run at a prodigious rate, the moment they are let loose, pricked and frightened
as they are by the shoutings and hideous clamor of a numerous rabble. The
carts are frequently drawn out of the road, over uneven ground, and not seldom
overturned in ditches and hollow places, to the great danger of the fellows
riding in them, who thus madly expose their life and limbs. Yet the vanity of
appearing superior to their neighbor, operates alike on the human heart,
whether rustic or civilized; and the desire of acquiring distinction, as well
as the certainty, in case of good success, that they will become considerable
in the eyes of their sweet-hearts, makes the young peasants of Piedmont venture
upon so perilous an exploit, with the greatest intrepidity and alacrity. In
this district of Italy they had also the battajola, as they called it; that is
a battle, regularly fought every holiday in the afternoon, between the
inhabitants of one part of Turin against those of another; the numbers of each
side being always very much increased by the peasants. The place of action was
under the walls of Turin, on the side of the river Po. There the parties, which
sometimes amounted to several thousands, flung stones at each other from slings
for many hours, with inexpressible fury; each party endeavoring to put the
opposite side to flight, and make them prisoners, when they immediately shaved
their heads, and otherwise very much insulted them, before they were dismissed.
The battajola usually began by boys on both sides, but generally ended with
men, who were gradually fired at the sight of the combat, and by the yielding
of the boys when overpowered by their opponents. Many were the heads broken on
such occasions, and scarce a holiday passed without some person being killed.
This ancient custom was, in a great measure, abolished by the present king, on
the marriage of his third wife; for it happened that the new queen, desirous of
seeing the battajola, went with a great retinue, to view it from the gardens
belonging to the royal palace, choosing a place that was thought out of the
reach of a sling. Yet it so happened that one of the slingers had the insolence
to sling a stone where she was, which struck one of her ladies. This made the
King resolve to put an end to this brutal diversion by a severe proclamation,
and by sending soldiers to disperse the rabble, as soon as they prepared to
assemble; so that at present the battajola consists only of a few daring boys,
who go to fight at a much greater distance from the town, than they used to do
before that accident happened.

Nor are these the only perilous amusements practiced in Italy. Those who
delight in v$ewing prints may possibly recollect having seen one by a famous
master, called Il ponte di Pisa, (or the bridge of Pisa) representing a kind of
battle, which used often to be fought on the bridge of that town, by two
parties; the combatants clad in iron armor, with helmets on their heads, and
furiously wielding heavy clubs, in order to get possession of the bridge.
Numbers in the scuffle had their heads broken, in spite of their helmets and
armor; and many more were beaten or pushed headlong into the river Arno,
underneath. It is true, that those who thus fell, were immediately taken out of
the water by boats, placed in the river on purpose; but as too many lives were
lost every year on this barbarous diversion, Government put a stop to it, and
only a few boys are now suffered to fight occasionally with their fists, for
the conquest of this bridge; a practice very customary at Venice. It is
observable that, in the prints abovementioned, the combatants are represented
to be naked, though, in fact, they fought completely armed.

Their bull-fights, horse-races, and regattas we have already noticed, under
the articles of Venice, Rome, and Tuscany. We shall therefore conclude this
review of the customs and manners of the Italians, with a short account of
their in-door amusements; particularly their games of cards, some of which
appear more complicated than ours.

That man, says Barelli, would certainly appear extraordinary, if not
ridiculous, who should attempt to appreciate the different degrees of mental
power, possessed by the principal European nations, by drawing inferences from
those portions of wit necessarily employed, when they play at their national
games. Forbearing, therefore, to enter into this subtle disquisition, says the
above writer, I will only observe, that it is not without reason the English
are proud of their game of whist, the French of picquet, and the Spaniards of
ombre, three of the best games of cards possessed by these nations. To obtain a
victory, or prevent being defeated, at any of them, requires so much quickness
and sagacity, that no wonder even men of good parts are flattered, when praised
for their skill in either of these games.

Which of them demands most skill I will not take upon me to determine; but
this I will venture to affirm, that three or four of our Italian games of cards
are as much superior in this respect to whist, picquet, and ombre, as chess is
to Polish drafts. The games I mean, are those which we form out of those cards
called Minchiate and Tarocco's: the first played all over Tuscany, and in the
dominions of the Pope; the second, in Piedmont and Lombardy. I crave the
indulgence of the reader for endeavoring to give him some idea of both these
games, to make him sensible that the Italians, who have often appeared great in
those arts, considered great by mankind, are also great in those that mankind
regard as little.

Both the minchiate and the taroccos consist of five suits instead of four, as
in other packs of cards. Four of these five suits correspond with the four
suits of the common cards, with the addition only of one card to the three
figured ones in each suit; so that, instead of king, queen, and knave, we have
king, queen, knight, and knave. As to the fifth suit it consists of 41 cards in
the minchiate, and 22 in the taroccos; and this fifth suit is called by a name
answering to trumps in English. Both these games may be played by only two or
three people several ways; but the most ingenious, and the most in use, are two
or three games played by four people, more especially one which is played by
one against three, in the same manner as ombre, and another played two against
two, something like whist.

By this the reader will see, that each of these games must necessarily be much
superior to whist and ombre, on account of the greater number of combinations
produced, either by the 97 cards of the minchiate, or by the 78 of the tarocco;
which combinations cannot but give a larger scope to the imagination, than the
lesser number of 40 at ombre, or 52 at whist, and oblige the player to exert
his memory and judgment more than at the latter of these games.

Strangers object to the games of minchiate and tarocco, because they produce
so many combinations as to prove fatiguing; but if this argument carries
conviction, we must of course conclude, that chess is less delightful than loo,
because it forces the mind to a greater recollection of its powers than loo.
This reasoning is certainly just, with regard to sluggish minds, but will not
hold with respect to those that are lively and comprehensive. Those Italians,
however, whose minds are much too contracted and disproportionate to the
taroccos and minchiate; or who do not choose to exert their talents too much,
have still the means of diverting themselves with several other games of cards,
that require no greater compass of imagination, or strength of memory and
understanding, than whist, picquet, and ombre; and others still, pretty nearly
on a footing with humble loo itself.

"Many strangers (concludes Barretti) are surprised that the Italians learn
their games with so much facility, as in a little time to play at them with as
much address as the best players among themselves. Hence they infer that Italy
abounds in gamblers more than other countries; but would they not speak with
greater justness, were they pleased to say -- that the Italians, accustomed to
more complicated games, easily learn those which, comparatively speaking,
require less wit, and less attention?"

CHAP. XXIV. Of the present State of Italian Literature, and of the learned
Professions in Italy.
LEARNING is now cultivated in Italy, as well as in other parts of Europe, more
out of regard to its use and convenience in common life, than from any great
hopes, by its means, of acquiring honor or emoluments. The stock of books, on
all kinds of subjects, is become so ample, that learned and ingenious men
cannot now have that facility which their predecessors had, of making
themselves known to their cotemporaries, and recommending themselves to public
notice, by handling any new subject. A Cardinal's hat is not now to be grasped
by climbing the ladders of Greek and Latin; a learned man may, indeed, obtain
some petty advantages by his industry, or by chance; but a bishopric in Italy,
as well as in England, is seldom the reward of merit and learning. "Whatever a
studious recluse, surrounded by his books, may think of the illustrious age of
Leo, when I consider the wonderful progress, (says Baretti) that all sciences
have made in Europe, within these three last centuries, I am tempted to think
that, exclusive of the knowledge of the learned languages, the literature of
the English women alone, would prove not much inferior to the real knowledge of
that illustrious age, with which shallow satyrists, and peevish poets, of all
countries, reproach the degeneracy of their own."

Granting, however, that the modern Italians are not so studious and learned as
their cinquecentisti ancestors of Leo's age (a name given to the learned of the
16th century) yet it is presumptuous in foreigners to suppose the Italians are
quite destitute of literary merit.

Let any Englishman enter the public libraries of Italy, and he will no longer
boast those of Oxford, Cambridge, and the Museum. The libraries of Milan,
Venice, Florence, and Rome, stand in no need of additional shelves to vic with
the most famous English ones. Misson, in his Travels, reckons 14 in Venice
alone, some larger than that of St. Mark, and almost all public. In Turin,
Pavia, Parma, Padua, Pisa, Modena, Bologna, and Naples, there are likewise
ample collections of books for public use; nor is there scarce a town or a
convent in Italy without a public or private library.

It would be endless to enumerate all the stores of learning thus accumulated
in various parts of Italy; and the Italians are not so absurd to keep their
libraries for mere show, or for the pleasure of feeding moths and mice. Many
learned men are to be found in them, whose lives were early devoted to the
acquisition of knowledge. Ambition and curiosity act upon the inhabitants of
Italy with full as much vigor as they do in other countries.

But few are the cultivators of science whose names are wafted by fame to
distant regions, during their lives; the greatest part must be content to enjoy
renown only in those places which gave them birth. They cannot all have a King
of Prussia for a patron and panegyrist, who will deign to gild the silver of
Voltaire, and the copper of Algarotti.

Though extended literary reputation, however, be scarce attainable by the sons
of learning, while they live; and though the approaches toward it be gradual
and slow, yet the names of some living authors have reached England, and other
parts of Europe; and those of Metastasio, the Poet; Morgagni, the Anatomist;
Frisio, the Mathematician; and Father Beccaria, the Electric Philosopher; are
not unknown on the other side of the Alps.

After this slight sketch of their literature, it may not be amiss to mention
the advantages which the Italians may reasonably expect from applying
themselves to a life of study. An information of this kind will lead our
English readers into an acquaintance with such parts of their customs, as no
other traveller has yet made an object of his attention.

In Italy, when a young man is trained up to physic, he has it in his power to
get his livelihood in a very short time; if he will apply to it in such a
manner as to acquire reputation. On quitting the university, which is generally
done after a residence of seven years, and having took all his degrees, he goes
to serve as a volunteer in some great hospital, or puts himself to a kind of
apprenticeship with one of the most eminent physicians in a capital town; that
he may now learn the practice, as he is supposed to have already done the
theory of the art.

The Italian physicians visit all their patients, with their pupils constantly
attending them, whom they oblige to inspect minutely all the disorders that
fall in their way, and notice the remedies they prescribe.

This kind of life they generally follow, till an opportunity offers of being
chosen physician to an hospital, or to go in the same capacity to some small
town or village. When a vacancy offers, there are generally several
competitors. But the young physician who has acquired the best character for
skill in his profession, and prudence in private life, has most chance of
succeeding in his application. His success however depends on the suffrages of
the corporation, who are not always influenced in their choice by superior
merit. Partiality will sometimes interfere, and give an appointment to one,
which ought to be bestowed on another.

When the appointment is obtained, the young practitioner keeps it till he
hears of a better, and then offers himself a candidate for that. By these means
they shift from place to place, that is, from a smaller appointment to a
greater.

No patient, in any provincial town, is obliged to fee the physician for his
attendance, as he is allowed by the corporation a salary for that purpose. All
families, however, whether they have occasion for one or not, send him some
little present at Easter and Christmas; which consists of a lamb or kid, hams,
sausages, capons, game, oil, wine, corn, or the like. The poorest peasant would
be ashamed not to send at least a couple of fowls to his physician, during the
holidays.

If a village is so small as not to afford a sufficient salary, it is annexed
to one or two more in the neighborhood, and the physician is then enabled to
keep a horse or a chaise. It is also the business of the corporation to provide
a lodging for him, when he is obliged to make a stay among them, and be absent
from his usual place of residence. If the place, on the contrary, is too large
for one physician, the corporation calls in the assistance of another, who is
paid and elected like the first.

The salaries, with the presents, are equivalent, upon a medium, to a
capitation of two shillings per head; and few of the appointments contain less
than 300 souls; nor do they, in general, exceed 7 or 800. So the provincial
physicians get about 30 or 40l. a year, in the smallest places and about 70 or
80 in the largest; and either of these afford a sufficient competence, as there
is no provincial town in Italy, where a middling family may not be decently
maintained with the smallest of these sums.

All physicians, however, do not proceed in this manner. Some act for many
years as substitutes for their principals, and set up in great cities, where
many of them have acquired very easy fortunes.

Whether this method of proceeding, with regard to the practice of physic, be
preferable to that used in England, I will not take upon me to determine. It
may perhaps be less lucrative to some of the professors of medicine. But it
seems more useful to the people, who are much better accommodated with the aid
of physicians, regularly bred, than the lower class of people in England.

The young men who apply themselves to Surgery, go through life in a similar
manner. As for the apothecaries, any person who chooses it, may set up for one,
after having undergone proper examinations. But the physicians in every place,
are obliged to visit, at least once a year, the shops of the apothecaries,
where they have power to destroy all the decayed and bad drugs.

With regard to those who apply themselves to the study of the law, they are
more dependent on government, than the other professions; being sent, after
they have quitted the universities, as Podestas, or judges in different parts
of the provinces. There a young lawyer administers both civil and criminal
justice, in cases of lesser moment; but in those of importance, people must
resort to higher tribunals.

When a young Podesta has thus administered justice for three years, a Syndic
is sent to make the tour of all the places, where the Podestas reside. Public
notice is then given in each respective place, of the arrival of the Syndic,
and every person, without exception, is at liberty to lay before him any
complaint against the Podesta. These complaints are immediately transmitted by
the Syndic, to the highest magistrate of the state, and by him examined. If
found trifling, or ill-grounded, they are dismissed, but if just, redressed.
But a Podesta has little chance of being promoted to a more lucrative part, if
it should appear that he has not administered justice with impartiality. If he
has, he is sent to a more profitable place for another triennium, and so on;
nor is any Podesta ever kept more than three years in the same place, that he
may not contract strong attachments to particular people, or run into any
danger of partiality.

Besides applying for these posts, the young students take up the profession of
advocate, in great cities, and have clients, much in the same manner as the
counselors in England. In this line of life, they generally fare as in
England, according to their abilities and eloquence: and from this class, the
chief magistrates and superior judges are chosen by government.

What the government does with respect to the law students, the bishops do with
regard to those in divinity. These are sent as curates, rectors, or vicars,
from the capital towns, to the villages, or small places in their district, as
soon as they have obtained the order of Priesthood. But they are not removed
triennally as the Podestas. They succeed like physicians to vacancies in the
different towns and villages; and he who is thought best qualified, is
generally preferred by the electors appointed by the bishop.

The reader is not to suppose these customs to be universal throughout Italy.
The country being divided into many sovereignties of different forms, the laws
and customs must consequently differ. Yet this, in the main, is the plan which
each of them follow, with respect to the three professions of law, physic, and
divinity.

Besides these channels, which the literati of Italy have open to them for
honors and emolument, and through which they may advance to the highest posts
in church and state; the universities are also open to them; and to obtain the
chairs of professors, generally depends on their reputation for learning. The
salaries annexed to the professions, are partly paid by government, and arise
partly from fees and perquisites. Few of the Italian universities have lands
and funds of their own, like those of Oxford and Cambridge.

When a person is chosen professor, he has only to continue reading his
lecture, and acquire learning and credit; and he may be certain to end his days
in easy circumstances, if he arrives at old age, his salary being generally
augmented every seven years. After 14 years, he is at liberty to quit the
university, and retire on half pay, and frequently receives the whole, if he
has rendered himself useful and conspicuous.

The division of Italy into so many states, makes the inhabitants of different
governments almost as much strangers to each other, as if they inhabited so
many islands; they seldom traveling into each others territories. This
obstructs the enlargement of our capital cities, which cannot all be swallowed
up in one, like London and Paris. A country so constituted, cannot afford the
means of any considerable pecuniary advantage to such as devote their lives to
those kinds of literature, independent of the three learned professions. Hence
the writer who applies to poetry, history, astronomy, botany, and other
branches of ornamental literature, cannot raise contributions on the public, as
in Paris and London. They have likewise to encounter many difficulties in the
publication. Nothing is suffered to be printed in Italy, without being first
licenced by two, and sometimes more, revisers, appointed by the civil and
ecclesiastical powers. These revisers are to peruse every manuscript intended
for the press; and sometimes their timidity or ignorance; at others, their
vanity or ill-humour, raise so many objections, that a poor author is quite
surfeited of his own productions. This ordeal trial is very troublesome, and
should the custom be now revived in England, few writers would have phlegm
enough to submit to it. Long use, however, has reconciled it to the Italians,
and few printers there, will dare to violate the law, and print a book secretly.

Were this privilege of printing books, ad libitum, admitted in Italy, it would
not fail, says Baretti, of being mischievous to the different states, without
increasing knowledge in proportion. Such a freedom would hardly contribute to
multiply the Metastasios and Gozzis or the Finettis and Morgagnis. But on the
other hand, it would soon degenerate into licentiousness, and the times of the
obscene Arelinos, and the atheistical Brunos would presently be revived. Every
scribbling Abatino of Rome, would then declaim in the most virulent manner
against kings and emperors, did they declare war, or make peace in opposition
to the interests of the Apostolic See. A ragged Birricchino of Bologna, would
besmear, with his blackest ink, the handsomest queens for encouraging foreign
manufacturers to settle in their dominions; and a stupid Lazzerone of Naples,
would be lavish of the vilest epithets on any little republic, that should
permit their ship-wrights to build men of war, and sell them to those, who have
money enough to purchase them. No public character would find shelter against
that deluge of outrageous satire, which would flow from the Italian pens, and
every private reputation would be at the mercy of any scoundrel that could
rhyme.

In most of the Italian states, very few individuals have their sleep
interrupted by the political measures of their respective governments; but were
our press set free, continues Baretti, many an oilman of Lucca, many a
wine-merchant of Empoli, and many a tallow-chandler of Modena would pretend to
be wiser than secretaries of state; and wonder that kings and queens had not
taken them from their counters, and raised them to the highest employments.
Sedition, defamation, profaneness, and ribaldry, would then quickly circulate
through all our towns, villages, and hamlets. Irreligion would be substituted
for bigotry and superstition: the pope would be called antichrist, and
mother church a whore. Such would be the blessed effects of a free press in
Italy, could we ever be indulged in it.

CHAP. XXV. Marriages and Funerals.
WITH respect to their marriages and funerals, people marry in Italy, as in
England, after the publication of three banns; and a dispensation is easily to
be procured there, as well as here, by those who do not choose to be married in
a church. Great dinners and suppers are usual on such occasions, in both
countries; that is, among the middle and lower class of people, who adhere
longest to old customs, and whose usages form the principal part of the
national manners. Congratulations are customary on such occasions.

As for their funerals, little more need be said respecting them, but that the
people in Italy are generally buried in their parish church or churchyard; but
few corpses are sent to distant places, to be interred in family vaults, as is
the custom in England, because the Italians live in cities, and not at their
country-seats, like the English nobility and gentry.

The principal difference between the two nations is, that a corpse in Italy is
generally escorted to the place of interment by a large procession of priests,
friars, and orphans, of both sexes, maintained in hospitals; all with lighted
tapers in their hands, and singing penitentiary psalms, litanies and other
compositions adapted to the occasion. And such processions are longer or
shorter; that is, more or less expensive, according to the directions of the
testator, or those, whose office it is to provide for the funeral.

In traveling through Italy, a stranger should endeavor, on reaching the
first town, to obtain as many letters of recommendation as he can, to take
along with him as he advances further into the country. The nobility of every
place, and particularly the literati, will be pleased to give such letters, and
the people to whom he will be thus recommended, will still address him to
others; so that in arriving in any city, he will have persons to converse with,
and they will be all glad of doing some of those petty offices, which render
traveling agreeable. He may indeed, often find that the persons to whom he is
recommended, are not in every respect, such as he would like. One will be over
civil, another over blunt; one will be absurd in one particular, and others in
several, but people must be taken as they are. Perfect characters are uncommon
every where. A stranger, therefore, should make the best use of each. One will
show the place; another his pictures; a third his medals, and so on. Nor should
he omit, if he makes the least stay in any place, to enquire who are the friars
of most repute, and pay them a visit. To a friar, there is no need of any
introduction. It is enough that you pay them the usual compliment, by telling
them, you have heard of their merit, and therefore could not miss the
opportunity of paying your respects to them. They will all be extremely civil,
show their convents, their libraries, their gardens, and whatever curiosities
they have. They will give every information of their rules and manner of
living, which is pretty singular in each convent, and merits notice. Most of
them are very frank and open with strangers, so that it may be easily collected
from their discourse, what is their sanctity or hypocrisy, their knowledge or
ignorance, their pleasures or their pains. Nor should they be judged from the
countenance they put on at the altar, or in a procession. They must be seen in
their cells, and at their tables where the rules of their order permit them to
eat and drink with strangers: and thus he will come to the knowledge of as
singular a set of men, as ever attracted philosophical curiosity. A traveller
should shun nothing, slight nothing; if he is in danger from general
intercourse, he is not fit to travel.

Some writers assert, that the bread and wine are bad throughout Italy,
particularly the wine. This is not true. The poor people in several parts of
Italy, often eat bread that is very indifferent; but people in easy
circumstances, eat good bread every where. As to the wine, there is some very
good in many parts of Italy, without a person is determined to allow no wine to
be good, but claret and burgundy. And even these wines are to be met with in
all great towns, and it is only for a stranger to take half a dozen bottles in
his carriage, to serve him from one town to another. The like may be observed
with respect to hams, sausages, or fowls, which may be carried, made ready for
the pot or spit, with very little trouble.

The beds, indeed, are bad enough in many places, and a stranger in traveling,
should endeavor never to sleep but in his own sheets; because the innkeepers,
when poor, are in general very ill stocked with linen; and to save their
credit, will swear no person has slept in the sheets they offer, though the
contrary is very evident; nor would it be amiss to have a thin mattrass,
stuffed with feathers or Spanish wool, to throw over the mattrasses of the inn.

Some young travelers are very apt to be rude with the maidservants at inns.
They had better make their proposal, and had still better let it alone; for
little good will they get either by their rudeness or their proposals. If the
nymph be willing, there is danger on one side, if unwilling, at another. The
common people in Italy, are generally very fierce, where women are concerned.
Care should be taken not to be over busy with actresses and figurantes, says
Baretti, for they will both fleece a stranger, and bring him acquainted with
surgeons and apothecaries.

Altercations with innkeepers, postillions, and such kinds of people, should
by all means be avoided, and a traveller should be particularly on his guard,
never to forget himself so far, as to strike any of them; for they are most of
them very choleric, and there is no honor to be got by conquering them.
Impetuous characters are disliked every where, and it is not to be imagined,
how much the common people of Italy detest being bullied, especially by
strangers. An open countenance, an affable look, a kind enquiry after their
christian names, and the offer of a glass of wine, if at meals, will do wonders
toward obtaining whatever may be wanted of them: for the Italians have in
general quick feelings, are of a yielding disposition, and as generous a set of
mortals, as any in the world. If some rules of this sort are not previously
laid down, traveling will be no better than a continual scene of vexation and
wrangling, not only in Italy, but in all countries

Credit not your travel writers, says Baretti, about the character of the
Italians, or your imagination will be disturbed by the most horrible tales.
There is scarce one of them who has not some story to tell of a fellow in a
church, who has stabbed different people. Yet, all over Italy, in towns or
villages, on great roads, or along narrow paths, a traveller may be assured,
that no person will offend him, if he does not choose to be offended: but on
the contrary, he will meet with abundance of kindness and respect, if he will
but moderately deserve it.

All this pre-supposes some knowledge of the language, otherwise traveling in
any country is disagreeable and vexatious. Should he, however, be unprovided in
this respect, let him hasten to Florence or Sienne, though Florence is
preferable, and labor till he has acquired a proficiency of the language. If
he wishes to be any thing of a critic in Italian, Florence is the best place in
all Italy, both to obtain a good phraseology, and a good pronunciation, as
Florence is in both respects to Italy, what Athens was to Greece.

Map of SWITZERLAND
map of Switzerland

A DESCRIPTION OF SWITZERLAND, FROM BUSCHING, COXE, L'ANGLE, MARTYN, KEYSLER,
GROSLEY, and others.
CHAP. I. Country, Climate, Mountains, Rivers, and Productions.
SWITZERLAND, the Helvetia of the Ancients, lies between France, Italy, and
Germany, being bounded by Germany on the north and east, by Italy on the south,
and by France on the west. It is about 225 miles in length, and 83 in breadth,
and separated from the adjacent countries by high mountains, most of which are
covered with snow.

Switzerland is one of the highest lands in Europe, the greatest part of it
consisting of chains of hills, ranged one under another, with only narrow
valleys between them; these hills also are composed of stupendous rocky masses,
two, four, and even six, being piled on each other, and from four to 10,000
feet high. One peak on a mountain called St. Gothard, is computed at 16,500
French feet. The lower parts of these high mountains are covered with woods and
pastures, the herbage of which is of a remarkable length and richness. The
middle parts abound in a great variety of odoriferous herbs, thickets, and
bushes, as also in excellent springs, and in summer are frequented by herdsmen
with their cattle. The upper parts of these mountains, consist almost entirely
of craggy and inaccessible rocks, some of which are quite bare, without any
herbage growing upon them, not even so much as grass; whilst others are
continually covered with snow and ice. The valleys between these icy and snowy
mountains, form an appearance like so many smooth frozen lakes, and vast
fragments of ice often fall down from them, into the intervals of the more
fruitful eminences. It is from these masses, and the thawing of the ice in
general, that the greatest part of the streams and rivers in Switzerland are
derived. The ice-mountains begin in the canton of Glarus, and, after passing
through the territory of the Grisons, and from thence into the Canton of Uri,
terminate in the district of Bern.

The highest of these mountains are those in the Canton of Uri, which send
forth rivers to all the principal parts of the world. This is the most dreary
tract of all Switzerland, and on the summit of the mountains, one eternal cold
almost always prevails; with hard gales of wind, and very damp fogs; whereas
the valleys, excepting some towns and villages, with a few fields, and still
fewer vineyards, thick woods and rich pastures, are overrun with lakes and
other waters, and the summer heats there, are frequently so insupportable, that
the inhabitants betake themselves to the mountains, though in winter, their
houses are almost buried with snow. In many places, within a small compass, the
four seasons are seen at once, and sometimes summer and winter are so near each
other, that one hand may take up snow, and the other gather growing flowers.
During most parts of the year, the clouds lie beneath the peaks of the highest
mountains; so that from thence they appear like a sea, the peaks projecting
among them like islands. Sometimes too they break, and thus display a view of
the subterjacent country. From the rising and falling of the clouds, the
inhabitants form almost certain conjectures with respect to the weather. Not
one of these mountains is without a cataract or water-fall, and as the eye, by
reason of the intervention of the clouds, is not always able to reach the
beginning of them, they look as if poured down from heaven upon the rocks. The
water thus falling from one rock to another, makes an astonishing noise, and
raises a mist round it, on which, when the sun beams play, is formed a very
beautiful sight, particularly at the foot of the cascade, where is exhibited an
entire circle of the most lively colors. Among these mountains, are many
excellent springs, some of which are medicinal, others warm, and others again
cold baths, celebrated for their extraordinary virtues.

Very different from this, is the remaining and smaller part of Switzerland,
including part of the Cantons of Zurich, Schafhausen, Bern, Basle, Soleur, and
Friburgh, for though this district is not without mountains, some of which are
even 2000, or 2500 feet high, yet it is much more level than the
abovementioned part; and the lower parts of the mountains, and sometimes also
the very summits are covered with vineyards, cornfieldsd, meadows, and
pasture-grounds. Here are likewise no Alps, nor rocky precipices, no cataract,
few trees, and, in summer, neither snow nor ice. The mountains, instead of
being interrupted by vast chasms or abysses, are generally entire, and composed
of a few small eminences; the summits of which, far from shooting out into
peaks, are flat or round, to the extent of many miles, without any considerable
inequality, and frequently afford not only pasturage, but also arable ground.
It is only during long rains, that in these parts the clouds sink below the
eminences. Great number of petrifications, more particularly of marine shells
and plants, are found among them. The fields too, though generally stony, are
fertile, and the meadows in most places, are planted with fruit trees.

Switzerland is not only divided from the countries that surround it, by the
mountains of the Alps, the highest in Europe, but almost every canton is
divided from the other, by a ridge of hills, which are covered with snow in
winter, but afford good pasture in summer.

The seasons are very different in this country, according to the different
situations. If a field lies on the south side of a mountain, the snow melts
early in the spring, and the seed time begins early; while on the north side,
the snow lies much longer before it melts. Travelers have observed, that when
it is seed time on the north side of the mountain, they are frequently at their
harvest on the opposite side.

No country in the world can be more agreeable to travelers during the summer,
than Switzerland; for besides the commodious roads and comfortable inns, some
of the most beautiful objects of nature, woods, mountains, lakes, intermingled
with fertile fields, vineyards, and scenes of the most perfect cultivation, are
here presented to the eye in greater variety, and on a larger scale, than in
any other country. Every body is seldom in the right, remarks Sherlock; but
every body is in the right in saying, the Swiss are good people. Their country
is certainly neither the favorite residence of genius nor of taste; but you
will no where meet with more sensible men, or more serene foreheads.

The principal rivers are the Rhine, a name given by the Swiss to all streams
and rivers in general, which have their rise in the country of the Grisons. The
Reussisseris form Mount S. Gothard. The river Aar comes from the Grimsel-hill,
and falls into the Rhine at Coblentz. The Rhine is first formed by a water on
the Fuska chain of mountains, and runs into the lake of Geneva, from whence
issuing again, it traverses the territory of that city, and then watering a
small part of Savoy, enters France. The Tesin has its rise partly in two lakes
on Mount S. Gothard, and mingles with the Lago Maggiore, but emerging again,
enters the duchy of Milan, and lastly looses itself in the Po.

The large lakes, for the smaller ones, are innumerable, are those of Geneva,
Neuenburg, Biel, Zurich, the four forest towns, Thun and Brien, with many more,
which shall be noticed in the description of the several countries in which
they lie. That part of the lake of Constance, which waters the borders of
Thurgau, and the abbey of S. Gall, belongs also to the Helvetic confederacy.

These several rivers and lakes, are of considerable advantage to Switzerland,
as supplying it with fish, and being a means of the great convenience they
enjoy in water carriage.

The fossils here are very considerable, such as chalk, mundick, and several
good kinds of clay for the making of earthen-ware. Slate likewise is very
common in many parts; and though white marble is scarce, it abounds in
colored. There are also several kinds of crystal. Its other fossils are
sand-stone, saltpetre, salt, torf, pit-coal, sulphur, etc. Gold dust too is
found among the sands of some of its rivers. Switzerland also is not without
silver, copper, lead, and more particularly iron ores. It must be owned,
however, that the metals of this country, are generally observed to be brittle,
and accordingly, all metallic attempts, a few iron mines excepted, have turned
out to the disadvantage of the undertakers.

Switzerland is better cultivated, and more populous, than people usually
imagine; though in proportion to its extent, the number of towns, villages, and
people here falls much short of that in many other European countries. In
several provinces, there is not so much as one single town, and in the whole
country, very little more than 100. The protestant cantons are better inhabited
and more wealthy, than the popish; a variation owing to the convents in the
latter.

The levels and valleys produce grain, but not in sufficient quantity, to
answer all the demands of home consumption. Barley is sowed on the very ice
mountains, the oats in a warmer soil, rye in a still warmer, and the warmest of
all is assigned to spelt. In most parts, a threefold produce is accounted a
tolerable harvest. Flax is much cultivated and worked, though not in sufficient
quantity, and the like may be said of hemp. A beginning likewise has been made
here with tobacco. The Pais de Vaud, the cantons of Bern and Schafhausen, the
Valteline, and the Valais, produce the best wines in Switzerland, and of
various sorts. An acre of vineyard is worth from two to 3000 rix-dollars, each
rix-dollar 4s 6d. Of apples, pears, nuts, cherries, plums, and chestnuts,
Switzerland enjoys great plenty; and the parts toward Italy, abound in
peaches, morelles, almonds, figs, citrons, pomegranates, and others fruits of
the nobler kind. Of the first two, the inhabitants make a very palatable and
strong liquor. Most of the cantons abound in timber, but in the vale of Avers,
dried sheeps dung is the common fuel, and the people on the mountain of S.
Gothard, burn a small shrub, called the Alprosin, and Breusch, a species of
heath, the stem of which is seldom as long as a mans' little finger, and the
height of the whole plant almost a foot and a half; they are gathered only on
the mountains. Lastly, the Valais is noted for its saffron.

The inhabitants derive their principal subsistence from grazing, which is very
profitable here, both the valleys and Alps, or middle parts of their enormous
mountains, yielding excellent fodder. White meats are the usual food of the
peasants, and such as labor in the mines. In the beginning of the summer,
their cattle are driven up among the Alps, and there committed to the care of
certain persons, styled Sennen, who are either accountable to the owners for
the milk, butter, and cheese, or agree to pay a certain sum for the
usufructuary possession. The Senns on all the Alps, likewise keep hogs, which
are fed with the whey, after making butter and cheese. Their cheese is much
esteemed in most parts of Europe, but the best is that of Bern and Griers in
the canton of Friburgh. Great numbers of horses are brought up here for the
French cavalry.

Of wild animals, the chamois are the most remarkable, and of two different
species; one making their constant abode in the highest and wildest mountains,
to which scarce any access can be found; and the others, not confining
themselves to the peaks and summits of mountains, but haunting likewise the
woods and thickets in the vales. The chamois are very watchful animals. They
usually get out in herds of 20 or 30; and while they are feeding, one of them
posted on an adjacent height, stands sentinel, and is relieved every quarter of
an hour by another. The sentinel looks around with great solicitude and
attention; and on the least suspicion of danger, alarming the herd by a shrill
cry; instantly the whole troop decamp, one following the other.

The chamois feeds on various kinds of herbage, and particularly the rein deer
licken, which is found in such great quantities, as in many parts to cover the
summits and sides of the mountains. In order to get at their favorite food in
winter, they, like the reindeer, clear away the snow with their fore-feet,
frequently thawing it with their breath, in order to loosen it more easily.

The Marmouset, in Latin, mus Alpinus, is a kind of badger, but both are most
properly classed among the swine species, and toward winter, grows so
exceedingly fat, as to weigh upwards of 20 pounds, by which means, it becomes
an easier prey to the peasants and hunters. They burrow either in the earth or
under a rock. Among the Alps is found likewise a species of hare, which, in
summer, perfectly resembles other hares, but in winter becomes entirely white;
so as to be scarce distinguishable among the snow. Here are also yellow and
white foxes in great numbers, which in winter come down to the valleys. The
Lammergeyer, which delights in the highest peaks, is of the large eagle kind,
and its wings are frequently 14 feet in breadth. This bird preys alike on wild
and tame animals. There are besides several edible fowls here; such as the
moorcock, the rail, snipe, partridge, and some others.

There is a stuffed specimen of that species of the chamois, which inhabits the
highest and most inaccessible mountains of the Alps, in Parkinson's Museum. It
is called by Cox the bouquetin. The agility of this animal must be very great;
for it is said, that he will mount a perpendicular rock of 15 feet at three
leaps, or rather three successive bounds of five feet each. It does not seem as
if he found any footing on the rock, appearing to touch it merely to be
repelled, like an elastic substance striking against a hard body. If he is
between two rocks which are near each other, and wants to reach the top, he
leaps from the side of one rock to the other, alternatively, till he has
attained the summit.

As it appears that this animal is extremely rare, and the description hitherto
given very inaccurate and confused, some farther account of it may not be
uninteresting.

The bouquetins feed during the night in the highest woods: but the sun no
sooner begins to gild the summits, than they quit the woody region, and mount,
feeding in their progress, till they have reached the most considerable height.
They betake themselves to the sides of the mountains, which face the east or
south, and lie down in the highest places or hottest exposures; but when the
sun has finished more than three quarters of its course, they again begin to
feed and to descend toward the woods whither they retire, when it is likely to
snow, and where they always pass the winter. The bouquetins assemble in flocks,
consisting, at the most, of 12, or 15; but more usually in smaller numbers. The
males, which are six years old and upwards, haunt more elevated places than the
females and younger bouquetins; and as they advance in age, are less fond of
society; they become gradually hardened against the effects of extreme cold,
and frequently live entirely alone.

In summer they feed principally on the genipi, and other aromatic plants,
which grow in the high Alps; and in winter they eat the lickens, and brouze on
bushes, and the tender shoots of trees.

The bouquetins having their sore legs somewhat shorter than the hind legs,
naturally ascend with greater facility than they descend; for this reason,
nothing but the severest weather can engage them to come down into the lower
regions; and even in winter, if there are a few fine days, they leave the woods
and mount higher.

Winter is the season of love with them, and principally the month of January.
The females go with young five months, and consequently produce in the last
week of June, or the first of July. At the time of parturition, they separate
from the males, retire to the side of some rill, and generally bring forth only
one young, though some naturalists affirm, they occasionally produce two.

The common cry of the bouquetin, is a short sharp whistle, not unlike that of
the chamois, but of less continuance: sometimes it makes a snort, and when
young, bleats.

The season for hunting the bouquetin, is toward the end of summer, and in
autumn, during the months of August and September, when they are in good
condition. None but the inhabitants of the mountains engage in the chase, for
it requires not only a head that can bear to look down from the greatest
heights without terror, but also much strength and vigor, to support hunger,
cold, and prodigious fatigue.

The most determined hunters of bouquetins, live in the mountains of the lower
Valais. Two or three of them usually associate in this perilous occupation;
they are armed with rifle-barrelled guns, and furnished with small bags of
provisions; pass the night among rocks at considerable heights; and erect a
miserable hut, where they lie without fire or covering, and on waking, not
unfrequently find the entrance blocked up with snow, three or four feet in
depth. Sometimes, in the pursuit of a bouquetin, being overtaken by darkness
amid crags and precipices, they are obliged to pass the whole night standing,
embraced, in order to support each other, and to prevent themselves from
sleeping. As the bouquetins ascend into the higher regions very early in the
morning, it is necessary to gain the heights before them, otherwise they scent
the hunter and fly him; it would then be in vain to follow them, for when once
they begin to escape, they never stop till they think themselves entirely out
of danger, and will even sometimes run for ten or twelve leagues.

The female shows much attachment to her young, and even defends it against
eagles, wolves, and other enemies; she takes refuge in some cavern, and
presenting her head at the entrance of the hole, thus opposes the enemy.

When a bouquetin is shot, the hunters let it cool upon the spot, and then
embowel it, putting the blood into one of the entrails, which is esteemed by
the peasants a sovereign remedy in pleurisies, and some other disorders. A
large bouquetin thus embowelled, will weigh 180 or 200 pounds. The horns are
sometimes found to weigh 16 or 18 pounds, and to be three feet in length.

Some naturalists are of opinion, that the diminution of the bouquetin in the
Alps, is owing to his size, the monstrous length and weight of his horns, which
impede him in his course; because he is driven into places where he can
scarcely procure sufficient nourishment during great part of the year, when his
sight becomes debilitated, and is frequently lost, by the strong reflections of
the sun from the ice and snow. On the contrary, it is maintained by others,
that the bouquetin is endued with strength proportionate to his size, and
though he is inferior to the chamois in liveliness and agility, yet he is by no
means deficient in activity; that his horns, though large and weighty, yet from
their reclined position, do not seem to be any impediment, but rather render
him essential service when he happens to fall, or purposely throws himself down
precipices, to avoid his pursuers. They add also, that his natural food is
rather lickens than herbs; that he is particularly fond of the young shoots of
trees and shrubs; and that in all the places where he inhabits, he is found in
the coldest and rudest mountains, and on the steepest rocks. From these
circumstances, it is not improbable, that his present situation and manner of
life, is an effect of nature, rather than necessity. To account for the present
scarcity of the bouquetins, we need only consider the number of its enemies, in
men, beasts, and birds of prey. But allowing that the bouquetin was no longer
found in his native Alps, still we could not affirm, with so much propriety,
that the race was extinct, or that it had migrated into a milder climate, and
with a state of domesticity, and more succulent food, had acquired softer
manners, a form less rude, and smaller and smoother horns. For it is even not
improbable that the hircus ferus of Belon, the bouquetin of the Alps, the
Siberian ibex, so accurately described by Pallas, and the tame goat in all its
different forms, are only varieties of the same species.

CHAP. II. Of the Helvetic Union.
BEFORE we proceed to treat of the different cantons and the allied provinces
of Switzerland, it may be necessary to give a comprehensive view of the origin
of the Helvetic union, in order more readily to understand the division of this
country, and the connexions the cantons have with each other.

The ancient Helvetians were a Gaulick or Celtic people, and Helvetia, which
received its name from them, was divided into four cantons or territories.
Julius Caesar was the first who reduced the inhabitants under the dominion of
the Romans; which government continued till the fifth century, and then the
country was overrun by the Burgundians and Germans.

While the greater part of Helvetia was subject to the Germans, the inhabitants
of Uri, Schweitz, and Underwalden, three of the 13 cantons of Switzerland, had
long enjoyed the most considerable privileges, particularly the right of being
governed by their own magistrates. During the 12th century, various disputes
between these three cantons and the Emperor, united them more firmly than ever:
such was the situation at the death of the Emperor Frederic II. in 1250. From
this period, or soon after commenced the interregnum in the empire: during
which time of anarchy and confusion, the nobles and bishops endeavoring to
encroach upon the privileges of the people in these cantons, put themselves
under the protection of Rhodolph of Hapsburgh, who was elected to the Imperial
throne in 1273. On the death of Rodolph, his son Albert not only refused to
confirm the privileges granted them by his father, but likewise set over them
two noblemen of the most infamous characters, whose administration became quite
insupportable. Finding that nothing less was in agitation, than the total
deprivation of their liberties, they united in a firm resolution to defend
themselves to the last extremity. They accordingly chose for commanders, three
gentlemen of approved courage and abilities, who secretly agreed, that on the
first of January 1308, they should surprise and demolish all the castles, in
which the Imperial governors resided.

This resolution being effected, these three cantons joined again in a league
for ten years, which gave birth to the Helvetic union.

The Emperor Albert, whilst he was preparing to attack them, was assassinated
by his nephew John of Hapsburgh. This assassination was committed the first of
May, 1308, in the open day, and in the sight of his son Leopold, and the rest
of his court. Its occasion, and the circumstances attending it are singular.
Albert as guardian to his nephew, had taken possession of his hereditary
dominions in Switzerland, and refused under various pretenses, to deliver them
up to him. At length, wearied with repeated and fruitless solicitations, John
entered into a conspiracy against the Emperor, with Rhodolph de Warth, Ulrie de
Palma, Walter de Eschenbach, and Conrad de Tagerfeld.

The Emperor dined at Baden, in his way to Rheinfelden, a town in Suabia, where
the Empress, his consort, had collected a considerable body of troops, with
which he proposed invading the three cantons. Contemporary historians, who have
recorded the minutest circumstances in this whole transaction, relate that
Albert was in high spirits during the repast; and that his nephew again
entreating to be put into possession of his hereditary dominion, the Emperor,
with an air of banter, placed a garland of flowers upon his head, adding at the
same time, "This will be more suitable to you, for the present, than the cares
of a troublesome government." This taunt had such an affect upon the young
prince, that he burst into tears, flung away the flowers, and could not be
prevailed upon to sit down to table.

After dinner, Albert continued his journey on horseback, accompanied by his
son Leopold, the conspirators, and his usual attendants; and came near the town
of Windich, in the canton of Berne, to the Reuss, over which river passengers
were usually $erried upon a raft. The conspirators passed over first, and were
followed by Albert: as he was riding gently on, expecting his son Leopold, and
the remainder of his suite, he was suddenly beset by the assassins. One of them
seizing his horse's bridle, The DEATH of ALBERT.
John of Hapsburg reproached him for his injustice in detaining his dominions,
and struck him on the neck with his sword: Rhodolph de Warth wounded him in the
side; and Ulrie de Palma clove his head with a sabre. In this condition they
left him expiring on the ground. His son and attendants, though witnesses to
the murder, not having passed the river, could not assist the emperor.

The assassins escaped into the cantons of Uri, Schweitz, and Underwalden,
expecting to find a sure asylum in a nation which Albert was preparing to
invade. But the generous natives detesting a crime of so atrocious a nature,
although committed upon the person of their greatest and most formidable enemy,
refused to protect the murderers. De Eschenbach concealed himself in the
disguise of a common labourer, for 30 years, nor was his rank discovered, till
he confessed it upon his death bed; De Palma, destitute of common necessaries,
died in extreme poverty; and De Warth, tied to a horse's tail like a common
malefactor, and dragged to the place of execution, was broken upon the wheel.
John of Hapsburgh, commonly known by the name of the Parricide, from this
assassination, did not reap the expected benefits of the crime; for by order of
the Emperor Henry VII. he retired into a monastery of Augustine Friars, where
he died in 1313. Mean while, the three cantons were for a few years left to the
undisturbed enjoyment of their liberties, and to strengthen themselves against
any future attack: and thus they innocently reaped the sole advantage which was
derived from this assassination.

In 1315 however, Leopold, Duke of Austria, marched against the confederate
cantons, at the head of 20,000 troops, and endeavoring to force his way into
Schweitz, at the straights of Morgarten, received a total defeat from 1,300
Swiss, who were posted upon the mountains. In the same year, the three cantons
contracted a perpetual alliance, which was ratified at Brunnen, and is the
grand foundation of the Helvetic confederacy. Such were the feeble beginnings
of a league, since become so formidable by the accession of ten more cantons,
and by the additional strength of its numerous allies; and it is remarkable,
that Switzerland is the only country which on the one side, has confined the
limits of the German empire; and on the other, has set bounds to the French
monarchy, which the latter has never transgressed.

The name of Schweitzerland, or Switzerland, which originally comprehended only
the above three cantons, was afterward extended to all Helvetia. It derived
that appellation either from the canton of Schweitz, as having particularly
distinguished itself in the revolution of 1308, and also at the battle of
Morgarten; or because the Austrians called all the inhabitants of these
mountainous parts, by the general denomination of Schweitzers.

The accession of Zuric, Berne, Lucerne, Zug, and Glarus, which happened a few
years after, gave strength and solidity to this union; but a century and a half
elapsed, before a new member was admitted. At length in 1501, after much
difficulty, Friburgh and Soleure were admitted into the league. Basle,
Schafhausen, and Appenzel, soon after subscribed to the same terms.

These 13 towns and countries which properly constitute the Helvetian republic,
are united by a reciprocal convention; which, though not in all places the
same; the union of the first eight, and five subsequent cantons, differing in
certain respects, yet in the principal points, they nearly agree.

It appears, says Coxe, from the several treaties concluded between the
combined republics of Switzerland, that the Helvetic union is a perpetual
defensive alliance between the 13 independent contracting powers, to protect
each other by their united forces, against all foreign enemies. Accordingly, if
any member of the union should be attacked, that particular canton has a right
to demand succors from the whole confederate body; and in case of war, the
several forces to be supplied by each canton, are precisely specified. It
appears, however, from the stipulations to which the five cantons agreed, that
they do not enjoy equal prerogatives with the eight ancient cantons. For the
latter have recovered to themselves a right, if the question for declaring war
against any foreign state, should be unanimously carried in their assembly, to
require the assistance of the other five cantons, without assigning the motive.
It is further stipulated, that if a rupture should ensue between the eight
cantons, the five are to observe a strict neutrality.

The next essential object of the league, is to preserve peace and good order.
To this is added, a reciprocal guarantee of the forms of government,
established in the respective commonwealths. Accordingly, the history of
Switzerland affords many instances of protection and assistance, reciprocally
given between the confederates, in defense and support of the respective
governments.

No separate engagement, which any of the cantons may conclude, can be valid,
if inconsistent with the fundamental articles of this general union: that is,
the reciprocal contract between the members of the league, supersedes every
other consideration. With this exception, the several combined states are
independent of each other: they may form alliances with any power, or reject
the same, although the others have acceded to it; may grant auxiliary troops to
foreign princes, may prohibit the money of the other cantons from being current
within their own territories, may impose taxes, in short, may perform every
other act of absolute sovereignty.

The public affairs of the Helvetic body and their allies, are discussed and
determined in their several diets assembled at Frauenfield in Thurgau. Each
canton sends as many deputies as it thinks proper.

It would be descending into a tedious detail to enter into the particular
connections of the several allies, either with the whole Helvetic body, or with
some of the cantons; and the different nature of these respective alliances.
Suffice it to remark, that the allies may be divided into associate and
confederate states; of the former, or associate states, are the abbot and town
of S. Gallen, Bienne, and Mulhausen; of the latter, or confederate states, are
the Grisons, the republic of the Vallais, Geneva, Neuchatel, and the Bishop of
Basle.

These states thus comprised under the denomination of associate and
confederate, enjoy, by virtue of this union, a total independence of all
foreign dominion; and partake of all the privileges and immunities granted to
the Swiss in other countries. And notwithstanding these states are allied only
with particular cantons, yet if any of them should be attacked, those cantons,
with whom they are in treaty, would not only supply them with succors, but
would also require the joint assistance of the remaining canton; if therefore,
any part of the whole body should he invaded, all the other members would unite
in its defense, either as immediate guarantees, or as auxiliaries of the actual
guarrantees.

Having now given this summary history of the Helvetic union; we shall proceed
to treat of each separate canton, its cities, manners, customs, laws,
government, commerce, religion, etc. noticing at the same time, the associate
or confederate states with which it may be more immediately connected. We shall
begin with that of Bern, as being the most populous and flourishing.

CHAP. III. Town and Canton of Berne.
THIS canton is by much the largest, most populous, and most fertile of any in
Switzerland. It is about 120 miles in breadth, and 60 in length, forming in the
whole, little less than one third of the confederacy. Scheuchzer styles this
canton the most valuable gem of all Switzerland. The levels yield an exuberance
of grain and fruit, and the high lands afford rich pastures, covered with
cattle of all kinds; consequently the inhabitants are in no want of milk,
butter, and cheese. The finest spots here, are the Waat, or pais de Vaud, and
the country bordering on the lakes of Bienne, and Geneva, which yield not only
the choicest fruits, but also excellent wine.

Among the lakes here, the principal is that of Geneva; the greatest part of
which is within this canton. At present, either the whole lake is styled the
lake of Geneva, or this appellation is limited to the western part, the eastern
being distinguished by the name of the lake of Lausanne. Its extreme length is
estimated at 18 hours distance. Its greatest breadth is between three and four
hours, but toward both ends, it gradually decreases. Its depth also varies
considerably, being toward Savoy from two to 400 hundred fathoms, but in most
parts, not exceeding 40. Southward, not far from Bouveret, the river Rhine
enters it with great rapidity, but quits it again at Geneva. That it passes
however, through the lake without mingling with it, as some ancient and modern
writers have inadvertently asserted, is unnatural; for though at about two or
three miles from its entrance, the turbid waters of this river may be easily
distinguished from those of the lake; yet beyond that distance, the distinction
both in agitation and color ceases; the lake being every where smooth, and of
one uniform appearance. In summer, the waters of the lake are greatly increased
by the melting of the snow and ice in the mountains. The lake abounds in fish,
and is particularly famous for very large trouts, many of which, weigh between
40 and 50 pounds each; and all the several kinds of fish in it, are remarkable
for their fine flavor.

The borders of the lake of Bienne are fruitful, and planted with many
vineyards; and almost in its center, stand two small islands, the largest of
which, called S. Peter's, is a delightful spot, covered with meadows, vineyards,
and a most beautiful wood.

This island, says Coxe, is about two miles in circumference, and richly wooded
with various shrubs and trees. Its surface is gently undulating; the southern
shore covered with herbage, forms a gradual slope to the lake, the remaining
borders are steep and rocky; in a few places their summits are thinly fringed
with shrubs; in others their perpendicular sides are clothed to the water's
edge with hanging woods. Agreeable walks are carried through the woods and
terminate at a circular pavilion placed in the center of the island. During
vintage particularly, and on Sunday, which is the usual day of festivity, the
island is filled with parties who take refreshments at the farm-house, stray
about the woods, or dance the circular walse, which we shall describe hereafter.

It was in this farm-house, the only dwelling in the island, that Rousseau
occupied an apartment, when driven from Mortier in the district of Neuchatel,
by the inhabitants, to whom he had made himself obnoxious from the skepticism
and infidelity of his religious opinions. He lived with the steward and his
family, says Coxe, who are the present inhabitants. The woman informed me that
he paid for his board and lodging forty shillings a month, that he usually rose
at six, dined with the family at twelve, and after a slight supper retired to
rest at nine. She added that he was extremely cheerful and agreeable; conversed
with the family with the greatest ease and complacency, and conformed to their
hours and manner of living; that he amused himself entirely with wandering
about the woods, and searching for plants, which he used to explain to them
with singular satisfaction. Rousseau mentions his residence in this island with
the highest terms of rapture, and his usual proness to exaggeration.

"I was permitted, says he, to remain only two months in this delightful
island; but I could have passed there two years, two centuries, all eternity,
without suffering a moment's ennui, although my whole society consisted of the
steward and family, good but plain people. I esteem these two months as the
most happy period of my life; and so happy, that I could have passed my whole
existence without even a momentary wish for another situation."

If we examine in what this extreme happiness consisted, he himself informs us,
that his principal occupation was in doing nothing. He did not even unpack his
books, and could scarcely prevail on himself to read, much less to answer any
letters. He assisted the steward and his servant at work in the vineyards and
fields; sauntered about the woods, and gave himself up entirely to botany. He
made occasional excursions on the lake, sometimes coasting the shady banks of
the island; at other times suffering the bark to float without direction into
the middle of the lake: then, to use his own expression, "he would lie down in
the boat, look up to the heavens, and continue in that posture several hours,
enjoying a thousand unconnected and confused, but delicious reveries." He
frequently rowed to a small sandy island, which he describes as a most
delicious spot. It was one of his great amusements to people this little island
with rabbits; and as he was conveying with great pomp, the steward's family to
be present at the foundation of this little colony, he describes himself as
equally elated with the pilot of the Argonautic expedition.

From these simple avocations and every day occurrences, which Rousseau relates
with that enthusiasm and those sentiments peculiar to himself, he draws the
following sublime morality:

"I have remarked during the vicissitudes of a long life, that the most
delightful enjoyments and most rapturous pleasures, are not, upon recollection,
those with which I am most affected. Such fleeting moments of passion and
delirium, however rapturous, are from their very nature but thinly scattered in
the path of life. They are too rare and rapid to constitute a fixed state; and
the happiness which my heart regrets, is not composed of fugitive instants, but
consists in a simple and permanent state, without rapture, the duration of
which increases the charm, till it finds supreme felicity."

This state he describes himself as possessing during his short continuation in
the island of Bienne; a longer residence would probably have dissolved the
charm, which was raised by his own heated imagination. That restlessness of
temper which is usually the attendant of great genius, and which was his
inseparable companion, would have probably returned, and embittered the
delightful calm, which he describes with such rapture and ecstasy. But he had
not time to become disgusted with his situation: for the same intolerant spirit
which had hitherto pursued him, followed him even to this sequestered island;
and he had scarcely passed two months, before he received an order from the
government of Berne to depart from their territories. Rousseau was so shocked
at this unexpected command, that he petitioned to be imprisoned for life, only
requesting the use of a few books, and that he might be occasionally permitted
to walk in the open air. Soon after this extraordinary request which shows the
extreme agitation of his mind, and which cannot but interest every feeling
mind, he reluctantly quitted the island. It does not fall within the compass of
this work to dwell upon this singular man through the subsequent events of his
life, or even accompany him to England, where, notwithstanding the most
distinguished reception, the same perverseness of disposition, and the same
excessive delicacy, rendered him no less unhappy, than when he was under the
pressure of real calamities, and exposed to reiterated persecutions.

The canton of Berne is well cultivated and very populous, containing 39 large
and small towns, and above 1300 villages. Its subjects are computed at no less
than 400,000, which is supposed to be nearly one fourth part of the population
of all Switzerland. Its territories are said to comprize nearly one third part.

The principal towns in this canton are Berne and Lausanne. Berne is a regular
well built town with some air of magnificence. It is situated on the river Aar,
by which three sides of it are environed, forming a peninsula. The houses are
of a fine white freestone and pretty uniform, particularly in the principal
street, where they are all exactly of the same height. There are piazzas on
each side, with a walk, raised four feet above the level of the street, very
commodious in wet weather.

A small branch of the river Aar has been turned into this street, and being
confined to a narrow channel in the middle, which has a considerable slope, it
runs with great rapidity; and without being a disagreeable object in itself, is
of great service in keeping the streets clean.

Another circumstance contributes to render this one of the most cleanly towns
in Europe: -- Criminals are employed in removing rubbish from the streets and
public walks. The more atrocious delinquents are chained to wagons, while
those who are condemned for smaller crimes, are employed in sweeping the light
rubbish into the rivulet, and throwing the heavier into the carts or wagons,
which their more criminal companions are obliged to push or draw along.

These wretches have collars of iron fixed round their necks, with a projecting
handle in the form of a hook to each, by which on the slightest offense or
mutiny, they may be seized, and are entirely at the command of the guard, whose
duty it is to see that they perform their work. People of both sexes are
condemned to this labor, for months, years, or for less, according to the
nature of their crimes.

It is alleged, that besides deterring from crimes which is effected by this
means, in common with the other methods of punishment, there is the additional
advantage of obliging the criminal to repair by his labor, the injury which he
has done to the community.

The public buildings at Berne, as the hospital, the granary, the guard-house,
the arsenal, and the churches, are magnificent. There has also lately a very
elegant building been erected, with accommodations for many public amusements,
such as balls, concerts, and theatrical entertainments. There are likewise
apartments for private societies and assemblies. It was built by a voluntary
subscription among the nobility; and no societies, but of the patrician order,
are allowed there.

Theatrical entertainments are seldom permitted at Berne; none had been
performed at the new theater, when Moore passed through this city, though the
building had been some time erected..

The walk by the great church, was formerly the only public walk, and
universally admired on account of the view from it, and the peculiarity of its
situation, being on a level with the streets on one side, and some hundred feet
of perpendicular height above them on the other. But there is now another
public walk, at some distance without the town, which has been lately made upon
a high bank, by the side of the Aar, and is the most magnificent one belonging
to this or any other town. From it there is a commanding view of the river, the
town of Berne, the country about it, and the glaciers of Switzerland.

The public library is a small, but well chosen collection, and contains 20,000
volumes, a cabinet of Swiss coins and medals, and many curious manuscripts. An
addition was lately made to this library, by a collection of English books,
magnificently bound, which were sent as a present by an English gentleman; who,
though he has thought proper to conceal his name, has sufficiently discovered
his political principles, by the nature of the collection; amongst which are,
Milton's works, particularly his prose writings; Algernon Sidney on Government,
Lock, Ludlow's Memoirs, Gordon's Translation of Tacitus, Addison's works,
particularly the Freeholder; Marvel's works, Steel's, etc. They were the
largest and finest editions, and might be about the value of 200 pounds. This
gentleman made a present of the same nature to the public library at Geneva.

The arsenal contains arms for 60,000 men, and a considerable quantity of
cannon, which are cast in the town. The Bernois value themselves much on the
trophies contained in this building, and upon the quantity, good condition, and
arrangement of the arms.

Nothing interested me so much, says Moore, as the figures of the brave
Switzers, who first took arms against tyranny, and that of William Tell, who is
represented aiming the apple at his son's head. I contemplated this with an
emotion created by the circumstances of the story, not by the workmanship; for
at that moment I should have beheld with neglect the most exquisite statue ever
formed of Augustus Caesar.

Surely no characters have so just a claim to the admiration and gratitude of
posterity, as those who have freed their countrymen from the capricious
insolence of tyrants; and whether all the incidents of Tell's story be true or
fabulous, the men, whoever they were, who roused and incited their
fellow-citizens to throw off the Austrian yoke, deserve to be regarded as
patriots, having undoubtedly been actuated by that principle, so dear to every
generous heart, the spirit of independence.

Addison justly observes, that there is no great pleasure in visiting arsenals,
merely to see a repetition of these magazines of war; yet it is worth while, as
it gives an idea of the force of a state, and serves to fix in the mind the
most important parts of its history.

The arms taken from the Burgundians, in the various battles which established
the liberties of Switzerland, are displayed here; also the figure of the
General of Berne, who, in the year 1536, conquered the Pays de Vaud from
Charles III. Duke of Savoy: and if they have no trophies to show of a later
date, it is because they are too poor and too wise to aim at any extension of
dominion.

The charitable institutions of Berne, are numerous, liberal, and well
directed. The hospitals are in general large, clean, and airy; and in the
almshouse for the reception of 50 poor citizens, is a curious establishment,
similar to one at Basle. Distressed travelers are treated with a meal and a
lodging, if at night, and receive sixpence on their departure. If sick or
wounded, they are maintained till their recovery is established.

The external appearance of the hospital of Berne, says De l'Angle, seems to
announce the palace of a sovereign. This magnificence is perhaps reprehensible
more especially in a republic. What is wanting for the sick? Convenience,
cleanliness, salubrity -- nothing more. The hospital of Berne re-unites all
these advantages. The most generous humanity, and the strictest regularity
preside over the administration of this charity. The greatest care and
attention is paid to the patient; every one has a bed to himself; every bed has
proper curtains, and a couple of mattrasses; and no smell, either good or bad,
is perceptible in the apartments.

The house of correction, which when the benevolent Howard visited Berne, was
in so deplorable a state, is now extremely well regulated. Formerly, all
delinquents, without distinction of crime, were confined in the same place; but
they are now separated; and two houses are established, one called the house of
correction for greater crimes, and the other the house of labor for smaller
misdemeanors. The prisoners are also discriminated by the appellations of brown
and blue, from the color of their clothes, with which they are supplied
gratis, during the term of their confinement. The brown color is appropriate
to the house of correction, the blue to the house of labor. The men and women
are lodged in separate apartments. Both are constantly employed, sometimes in
cleaning the streets and other servile occupations; at other times they are
taught to read and write, and are instructed in various trades, which may
assist them in gaining a maintenance at the expiration of the term for which
they are sentenced to hard labor. By these means, the expense of the
establishment is nearly supported; and an honest livelihood assured to those,
who would otherwise prove useless or pernicious members of society.

There are four tables at which the respective seats are a mark of distinction,
appropriated to good behavior; and a larger or lesser share of provision is
distributed to each, in proportion to their industry. After having earned their
food, the prisoners in the house of labor, receive 10 per cent; those in the
house of correction, eight per cent. for their extra work.

Public justice is wisely and impartially administered; and the torture which
had for some time fallen into disuse, is now formally abolished by a public act
of government. This humane act, forms a distinguished era in the history of
Swiss jurisprudence; as the example of so powerful and wise a government,
cannot fail producing a general influence; and it is to be hoped, will be the
prelude to its abolition throughout Switzerland.

The solemnity used in passing capital sentence on a criminal, deserves to be
mentioned and imitated. The trial being finished, the prisoner is informed of
his condemnation by the Lieutenant or principal officer of the police, and
attended by two clergymen, who prepare him for death. On the day appointed for
execution, a large scaffolding, covered with a black canopy, is constructed in
the middle of the principal street. The Advoyer, or chief of the republic, with
a scepter in his hand, is seated on an elevated kind of throne, between two
senators, and attended by the Chancellor and the Lieutenant of the police,
holding an iron stick, called the rod of blood, all habited in their official
robes. The criminal being brought to the foot of the scaffolding without
chains, the Chancellor reads aloud the sentence of condemnation, at the
conclusion of which, the Advoyer bids the executioner approach. The latter
instantly binds the arms of the culprit, and leads him to the place of
execution.

The supreme power is lodged in the great council, which, including the lesser
council, is styled the Council and Burghery of the city of Berne. By an old
act, it is not to consist of less than 200 members, and when complete, their
number amounts to 299, but never to 300; though it is but seldom also that it
is so full, 80 or more generally dying before their places are filled up. This
council makes war, peace, and alliances, manages the upper and lower regalia,
and all matters relating to the finances; it chooses the lesser council, and its
members also preside in all capital causes, for crimes committed within the
district of the city, and likewise in civil causes, when the sum in debate
exceeds 500 pounds.

The great council is generally filled up every ten years; as within that
period, there is usually a deficiency of 80 members to complete the whole
number of 299; a new election can only be proposed on a vacancy of 80; and
cannot be deferred, when there is a deficiency of 100. The vacancies are
supplied by the suffrages of the senate.

The several bailiffs are representatives of the sovereign power in their
respective districts. They enforce the edicts of government; collect the public
revenues; act as justices of the peace; and are judges in civil and criminal
causes, except where there is any local jurisdiction. In civil causes, beyond a
certain value, an appeal lies to the courts of Berne: in criminal affairs, the
process is made out in the bailiffs court, undergoes a re-vision in the senate,
and is referred to the criminal chamber, which inflicts punishment for small
misdemeanors. In capital cases, the sentence must be confirmed by the senate,
and by the sovereign council, if the delinquent is a citizen of Bern.

Although there are no standing armies in Switzerland, yet in many of the
cantons, and particularly in Berne, the militia is so well regulated, that
government could assemble a very considerable body of men, at a moment's
warning. To this end, every male at the age of 16, is enrolled in the militia;
and about a third of the whole number are formed into particular regiments,
composed of fusileers and electionaries; the former consisting of bachelors,
and the latter of married men. Every person thus enrolled, is obliged to
provide himself, at his own expense, with a uniform, a musket, and a certain
quantity of powder and ball: and no peasant is allowed to marry, unless he
produces his uniform and arms. Every year, a certain number of officers are
deputed by the council of war, to inspect the arms of the soldiers; to complete
the regiments; to exercise the militia; and, upon their return, they make their
report to the council. Beside this annual review, the regiments are
occasionally exercised by veteran soldiers, appointed for that purpose.

Besides the arms in the arsenal of Berne, a certain quantity is also provided,
in the arsenal of each bailliage, sufficient for the militia of that district;
and likewise a sum of money, amounting to three months pay, which is
appropriated to the electionaries in case of actual service. The dragoons are
chosen from the substantial farmers; as each person is obliged to provide his
horse and accoutrements. In time of peace, the Advoyer out of office, is
president of the council of war, and a member of that council, is commander of
the militia in the Pays de Vaud; but during a war, a general in chief is
nominated, who commands the forces of the republic.

A certain number of regiments, being thus always in readiness, signals are
fixed on the highest part of each bailliage, for assembling the militia at a
particular place in each district; where they receive orders for marching.

The whole power of the government, and all the honorable offices of state,
are in the hands of the nobility. As they are not permitted to trade, they
would naturally fall into poverty, did not the number of places, which the
nobles enjoy, and to which very considerable pensions are annexed, enable the
poorest of them to support their families with dignity.

The bailliages into which the whole canton and the conquered territories are
divided, form lucrative and honorable establishments for the principal
families of Berne. The bailiff is governor and judge in his own district, and
there is a magnificent chateau in each for his accommodation. An appeal may be
made from all subordinate courts to him, as also from his dominion, to the
council at Berne.

The nobility of Berne, though born to be judges, are not always instructed in
law. It has, therefore, been thought requisite, to appoint a certain number of
persons, as their assessors, who have been bred to the profession. But in case
the judges should differ from the assessors, as the nobles have the precedence
of the lawyers, the decision must be given according to their directions.

This office remains in the hands of the same person for the term of six years
only. In some of these bailliages, it is said, the governor may live with
proper magnificence, and lay up, during the period of his continuing in office,
two or 3000 pounds, without extortion. There is no law against his being
afterward named to another bailliage.

The executive power of the government being thus in the hands of the nobility,
together with all the lucrative and honorable offices, it may be imagined,
that the middle and lower ranks of people are oppressed. But this is by no
means the case; for the citizens, that is, the merchants and trades-people seem
in general to enjoy all the comforts and conveniences of life. And the
peasantry is uncommonly wealthy through the whole canton of Berne.

The Swiss have no objection to their nobles being their judges, and to the
principal offices of government remaining in their hands. They look upon the
nobility as their natural superiors, and think, that they and their families
ought to be supported with a certain degree of splendour. But the power of
direct taxation, is a different question, and must be managed with all possible
caution and delicacy. It is a common cause, and the conduct of the nobles, in
this particular, is watched with very jealous eyes. They are sufficiently aware
of this, and use their power with moderation. But lest the nobles should at any
time forget, a very good hint is given in a German inscription of the arsenal,
implying, that the insolence and rapacity of high rank, had brought about the
liberty of Switzerland.

A people who have always arms in their hands, and form the only military force
of the country, are in no danger of being oppressed and irritated with taxes.

It has been considered by many, as a pernicious policy in the Swiss, to allow
such a considerable number of the natives to serve as mercenaries in the
different armies of Europe. There are others who consider this measure as
expedient or less pernicious in the Swiss cantons, than it would be in any
other country.

They who support this opinion, assert, that every part of Switzerland, which
is capable of cultivation, is already improved to the highest degree; and that
after retaining a sufficient number of hands, to keep it always in this
condition, and the support of every manufactory, still there remains a surplus
of inhabitants, which form the troops that are allowed to go into foreign
service. They add, that these troops engage for a limited number of years; at
the expiration of which, many of them return, with money, to their native
country; and all, by stipulation, may be re-called on any emergency. By this
means, they retain a numerous and well disciplined army, which so far from
being a burden, in reality, enriches the state; an advantage, which no other
people ever possessed.

There is still another motive for this measure, which, though it be not openly
avowed, yet perhaps has considerable weight: the council may be afraid, that if
the young nobility were kept at home, where they could have but few objects to
occupy them, they might cabal and spread dissentions in the state; or perhaps
through idleness and ambition, excite dangerous insurrections among the
peasants. For although the laws are severe against state crimes, and easily put
in execution against ordinary offenders; it might be difficult and dangerous to
punish a popular young nobleman.

It may on these accounts be highly prudent to allow a large proportion of them
to exhaust, in some foreign service, the fiery and restless years of youth,
which at home might have been spent in faction and dangerous intrigue. Very
probably the state would incline to permit the officers to go, while they
retained the private men at home; but they are under the necessity of allowing
the latter likewise to go, as without them, the officers could not be raised to
those distinguished situations in foreign services, which are their greatest
inducements to leave their own country.

After having served a certain term of years, they almost all return to
Switzerland. Some, because they are tired of dissipation; others, to inherit a
paternal estate; and many with pensions from the princes they have served. The
heat of youth is then most probably passed, and they begin to aspire to those
offices in their own country, to which their birth gives them a claim, and
which they now prefer to the luster of military rank. They either wish to
support those laws and that government, which they find so partial to their
families; or they desire to pass the remainder of their days in ease and
retirement on their paternal estates.

It is remarkable, that the Swiss officers who return from foreign services,
particularly that of France, instead of importing French manners to their
native mountains, and infecting their countrymen with the luxuries and
fopperies of that nation; throw off all foreign airs with their uniforms, and
immediately resume the plain and frugal style of life, which prevails in their
own country.

CHAP. IV. Customs, Manners, and Environs of Berne.
AT Berne, the society is extremely agreeable, and foreigners are received with
great ease and politeness. The men do not meet in separate societies; and the
women are the life and ornament of their daily assemblies. These assemblies
begin about four or five in the afternoon, and continue till about eight, when
the parties retire to their respective houses.

Dancing is a very frequent amusement at Berne. There is a public ball every
fortnight; and in winter, scarcely an evening passes without one. These
diversions commence at so early an hour as five in the afternoon, on account of
a standing order from government, which prohibits their continuance after
eleven. English country dances are commonly introduced, but the Walse, which is
a species of allemande, is the favorite dance of the natives. The parties
arrange themselves in distinct couples, and follow each other in a circular
direction; the gentleman turning his partner with great velocity. The life and
spirit of their dances, strike a foreigner with astonishment, and can scarcely
be conceived by those who have never seen them. The gaiety of these parties is
still more enlivened during the summer months, when the natives resort to a
garden near the town, and dance under an open pavilion, amid scenes of rural
festivity. The foreigner who prefers the constant intercourse of company to a
more tranquil society, will choose the residence of Berne, rather than that of
any other town in Switzerland.

There is but little trade in the capital; some few manufactures, indeed,
chiefly of linen and silk, have been established; but are carried on by those
only, who have no prospect of being admitted into the sovereign council. For
those families who enjoy any influence in public affairs, would hold themselves
degraded, by engaging in any branch of commerce; one general advantage,
however, is derived from this anti-commercial spirit: the members of
government, not being interested in laying restrictions on trade, do not, as at
Zuric and Basle, confine the exclusive right of establishing manufactures to
the burghers of the capital; but wisely extend that permission to all their
subjects, without distinction of rank or place. From this circumstance, in
conjunction with the mildness and wisdom of government, arise that comfortable
state, and even wealth, which so peculiarly distinguishes the peasantry in the
whole canton of Berne; and to the natural result of these wise regulations, may
be naturally imputed the attachment of government, particularly observable in
the German district.

Sumptuary laws are in force throughout this canton; and the wearing of gold,
silver, lace, etc. even of silk, is expressly prohibited. The chamber of reform
has found it necessary, however, upon some occasions, to relax the vigor of
these laws. Indeed, the vast strides which luxury has made within this century,
is very perceivable throughout Switzerland: and there is no place where its
progress has been more rapid than at Berne. The attention of government has not
been wanting to restrain it; as appears by the laws that have been repeatedly
enacted for that purpose: an attention, however, which in many instances, has
not proved altogether successful; notwithstanding the sovereign council has
given the several fines to the members of the chamber of reform. In one
respect, however, their laudable endeavors have been more effectual. Not long
ago, the spirit of gaming had arisen in Berne to such an extravagant height, as
to have overwhelmed several families in total ruin. Upon this occasion, the
sovereign council interposed its authority by very SWISS PEASANTS.
salutary regulations; and, in order to enforce the observance of them more
strictly, every member of that council is bound by an oath, to inform against
any transgressor that comes within his observation. By this law, all games of
chance are expressly prohibited; and in other kind of games, the parties are
restrained from playing for more than a certain sum, particularly specified.

The dress of the peasants in this canton, as seen at a fair near Berne, is
thus described by Coxe. Great numbers of the men have long beards; and many of
them cover their heads with a woman's straw hat, extremely broad, which gives
them a very grotesque appearance: their dress is chiefly a coarse brown cloth
jacket, without sleeves; with large puffed breeches of ticking. The women wear
their hair plaited behind, in tresses, with the ribband hanging down below the
waist: a flat plain straw hat, which is very becoming; a red or brown cloth
jacket without sleeves; a black or blue petticoat bordered with red, and
scarcely reaching below their knees; red stockings with black clocks, and no
heels to their shoes; their shifts, fastened close round the throat by a black
collar, with red ornaments; the better sort have chains of silver between the
shoulders, brought round under each arm, and fastened beneath the bosom, the
ends hanging down with some silver ornaments.

It is worthy of remark, that the peasants who have acquired opulence, either
by manufactures or agriculture, seldom quit their situation; they continue in
the same habits which they contracted in the earlier period of life, and
however wealthy, never give their daughters in marriage, but to persons of
their own description.

Learning is neither so universally encouraged, nor so successfully cultivated
here, as at Zurie; the academical studies are almost solely directed to those
branches of knowledge, more essentially necessary for entering into the church.
The society for the promotion of agriculture, was, till within these few years,
almost the only establishment that directly tends to the progress of the arts
and sciences. A literary society, has, however, since been instituted for the
promotion of physic and natural history in general, and that of Switzerland in
particular. In January, 1788, this society consisted of ten members, resident
at Berne, of whom several possess, and others are forming collections,
agreeable to the plan of the institution. The members have established regular
correspondence in various parts of Europe, and are ready to answer the
enquiries of foreign naturalists, who wish to be informed concerning any
points, which relate to the natural history of this country. An institution
founded on such liberal and extensive principles, and having one object
principally in view, cannot fail to render the most essential service to
science.

The environs of Berne, are in general extremely delightful, and there is no
road which exhibits a more pleasing variety of hill and dale, than that which
leads to Thun. It runs through an agreeable country; winds through fertile
meadows, enriched with dark forests of pine and fir, and occasional groves of
beech and oak. The well being of the inhabitants is visible from the
cultivation of the grounds, and the number and neatness of the cottages and
farm-houses, which are scattered about the fields, skirted by trees, or half
concealed amid tufts of wood.

About four miles from Berne, is the village of Hindelbank, which is generally
visited by travelers, to view the tomb of Madame Langhan's, a most celebrated
work of Nahl, a Swedish sculptor. Being employed in constructing a sepulcher
for Count de Erlach, he was lodged in the house of the clergyman, his
particular friend, whose wife, a woman of uncommon beauty, expired in childbed
on Easter-eve. Struck with the time of her death, animated by the recollection
of her beauty, and sympathising with the affliction of her husband, he
conceived and finished this affecting monument. It is placed in the body of the
church, sunk into the pavement like a grave, and covered with two folding
doors. When these are opened, a gravestone appears, as if just rent into three
fractures, through which is half discovered the figure of a woman, slightly
veiled with a shroud. She is represented at the moment of the resurrection,
when, "The graves are commanded to yield up their dead." With her right hand,
she is gently raising that portion of the broken grave stone which lies over
her head; and in the other, holds a naked infant, struggling with its little
hands to relieve itself from the tomb. "Here am I, Lord, and the child whom
thou gave me," are the sublime words which form the inscription. Below is the
name of the deceased; Anna Magdalena Langhans, wife of the clergyman: born
1723; died 1751. The workmanship is by no means inferior to the original
design. The artist has formed the whole sepulcher out of one block, and so
naturally expressed the swelling of the stone, that the fragments seem as if
they had just burst, and were in the act of opening.

Nothing, perhaps, can more strongly display the superior effect of simplicity
over magnificence, than the companion of this tomb, with the mausoleum of Count
de Erlach, in the same church. The latter consisting of several marble figures,
executed in a masterly style, and loaded with all the emblems of rank and
opulence, scarcely attracts a momentary attention; while this simple
gravestone "speaks home" to the heart of every person of taste and feeling.

Morat, another town in the environs of this capital, is celebrated for the
obstinate siege it sustained against Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, which
was followed by the battle of Morat, fought on the 22d of June, 1476. In this
famous engagement, the Duke was routed, and his whole army almost entirely
destroyed by the confederatet roops of Switzerland. Not far from the town, and
adjoining to the high road, a monument of this victory still remains: it is a
square building, filled with the bones of the Burgundian soldiers, who were
slain at the siege, and in the battle. To judge from the quantity of these
bones, the number of the slaughtered must have been considerable.

"And what," says Philip de Comines, "was the occasion of this war? It was
begun on an account of a wagon of sheepskins, which the Lord of Romont took
from a Swiss, who was passing through his territories. If God had not abandoned
the Duke, it is not probable, that he would have put himself into so much
danger, for so trifling a circumstance; considering the offers that were made
to him; against what sort of people he was engaged; and from whence neither
profit nor glory could accrue to him. For the Swiss were not in such repute, as
they are at present, and nothing could be poorer: insomuch, that one of their
ambassadors, as he was endeavoring to prevent the Duke from engaging in that
war, remonstrated, that he could get nothing by attacking them: for, their
country was so barren, that the spurs of his troops, and the bits of their
horses, were worth more than could be furnished by all the Swiss territories,
in case they were conquered."

The borders of the lake of Morat, are enriched with gentlemen's houses, and
villages in great abundance. Pennant observes, that the vast fish, called the
silurus glanis, or the saluth, which frequents the lakes of Morat and
Neuchatel, has not been caught here in the memory of man. It is well described,
and finely engraven in Block's History of Fishes. In the time of Gesner, two
were taken, one of which was eight feet long, but they are sometimes so large,
as to weigh six hundred pounds. It is an eel-shaped fish, very smooth, round
and thick, and has a great head. The mouth is furnished with four short, and
two very long whiskers. It is very inactive and slow in its motions, and loves
the deep and muddy parts of the lakes. They are found in many of the great
fresh waters of Europe, and abundantly in the Volga.

The dress, manners, and persons of the inhabitants of this part of the canton,
differ from those on the opposite side. They are very tall and robust. Their
dresses very particular. They wear little round hats, like those of the Dutch
skippers. Their coats and waistcoats are all of a kind of coarse black cloth.
Their breeches made of coarse linen, are something like sailors trowsers; but
drawn together in plaits below the knees, and the stockings are of the same
stuff with the breeches.

The women wear short jackets, with a great superfluity of bottons. The
unmarried women value themselves on the length of their hair, which they
separate into two divisions, and allow to hang at its full length, braided with
ribbands in the Ramillie fashion. After marriage, these tresses are no longer
permitted to hang down; but being twisted round the head in spiral lines, are
fixed at the crown with large silver pins. This is the only difference in point
of dress, which matrimony makes.

Married and unmarried wear straw hats, ornamented with black ribbands. So far
their dress is becoming enough; but they have an awkward manner of fixing their
petticoats so high, as to leave hardly any waist. This encroachment of the
petticoats upon the waist, with the amazing number they wear, gives a size and
importance to the lower and hind part of the body, to which it is by no means
entitled; and very much deforms the appearance of the whole power. The elegant
figure of the Venus de Medicis, or of the D -- s of D -- re, would he impaired
or annihilated under such a preposterous load of dress.

Upon an insulated ride, between the lakes of Neuchatel and Morat, are many
delightful points of view. Of these various prospects, the most remarkable is
from the summit of Mount Vicilly. What renders this charming spot more
particularly striking is, that it is perhaps the only central point, from which
the eye can at once comprehend the vast amphitheatre, formed on one side by the
Jura, stretching from the environs of Geneva as far as Basle, and on the other,
by that stupendous chain of snowy Alps, which extends from the frontiers of
Italy, to the consines of Germany, and is lost at each extremity on the
boundless horizon.

THE VALLEY OF LAUTERBRANIN, SWITZERLAND.


CHAP. V. Of Lausanne, and its Vicinage.
LAUSANNE is built upon an ascent so steep, that in some places it is with
great difficulty the horses can draw up a carriage; and foot passengers mount
toward the upper part of the town by flights of steps which lean against the
rocks. But these inconveniences are amply compensated by the sublimest views in
nature; the principal object is the lake of Geneva, shaped like a bow; the arc
of which is formed by the Pays de Vaud, and the cord by the coast of Chablais.
From Geneva to Villeneuve, says Coxe, the two extremities of this lake, may be
about 40 miles distant; it varies in its breadth, the narrowest part is scarce
three miles across, and from Rolls to Thonon, is 15. The town contains about
7000 inhabitants. It formerly belonged to the Duke of Savoy, and was the
capital of the Pays de Vaud. However mortifying this may be to the former
possessor, it has certainly, says Moore, been a happy dispensation to the
inhabitants, who are in every respect more at their ease, and in a better
situation, than any of the subjects of his Sardinian Majesty.

This city is situated within half a mile of the lake, and at the distance of
about 30 miles from Geneva. As the nobility from the country, and from some
parts of Switzerland, and the families of several officers who have retired
from service, reside here; there is an air of more ease and gaiety, and perhaps
also so much more real politeness in the societies of Lausanne, than in those
of Geneva; at least, this is firmly believed and asserted by all the nobles of
this place, who consider themselves as greatly superior to the citizens of
Geneva. These, on the other hand, talk a good deal of the poverty,
frivolousness, and ignorance of these same nobility, and make no scruple of
ranking their own enlightened mechanics above them in every essential quality.

Lausanne possesses an academy for the students of this country; professors in
every science are appointed by government; and there is a tolerable library for
the use of the public.

The church of Lausanne, formerly the cathedral, is a magnificent gothic
building, standing on the most elevated part of the town. It contains, among
many other sepulchers, the tomb of Amadeus, the eighth Duke of Savoy, styled
the Solomon of his age; but more known by the name of the Antipope, Felix the
Fifth, who exhibited a singular instance in the annals of Europe, of a
personage twice abdicating the pomp of sovereignty, and twice retiring to a
private station.

Having passed his early youth and ripening manhood, in the pursuit of
ambition, he enlarged his dominions by the acquisition of the Genevois and
Piedmont, and obtained an increase of rank by the erection of Savoy into a
duchy. Yet in the midst of his greatest success, and when fortune seemed most
propitious to him, the sudden death of a beloved wife, and a narrow escape from
assassination, inspired him with such a disgust of the world, that he resigned
in 1434, the administration of his estates to his eldest son, and accompanied
with a few lords of his court, retired to a palace at La Ripaille, on the
borders of the lake of Geneva. In this palace, which he called a hermitage, he
enjoyed, with an apparent indifference to the affairs of the world, a calm and
tranquillity that seemed incompatible with his former aspiring ambition; until
he was suddenly called forth to public notice, in a more exalted station.

The council of Basle, having deposed Eugenius the Fourth, induced, according
to some authors, by the reputation which Amadeus had acquired of sanctity,
influenced according to others by his presents and intrigues, raised the hermit
of La Ripaille to the papal throne. This event took place in 1439, the new
pontiff quitting his favorite retreat, accepted the proffered dignity, either
with a real or affected reluctance, and assumed the name of Felix the Fifth.

The era of his disputed pontificate, was marked with turbulence and anarchy.
In order to avoid the storm which agitated Europe, and to favor the natural
indolence of his temper, he frequently retreated to his beloved hermitage, and
directed the affairs of the church from that sequestered corner. Conscious, at
length, that his acceptance of the papacy, served to widen, instead of healing
the schism of the church; finding that he was opposed by the most powerful
princes of Europe; that, on the death of his rival Eugenius, the cardinals of
Rome had chosen another Pope; and being ill supported by the remains of the
council of Basle, he terminated the schism, by resigning the papal tiara in
favor of Nicholas the Fifth. In this transaction, he proved his talents for
negotiation, by obtaining the following conditions: that he should enjoy the
next rank to the pope; that he should be appointed vicar of the Roman see, and
that all the acts passed in his pontificate, should be valid. On his
resignation, he fixed his residence at La Ripaille, and died in 1451.

Lausanne, says Keysler, lies in a valley, but so uneven, that the carriage
wheels must be continually shod. On the east side of the town, is a very
spacious walk, with a wall, and a prospect toward the city and lake of Geneva,
which seems very near, but is a good half league distant.

In the wall of the great church, was a crack, wide enough for a man to creep
through, occasioned by an earthquake in the year 1634. The celebrated old
professor Pictat, used to say, that when he was a boy, and at play in the
churchyard, he has sometimes laid his cloak in it; about 60 years ago, it was
closed again by another earthquake, and the crevice which remained, was filled
up with mortar, being not above an inch in breadth. The tower does not want
beauty, but having been twice burned, only half of it is now standing. A
smaller tower belonging to this church, was also set on fire by lightning, when
they prudently beat it down with a chain ball, by which the body of the church
was saved, and since a spire has been raised on it. On one side of this
cathedral, is a walled terrace, like that at Berne, with this difference; that
the terrace of Berne is much higher walled, and that of Lausanne, has the
advantage in prospect, commanding the lake and all the country below toward
Geneva. This country, indeed, from its nature and the improvements of it,
affords a delicious view, in the variety of little hills and dales, fields,
meadows, vineyards, and woods, together with the vicinity of the lake. All
these allurements, and the regularity and mildness of the government, draw
people of all countries into the Pays de Vaud, and especially to pass the
summers and autumns there. Some also purchase lands.

The resort of persons of rank from Geneva, and the canton of Berne, of men of
letters, of gentlemen who have traveled, of experienced merchants, and other
persons of amiable qualities, who came hither as a refuge from civil and
ecclesiastical tyranny, affords the most desirable opportunities of spending
the time agreeably in improving conversation. Even ministers of state, whose
talents have shone in the greatest courts of Europe, have chosen this spot for
the seat of their repose: and their conversation, to a mind formed for
instruction whom they are pleased to honor with their confidence, cannot but
be an exquisite entertainment; as they themselves may feel transports of
rational pleasures which they were strangers to, amidst the tumult of a court,
and the embarrassments of their station.

The country from Lausanne to Geneva abounds in vineyards; but the wine of a
strip of land, half a league on this side Nyon, is esteemed the choicest. This
territory is three small leagues in length, and is distinguished by the name of
La Cote. The wine of the growth of Roll and Bursin, two particular spots here,
is reckoned to surpass the rest, and especially the white wine; as the baronry
of Capet, which lies nearer toward Geneva, is celebrated for red wine.

The wine growing on the Savoy side of the lake of Geneva, had formerly a very
considerable vent, the people of Geneva, and the adjoining Swiss, buying their
wine from Savoy; but a certain rapacious minister put the Duke on laying a duty
upon this wine, which as the Swiss could not do without, he said would be a
very great increase to the revenue. Such counselors are but too readily
listened to, and the imposition accordingly took place. This, of course,
occasioned the wine to rise, and the Swiss were not wanting to make
remonstrances, but all to no purpose; at last, seeing no remedy, it occurred to
some of the leading men, that though their ancestors had never turned their
thoughts to the planting of vines, yet it was not impossible, but their
country, especially that part of it between Geneva and Lausanne, might yield as
good wine as Savoy; the position of their mountains, and of the land in
general, affording a better exposure to the sun, than the Savoy territory. This
business was immediately set on foot, and the consequence far exceeded all
expectation: by this means, the Savoy wines remained upon their hands, and
instead of the uncertain advantages the Duke's finances were gaping for, they
lost, besides the detriment occasioned to his industrious subjects, a certain
income, which they have never since been able to retrieve.

At present, Lausanne is governed by its own magistrates; has its own courts of
justice; and what is very singular, the citizens who possess houses in the
principal streets, enjoy the privilege of pronouncing sentence in criminal
causes. The criminal is tried by the civil power: if he is found, or
acknowledges himself guilty, the burghers of this street assemble; one of the
magistrates pleads in defense of the prisoner, and another against him; the
court of justice give their opinion upon the point of law; and the majority of
the citizens possessing houses in the principal street, determine the penalty.
If the punishment is capital, there is, according to the letter of the law, no
pardon, except it be obtained within 24 hours from the sovereign council of
Berne; although it generally happens, that eight days are granted for that
purpose. When the criminal is seized within the jurisdiction of the town, the
fact is tried, and the burghers pronounce sentence in the town hall; from this
sentence there is no appeal. But if taken within the district of the bailiff,
he is tried in his house, and an appeal lies to the council of Berne.

Vevay is another pretty little town in this district, visited by most
travelers. It is sweetly situated on a plain, near the head of the lake of
Geneva, where the Rhine enters. The road from Lausanne to this place, runs
along the sides of the mountains, between continued ranges of vineyards. The
industry of the Swiss is no where more observable, than in these parts; the
mountains in many places, though naturally consisting of a bare steep rock,
being thickly covered with vines. The mould has been brought from other
grounds, in order to create a soil, and is supported by rows of stones, ranged
in strait lines like walls.

This town is distinguished as being the residence of Edmund Ludlow, the famous
parliamentary general, whose name stands foremost among the few persons, who in
those times of misrule and confusion, uniformly acted with consistency and
dignity. True to his republican principles, he no less violently opposed the
daring usurpation of Cromwell, than the arbitrary measures of Charles the
First; and could never be prevailed upon, either by threats or promises, to
desert the cause, which he considered as the cause of justice and liberty.

Being excepted as one of the king's judges, from the act of indemnity, passed
at the restoration of Charles the Second, he wandered, without any fixed place
of residence; until he found an asylum from the bare attempts of his enemies at
Vevay, under the protection of Berne.

At the important period of the revolution, he returned to England, anxious to
serve his country under our great deliverer; and William the Third, whose mind
rose superior to the narrow prejudices of party, was no less desirous to employ
a general of such approved experience and fidelity. But the king being
addressed by the House of Commons, to issue a proclamation for apprehending
Ludlow, at the moment his Majesty was going to employ him; he was accordingly
compelled to quit England at this critical period, and again settled at Vevay.
We may collect from his general character and conduct, that if he had been
permitted to serve his country, he would have successfully employed his great
military talents, against the assertors of bigotry and despotism; and with the
same zeal which he had displayed in opposing an arbitrary government, would
have supported the new administration; when the enormous prerogatives of the
crown, against which he had unsheathed his sword, were abolished by law, and
the freedom of the subject was established on the basis of equal liberty, under
the authority of a limited monarch.

He died in 1693, in the 64th year of his age; and was interred in the church
of Vevay. His monument is a plain gravestone of black marble, containing a
Latin inscription, which is printed in Addison's Travels. The house which he
formerly inhabited, stands near the gate, leading to the Vallais, and the
following motto is inscribed over the door, which is still preserved out of
respect to his memory; Omne solum forti patria est. i. e. To a brave man, every
country is his own?

Not far from Vevay, is the village of Clarens, rendered memorable by Rousseau,
from having been chosen by him as the scene of his celebrated novel Eloise. It
stands on an eminence, whose gentle declivity slopes gradually toward the
lake. The adjacent scenery consists of vineyards, fields of corn, pasture, rich
groves of oak, ash, and spanish chestnut trees. Although the situation and
environs harmonize with the animated scenery in this novel, yet the castle by
no means accords with the description given of it in this work. The traveller
sees an oblong building with ancient towers, and a pent-house roof; in the
inside, a large hall that looks like a prison; and the whole bears rather the
antiquated appearance of a feudal mansion, inhabited by some turbulent baron,
then the residence of the elegant and impassioned Julie.

Opposite to Clarens, on the other shore of the lake, are the dark gloomy rocks
of Meillerie. Although there are no traces of any history like that of Julie in
these parts, yet the scenery is strongly marked; and every spot which is
mentioned in these letters, actually exists in this romantic country. Rousseau
himself, passed some time at different parts on the borders of the lake, and
particularly at Meillerie, about that period of his life, when he may be
supposed to have written his Eloise.

END OF VOL. XVIII.

