THE Habitable World DESCRIBED.

Inscribed by Permission to His Royal Highness Frederick, DUKE OF YORK, etc.
etc.

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

blazon or coat of arms

LONDON: Published as the Act directs, by the Author No. 62. Wardour Street,
Soho.

1795.

THE HABITABLE WORLD DESCRIBED, OR THE PRESENT STATE OF THE PEOPLE IN ALL PARTS
OF THE GLOBE, FROM NORTH TO SOUTH; SHOWING The Situation, Extent, Climate,
Productions, Animals, etc. etc. of the different Kingdoms and States; Including
all the new Discoveries: TOGETHER WITH The Genius, Manners, Customs, Trade,
Religion, Forms of Government, etc. of the Inhabitants, and every thing
respecting them, that can be either entertaining or informing to the Reader,
collected from the earliest and latest Accounts of Historians and Travelers of
all Nations; With some that have never been published in this Kingdom; And
nothing advanced but on the best Authorities.

WITH A great Variety of MAPS and COPPER PLATES, engraved in a capital Style,
the Subjects of which are mostly new, and such as have never yet been given in
any English work.

BY THE REV. DR. JOHN TRUSLER.

VOL. XVI.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, and sold by J. PARSONS, Paternoster-Row, and
all Booksellers.

M DCC XCIV.

NAPLES.
CHAP X. Of the Two Calabrias.
FROM Tarento southward, run the provinces of the Calabrias, which comprise
that whole peninsula, called the foot of Italy, from its resembling the foot,
as the Terra di Otranto does the heel, and is so called on that account. The
country extends from latitude 40, to below 38, and is that part of Naples which
suffered so much by an earthquake.

At the mouth of the river Basiento, near Terre di Mare, a town in ruins, built
by the Angevino kings, as a safeguard to the coast, are two rows of coarse
marble columns, that mark the situation of Metapontum; ten in one row, and five
in the other; their diameter, five feet; their height, sixteen feet; the
interstices ten feet: they are of the ancient Doric order. These are all the
vestiges of Metapontum; a city which, two thousand years ago, stood in the
skirts of a plain, twenty-five miles in length, and was in the zenith of its
glory. Pythagoras spent the last years of his life here. The Metapontines were
warm partisans of Hannibal. He made this city his head quarters; and, in the
retreat of the Carthaginians, it was punished by the Romans, for its attachment
to Hannibal, with its loss of liberty. This whole district was a colony of
industrious and wealthy farmers; and there cannot be a sight more mortifying to
the pride of man, than this wide stretched tract of land, almost without an
inhabitant, full of briars and marshes, and stagnant pools; and, instead of
navigable rivers, in whose deep and capacious bosom, whole fleets might moor
with safety, the Basianto road, has the appearance of a straggling torrent;
impeded by sand-banks, that shift at every shower, and drive the waters back
over half the plain, keeping them there to putrify.

At the wood near the banks of the Agri, eleven miles more to the South, and
about three miles from the sea, are some heaps of rubbish, that fix the
situation of Heraclea; and near the mouth of the Linno, stood the city of
Tyris, founded by the Trojans, and renowned for its college of priests, skilled
in cabalistic lore. Heraclea was the place of rendezvous, agreed on by the
whole Greek confederacy, where their general interests and disputes were to be
settled.

Upper Calabria, says Swinburne, seems decreasing in its number of people;
owing, as it is supposed, to the custom of the Calabrians never marrying beyond
the limits of their own township. Farms are here let for two years only;
indeed, the Baians consider little but their own pleasure, and keep the lands
waste, for the sake of extending their chase; so that the peasants, their
vassals, have neither room nor opportunity, to raise sufficient food for their
support; they fly, therefore, to the convents, and take the religious habit.
And the father of a family, when pressed for payment of taxes, and sinking
beneath the load of hunger and distress, va alla montagna, that is, retires to
the woods; where he meets with fellow sufferers, turns smuggler, and becomes,
by degrees, an outlaw, robber, and an assassin.

The women here breed fast, and bring forth their offspring almost without a
pain. It is a common thing for a woman, pregnant with child, to go up to the
forest for fuel, to be there surprised with the pains of childbirth, to deliver
herself without dismay, and fold up her infant in her apron; and, after a
little rest, return to her cottage. Che una serva Calabrese piu ama far un
figlio che un bucato, is a proverb much in use in the neighboring provinces;
that is, "A Calabrian maidservant prefers the labor of a childbirth, to that
of a wash."

The territory of Rosetta produces olives, capers, corn, safforn, and cotton.
The mountains abound with fine oak timber, fit for shipping; and the woods are
well stocked with game. Calabria is too hilly to admit of hunting. All game is
brought down by the gun, or taken in the net. They have an exceeding good
spaniel; so good, that the king has taken pains to increase the breed. The
lower parts of the mountains abound with the Ormus, or small-leaved flowering
Manna-ash, which grows spontaneously. About the end of July, the
manna-gatherers make a horizontal gash in the bole of a tree, inclining
upwards; as the liquor never oozes out the first day, another cut is given on
the second, and then the woodman fixes the the stalk of a maple leaf in the
upper wound, and the end of the leaf in the lower one, so as to form a cup to
receive the gum, as it oozes from each cut. All manna belongs to the king, who
farms it to a set of contractors.

All live animals in Calabria are taxed; another check on husbandry; three
shillings a year are paid for an ox. Arable land is here ploughed four times;
the first in May, but the work is badly done. They never lay down their lands
with artificial grasses; but a Calabrian farmer thinks he does his farm ample
justice, if he lets it lie barren three or four years, and cover itself with
natural grass.

The roads through Calabria are very bad; there is but here and there an inn,
and at these the accommodations are very poor. Those who travel this country
must proceed on horseback, and get recommended from city to city. At Rossaro,
Swinburne says, there was an encampment of zingari, or gypsies, who are great
thieves. The gypsies of Calabria do not mix with the other people; they marry
among themselves. They have no fixed place of abode, but carry their tents with
them, and pitch them where they please. They support themselves by little
handicrafts; and by swopping, or trucking, asses and horses. Their chief work
is in making trivets, knitting needles, bodkins, and the like, in iron. Their
dress is poor; they shave their faces, but let their hair grow very long. At
their weddings they carry torches, and have para-nymphs to give the bride away.
They are accounted to be great pilferers, cheats; and to be faithless,
shameless, and abandoned to all manner of dissoluteness. The following anecdote
will show how little they are under the control of modesty, or fear of shame.

A gang of gypsies assembled at a fair, with an intention of robbing the shops;
for which purpose, a proper number of them were dispersed in the throng, to
draw off the attention of the people from their property. Some of these men and
women went into the adjacent fields, and proceeded to such indecent liberties,
as soon brought most of the people of the fair about them, and left their shops
a prey to the confident thieves. They tell fortunes, and play juggling tricks,
as they do in all other countries where they are tolerated. A gypsey, being
brought to Nice for larceny, declared, that his law allowed him to take from
others, as much every day as sufficed for his maintenance. They speak here an
oriental jargon of their own; and one of the most intelligent among them, being
asked, why their nation was a wandering one? replied, they could not remain
long in one place, without being overrun with lice. Their propensity to breed
vermin proceeds from their excessive filthiness; they sleep like dogs in a
kennel, men, women, and children, and take up no more room when asleep, than if
in their graves.

In Calabria, all the oxen are white, large, and long horned, except those of
the red breed, lately introduced into Sicily. Their buffaloes are black; so are
most of the goats, sheep, and hogs. Their hogs have no hair, but are as sleek
in their hides as the elephant. Dormice are here accounted delicate game, as
they were in ancient Rome, where they were kept in warrens, and fatted for the
tables of the epicures. The Calabrian horses are pretty spirited, and brilliant
in their motions; but are low, and seldom free from vice; but will travel two
hundred and fifty miles in five days, in hot weather.

Croton, the Greek city, whose walls enclosed a circumference of twelve miles,
and alone furnished succor to the mother country, when invaded by the
Persians, is now but a small place, and bears the name of Crotone; and no
vestiges of the ancient city remain. Near Crotone is an island, considered as
the habitation of Calypso, but is a rock scarcely able to feed a sheep.

There are some customs in Calabria, that explain some allusions in Horace.
When he says, "Death treads, with impartial foot, the doors of palaces and of
cottages."

Pallida morsaeque pulsat peda paupeum tabernas
Regumque turres. --
He alludes to a custom now existing, that of the bailiff kicking furiously at
the door of a debtor, or tenant, that refuses to pay, and shuts himself up in
his house for safety; which implies, that he means to give no quarter. So
Horace means, that death is inexorably bent in exacting the debt of nature. His
account of the hardy education, and filial obedience of the Roman youth, --
Rusticorum mascula militum
Proles, etc.
Is still exact with respect to the young Calabrian peasant. After hoeing the
ground all day, with no better fare than bread and water, and an onion; he does
not presume to present himself before his mother, without bringing her a
faggot, or some other wood. His animated description of a mother, longing for
the return of her son, Ut matter juvenem, quem natus invide
Flatu Carpathii, etc.
May still be applied to the Calabrian matrons. If the feluccas do not appear
at the usual term of their annual voyage; the mothers, and wives of the
sailors, offer up incessant prayers, call on the beloved person by name, and
remain at their windows, with eyes fixed on the cape, which the bark is to
double. The instant a boat is seen coming round the point, the whole town
resounds with joyful cries of Barca! Barca! The boys ring the bells; and, as
soon as they can distinguish what felucca it is, run to the relations to claim
something to drink for the good news.

Castelvetere, in a lofty situation, three miles from the sea, occupies the
site of Caulon, of which some vestiges are said to exist. Caulon was one of
the earliest Greek settlements, but demolished by Dionysius, four hundred years
before Christ. Swinburne tells us, that when he was in this neighborhood, he
joined a crowd one evening, that was dragging a woman to church, in order to
have the devil driven out of her, by exorcism. She was a middle-aged person,
and seemed to be in strong convulsions, which every one supposed to proceed
from a demoniacal possession. The priest refusing to attend, some of the
assistants grew impatient, and pulled the woman about so roughly, that
Beelzebub thought proper to decamp. The patient recovered her senses, got up,
and ran away full speed; so that it appeared, there was more roguery in her
case, than real disorder. All convulsions of this kind are, however, attributed
to assaults of malignant spirits. Near fifteen hundred women, pretending to be
thus tormented, go up annually to Soriano, to be cured, by looking at a
portrait of St. Dominick, sent down, as they suppose, from Heaven. Under these
pretexts, they obtain leave of their tyrannical spouses, to make this pleasant
pilgrimage, and a pair of holiday shoes for the purpose; without which they
dare not appear before the picture. A priest of that convent, says Swinburne,
told me a story of a female demoniac, who, after going through the usual course
of cure, was sent to him to confess her sins. Being perfectly well acquainted
with the common tricks, he ordered her to give him the true reason of her
acting that farce, threatening her in case of obstinacy, with a visit from a
real devil, who would torment her in good earnest. The poor woman terrified at
the menace, freely confessed; that, having been married against her
inclinations to a goat-herd, who stank intolerably of his goats and cheeses,
she shunned his approach, and feigned demoniac possession, to avoid cohabiting
with him. Having thus got the secret from her, the priest, in hopes of
alleviating her misfortune, sent for her husband, and knowing it would be in
vain to urge him out of a belief of the devil's being in his wife, planned a
different mode of attack, and informed the simple fellow, that he had
discovered what particular kind of spirit it was; that this demon was
remarkable for an outrageous antipathy to goat-herds, and that no exorcisms
could prevent him from plaguing him. The poor man, whose first profession had
been gardening, and whose success in the other line of business had not been
very great, readily consented to his old way of labor, in order to keep Satan
from his house, The friar procured a garden for him, and a chapman for his herd
of goats, and soon had the happiness of seeing the married couple well settled,
and perfectly satisfied with each other.

It is remarkable that the Albanian dialect, in Calabria, has many English
words, bearing the same meaning as with us; as for example, aunt, boor,
breeches, breast, car, chimney, chide, cough, crab, door, dream, feather,
grumble, hunger, and many others. These people are settled in Calabria, and
emigrated from Albanie, only a few centuries ago: they amount to, at least,
100,000, and are dispersed in two hundred villages, or towns; but, many of
these settlements are wretchedly poor, and much decayed; those in the
neighborhood of Bova remarkably so. They are a quiet industrious people, and
their women remarkable for regularity of conduct. In their dress they preserve
the costume of Illyricum, from whence their forefathers came. The most
beautiful women are generally given in marriage to clergymen, and are
exceedingly proud of their husbands; for, among them, priesthood is the highest
nobility. When an ecclesiastic dies, his widow never enters into a second
engagement, because none but a virgin can aspire to the hand of a priest, and
any other is beneath her acceptance.

Reggio is the capital of Lower Calabria, an archbishopric, and is situated on
the seacoast, at the Southern extremity of Italy, and adjoins the Faro, or
streights of Messina. The approach to this place is charming, every cottage of
the suburb being shaded with a beautiful arbor of vines, and loaded with
clusters of grapes, that produce a very good sort of wine. Oranges, and their
kindred fruits, reach great perfection in these plains, which are said to be
the first spot in Italy, where their culture was attempted. They are found to
be much hardier than was at first suspected; many large plantations thriving at
the foot of the Appenines, twenty miles from the sea; where, in winter, there
is frost enough to congeal water. The Reggians trade with the Genoese, in
essence of citron, orange and bergamot. This spirit is extracted, by paring off
the rind of the fruit with a broad knife, squeezing the peel with wooden
pincers, against a sponge, and when the sponge is full, it is squeezed out into
a phial, and sold at five shillings and sixpence English per ounce.

The country, round Reggio, is a rich delicious garden, shaded by groves, and
avenues of poplars and mulberry-trees; divided by hedges of pomegranates,
enclosing vineyards and orchards of orange, citron, and various other kinds of
aromatic fruits. Copious streams meander through these agreeable plains, and
distribute life and vigor to every plant.

The exportation of oil brings into Lower Calabria, half a million of ducats
yearly. On each side of the wood, are houses erected for silkworms, on a
particular construction. The windows are long, and not more than six inches
wide, to prevent too much air being admitted at a time. When the eggs are about
to hatch, these windows are shut, and a moderate fire kept up in the rooms. The
worms, as soon as out, are placed on beds of reeds, and there fed with the
leaves of the red mulberry-tree. These houses are built by the people of
Reggio, who furnish every thing, and take two-thirds of the profits.

Figs here have a fine flavor, and the first, ever seen in Italy, was brought
from Sicily, by Dionysius the tyrant, and planted in his garden at Reggio. The
hills, that skirt the great chain of mountains, abound with chesnut-trees,
producing a very large, sweet fruit, which the people dry, grind, knead into a
paste, and use instead of bread.

Between Reggio and Scylla, a silver-mine was opened by the present King of
Spain; but, the vein dipping toward the sea, and in a rock, the expenses would
be more than the profits; of course, it was abandoned.

Reggio can neither boast of beautiful buildings, nor strong fortifications. Of
all edifices, the Gothic cathedral is the only striking one. There is plenty of
fresh water here; wherever a hole is made in the sands, though within a foot of
the sea, fresh water bubbles up. The views all around are enchanting. Messina
rises out of the waves like a grand amphitheatre; and the Faro, or straight,
lined with villages and towns, seems a noble view, winding between two bold
shores. Sometimes, though very rarely, Swinburne says, it exhibits a very
curious phenomenon, called La Fata Morgana, as if produced by a fairy, or
magician. The populace are delighted, whenever the vision appears, and are seen
about the streets, shouting for joy. The philosophic reader will find its
causes and operations accounted for, in Kircher, Minais, and other authors.
Father Angelucci was the first person who described the appearance with any
accuracy.

On the 15th of August, 1643, as I stood at my window, says he, I was surprised
with a most wonderful delectable vision. The sea, that washes the Sicilian
shore, swelled up, and became, for ten miles in length, like a chain of dark
mountains; whilst the waters, near our Calabrian coast, grew quite smooth, and
in an instant, appeared as one clear polished mirror, reclining against the
aforesaid ridge. On this glass was depicted, in chiaro obscuro, a string of
several thousands of pilasters, all equal in altitude, distance, and degree of
light and shade. In a moment, they lost half their height, and bent into
arcades, like Roman aqueducts. A long cornice was next formed on the top; and
above it rose castles innumerable, all perfectly alike. These soon split into
towers, which were shortly after lost in colonades, then windows; and at last
ended in pines, cypresses, and other trees, even and similar. This is the Fata
Morgana, which, for twenty-six years, I considered as a fable.

To produce this pleasing deception, says Swinburne, many circumstances must
concur, which are not known to exist in any other situation. The spectator too
must be particularly situated. The winds must be hushed, the surface of the
Faro quite smooth, the tide at its height, and the waters pressed by currents,
to great elevation in the middle of the channel. All these events coinciding,
as soon as the sun rises to a certain height, every object existing or moving
at Reggio, will be repeated a thousand-fold on this marine looking-glass; and,
as the day advances, each image will pass rapidly off in succession.

Tropea is the next city of note, traveling Northward on the coast of
Calabria, from Reggio to Naples. It is a bishop's see, containing about four
thousand people. It derives its name, says Swinburne, from the trophies erected
by Scipio, in his triumphant return from Carthage; or from those of Sextus
Pompeius, after his naval victory, off the neighboring cape. It is situated on
the point of a lofty rock, hanging over the sea, and joined to the main land by
an isthmus; almost cut through at the gates, leaving only a narrow passage to
the town. A little to the North is a large island, kept as a pasture for sheep,
and a small one, with a hermitage on its summit, most romantically situated.
They have a pleasing effect from Tropea.

The streets of the town are narrow, the houses high, and built of stone, with
great solidity. It has two gates; one toward the Nile that rises from the bay;
and the other along the isthmus, leading to a high plain; in which there is a
pleasant walk near two miles in length, and half a mile broad, between the sea
and chain of mountains; so steep and rugged, as seems to cut off all
communication by land, with the rest of Calabria. The whole flat, and the sides
of the hills, yield grapes, mulberries, olives, pulse, and vegetables; and
garden fruit in great plenty. Copious streams rush from the mountain; and,
after watering the orchards, are collected into one body, and turn a number of
mills. The water is conveyed, in a channel, to the edge of a high precipice
over the mill, there received into a stone well, from whence it falls a
considerable height upon an over-shot wheel; and, having turned this, is again
collected for a second mill in a similar way, and thus turns many, before it
reaches the sands. Some of these cascades, as they fall through arbours of
vines, and groves of orange trees, are exceedingly beautiful. The wealthy
inhabitants of Tropea reside within the walls; husbandmen, and laborers dwell
on the outskirts, on the land they cultivate.

Two miles East of this town is Paralia; a village inhabited by manufacturers
and mariners; who make cotton blankets, and carry them in their own barks to
Marseilles and Genoa.

Strombolo, a volcano, on an island sixteen leagues West of this coast, on our
way to Naples, is continually throwing up flames; and yet the place is
inhabited by fishermen, who watch their opportunities, for a quiet moment, to
pass along the strand, or they would otherwise be buried under a shower of
red-hot stones.

Strombolo is one of the Lipari islands, and a mountain about ten miles round,
rising suddenly from the sea, and is more lofty than Vesuvius, only not so
conical: in clear weather, it is discoverable at twenty-five leagues distance,
at sea; and at night its flames are to be seen much farther; so that the
visible horizon, seen from the top, cannot be less than five hundred miles; of
course, it is of great elevation. It is wonderful, that this volcano has been
continually burning, for more than a thousand years. It is the lighthouse of
the whole coast, whose fires are never extinguished. This is the island,
supposed by Virgil, to be the habitation of Aeolus. Indeed, all the Lipari
islands were called Aeolian. Being full of vast caverns, says Bridone, roaring
with internal fires; the poets feigned, that Aeolus here kept the winds
prisoners, and let them out at his pleasure.

The forge of Vulcan too has been supposed, by the poets, to be placed in
Hiera, one of these islands. Virgil sends him here, to make the celestial
armor for Aeneas, and gives a noble description of this gloomy habitation,
where he found the Cyclops busy forging a thunderbolt for Jupiter; the account
of which is very singular.

Beneath their hands, tremendous to survey!
Half rough, half formed, the dreadful engine lay.
Three points of rain, three forks of hail conspire;
Three armed with wind, and three were barb'd with fire:
The mass they tempered thick with livid rays,
Fear, wrath, and terror, and the light'ning's blaze. PIT.
This island is now called Volcano. All the Lipari islands bring no
inconsiderable revenue to the King of Naples. They produce great quantities of
alum, sulphur, nitre, cinnabar, and most sorts of fruits; particularly
raisins, currants, and figs, in great perfection. Some of their wines are also
much esteemed, particularly the Malvasia, well known all over Europe. The isle
of Lipari, from which the rest take their name, is by much the largest, and
most fertile.

It is bad traveling in the province of Calabria; the post-houses not being
obliged to keep more than three horses, travelers find it difficult to get on.
The country round Tropea resembles a park, being quite open, but shaded with
irregular avenues and straggling clumps of olive trees, large enough to cut for
timber. Monteleone is a considerable town, on the brow of a hill, situated in
this open country. The barons castle occupies the highest part, embowered in
ever-greens; the town covers the rest of the slope in a very happy manner. The
prospects are enchanting, the vales covered with wood, and a fine river winds
its way through them: the distant mountains, darkened with extensive forests,
and lesser hills at their feet, swelling into view, and intersected by
numberless glens, from the bosom of which rises the smoke of many sequestered
villages. Monteleone contains three parishes, twelve religious houses, and
thirteen thousand people. The scenes, and environs of this place, equal in
beauty the most delightful spots in Sicily; and, on the whole, has greatly the
advantage over that island in its general aspect.

This country seems to be stocked with swine. Swinburne says, he saw many very
large herds, attended by one or two herdsmen, who led them on by the sound of a
great bagpipe. He is persuaded, that the present Calabrian swineherds, are the
exact copies of the ancient ones; and, that their mode of managing these
stubborn animals, has been transmitted down by a regular tradition. The hogs
are well acquainted with their herdsman's note; and if, by accident, two or
three herds should meet together, the sound of each herd's bagpipe, will
immediately separate them.

The Calabrian accent is very different from the Sicilian; being more guttural,
and fuller of aspirations.

Paula is a town, on the Western coast of South Calabria, not a great way from
the city of Cosenza, renowned for being the birthplace of St. Francis, the
founder of the order of Minims. He was a peasant's son, and became the
favorite saint, and patron of his native country. The Calabrians have still a
great confidence in his mediation with our Savior; but their mode of applying
to him is extraordinary. They approach his statue, with reverential awe,
holding in both hands an ass's halter; this they suddenly throw over the head
of the statue; and, after fixing the slipknot with a smart pull, repeat their
petition, and leave the rope. Swinburne says, there was two hundred pounds
weight of rope on his shoulders when he saw it. St. Francis kept a small stock
of pigeons, for the use of the infirmary which he founded; and, as they are
seldom killed for that purpose, and held as sacred, by all the neighborhood;
these birds have, in the course of near three centuries, increased incredibly,
and are great nuisances. Some farmers go so far as to sow plots of ground for
them, and this from a selfish view; being persuaded, that these pigeons have
too much honor to meddle with any seed but what is allotted them, unless such
provision be not made for them.

Cosenza is an archbishopric, the residence of the governor of the province;
was the capital of the Brutian state, and of some consequence during the second
Punic war. The Saracens reduced it to ashes in the tenth century; but it soon
recovered from the calamity. Louis the Third, of Anjou, died here in 1434, and
was buried in the cathedral.

It is pleasantly situated, at the Southern extremity of a spacious plain,
twenty miles along the river Crati, very broad, and about twelve miles from the
Mediterranean sea. The city stands upon seven hills. From an ancient castle, on
the highest of the seven hills, the prospect is very grand over the mountains,
on three sides, and down the plain on the other.

There is a great difference in the dress and manners of the two Calabrias. The
people of South Calabria resemble the Sicilians; and, like them, the men wear
bonnets: North of Regliagno, the boundary of the two provinces, hats are
universally worn. It has been remarked that the Sicilians, even now, betray
strong marks in their character, of their ancient connections with the
Africans; and the North Calabrese of German solidity, arising from colonies
transplanted there by the Swabian princes; and, in the South Calabrese, the
Neapolitans are evident traces of Grecian manners, and turn of mind; but more
so in the latter.

Though Calabria is stigmatized with dishonesty, and supposed to be overrun
with banditti, they are certainly honest to each other; for their doors have
neither bars, nor bolts; and, during the absence of the master, the house is
left to the mercy of every passenger.

CHAP. XI. Of their Amusements, and Mode of Traveling.
WE have given some of the amusements of this country, when speaking of Naples,
but there still remain some few to be treated of, particularly the Carnival.

The Carnival is a festival that precedes Lent, or the time of fasting; and is
pretty general throughout Italy. It begins on St. Charles's day, and continues
till Lent. All this time the city of Naples is very gay, with the customary
amusements of operas, balls, masquerades, etc. terminating with horse-races in
the Strada Toledo; and, sometimes, with a royal masquerade procession of the
Grand Signior to Mecca, which is a most magnificent spectacle. The barbarous
Cocagna, in which a prodigious number of calves, sheep, hogs, lambs, and
poultry, were assembled every Sunday, in carnival-time, to be torn in pieces by
the populace, is now discontinued; and, of course, ought not to be related.

There are three Conservatories in Naples, for the education of boys in the
profession of music. These furnish a band for the church of Franciscans,
morning and evening, during eight days in October. The octaves, indeed, or
eight days following the festival of the patron-saint of every church, are a
continual solemnity, at which the finest voices, and best performers attend,
both morning and evening; and the churches at Naples are so numerous, that the
octaves make one continued entertainment throughout the year. At the festival
of Corpus Christi, the richest churches engross the whole opera, voices,
instruments, machines, and decorations.

To give me an idea of this spectacle, says Grosley, I was told that the
santissimo, being carried up on clouds almost to the roof of the church of the
Jesuits, descends of itself, for the benediction; making its way through the
clouds, which separate; and, receiving in its passage the veneration of angels,
and other beings, part of whom leave their stations to attend on it. What can
the Greeks think, at the fight of spectacles like these; they, who have no
better way of keeping the Eucharist, than in a leather purse, hung up against
the wall, in the sacristy of their churches?

The common people of Naples are very devout, or rather superstitious. Next to
St. Gennaro, their patron saint, the Madonnas, which are frequent in the
streets, seem most to attract their attention. On Christmas-eve they play off
fireworks the whole night. Indeed, at Christmas-time, all quarters of Naples
resound with Pastorali, or Siciliane; a kind of simple, rural music, performed
by Abruzzese, or Calabrian shepherds, on a species of bagpipes. The tunes vary
according to the provinces. In the South, they have three different airs; the
Northern shepherds know only two; to which they add such variations, as their
own genius inspires. The boys learn of their fathers, to play on this
instrument, as the means of subsistence. At other seasons, it is rare, says
Swinburne, to hear any agreeable sounds in the streets of Naples, though it is
the nursery of musical professors. There is no such thing as a national music,
unless we give that name to a monotanous, dralling seguidilla, used by the
nurses to lull children to sleep, and seems borrowed from the Spaniards, who
learnt it of the Moors.

They do not even dance to music, but perform the tarantella, which is a low
dance; consisting of turns on the heel, much footing and snapping of the
fingers. Indeed, persons of all ranks here dance very low, but mark the time as
perfectly with their steps, as other nations do by springing from the ground.
The tarantella dance is the delight of their soul, and a constant holiday
diversion of the young women.

Bull-baiting is a common diversion; there is a large square at Naples, walled
in for the purpose. Hunting is laid aside; but gentlemen, throughout the
country, hunt hares, foxes, and sometimes wild boars, with hounds, or lurchers,
and sometimes with both. In autumn, fowlers use nets, springes, or bird-lime,
to take birds; and in winter, guns. All the country is free to those who buy
the king's license, except some few enclosures, where the barons endeavor to
preserve the game. A license for fowling in the plains of Naples, with
bird-calls, costs ten carlines a year; in the plains and woods, twenty-four,
and sixty with nets. At a distance from the capital, it is only four carlines.
Calabria is too hilly for hunting, all game is brought down by the gun, or
taken in nets.

The road, from Rome to Naples, is bad enough, says Sharp, and the inns worse.
He traveled in 1765. Nothing but vermin and nastiness in their beds, on the
Appian to Brindisi; the road that Horace traveled has nothing in it desirable.
The swampy soil and marshes on the right; and the string of barren mountains on
the left, for scores of miles together, may amuse, but cannot delight a
traveller.

In traveling through the kingdom of Naples, and the ecclesiastical state, an
Englishman is struck at the scarcity of villages and cottages; indeed, one may
almost assert, says Sharp, that there is no such thing as a village, or even a
cluster of houses resembling one. What single, separate houses there are, you
see at a small distance from the town; and, as the country is so thinly
inhabited, the towns swarm with inhabitants. If any of these labor in the
fields, they must travel far for that purpose; but there are multitudes of idle
people, who wrap themselves up in their cloaks, and stand pensively and stupid
in the streets, from morning to night. On holidays, every soul is in this
sauntering attitude.

The towns stand on the summit of hills; and, at some distance, afford a
pleasant prospect, being built with stone, and having flat roofs; but, when you
enter within the walls, and see the houses so offensively nasty, and the
windows not only without glass, but without shutters; the marks of dirty
poverty are so strong, as almost to turn the stomach. Some of the inns, on this
road, exceed in filth and bad accommodations, every thing that can be
conceived. I do sincerely believe, says Sharp, they no more think of wiping
down a cobweb in a bedchamber, than our farmers do of sweeping them away in an
old barn; and can declare, upon my honor, that was a spider to fall from his
mansion, every guest would be liable to receive it in his face as he lies in
bed, for the whole cieling is covered with them.

Between the Mediterranean sea and the Adriatic, are many forests, where
robbers are said to be continually lurking; and, as an escort, government has
stationed certain detachments of troopers, at proper distances, to take
travelers and merchants under their protection.

In the months of February and March, says Keysler, who traveled it in 1730, a
person must be very expeditious to travel seven stages in a post-chaise, from
sunrising to sunset; but, in summer, the seventeen stages and a half, between
Rome and Naples, are easily performed in two days. For the two chaise-horses at
every stage, within the kingdom of Naples, we pay eleven carlines, (three
shillings and eightpence English) and half as much for the chaise, if wanted.
The goodness of the roads (this contradicts Sharp) the fertility of the
country, and the vigor and strength of the horses, make traveling extremely
pleasant in the Neapolitan territories. However, we cannot be too careful, that
the louis d'ors, or Spanish pistoles, which a traveller brings into this
country, be of right weight; for, both at Naples, and on the road, all gold
coins are weighed with more cunning than equity, and needless cavils raised, to
make them appear to be under weight.

CHAP. XII. Of their Births, Education, Marriages, Physic, Funerals, etc.
THE Neapolitan people, says Bisani, are known by their disposition to rebel.
The peasants are vigorous, robust, strong, muscular, full of fire, active, and
very laborious; they resemble the Italians only in sobriety. This race of men
glory in their descent from the Greeks, whom they resemble. The other class of
people are voluptuous to an excess.

Though the Neapolitan gentry are at a very small expense for their tables,
keeping little or no company; yet, upon weddings, lyings-inn, and funerals,
they are very pompous. Lying-in ladies receive company, in great crowds, the
day after their delivery; who, as soon as their compliments are paid, retire to
adjacent chambers, forming themselves into card-parties, or converzationi, and
are regaled with every dainty the confectioner can furnish. These compliments
are continued nine days.

The establishment of a Neapolitan grandee's house, as has been observed, is
upon a very expensive plan. The number of servants, carriages, horses, and
running footmen, would suffice for a sovereign prince; and the wardrobes of
their wives is formed on the same magnificent scale; yet, it is a fixed rule,
says Swinburne, that all ladies whatever, be the circumstances of their
husbands affluent or circumscribed, have an hundred ducats a month, and no
more, allowed them for pin-money, (about seventeen guineas English.) At the
birth of every child, the husband makes the wife a present of an hundred
ounces, and some valuable trinkets, according to his fortune. In the plains it
is customary for a peasant, on the birth of a daughter, to plant a row of
poplar-trees, which are cut down and sold, at the end of seventeen years, to
make up a fortune for her. The proverbial benediction of Figlij Maschi, i. e.
male children, which a Neapolitan gives a woman when she sneezes, is founded on
the great facility with which the common people provide for their sons: as soon
as they can run about, they are able to earn their bread; while their sisters
remain idle at home, or beg till they are old enough to attract the notice of
the men.

Swinburne says, that the Neapolitans have tears at command, and are very
easily moved to show them, that neither blows nor caresses can stop their
children when once they begin to cry; that they must roar till they are tired;
that all nurses have a notion of singing, a monotanous, drawling, sequidilla,
by which they lull children to sleep; but that they provided against its
wakeful influence, by such doses of Venice treacle, as to render it a material
article of importation.

Now I am speaking of nurses, it may not be amiss to tell my readers, from Mrs.
Piozzi, that it is a common thing, for the wives of the lower class of men, to
suckle the lap-dogs of ladies of quality; nay, many a woman of fashion has
fuckled her own dog herself.

Education, says Martyn, has been little attended to. Few people of rank will
suffer their children to frequent academies, or public schools, but keep them
at home; where in this soft climate they acquire indolence and effeminacy. All
literary distinctions have been beneath their rank, and it was not thought
expedient to cloud the playful innocence of childhood, or the amiable gaiety of
youth, with severe study. The nobility of this country, very seldom travel; and
the only dramatic pieces here represented, are operas; in which music, not
sentiment, is the principal thing attended to. But, the pains and expense
government has been at, in establishing public seminaries; the patriotic
effects of the new academy of sciences and belles lettres, and the fashion
which begins to prevail, among the nobility, of visiting foreign countries;
will, probably, bring on a gradual improvement.

Marriage-portions are not very great in general. It does not cost a nobleman
more to marry a daughter, than it does to make her a nun; five thousand pounds
will not defray the expense of the ceremonies and profession; she must have a
pension settled on her; and reserves, besides, a power over her inheritance, in
case she arrives at any dignity in the convent, and wishes to enrich it with
buildings, plate, or vestments.

Servants, and artificers of the city of Naples, give from fifty to an hundred
ducats with their daughters. Peasants, and country workmen, go as far as three
hundred. Females at, or near Naples, are esteemed helpless and indolent, and
therefore have always twice or thrice as much fortune as their brothers, who
have greater resources in their strength and activity. A girl would scarce get
a husband, if her lover did not expect to be re-imbursed, by her portion, for
the sum he paid away with his own sisters.

In funeral ceremonies, it is usual to hire clergymen; who, having no
patrimony, earn as much by their fees on these occasions, as pays for their
ordination; but it is very common, says Swinburne, for them to dress up the
vagabonds of the streets, in their clothes, and send them to sing and pray in
their stead. These fellows are always attended by a friend, who holds a paper
bag with a taper in it, in which they make the taper sweal and waste as much as
possible. At the burial of an archbishop of Naples, four hundred friars
attended with wax lights; but some thieves let loose a mad ox among them; and,
in the confusion, ran away with the candles. At another great funeral, a gang
of rogues disguised themselves like clerks and sacristans, and demanded from
each assistant his taper, which they extinguished, and carried off with the
utmost hypocritical composure.

The manner of burying their dead, here, is very shocking to an Englishman.
Their custom is, to carry the corpse, dressed in his usual wearing apparel, with
his face exposed, on an open bier, through the streets to the church, where the
service is read; after which it is stripped, and at a convenient hour, buried:
but there is a pride and rivalry among the middling rank of people, in dressing
out their children for this exhibition, which is truly laughable. The other
day, says Sharp, there passed under my window, the body of a boy about eight
years old, whose figure and face were as hideous, as death and the smallpox
could make him. The parents had dressed him in a fine laced hat, bag-wig, blue
and silver clothes, etc. and above all things, they don't forget to stick a
sword by his side. The origin of this custom I could not learn, but apprehend,
continues this author, it was at first designed to prevent foul play. The
reality of every man's death, is even evident to the whole parish; and no young
spendthrift can spirit away a father, or rich uncle, and fill a coffin with
stones, send it to the grave, and take possession of the estate.

Dr. Moore tells us, he met with a similar funeral procession. The deceased was
a tradesman, whose widow had bestowed, not only the utmost attention, but more
than she could afford, in dressing him to the greatest advantage on this solemn
occasion. He had on quite a new suit of clothes, a laced hat on his head,
ruffles, his hair finely powdered, and a large blooming nosegay in his
left hand, while the right was very gracefully stuck in his side.

It is the fashion to visit the widow, or nearest relation of the deceased, the
day after his, or her death; and this compliment of condolence is also paid, by
every acquaintance, before the expiration of nine days.

In all the countries I have seen, says Grosley, there is not a town, Langres
in France excepted, where the walls of churches are so crowded with epitaphs,
and funeral inscriptions, as at Naples; and they generally savor very strongly
of the country: grief expresses itself in epigrams, antitheses, and puns; a
diction quite opposite to the style used by the ancients, on these solemn
occasions. Misson has inserted a great many of these epitaphs, taken as they
come. The following is one he omitted. It is in a stone sarcophagus, surmounted
with a little Bacchus, in a chapel of the Mount of Olives church, and was
composed by king Alphonso, the magnanimous, in honor of a favorite, called
Mussimo.

Qui fuit Alfonsi quondam pars maxima regis:
Maximus, hac tenui nunc tumulatur humo.
The burial ground, set apart for English, who die at Naples, says Mrs. Piozzi,
is a dirty garden near the city, contemptuously called Buco Protestante; where
not less than an hundred Englishmen are annually interred; leaving, on a
moderate computation, fifty or sixty thousand pounds each. It is literally a
kitchen garden; on which cabbages, cauliflowers, etc. are carried to market,
and sold in the city. The catacombs of Naples we have mentioned.

CHAP. XIII. Of their Commerce, Trade, and Manufactories.
NAPLES, by its situation and harbor, has always been the center of a
commerce, which it lies in its own breast to enlarge, and that very
considerably; but, notwithstanding its situation, and that no kingdom produces
the necessaries and luxuries of life in greater profusion; yet trade is but in
a languishing condition; the best silks come from Lions; the best woollen goods
from England.

The following merchandise, says Swinburne, is imported in Naples.

From England -- Woollen goods of all sorts, silk and worsted stockings, hats,
tanned hides, lead, tin, pepper, hardware, linens, fans, canes, guns,
dying-woods, drugs, watches, clocks, mathematical instruments, household
furniture, salt-cod, pilchards, herrings, coffee, tea, cocoa, sugar, and
occasionally callicoes, and East India goods.

From Holland -- Cinnamon, cloves, nutmegs, pepper, drugs from the East and
West Indies; fine cloths, particularly black, called Segovia; linens, muslins,
chintz, callicoes, cocoa, whalebone, tobacco, silk stuffs, and velvet.

From France -- Great quantities of sugar, indigo, coffee, dying-woods,
verdigrease, Levant drugs, cocoa, hardware, silk-stuffs, gold and silver, sags
of le man's, du roy, cloths of Elbeuf, and all sorts of women's apparel.

From Spain -- Sugar, cochineal, dying-woods, cocoa, hides salted, and in the
hair; American drugs, diverse cloths, wine, tobacco, Seville and Havannah snuff,
lead, gun-barrels, honey, etc.

From Portugal -- Brazil sugars, tobacco, cocoa of Maringan, drugs, hides, etc.

From Venice -- Books, cordovans, looking-glasses of all sorts, lustres, coach
and window-glasses, Padua cloths, fine Verona cloths, equal to English scarlet;
stockings, woollen caps, fine hats, wax candles, white loaf sugar, fine linen,
medicinal and Levant drugs; all sorts of paints, sublimate, cinnabar,
quicksilver, turpentine, dragon's blood, copper, iron, manufactures of Germany
and Brescia, and excellent paper.

From Genoa -- American goods from the Spanish main, and the Portuguese
West Indies; velvets, iron in great quantities, nails, common hats; wax, from
Tunis and Africa.

From Leghorn -- All sorts of second-hand goods from the Levant, Barbary wools,
Egypt linens, wax, and many silk manufactures.

From Petersburg -- Hides, wax, iron, furs, etc.

From Sardinia -- Great quantities of tunny fish, and white cheese.

From Germany -- Silesia linens of all sorts, white and painted iron of diverse
manufactures, Hungary vitriol, Bohemia chrystals, large glasses for coaches and
windows; hats, and goods of Vienna fabric; turpentine, quicksilver, hardware,
manufactures of Osnaburg, and Nuremberg; copper, tin-plates, boards, cloth, etc.

The duties, on imports in general, are twenty-five per cent. on the
custom-house valuation; sugars and rum pay forty or fifty per cent. on the
market price; the duty on sugar produces, annually, about 80,000 ducats.

The exports are, hemp, flax, goat's hair, silk, dried fruits, manna, horses,
excellent ship timber, and different sorts of grain. In the city of Naples
there are several manufactories of silk, velvets, velverets, handkerchiefs, and
stockings. Their soap is much esteemed. They also make liqueurs, essences,
artificial flowers, and abundance of macaroni. The best musical strings are
made here, from lambs-gut. There is a manufactory of tortoise-shell, which they
inlay occasionally with gold, for snuff-boxes, and other articles; and they
carry on a considerable commerce in polished marbles and lava's. They are
thought to embroider here, better than in France; their macaroni is preferred
to any modern Italy; and they have one kind of confection called Diabolonis, a
drug of a very hot and stimulating nature, sold at a very high price, four or
five guineas for a handful.

The wines of Naples are the best in Italy, and the clergy are the greatest
wine-merchants. The wine-cellar, belonging to the Jesuits, if we may credit Dr.
Burnet, is a vast vault, that contains above a thousand hogsheads. The people
here, from the highest to the lowest, will drink no wine, or other liquors, not
even water, if it has not been some time in snow, which they use instead of
ice; affirming, that snow cools liquor sooner; and, according to Mr. Addison, a
scarcity of snow would raise a mutiny at Naples, as soon as a dearth of corn,
or provisions, in another country. There are persons who contract under
government, to serve the city at so much a pound. There is a high mountain
about eighteen miles from Naples, in which several pits are dug; and here
laborers are employed at certain seasons, to roll in vast balls of snow, which
they ram close together and cover from the sun; and out of these reservoirs of
snow, they cut great lumps as they have occasion, and send them on asses to the
seaside, whence they are carried in boats to Naples, and sold to the several
shops at a fixed price.

CHAP. XIV. Of their Army and Navy, Constitution, Revenue, Laws.
THE standing forces, horse and foot, in time of peace, throughout the kingdom,
do not exceed 27,000 men; of which 1,700 are foreigners; Swiss, Italians, and
Spaniards: a number very insufficient for keeping the inhabitants in awe, on
the approach of an enemy. The officers, in the Neapolitan service, says
Grosley, are distinguished, from the ensign to the colonel, by the heads of
their canes. Their pay is small; a captain having but three hundred dollars a
year. No officer can marry without the King's consent, in order to prevent
their marrying below their rank; and they say his Majesty is very strict in his
enquiries, before he grants the lady the request; for it is she that must ask
the permission.

The soldiers seem dissatisfied with their situation, and are always
complaining of their hardships; but this is of little moment, the frontiers
being too well secured for any of them to escape. One act of humanity, however,
in their government, deserves notice; that on deserters being brought back to
their corpse, they are only imprisoned, and fed on bread and water for a few
days; for the second offense, the punishment is heavier, but never death.

Among their regiments there is a corpse of light infantry, armed and dressed
after the fashion of the Catalonian miquelets. Their uniform is yellow; their
accoutrements light, and fit for desultory attacks; their persons well chosen,
and proper for the duty. This regiment is called Fucilieii di Compagna, country
fuzileers, and their office is to patrole the roads, and escort travelers from
place to place.

The King has a fleet, as has been observed, of armed galleys, and a few men
of war, but unworthy the name of a fleet; so that the state is not secure from
the bombardment of a naval force. The whole navy of the kingdom, says Sharp,
may be seen in the port of Naples; for, as magnificent as it may appear to an
Englishman, it is much larger than they have any use for. The only purpose for
which they employ their ships of war, and frigates, is a cruise against the
Barbary rovers, and this happens but rarely. They seem, at last, to have
discovered, that galleys are but a poor defense against frigates, and such as
English privateers; for which reason, they never fit them out for sea, but
reserve them merely as prisons. The following was a true list of their fleet in
1766. Two men of war, one of 64 guns, and the other of 54; two frigates of 32
guns each; four galleys, four galliots, and six xebecks; a formidable army
against Lilliput, or their neighboring potentate the pope.

As the nobility hold their lands by feudal tenure, and were obliged to furnish
a certain number of soldiers, it was formerly calculated, that they could bring
into the field 100,000 horse, and 150,000 foot; but most of these military
services are now turned into rents; and the sovereign chooses to rely rather
upon foreign troops, than his own people.

The title of King of both Sicilies was first used in the twelfth century, when
Roger II. earl of Sicily, was also king of Naples. The title of investiture,
which the pope claims for the kingdom, commenced in the eleventh century, when
pope Leo IX. invested count Humphrey, the Norman, and his heirs, with Apulia,
Calabria, and whatever he should conquer in Sicily. Though this investiture
meant no more, than that the pope wished success to the Norman arms, and
pronounced their future conquests lawful; yet, in 1059, it was made more
absolute, and the province of the kingdom of Naples, was considered as fiefs to
the popedom. The pope now accepts the city of Benevento, from the King of
Naples, for the investiture; and sends to Naples annually, a present of a white
palfrey, and a purse of six thousand ducats. The King's eldest son is styled
prince of Calabria. The arms of the kingdom is a blue field, interspersed with
lilies; or, with a tournament collar of five lappets gules.

Here is one order, that of St. Januarius, instituted in 1728. Its badge is an
image of that saint, appendant to a watered carnation ribband hanging from the
right shoulder to the left side, and on the left breast a silver cross.

The nobility are numerous, too much so for the extent of the kingdom. There
are 119 princes, 156 dukes, 173 marquisses, 42 counts, and 445 barons; all
vassals of the crown. Many a spot of land, not worth fifty dollars a year,
gives the title of marquis to the owners; so that, in general, they are very
poor.

The kingdom of Naples is still governed by laws, which the Normans introduced
in the eleventh century, viz. the annual feudal law in all its origin; a proof
of its former conquest by the Normans. The peasants, of course, are poor; and
it depends entirely on the personal character of the masters, whether their
poverty is not the least of their grievances. The court of Naples has not yet
ventured, says Moore, by one open act of authority, to abolish the immediate
power of the lords over their tenants; but, it is believed, the minister wishes
secretly for its destruction.

Though the Neapolitan nobility still retain, as I said, the ancient feudal
authority over the peasants; yet their personal importance depends, in a great
measure, on the favor of the king; who, under pretext of any offense, can
confine them to their own estates, or imprison them at pleasure; or, which is
worse to them, can forbid them the court. Unless the king was to affront all
the nobility at once, he has little to fear from their resentment. Even in case
of such a union, as the nobles have lost the affection and attachment of their
peasants; what could they do, in opposition to a standing army of 30,000 men,
(some of whom are Swiss) entirely devoted to the crown?

There are a number of state officers in the service of the crown; but men of
high birth are seldom here called to the management of public affairs; of
course, they live a great deal upon their estates, and these save money, to
make a figure occasionally at Naples. The country seats, of the nobility, are
castles; with a single wall, or ditch about them, like the gentlemen's
chateaus, or seats, in Flanders; sufficient to secure them against a troop of
banditti, but by no means capable of resisting an army.

Dr. Burnet says, the clergy are possessed of one-third of the lands of the
whole kingdom; the crown, nobility, and gentry, possess almost all the rest.
Tradesmen and peasants have scarce any they can call their own; being no better
than tenants at will. They manure the lord's lands, plant and prune his vines
and olives, and are allowed no more than a bare subsisttance for their poor
families. They come for justice to the courts of their respective lords, in all
cases that are not capital, or highly criminal; and are, in all respects,
subject to these petty sovereigns. As the crown lands pay no taxes, and those
of the clergy none, but what they think proper; the charges of government are
born chiefly by the nobility and gentry.

The revenues of the Crown amount to about one million sterling per year; and
arise from the monopoly of salt, gunpowder, and from excise and different
taxes, ports-royal, and an annual free gift of the nobility, clergy, and feudal
states. But there is not above eight or nine millions of ducats, current coin,
in the kingdom; including gold, silver, and brass; which is not sufficient for
the circulation of a very extensive commerce; for, although the notes of seven
public banks, established in Naples, circulate even down to the value of the
smallest sums; yet the cash for these notes is paid into these banks, as into
bankers hands in London, and without interest; of course, this paper money does
not increase the quantity of specie circulated, it only saves trouble. These
banks take in pawns to an immense value, at stated interests, and lend money on
other securities.

All manufactures sent from the capital into the provinces, and exported out of
the kingdom, are liable to a duty of sixteen to twenty per cent. and these
duties arise annually to 74909 ducats -- a ducat is 3s. 4d. sterling.

There is a great scarcity of gold, but much silver, and vast quantities of
copper coin in circulation. Gold is so scarce, says Sharp, that I have seen
five or six gentlemen, not choosing to carry a load of silver, sit down to
cards, and be under the necessity of marking their losings. On the contrary,
there is such a profusion of copper, and retail taaders are overloaded with it
to such a degree, as to oblige them to make a certain allowance for the
exchange. In consequence of this necessity, we see, in the marketplaces and
streets, great numbers of money changers, who have a little stall heaped up
with copper money, which they deliver out for silver to those who want change;
and they receive of the shopkeepers, about a halfpenny for every four shillings
worth.

The feudal system is here in its full force, it begins with the person of the
king, and extends itself through all classes. The kingdom of Naples is a fief
to the holy see of Rome; but, since the year 1788, the King has not paid his
homage. Many of the fiefs in the two Sicilies, are in the hands of the
Venetians, and the Genoese.

The sovereign authority is not unlimited; it is in some measure curbed, by the
states of the kingdom, who assemble annually. There are six thousand noble
families in the kingdom of Naples only, the great dignities are as numerous as
in Spain; and in every town there are inferior jurisdictions. Justice is
administered by upper tribunals, in every province, with an appeal to the great
court in Naples; even from Sicily itself.

The forms of criminal jurisprudence are here so ill ordained, says Swinburne,
so multiplied, and so complex; that, if the king was to insist upon a villain's
taken in the fact being tried, and if found guilty, hanged before the end of
three days; the dispatch would almost kill the judges with fatigue; for the
trial and procedures would employ them full eighteen hours out of every
twenty-four. First, the accusation must be laid according to rule, and
witnesses examined; next, the counsel for the prisoner pleads a couple of
hours; the counsel for the crown one hour; then the counsel for the prisoner,
if he pleases, two hours more. This done, every one of the judges harangues.
Then all the notifications are made, examinations canvassed, proofs debated,
and a thousand trifling formalities observed, which occasion such shameful,
unsurmountable delays, as eternise a criminal process. It happened lately,
continues Swinburne, that on the final determination of the trial, and
condemnation of a malefactor, a messenger was sent to the jailer, to bring the
culprit into court, in order to receive sentence; when behold! the turnkey
appeared, and made an affidavit, that the prisoner had died of a long fit of
sickness, the Christmas twelvemonth before.

As the salary of a judge, in Naples, is only fifty ducats a month (9l. 7s. 6d.
English) he cannot afford to be honest, or expeditious; but the case is still
worse in the provinces, where the judges have but half the sum; and with that
must keep a coach, and proper household establishment. Those who serve
warrants, writs, etc. are allowed no pay, though they must keep thirty bailiffs
each under them; of course, they are naturally very active in taking up an
offender, where there is a possibility of extorting any money out of him; when
once in durance, the prisoner ceases to be an object of consideration to them,
and therefore they take no pains to forward his trial. There were above twelve
thousand criminals, rotting in the different prisons of the kingdom, when Mr.
Swinburne was there, whose maintenance cost the state above two hundred
thousand ducats a year, (37,500l.).

The plaintiff and defendant are not brought, face to face, before a judge; but
the cause is brought on by an attorney, on the part of each; one states the
accusation, the other the defense; after this, the judges, by a plurality of
voices, determine according to the evidence; of course the delays of criminal
causes, become as tedious as those of civil ones.

The prisoners, condemned to the galleys, of which there are generally about
two thousand, are chained two and two, and may be thought to suffer by lying on
the decks; but their condition is far preferable to that of many of the poor,
who lie in the streets. Besides, they have a certain allowance of bread from
the king, and wear some clothing. The galley slaves lead an idle life;
whatever work they do a-board, is chiefly for their own benefit; for few of
them are employed in cruising. If a tailor, or a shoemaker, earns a few pence,
he puts a part of it into his pocket, and purchases some rarity with it. A man,
says Sharp, who has visited them as often as I have done, will never, when he
means to picture extreme misery, represent it in the shape of a galley-slave. I
have seen a musician, on board, entertaining them with vocal and instrumental
music, whom they paid for his performance; and I have no doubt, but this poor
man styled those we call wretches, his good masters.

CHAP XV. Of their Religion.
THE Roman Catholic religion, here, is on a very bad footing; and the best that
can be said of the ecclesiastical constitution is, that the Neapolitans have
always resolutely opposed the introducing of the inquisition. The number of
monasteries and convents is astonishing; and the clergy may be said to be all
wealthy, but the laity, poor. We have said, that the clergy possess a third of
the kingdom; but Giannone, who wrote with such veracity and freedom, on the
ambition of avarice, of the Neapolitan clergy, and thereby involved himself in
misfortunes, mentions, as a general received opinion, that were the country
divided into five parts, four would be found in the hands of the church, as
being in actual possession of half the land; and having, upon an average,
procured by legacies and donations, a fifth, and a half-fifth more; scarce a
person dying, without leaving something to a church, or a convent. Indeed, such
is the power and opulence of the clergy, of this country, says Keysler, and the
veneration paid them, that more than once they have been ready to seize the
civil power. The laity have often, in the strongest manner, petitioned their
sovereign, that the clergy should be no longer allowed to purchase lands; but
all endeavors were fruitless, till 1751, when measures were invented, for the
pope's consent, for lessening the number of convents.

As to external ceremonies, the devotion of the Roman Catholics, here, is not
so outrageous as in several provinces of Germany. At the elevation of the host,
in churches, protestants are not compelled to kneel; and travelers are allowed
to eat flesh in Lent. In this kingdom are twenty-one archbishopricks, and one
hundred and twenty-three bishoprics; in 1782, the kingdom of Naples, alone,
contained 45,525 priests; 24,694 monks, and 20,973 nuns: the abbeys, priories,
commendaries, in the two kingdoms, are very rich, and amount to one hundred and
twenty.

The most common procession, which is exhibited almost every day, is not so
much intended to create devotion, as to raise a fund for penitent prostitutes;
who have quitted their abandoned way of living, and retired to a convent. In
order the more effectually to move the spectator to charity, the youngest and
most beautiful of these penitents are selected, who are ordered to walk
barefooted, through the city, two abreast. At some particular places they
kneel down, acknowledge their past wickedness, and sing penitential hymns; the
ecclesiastic, and a lay assistant, who attend them, in the mean time, receiving
the contributions of the public, in a purse fastened to the end of a stick.
Their habit, on these occasions, is a violet colored gown, tied round the
waist with a cord of the same color. Their heads are shaved, but they wear a
blue veil, which, however, is thin enough to give a sight of the charms of
youth and beauty, as powerful incentives to a liberal contribution.

The Neapolitans have a tendency to Atheism, says Keysler. Molines had a strong
party in this city; and many, in their heart, are Jansenists. Naples is the
place, of all Italy, where booksellers are under the least restraint; books
written by Protestants are openly sold.

At Naples they have a practice, unknown at Rome; and which is meant as a piece
of devotional compliment to the Savior of the world. From the Friday to the
Sunday, inclusive, which three days our Lord remained interred in the earth,
persons of quality visit in chairs; and those of inferior rank, walk. No
carriages are allowed at that time to pass the streets; left, by their clatter,
they should disturb our Savior in his grave. I speak not this ludicrously,
says Sharp; there are thousands who believe him at this time in the bowels of
the earth.

Among other ridiculous practices which are meant as sacred ones in the holy
week; they fasten a man on a cross, and carry him in procession through the
streets of Naples. On each side of the cross are two vulgar women, who, with
their hair dishevelled, and some gestures of lamentation, represent Mary, and
Mary Magdalen in tears. The man, who represents our Savior, is some poor
fellow, who is paid a shilling or two for his trouble; the extension of his
arms, for a length of time, being very uneasy and painful to him.

They have even admitted into their devotion, the noise and explosion of
gunpowder. I was roused one day from my seat, continues Sharp, by a universal
discharge of the whole artillery of Naples; and on enquiry, was informed the
guns were fired for the immaculate conception of the Virgin Mary. In truth, the
Neapolitans are the greatest gunpowder nation in the world. No merchant sends a
few casks of wine into the city, but they are preceded by squibs, crackers, and
the firing of muskets; and, during the Christmas week, all the young men,
boys, and little children, spend every farthing they can scrape together, in
gunpowder; and pop and shoot all day, and all night, to the great annoyance of
the healthy, and the disturbance of the sick.

One of the greatest singularities of Naples, at Christmas, is the Presepe;
which is a representation of the birth of our Savior, with all its concomitant
circumstances, in small figures. It is exposed either in a suite of apartments,
or on the flat top of a house; and, by means of masses, popes, cork, and
branches of trees, form an historical landscape. Some of these presepes are
pretty enough; they contrive to make the sky, and distant country, a part of
it; and optical illusions are wonderful.

The presepe, or presepio, properly signifies a manger; and this is a
dedication of the presepio to the virgin and her infant; not only in churches,
but in houses. Among the puppets exhibited, we often see the wise men of the
East, with the star over their heads, on one spot; the shepherds attending
their flocks, with the angel descending toward them, on another. The Virgin,
the Infant, Joseph, and the ass, on another. In short, the composer introduces
such figures and historical facts into the group, as the new Testament, and
sometimes his own fancy, suggests. But what renders this made-picture really an
object, for a man of taste, is the artful disposition of the figures, amidst a
scenery of perspective astonishingly deceitful to the eye. These are often made
at a very great expense, from five hundred to as many thousand pounds, and are
always kept up. The poor, if they are not already provided with a presepio,
purchase a cheap trumpery one at Christmas, which they lock up with care the
whole year; or, perhaps, for their lives.

In time of Lent, fine preachers, from every monkery, travel to distant
provinces to hold forth to the public; and Naples is generally visited by some
of the best. Mr. Sharp tells us, he was induced to go and hear one or two of
them, that were in the highest estimation for their eloquence. Some of the
pulpits are a kind of gallery, which admit of great scope for action, running
from one end to the other; and injudicious preachers do not fail to take
advantage of it. It is the habit of this country, to employ much action and
gestures, in the most trifling conversations. This habit infests the bar and
the pulpit; and from an indiscriminate application of it, on slight occasions,
its force and effect are lost in great ones.

But what gives more offense, is a familiarity of style, which they have
introduced into their compositions; when even God Almighty, and our Savior,
are the subjects in question. I went the other day, says Sharp, when the most
celebrated preacher was in Naples; this was in 1766; who, among other
inelegancies, gave us a familiar dialogue, and in a very familiar manner,
betwixt God and Jesus Christ, in which our Savior begged and prayed that he
would not damn mankind; but God being inexorable, and deaf to all entreaty, our
Savior said, "Why then, if your justice must exceed your mercy, be so good to
damn me, and spare them. This the preacher told us, God was so good as to
comply with. I believe, continues Sharp, I have not mistaken him a jot; because
another gentleman, who was present, agreed with me in every particular, word
for word; and I was so fearful of misrepresenting the truth, that I immediately
committed it to paper.

There has crept also into fashion, an idle custom of telling a story in their
sermons; with which they sometimes finish their discourse, as our clergy do
with a practical inference. They mean, that the moral of their stories should
be a religious one; but their attempts to tell, in the character of a man of
the world, often miscarries. A certain Catholic lady, continues this author,
informed me, that last year she was at church, when a celebrated Jesuit told
the following story: "That queen Elizabeth, so famous throughout the world for
her heresy, made a compact with the devil, that if he would indulge her in all
she desired, and suffer her to reign so many years, she would surrender her
soul at the conclusion of that term." Accordingly, the day she died, there was
a great black cloud ascended from the Thames, which drew the attention of an
infinite number of spectators; who, at last, heard a voice from the cloud
pronounce these words: I am the soul of queen Elizabeth, now going to the devil
for the sins I have committed. There is one week in Lent, that most of the
ladies of distinction go, every day, to hear a sermon at the Jesuit's church;
and it was on one of those days that the preacher told this story to the
politest congregation at Naples.

The preachers here have a moveable crucifix in the pulpit, about two feet
high, standing close to their elbow. The Christ on it has generally a crown of
thorns; and the stream of blood, down his face and breast, are painted with a
lively red. At the conclusion of the sermon, or on any other apposite occasion,
when the preacher is to set forth the sufferings and agonies of our Savior,
dying for the salvation of the world, he takes the crucifix in his hands,
displays the bleeding wounds of the image; and, if he has any pathetic powers,
never fails to extort such marks of contrition and horror from the
congregation, such knockings on the breast, such an effusion of tears, and
sometimes, amongst the women, such involuntary hysterical screams, as
Protestants have no idea of.

But powerful as the crucifix usually is, particularly in the hands of an
eloquent preacher, I am tempted, says Sharp, to tell a ludicrious story,
bordering upon profaneness, where its efficacy failed. It is one of those
instances, where a burning zeal, through a deplorable ignorance, furnishes
matters of raillery to scoffers, and compassion to such as are truly religious.
At Naples, there is a place called Largo del Castello, not unlike our
Tower Hill, the resort of the idle. Here, every afternoon, monks, mountebanks,
pickpockets, and conjurors, follow their several occupations. The monk, (for I
never saw more than one at a time) holds forth like our itinerant
field-preachers, to what congregation he can collect. The mountebank, by means
of punch, and his fellow comedians, endeavors to gather as great an audience
as he can. It happened one day, that punch succeeded wonderfully, and the poor
monk preached to the air, for not a living creature was near him. Mortified and
provoked, that a puppet-shew, within thirty yards of him, should draw the
attention of the people from the gospel, to such idle trash; with a mixture of
rage and religion, he held up his crucifix and called aloud, "Ecco il vero
pulcinella." "Here is the true pulchinello; come here -- come here." This story
is so well known in Naples to be true, that the most devout people tell it; and
were it not for such a sanction, I should not have repeated it.

To be more serious, Mrs. Piozzi tells us, that she saw a very odd scene one
morning at church; which, though new to her, perhaps, from its frequent
repetition, seemed to strike no one but herself.

A lady, with a long white dress, and veiled, came in her carriage, which
waited for her at the door, with her own arms on it; and three servants, better
dressed than is here common, followed and put a lighted taper in her hand. En
cet etat, she moved slowly up the church, looking like Jane Shore, in the last
act, but not so feeble; and, having reached the steps of the high altar, threw
herself quite upon her face before it; remaining there prostrate, at least five
minutes, in the face of the whole congregation; who neither stared, sneered,
smiled, nor lamented; but minded their own private devotions (no mass was
saying). The lady rose, kissed the steps, and bathed them with her tears,
mingled with sobs of an affected penitence; this done, she retired to her seat,
where she waited with others, the commencement of the sacred office.

Let not this story, however, continues our fair authoress, lead any one to
think, that more general decorum, or true devotion, can be found in churches of
the Romish persuasion, than in ours -- quite the reverse. This burst of
penitential piety was, in itself, an indecorous thing; but it is the nature and
genius of the people, not to mind pretenders. Dogs are suffered to run about
and dirty the churches, during the whole time of service; whilst the crying of
children, and the most indecent methods taken by the women to pacify them, give
one still juster offense. In all the churches of Italy, there is no treading
for spittle and nastiness, but more so at Naples.

I will conclude these anecdotes of their religion, with the customary miracle
of the liquefaction of the blood of St. Januarius, their patron saint, which is
kept in two different phials (one holding near an ounce, and the other a few
drops) in one of the chapels of the church, dedicated to that saint. Both the
phials resemble the ladies' smelling bottles for salts; the larger being a
depressed spheroid, like a flat watch-case, of three inches diameter, with
glasses before and behind; the smaller, a narrow cylindrical one. They are
contained in a gold case, between two circular glasses, of about three inches
diameter, supported on a thin pedestal; by which means, when it is held up
against light, or a candle placed behind, the spectator sees clearly the
bottles, and their contents; which seems to be a congealed substance, not
unlike a lump of Spanish snuff. Keysler says, it is of a brownish red, and
looks like balsam of Peru, which may be very easily liquified. The pretended
liquefaction of the coagulated blood in the phials, when placed near the head,
is known to all the world. This farce is acted the first Sunday in May; and on
the success, or failure of this miracle, the prosperity, or calamity of the
succeeding year, is supposed to depend. As its success, that is, its
liquefaction, occasions great rejoicings; so, if the blood remains coagulated,
recourse is had to processions, and public flagellations, etc. to avert the
impending danger.

On the day when this miracle is to be exhibited, the phials, containing the
blood, stand surrounded with a great number of lights. They are applied to the
mouths and foreheads of an innumerable multitude of people, who throng to
partake of such a blessing; the priest all the while burning it every way; so
that, by the continual agitation, the warmth of his hands, the heat from the
lights, the effluvia from the crowd, the sultriness of the weather, etc. it is
not unreasonable to suppose, a condensed fluid, may be gradually restored to
its liquid state. This operation, Sharp says, is generally executed in eight,
ten, fifteen, or twenty minutes; but when he was present, it was near an hour
and half, it being a very cold morning. Some heretics, finding how slowly the
miracle operated, thought proper to retire, to save their bones from being
broke; for the Neapolitans entertain an opinion, that the saint refuses to act
when heretics are present; and as the refusal is esteemed ominous, they have,
sometimes, drove them very rudely from the altar. I heard, continues he, a
woman declare, that it must be owing to the presence of some Protestants in the
churches, that the miracle went on so slowly. The liquefaction in the larger
phial was evident; in the smaller, the matter, after the miracle, appeared of a
more vivid red. I cannot say it resembled blood very much in either of them. As
soon as the liquefaction takes place, the priests cry out, Il miraculo e fatto.
"The miracle is done," which is immediately answered by a Te Deum, amid the
acclamations of the people, and a discharge of cannon. In 1733, Mr. Neuman, a
celebrated chemist at Berlin, invented a method to liquefy coagulated blood
easily, at any time; so that, admitting the contents of the phial to be blood,
(which most likely is not the case) there is nothing wonderful in the business.

CHAP. XVI. Of their Learning, Arts, Sciences, etc.
THE Neapolitans are far from being deficient in understanding; but,
notwithstanding all their schools, universities, and academies, their religion
must be a perpetual bar to the improvement and increase of solid literature.
Though the booksellers in Naples enjoy more liberty than in other Italian
states; yet they are under very mortifying restrictions, says Busching, with
regard to the publication and vending of books.

Dr. Burnet, who would not allow the clergy of Naples any great share of
learning, observes, however, that there were societies of men in this city, of
finer thoughts, than could be found in any other part of Italy.

At Naples, there is a university; several public libraries, and professors,
read lectures here on theology, medicine, politics, law, mathematics, physics,
history, humanity, and languages. In the two kingdoms, there are four
universities, and many academies of science, music, sculpture, and architecture.

With respect to the arts, Naples has been infinitely more happy in painting,
than in architects. Lanfranc, Diminichini, Guido, and of the Bologna school;
Lucca Giordano, and Massimo.

The architecture of both sacred and civil, public and private edifices, is no
longer the architecture of Rome; the outside of most of the churches, even the
most stately and splendid, is, all over Italy, only a bare wall standing, as it
were, in expectation of a portal. Their churches are ill built, in the form of
a cup, with a cupola over the junction; all their gates and doors are loaded
with heavy balconies, supported by brackets, heavier than what they bear, or
suspended by a miracle. The insides are rather rich and glaring, than fine; and
the decorations and distributions every where uniform.

The fountains, says Grosley, in the several parts of the city, bear the marks
of the same bad taste; but no where does Neapolitan taste shine with so much
luster, as in the pyramids or obelisks, erected in squares fronting the
principal churches. In the monstrous expense of them, in the uncouth assemblage
of the various marbles, they exceed all the enormities of Gothic rudeness.

It is universally known, that Naples is the center of the best music in Italy,
and the non plus ultra in execution. It is to all Italy, in music, what Athens
was to Greece, in eloquence and philosophy; but its music, like other arts,
savours a little of the national fondness for the Capriccioso and the
Stravagante.

Naples has, for a long time, been the school and seminary of the best violins;
yet, they question their skill, till they have been tried by the renowned
Tartini, of Padua, where they flock to covet his approbation. Tartini cooly
hears them; and after very attentively listening to what they propose to
execute, "That Is fine," says he, or, "that is very difficult; that is
brilliantly executed," "but," adds he, putting his finger to his breast, "It
did not reach hither."

The study of music is so much neglected, says Sharp, at Naples, that I found
it as impossible here as at Venice, to have a harpsichord to play on; nor do
they ever print their operas or favorite airs.

The Italians count their hours to twenty-four o'clock, beginning the day from
the time it is almost dark; so that time varies with them, in conformity to the
setting of the sun. For example, if they begin to count from our six-in the
evening; when it is seven with us, it will be one with them; and the next day,
when it is seven in the evening, it will be a little past one with them; as
many minutes as the day is lengthened, To obviate, therefore, this error in
time, they alter their clocks and watches, as often as the error amounts to
fifteen minutes; advancing, or putting them back, as the days shorten or
lengthen. If a man forgets to alter his watch, he loses or gains a quarter of
an hour; and, of course, cannot be very punctual to his engagements. There is
no man sufficiently learned in this place, to know the origin of this method of
reckoning.

OF THE ISLAND OF SICILY. FROM BUSCHING, BRYDONE, SWINBURNE, NON, KEYSLER, etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Country, Climate, Productions, etc.
SICILY is in the shape of a triangle, situated between 37 and 38 degrees, 40
min. North latitude, and between the 12th and 16th degrees of East longitude;
being about two hundred and ten miles long, from East to West; and one hundred
and thirty-three broad, from North to South; three hundred round; and the
largest of all the Mediterranean islands. It was anciently called Sicania; but
the Siculi conquering great part of it, gave it the name of Sicilia. It has
been held, that Sicily was originally joined to the continent of Italy, but
gradually separated from it by the encroachment of the sea, and the
devastations of earthquakes. The streights, between Sicily and Calabria, were,
by the Latins, called Fretum Siculum; but its common name is, Il Faro de
Messina; from Pharus, the light-house at the bottom of Cape di Faro. Opposite
this cape, in Calabria, stands the rocky promontory of Scylla, at the distance
of about five miles across. The ebb and flood, in these streights, are very
irregular and strong; where it is narrowest, between Faro and Sciglio,
extremely impetuous. The flux of the sea is much more violent in its descent
toward Greece, than in its return upwards. During this descent, there is no
stemming the tide, even in a strong southerly wind; so that it is usual to have
the vessels hauled up along the coast of Calabria by men; and it is also
impracticable for any vessels to cross the current, from Calabria to Sicily.
Mr. Popowitsch conceives, that this rapidity proceeds from the course of the
waters issuing out of the Atlantic ocean, into the Mediterranean, which
directly bear upon this part of Calabria. It is, therefore, natural to think,
that it is this direct impulse of the sea, on the coast of Calabria, which
among the ancients, raised such terrifying ideas of Cape Scylla, or Sciglio;
for, till experience had shown how to avoid the danger, ships were often driven
against this promontory, and dashed to pieces. This rock is near two hundred
feet high, has a large castle on its summit; and from it a line of houses
extends, on both sides, in a slope, to the beach, semicircular, planted with
trees, and sheltered with very high clifts; containing three or four hundred
inhabitants; and gives the tide of prince, to a Calabrese family. There are
many small rocks that show their heads, at the base of the large one; and are,
probably, the dogs, that are described as howling round the monster Scylla.

The whirlpool Charybdis, which was once supposed to be an abyss, into which
the waters precipitated themselves, is a kind of vortex, arising from the
currents of the sea, at particular winds, opposing each other. In a calm, and
when the South wind does not blow, this place is so smooth, that a boat may
cross it with safety. It lies close on the outside of the harbor of Messina.
Vessels in this passage, are obliged to go as near as possible to the coast of
Calabria, to avoid the suction occasioned by the whirling of Charybdis; that
when they come to the narrowest and most rapid part of the streights, they are
in danger of being carried on the rock of Scylla. From whence the proverb,
still applied to those, who, in attempting to avoid one evil, fall into another.

Incidit in Scyllam, cupiens evitare Caribdem. There is a fine fountain of
white marble on the key of Messina, representing Neptune holding Scylla and
Charybdis chained, under the emblematical figures of two sea monsters, as
represented by the poets.

Sicily is so hot a country, that even in the beginning of January, the shade
is refreshing; and it is only for a few months, in March, etc. that any
chilling winds are felt, and even then a little fire suffices to banish the
cold. The only appearance of winter, is toward the summit of Mount Aetna; where
snow falls, and where it is preserved for use in the following manner. Pits are
dug in the open air; and in these they lay the snow, with straw or stubble, and
salt. Stratum super stratum, layer upon layer, and then cover the place with
earth. In summer, when wanted, one of these pits are opened on one side, and
the snow being taken out, the hole is again closed.

The hot sirroc winds are as powerful here as at Naples. Though the island
appears to be one entire rock, the soil is exceedingly fertile. Anciently it
was styled the granary of Rome; and now it exports great quantities to Naples,
which would otherwise be distressed. It is, however, far from being well
cultivated; several tracts on the western side lying waste. Its wine is
excellent, as are also all fruits, together with honey, oil, salt, saffron, and
sugar; which last is produced in the neighborhood of Mount Aetna. All the
coasts afford good fisheries, particularly for ^unny; the cattle are fine, and
all sorts of game in plenty. Great profits are made here of silk, where it was
introduced in 1130, from the Holy Land, and hence soon spread to Naples, Spain,
and the French provinces bordering on Italy. In this island are also found
gems, or marble stones; metals and minerals, as gold, silver, copper, tin,
lead, iron, alum, and a variety of hot baths, and medicinal springs.

Many of their springs are boiling hot; others still more singular, are colder
than ice, and yet never freeze.

In several places, they have fountains, that throw up a kind of oil on their
surface, which the peasants burn in lamps, and use for many other purposes.
There is still one more remarkable at Nicosia, called Il fonia Canaletto. This
is covered with a thick scum, like pitch, which the country people esteem a
sovereign remedy in rheumatic, and other complaints.

The water of a small lake, near Naso, is celebrated for dying every thing, put
into it, black; though the water is remarkably pure and transparent. They have
a variety of sulphurous baths, where the patient is thrown into a profuse
sweat, only from the heat of the vapor. About a mile and a half from Palermo,
at a small beach where the people go to swim; there are many springs of warm
water, that rise even with the sea, at the depth of five or six feet.

Brydone is of opinion, that not only Mount Aetna, but the greatest part of
Sicily, and almost the whole of the circumjacent islands, have been originally
formed by subterraneous fire; from the distant hot springs, and from throwing
lava, pumice, and tuffa, at a great distance from Aetna.

At Trapany is a considerable coral-fishery; in short, whatever seems requisite
in point of necessity, delight, or ornament, this country affords in such a
liberal manner; that the inhabitants, notwithstanding how much it is burdened
by their viceroys, live at their ease and grow rich.

The great standing commodity, as I have observed, is wheat. They preserve
their grain, not by exposing it to the air, as we do, but by shutting it up in
pits, or where the soil is dry, or in caverns in the rock. These open by a
small hole at top, and widen below; here they pour down their wheat, after it
has been made exceedingly dry; and, ramming it hard, they cover up the hole, to
protect it from rain; and assure us, it will preserve in this manner for many
years.

The soda is a plant much cultivated here, and turns out to good account. This
is the vegetable, that by the action of the fire, is afterward converted into
mirrors and chrystals. Great quantities are sent annually to Venice, to supply
the glass-houses. Their honey is delicious, even superior to that of Minorca.
It is found by the peasants in the hollows of trees, and rocks. The sugar-cane
thrives well here, and they make sugar enough for home-consumption. Liquorice
juice is preferred both here and in Calabria. The juice is squeezed out of the
roots; after which it is boiled to a consistency, and formed into cakes, which
are packed up with bay leaves, and exported in the same order as we receive
them.

In some of the Northern parts of the island, they find shellfish, that
produces a kind of flax, of which gloves and stockings are made. This is the
muscle, found in great quantities at Tarentum.

The pistachio nut is much cultivated here, and with great success. These
trees, like many others, are male and female; the male is always barren; but,
unless a quantity of these are mixed in every plantation, the pistachio-tree
never bears a nut. But of all the variety cultivated in Sicily, the manna-tree
is esteemed the most profitable. It is a kind of ash, and resembles it much.
About the beginning of August, during the greatest heat, an incision is made in
the bark near the root, and a thick, whitish liquor is immediately discharged
from the wound, which soon hardens in the sun; when it is carefully taken off,
and and gathered into boxes. They renew these incisions every day during the
season; wounding the tree on one side only, reserving the other side for the
next year.

The cantharides fly is a Sicilian commodity, found on several trees of Aetna.

The marbles of Sicily would be a great source of opulence, if the quarries
were encouraged; at Centorbi, they have a kind of soft stone, that dissolves in
water, and is used to wash linen instead of soap, from which property it is
called Pietra Saponaro; soapy stone. They likewise find here, as well as in
Calabria, the celebrated stone, which, on being watered, and exposed to a
pretty violent degree of heat, produces a plentiful crop of mushrooms: but, it
would be endless to give an account of all the various commodities, and curious
productions of this island. It is also well watered; for it has five principal
rivers.

CHAP. II. Of their History.
SICILY has had many masters, and being classic ground, it may not be
unentertaining to our readers, to have a short sketch of its history. This
island was invaded by the Greeks, six or seven centuries before the birth of
Christ, and they became blended with the natives. Aristocracy prevailed first;
tyranny succeeded, under Phalaris os Agrigentum, six hundred years before
Christ; and democracy followed. Syracuse went to pieces by dissension, and
their arts and sciences fell before it. Soon after the settlement of the
Grecians; the Carthaginians, from Africa, invaded it with large bodies of
forces; and, about five hundred before Christ, made themselves masters of all
the Western parts. The old inhabitants, the Siculi, kept the midland county,
and the Greeks the eastern coasts.

Dionysius, the elder, had the supreme command at Syracuse. Avarice, despotism,
and cruelty, marked his reign; and his son, Dionysius, the younger, succeeded
him, who was the greater tyrant of the two* Agathocles, a tyrant, however,
seized the throne, and deluged the country with blood. This man, at war with
the Carthaginians, drove them off his coast, followed them to Africa, routed
them in a pitched battle, burnt their fleet, and laid their territory waste.
But the Sicilian forces were men of no principle; murder, and riot ensued upon
the victory. They murdered the friends and children of their king; he escaped
to Sicily, and there met a death which his crimes deserved.

Pyrrhus, king of Epirus, now took the lead, reduced all parties to obedience;
but, making Sicily feel the weight of his hand, the Sicilians soon drove him
out. At this time, a crew of miscreant Romans took Messina, slaughtered the
inhabitants; eslablished a republic there, and became troublesome to Hiero II.
whom the Greeks raised to the chies command at Syracuse. He leagued with
Carthage to turn out the Romans; but, being assisted from Italy, defeated the
Carthaginians, and Hiero became an ally of the republic. This began the first
punic war. For the several dates, see Trusler's Chronology.
Hamilcar Barcas long supported the African cause; but, not succceding to his
wishes, led the Carthaginians to purchase peace of the prince of Sicily. This
did for some time; but the vanquished party gaining strength, Hannibal,
Hamilcar's son, persuaded them to renew the combat; and for sixteen years
carried war into the heart of the Roman territories. This was the second punic
war. Hiero, of Syracuse, kept terms with both parties; but, being succeeded by
his grandson Hieronymus, who contracted an alliance with Carthage, he soon fell
a victim to his own folly. Syracuse was now independent; but Marcellus soon
after besieged it, under the advice of Archimedes, and took it.

From this time, Sicily relinquished all martial ideas, for many generations;
the people turned their thoughts to peace and agriculture, till, in 827, the
Saracens subdued the country, and chose Palermo for their capital, and the
standard of Mahomet triumphed for about two hundred years.

In 1038, George Maniaces was sent with great force, by the Greek empire, to
attack Sicily. He did this, in conjunction with some Norman troops, whom he
took into pay, and succeeded. Robert and Roger, Normans of Hauteville,
afterward conquered Sicily on their own account. After a ten years struggle,
the Saracens yielded it up in 1072, and Robert ceded it to his brother Roger,
who assumed the title of Great JOHN of PROCIDA
Earl of Sicily. He was succeeded by Simon, his eldest son, and Simon by Roger,
in 1127, who called himself king. Hence the kingdom descended, from son to son,
till the reign of William III. who was vanquished by Henry of Swabia. Thus, it
continued with the Germans, till after the battle of Benevento, when it
submitted to Charles of Anjou; and, for several years, obeyed him;
notwithstanding the wanton cruelty with which they were treated. But, a day of
retribution came at last; Sicily had been revenged, for twelve years, by as
many tyrants, as it contained Frenchmen; no redress could be obtained, nor hope
left of future indulgence. Their best appeal, therefore, was a dagger. John of
Procida, with the connivance of the Greek emperor, and the king of Arragon,
son-in-law to Manfred, who had been king of Sicily, encouraged the growing
ferment; and, on Easter-Monday, 1282, at the Vesper-bell, the people of Palermo
rose, and slew every Frenchman they could find; man, woman, and child. Their
example was followed by the whole island; not a French person was left living.
No pardon could be expected from Charles. The insurgents, therefore, offered
the crown to Peter I. king of Arragon, who defended, and kept it. In his family
it continued till 1469, when the line of Arragon becoming extinct, it fell to
Ferdinand I. of Castile. With this family it continued, till the death of John,
king of Navarre; and, at the peace of Utrecht, it was ceded to Victor, duke of
Savoy.

Not many years afterward, the emperor Charles VI. forced him to relinquish
Sicily, and take that of Sardinia in lieu of it: but, as the Spaniards had no
concern in these bargains, they made a sudden attempt to recover Sicily; in
this they failed, owing to the vigilance of the English admiral, Byng, who
destroyed their fleet in 1718.

In 1734, the Spaniards resumed their design with success. The infant, Don
Carlos, drove the Germans out, and was crowned king of the two Sicilies, at
Palermo: this kingdom being ceded to him, on condition it was never united to
Spain. When he took the crown of Spain in 1759, he transferred that of Sicily
to his second son, Ferdinand the Third of Sicily, and Fourth of Naples; his
eldest son being an idiot, and established the succession to the heirs male of
Ferdinand, and his younger brother; and, in default of male issue, to the
females.

CHAP. III. Of Mount Aetna.
THE principal mountain is Aetna; a volcano, that appears at sea, when first
discovered, as a prodigious chimney, or a very large rugged pillar. The
perpendicular height, to the the top, is between two and three miles; some have
imagined it more, and some rather less.

The whole mountain is divided into three distinct regions; the fertile, the
woody, and the barren. These three are as different, both in climate and
productions, as the three zones of the earth. The fertile region surrounds the
foot of the mountain, and is rich in the extreme, to the extent of about
fourteen or fifteen miles, where the woody region begins; being composed almost
entirely of lava; which, after a number of ages, is, at last, converted into
the most fertile of soils. From Catania, to Nicolesi, twelve miles up the
mountain; though its perpendicular elevation is not, probably, more than three
thousand feet; the climate, says Brydone, who ascended it in 1770, was totally
changed. It was at the latter end of the month of May; and, at Catania, the
harvest was entirely over, and the heats insupportable. Here they were more
moderate; and, in many places, the corn is as yet green. The road up was very
bad, over old lavas, and mouths of extintinguished volcanoes, now converted
into cornfieldsd, vineyards, and orchards. The fruit of this region is reckoned
the finest in Sicily, particularly the figs.

The lavas, forming this region of the mountain, have thrown up an infinite
number of beautiful little mountains; every where scattered on the immense
declivity of Aetna, all of a regular figure, and almost covered with beautiful
trees, and the richest verdure. Each of these mountains has been transformed by
one irruption, and, perhaps, in the course of a few days; in the irruption of
1669, the stones and ashes, thrown out for months, formed a mountain of a great
size, seven or eight miles round, and a thousand feet in perpendicular height;
other mountains are not above three or four miles round, and three or four
hundred feet high.

The progress of an irruption is as follows. The mountain, after shaking for
vent, bursts open, somewhere in its side. At first, it only sends forth thick
smoke, and showers of ashes, that lays waste the adjacent country. These are
soon followed by red-hot stones, and rocks of a great size, thrown to an
immense height in the air. The fall of these stones, with the ashes, form the
mountains mentioned. After the new mountain is formed, the lava generally
bursts out, from its lower side, and braving every thing before it, is
generally terminated by the sea. It sometimes happens, though rarely, that the
lava bursts out at once, from the side of the mountain, without all these
attendant circumstances, as is the case with Vesuvius; where, the elevation
being so much smaller, the melted matter is generally carried up into the
crater of the mountain, discharging showers of stones and ashes from the mouth;
without forming any new mountain, only adding considerably to the old one. At
last, the lava, rising near the summit, bursts the sides of the crater, and
runs down in an ocean of liquid fire. Aetna, being on a much larger scale, one
crater is not enough to give its lava vent.

Brydone was well assured, by a person of credit, that he saw, in an irruption
of Aetna, large rocks of fire discharged to the height of some thousand feet,
with a noise more terrible than that of thunder. This person took notice, that
from their greatest height of these rocks of fire, till they reached the
ground, it was twenty-one seconds of time; which, according to philosophic
measurement, must have been upwards of seven thousand feet.

We cannot pretend to follow Mr. Brydone, through all his description of this
mountain. Those who wish for more information must have recourse to his tour
through Sicily and Malta; but we will mention some of the most curious
particularities. The country of Hybla, celebrated for its honey, was
overwhelmed by an irruption; it was called Mel Passi; but, when overwhelmed,
became barren, and was called Mal Passi. In a second irruption, by a shower of
ashes on it, it was again rendered fertile, and its name was then changed to
Bell Passi; but, in the great volcanic irruption of 1669, it was laid under an
ocean of fire, and reduced to the utmost state of barrenness, and has since
been called Mal Passi. The lava, however, in its course over this beautiful
country, has left several little islands, or hillocks, uncovered; just enough
to show what it formerly was. These make a singular appearance, in all the
bloom of luxuriant vegetation, surrounded, and rendered almost inaccessible, by
large fields of black and rugged lava, that issued from a mountain not more
than three hundred feet high, first formed itself by an irruption of Aetna.

Massa says, that in some irruptions of Aetna, the lava has poured down with
such a sudden impetuosity; that, in the course of a few hours, churches,
palaces, and villages, have been melted down, and the whole run off in fusion,
without leaving the least mark of their former existence: for, these churches
and villages having been built with lava, it is the property of such matter, to
melt down instantly, on being overrun with other melted lava, and thus mingle
in the general fusion.

The great irruption of 1669, after shaking the whole country round for four
months, and forming a very large mountain of stones and ashes, burst out about
a mile above the mountain Montpeliere, then below it; and, descending like a
torrent, bore directly against the middle of that mountain; and, as they
pretend, perforated it from side to side: however, it is certain, it pierced it
very deep. It then divided into two branches; and, surrounding this mountain,
joined again on its south side, laying waste the whole country, between that
and Catania; scaled the walls of that city, and poured its flaming torrent into
the ocean. In its way, it is said to have destroyed the possessions of thirty
thousand people, and reduced them to beggary; it formed several hills, where
valleys were before, and filled up a large lake. Among other singular
circumstances, says Brydone, the following is well ascertained.

A vineyard, belonging to a convent of jesuits, lay directly in its way. This
vineyard was formed on an ancient lava, probably a thin one, with a number of
caverns and crevices under it; the liquid lava entering into these caverns,
soon filled them up; and, by degrees, tore up the vineyard; and the jesuits,
who every moment expected to see it buried, beheld, with amasement, the whole
field begin to move off. It was carried, on the surface of the lava, to a
considerable distance: though the greatest part was destroyed, yet some of it
remains to this day.

There is a great wildness, ferocity, and credulity, in the inhabitants of this
mountain; they conceive the crater of Aetna, to be the mouth of hell. They,
thinking, says Brydone, that we were come to look for hidden treasures, flocked
round me, and watched every bit of stone I took up; seemed to entertain a bad
opinion of the English, considering them as heretics, deserving of damnation;
and gave me to understand, that the English had a queen, Anne Boleyn, who was
wife to a Christian King; that she made a heretic of him, and was, in
consequence, condemned to burn for ever in Mount Aetna. I asked them, if her
husband was there too, for he deserved it much better than she. Sicuro said,
they are safe enough, and all his heretic subjects; and, if you are of that
number, you need not be in such a hurry to get there; you will be sure of it at
last.

On leaving Nicolesi, and in an hour and a half traveling over barren ashes
and lava, we arrived on the confines of the woody region, or temperate zone. As
soon as we entered these delightful forests, we seemed got into another world.
The air, which was before sultry and hot, was now cool and refreshing, and
every breeze was loaded with a thousand perfumes; the whole ground being
covered with the richest aromatic plants. Many parts of this region are,
surely, the most heavenly spots upon earth; and, if Aetna resembles hell, it
may, with equal justice, be said to resemble paradise without.

It is, indeed, a curious consideration, that this mountain should reunite
every beauty, and every horror; but, our astonishment increases, in casting our
eyes on its higher regions. There we behold in perpetual union, the two
elements that are at continual war, an immense gulf of fire, for ever existing
in the midst of snows, which it has not power to melt; and immense fields of
snow and ice, for ever surrounding this gulf of fire, which they have not
power to extinguish.

The woody region ascends for about eight or nine miles, forming a girdle of
the brightest green all round the mountain. Brydone, and his company, in the
course of one night, got about half through, and reached, before sunset, a
large cave; where they lodged. It was surrounded with stately and majestic
oaks; they kindled a fire, and made comfortable beds of the dried leaves. The
thermometer, which was at 71, at Nicolesi, now fell below 60. The barometer
stood at 24. 2.

Not a great way from this cavern, are two of the most beautiful mountains that
spring from Aetna. I mounted a mule, and rode to the top of one of them, a
little before sunset. The prospect of Sicily, with the surrounding sea, and
its islands, was wonderfully noble.

The next day we scrambled, on foot, seven miles, over the barren regions, or
frigid zone, till we reached, a little before break of day, the ruins of an
ancient structure, called the philosopher's tower; supposed to have been built
by the philosopher Empedocles, who took up his habitation here, the better to
study the nature of the mountain. The mercury here fell to 20. 6. we had now
time, says Brydone, to pay our adorations, in silent contemplation of the
sublime objects of nature. The sky was clear, and the immense vault of the
heavens, appeared in awful majesty and splendour. We found ourselves more struck
with veneration than below; the number of stars seeming to be infinitely
increased, and the light of each appeared brighter than usual; the whiteness of
the milky way was like a pure flame, that shot across the heavens; and, with
the naked eye, we could discern clusters of stars, invisible in the regions
below. We were amazed at the distinctness of vision, not recollecting that we
had now passed through ten or twelve thousand feet of gross vapor, that blunts
and confuses every ray, before it reaches the surface of the earth. We took
notice of several of these meteors, called falling stars; which seemed as much
above, as they do when standing on the earth below.

In about an hour's climbing, we reached a place where there was no snow; and
where a warm, and comfortable vapor issued from the mountain, which induced us
to halt. The mercury here was at 19. 6. The thermometer three degrees below the
freezing point; and, before we left the summit of Aetna, it fell two degrees
more, to 27. From that spot, it was only about three hundred yards to the
highest summit; where we arrived in full time, to see the most wonderful, and
most sublime sight in nature.

Description must ever fall short; for no imagination has dared to form an
idea, of so glorious, and so magnificent a scene; nor is there on the surface
of the globe, any one point, that unites so many awful and sublime objects. --
The immense elevation, from the surface of the earth; drawn, as it were, to a
single point, without any neighboring mountain, for the senses and imagination
to rest on, and recover from their astonishment, in their way down to the
world: this point, or pinnacle, raised on the point of a bottomless gulf, as
old as the world; often discharging rivers of fire, and throwing out burning
rocks, with a noise that shakes the whole island. Add to this, the unbounded
extent of the prospect, comprehending the greatest diversity, and most
beautiful scenery in nature; with the rising sun, advancing in the East, to
illumine the wondrous scene.

The whole atmosphere, by degrees, kindle up, and show, dimly and faintly, the
boundless prospect round. Both sea and land look dark and confused, as if only
emerging from their original chaos; and light and darkness seem still
undivided; till the morning, advancing by degrees, completes the separation.
The stars are extinguished, and the shades disappear. The forests, which till
now, seemed black and bottomless gulphs; from whence no ray was reflected, to
show their form or colors, appear a new creation, rising to the sight,
catching life and beauty from every increasing beam. The scene still enlarges,
and the horizon widens and expands around; till the sun, like the Creator,
appears in the East; and, with his plastic ray, completes the mighty scene. --
All appears enchantment, and it is with difficulty we can believe that we are
still on earth. The senses, unaccustomed to the sublimity of such a scene, are
bewildered and confounded; and it is not till after some time, they are capable
of separating and judging of the objects that compose it. The body of the sun
is seen rising from the ocean; immense tracks, both of sea and land,
intervening. The islands of Lipari, Panari, Alicudi, Strombolo and Volcano,
with their smoking summits, appear under your feet; and you look down on the
whole of Sicily as on a map, and can trace every river, through all its
windings, from its source to its mouth. The view is absolutely boundless on
every side; nor is there one object within the circle of vision to interrupt
it, so that the sight is every where best in the immensity; and I am persuaded,
continues Brydone, it is only from the imperfection of our organs, that the
coasts of Africa are not discovered; as they are certainly above the horizon.
Could the eye see so far, the distance of two thousand miles would be
discoverable, from the top of Aetna. At Malta, which is near two hundred miles,
they perceived the irruptions from the second region of Aetna; and that island
is often discovered when we are halfway up the mountain. Massa, a Sicilian
writer, says, that the African coast, as well as that of Naples, with many of
its islands, have been seen from the top of Aetna.

The circumference of the great circle of Aetna, that is, of the woody part
that surrounds it, is not less than seventy or eighty miles; and the
circumference of the mountain at bottom, according to Recupero, is an hundred
and eighty-three miles.

The present crater, at the top of this immense volcano, is a circle of about
three miles and a half. It goes shelving down on each side, and forms a regular
hollow, like a vast amphitheatre. From many places, of this space, issue
volumes of sulphurous smoke; and, immediately on clearing the crater, rolls
down the mountain side like a torrent; till reaching that part of the
atmosphere, of equal gravity with itself, it shoots off horizontally, and forms
a large track in the air, according to the direction of the wind. We did not
attempt to go down into the crater; in the center of which is the great mouth
of the volcano. We looked down, and beheld it with awe and horror, and were not
surprised, it had been considered as the place of the damned. When we reflect
on the immensity of its depth, the vast cells and caverns, whence so many lava
have issued; the force of its internal fire, to carry up these lavas so high
into the air, with all the dreadful accompaniments; the boiling of the matter,
the shaking of the mountain, the explosions of the flaming rocks, etc. we must
allow, that the most enthusiastic imagination, in the midst of all its terrors,
hardly ever formed an idea of a hell more dreadful.

Empedocles was a native of Agrigentum, and is supposed to have died four
hundred years before the Christian era. Perhaps his vanity, more than his
philosophy, led him to have erected the philosopher's tower; nay, it is said to
have carried him still farther; that he might be considered as a god, and that
the people might suppose he was taken up to heaven, he is recorded to have
thrown himself headlong into the great gulf of Mount Aetna, never supposing
his death could be discovered to mankind; but the treacherous mountain threw
out his slippers, which were of brass, and announced to the world the fate of
this philosopher.

We left the summit of the mountain at six in the morning, and it was eight at
night before we reached Catania. On first entering the forests, the trees were
still as bare as in December; but, after we had descended a few miles, we found
ourselves in the mildest, and sofest of climates; the trees in full verdure,
and the fields covered with all the flowers of summer; but, as soon as we got
out of the woods, and entered the torrid zone below them, we found the heat
insupportable, and suffered dreadfully before we reached the city.

The productions of the island are numberless, some of which I shall mention by
and by; but Aetna alone affords a greater variety, than many of the most
extensive kingdoms; and is, not less an epitome of the whole earth, in its soil
and climate, than in the variety of its productions. Besides the corn, the
wine, the oil, the silk, the spice, the delicious fruits of its lower region;
the beautiful forests, the flocks, the game, the tar, the cork, the honey, of
its second; the snow and ice of its third; it affords, from its caverns, a
variety of minerals, as cinnabar, mercury, sulphur, alum, nitre, and vitriol;
so that this wonderful mountain produces every necessary, and every luxury of
life.

We are not then to be surprised at the obstinate attachment of the people to
this mountain; and that all its terrors have not been able to drive them away
from him; for, though he sometimes chastises, he mixes such blessings with his
chastisements, that their affections can never be estranged; for, at the same
time, that he threatens with a rod of iron, he pours down upon them all the
blessings of the ape of gold.

Swinburne describes the remarkable large chesnut-tree, in the first region of
Aetna, called, from its astonishing size, Castagno di cento cavalli, as
supposing it capable of sheltering a hundred horse under the canopy of its
boughs. It stands single, on a gentle rising; the ground round it, an open
pasture. Its height has been diminished, by cutting the tops of its branches,
to increase its bearing. It appears to be a group of trees; but is, in fact, an
old trunk split down to the surface of the earth, but united in one body at a
very small depth below. Its circumference, one inch from the ground, is one
hundred and ninety-six English feet. From this trunk rise five divisions; each
of which sends forth enormous branches. The outer surface of these divisions,
or stems, are covered with bark; the inner surface has no bark, and they all
turn toward a common center; a proof that all these stems were once united.
Between two of the stems, two coaches may drive abreast; and, in the center of
the five is built a hut, where the fruit of the tree is deposited. It is a
wonderful production of the vegetable kingdom.

CHAP IV. Of the Cities, and their Inhabitants, particularly of Messina.
SICILY consists of three provinces, which are called Valleys, and has two
principal cities, Palermo and Messina. Syracuse was anciently the capital, and
a very flourishing republic; but is, at present, extremely reduced by a series
of calamities, especially by the earthquake in 1693. It is an archbishopric;
has a harbor and some fortifications. It was taken by the Spaniards in 1735.
Palermo is now the capital; though Messina claims to be the capital also.

Messina being the first city we approach, in our way from Calabria, we will
speak of Messina first. This city is reckoned about twelve miles from Reggio,
on the coast of Calabria. The harbor is one of the most beautiful ever formed
by nature; on the Northside runs, Westward, a semicircular tongue, or slip of
land; on which stands the light-house, and some salt ponds; on the opposite
side of the harbor stands the city, upon rising ground, on a semicircular
shore; forming together a circular harbor, and something like a horse-shoe;
open to the sea at the West, but commanded by four forts; and, at the upper end
of the harbor, in the center, stands the governor's house, and a pentagon
fortress, called the citadel; behind the city, rise immediately a number of
lofty mountains, well secured, and Aetna as a pinnacle above the whole.

From the palace, now the governor's house, at the foot of these mountains, ran
one of the broadest, cleanest, and finest quays in Europe; ornamented with
statues and fountains, more than a mile in length; with a beautiful range of
regular lofty houses; with nineteen gates, answering to as many streets; it
followed the semicircular bend of the port, quite to the sea, hiding the lower
houses of the city, and showing only the more beautiful, that stand on the rise
of the hill above it. I say ran, for this beautiful pile of buildings was
thrown down in the earthquake of 1783, but is to be rebuilt. The anchorage is
beyond the reach of a cannon-shot from the sea, and there is two hundred fathom
water. The harbor, in short, is so deep, close to the quay, that vessels of
the greatest tonnage can unload upon it; and the harbor is large enough to
contain all the ships of Europe. Messina has been declared a free port since
1728.

The inner part of Messina is dirty, says Swinburne, though it contains a great
number of churches, and large substantial dwellings. De Non says, there are
handsome streets, beautiful squares, elegant marble fountains, equestrian and
pedestrian statues of bronze; large and handsome churches, vast convents, and
well built hotels. He was there in 1778. Swinburne, about the same time. The
population, says De Non, formerly corresponded with the appearance of the city;
but the plague of 1743 or 1744, reduced it from one hundred thousand souls, to
thirty thousand. Messina could never recover this loss; and, of course, the
remote parts of the city are deserted. The cathedral is Gothic, and enriched
with Saracenic mosaics on the altars and shrines. In the treasury of the church
is preserved, the Palladium of Messina. This is a letter from the Virgin Mary
to its citizens, in latin the purport of which is, "An acknowledgment from her,
that her son is the son of God; in his nature, both God and man; and that,
after his resurrection, he ascended into heaven; and that Paul was an apostle,
chosen to preach the way of truth; dated in the year of Christ, forty-two." The
story is as follows: After St. Paul had made some stay at Messina, the
Messinese prevailed on him to return to Jerusalem, with an embassy of four
persons, sent by the city to the Virgin Mary. Their excellencies, says
Swinburne, were graciously received by her; and brought back a letter, written
by her own hand, in the Hebrew tongue, which St. Paul translated into Greek. By
the irruption of the Saracens, this invaluable treasure was lost, and utterly
forgotten, till the year 1467; when Constantine Lascaris, a refugee Greek,
found a copy of it; and, turning it into Latin, made it known to the citizens,
and then to all the Catholic world; and its authenticity is so well established
at Messina, that whoever confesses a doubt on the subject, is considered as an
infidel.

In the dates to this curious letter, says Swinburne, for there are more than
one, there are some astronomical blunders; and Lascaris having annexed the
date, Anno Christi 42, was not aware, that Denis the Little, a Syrian monk, in
the sixth century, was the first that made use of the era, that commences at
our Savior's birth.

This favored letter, is that on which the Messinese built their pretensions
to pre-eminence, over the whole world; to its virtues and patronage they
attribute every piece of good fortune, and to their own unworthiness all
sinister events that have befallen them.

Brydone says, the number of galleys and galliots, in this harbor, adds
greatly to its beauty. They are commissioned to cruize round the island, in
order to protect it from the sudden invasions of the Barbarians, who are often
very troublesome on the South coast. These vessels, when sailing out of the
harbor, make a very picturesque appearance; their oars rowing all together,
and with the greatest regularity. There are nine or ten men to each oar. Rowing
seems the hardest work imaginable, for they all rise at every stroke of the
oar; and when they pull, they almost throw themselves on their backs, and seem
to exert their utmost force. These galley-slaves are chained to their oars, and
sleep every night on the bare benches, without any thing to throw over them.

On the 20th of May is celebrated a great festival here, in honor of St.
Francis. The Saint is carried in procession, with vast ceremony, to the top of
a hill, without the city; and receives there the homage of the people with
becoming dignity. After this, he is lodged again in his chapel, and the people
dance and make merry till sunset. The assembly-room was one fine green plain
on the top of this hill, and a range of two thousand small cannon were fired,
so quick after each other, by a train of running fire, that the ear could not
separate the reports; their echo among the mountains, prolonged the sound, and
had a fine effect.

The view, from the top of this, is beautiful beyond description. The
streights, between Sicily and Italy, appear like a vast majestic river, flowing
slowly betwixt two ridges of mountains; its banks adorned with rich
cornfieldsd, vineyards, orchards, towns, villages, and churches; and the
prospect terminated on each side, by the tops of high mountains covered with
wood.

The lark-spur, Venus' look-glass, hawks-weed, and very fine lupins, grow wild
over all the mountains round Messina; also a variety of flowering shrubs. All
the fields are covered with the richest white clover, intermixed with a variety
of aromatic plants, which perfume the air, and render their walks delightful.
There are many fine shady walks on all sides of Messina. The houses are large,
and most of the articles of life cheap, and in plenty, particularly fish; which
is reckoned better here, than any where else in the Mediterranean. Hire of
lodging is next to nothing. Almost half that noble range of buildings, on the
quay, was absolutely uninhabited, even before the last earthquake; so that the
owners are glad to get tenants on any terms; of course, all things considered,
Brydone is of opinion, it is a place admirably calculated for valetudinarians,
who search a warm climate. Even their winter-season is preferable to that of
Naples; and it has many advantages over Naples. They have, indeed, heavy rains
sometimes, for two or three weeks, but they never last longer; for even in
these, there are some fair hours every day; and the soil being a light gravel,
the rain is no sooner over, than the walks are dry.

CHAP. V. Of Palermo and its Environs.
PALERMO is the capital of Sicily, and the residence of the viceroy; well
fortified, with a harbor, the entrance to which is defended by two strong
citidels. It carries on a brisk trade, and is said to contain upwards of twenty
thousand inhabitants. It is an archbishopric, united with Monte Reale; has a
university, fifty-two convents, twenty-two nunneries, and is the usual abode of
many princes, and others of the chief nobility. The city is divided into four
divisions; in the first is the royal palace, where the viceroy resides, and the
parliament holds its meetings, and a large hospital; in the second, the
cathedral, called in Italy, La Matrice; in the third, the town house, a
handsome edifice; and in the fourth, a Dominican church, and several other fine
buildings. This city suffered much in the earthquakes of 1693 and 1726.

The more we see of Palermo, says De Non, and the more minutely it is examined,
the more we shall be sensible of its beauty; handsome streets, large and
beautiful squares, public fountains, and private ones, even on the fourth story
of every house; superb churches, and delightful walks; a good air, a vast
population, with a cleanliness not to be found in any other city of the
kingdom; a tolerable extensive commerce, though not a twelfth part of what it
might be; a great number of houses, at once rich, noble, and triumphant; a warm
climate, lively passions, pleasing women, and the luxury of the Sybaerites, are
all found there.

Palermo, the capital of Sicily, washed by the Tyrrhenian sea, says Bisani, is
situated at the foot of a chain of mountains, which forms a kind of
amphitheatre, and supplies it with plenty of clear, pure, and healthy water.
Though, apparently a small city, viewed from without, it is a large, fine,
place; six miles in circumference. Two large streets, more than a mile long,
cross each other in right angles, and divide it into four parts, corresponding
to four principal gates. These streets are well paved, and have a broad
pavement for foot passengers; fine buildings, and well lighted at night. The
central place, where the great streets cross each other, forming a fine
octagon, is called Piazza Villena; each side of which exhibits a reunion of
the three orders of architecture, Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian; three statues
and a fountain. there is not such a coup d'oeil, in any other city in Europe.
The lesser streets run parallel to these great ones.

The places, the statues, the obelisks, the fountains, are not the most
remarkable objects here. Besides the fountain De Preteur, which, for the beauty
of its marble, its design, the great number of animals, monsters, and statues,
of which it is composed; its circumference of five hundred and fifteen feet,
and the disposition of its balustrades, is allowed by connoisseurs, as a chef
d'oeuvre of art; the churches are enriched with fine marbles, and alabaster,
peculiar to this island; porphyry, precious stones, and a profusion of gold and
silver vessels. Some of them boast of excellent architecture; and, in many, are
pictures of the best Italian masters. As the climate inspires indolence and
devotion, here are no less than eighty convents of monks and nuns; which are
very humane and charitable. Here are about seven hospitals, and a general
asylum for the poor.

One of the city gates opens to the marino, a delightful walk, which
constitutes one of the great pleasures of the nobility of Palermo. It is
bounded, on one side, by the city-wall; and, on the other, by the sea; from
whence there is always an agreeable breeze. In the center of the marino, they
have erected a kind of temple, as an orchestra for music; and, in the summer
seasons, they are obliged to convert the night into day; the concert does not
begin till midnight. At that time, the walk is crowded with carriages, and
people on foot; and, the better to favor pleasure and intrigue, there is an
order, that no person shall carry a light with him. The flambeaux are put out
at the city-gate, where the servants wait for the return of the carriages; and
the company generally continue an hour or two in utter darkness; except when
the intruding moon, says Brydone, with her horns and her chastity, comes to
disturb them. The concert ends about two in the morning; when, for the most
part, every husband goes home to his own wife. This is an admirable
institution, and never produces any scandal. No husband is such a brute as to
deny his wife the marino; and the ladies are so cautious and circumspect, on
their side, that, the more to avoid giving offense, they very often put on
masks.

In this hallowed walk, says De Non, the most mysterious obscurity, and most
rigorously respected, reigns. The whole company is intermingled without
distinction. They seek for and find each other; supper parties are formed, and
carried snugly into execution; and upon the spot, at taverns, built along the
walls of the rampart.

Thus do the inhabitants of Palermo vary the order of nature, and preserve
themselves from feeling, and almost from recollecting the heat of their
climate. They rise, says De Non, at noon, when the sea-breeze, which springs up
at ten, has tempered the heat; they then repair either for business or
pleasure, to the Cassaro, a large, and superb street, which crosses the whole
city, from North to South. The prodigious population of Palermo, which is about
110,000 persons; is as great in proportion as that of Naples, and is here
particularly discovered. The number of carriages is truly astonishing; for
these are so much in fashion at Palermo, that a coach is become a matter of
absolute necessity. There are no hackney-coaches; those let out for hire, as
well as those of the nobility, are antique, inconvenient vehicles, drawn by
mules. In summer, their carriages are more elegant.

The nobility parade in the Cassaro, till three in the afternoon; they then
dine; thence they go to the Marino, where a band of music awaits them two hours
before night. From hence they pass to the Conversaziones; or the opera, which
is the only public entertainment, beginning an hour before night, and ending as
do the Conversaziones, at midnight, or one in the morning; when they return to
the Marino, the constantly recurring amusement of the Palermian day. This
diurnal round of pleasure is interrupted, only by the Carnival; which changes
the order of enjoyments, only to render them more lively, by the two seasons
for the country, which are May and October; and by the festival of Saint
Rosalia, which exhibits the most splendid, and most agreeable enthusiasm of
devotion, and which I shall speak of in its course.

There are a variety of conversaziones every night. There is one general one,
supported by the subscription of the nobility; open every evening at sun set,
and continuing till midnight, when the marino begins. At these meetings, the
company merely converse; few play at cards, and these not long. At this
assembly there are a number of apartments, lighted with wax-lights, and kept
exceeding cool and agreeable. The private conversaziones are always held, says
Brydone, in the apartments of lying-in ladies; from this happy climate,
childbearing is divested of all its terror, and is only considered as a party
of pleasure. Brydone went to one of these, that of princess Palerno, the
evening she was brought to bed. The princess sat up in her bed, in an elegant
undress, with a number of her friends about her; she talked as usual, and
seemed perfectly well. The conversation is repeated every night, during her
convalescence, which generally lasts-eleven or twelve days. This custom is
universal; and, as the ladies here are very prolific, three or four of these
meetings occur every night; possibly the Marino may not a little contribute
toward them.

Mr. Brydone spoke so free of the ladies of fashion at Palermo, and his tour to
Sicily, being translated into French, and spreading to Palermo, the nobility
have determined never to pay any attention to letters of recommendation, in
favor of the English, nor receive them on their travels. In consequence of
this, Swinburne, who followed Brydone, says, he could not obtain access into
any family.

The Sicilian ladies, says Brydone, marry at thirteen, or fourteen; and are,
sometimes, grandmothers before thirty. I was presented, by count Stetela, to
the princess Partana, who had twelze children, the eldest of whom was a fine
girl of fifteen. I talked to the princess, continues he, for half an hour, and
concluded I was speaking to her daughter; and, when the young lady entered, it
was not easy to say which was youngest, or which was handsomest. The princess
assured me, she never enjoyed more perfect health than when in childbed; that,
during her pregnancy, she was often indisposed; but that, immediately on
delivery, she was cured of all complaints, and was capable of enjoying the
company of her friends, even more than at any other time. When I told her that
the English ladies often died in childbed, and that the most easy deliveries
were attended with violent pain and anguish; she lamented their fate, and
thanked heaven she was born a Sicilian.

Their ease, in childbirth, is owing to the climate, which relaxes the frame.
Among the cold Alps, half their women die in labor; and those who can afford
it, often go dawn to the low countries, some weeks before they lie-in, and find
their deliveries much easier.

Swinburne went out to sea, purposely to view Palermo from it; and says, its
extensive bay is confined by a circle of mountains, of various elevations and
forms; and the steeples, cupolas, and towers of the city, rise on the plain
that extends from their foot, and line the shore.

Palermo is walled round, almost in a circular form, and the principal streets
are so decorated with statues, fountains, and buildings, as to present the idea
of a royal city. Most of the other streets are narrow and crooked; and, being
wretchedly paved, are buried in dirt during the winter. The city is well
lighted, with reverberating lamps; and, in wet weather, moveable wooden bridges
are provided for crossing the kennels, which then become rapid torrents.

The cathedral was built in 1185, and is in a very ruinous condition. It is a
Gothic edifice, but heavy, and void of all the chaste proportions of the
Grecian art. It contains several tombs of sovereigns; and, at the foot of the
altar, rests the heroic earl Roger, conqueror of Sicily, and terror of infidels.

Most of the churches are rich, in silver, gems, and marble; but their
architecture, and embellishments, horrid. In several, the walls within are
lined with red, or yellow marble; upon which, from the cieling to the floor,
are glued basso relievo figures of angels, busts, and flowers in white marble.

The palace, which stands near the small gate, is an immense mass of discordant
parts, built at different periods. The halls are of noble size, the courts of
justice are held on a ground floor, and batteries of cannon defend the approach.

The assemblies, at the viceroy's palaces, says Swinburne, gave me an
opportunity of seeing the whole corpse of nobility collected together. The men
are rather a comely race; but the ladies are little favored by nature. Two
girls, under eight years of age, heiresses of great families, and already
betrothed, made their appearance in the ball-room, decked out in the very
excess of the mode; their showy dresses, their diminutive size, and affected
gravity, in dancing a minuet; joined to the fatherly care, their future
husbands anxiously took of them, reminded me of dolls made to move round a
table by clock-work.

In the streets women hide their heads, in black veils; a very ancient mode of
dress in this island, and very lately introduced at Naples, and there become
fashionable.

The viceroy, like the viceroy of Ireland, affects in every thing the pageantry
of royalty. His train of coaches are as splendid; a strong, well-dressed body
of guards attends his person; and, on parade days, his coachmen, postillions,
and livery-servants, are dressed in flowing wigs, without hats. When he goes to
church, he receives the tribute of a cloud of incense; and he, alone, with
great solemnity, puts on his hat. On the 21st of December, he makes an annual
visit to the jails, where he pardons as many prisoners as he pleases. All law
is that day dormant; and, although the magistrates have a right to remonstrate,
he is under no obligation to follow their advice; but, the viceroys are very
cautious not to abuse this privilege. If they pardon, it is on a report from
the judges.

The Sicilians, says Brydone, appear frank and sincere; and their politeness
does not consist in show and grimace, like some of the polite nations of the
continent. The viceroy sets the pattern of hospitality, and he is followed by
the rest of the nobles. Notwithstanding his great authority, he is affable and
familiar, and makes his house agreeable to every body. His table is served with
elegance and magnificence, much superior to that of his Sicilian majesty; who
eats off a service of plate, at least, three hundred years old, very black and
rusty, as if it had been dug out of Herculaneum.

Sicilian cookery is a mixture of French and Spanish; the olio still preserves
its rank and dignity, in the center of the table, surrounded by a numerous
train of fricasees, fricandeaus, ragouts, and pet de loups, like a grave
Spanish don, amid a number of little smart marquisses. All the nobility, are
magnificent in their entertainments; particularly in their deserts and ices; of
which there is a greater variety than in most countries. They are very
temperate in their wines; but, having learnt from the English the method of
hob-a-nobbing, and toasting ladies, they are more free in drinking than they
used to be; and say, the English have made them drunkards. In their ordinary
living, they are very frugal and temperate.

Brydone dined with the bishop of Agrigentum, the richest bishop in the
kingdom; thirty were at table, and there were not less than a hundred dishes,
dressed with the richest and most delicate sauces. By a modern refinement in
luxury, they contrive to make the livers of their fowls, grow to a large size,
and acquire a rich and high flavor; it is a cruel mode, which occasions
lingering death to the poor animal; and it is, therefore, best not to mention
it. In their deserts, besides a variety of fruit, they introduce a profusion of
ices, in the shape of peaches, figs, oranges, nuts, etc. The company were
chiefly priests, but were very fond of punch, which they persuaded Mr. Brydone
and his friend to make; called it Pontio; and spoke loudly in its praise;
declaring Pontio, alluding to Pontius Pilate, was a much better fellow than
they had ever taken him for. One of the canons growing sick, with drinking too
much of it, and vomiting, exclaimed, shaking his head and groaning, Ah signior
Capitano, sapeva sempre che Pontio era un grande traditore. "I always knew that
Pontius was a great traitor." Their conversation ran on the pleasures of the
world; they said they were a happy fraternity; had long exploded every thing
that is dismal and melancholy; and were convinced, a cheerful life on earth was
the best preparation for happiness hereafter; that abstinence, from lawful
pleasures, was a sin.

For God is paid when man receives:
To Enjoy is to obey.
The Sicilians, continues Brydone, have always had the character of being very
amorous, and surely not without reason. The whole nation are poets; even the
peasants; and a man stands a poor chance of a mistress, that cannot celebrate
her muses. Gallantry, here, is much on the same footing as in Italy. The
establishment of cicisbeos is also pretty general, though not quite so
universal as on the continent. A breach, however, of the married vow, is not
looked upon as a deadly sin. Husbands are content; and, like able generals,
make up for the loss of one fortress, by taking another. Female licentiousness,
however, has, by no means, come to such a height as in Italy. We saw a great
deal of domestic happiness. Husbands and wives that truly love one another:
sights that are very rare on the continent. Indeed the style that young ladies
are brought up in here, seems to lay a more solid foundation for matrimonial
happiness, than either in France or Italy. The young ladies are not shut up in
convents till the day of their marriage; but live with their parents, and visit
with them, being allowed as much liberty as with us. In their great assemblies,
we often see a number of young people, of both sexes, get together in a corner,
and amuse themselves for hours, at cross-purposes, or such like games, without
the mother being at all uneasy. In general, they are quick and lively, and have
a number of those jeux d'esprit, which is a proof, in all countries, of a
familiar intercourse of the sexes; for all these games are insipid, if they are
not seasoned by something of that invisible and subtle agency, which renders
every thing more interesting, in these mixed societies, than in the lifeless
one, composed of only one sex.

In the gardens, about Palermo, there are a profusion of fine flowers.
Swinburne was here in December, and says, the borders were full of roses, and
other flowers in bloom, and very highly scented; and violets and carnations had
been in flower since October. Many fruit trees, here, bear two crops; they
produce a fruit at the usual season; then bud again, and bear fruit, a second
time, near the middle of September; though the second fruit is not so large and
fine flavoured as the first. The manna-tree yields, annually, about a pound of
manna, worth four hundred tari and a half; the tari equal to the carline of
Naples. These trees never arrive at a great size, owing to their annual
bleedings; but will yield manna for a hundred years. The sugar-cane, on the
Eastern coast of Valdinote, grows to a fine size, and is very juicy; thrives
almost without care; has heat and mixture enough; and neither hurricanes nor
insects to destroy them, but, hands are scarce, and labor dear; and, of
course, not much is done in it.

There are two small countries, one to the East, the other to the West of
Palermo, where the principal nobility have their county palaces. I shall only
speak of one; which, for all its singularity, is certainly not to be
parallelled on the face of the earth; it belongs to the prince of Patagonia; a
man of immense fortune; who has devoted his whole life, to the study of
monsters and chimaeras; greater, and more ridiculous than ever entered into the
imagination of the wildest writers of romance, or knight-errantry.

The amazing crowd of statues, that surround his house, appear at a distance,
like a little army, drawn up for its defense; but, when you get among them,
says Brydone, you imagine you have got into the regions of delusion and
enchantment; for of all that immense group, there is not one made to represent
any object in nature; nor is the absurdity of the wretched imagination that
created them less astonishing, than its wonderful fertility. He has put the
heads of men, to the bodies of every sort of animal; and the heads of every
other animal, to the bodies of men; sometimes he makes a compound of five or
six animals, that have no resemblance in nature. He puts the head of a lion to
the neck of a goose, the body of a lizard, the legs of a goat, and the tail of
a fox; on the back of this monster he puts another, if possible, still more
hideous, with five or six heads, and a bush of horns, that beat the beast in
the revelations, all to nothing. There is not a horn in the world that he has
not collected; and his pleasure is to see them flourishing on the same head.
This is a strange piece of madness, and is truly unaccountable, that he has not
been shut up many years ago; but, he is perfectly innocent, and troubles no one
by the indulgence of his phrenzy. I have conversed with him, continues Brydone,
and heard him talk speciously enough, on all occasions; and he gives bread to a
number of statuaries and workmen, whom he rewards, in proportion as they can
bring their imaginations to coincide with his own.

To this extraordinary place, says Swinburne, the traveller is admitted through
a large gate; on the plinth of which are fixed, six colossal white-washed
statues of hussars, or halberdiers, to dispute the entrance of an avenue, three
hundred yards long; not of cypresses, elms, or orange trees; but of monsters,
to the number of six hundred. On each side of this avenue is a parapet-wall,
loaded with more horrible figures than were ever raised by Armida, and all the
enchantment of Ariosto. Busts of punchinellos and harlequins, with snakes
twisted round them. Heads of dwarfs, with huge perriwigs; of asses and horses,
with laced cravats, and ruffs, compose the lower range of this gallery; and, at
intervals of an hundred yards, are clustered pillars, supporting curious groups
of figures; some are musicians, others pigmies, opera-heroes, old women
grinning; lions, and other beasts, seated at tables, with napkins under their
chins, eating oysters; princesses with feathers and fur-belows, ostriches in
hoops, and cats in boots.

The old ornaments, in the court that surrounds the palace, that were put up by
his father, who was a man of taste and sense, have been all knocked to pieces,
to make room for this new creation. These monsters, and animals, line the
battlements of the mansion; and stand so thick, and in such menacing attitudes,
as it would not be safe to approach in a windy day. They are all carved out of
very soft stone, that crumbles away, and will not last long. The walls are
cased with basso-relievos, masks, medallions, scriptural subjects, heathen
gods, emperors, and posture-masters; some in a good style, copied from the
antique; but, the greatest part consists of such figures, as we meet with in
Dutch fairs, representing the seasons and elements.

The inside of this enchanted castle, says Brydone, corresponds exactly with
the out; it is, in every respect, as whimsical and fantastical; and, you cannot
turn yourself to any side, where you are not stared in the face by some hideous
figure, or other. Some of the apartments are spacious and magnificent, with
high arched roofs; which, instead of plaster or stucco, are composed entirely
of large mirrors, nicely joined together. The effect that these produce, (as
each of them make a small angle with the other) is exactly a multiplying-glass;
so that, when three or four people are walking below, there is always the
appearance of three or four hundred walking above. The whole of the doors are,
likewise, covered over with small pieces of looking-glass; cut into the most
ridiculous shapes, and intermixed with a great variety of crystal and glass of
different colors. All the chimney-pieces, windows, and side-boards, are
crowded with pyramids and pillars of tea-pots, candle cups, bowls, cups,
saucers, etc. strongly cemented together. Some of these columns are not without
their beauty. One of them has a large china chamberpot for its base, and a
circle of pretty little flower-pots for its capital; the shaft of the column,
upwards of four feet long, is composed entirely of tea-pots, of different
sizes, diminishing gradually from the base to the capital. The profusion of
choice, that has been employed in forming these columns, is incredible. There
are not less than forty of them.

Most of the rooms are paved with fine marble tiles of different colors, that
look like so many tomb-stones; some of these very richly wrought, with lapis
lazuli, porphyry, and other valuable stones. The windows are composed of a
variety of glass, of every color, mixed without order or regularity. The
house-clock is cased in the body a statue; the eyes of the figure moves with
the pendulum, turning up their white and black, alternately, and make a hideous
appearance.

His bedchamber and dressing room are like two apartments of Noah's ark; there
is scarce a beast, however vile, that he has not placed there; birds, pigs,
serpents, lizards, scorpions, all cut in marble, in their respective colors.
There are a good many busts too, not less singularly imagined. Some of these
make a very handsome profile on one side; turn to the other and you have a
skeleton; here you see a nurse with a child in her arms, its back is exactly
that of an infant; its face, that of a wrinkled old woman of ninety.

For some minutes we can laugh at these follies, says Brydone; but indignation
and contempt, soon get the better of your mirth, and the laugh is turned into a
sneer.

The family-statues are charming; they have been done from some old pictures,
and make a most venerable appearance; but, this man has dressed them out, from
head to foot, in new and elegant suits of marble; and the effect it produces,
is more ridiculous than any thing that can be conceived. Their shoes are made
of black marble; their stockings are chiefly of red; their clothes of different
colors, blue, green, and variegated, with a rich lace of Giall'antique. The
wigs of men, and head-dresses of the ladies, are of white marble; so are their
shirts, with long flowing ruffles of alabaster.

These fooleries, says De Non, must create in us a contempt for the owner; who
is, otherwise, a very amiable man. Fortunately, the confusion of the objects
effaces them from the mind, as soon as they are seen, and leaves only an
indistinct idea of this collection; apparently formed without motive, and as
difficult to describe, as disagreeable to behold.

The prince of P. author of this collection, is a poor, miserable, lean figure;
shivering at a breeze, and seems to be afraid of every body he speaks to. He is
one of the richest subjects in the island; and, it is thought, has not laid out
less than twenty thousand pounds, ( Swinburne says, forty thousand pounds, in
the creation of this world of monsters and chimaeras; however, as we have
observed, it gives bread to a number of poor people, to whom he is an excellent
master. His house, at Palermo, is a good deal in the same style; his carriages
are covered with plates of brass, and some of them musket-proof.

Government have had serious thoughts of demolishing the regiment of monsters
he has placed round his house; but, as he is humane and inoffensive, and as
this would certainly break his heart, they have yet forborne. Seeing of them,
it is said, by women with child, has been already attended with very
unfortunate circumstances. Several living monsters have been brought forth in
the neighborhood. The ladies, says Brydone, complain, that they dare not take
an airing that way; that some hideous form always haunts their imagination for
some time after; their husbands too, are as little satisfied with the great
variety of horns.

In the midst of this extravagance of the prince, says Swinburne, his family
has often wanted clothes and victuals. Having run himself out, his relations
have taken upon them the administration of his estate, and he has left the
place. Since he has been debarred the pleasure of raising devils, he has
attached himself to saints, and spends his time in following processions, and
visiting churches. On being asked what part of the globe the originals of the
figures upon his walls, are to be met with; he replied, in Egypt; where
Diodorus Siculus says, the rays of the sun act so powerfully, on the fat slime
left by the Nile, that it engenders all sorts of uncouth, and otherwise,
unknown animals.

CHAP. VI. Of the Festival of Rosolia, at Palermo.
ONE of the most magnificent, and brilliant spectacles in the world, is the
festival held annually at Palermo, on the twelfth of July, and the four
following days, in memory and honor of Saint Rosolia, the patroness of the
city.

Rosolia, or Rosolia, for she is thus differently called, as report goes, was
the daughter of a count Sinibaldus; and, in the twelfth century, to save her
virginity from the brutality of the Saracens, she retired to a cave in Mount
Quisquina, and afterward came to live in Mount Pellegrino, a mountain quite
detached from others, about a mile from the gates of Palermo. It is a tall
rock, without a tree or a shrub, except near the top. Here was her grotto, and
here she died, and remained unknown till in the year 1624. During the time of a
dreadful plague, a holy man had a vision, that the saint's bones were lying in
a cave near the top of this mountain; that, if they were taken up with due
reverence, and carried in procession, thrice round the walls of the city, the
plague would cease; he was listened to by the vulgar, they rose and supported
his cause; and, the magistrates to appease them, sent to Monte Pellegrino; when
Io! the mighty discovery was made; the sacred bones were found. The city was
freed from the plague. Rosalia became the greatest saint in the calendar;
churches were reared, altars were dedicated, and monasteries appointed to this
new divinity; whose dignity and consequence, have ever since been supported at
an incredible expense.

There is a zig-zag road up the side of this mountain, in length, about an
hour's walk, made at the expense of the state; the senate levying a tax upon
meat for the purpose. A convent and portico close up the entrance of a spacious
^avern. A rich altar covers the marble effigy of the saint, represented lying
at full length. It is covered with a silver vest, the gift of the King of Spain.

People of education are very grave here, and despise the wild superstition of
the vulgar; yet, they go to mass regularly, and attend the ordinances with
great respect and decency, and are pleased with us for conforming to their
customs, and for not appearing openly to despise their rites and ceremonies.
This attention of theirs, not to offend weak minds, shows a good heart and
understanding. They boast not of their infidelity; neither do they pester you
with it, as in France; and where, although they pretend to be lawless; they do,
in fact, believe more than any nation on the continent.

A man can have no good principles, who makes a parade of his contempt for
things held sacred; it is an open insult to the judgment of the public. An
Englishman, says Brydone, a few years ago, offended egregiously in this
respect, and the people of Palermo still speak of him with contempt and
detestation. It happened one day, in the great church, during the elevation of
the host, when every one else were on their knees, that this man was standing,
without any appearance of respect to the ceremony; a young nobleman near him
expressed his surprise at it: "It is strange, Sir, (said he) that you who have
had the education of a gentleman, and ought to have the sentiments of one,
should choose thus to give so very public offense." "Why, it is, (said the
Englishman) I don't believe in transubstantiation." -- "Neither do I, Sir,
(replied the other) and yet you see I kneel."

Mr. Brydone was present at the festival of St. Rosalio, and gives us the
following full and entertaining account of it.

The corso is one of the great streets that crosses the city; it is a mile
long, and extends to the maund, or public walk, which continues its length
another mile, along the seaside. The surface of the street is concave; and, of
course, we can see easily from end to end. Some time before the festival, great
preparations are made for illuminating this street, the marino, and the other
great street that crosses the corso. This is done by the erection of pyramids
and arches. They are erected on each side the streets, betwixt the front path
and the pavement, and run in two right lines, exactly parallel from one end to
the other; the four gates, at the end of these cross streets, are also
illuminated; so that, from the square in the center of the city, the whole of
this illumination can be seen at once. The number of pyramids, and arches,
exceed two thousand. Two great theaters are also erected for fireworks; one
fronting the viceroy's palace, and almost equal to it in size; and the other on
piles, driven into the sea, exactly opposite to the great orchestra, in the
center of the marino.

The cathedral too is illuminated, both roof and walls; and within, they are
entirely covered over, on this occasion, with looking-glass, intermixed with
gold and silver paper, and an infinite variety of artificial flowers, all
arranged with great taste and judgment. Every altar, chapel, and column, is
decorated in the same manner. The roof is hung with innumerable lustres filled
with candles; the saints are dressed out in all their glory, and the fairy
queen, herself, was never finer than St. Rosalio.

On the evening of the twelfth of July, at five o'clock, the festival begins. A
triumphal car is drawn, from the middle of the marino, through the center of
the city to its furthest gate; preceded by a troop of horse, with trumpets and
kettle-drums, and all the city-officers in their gala uniforms. The car is an
enormous machine, on wheels, seventy feet long, thirty wide, and more than
eighty high; and, as it passed along, overtopped the loftiest houses of
Palermo. The form of its under part is like that of the Roman galleys, but
smaller as it advances in height. The front assumes an oval shape, like an
amphitheatre, with seats placed in the style of a theater. This is the great
orchestra, filled with a numerous band of musicians, in rows one above another.
Over this orchestra, and a little behind it, there is a large dome, supported
by six large Corinthian columns, and adorned with a number of figures of saints
and angels; and, on the summit of the dome, a gigantic silver statue of
FESTIVAL of ROSALIA.
St. Rosalio. The whole machine is dressed out with orange trees, flower-pots,
and trees of artificial coral. The car stopped every fifty or sixty yards; when
the orchestra performed a piece of music; with songs, in honor of the saint.
It appeared a moving castle, and completely filled the great street, from side
to side. This vast fabric was drawn by fifty-six huge mules, two abreast,
curiously caparisoned, and mounted by twenty-eight postilions, dressed in gold
and silver stuffs, with great plumes of ostrich feathers in their hats. Every
window, and balcony, both sides of the street, were full of well dressed
people; and the car was followed by many thousands of the lower sort. The
triumph was finished in about three hours, and was succeeded by the beautiful
illumination of the marino. ( See the Plate.)

From end to end of the marino, pyramids and arches were erected, as in the
great street; and so entirely were they covered with lamps, that, at a little
distance, they seemed pyramids and arches of flame. The whole chain of this
illumination was about a mile in length, and nothing can be conceived more
splendid; no break, or imperfection any where, nor a single lamp extinguished:
so still was the night.

Opposite to the center, of this great line of light, was a magnificent
pavilion, erected for the viceroy and his company, which consisted of the whole
nobility of Palermo; and, at the entrance of this, at some little distance in
the sea, stood the great fireworks; representing the front of a palace, adorned
with columns, arches, trophies, and every ornament of architecture. All the
xebecs, galleys, galliots, and other shipping, were ranged round this palace,
and formed a kind of amphitheatre in the sea, enclosing it in the center. These
began the show, by a discharge of their artillery; the sound of which reechoed
from the mountains; and, in a still night, produced a very noble effect. A
variety of water-rockets, and bombs of a curious construction, were next played
off, that often burst below water. This continued for half an hour; when, in an
instant, the whole of the palace was beautifully illuminated. This was the
signal for the shipping to cease; and appeared, indeed, like a piece of
enchantment, being done instantaneously, altogether, and without the appearance
of any agent: at the same time, the fountains, that were represented in the
court, before the palace, began to spout out fire, resembling the great Jet
d'eaus of Versailles and Marly. As soon as these were extinguished, the court
of this palace took on the form of a great parterre, embellished with a variety
of palm trees of fire, interspersed with orange trees, flower-pots, vases, and
other ornaments; and the front of it broke out into a variety of suns, stars,
and wheels of fire; which, in a short time, reduced the whole erection to a
perfect ruin. All now seemed over; when, unexpectedly, there burst from the
center of the pile, a vast explosion of two thousand rockets, bombs, serpents,
squibs, and devils; which seemed to fill the whole atmosphere. During this
exhibition, coffee, ices, sweetmeats, and a variety of excellent wines, were
handed round in the pavilion, in the center of the marino. This was at the
expense of the duke of Castellano, the praetor, or mayor of the city. The
principal nobility give these entertainments by turns, every night during the
festival, and vie with each other in magnificence.

The firework being finished, the viceroy went out to sea in a galley, richly
illuminated. Brydone continued on shore, to see the effect. It was rowed by
seventy-two oars; and, he says, made one of the most beautiful objects
imaginable; flying with vast velocity over the waters, then as smooth and as
clear as glass; which shone round it like a flame, and reflected its splendour
on all sides. The oars beat time to the French-horns, clarinets, and trumpets,
of which there was a numerous band in the prow.

The day's entertainment was concluded by the corso; which began exactly at
midnight, and lasted two hours. This great street was illuminated in the same
manner as the marino. The arches and pyramids were erected, at little distances
from each other, on both sides, betwixt the foot-path and the space for
carriages; and, when seen from either of the city gates, at the end of the
street, appeared to be two continued lines of the brightest flame. Indeed, says
Brydone, these illuminations are so very different, and so much superior, to
any I ever saw, that I find it difficult to give an idea of them. Two lines of
coaches occupied the space between these two lines of illumination. They in
their greatest gala; and, as these coaches open in the middle, and let down on
each side, the beauty of the ladies, the richness of their dress, and
brilliance of their jewels, were displayed in the most advantageous manner.

The beautiful train moved slowly, round and round, for two hours. They seemed
all joy and exultation; scarce two coaches past, without some mutual
acknowledgment of affection, or respect; and the pleasure, that sparkled from
every eye, seemed to be reflected and communicated by sympathy through the
whole.

In such an assembly, continues Brydone, it was impossible for the heart not to
dilate and expand itself. I own, mine was so full, that I could hardly find
utterance; and, I have seen a tragedy with less emotion, than this scene of
festivity. The universal joy seemed here to spring from the heart; it
brightened every countenance, and spoke affection and friendship from every
face. -- No stately air -- no supercilious look -- all appeared friends and
equals -- and, sure I am, that the beauty of the ladies was not half so much
heightened, either by their dress or their jewels, as by that air of
complacency and good humor, with which it was animated.

The next day, I thought there would be a falling off. The entertainments of
the thirteenth began by horse-races. Of these there were three; six horses
started each time, mounted by boys, about twelve years old, without either
saddle or bridle; only a small piece of cord, by way of bit in the horse's
mouth, which it seems is sufficient to stop them. The great street was the
course; and for this purpose it was covered with earth, five or six inches
deep. The firing of a gun was the signal for starting; the horses understood
this, for they all sat off at once, full speed, from one gate; and continued at
their utmost stretch to the other; exactly a mile, and ran it in a minute and
thirty-five seconds; the horses scarce fourteen hands high; barbs, or a mixed
breed, between a Sicilian and a barb. The boys were gaudily dressed, and made a
pretty appearance. They kept their seat by leaning forward, and laying fast
hold of the mane.

The moment before starting, the street appeared full of people; nor did we
conceive how the race could be run; and we were alarmed at seeing the horses
run full speed, at the very thickest of the crowd, which did not begin to open,
till they were almost close upon it. The people then opened, and fell back on
each side, by a regular uniform motion, from one end of the street to the
other. This singular maneuver seemed to be performed without any bustle or
confusion; and, the moment the horses were past, the people closed again behind
them. The victor was conducted along the street in triumph, with his prize
before him; viz. a piece of white silk, embroidered and worked with gold.

The great street was illuminated in the same manner as before; and the grand
assembly of the nobles was held at the archbishop's palace, which was richly
fitted up on the occasion. The gardens were finely illuminated, like our
Vauxhall on an extra day; an orchestra was erected at each end, and two very
good bands of music played. The entertainment was splendid.

About ten at night, the great triumphal car was drawn back again, in
procession, to the marino; richly illuminated with wax tapers, and made a most
formidable figure. Don Qaixole would have been excusable in taking it for an
enchanted castle, moving through the air. The corso was illuminated, as the
night before, and the same parading of carriages took place.

On the fourteenth, at night, the two great streets, and the city gates that
terminate them, were illuminated in the most splendid manner. The square, in
the center, where the streets cross each other, was richly ornamented with
tapestry, statues, and artificial flowers; and, as the buildings which form its
four sides are uniform, and of fine architecture, and at the same time highly
illuminated, it had a wonderful effect. There were four orchestras erected in
it; and the fine bands of music were greater, than it could be supposed Palermo
could furnish. From the center of this square, we have a view of the whole
city, thus dressed out in its glory; and the effect it produces, surpasses
belief.

The nobles assembled in the viceroy's palace; and the entertainment, was still
more magnificent, than either of the former evenings. The great fireworks,
opposite the front of the palace, began at ten o'clock, and ended at midnight;
after this, the parading in the corso, as before, till two. The fireworks were
more superb than those on the sea; though it had not so good an effect.

On the fifteenth, three races, six horses each, as before. The great assembly
of the nobility was at the justice Monarchias, an officer of high rank and
dignity. Here, also, was a sumptuous entertainment, and a concert. At eleven at
night, the viceroy, and the whole company, walked to visit the square and the
great church; a prodigious train; for, though the city was all a lamp of light,
the servants of the viceroy and nobles, preceded with flambeaus. As soon as the
viceroy entered the square, the five orchestras played, and continued playing
till he left it.

The crowd round the church was very great, but the attendants soon cleared the
way; and, entering at the great gate, we beheld the most splendid scene in the
world. The whole church appeared a flame of light, which reflected from ten
thousand bright and shining surfaces, of different colors, and different
angles, produced an effect, which no description of enchantment can equal. The
whole church, walls, roof, pillars, etc. were entirely covered over with
looking-glass, as I have observed, interspersed with gold and silver paper, and
artificial flowers; so that not one inch of stone, or plaster, could be seen.
Form an idea of one of our great cathedrals dressed out in this manner, and
illuminated with twenty thousand wax-tapers, and it will give some faint notion
of this splendid scene. I never could have supposed, says Brydone, that human
art could have devised any thing so splendid. The scene was too glaring to bear
any considerable time; and the heat, occasioned by the lights, soon became
intolerable. In this cathedral there were twenty-eight altars, fourteen on each
side; these were dressed out with the utmost magnificence; and the great altar
was still more splendid than all. From the church, the company went to the
corso; which concluded, as usual, the entertainments of the day.

On the sixteenth, the streets were fully illuminated. The assembly was held at
the praeters, with an elegant entertainment and a concert. Pacherotti and
Gabrielli sung; for they were here for the opera. The great procession, that
closed the festival, began at ten o'clock. It differed only from the other
procession in this; that, besides all the priests, friars, and religious orders
of the city; there were placed, at equal distances from each, other, ten lofty
machines of wood and pasteboard; representing temples, tabernacles, and a
variety of beautiful pieces of architecture. These are furnished by the
different convents, and religious fraternities, who vie with each other in the
richness and elegance of the work; some of them are not less than sixty feet
high. They were filled with figures of saints and angels, made of wax; so
natural, and so admirably well painted, that many of them seemed alive. All
these figures are prepared by the nuns, and dressed out in rich robes of gold
and silver tissue. A great silver box, containing the bones of St. Rosalia,
closed the procession. It was carried by thirty-six of the most respectable
burgesses of the city, who look upon this as the greatest honor. The
archbishop walked behind it, giving his benediction to the people as they
passed.

No sooner had the procession finished the tour of the great square, before the
praeter's palace, than the fountain in the center, one of the largest and
finest in Europe, was converted into a fountain of fire; throwing it up on all
sides, and making a very beautiful appearance. It only lasted a few minutes,
and was extinguished by a vast explosion that concluded the whole; and we may
say, with truth, that the entertainments of the feast of St. Rosalio, are much
beyond those of the holy week at Rome; of the Ascension at Venice; or, indeed,
any other Romish festival.

On these occasions, we cannot but remark, says De Non, the gravity of the
Sicilians; who enjoy all this, without the smallest external symptom of joy, or
pleasure. They would, perhaps, revolt, if the senate was to put a stop to this
festival; yet, they look on it with composure, without a smile, or any token of
satisfaction; observing the most perfect good order, without requiring the
interposition of the justice. No tumult ever happens; and, though there are
upwards of one hundred thousand persons collected on the same spot, there never
is any crouding. The inhabitants, of themselves, divide the street between
them; one side for those coming up, and the other for the passengers going
down. They are very different from our populace, who want to see every thing
before it begins, keep looking when it has begun, and still push forward to
stare about them when all is over; who never remain quiet so long as a lamp is
burning, and can hardly prevail on themselves to retire, even when the lights
are out. Here the labourer, or mechanic, as soon as midnight comes, leads off
his wife, or mistress, whose arm he has never quitted, and resigns his place,
without clamor to the nobility; who enter with the same order, and display,
with true Italian pomp, their magnificent equipages, and gala liveries.

Another curiosity, near Palermo, is the sepultures of the dead, of the convent
of Capuchins, about a mile from it. This is a vast subterraneous apartment,
divided into large commodious galleries; the walls, on each side of which, are
hollowed into a variety of niches, as if intended for a great collection of
statues. These niches are filled with dead bodies of men, (for they will not
permit women to be placed there) set upright upon their legs, and fixed by the
back to the inside of the niche. Their number is about three hundred; all
dressed in the clothes they usually wore. The skin and muscles, by a certain
preparation, become as dry and hard, as a piece of stock fish; and, although
many of them have been there upwards of two hundred and fifty years, yet none
are reduced to skeletons. The muscles are, indeed, more shrunk in some than in
others; possibly, because they might have been more wasted at the time of their
death. The sight of objects, like these, must raise in the spectator such
emotions, as are not easily stifled. It is equally disagreeable to find, that
they mortify our vanity, by destroying those fanciful chimaeras of happiness,
and those great projects which the imagination is pleased to form. I
experienced this, says Bisani, among others; but, no sooner were those ideas
passed, than I could look on these spestres with calmness. Some inspired me
with terror, some made me laugh, and seemed to laugh in their turn; all,
however, afforded this lesson; that since we are born only to look round us,
and to fall and confound our ashes with those of our ancestors, we should enjoy
life; that life, whose days are so fugitive; and yet in such enjoyment, not
forget, that virtue is the first of duties, and the parent of pleasure.

Here, says Brydone, the people of Palermo pay daily visits to their deceased
friends, and regret the scenes of their past life; here they familiarise
themselves with their future state, and choose the company they would keep in
the other world. It is a common thing to make choice of their niches, and try
if their body fits it, that no alterations may be necessary after their death;
and, sometimes by way of penance, they accustom themselves to stand for hours
in these niches.

The bodies of the princes, and first nobility, are deposited in handsome
chests, or trunks; some of them richly adorned. The keys are kept by the
nearest relations of the family; who, sometimes, come and drop a tear over
their departed friends.

These preserved bodies are, by no means, great objects of horror; they retain
a strong likeness to what they were when alive; so that, as soon as the first
feeling excited by these venerable figures is conquered, it may be considered
as a vast gallery of original portraits, drawn by the pencil of truth.

Description is of all things the most insipid; for words, and writing, convey
ideas only by a slow and regular kind of progress; and, whilst we gain one, we
generally lose another; so that the fancy seldom embraces the whole: to relieve
my readers, I have often, therefore, introduced anecdotes, and stories, perhaps
not very pertinent to the subject; but merely to enliven the work, that might
otherwise become dull and tiresome. It is on this principle, I shall give the
following laughable story from Brydone. He dined with a nobleman at Palermo;
and an abbe present gave him this anecdote of a friend of his, who was formerly
a brother of the Capuchin convent, known by the name of Fra Pasqual, and who
had passed through many singular scenes of life. He was one of the banditti of
this kingdom, in which he had been enrolled some time; (of this banditti we
shall speak hereafter) but, tired of the danger to which he was continually
exposed, he changed the character of hero, for that of saint, and became a
capuchin friar. He took the vows of poverty and chastity, and entered into all
the rigours of a monastic life; determining to atone for his sins, by spending
the remainder of it, in mortification and penance. He went barefooted, wore a
large rosary, and a thicker cord of discipline, than any monk in the convent;
and, his whole deportment gave testimony of the most unfeigned repentance; this
lasted only a few weeks. The devil was still at work in the heart of Pasqual;
and, all these external mortifications only made him work the harder. In short,
Pasqual finding it impossible to drive him out; and afraid, left the enemy
should, at last, get the better of him, he thought it advisable to leave, at
Palermo, the character of sanctity he had acquired, and began a new life at a
new place. He embarked for Naples, and was soon there admitted into a capuchin
convent.

Pasqual knowing from experience, that the dull uniformity of a monastic life
required some renovation, and amusement to render it supportable, set about it;
the first thing he did, was to find himself a mistress, in a snug corner, where
he might sleep at night, occasionally, from his convent, and indulge in that
enjoyment which his austere order forbids. He soon fixed his eye on a
celebrated courtezan; who, like our London ladies of easy virtue, though they
admit for pay no visits from strangers, but those that are wealthy; will take
up with lovers, at times, more suited to their own cast and inclinations. This
lady admitted to her bed, at certain times, when she was otherwise engaged, a
life-guard-man, six feet two inches high; a fellow with a spada, or toledo, of
uncommon length; and wore a pair of curled whiskers, that would frighten any
man, whose nerves were not uncommonly strong. This man was kept by her as her
champion, and paid by those favors she had occasionally to spare; but, having
an art of winning her affections, more than by fighting her battles, he had got
the ascendancy over her; and never suffered her to receive any visits, but from
those he was made acquainted with; which were generally old fools, who had more
money than wit; and, would often sacrifice the former at the shrine of their
idolatry. This lady, however, had a penchant of her own; and, having no idea of
being confined to one youthful admirer, was determined to receive any other she
pleased. At this time the capuchin, one night, fell in her way. When she knew
her life-guard-man would be on duty, she invited him to her bed; and, to make
her favors more valuable, told him, she had a lover, who was exceedingly
jealous of her; that, if he knew of her intriguing, or admitting the visits of
any other person, he would be the death of them both; for that he was a
soldier, and a man in disposition as furious as a lion; but, that as he was
then on duty, there would be no danger, and she should be glad to see him.

The capuchin, who had been originally bred to arms, having no fear, and liking
difficulties, was more eager than ever to accept this lady's invitation. He,
accordingly, stepped out of his convent, and hied to the apartments of his
mistress. But it so happened, that about one in the morning, when he was
asleep, with his fair enchantress, the life-guard-man, unexpectedly returned.
The noise he made at the door, soon awaked and alarmed them; the lady was
frightened out of her wits, told the capuchin it was her lover, and that she
expected nothing less than that both would be put to death. The capuchin, being
unarmed, was also not a little frightened. Not finding a ready admittance, the
soldier stormed and made a louder noise; and the capuchin, having no time to
reflect, gathered up his rags and crept under the bed; which, being rather
corpulent, he found a difficulty in doing. He was no sooner there than she
opened the door, which was a ground-floor-room, and the giant stalked in, angry
that he was kept at the door so long. However, as he returned in an amorous
mood, her winning ways soon put him into good humor. There was no light in the
room; and, of course, the monk did not fear a discovery. Strike a light said
the soldier, that I may see to undress. The monk trembled, and the bed shook.
What makes the bed shake so, says he, it is I, returned the lady, that ran
against it in searching for the tinder-box. It was found, and the monk quaked
within him: but, she having designedly, from the chamberpot, thrown some water
into it; the tinder would not take fire. Till the capuchin knew this, every
stroke of the flint was to him a double knell; but, when both had tried, and
his rival swore at the tinder's not kindling, saying, it was wet; his spirits
recovered. She advised him to go to the guard-house for a light, being only at
the end of the street: here the monk had fresh hopes, which sunk again, on
hearing the soldier say that he left his duty without leave, and dared not go,
and would rather undress in the dark. He then began to grope about under the
bed, for a bottle of liquors that he knew was there, and had very nearly laid
hold of the capuchin's head; but, madam finding what he was at, sprung to the
bed and reached it for him. He was now undressed, and they got into bed. The
weight of this giant gave the poor monk less room, for he lay just over him; he
was squeezed quite flat, and was nearly suffocated. He had now a little time to
think; and, it first struck him, that he would rush out into the street; but
then he was stark naked, for the capuchins wear no shirts; this would alarm the
police; next he thought of seizing the toledo, and then, threatening the
life-guard-man, demand honorable terms of capitulation, for both himself and
the lady. A thousand ideas rolled in his mind. He could neither attend to any
thing that was passing, nor be sensible of the pressure that was over him. At
last, the man of war fell asleep, and the capuchin heard him snore; this was
music to his heart; till he heard this, he was determined to keep his place
till the morning; but now, he ventured, if possible, to escape. He,
accordingly, worked his way out from under the bed; and, laying hold of the
sword, relinquished the cowardly idea of escaping, and felt himself bold; his
thoughts now were to be revenged of his rival, and make him suffer in his turn.
He accordingly dressed himself in the soldier's uniform, and placed his greasy
clothes, cowl, etc. in a chair before the bed, where the soldier had placed
his, and sallied forth into the street. Here he had time to think. Shall I go
back, says he to himself, in the character of another lifeguard man, and
pretend I am sent by the officer on guard, in search of him, and take him to
the guard-house as a deserter? No, this would be treacherous, and not a
sufficient retaliation. I will go and acquaint the guard, who hate the capuchin
friars, for the ill opinion they entertain of the licentiousness of the army,
that I have traced one of that order to a house of ill fame, and induce them to
accompany me and unkennel the fox. This he did; he told the officer then on
duty, that, as the capuchins were very apt to censure the army, he had now an
opportunity of being revenged; that he had noticed a Franciscan friar in his
habit, skulking in the streets; had watched him, and traced him to the house of
a common woman; that he had listened at the window, and heard them go to bed;
and, that if the officer would accompany him, he would enjoy not only great
diversion, but would, when he heard the capuchins inveigh against the army, be
able, in future, to turn the laugh against them. The officer, pleased with the
idea, took the guard with him, and followed the capuchin to the house. they
rapped loud at the door, and demanded admittance for the night-guard. The noise
waked the sleepy couple; and, the soldier fearing it was the guard come to
apprehend him for quitting his duty, was, in his turn, much more afraid than
the monk, when his rival announced his return. In his panic, he got out of bed,
took up in the dark the capuchin's clothes that laid in the chair, supposing
them to be his own, and hid himself where the priest had done before. The
capuchin not readily gaining admittance, put his foot to the door, and forced
it open. The guard entered, and demanded of the lady the body of a capuchin
friar, that lodged with her that night. She hearing the monk, when he quitted
her chamber, and not supposing he would inform against himself, protested she
had no capuchin with her, and called upon all the saints in support of her
assertion. But, the monk suspecting the retreat of his rival, stooped, and
pulled from under the bed the cowl, the cloak, the sandals, the rosary, and the
cord of discipline, one after the other, crying out, No capuchin! No capuchin!
These are damning proofs, proofs not to be controverted; and, then stooping to
the ground, cried out, soho! -- I nose him; he stinks like a fox. The only way
to find a capuchin, is to nose him. -- We may wind them a mile off. The
lanthorn was now held down, and the man of ardour was found squeezed beneath
the bed, almost stifled. Ecco lo, cries the capuchin, here he is -- here he is.
-- The reverend father is come, you see, to do penance: let us assist him in
his discipline. With this they drew him out, and belabored him well with the
cord, crying out Andiamo Signior Padre, Andiamo. The poor soldier, being
without his clothes, felt the weight of St. Francis, heavier than what he
liked, and bawled out that he was no capuchin, and that they were all mistaken.
This occasioned a repetion of the scourging. The monk laid it on now the
heavier, saying, he deserved this for denying his master, and his order. The
guards lay all round the bed, in convulsions of laughter, at the scene.

The lady was frightened, and alarmed; she ran about the room exclaiming, Oime!
siamo perduti -- siamo incantati -- siamo insorcelati! that is, "Ah me! I am
ruined -- I am under an enchantment -- I am bewitched!

The monk, delighted at the success of his scheme, thought it was best that he
should get off, before he was discovered; therefore, made an excuse to the
officer for leaving him, saying, his hour of duty was come, and he was obliged
to join his corpse; but, recommended to to him, with a sneer, to treat the holy
father with all all that respect and reverence due to so sacred a person.

The life-guard-man, no sooner got from under the bed, than he looked for his
clothes, and not seeing any but the greasy robes of a capuchin friar, was
persuaded that God had given him over to the devil, as a punishment for his
offenses; for of all men, the Neapolitan soldiers are most superstitious; and
he recollected it was Friday, a fast day; and that, in passing the statue of
St. Januarius, he had not offered up a prayer to it. This is the consequence,
says he, moaning, of offending heaven. I acknowledge my sin; I knew it was
Friday, and yet, O flesh, flesh: -- had it been any other day, I should not
have been thus metamorphosed; now, must I no longer carry a sword, but a
crucifix. Oh St. Januarius, thy all-searching eye has found me out! -- Do,
gentlemen, what you please with me. I am not what I seem to be. "True enough
(said the officer) we are sensible of that. Come, Signior Padre, put on your
filthy garments, and march; for we have no time to lose." Here corporal (giving
him the cord) tie his hands, and let St. Francis bind him. The poor son of Mars
was perfectly passive; they arrayed him in the sandals, the cloak and cowl of
the capuchin, and put the great rosary round his neck; he hung his head, and a
woeful figure he made. -- Look in the glass, said the officer, turning him
about, and see if you know yourself? Are you a capuchin now? He was shocked at
his own appearance, but bore all with resignation. Thus equipped, they
conducted him to the guard-house, scourging him all the way with the cord, and
asking him, at every stroke, if he knew his master now?

The capuchin, during this time, had sneaked, unperceived, into his convent;
and, having a second dress, put it on; taking the clothes of the
life-guard-man, and laying them in a heap, before it was light, near the gate
of another capuchin convent, at some distance from his own; not forgetting to
pocket the trifle of money he found in the soldier's breeches, to atone for the
loss of his garments. Capuchins are forbidden, by their order, to carry money;
and this man says, he should not have thought of doing it, but to prevent any
other from making an unlawful prize of it.

The poor soldier's comrades soon heard of his transformation, and came in
troops to see him, and jeer him, in his metamorphosis; but, as he thought
himself under the finger of Heaven, and does to this day, he bore all with
meekness. They kept him a prisoner for a day or two; but, his clothes being
found, he was set at liberty. It has been of some use to him, for he never
passes St. Januarius, without muttering a prayer; nor ever visits his mistress
on a Friday.

About five miles from Palermo is the city of Monreale, a small place on the
brow of a very high hill, but the sea of an archbishop; remarkable for its
grand approach, or paved road, made by the Diocesan, winding up the mountain,
supported by strong buttresses and breast-works, and adorned with borders of
flowering-shrubs, urns, fountains, and inscriptions. About the midway, close to
the road, rises a huge barren rock; out of the bowels of which, a fine stream
gushes with great force. An artist has been employed to improve this natural
fountain, which he has done, by adding to the original cliff, large masses of
rugged stone, which pen up the water into one full, but irregular body; it then
dashes headlong into a capacious basin, overgrown with the broad leaves of the
lotus, flag, and water-lily. On the summit of this artificial rock is the
statue of a boy, armed with a hatchet, watching a serpent, that seems creeping
toward the water; another boy, as if roused by alarm, is represented climbing
up, with a stone in his hand; whilst a little girl, with dismay strongly marked
in every feature, is hiding herself behind the stump of a tree.

A gate terminates this fine approach to Monreale; the other end of the road
joins an avenue of aged trees, (some of which are plantanes) leading through
the plain to the gates of Palermo; which plain, for many miles, is a continued
orange-garden, and fine scenery; the air perfumed. Monreale is hemmed in on
every side but the northern, by lofty mountains; but, on the North, a view
opens over hanging woods of olive, and of orange trees, to Palermo, and the
sea; a noble and most extensive scene.

The city is clean and neatly built, and contains above eight thousand
inhabitants; but the cathedral, the second in the island, exhibits a very
disagreeable specimen of Gothic taste; and, to mend it, they have white-washed
the outside. Let me notice, in the way back to Palermo, the Torre Zizza, and I
have done. This is a country house, of very ancient foundation, and remarkable
architecture; it was built by the Saracens, during their abode in Sicily, in
the ninth or tenth century, and is almost coeval with the mosque at Cordova, in
Spain; but differs widely from it, in the character of its architecture. The
windows of la Zizza are long, and almost round at top; instead of being
pointed, or arched like a horseshoe. It is a square stone tower, three stories
high, of regular courses of masonry, not at all decayed by age, with a
battlement on the top; on each stone of which is a letter of some alphabet,
used by the Saracens; which Mr. Swinburne supposes to be the Cufick, now only
to be found in the oldest Mahomedan manuscripts. The inside is decorated with
thin arches, and frosted cielings, hanging down in drops; a fountain plays in
the hall, and fragrant gardens, with rich decorations, adjoin it. The tale of
this town, handed down by tradition, is, that a sultan erected it, for the
purpose of consining his beautiful daughter Zizza; but, as this word is said to
imply gay, flowery, deckedout, this tower might have been called so from its
ornaments. Even now, when the Sicilians speak of a well-drest lady, they say
she is a zizzata.

CHAP. VII. Of Catania.
CATANIA is a city standing on the Western coast of Sicily; it lies at the foot
of Mount Aetna, and has been several times destroyed by it. It evidently
appears, says Brydone, that the irruptions of the mountain have formed the
whole coast; and, in many places, have driven back the sea, for several miles,
from its ancient boundaries. The account given by Sicilian authors, of the
conflict between these two adverse elements, fire and water, is truly
tremendous; and, in relating it, they seem to have been shaken with horror.
Conceive the front of a torrent of fire, ten miles in breadth, and heaped up to
an enormous height, rolling down the mountain, and pouring its flames into the
ocean! The noise more dreadful than the loudest thunder; and heard, through the
whole country, to an immense distance. The water seeming to retire and hide its
head before its antagonist, and to confess its superiority; yielding up its
possessions, and contracting its banks: salt vapors darkening the face of the
sun, covering up this scene under a veil of horror, and of night; and laying
waste every field and vineyard in these regions of the island. This city was in
great want of a port; till, by an irruption in the sixteenth century, a stream
of lava running into the sea, formed a mole, which no expense could have
furnished. This lasted for some time, a safe and commodious harbor; till, at
last, by a subsequent irruption, it was entirely filled up, and demolished. At
this time, the torrent burst over the walls; and, laying waste great part of
this beautiful city, poured into the sea. But, the superstition of the people
is so great, and so great is their reliance on St. Agatha, their saint, that
they cannot be made to believe, but that when such irruptions injure them, it
is, because they have offended Agatha, whose influence and power can prevent
such accidents if she pleases; nor would they be persuaded to remove their
situation, if the lava were at their walls; from an opinion, that Agatha can
keep it fromentering the city. Neither is it the veil of the saint alone, that,
in their opinion, can do this, which they have long preserved as a relick; but
they conceive, says Brydone, every thing, that has touched that piece of sacred
attire, possessing the same miraculous property. Thus, there is a number of
little bits of cotton, and linen fixed to the veil, which, after being blessed
by the bishop, are supposed to acquire power enough to save any person's house,
or garden; and, wherever this expedient has failed, it is always attributed to
want of faith of the person, not want of faith in the veil.

Catania was founded by the Chalcidians; soon after the settlement of Syracuse,
it fell into the hands of the Romans, among their earliest acquisitions in
Sicily, and became the residence of the praeter; it was adorned with sumptuous
buildings, and every convenience was procured to supply the natural and
artificial wants of life. It was destroyed by Pompey's son, but restored with
superior magnificence, by Augustus. In the reign of Decius, St. Agatha, its
patroness, was martyred; on every emergency her intercession is implored; she
is piously believed to have preserved Catania, from being overwhelmed by
torrents of lava, or shaken to pieces by earthquakes; yet, its ancient edifices
are covered, by repeated streams of volcanic matter, and almost every house;
even her own church has been thrown to the ground; once, by an irruption of
Aetna, twenty thousand Catanians, with their pastor at their head, were
destroyed, before the sacred veil could be properly placed to check the flames.
And in the last century, the irruptions, and earthquakes, raged with redoubled
violence, and Catania was quite demolished.

The prince of Biscari has been at infinite pains, and spent a large sum of
money, in working down to the ancient town. We descended into baths, says
Swinburne, into sepulchers, an amphitheatre, and a theater, all very much
injured. They were erected on old beds of lava, and even built with square
pieces of the same substance; which does not appear to have been fused by the
contact of new lava.

This city has been frequently defended, from the burning streams, by the solid
mass of its own ramparts; and by the air compressed between them and the lava.
This appears, by the torrent having stopped, within a small distance of the
walls, and taken another direction; but when the walls were broken, or low, the
lava collected itself, till it rose to a great height, and then poured over in
a curve. There is a wall at the foot of the old walls, where the lava, after
running along the parapet, and then falling forwards, has produced a very
complete lofty arch over the spring.

Since its destruction, by an irruption, in 1669, and its overthrow, by an
earthquake, in 1693, Catania is reviving with great splendour; and, when all the
houses now building are finished, will be a very handsome city. It has much
more the features of a metropolis, and royal residence, than Palermo; the
principal streets are wide, straight, and well paved with lava. An obelisk of
red granite, placed on the back of an antique elephant of touchstone, or lava;
a fine monument of antiquity stands in the center of the great square; which is
formed by the town hall seminary and cathedral. One would naturally suppose,
that men would be backward in erecting new habitations, especially with any
degree of grandeur, on a ground so often shaken to its center, and so often
buried under the ashes of a volcano; but such is the attachment of an Italian
to his native soil, and such his contempt to dangers to which they are
habituated; that, like the martin, which builds its nests under the eves of
houses; pull it down as often as you please, it will immediately proceed to
re-building it; so will the Italians rebuild their houses, on the warm cinders
of Vesuvius, the quaking plains of Calabria, and the black mountains of
Sciarra, at Catania. There is a great deal of activity in the disposition of
this people; they know by tradition, that their ancestors carried on a
flourishing commerce; and that, before the fiery river filled it up, they had a
spacious, convenient harbor, where they now have scarcely a creek for a
felucca; they, therefore, wish to restore these advantages to Catania; and have
often applied to government for assistance, toward forming a mole and a port.

The number of inhabitants, in Catania, amounts to about thirty thousand men;
the Catanians say sixty thousand. Great part of this number belongs to the
university, the only one in the island, and the nursery of all the lawyers.

The prince of Biscari has enclosed a large tract of the lava, of 1669, near
the seaside, surrounded the old fortress, where the kings of Arragon used to
reside; and, in this black impenetrable surface, has made a garden, built
houses, carried on a good coach road round it; planted trees, in earth brought
from other places; and, what seems almost incomprehensible, has formed two
large ponds of fresh water, supplied by springs, that ooze through the lava;
stocked them them with fish, and water-sowl, and preserved them from the fury
of the sea, by a strong pier, the only barrier between the salt and fresh
water. The spot, where his villa stands on the lava, was formerly fifty feet
deep in water; and the height of the lava, above the present level of the sea,
is not less than fifty feet more.

This prince has a museum of the antiquities, he has dug out of the ruins of
Catania. His collection is very rich and extensive, especially in Etruscan
vases, lamps, and antiquities, of terra cotta. One of the most remarkable lamps
is molded into the form of a camel, with an amphora on each side, fixed in a
cradle. The water-carriers, at Palermo, use a similar contrivance to this day,
for conveying water upon asses. Among his busts and statues, some are
conspicuous for the perfection of their sculpture; others for the persons they
represent. It would require a volume to describe them; let it suffice to say,
that his collection consists of whatever Catania and Sicily produce, that is
curious in antiquity.

Among other curiosities, is the organ at the Benedictine convent, built by a
Neapolitan priest. The tunes of all sorts of wind and strung instruments are
imitated with the most perfect illusion. One of the pipes gives an echo in so
aerial a manner, that you follow the sound to its distant reverberations, till
it loses itself in space.

Catania, says Brydone, is looked upon as one of the most ancient cities in the
world. Their legends aver, that it was founded by the Cyclops, or giants of
Aetna, supposed to be the first inhabitants of Sicily, after the deluge; and,
some Sicilian writers pretend, it was built by Deucalion and Pyrrha, as soon as
the waters subsided, and had got down again to the foot of the mountain. Its
ancient name was Cataetna, or the city of Aetna. It is now reckoned the third
city in the kingdom; though, since Messina has been destroyed, it may well be
considered as the second. It has a bishop; and the bishop's revenues, which are
considerable, arise principally from the sale of the snow on Mount Aetna; one
small portion of which, lying in the north of the mountain, is said to bring
him in upwards of a thousand pounds a year; for Aetna furnishes snow and ice,
not only to the whole island of Sicily, but likewise to Malta, and a great part
of Italy, and makes a very considerable branch of commerce; for, even the
peasants in these hot countries, regalo themselves with ices, during the summer
heats; and, there is no entertainment, given by the nobility, of which these do
not always make a principal part. A famine of snow, they say, would be more
grievous, than a famine of either corn or wine. It is a common observation
among them, that without the snows of Aetna, their island could not be
inhabited; but, Aetna not only cools them in summer, but warms them in winter;
the fuel for the greater part of the island, being carried from the immense and
inexhaustible forests of this volcano.

Near to the walls of the ancient city, many of which are standing, near sixty
feet high, and of great strength, and yet the lava of 1669 overflowed them;
near to these walls, and the Benedictine convent, they have discovered the
fragments of a famous temple of Ceres, a nymphaeum, the gymnasium, and a
naumachia, that was near the castle; the vestiges of which were to be seen,
before the lava of 1669 had covered them; and two arches of the aqueducts,
leading to which, are still visible in the lava.

So many public edifices, crowded together in so small a space, must have left
but little room for the houses of individuals, which may lead us to conclude,
that this city has been embellished, at different periods; or, that the private
houses were extremely small, in comparison to the public buildings; or, that
ancient Catania was still more ornamented than extensive; and, consequently,
more rich than popular. The modern town is of the same nature; for, though the
Catanians estimate their number at sixty thousand, we see nothing in the
streets but convents, churches, and palaces, separated by a few private houses.

It is difficult to assign the epoch of this splendour of Catania. The great
quantity of Latin inscriptions, discovered in the different edifices, the
baths, the naumachia, etc. known only to the Romans, lead us to determine its
splendour to have been in their time, which continued to the incursions of the
Barbarians; who broke the statues, pillaged the bronzes, and melted down the
metals to carry them off. Next came the Normans; who, barbarously catholic,
piously despoiled the beautiful temples of their marbles, to construct their
miserable churches.

Catania, now a handsome city, but without an inn, is, most likely, to be again
destroyed by commotion of the mountain. Catania is now purged and purified from
all the infection contracted from heathen rites; and the rotundo, like the
pantheon at Rome, which seems to have outlived other buildings, owing to its
singular form, is become a Christian church. It is not a little curious to
consider, says Brydone, how small the deviation is, in the present rites, from
those of the ancients, in almost every article. It is a just observation; that,
during the long reign of heathenism, superstition had exhausted her talent for
invention; so that, when a superstitious spirit seized Christians, they were
under a necessity of borrowing from their predecessors, and imitating some part
of their idolatry. In some places, the very images still remain. They have only
christened them; and, the statue that bore the name of Venus, or Proserpine, is
now called Mary Magdalene, or the Virgin. The same ceremonies are daily
performed before these images, in the same language, and nearly in the same
manner. The saints are perpetually coming down in person, and working miracles,
as did the heathen gods of old. The walls of the temples are covered with the
vows of pilgrims, as they were formerly. The holy water, which was held in such
detestation by the first Christians, is again revered and sprinkled about with
the same devotion, as in the time of Paganism. The same incest is burnt by
priests, arrayed in the same manner, with the same grimaces, genuflexions,
before the same images, and in the same temples too. In short, so nearly do the
rites coincide, that, were the pagan high priest to return and reassume his
functions, he would only have to learn a few new names; to get the mass, the
paters, and the eves by heart. Brydone says, he took notice of this to a Roman
Catholic nobleman, who is not the most zealous sectary in the world, and he
frankly owned the truth of the observation.

Not far from Catania, between that and Messina, is the city of Iaci; near
which Homer has placed the landing of Ulysses, and which still bears the name
of Porto d'Ulysse. Homer must have made a very bad choice, for a place to land
his hero, or else the lava has greatly changed its form. The shoals, or rocks,
between this and Catania, which are a hundred feet above the level of the sea;
and, probably, as many below it, are entire masses of lava. It is impossible to
conceive, how these masses have become insulated, with gulphs between them, of
such profundity, as to make the water black as ink; unless some dreadful
convulsions of the North have removed the sandy bottom, on which these masses
had run, when liquid; and have thus separated them from the shore, and formed
them into rocks.

CHAP. VIII. Of Syracuse, and the chief Antiquities of the Island.
THE great and mighty Syracuse, whose spacious harbor once received
innumerable fleets; whose battles were fought by the Athenians, within its
circumference; and, where the triumphant Carthaginians found their tombs, is
now a desolate, and a filthy wretched place; but, the isle of Ortyra, which is
the modern town, and was anciently the fortress and castle of Dionysius, has
been fortified by the King of Spain, though without artillery. Those who come
here, by sea, are obliged to perform quarantine, at the instance of those who
farm out the lazarettos of Sicily, and oblige all vessels to quarantine, though
there is not a shed, nor even ground enough for the prows, of the little craft
that come here, to rest upon. This difficulty they oblige mariners to put up
with, for twenty-eight days, in order to fill the pockets of those who guard
the vessel, by little indulgencies they show them.

The fountain of Arethusa is one of the chief curiosities, and pieces of
antiquity here. It is an angular basin, of sulphurous water, close to the sea,
formed by two wells, but not antique wells, and where now the dirtiest linen is
washed, by a number of still dirtier women; who, almost naked, and with their
petticoats tucked up, present the most disgusting scene immodesty can display.
Notwithstanding the wretched condition of this fountain, it appears miraculous,
that, from the center of a rock, almost surrounded by the sea, a spring should
break out in streams; which, when united, must rather have resembled the mouth
of a river, than a fountain. Near this fountain, was the palace of Verres, and
that delicious walk which Cicero accuses the proconsul of converting into a
scene of debauchery. It is still the public walk, but has now no delights;
being nothing but a narrow sauntering place, between a great wall; and the
parapet of the harbor planted with a few sorry birches. At the bottom of the
wall are two fragments, of a Norman building, which might have been part of the
palace of Verres.

Of the temples of Diana and Minerva, the palace of Dyonisius, his garden, his
tomb, and those famous baths, of the celebrated Daphnis, the son of Mercury,
and a nymph, the inventor of pastoral poetry, who charmed Diana by his songs
and verses, and was punished with blindness for his infidelity, nothing remains
but the temple of Minerva, converted into a cathedral; and part of the temple
of Diana, now in the chamber of a private individual, being two pieces of
columns, fixed up to support a roof, and enlarge bis apartment.

In Acradina, originally part of Syracuse, stands the church of St. John, in
some low grounds, covering the entrance of immense catacombs, where the ancient
Sicilians buried their dead; the primitive saithful are supposed to have
assembled here, in times of persecution; and to have interred their brethren in
these vaults. These vaults are formed in streets, cut through one continued
stratum of soft stone, a sediment of marine bodies; crossing each other in many
directions, and are hewn with more care and regularity, than the catacombs of
St. Januarius, at Naples. At stated distances, there are large circular rooms,
lined with stucco, and pierced at the top, so as to admit light and air. On
each side of the walls, are recesses cut into the rock; and, in the floor of
these cavities, coffins of all sizes have been hollowed out. In some places,
there have been twenty troughs, one behind another; and skeletons have been
found in them, with a piece of money in their mouths.

Near the port, they show the spot where stood Archimedes's house; and also the
tower, from whence he is said to have set fire to the Roman galleys, with his
burning glasses. Mr. Brydone thinks, if there is any degree of truth in this
story, it must have been with a number of looking-glasses, not unequal glasses,
or concave speculums; as it would have been difficult, with such glasses, to
have caused a focus of such a great length; but, Mr. Buffon has made the
experiment with looking-glasses. He fixed four hundred small mirrors in a kind
of frame, and disposed them in such a manner, that the rays, reflected from
each of them, fell exactly on the same point; by which means he melted lead, at
the distance of a hundred and twenty feet, and set fire to a hay-stack, at a
much greater distance.

The end of this philosopher was remarkable. When Marcellus, the Roman general,
was before the ARCHIMEDES SUMMONED before the ROMAN GENERAL.
walls of this city, the same of Archimedes reached him; and he dispatched a
Roman soldier to bring him. On his arrival at his house, he told the
philosopher his message; but, he being too taken up with studies, paid little
attention to the summons; which so exasperated the soldier, that, to revenge
his disobedience to the general, he immediately ran him through the body, and
killed him.

The chief remains of antiquity, besides those I have mentioned, are a theater,
and amphitheatre; many sepulchers, the latomic, and the ear of Dionysius. The
latomie now makes a noble subterraneous garden; and is, indeed, a romantic and
beautiful spot. Most of it is about a hundred feet below the level of the
earth, and of an incredible extent. The whole is hewn out of a rock, composed
of a concretion of shells, gravel, and other marine bodies. The bottom of this
immense quarry, from whence, probably, the greatest part of Syracuse was built,
is now covered with an exceeding rich soil; and, as no wind from any part of
the compass can touch it, it is filled with a great variety of the finest
shrubs and fruit trees, which bear, with vast luxuriance, and are never
blasted. The oranges, citrons, bergamots, pomegranates, figs, etc. are all of a
remarkable size, and fine quality. Some of these trees, but more particularly
the olives, grow out of the hard rock, where there is no visible soil, and
exhibit a very uncommon and pleasing appearance. This is the same spot, so
celebrated by Cicero, about eighteen hundred years ago. Opus est ingens, says
he, magnificum regum ac tyrannorum. Totum ex saxo in mirandam altitudinem
depresso, etc.

The ear of Dionysius is no less a monument, of ingenuity and magnificence,
than of the cruelty of that tyrant. It is a huge cavern, cut out of the hard
rock, in form of a human ear; the perpendicular height, about eighty feet; and
its length, no less than two hundred and fifty. This cavern was said to be so
contrived, that every sound made in it was collected, and united into one
focus, which was called the tympanum; and, exactly opposite to it, the tyrant
had made a small hole, which communicated with a little apartment, where he
used to conceal himself. He applied his own ear at this hole, and is said to
have heard distinctly, every word that was spoken in the cavern below. This
apartment was no sooner finished, than he put to death all the workmen that had
been employed in it. He then confined all that he suspected were his enemies;
and, by over-hearing their conversation, judged of their guilt; and condemned,
or acquitted them, accordingly.

The amphitheatre is in the form of a very eccentric ellipse, and much fallen
to decay; but the theater is so entire, that most of the seats still remain.
There are near twenty remains of temples, but none that are distinguishable; a
few fine columns of Jupiter Olympus still remain; and the temple of Minerva,
now converted, as I have observed, into the cathedral, is almost entire.

Syracuse was composed of four cities; Ortygia is the only one remaining, by
much the smallest, situated in the island of that name; is about two miles
round, and contains about fourteen thousand people. The ruins of the other
three, Tycha, Acradina, and Neapoli, are computed at twenty-two miles in
circumference; almost the whole space of which is now converted into rich
vineyards, orchards, and cornfields. The walls of these are, indeed, built with
broken marbles, full of engravings and inscriptions, but most of them defaced
and spoiled.

On a hill, near Ortygia, is a convent of capuchin friars. When a stranger
walks up to this monastery, he sees neither verdure nor tree, all appears one
dreary rock; and, little does he suspect he is within reach of extensive
orchards, which, by their produce, yield a handsome income to the friars. No
sight can be more singular than the gardens of this convent, which are, in some
measure, subterraneous; being contained in the areas of immense excavations,
made by cutting stone for the ancient city. These areas are covered with a
thick grove of trees, loaded with rich scented blossoms, and beautiful fruit.
The vaults, of this convent, have the property of drying the bodies of the
dead, in a very short space of time; after which, they are dressed in religious
habits, and placed as statues in niches, on each side of the subterranean
alleys.

The diocese of Syracuse produces above forty different sorts of wine; the
honey of the hills is as clear as amber, and of delicious flavor; and
vegetables are admirable in their kind, particularly brocoli, which grows to a
very great size. Syracuse is the mildest climate that can be for a winter's
residence; two or three days of sharp Easterly winds excepted; the remainder of
the winter months is a continual spring. On the 16th of January, the vines
which are kept low, and closed pruned, had shot out new leaves; the gardens
were shaded with flowers, and fresh almonds were gathered from the trees. The
river, at Ortygia, throws up great quantities of fine amber. Sugarcanes, ready
jointed for chewing, are sold in the market, and salt may be had gratis.

Agrigentum, now Girgenti, was the second ancient city, in size, to Syracuse;
it is situated on the East coast of Sicily, on the top of a mountain, eleven
hundred feet above the level of the sea, and about four miles distant from the
port of Agrigentum; from which place the road, on each side, is bordered by a
row of exceeding large American aloes. When Brydone was there, upwards of
one-third of them were in full bloom, and making the most beautiful appearance.
The flower stems, of this noble plant, are, in general, between twenty and
thirty feet high (some more) and are covered with flowers from top to bottom,
which taper regularly, and form a beautiful kind of pyramid; the base, or
pedestal of which, is the fine spreading leaves of that plant. With us, they
are reckoned only to flower once in a hundred years; but in Sicily they blow
always at the latest, the sixth year; and often the fifth. The whole substance
of the plant being carried into the stem and the flowers, the leaves begin to
decay, as soon as the bloom is completed, and a numerous offspring of young
plants are produced round the root of the old one; these are slipped off, and
formed into new plantations; either for hedges, or for avenues to their country
houses.

The city of Girgenti is irregular and ugly, but it looks grand at a distance;
lying on the slope of the mountain. The houses are mean, the streets dirty,
crooked and narrow, yet it contains near twenty thousand people; a sad
reduction from its ancient grandeur, when it was said to consist of no less
than eight hundred thousand.

The antiquities of this place are, perhaps, more considerable than any in
Sicily. The ruins, of the ancient city, lie about eight miles from the modern
one. These, like those of the Syracuse, are mostly converted into cornfieldsd,
vineyards, and orchards; but the remains of the temples, here, are more
conspicuous. Four of these temples stood pretty much in a right line. Half of
the first remains; the second has every column standing; consisting of thirteen
fluted Doric pillars, with all their bases, capitals, entablatures, etc.
complete. The third temple is that of Hercules, and contained that famous
statue so much celebrated by Cicero. Near to this lie ruins of the temple of
Jupiter Olympus, supposed to have been the largest in the heathen world. It is
now called the giant's temple, but is a perfect ruin. It was exactly, we are
told, of the same dimensions with the church of St. Peter, at Rome; but this we
apprehend not to be true: the temple of Esculapius (the ruins of which are
still to be seen) are not less celebrated for a statue of Apollo, which was
taken from this temple by the Carthaginians, and continued the greatest
ornament of Carthage for many years; and was, at last, restored by Scipio, at
the final destruction of that city. Some Sicilians allege, that it was
afterward carried to Rome, and is the Apollo of Belvidere.

The ancient walls are mostly cut out of the rock; the catacombs and sepulchers
are all very great; and the monument of Tero, king of Agrigentum, one of the
first of the Sicilian tyrants, whose name is mentioned by Herodotus and Pindar,
must be more than two thousand years old.

All these mighty ruins, and the whole mountain on which it stands, are
composed of a concretion of sea-shells, and cemented by a kind of sand, or
gravel, and now become as hard, and, perhaps, more durable than marble; a
proof, that this globe must have under-gone many convulsions, not recorded in
any history.

The magnificence, the pomp, the hospitality of the ancient inhabitants of
Agrigentum, may be read in Diodorus Siculus, Pliny, Solinus, Virgil, Timeus,
and others. In the great church, at Agrigentum, there is a remarkable echo;
something in the manner of our whispering gallery at St. Paul's, though more
difficult to be accounted for. If one person stands at the West gate, and
another places himself on the cornice, at the most distant point of the church,
exactly behind the great altar, they can hold a conversation in very low
whispers. For many years this singularity was not known; and, several of the
confessing chairs being placed near the great altar, the wags, who were in the
secret, used to take their station at the door of the cathedral; and thus
heard, distinctly, every word that passed between the confessor and his
penitent; of which they did not fail to make their own use, when occasion
offered. The most secret intrigues were discovered; and such ladies as were
disposed to intrigue, were very well known. This lead every woman in Agrigentum
to change, either her gallant, or her confessor. Yet, still it was the same. --
At last, however, the cause was found out; the chairs were removed, and other
precautions taken, to prevent the future discovery of such sacred mysteries.

CHAP. IX. Of the Manners of the Sicilians, their Amusements, and Traveling.
THE Sicilians, says Brydone, are much more animated in conversation, than
either the French or Neapolitans; and their action is generally so just, and so
expressive of their sentiments, that without hearing what is said, one may
comprehend the subject of their discourse. The origin of this custom they carry
so far back, as the time of the earliest tyrants of Syracuse; who, to prevent
conspiracies, had forbidden their subjects, under heavy penalties, to be seen
talking together in parties. This induced them to invent a method of
communicating their ideas by action, which they pretend has been transmitted to
posterity ever since.

The people of Sicily, till lately, retained a great many ridiculous and
superstitious customs, particularly in their marriage and funeral ceremonies;
some of them are still retained in the wild and mountainous part of the island.
As soon as the marriage ceremony is performed, two of the attendants are ready
to cram a spoonful of honey into the mouths of the bride and bridegroom, as
emblematical of their love and union, which they hope will continue as sweet to
their souls, as is honey to their palates; they then begin to throw handfuls of
wheat upon them, which is continued all the way to the house of the bridegroom;
probably, some remains of an ancient rite to Ceres. They fancy it procures them
a numerous progeny; but, without this, they are abundantly prolific. Women
frequently, says Brydone, having upwards of forty children. Carrera mentions
one who had forty-seven. The young couple are not allowed to partake of the
marriage feast; and this to teach them temperance, and patience; but, when
dinner is finished, a great bone is presented to the bridegroom, by the bride's
father, or one of her nearest relations, who pronounces these words, " Rodi tu
quest' osso, etc." "Pick you this bone, for you have now taken in hand to pick
one, which you will find much harder, and of more difficult digestion." Hence,
probably, the old saying, "I Will give him a bone to pick."

Like most other nations in Europe, they carefully avoid marrying in the month
of May, as inauspicious; a piece of superstition, perhaps, older than the time
of the Romans. But the marriages, of the Sicilian nobility, are celebrated with
great magnificence. The ladies marry very young, and often live to see the
fifth or sixth generation. They are generally sprightly and agreeable, says
Brydone; but what the English would call ordinary. They have remarkable fine
hair, know how to adorn it to the greatest advantage, and pride themselves on
their female ancestors', in a dearth of bow-strings, when Palermo was besieged,
cutting off their hair, and twisting it into strings, for destruction to their
enemies; which heroism saved the town till assistance was procured. Their hair,
now, discharges no other shafts than those of Cupid; and the only cords it
forms, are the cords of love.

The Sicilians are much fonder of study, than their neighbors on the
continent, and their education much more attended to; so opposite are they to
the Italian nobility in general, who have nothing but small-talk; the Sicilian
nobility talk on subjects of literature, history, and politics, but chiefly of
poetry; this is a universal topic. Every one, in some period of his life, is
sure to be inspired; and a lover is never believed, whilst he speaks in prose;
but is reckoned true, in proportion as he is poetical.

Many of the young nobility speak English, and are well acquainted with our
poets and philosophers; our language is a part of their polite education, and
they pride themselves in associating with the well-bred English; but do not
seem pleased with their neighbors of the continent.

The native language of Sicily is now a mixture, of Norman, Roman, German,
Italian, Spanish, and some remnants of the old tongue; the island having been
overrun, at times, by these nations. I searched among their literature, says
Swinburne, and met with no good prose-composition; and scarcely a poet of
moderate genius is to be discovered among versifiers that have rhymed their
native dialect.

The luxury of the people here, says Brydone, like that of the Neapolitans,
consists chiefly in their equipages and horses; but, by a wise law of the King
of Sardinia, still in force, the viceroy alone is allowed to drive in Palermo
with six horses; the praeter, the archbishop, the president of the parliament,
with four; all the rest of the nobility are restricted to two, but drive four
out of the city. Every family of distinction has, at least, two or three
carriages in daily use; the wife of a man of fashion has always one at her
command; and the upper servants of the first families have one also for them.

Prince is a common title here; the eldest sons take the title of marquis, or
count, and the younger sons are called dons; the daughters donnas, before their
christian names; as we call the daughters, and younger sons of dukes, lady and
lord.

They make very splendid entertainments; and it is a custom, says Swinburne, at
such entertainments at Girgenti, (he is not sure it was the same at Palermo)
that none of the family will taste a morsel till the strangers have helped
themselves; they are then to help the persons of the family they dine with.
This custom, he apprehends, was founded on an idea, of having given every thing
to the guest, and then receiving at his hands what he could spare.

Some of their amusements we have described. They have a very good opera at
Palermo; and Brydone says, he was present at a ballet, which consisted of a
representation of Vauxhall Gardens, in London; in which all the outre
characters of the English, in dress, and manner, caricatured, from the upper to
the lower class of people, are exhibited, and with no small degree of humor.
Three quakers were introduced, as duped by three ladies of the town, in concert
with three jack-tars, their lovers.

The Sicilians are passionately fond of loud wind and instrumental music; and,
upon great holidays, will collect before a church-door, forty or fifty drums,
all beating together; for the greater the noise, the more honor for the saint.

The account of traveling in Sicily, where there are no post-roads, no
public-carriages, or any inns, we will give our readers from Brydone; who
crossed the island in two or three places. Being well recommended, he had the
favor of those who could accommodate him with mules, guards, etc.

When Mr. Brydone proposed setting off from Messina, toward Catania, the
prince of Villa Franca told him, he would give orders for guards to attend him,
who should be answerable for every thing; that whatever number of mules he had
occasion for, should be at the door of the inn, at any hour he should appoint;
that the guards he should send, were men of the most determined resolution, as
well as the most approved fidelity; and would not fail to chastise, on the
spot, any person who should presume to impose on him.

These guards, Mr. Brydone discovered afterward, to be some of the most
daring, and hardened villains, perhaps, that are to be met with upon earth;
who, in any other country, would have been broken on the wheel, or hung in
chains; but are here publicly protected. The prince's secretary told him, that
in the East part of the island, called Val Demoni (from the devils that are
supposed to inhabit Mount Aetna) it has ever been found impracticable to
extirpate the banditti; there being numberless caverns, and subterraneous
passages, in that mountain, where no troops could possibly pursue them; that,
besides, as they are known to take a dreadful revenge on all who have offended
them, the prince of Villa Franca has embraced it, not only as the safest, but
as the wisest and most political scheme, to become their declared patron and
protector; and such of them as think proper to leave their recesses, though
only for a time, are sure to meet with good encouragement and security in his
service. They enjoy the most unbounded confidence; which, in no instance, they
have ever yet been found to make an improper, or a dishonest use of. They are
clothed in the prince's livery, yellow and green, with silverlace; and wear
likewise a badge of their honorable order, which entitles them to universal
fear and respect from the people.

In some circumstances, these banditti are the most respectable people in the
island; and have, by much, the highest and most romantic notions of what they
call their point of honor; that, however criminal they may be with regard to
society in general; yet, with respect to one another, and to every person, to
whom they have once professed it, they have ever maintained the most unshaken
fidelity. The magistrates have often been obliged to protect them, and even pay
them court, being known to be perfectly determined and desperate; and so
extremely vindictive, that they will put any person to death, who has ever
given them just cause of provocation. On the other hand, Brydone was
well-informed, that it never was known, that any person who had put himself
under their protection, and showed that he had confidence in them, had cause to
repent it, or was injured by them, in the most minute trifle; but, on the
contrary, they will protect him from impositions of every kind, and scorn to go
halves with the landlord, like most other conductors and traveling servants;
and will defend them with their lives, if there is occasion. But those, of
their number, who have enlisted themselves in the service of society, are known
and respected by the other banditti all over the island; and the persons of
those they accompany, are ever held sacred. For these reasons, most travelers
choose to hire a couple of them, from town to town, and may then travel over the
island in safety. Two recent stories will serve to illustrate their character.

A number of people were found digging in a place, where some treasure was
supposed to have been concealed, during the plague; this being forbidden under
severe penalties, they were immediately taken to prison, and expected to have
been treated without mercy; but, luckily for the rest, one of these banditti
happened to be of the number. He wrote to the prince of Villa Franca, and made
use of such powerful arguments in their favor, they were all immediately set
at liberty. This serves to show their consequence with the civil power. The
other story will give our readers a strong idea of their barbarous ferocity,
and the horrid mixture of stubborn vice, and virtue, (if it may be called by
that name) that seems to direct their actions. They have a practice of
borrowing money from the country people, who dare never refuse them; and, if
they promise to pay it, they have ever been found punctual and exact, both as
to the time and sum; and would rather rob and murder an innocent person, than
fail of payment at the day appointed; and this they have been often obliged to
do, in order (as they say) to fulfill their engagements, and save their honor.

It happened, at the time Mr. Brydone was at Messina, that the brother of one
of these fellows having occasion for money, and not knowing how to procure it,
determined to make use of his brother's name and authority; an artifice, which
he thought would not easily be discovered. He, accordingly, went to a country
priest, and told him, his brother had occasion for twenty ducats, which he
desired he would immediately lend him. The priest assured him, he had not then
so large a sum; but that, if he would return in a few days, it should be ready
for him. The other replied, that he was afraid to return to his brother with
that answer; and desired that he would, by all means, take care to keep out of
his way, at least, till such time as he had pacified him; otherwise, he could
not be answerable for the consequences. As bad fortune would have it, the
priest and the robber met in a narrow road. The former trembled, as the latter
approached; and, at last, dropped on his knees to beg for mercy. The robber,
astonished at his behavior, desired to know the cause of it. The trembling
priest answered, "Il denaro, il denaro," "The money, the money" -- but send
your brother tomorrow and you shall have it. The haughty robber assured him,
that he disdained taking money of a poor priest; adding, that if any of his
brothers had been low enough to make such a demand, he himself was ready to
advance the sum. The priest then acquainted him with the visit he had received
the preceding night, from his brother, by his order; assuring him, that had he
been master of the sum, he should immediately have lent it. Well, said the
robber, I will now convince you, whether my brother or I are most to be
believed; you shall go with me to his house, which is but a few miles off. On
their arrival at the door, the robber called on his brother; who, never
suspecting the discovery, came immediately to the balcony; but, on perceiving
the priest, began to make excuses for his conduct. The robber told him, there
was no excuse to be made, that he only desired to know the fact, whether he had
gone to borrow money of that priest, in his name? On his saying he had, the
robber with deliberate coolness, raised his blunderbuss to his shoulder, and
shot him dead; and, turning to the astonished priest, "You will now be
persuaded," said he, "that I have no intention of robbing you at least."

This hero might have been one of the guards, appointed to conduct Mr. Brydone
and his company on the road; for, the prince's secretary told him, that if any
person should presume to impose upon him, to the value of a single baioc (which
is a very small coin) he would certainly put him to death. He gave the
secretary an ounce, about eleven shillings, on which he thanked his excellency,
for so he called him; and declared, bowing, he was the most honorabilis signor,
he had ever met with; and that, if he pleased, he himself would have the honor
of attending him, and would chastise any person who should presume to take the
wall of him, or affront him in the least.

The guards sent with Mr. Brydone, were two of the most resolute, and desperate
of this gang; two great drawcansir figures, armed cap-a-pie, with a broad
hanger each, two enormous pistols, and a long arquebuse, kept cocked and ready
for action, in all suspicious places; where they recounted wonderful stories of
robberies and murders, in which they had been the principal actors. They took
great pains that the travelers, under their escort, should not pay too much,
taxing the bills as they thought proper. So, one day's dinner, for eleven men,
and feeding ten mules and horses, did not amount to half-a-guinea; and, though
these guards are paid one ounce each, per day; they save, at least, one-half of
it in the bills. They entertained their company with some of their feats, and
made no scruple of owning, that they had put several people to death; but
added, Mas tutti, tutti honorabilmente. That is to say, they did not do it in a
dastardly manner, nor without just provocation. There possibly may be truth in
their stories; a number of gibbets being erected on the road in terrorem; and
every little baron has the power of life and death in his own domain.
Four-and-twenty of these desperate banditti, were lately seized, after a strong
resistance, wherein several were killed on both sides; and, notwithstanding
some were under the protection of the nobility, and in their service, they were
all hanged.

CHAP X. On their Government, etc.
THE feudal system was first introduced here, by count Rugiero, about the
middle of the eleventh century; immediately after he had driven the Saracens
out of the island, and has continued ever since. He divided Sicily into three
parts; the first, by consent of his army, was given to the church; the second
he bestowed on his officers; and the third he reserved for himself.

Of these three branches, or as they call them, braccios (arms) he composed his
parliament; and the form still remains. The braccio militare is composed of all
the barons of the kingdom, to the number of two hundred and fifty-one, who are
still obliged to military service. Their chief is the prince of Butero, who is
hereditary president of the parliament; for, in conformity to the feudal
government, some of the great officers are still hereditary. The three
archbishops, all the bishops, abbe's, priors, and dignified clergy, amounting
to near seventy, form the braccio ecclesiastice. The archbishop of Palermo is
their chief. The braccio demaniale is formed by election, like our House of
Commons. There are forty-three royal cities, styled Demaniale, that have a
right to elect members. Every house-holder has a vote at this election. Their
chief is the member for Palermo, who is also praeter, or mayor of the city. He
is an officer of the highest rank, and his power is very extensive; inferior
only to the viceroy, in whose absence the greatest part of the authority
devolves on him. He has a company of grenadiers for his body-guard, and
receives the title of Excellency.

The praeter, with six senators, who are styled patricians, have the management
of the civil government of the city. He is appointed every year by the King, or
by the viceroy, which is the same thing; for the people do not even think of
acting; so that the very shadow of liberty has now disappeared, as well as the
substance. In short, all courts, both civil and criminal, are appointed by
royal authority; and all offices depend entirely on the caprice of the
sovereign; but they have no inquisition.

The laws of Sicily are scattered through a number of volumes; these, the King
of Sardinia intended to abridge, and collect into one code; but, unfortunately,
was not long enough in possession of the island, to accomplish this useful
work; but, where there is an authority above law, law can be of little use.

The power of the viceroy is very absolute; he has not only the command of all
the military force in the kingdom, but likewise presides with unbounded
authority in all civil tribunals; and, being also invested with the legantine
power, his sway is equally great in matters of religion. He has the right of
nominating to all the great offices in the kingdom, and confirming of all
dignities, both civil and ecclesiastical.

In visiting the prisons, a ceremony which he performs with great pomp, twice a
year; he has the power of liberating whatever prisoners he pleases; of
reducing, or altering their sentences; their crimes and accusations having been
first read over to him. And, that there may be some appearance of a regard to
law and justice, his counselor always attends him, on these occasions, to
point out the limits of the law.

The whole military force of Sicily, amounts, at present, to nine thousand five
hundred men; about twelve hundred of which are cavalry. Many of their cities
and fortresses would require a very numerous garrison to defend them;
particularly Messina, Syracuse, or Palermo: but, indeed, the state of their
fortifications is such, as well as that of their artillery, that were they
inclined, they could but make a small defense.

If this island had a good navy, or was in the hands of a good naval power, it
must command the whole trade of the Levant. There are several little ports at
each end of it; besides the great ones of Trapani, Syracuse, and Messina, which
lie pretty near the three angles of the triangle. Whatever ships had passed
either of these, the others would be apprized of, in the space of half an hour,
by means of signal towers, which are erected all round the island, to warn them
against sudden invasions from the Barbary coast. These towers are built on
every little promontory, within sight of each other. Fires are always kept
ready for lighting, and a person is appointed to watch at each of them; so that
the whole island, they say, can be alarmed in the space of an hour.

The Sicilians have no other means, says De Non, of borrowing on their land,
but of the farmers, on the renewal of their leases; the lands being ever
entailed on the eldest son, and subject to no other incumberance, than
annuities for the younger boys, or portions for the girls; the feudal laws
being in as full force for the nobility, in Sicily, as at the Norman conquest,
which produces lawsuits for inheritances without end; and enriches a swarm of
lawyers, who are found in crowds at Palermo, and who are all wealthy. Right
being here put up to auction, and justice become a branch of commerce, all the
money in the kingdom flows into this city, through the channel of the
tribunals; and is again distributed among the public, by the luxury of their
presidents and counselors.

Remote from their King, whom they know only by his representative, the
Sicilians are accustomed to consider him as a pensioner; whom they defraud of
his due, whilst they pride themselves in granting him free gifts; and, from
time to time, make experiments of disobedience, with the sole view of
performing an act that may assert their freedom.

The Sicilians have had so many sovereigns, that they are accustomed to like
none of them; and to give the preference only to him, with whom they can make
the best conditions. They are ever ready to receive the sovereign, who
establishes his authority by force, or him who grants them the most favorable
terms; but always with the implied reserve of recurring, in case of violence
and tyranny, to the well-known methods of revolt, Sicilian vespers, or others
of the same nature. Their country furnishing them with all sorts of productions
in abundance, they are more difficult to reduce, than any nation; it being
impossible to keep them in subjection, by refusing them any kind of supplies.
They may be despoiled, but can never be starved, or ruined.

ERRATA.
VOL. XV. Page 318, line 8, for Chian and Valernian, read Chios and Falernian.
VOL. XVI. Page 9, the last line but one should read thus, Pallida mors aequo
pulsat pede pauperum tabernas,
A DESCRIPTION OF THE ISLAND OF MALTA. FROM DE NON, BRYDONE, AND OTHERS.
CHAP. I. Of the History, Constitution, etc.
MALTA was anciently called Iberia, afterward Ogygia; and by the Greeks,
Melite; from which, at last, the Saracens formed the appellation of Malta.
Mention is made of this island, Acts xxviii. Its length is computed at about
twenty Italian miles; its greatest breadth twelve; and its circumference sixty.
It is situated in the Mediterranean sea, eighty miles South of Sicily; lying in
North Latitude 36, and between 14 and 15 degrees West Longitude.

Malta, as well as Sicily, was long under the tyranny of the Saracens; from
which they were both delivered about the middle of the eleventh century, by the
valor of the Normans; after which time, the fate of Malta commonly rested on
that of Sicily; till the emperor Charles V. about 1530, gave it, together with
the adjoining island of Gozzo, to the knights of St. John, of Jerusalem; who,
at that time, had lost the island of Rhodes. In testimony of this concession,
the grand master is still obliged, every year, to send a falcon to the King of
Sicily, or his viceroy; and, on every new succession, to swear allegiance: and
to receive, from the hands of the Sicilian monarch, the investiture of these
two islands.

Unproductive in itself, (for it is one solid rock, not covered five inches
with soil) the garrison, and fortifications necessary for its defense, were too
burthen-some for its successive sovereigns. It became the emporium, and place
of refreshment, for all European vessels, trading in the Mediterranean; and
fell, successively, under the power of every invader. It required, therefore, a
sovereignty, which, from its nature could only remain neuter; too feeble to
give umbrage to any other power, and derives all it subsistence from without.
It was necessary also, that its possessors, wealthy in other countries, should
bring with them, in specie, what the island is obliged to expend in the
purchase of articles of subsistence; that they should be at once monks,
soldiers, and bachelors, composing one and the same family; the economy of
whose individual members should revert, by inheritance, to the accumulated
mass, which pays the labor, and provides for the subsistence, of the active
inhabitants; who had increased, since the establishment of the order, from
10,000, to 50,000, including the two adjoining isles of Gozzo and Cumino.

Could the sovereign then do a more politic thing, than bestow it on the
knights, as he did; by which it is become an epitome of all Europe, and an
assemblage of the younger brothers, who are commonly the best, of its first
families? It is, probably, one of the best academies for politeness, in this
part of the globe; besides, where every one is entitled, by law, to demand
satisfaction for the least breach of it, people are under a necessity of being
very exact, and circumspect, in their words and actions.

All the knights, and commanders, have much the appearance of gentlemen, and
men of the world. Here are no characters in the extreme. The ridicules and
prejudices, of every particular nation, are, by degrees softened, and worn off,
by the familiar intercourse and collision of each other. It is curious, says
Brydone, to observe the effect it produces upon various people, that compose
this little medley. The French skip, the German strut, and the Spanish stalk,
are mingled together, in such small proportions, that none are striking; yet
every one of these nations still retain something of their original
chacteristic; for though the Parisian has, in a great measure, lost his
assuming air; the Spaniard his taciturnity and solemnity; the German his
formality and his pride; yet, still you see the German, the Frenchman, and the
Spaniard.

This institution, which is a strange compound of military and ecclesiastic,
has now subsisted for near seven hundred years; and, though one of the
firstborn, has long survived every other child of chivalry. It possesses great
riches, in most of the Catholic counties of Europe; and did so in England,
before the time of Henry VIII. but that capricious tyrant seized on all their
possessions, when he plundered the church.

The grand master, who is the sovereign of this little country, is chosen by a
committee of twenty-one, nominated by seven nations, three out of each nation.
The election must be over within three days after the death of the former grand
master; and, during these three days, scarce a soul sleeps at Malta. All is
cabal and intrigue; and most of the knights are masked, to prevent their
particular attachment, and connexions from being known. The moment the election
is over, every thing returns to its former channel.

When we consider the credit of the work from which the following story is
taken, namely, the well-written History of the Order of Malta, by the Abbe
Vertot, our readers may possibly be pleased with a relation of it, as it
occurred under the grand master Helion of Villeneuve, about the year 1342.

On this island, according to the record of all the authors of that time, was a
crocodile of an enormous size: this amphibious animal kept its abode, in a
hollow ground, at the top of the mountain St. Ettienne, two miles distant from
the town; from whence it made its appearance, from time to time. Sheep, cows,
and even shepherds, were suddenly missed, and became the prey of this monster.
Several knights went forth to destroy it, but none returned; but at the
commencement of the fourteenth century firearms were not invented, and the
skin of this animal, being covered with scales, was impregnable to arrows, and
javelins. He fought to advantage, and was conqueror in every combat. This urged
the grand master to forbid any further attempts of the knights to destroy it,
on pain of expulsion from the order.

One only broke through this strict injunction. Dieu-don de Gozon, with a
heroism peculiar to the times, determined once more to make the attempt;
notwithstanding the ill-fate of his brethren, and the command of the grand
master to the contrary; choosing rather to lose his life in the conflict, than
suffer such a dangerous animal to exist.

Animated by the true spirit of chivalry, Gozon meditated on means to carry his
design into execution; and retired, for that purpose, to Castle Gozon, in
Languedoc. Having observed that the crocodile had no scales upon its belly, he
regulated his measures accordingly.

He ordered a figure of this beast to be made, in wood, which he carried in his
mind, and had it painted of the natural color. This done, he taught two dogs,
at his call, to attack it about the belly; whilst he stood by on horseback,
covered with a coat of mail, and struck him often with his lance.

After having practiced them in this, for some months, and taught his dogs
perfectly, Gozon returned to Rhodes. Immediately on his arrival, without
discovering his intent, he sent his arms, un-noticed, to a church, on the
mountain of St. Ettienne, and followed there himself, attended by two servants,
whom GOZON KILLING the CROCODILE.
he brought with him from France. Having offered up his prayers to God, in the
church, he put on his armor, mounted his horse, and ordered his two servants
to return to France, in case he should perish in the combat, and acquaint his
countrymen with the disaster; but, in case he should fortunately wound the
monster, or kill him, to come up to him with all expedition. He then rode down
the mountain, accompanied by his dogs, and approached the crocodile's abode,
with manly courage. The monster appeared, and ran at the knight, with open
mouth, and eyes flaming with rage and fire. Gozon attempted to pierce it with
his lance, but without effect; its scales were impenetrable. He was on the
point of giving him a second thrust; but his horse took fright, at the noise,
and stench, of an animal he had never seen before. It darted on one side, he
fell off, and would have caused the death of his master, had be not, with
wonderful coolness, drawn his sword; and, assisted by his two dogs, attacked
the crocodile again. The thrusts of his sword were as fruitless as those of his
lance. The monster threw him down with the stroke of his tail; and the knight
would inevitably have perished, had not his dogs seized the crocodile, by the
belly, and severely wounded it.

This gave the knight time to rise again, and to run his sword, to the haft,
into the belly of the animal, at a place where it was not covered with scales.
The blood ran rapidly from the wound, and the monster fell, mortally wounded,
on its back; and this threw the knight on the ground again. He would now have
been pressed to death, by the weight of the crocodile, had his two servants not
hastened up, and drawn him from under it. He was in a fit, and they thought him
dead; but, having taken the helmet from his head, he opened his eyes; and the
first agreeable object, that struck him, was the death of the enemy. The honor
of having overcome a monster, that had been the death of several of his
brethren, gave fresh motion to his blood, and fresh elasticity to his nerves.

The news of this victory; and the death of the crocodile, had scarce reached
the town, when multitudes came forth to the field of battle; and the knights of
Malta conducted their brother, in triumph, to the palace of the grand master.
But how great was Gozon's astonishment, when he saw the grand master approach
him with anger. Had you forgot my order, said Villeneuve, with the tone of a
regent? Can you hope to escape with impunity, in having offended against my
commands? Gozon was instantly carried to prison, without being suffered to say
a word in his defense; nor could all that the knights, in general, say, soften
Villeneuve's resentment. The grand master called a council of war; and
represented to them, that it was absolutely necessary to punish his
disobedience; which was far more injurious to the order, than many such
monsters. Like Manlius, the Roman, he insisted upon it that the conqueror
should be punished for this victory.

The unfortunate Gozon was consequently adjudged to have forfeited the robe of
the order; a punishment more severe to him than death itself. But the grand
master, after having satisfied the law, so arranged matters, that he was
requested to grant a favor, which he himself would have begged, had he not
been grand master. At the request of the knights, he restored the robe to the
chevalier, and loaded him with favors; and the head of the monster was fixed
up, at one of the town-gates, as a monument of victory. Thevenot says, in his
travels, which he published in 1637, either that he saw it, or a picture of it.
According to this author, the jaw split to the ears, his teeth and eyes were of
an uncommon size, the nostrils round, and the color gray.

We have given this account as we find it in Vertot, leaving it to the judgment
of our readers to decide on its probability. So much we find in cotemporary
writers, from inscriptions, and other tokens of the same period, that chevalier
Gozon had killed a great formidable animal, and had acquired great honor among
the people of Rhodes in so doing; who considered him as their deliverer. This
may easily be credited.

The grand master gave him, soon after, several lucrative places, to indemnify
him; and, finding that Gozon had as much prudence as valor, appointed him his
lieutenant; convinced that a man, who had so nobly ventured his life for the
good of his countrymen; would defend them, in war, against any enterpize of an
enemy, with equal, if not still greater, courage.

Of this renowned man we will give another anecdote, still more characteristic.
The grand master, Villeneuve, died in 1346. Many aspired to this important
office. The elder knights, though resting in peace, after the actions of their
younger days, wished for a grand master of a peaceful disposition. The younger
ones were of a contrary turn; they coveted a keen and fiery chief, who would
lead them to war; and give them an opportunity of acquiring glory and riches.
Gozon was one of the competitors; and, on entering the council, or conclave, he
said, "On my admission here, I took a solemn oath to give my suffrage to the
worthiest knight; and propose, to this exalted post, the man, who, in my
opinion, has most the good of the order at heart. Having considered seriously
on the state of Christendom; having taken into consideration the continual war
we have to carry on against the Infidels; in a word, having impartially
considered that firmness of character, which a grand master ought to be
possessed of, in order to support the laws with respect, to counteract every
disorder in the state, and show an intrepidity in the most dangerous
situations; I having weighed all this in my mind, I declare it to be my
opinion, that no one can fill this post better than -- myself." Gozon then
enlarged, in a very eloquent speech, on his own merits and virtues. The combat
with the monster was not forgotten, but he particularly brought to mind his
conduct, whilst he was lieutenant to the grand master. "You already know,"
continued he, "my manner of governing; -- you know what you have to expect from
me; -- and you know also that you cannot, without injustice, deny me your
votes." The surprised assembly acknowledged his merits, and chose him grand
master, unanimously.

Since this time it has been the custom to ask for the grand mastership of
Malta, without having killed a monster.

The grand master of Malta is called Serene Highness, and Eminence. He has the
disposal of all lucrative places, makes whom he pleases of his council; and in
all the councils, that compose the jurisdiction of this little nation, he
presides himself, and has two votes. He has the disposal of twenty-one
commendaries, worth upwards of L. 2000 a year, and one priory every five years;
and, as there are always a number of competitors, and expectants, he is very
much crushed. He is always a priest; and esteems his situation the most eminent
a private individual can obtain, except the Papacy. In short, says Brydone, he
is more absolute, and possesses more power, than most sovereign princes. His
household attendance, and court, are all very princely; and yet, says De Non, he
is only what a consul was at Rome, an archon at Athens; and what a landman now
is in Switzerland. But he has a privy council; where every matter, to be
discussed, must be proposed by the grand master; so that, unless he sees he can
carry his point, he is silent; and, of course, absolute. Notwithstanding this,
he may not be so happy. Surrounded by ambitious pretenders, his court is a prey
to intrigue; and his territory is so limited, that he can never remove far from
his tomb, toward which he will hasten, though a thousand of his brotherhood
regret that his approaches are so slow. Nay, when within his palace, under ties
to all the sovereigns of Europe, who grant unmeaning honors to his flag; and
without a force sufficient to act the part of a neutral power, he is
continually reduced to the necessity of making apologies; and to atone, for
every seeming offense, to those princes who demand it; and, in his own country,
surrounded with fortifications, with mortars, and with cannon, this unfortunate
sovereign is perpetually, on the defense, against intestine cabals,
conspiracies, and revolts; and cannot have a moment's ease.

The land-force of Malta is equal to the number of men in the island, fit to
bear arms. They have about five hundred regulars, belonging to the ships of
war; and one hundred and fifty compose the guard of the prince. The two
islands, of Malta and Gozzo, contain about one hundred and fifty thousand
inhabitants. The men are exceedingly robust and hardy; and will row standing,
shoving the handle of the oars from them, for ten or twelve hours, without
intermission.

Their navy consists of four galleys, three galliots, four ships, of sixty
guns, and a frigate of thirty-six; besides a number of quick sailing little
vessels, called Scampaira's, or run-aways. Their ships, galleys, and
fortifications, are not only well supplied with excellent artillery, but they
have invented an ordnance of their own, unknown to all the world besides; their
very rocks are cut into artillery, being hollowed out, in many places, in the
form of vast mortars; the charge of which is said to be a barrel of gunpowder;
on which they place a lage piece of wood, made exactly to fit the mouth of the
chamber. On this they heap a great quantity of cannon balls, shells, or other
deadly materials; and, when an enemy's ship approaches the harbor, they fire
the whole into the air; making a shower, for two or three hundred yards round,
that would sink any vessel.

Brydone has just seen the naval force of Malta, in its greatest gala. It was
the departure of a Maltese squadron, to assist the French against the Bey of
Tunis; who had offended the French King, by refusing to deliver up, without
ransom, the Corsican slaves, that were taken, before the French were in
possession of that island. The squadron consisted of three galleys, the largest
with nine hundred men; each of the others with seven hundred; three galliots,
and several scampaira's. These immense bodies were all worked by oars, and
moved with great regularity. The admiral went first, and the rest in order,
according to their dignity. The sea was crowded with boats, it was a fine
evening, and the ramparts, and fortifications, were filled with company. The
port resounded, on all sides, with the discharge of heavy artillery, announced
by the galleys, and galliots, as they left the harbor; and, as the echo here
is uncommonly great, it had a very noble effect. There were about thirty
knights in each galley, making signals, all the way, to their mistresses, who
were weeping for their departure upon the bastions.

Notwithstanding the supposed bigotry of the Maltese, the spirit of toleration
is so strong, that they have suffered the Turks, their sworn enemies, to erect
a mosque, and punish any who disturb them.

Perhaps Malta is the only country where duelling is permitted by law; for, as
their establishment originated in chivalry, they appear, in some points, to
keep it up; though they so restrict this toleration, as greatly to lessen its
danger. The duelists are obliged to fight in one particular street of the city;
and are obliged, under severe censure, to put up their swords, when ordered so
to do by a woman, a priest, or a knight. But even this does not prevent
bloodshed. A cross is always painted on the wall, opposite to the spot where a
knight has been killed in a duel; and this is in commemoration of his fall.
Brydone says he counted about twenty of such crosses.

Brydone says, about three months before he was there, two knights had a
dispute at a billiard table. One of them, after a great deal of abusive
language, gave the other a blow; and, to the astonishment of all Malta, after
so great an affront, absolutely refused to fight his antagonist. -- The
challenge was repeated; he had time to reflect on the consequences, and still
refused. For this he was condemned to make the amend honorable, in the great
church, for forty-five days, successively; then to be confined to a dark
dungeon, for five years; and, after this, to remain a prisoner for life. The
unfortunate young man, who received the blow, was also in disgrace, not having
had an opportunity of wiping it out, in the blood of his adversary.

CHAP. II. Of the Island, its Productions, People, etc.
MR. Brydone, and his company, approached Malta by sea; having passed from
Sicily in a six-oared shallow boat, scarce able to hold six persons, besides
the rowers; but the sea, in the channel between the two islands, being pretty
calm, at certain seasons, it is the only vessel that passes it.

The aspect of the country, says he, is far from pleasing; the whole being, as
I observed, on a rock of freestone, thinly covered with earth; yet their
crops, in general, were abundant, owing to the dews that fall, during the
spring and summer months, and their corn and cotton looked well; it was then in
the beginning of the month of June. Their barley harvest was then over, and
they were just finishing that of wheat. All the corn, grown in the island, will
support the people but five months; the crop they must depend on is the cotton.
They begin sowing in the middle of May, finish in the middle of June, and reap
in October, and beginning of November.

The cotton-plant rises to the height of eighteen inches, and is covered with a
number of nuts, or pods, full of cotton. These, when ripe, they cut off every
morning, before the sun rises; as the sun's heat turns it yellow. They
manufacture this into a variety of stuffs, and very fine stockings; some have
been sold for ten sequins a pair, near seven pounds ten shillings English.
Their worsteds and blankets are esteemed all over Europe. The chief
manufactures are at Gozzo. Small quantities of the sugar-cane are here
cultivated. The Maltese oranges are reckoned the finest in the world. The trees
are covered with fruit, from November till the middle of June. They are red
oranges; the juice is red as blood; being the common orange-bud, grafted on the
pomegranate stock. The greatest part of this crop is sent, as presents, to
crowned-heads, and to the relations of the knights.

The industry of the Maltese, in cultivating their little island, is
inconceivable. There is not an inch of ground lost in any part of it; and,
where the soil failed, they have covered the stone with earth, brought from
Sicily, in ships and boats. The whole island is full of enclosures of
freestone; which, in summer, reflects so much light, and heat, as to be very
troublesome to the eyes.

The island is covered with country-houses, and villages, besides the towns
which they call cities; though there are only two, the Valetta, and the Citta
Vecchia, that deserve that name. Every little village has a noble church,
elegantly finished, and adorned with marble statues, rich tapestry, and a
profusion of silver plate. They are, says Brydone, by much the handsomest
churches I ever saw.

The city of Valetta stands upon a peninsula, between two of the finest ports
in the world; which are defended, by almost impregnable fortifications. That on
the south-west side of the city is the largest, is scarce a quarter of a mile
broad, at the mouth, commanded, on each side, by batteries that would tear the
strongest ship to pieces, before she could enter. Besides A PLAN of the CITY of
MALTA.

References.
1 (...) o^ St. (...) 2 Women's Hospital 3 Magis^^^^ Palace 4 St. Mary Magdalen
5 The (...) 6 (...) Prison 7 St. (...) Chapel 8 (...) Church and College 9 Our
Lady Chapel 10 Dominician Church 11 St. (...) Church 12 St. (...) 13 St. John
Bap^. Church 14 The Market Place 15 Monast^ry of St. U^^^^^ 16 (...) 17 French
Chapel 18 (...) of Portugal 19 St. (...) of holy Ch^. 20 St. James (...) 21
(...) Church 22 Conservatory Palace 23 St. L^^^ie 24 Treasury Palace 25
^^a^cery Palace 26 German Hotel 27 Arr^gon Hotel 28 The Barrack 29 Augustin's
(...) 30 The Mill and Oven 31 (...) 32 Place of (...) 33 (...) Hotel 34 St.
John C^^^liers 35 St. James C^^^^iers 36 Wood (...) 37 Wind Mill 38 (...)
Church 39 (...) 40 (...) St. Church 41 Hospital for Men 42 Do.... for Women 43
(...) 44 Riccaroli Port 45 Salvador Cattle 46 St. Agne Cattle 47 Butcher Row 48
Galley Hotel for Generals 49 Galley Hotel for Captain 50 Wood Magazine 51 St.
Margaret's Monestry 52 St. Lawrence Church 53 Dominican Church 54 Inguisition
Palace 55 Corpse Barrack 56 Cormes Barefooted 57 St. Crucifix Church 58 St.
Paul's Chapel 59 Market Pl! 60 St. John's Chu! 61 Magazine for the Mature 62
Ship's Magazine 63 St. Cross Church 64 Manoel Carden 65 Mature Magazine 66 St.
Philip Church 67 The Siren Carden A City Valette B Lower Town C Lasencle Town D
The Bormola E Victorause City


map of Malta it is fronted by a quadruple battery, one above another; the
largest of which is on a level with the water. Within the mouth, the harbor
widens into a beautiful basin; running up two miles into the heart of the
island; divided into five distinct harbors, all equally safe; each capable of
containing an immense number of shipping. The soundings are here so very deep,
and surrounded by such high grounds, and fortifications, that the largest ships
of war may ride here, almost without a cable, in the roughest weather. These
batteries are mounted with about eighty of their heaviest artillery; and the
harbor, of course, may be considered as impregnable. The Turks have ever found
it so.

The harbor, on the north side of the city, although only used for fishing,
and as a place of quarantine, would, in any other part of the world, be
considered as inestimable. It is ably defended by very strong works; and in the
center of the basin is an island, on which is built a castle and a lazaretto.

The fortifications of Malta are indeed a most stupenduous work. All the
boasted catacombs of Rome, and Naples, are a trifle to the immense excavations
that have been made in this little island. The ditches, of a vast size, are all
cut out of a solid rock. These extend for many miles, and raise our
astonishment to think that so small a state has been ever able to make them.

One side of the island is so completely fortified by nature, that there was
nothing left for art. The rock is of a great height, and absolutely
perpendicular, from the sea, for several miles. Yet, even on this side, there
are still the vestiges of several ancient roads, with the tracks of carriages
worn deep in the rocks. These roads are now terminated by the precipices with
the sea beneath; and clearly show that, in former ages, this island has been
much larger than it is. Indeed it has often been observed to have been affected
by the irruption of mount Aetna; which may be clearly seen from this. They
reckon the distance near two hundred Italian miles; and the people declare
that, during the irruption, the whole island is illuminated; and, from the
reflection in the water, there appears a great track of fire in the sea, all
the way from Malta to Sicily. The thundering of the mountain is also distinctly
heard.

The city of Valetta is built upon a hill. None of the streets, except the key,
are level. They are all paved with white freestone, which creates a great
dust; and, by its glare, burts the eyes of the people. There are two good inns
in the town. Beautiful and spacious flights of stone steps conduct to large
streets, perfectly strait, and well paved. The houses are built of free stone,
and continue so beautifully white, as to look like new. In short, on
approaching the harbor, the superb prospect, within its innumerable forts, and
its two towns, the old and the new, built in an amphitheatre, gives it an
appearance, and renders it more magnificent, than any other city in the world.
Every edifice, public and private, is remarkably well built; and the whole
seems founded on vast, and noble bastions.

The principal public buildings are, the palace, the infirmary, the arsenal,
the hotels of the seven tongues of the great church of St John. -- The palace
is a noble, though plain, structure; and the grand master is more comfortably
lodged than any prince in Europe, except the King of Sardinia. St. John's is a
magnificent church; the pavement is reckoned the richest in the world. It is
entirely composed of sepulchral monuments, of the finest marbles, porphyry,
lapis lazuli, and a variety of other valuable stones, admirably joined
together, at an incredible expense; representing, in a kind of Mosaic, the
arms, insignia, etc. of the persons they commemorate. There are but two inns,
as I have observed, in this city, the Falcon and the Three Kings; the
accommodations are good, the treatment civil, and the entertainment of the
best, for half-a-crown a day, each.

No spot on earth can be more fortunate, and more fertile, than Sicily; none
can be more unfruitful, more barren, or more wretchedly situated, says De Non,
than Malta. In Sicily crops of every kind are produced; and though they rapidly
succeed, and press upon each other, the peasant, there, is poor, languid, and
disgustingly dirty. At Malta, the farmer can force from the soil a little corn,
and cotton; yet poverty there is so active, so industrious, and so neat, that
it has the air only of abstinence. Large breeches and a shirt of blue linen, a
broad sash, and the arms and feet left naked, form the whole description of the
light dress and ornaments of the Maltese. Their features and complexion are as
Arabian as their language. Interesting and artful in all their bargains, they
are scupulously faithful, in fulfilling every contract, which renders all
commercial intercourse with them safe, and easy. The women are exempted from
every kind of labor, which is entirely performed by the men, even to the most
trivial houshold-work. In imitation of the Levantine and Eastern customs, it
seems as if they limited the use of the sex, to the sole department of
pleasure. Though under a burning sky, they possess the fair skin of the
inhabitants of the North, with the impassioned expression of the Orientals;
their beauty is neither Grecian, nor majestic. but is not, on that account, the
less seducing. With fine complexions, which they carefully preserve, they have
almost all of them large eyes; in which love seems to lie in ambush, beneath
their long eyelids, that gives them a pleasing air of languor, not a little
resembling modesty. Those of the country are said to be faithful to their
husbands; but the women of the city know no more how to resist the gold of
Baillis, than the amorous sighs of the youthful knights; and we accordingly
find, at Malta, the utmost licentiousness of celibacy. Their cresses display
more of coquetry than magnificence. Elegance and neatness constitute their
luxury. They have a custom of shaving themselves, like the men; but then it is
with so much art, that you must come very close to them, to discover the
voluptuous effect of this practice. This operation they perform, very
dexterously, with broken glass.

The 6th of June is held as a thanksgiving for their deliverance from a
terrible conspiracy, that was formed, between thirty and forty years ago, by
the Turkish slaves; at one stroke to put an end to the whole order of Malta.
All the fountains of the palace were to be poisoned; and every slave had taken
a solemn oath to put his master to death.

It was discovered by a Jew, who kept a coffee-house. He understood the Turkish
language; and, over-hearing some discourse he thought suspicious, went and
informed the grand master. The suspected persons were instantly seized, and put
to the torture, and soon confessed the whole. The executions were shocking. One
hundred and twenty-five were put to death, by various torments; some were
burned alive, some were broken on the wheel, and some torn to pieces by four
galleys, rowing different ways, and each bringing off its limb. Since that time
the slaves have been more narrowly watched, and have less liberty, than
formerly.

The horse-races of Malta are of a very uncommon kind; performed without either
saddle, bridle, whip, or spur; and yet the horses run full speed, and afford
much diversion. They are accustomed to the ground for some weeks before; and,
though it is entirely over rock and pavement, there are seldom any accidents.
They have races of asses and mules, performed in the same manner, four times a
year. The rider is only furnished with a weapon like a shoemaker's awl, to push
on his courser, if he is lazy.

The ancient city of Melita stands, nearly, in the center of the island; and,
from its high situation, commands a view of the whole; and, in clear weather,
they say, of part of Barbary and Sicily. It is strongly fortified, and governed
by an officer, called the Hahem. The cathedral is a fine church, exceedingly
large; and was hung, when Brydone was there, with crimson damask, richly laced
with gold.

Not far from the old city is a small church, dedicated to St. Paul; and just
by the church, a miraculous statue of the Saint, with a viper in his hand;
supposed to be placed on the very spot on which the house stood, where he was
received after his shipwreck on this island; and where he shook the viper off
his hand, into the fire, without being hurt by it; at which time, the Maltese
say, the Saint cursed all the venomous animals of the island, and banished them
for ever; as St Peter healed those of his favorite isle. Whether this be the
cause or not, there are no venomous animals in Malta; and the people say, that
vipers have been brought from Sicily, and died, almost, immediately on their
arrival.

Adjoining the church there is the celebrated grotto, in which St. Paul was
imprisoned. It is very damp, and produces a whitish kind of stone; which, they
aver, when reduced to powder, is a sovereign remedy in many diseases. Boxes of
it are sent, annually, to Sicily, Italy, the Levant, and the East Indies; and
what is considered as a standing miracle, notwithstanding this consumption, it
has never been exhausted, nor ever sensibly diminished; the Saint always taking
care to supply them, with a fresh quantity, the day following. It is something
like magnesia, in look and taste. They give a tea-spoonful to children in
fevers, and the smallpox; which produces a copious sweat, about an hour after,
and never fails, they say, to be of service. It is esteemed a certain remedy
against the bite of all venomous animals. There is a very fine statue of St.
Paul, in the middle of this grotto, to which is ascribed great power. St. Paul,
after his shipwreck, continued in this island three months, and preached the
gospel.

The catacombs, not far from this city, are a great work. They are said to
extend fifteen miles under ground. Many people, they say, have been lost in
tracing them; for, branching out into so many parts, they could not find their
way back. The passages, or galleries, are so very narrow, that only one person
can pass at a time; but they are well finished, and well preserved.

The grand master's country palace is represented as an extensive place, with
fine hunting in the woods; but, in fact, it only contains a few scattered
trees, and about half-a-dozen deers; yet, this being the only thing like a wood
in the island, it is esteemed a great curiosity. The palace is as poor a thing;
and the furniture three or four hundred years old, in the most Gothic taste;
but the grand master never resides here.

Great source of water, that supplies the city of Valetta, takes its rise near
this place; and is conveyed by an aqueduct of some thousand arches. The
carriages, to pass from one part of the island to another, are coaches drawn by
one mule; the only kind of vehicle they have.

Indeed you here go out of town, without finding the country; for what is so
called, is as much covered with buildings, as the city, and seems as strongly
fortified, by large continued walls, which hold up or incase the little earth
there is naturally in the island, or what is brought, or fabricated there; for,
by breaking the soft soil, and mixing it with earth and rolling it, the
indefatigable Maltese compose a soil fit for cotton, and they abandon, almost,
every other species of culture for this; which, by its sale, supplies the want
of every other production.

The grand master has lately laid the foundation of a museum, to be the
property of the order, as is the library, which is considerable. They have
found some marble bas-reliefs here, Roman works, which appear, says De Non, to
be portraits; among these is a head of Cicero's daughter.

The isle of Gozzo has been imagined, by many of our modern antiquaries, to
have been the island of Calypso; but this opinion has been some years out of
fashion; and though there is nothing at Malta, which in the least resembles the
description of that island, by Homer and Fenelon, they have now transferred the
residence of that amorous nymph there; and placed her palace at the bottom of
the harbor of la Melleha. Here are a number of romantic characters, cut out of
the rock, more like hermit's cells than any other thing; and yet they call one
of these Calypso's dressing room. It is possible for imagination to destroy all
that now exists, and suppose things to exist, which never could exist; yet
still it is imagination, after all, and nothing else.

The Greeks, undoubtedly, had settlements at Gozzo; for some coins, of Gozzo
itself, are found, representing a head of Diana, with a crescent over it; and,
on the other side, a soldier armed with a sword and buckler, in the action of
attack.



A. Map of the POPES TERRITORIES from MONSR. DANVILLE.
map of Papal holdings

A DESCRIPTION OF THE POPE'S TERRITORIES. FROM BUSCHING, KEYSLER, MOORE,
MARTYN, GROSLEY, SHERLOCK, SHARP, MILLAR, PIOZZI, BARRETTI, AND OTHERS.
CHAP I. Situation, Extent, and general View.
THE dominions of the Holy See compose what the Italians call stato della
chiesa; and are bounded, on the North, by the territories of the states of
Venice; by the Adriatic Sea, on the North-East; by Naples, on the South-East;
by the Tuscan Sea, on the South-West; by Tuscany, on the North-West; and by the
duchies of Modena and Mantua, on the West; which it encompasses on three sides.

These dominions consist of the compagna of Rome; St. Peter's patrimony; the
duchies of Castro, Spoletto and Urbino; the marquisate of Ancona; the Sabinese,
the Romagna; which comprehends the Bolognese and duchy of Ferrara; the
Perrugin; and the territory of Orvieto. Besides these provinces, the duchy of
Benevento, in the kingdom of Naples, and the county of Avignon, in the South of
France, belong to the Pope.

The greatest length of this country may be about two hundred and forty Italian
miles; as to the breadth, from Civita Vecchia to Ancona, is about one hundred
and thirty miles; but, in many other places, it is not near so broad; and, in
some parts, is scarce twenty miles.

On considering that the Pope's dominions generally consist of a very fertile,
and excellent soil; that his harbors, both on the Adriatic and Mediterranean
seas, are very advantageously situated for trade; that he receives considerable
sums from other parts; that his country is visited by numbers of foreigners,
who spend a great deal of money in it; and that, on account of the supposed
sanctity of his person and character, his government should seem best
calculated for the welfare of his subjects: one would be apt to imagine that,
of all states, this ought to be the most flourishing, were not the reverse
manifest.

The country is but ill cultivated, and very poor, and thin of inhabitants; the
city of Bologna, alone, excepted. Trade and manufactures are totally stagnant;
and did not the bounty of Providence furnish the inhabitants with dates,
almonds, figs, olives, fruits, and such like products of the earth, growing
spontaneously, and without any culture; and deal out to them bread and wine, at
the expense of very little labor, their sloth would absolutely starve them.

Their little inclination, and spirit for work, is not to be wondered at;
because they are conscious, that if they have much, much will be taken from
them; and, in the end, nothing will be left them. The many holidays, which are
such an impediment to trade and business; the great number of young sturdy
beggars, strolling about, and burthening the inhabitants, under the appearance
of pilgrims; the many hospitals, which confirm the people in idleness; the
multitude of convents, that hinder the increase of inhabitants; the
inconceivable wealth of churches and convents, which lie dormant, without the
least advantage to the public; the inquisition, which will not permit the want
of the inhabitants to be supplied, by those of another religion; are some great
causes of the wretched condition of the papal dominions; though there are
others attended with still worse consequences.

No government equals the papal in rigor; the temporal sword being not the
only one used; but also, on several occasions, the spiritual, or inquisition.
Besides, nothing is so monstrous as the passion by which popes, cardinals, and
other great prelates have been carried away, for enriching and promoting their
nephews and relations; and nothing is so vain as the ambition of gaining for
themselves a great name, by founding convents and churches. The regulars vie
with each other in the number, splendour, and riches of their churches and
chapels; but it is from the sweat of the poor inhabitants that the money is
generally extracted for the support of this frivolous rivalship. The legates,
governors, and other inferior officers in the provinces, knowing that the time
of holding their charge is short and uncertain, scruple no kind of
rapaciousness. By collating these causes it will no longer be a subject of
surprise, if, in all parts of Europe, there is not a more wretched people than
the Pope's temporal subjects.

The campagna of Rome, in which is situated the capital, is the most
depopulated, and unhealthy, of all the ecclesiastical territories. This PLAN of
the CITY OF ROME.

References.
1 St. Peter 2 St. Peter Place 3 Castle of St. Angelo 4 Palace of the Vatican 5
St. Lawrence 6 St. Spirit^ 7 (...) Palace 8 St. (...) 9 St. M. Queen of Heaven
10 St. Peter in (...) 11 (...) and D^^^^i^^ 12 (...) Aplico of St. Michael 13
St. (...) in Tr^^^^erere 14 (...) of the most Holy Conception 15 St. M. of the
Angels 16 Barbe^i^i Palace 17 St. Anthony Abbey 18 St. Nicholas 19 Mig^i Palace
20 St. Lawrence in Pain and Pe^^^a 21 St. John in L^^^r 22 St. Mary of the Holy
Mount 23 St. Sil^^^^ro in Capet 24 (...) Palace 25 (...) Palace 26 St. Dominick
and Si^^^a 27 St. Co^^o etc D^^^^i^^^ 28 Titus Arch 29 Clementino College 30
(...) Palace 31 St. Lawrence in Lucia 32 (...) Palace 33 (...) Palace 34 St. M.
^pper the (...) 35 J^^^^ 36 St. Mary of the Consolation 37 St. A^o^^ino 38
(...) Palace 39 St. L^^^^^^io 40 Mattei Palace 41 St. M. in Vallicella 42
Sforza Cezarina Palace 43 St. Mary al Monserrato 44 St. Thomas English College
45 Farnese Palace 46 Spada Palace 47 Pellegrin St. Trinity 48 St. Francis
Pomaria 49 Giano Arch 50 St. M. Co^^^^din 51 St. M. Egeziaco 52 St. Lawrence in
Miranda 54 St. Adrian 55 Gallieno Arch 56 Coloseo 57 Mount Tertaccio 58 St. M.
d'Ara Ceti 59 St. Galla 60 St. John Calibita 61 St. Bartholomew 62 St. Offlrio
Palace 63 St. Peter's Seminary 64 People Gate 65 Pinciana Gate 66 St. Lawrence
Gate 67 the Great Gate 68 Castrense Amphith! 69 St. John's Gate 70 Latina Gate
71 Sebastian Gate 72 St. Paul's Gate 73 Portesse Gate 74 St. Pacrazio Gate 75
Cavalliggaria Gate 76 Angelica Gate 77 Castle Gate 78 Pia Gate


map of Rome province is under the immediate jurisdiction of the Pope; the
others are governed by legates and vicegerents. This territory, anciently
called Latium, is blessed with a very fruitful soil; but, for want of
cultivation, the inhabitants are wretchedly poor. Delicious plains are seen in
it, with scarce so much as a village; so that the few inhabitants it contains,
in order to get in their harvest, are under the necessity of employing the
peasants of the adjoining districts. It is said, on a very moderate
computation, that there were more inhabitants in the campagna of old Rome, than
are, at present, in all Italy; yet this spot is now accounted so unwholesome,
and so pestilential, that no no traveller, not even an Italian, will sleep
there, if he can avoid it.

CHAP. II. Of the City of Rome.
ROME, the metropolis of the dominions of the Pope, and anciently the whole
Roman empire, derives its name, according to some ancient writers, from Roma, a
Trojan lady; but according to others, from Romulus, the founder. There are some
who affirm it was called Roma, before the days of Romulus; and that he only
enlarged the city, and it was called after his name; as princes and great men
are, to this day, named from the places of their residence. Others reject the
story of Romulus and Remus, as fabulous; and indeed nothing satisfactory is to
be met with on this subject, any more than as to the era of its foundation;
some writers affirming it was founded in the year of the world 3301, or, 753
years before Christ; and others in the year 3198.

This city is situated on the river Tyber, about sixteen miles North-East of
the Tuscan Sea; in 41 degrees and 45 minutes of North latitude; and thirty-two
degrees odd minutes, to the eastward of London.

The city of Rome has suffered so much from the ancient Gauls, Vandals, Heruli,
Ostro and Visi-Goths, and lastly from the German troops, especially in the year
1527, under Charles of Bourbon, that, besides smaller damages, it is computed
to have been pillaged seven times. Others affirm that Rome was plundered twelve
times; this, however, is certain, that the surface of the ground the city
stands upon must have been altered, by such frequent ravages. At present it is
difficult to distinguish the seven hills, on which Rome was anciently built;
the low grounds having been filled up by the ruins of whole streets; so that,
sometimes, it is scarce observable that we are ascending an eminence,
celebrated by the ancients. Antiquity informs us that the ascent, from the
street into the pantheon, or rotunda, consisted of thirteen steps; whereas now
the whole area about it is on a level with the pavement of that temple. It is
very common, by digging deep for the foundation of houses, etc. to find
pillars, statues, and the fragments of ancient buildings; and, in some places,
parts of the pavement of the old city have been found to be twenty, or thirty,
feet below the present surface of the ground. It is probable, that this must
also have occasioned great alteration, with regard to the salubrity of the air.

The stupendous Cloacoe, or common shores and aqueducts, by which the filth and
dirt of the ancient city were conveyed into the Cloaca maxima, have, indeed,
many openings remaining for the passage of the soil and water; but most of the
outlets are stopped, and the Cloaca maxima itself is in very bad order. This
must necessarily cause a putrefaction in the air, which is sensibly perceived
by those who dig deep into the earth, and happen to light on the aperture of
such obstructed sink, or shore; there being many instances of workmen losing
their lives by those putrid effluviae. The same alterations are likewise
manifest in the country. Anciently several parts of Italy, near the sea, were
not only full of fine towns, villas and palaces, but resorted to, as the most
healthy places, in time of pestilence; but now it is quite the reverse: for the
greatest part of the seacoast is moist and marshy; and the air so bad, that,
during the summer-heats, many convents are uninhabited; and the monks remove,
for some months, to a healthier climate. Even in the neighborhood of Rome the
soil is but badly cultivated; and, in the nightime, covered with fogs, and
igneous vapors. These must have been very uncommon in the time of the ancient
Romans; for Livy frequently mentions such phoenomena as prodigies, and omens,
which occasioned propitiatory sacrifice and offerings. Sulphur is usually dug
up, like white earth, at Rome, and afterward purified by sublimation. Great
quantities of vitriol are also made here; and the green, found in the copper
mines, is particularly called Roman vitriol. Roch alum is also prepared within
a small distance of Rome; and, in some places, arsenic is made. These are works
which necessarily produce very noxious effluvia, from which ancient Rome was
free; for these minerals were then either unknown, or, at least, not dug up.

It is probable a concurrence of all these causes may have occasioned that
alteration of weather, which has been observed, with regard to the mildness of
the winters, in this climate. Some passages in Homer show, that, in his time,
the snow often lay very deep in the streets of Rome; and it is plain, from the
sixth satyr of Juvenal, that it was far from being unusual to see the Tyber
frozen in winter; but, in the present age, it must be a very sharp winter, if
the snow lays in Rome but a day or two; as for the Tyber, it has not been
frozen in the memory of any man living.

The river also has suffered by the alteration of the countries, through which
it takes its course; its mouth, where it disembogues itself into the sea, is
become very narrow, and choked with sand-banks; and its bed, by the rubbish of
houses on its banks, very much contracted; which, in a strong south wind,
causes inundations, that do great damage, both in the city, and the
neighboring country,

In regard to its present extent, and number of inhabitants, several cities may
be found, both in Europe and other parts of the world, superior to modern Rome;
but if we consider its ancient power, and its sovereignty over so many powerful
nations, for such a series of years, the whole world never produced its equal.
The remains of the ancient walls and buildings of the city demonstrate, that,
for its vast circumference, it might justly be classed among the principal
cities in the world. According to Pliny the city walls, in Vespasian's time,
were thirteen thousand paces, in circumference; and Vossius, who wrote in
Aurelius's time, magnifies them to fifty thousand. This must either be a
notorious error in the transcriber, or such a circuit must have included the
seats, and gardens, in the neigbourhood of Rome. What Vossius, in his Varioe
Observationes, endeavors to prove, is very weak and absurd; for he fain would
persuade his readers, that Rome was twenty times as large as Paris and London,
put together; that Nero's palace, alone, occupied more ground, than the
greatest of our modern European cities; that the number of slaves, in Rome,
amounted to eight millions; and the inhabitants, in general, to fourteen
millions. Whoever gives credit to these bare assertions, should not dispute
with him, when he affirms, the inhabitants of Nanquin, a single city in China,
to be above twenty millions. These exaggerations are still far short of
Rolefincks, who computes the inhabitants of Rome, in her highest prosperity, at
twenty-seven millions.

Nay, such is the infatuation of Lipsius, to magnifying the extent of Rome, and
the number of its inhabitants, says Keysler, that he does not scruple to alter,
and falsify, such passages, in ancient writers, as make against his chimeras;
and blindly follows the most absurd, and extravagant assertions of the Greeks,
who were remarkable for their flattery to the Romans. Was ever any thing more
ridiculous than what the orator, Aristides, says of Rome, in Adrian's time? "It
is so large, says this writer, that, in any part of it, a person may always,
with some reason, think himself in the center of it; so that a whole year is
not sufficient to enumerate other cities, that are, as it were, included in
this celestial city: whole nations, as Capadocians, Scythians, and others,
having, in numberless multitudes, at once settled in Rome." This boast,
however, can relate only to the few quarters, or wards, where some individuals,
of those nations, used chiefly to live. Vespasian's amphitheatre was about one
hundred and fifty feet in height; yet Ammianus Marcelinus is pleased to say,
that its height is scarce discernable by human eyes.

Authors, says Moore, differ very much in opinion, with respect to the number
of inhabitants which Rome contained, at the period when it was most populous.
Some accounts make them seven millions, he adds, and others a much greater
number. These seem all to be incredible exaggerations. It is not probable that
what is properly called the city of Rome, ever extended beyond the wall built
by Bellisarius, after he had defeated the Goths. This wall has been frequently
repaired since, and is still standing; it is about thirteen or fourteen miles
in circuit, which is nearly the size that Rome was of, in the days of
Vespasian. Those who assert that the number of inhabitants in ancient Rome,
when it was most populous, could not exceed a million, exclusive of slaves, are
thought moderate in their calculation; but when we consider that the
circumference, of thirteen or fourteen miles, is not equal to that of either
Paris or London; that the Campus Martius, which is the best built part of
modern Rome, was a field, without a house upon it, anciently; and that the
rising ground, where St Peter's church and the vatican stand, was no part of
old Rome; it will be difficult to conceive that ever Rome could boast a million
of inhabitants. If the wall of Bellisarius be admitted as the boundary of the
ancient city, it is not easy to imagine that it could have, at any time,
contained above five or six hundred thousand, without supposing the masters of
the world to have been the worst lodged people in it.

But if in the computations abovementioned the suburbs are included; if those
who lived without the walls are considered as inhabitants; in that case, there
will be room enough for any number, the limits of the suburbs not being
ascertained.

The buildings immediately without the walls of Rome, which were connectedly
continued so as to merit the name of suburbs, were certainly of vast extent;
and, with the inhabitants of the town itself, must have contained a prodigious
number of people. By a calculation, made by Mr. Byres, the Circus Maximus was
of sufficient size to accommodate three hundred and eighty thousand spectators;
and, we are told by the Latin poets, that it was usually full. Now if allowance
be made for the superannuated, the sick, and the infirm; also for children, and
those employed in their private business, and for slaves who were not permitted
to remain in the Circus, during the games; Mr. Byres imagines that such a
number could not be supplied by a city and suburbs, the number of whose
inhabitants were much under three millions.

Whatever may have been the extent of the suburbs of Rome, it is probable, they
were only formed of ordinary houses, and inhabited by people of inferior rank.
There are no remains of palaces, or magnificent buildings of any kind, to be
now seen near the walls, or, indeed, over the whole Campagna; yet, it it is
asserted by some authors, that this wide surface was peopled, at one period,
like a continued village; and, we are told of strangers, who, viewing this
immense plain covered with houses, imagined they had already entered Rome, when
they were thirty miles from the walls of that city.

Though this city is thought now not to contain above one hundred and sixty, or
seventy thousand inhabitants; a number greatly inferior to what it contained in
the days of its ancient power; yet this number is greater than it has generally
been able to boast, since the fall of the empire. There is good authority for
believing, that Rome, at particular periods, since that time, some of them not
very remote, has been reduced to between thirty and forty thousand inhabitants.
The numbers have gradually increased, during the whole of this century. As it
was much less expensive to purchase new ground for building upon, than to clear
away ruins, which, by time, had acquired the consistence of rock. Great part of
the modern city, is built upon what was the ancient Campus Martius.

The river Tyber divides the city, properly so called, from the Transtevere, or
quarter, in which is the church of St. Peter, and the palace of the Vatican.
This river is about three hundred and fifteen feet wide, at the bridge of St.
Angelo, and is navigable for large barges; the water is yellow and turbid.

Many are of opinion, that, by turning this river out of its channel for a
time, vast riches and valuable antiquities thrown into it, at different times,
when the city has been sacked and pillaged; would be found. The water of this
river, says Keysler, is so thick and foul, that it is not fit for horses to
drink, till it has stood two or three days for the filth to subside.

There are now three bridges at Rome: that of St. Angelo, anciently Pons
Aelius, leading to the castle of St. Angelo, is the principal. All the upper
part of it is finished by Bernini, in a good taste; but the statues on it are
heavy and disagreeable. Ancient Rome had six bridges. There are some small
remains of the Sublician bridge, which was only one, when Horatius Cocles
defended it so valiantly. It was then of wood, but afterward built of stone by
Lepidus.

The ruins of the triumphal bridge, near S. Angelo, is an object that cannot
but strike a man of letters. This was the bridge, over which every general
marched into the city, to whom a triumph was decreed, either for the conquest
of a province, or any other signal victory. From the time of Romulus, to that
of the emperor Probus, there were about three hundred and twenty of these
triumphs There are now only a few remains of the piers. Who can behold this
scene, without ruminating on the nature of the human heart, and recollecting to
what trials it must have been exposed, in the course of so proud, and so
flattering a procession?

A traveller, says Sharp, on his arrival at Rome, is not much animated by its
appearance; the narrowness of many of the streets, the thinness of inhabitants,
the prodigious quantity of monks and beggars, give but a gloomy aspect to this
renowned city. There are no rich tradesmen in it, who, by their acquisitions,
either ennoble their sons, or marry their daughters into the houses of princes.
All the shops seem empty, and the shopkeepers poor; not one hackney-coach in so
large a town; a proof that there is no middle station, between those who always
ride, and those who always walk. This is the first impression; but let the eye
be turned from that point of view to the magnificence of their churches; to the
venerable remains of ancient Rome; to the prodigious collection of pictures,
and antique statues; to the very river, and ground itself, formerly the
habitation of that people which, from our cradles, we have been taught to
admire; and, with a very few grains of enthusiasm, he will be more than
delighted.

The magnificence of the Roman emperors, in embellishing the city, rose to such
a height, that they ransacked all the quarries of Egypt for alabaster, granite,
porphyry, and every kind of marble that country afforded; and, though time and
Gothic rage must have destroyed great quantities, yet such was the profusion
brought to Rome, that, besides the infinite number of columns, statues, vases,
and tables still preserved entire; one may see the very posts in the streets,
all of them, without exception, made of granite, alabaster, or marble; but the
most stupendous sight of all, are the monstrous obelisks, which consist of only
one piece of marble. I meditate on these objects, says Sharp, till I am lost
in wonder and confusion. We have no idea of the mechanical powers by which they
are dug out of the quarry, and brought from Egypt. We are astonished at the
enormous size of the stones at Stonehenge, cannot comprehend by what
contrivance they were carried, and laid in that form; but the biggest of them
is small, when compared to the largest obelisk at Rome.

In the beauty and magnificence of the religious buildings and palaces, says
Busching, modern Rome, by far, surpasses the ancient; having a multitude of
splendid churches, stately palaces, and large houses. The parish churches alone
amount to eighty, together with upwards of thirty almshouses. Most of the
houses are of brick, but those of the better sort have the doors, windows, and
supporters, of freestone. Above two-thirds of the houses are the property of
the churches, and convents, to which new purpurchases are continually annexed.
The streets are well paved, and some of them with brick; but neither kept
clean, nor carefully illuminated.

London seems to be the only town, in Europe, where that convenience is rightly
understood, and carried effectually into execution; for at Paris, the candles,
in their brown glass lanterns, give but little light whilst they burn; and,
being small, are soon extinguished. It is astonishing this evil should not be
reformed, as every night's experience shows how much darkness invites to the
perpetration of shameful, and atrocious deeds. The cardinals are allowed to
take flambeaux behind their coaches; all their princes, and people of quality,
are forbidden to use any other light than small lanterns; of which every
footman, behind the coach, carries one.

Nothing can be more magnificent than the entrance into Rome, by the porta del
popolo; the road is fine, the approach beautiful, and the gate handsome. The
traveller immediately enters a large area, from the farther side of which he
sees the three principal streets of the city, diverging, and flanked by the
fronts of two handsome churches. In the middle is a noble Egyptian obelisk, and
a fountain. The numerous gates of the city are by no means handsome, or
ornamented. The Flaminean gate, or porta del popolo, is the best of them; the
outside by Buonarotti, and that next the city by Bernini.

Some of the principal streets are of considerable length, and perfectly
straight. That called the Corso is most frequented. It runs from the Porto del
popolo, along the side of the Campus Martius. Here the nobility display their
equipages during the carnival, and take the air in the evenings, in fine
weather. It is, indeed, the great scene of Roman magnificence and amusement.

The shops, on each side, are three or four feet higher than the street, and
there is a path for the convenience of foot-passengers, on a level with the
shop. The palaces, of which there are several in this street, range in a line
with the houses, having no court before them, like the hotels of Paris; and are
not shut up from the sight of the citizens, by high and gloomy walls, like
Devonshire and Burlington houses, in London. Such dismal barricades are more
suitable to the unsociable character of a proud baron, in the days of
aristocratic tyranny, than to the hospitable and benevolent disposition of
their present proprietors.

The corso commences at the fine area, immediately within the Porto del popolo.
This gate is built in a noble style of elegant simplicity, from the design of
Michael Angelo, executed by Bernini.

The strada felice, in the higher part of the city, is about a mile and a half
in length, from the Trinita del monte, to the church of St. John Lateran, on
the Pincean hill. This street runs all in one line, the view, only interrupted
by the fine church of St. Maria Maggiora. The strada felice is crossed by
another straight street, called the Strada di Porta Pia, considerably above a
mile in length, terminated at one end by that gate; and, at the other, by four
colossal statues, in white marble, of two horses led by two men; supposed, by
some, to be representations of Alexander taming Bucephalus; and, according to
others, of Castor and Pollux. They are placed before the pope's palace, on the
Quirinal hill, and have a noble effect.

It would be more difficult to convey an idea of the smaller and less regular
streets. We shall, therefore, only observe in general, that Rome, at present,
exhibits a strange mixture of magnificent and interesting, and of common and
beggarly objects; the former consists of palaces, churches, and fountains; and,
above all, of the remains of antiquity. The latter comprehends all the rest of
the city.

There are many squares in Rome, the principal ornaments of which are
fountains. That in the Piazza Novana is the most magnificent in the whole
world. It is a vast rock, pierced through and through, so as to be divided into
four parts, which unite at the top where the obelisk is placed: toward the
bottom, of each part of the rock, is seated a colossal figure, representing the
principal rivers with their attributes. The fountain of Paul V. is in a very
bad style; but, the water is so rapid, as to turn several mills. It was brought
by Augustus from the lake of Bracciano, thirty-five miles from Rome, to supply
his naumachia; and there are now some remains of the aqueduct, near the villa
Pamsili. The Fontana di Trevi is a noble fountain. This is the only water which
now comes to Rome by an ancient aqueduct; it is chiefly under ground, which is
the reason that it has been so much better preserved than any other. This is
also the best water in Rome; and all the lower parts of the city being
furnished from the fountain of Trevi, those who prefer good water to good air,
live in those parts. It was brought from the Sabina, by Agrippa, to supply the
Campus Martius.

These fountains are the remains of the munificence and industry of the ancient
Romans, who were extremely delicate in the article of water: but, great
applause, however, is also due to the different popes, who have been at the
expense of restoring and repairing those noble channels of health, pleasure,
and convenience. This great plenty of water, nevertheless, has not induced the
Romans to be cleanly. Their streets, and even their palaces, are disgraced with
filth. The noble Piazza Novana, though adorned with three or four fountains,
one of which, the most magnificent, perhaps, that Europe can produce, is,
notwithstanding this provision, almost as dirty as West Smithfield, where the
cattle are sold in London. The corridors, arcades, and even staircases,
belonging to their most elegant palaces, are depositories of nastiness; and,
indeed, in summer, smell as strong as spirits of hartshorn. It is highly
probable, their ancestors were not much more cleanly. If we consider that the
cities and suburbs of Rome, in the reign of Claudius, contained about seven
millions of inhabitants; a number, at least, equal to the sum total of all the
souls in England; that great part of ancient Rome was allotted to temples,
porticos, basilicae, theaters, baths, circuses, public and private walks and
gardens; where very few, if any, of this great number lodged; that by far the
greater part of these inhabitants were slaves, and did not enjoy the
conveniences of life; and, that the use of linen was scarce known; we must
naturally conclude, they were strangely crowded together; and that, in general,
they were a very frowzy generation. That they were crowded together, appears
from the height of their houses, which the poet Rutilius compared to towers
made for scaling heaven. In order to remedy this inconvenience, Augustus Caesar
published a decree, that for the future no houses should be built above seventy
feet high; which, at a moderate computation, might make six stories. But what
seems, beyond all dispute, to prove that the ancients were dirty creatures, are
these two particulars. Vespasian laid a tax upon urine and ordure, on pretense
of being at great expense in clearing the streets from such a nuisance; an
imposition which amounted to about fourteen-pence a year, for each individual;
and when Heliogabalus ordered all the cobwebs of the city, and suburbs, to be
collected, they were found to weigh ten thousand pounds. This was intended as a
demonstration of the great number of inhabitants; but it was proof of their
dirt, rather than of their popularity. To this we may likewise add the delicate
custom of taking vomits, at each others houses, when they were invited to
dinner, or supper, that they might prepare their stomach for gormandizing; a
beastly proof of their nastiness, as well as gluttony. Horace, in his
description of the banquet of Nasidenus, says, that when the canopy, under
which they sat, fell down, it brought along with it as much dirt, as is raised
by a hard gale of wind in dry weather.

I believe, adds Smollett, the moderns retain more of the customs of the
ancient Romans, than is generally imagined. When I first saw the infants, at
the foundling hospital in Paris, so swathed with bandages that the very sight
of them made my eyes water; I little dreamed that the prescription of the
ancients could be pleaded for this custom, equally shocking and absurd; but, in
the capital at Rome, I met with the antique statue of a child emaillote,
exactly in the same manner, rolled up, like an Egyptian mummy, from the feet.
The circulation of the blood, in such a case, must be obstructed on the whole
surface of the body, and nothing at liberty but the head; which is the only
part that ought to be confined. Is it not surprising that common sense should
not point out, even to the most ignorant, that these bandages must heat the
tender infant into a fever; must hinder the return of the muscles, and the play
of the joints, so necessary to health and nutrition; and that while the
refluent blood is obstructed in the veins, which run on the surface of the
body, the arteries, which lie deep, without the reach of compression, are
continually pouring their contents into the head, where the blood meets with no
resistance? The vessels of the brain are naturally lax, and the very futures of
the skull are yet open. What are the consequences of this cruel swaddling? The
limbs are wasted; the joints grow rickety; the brain is compressed, and a
hydrocephalus, with a great head, and sore eyes, ensues. This abominable custom
is, perhaps, one great cause of the bandy legs, diminutive bodies, and large
heads, so frequent in the south of France, and Italy.

I was no less surprised to find the modern fashion of curling the hair,
borrowed, in a great measure, from the coxcombs and coquettes of antiquity. I
saw a bust of Nero in the gallery at Florence, the hair represented in rows of
buckles, like that of a French petit-maitre, conformable to the picture drawn
of him by Suetonius. But there is a bust in the capital of Julia Pia, the
second wife of Septimus Severus, with a moveable peruke, dressed exactly in the
fashionable mode, with this difference, that there is no part of it frizzed;
nor is there any appearance of pomatum and powder. These improvements the beau
monde have borrowed from the natives of the Cape of Good Hope.

In a part of the city, across the Tyber, dwelt the Transtyberini, or
Transteveri, the descendants, as they call themselves, of the ancient Romans.
This people were once called other people of Rome, but intermarry among
themselves. Their features are very different from the rest of the inhabitants
of Rome; and they are as distinguishable by their common oaths, as by their
other customs. A Transtyberinian will swear by the head of Bacchus, and the
body of Jove, when other inhabitants of Rome will swear by the blood of Christ,
and by the several saints. There is a prince, and several noblemen, of this
fraternity.

Modern Rome does not cover more than one third of the space within the walls;
and those parts that were most frequented of old, are now entirely abandoned.
From the capital to the column there is nothing entire, but one or two
churches, built with the fragments of ancient edifices. You descend from the
capitol between the remaining pillars of two temples, the pedestals, and part
of the shafts, sunk in the rubbish; then, passing through the triumphal arch of
Septimus Severus, you proceed along the fort of Mons Palatinus, quite covered
with the ruins of the ancient palace, belonging to the Roman emperors; and, at
the foot of it, there are some beautiful detached pillars still standing. On
the left you see the remains of the templum pacis, which seems to have been the
largest, and most magnificent, of all the temples in Rome. It was built, and
dedicated, by the emperor Vespasian; who brought into it all the treasures, and
precious vessels, which he found in the temple of Jerusalem. This temple was
likewise famous for its library, mentioned by Aulus Gellius. Fronting you are
the noble ruins of that vast amphitheatre, called the Colossaeum, which has
been dismantled, and dilapidated, by the Gothic popes and princes of Modern
Rome, to build and adorn their paltry palaces, Behind the amphitheatre, were
with the thermae of the same emperor, Titus Vespasian. In the same quarter was
the Circus Maximus; and the whole space from hence, on both sides, to the walls
of Rome, comprehending above twice as much ground as the modern city, is almost
covered with the monuments of antiquity. The miserable houses, and even garden
walls, of the peasants in this district, are built with the precious materials
of shafts, and capitals of marble columns, heads, arms, legs, and mutilated
trunks of statues. What pity it is that, among all the remains of antiquity,
there is not one of their private dwelling houses existing. I should have been
glad, says Smollet, to have known how the senators of Rome were lodged. I want
to be better informed touching the cava oedium, focus, the ara deorum penatum,
the conclavia, trilinica, and caenationes; the atria, where the women resided,
and employed themselves in the woollen manufacture; and the Hysta, which were
shady walks, between two porticos, where the men exercised themselves in
winter. I am disgusted by the modern taste of architecture, though I am no
judge of the art. The churches, and palaces, of their days, are crowded with
petty ornaments, which distract the eye; and, by breaking into a variety of
little parts, destroy the effect of the whole. Every door and window has its
separate ornaments, its moulding, frize, cornice and tympanum; then there is
such an assemblage of useless festoons, pillars, pilasters, with their
architraves, entablatures, and I know not what, that nothing great or uniform
remains to fill the view; and we in vain look for that simplicity of grandeur,
those large masses of light and shadow, and the inexpressible tout ensemble,
which characterizes the edifices of the ancients. A great edifice, to have its
full effect, ought to be isole, that is, detached from all other, with a large
space around it, but the palaces of Rome, and indeed of all the other cities of
Italy, are so hemmed in, among other mean houses, that their beauty and
magnificence are, in a great measure, concealed. Even those which face open
streets, and piazzas, are clean only in front. The other apartments are
darkened by the vicinity of ordinary houses; and their views confined by dirty,
and disagreeable objects. Within the court there is generally a noble
colonnade, all around, and an open corridor above; but the stairs are usually
narrow, steep, and high. The want of sash windows, the dullness of thin small
glass lozenges, the dirty brick floors, and the crimson hangings, laced with
gold, contribute to cast a gloom on their apartments. I might add to these
causes, a number of pictures executed on melancholy subjects, antique,
mutilated statues, busts, bas-reliefs, and sepulchral stones, with which their
rooms are adorned. It must be owned, however, that there are some objections to
this general rule. The villa of Cardinal Alexander Albani is light, gay, airy;
yet the rooms are too small, and too much decorated with carving and gilding,
which is a kind of gingerbread work. The apartments of one of the princes
Borghese are furnished in the English taste; and, in the palace of the
constable Colonna, there is a saloon, or gallery; which, for the proportions,
lights, furniture and ornaments, is the most noble, elegant, and agreeable
apartment I ever saw.

It is diverting, adds Smollett, to hear an Italian expatiate on the greatness
of modern Rome. He will tell you there are above three hundred palaces in the
city; that there is scarce a Roman prince, whose revenue does not exceed two
hundred thousand crowns; and that Rome produces, not only the most learned men,
but also the most refined politicians, in the universe. To one of them, talking
in this strain, I replied, that instead of three hundred palaces, the number
did not amount to more than fourscore; that I had been informed, on good
authority, there were not six individuals in Rome, who had so much as forty
thousand crowns a year, about L. 10,000. sterling; and that to say their
princes were so rich, and their politicians so refined, was, in effect, a
severe satire upon them, for not employing their wealth, and their talents, for
the advantage of their country. I asked why their cardinals and princes did not
invite, and encourage, industrious people to settle, and cultivate the campagna
of Rome, which is a desert? Why they did not raise a subscription to drain the
marshes, in the vicinity of the city, and thus meliorate the air? Why they did
not contribute their wealth, and even their political refinements, in
augmenting their forces, by sea and land; in introducing commerce and
manufactures, and in giving some consequence to their state, which was no more
than a mite in the political state of Europe?

The only appearance of a fortification, in this city, is the castle of S.
Angelo, situated on the further bank of the Tyber; but this castle, which was
formerly the moles Adriani, could not hold out half-a-day, against a battery of
ten pieces of cannon, properly directed. It was an expedient lest to the
invention of the modern Romans, to convert an ancient tomb into a citadel. It
could only serve as a temporary retreat for the Pope, in times of popular
commotion, and on other sudden emergencies; as it happened in the case of Pope
Clement VII. when the troops of the emperor took the city by assault; and this
only while he resided at the Vatican, from whence there is a covered gallery,
continued to the castle. The castle of S. Angelo, how ridiculous soever as a
fortress, appears reputable as a noble monument of antiquity; and, though
standing in a low situation, is one of the finest objects that strike the eye,
for a stranger, approaching Rome.

CHAP. III. St. Peter's -- Pantheon -- and Amphitheatre of Vespasian.
THE incomparable church of St. Peter is built in the form of a Latin cross;
and the proportion is so exactly observed in the length, height, and breadth,
that the eye cannot perceive any thing extraordinary large, in any of these
dimensions, although the whole, taken together, is of a very uncommon bulk and
extent. For largeness, and beauty, it may be called the metropolitan church,
not only of Rome and Italy, but of the whole world. In this place we see to
what an amazing pitch the Romish church, which is so fond of external pomp and
splendour, has within two centuries carried its favorite scheme, viz. that of
captivating the senses, and inspiring the minds of the ignorant with awe, and
submission to the clergy. Fontana, in his account of this church, computes
that, in his time, it had cost above eighty millions of Roman crowns; or, about
twenty millions sterling. In the opinion of many it surpasses, in size and
magnificence, the finest monuments of ancient architecture. The Grecian, and
Roman temples, were more distinguished for the elegance of their form, than
their magnitude. The Pantheon, which was erected to all the gods, is the most
entire antique temple in Rome. It is said that Michael Angelo, to confirm the
triumph of modern, over ancient architecture, made the dome of St. Peter's of
the same diameter with the pantheon; raising the immense fabric on four
pilasters; whereas the whole circle of the rotunda rests upon the ground. This
great artist was, perhaps, delighted with the idea of being thought as superior
to the ancient architects, as he was conscious of being inferior to some of the
sculptors of antiquity.

This church, the most wonderful in the world, has a thousand faults, a
thousand bad things in sculpture, painting, etc. etc. But I pity the man, says
Sherlock, who thinks of looking for them; when a fault presents itself;, let
him advance a step further, -- a sublime beauty expects him.

These ideas struck me while I was walking in this church. I went thither with
a Pole, a Frenchman, and an Englishman; the Englishman looked for beauties; the
Frenchman, for faults; the Pole, for nothing. When we were at the end of the
church, "Behold," says the Frenchman, "that Charity of Bernini, how wretched it
is! the air of her head is affected, her flesh is without bone, and she makes
frightful faces." "These remarks appear to me just enough," replies the
Englishman, "but look on the other side of the altar, you will see one of the
finest pieces of modern sculpture; the justice of Guglielmo della porta." "You
are in the right," says the Frenchman, (without looking at it), "but that child
at the foot of the Charity, disgusts me more than its mother." While the
Englishman continued to praise the Justice, and the Frenchman to criticize the
Charity; the Pole looked at the door by which we entered, and said to me, that
"the church was much longer than he imagined."

All who have seen St. Paul's in London, may, by an enlargement of its
dimensions, form some idea of the external appearance of St. Peter's. But the
resemblance fails entirely, on comparing them within; St. Peter's being lined,
in many parts, with the most precious and beautiful marble, adorned with
valuable pictures, and all the powers of sculpture.

The approach to St. Peter's church, excells that to St. Paul's in a still
greater proportion, than the former surpasses the latter, either in size, or in
the richness and beauty of the internal ornaments. A magnificent portico
advances on each side from the front, by which means a square court is formed
immediately before the steps which lead into the church. The two porticos form
two sides of the square, the third is closed by the front of the church, and
the fourth is open. A colonnade, four columns deep, commences at the
extremities of the porticos; and, embracing in an oval direction, a space far
wider than the square, forms the most magnificent area, that perhaps was seen
before any building. This oval colonnade is crowned with a balustrade,
ornamented by a great number of statues, and consists of above three hundred
large pillars, forming three separate walks, which lead to the advanced
portico, and from that into the church. In the middle of the immense area,
stands an Egyptian obelisk of granite; and, to the right and left of this, two
very beautiful fountains refresh the atmosphere with streams of clear water.
The delighted eye glancing over these splendid objects, would rest with
complete satisfaction on the stupendous fabric, to which they serve as
embellishments, if the facade of this celebrated church, had been equal in
beauty and elegance to the rest of the building. But this is by no means the
case; and every impartial judge must acknowledge, that the front of St.
Peter's, is, in those particulars, inferior to that of our St. Paul's.

The length of St. Peter's, taken on the outside, is exactly seven hundred and
thirty feet; the breadth, five hundred and twenty; and the height, from the
pavement to the top of the cross, which crowns the cupola, four hundred and
fifty. The grand portico, before the entrance, is two hundred and sixteen feet
in length, and forty in breadth.

It is usual to desire strangers, on their first entering this church, to guess
at the size of the objects, which, on account of the distance, seems less than
they are in reality. The statues of the angels in particular, which support the
founts of holy water, when viewed from the door, seem no bigger than children;
but, when approached near, they are found to be six feet high. We make no
mistakes, on seeing a living man at the same distance, or at a greater; because
the knowledge we have of man's real size precludes the possibility of our being
mistaken, and we make allowance for the diminution which distance occasions;
but, angels, and other figures in sculpture, having no determined standard, but
being under the arbitrary will of the statuary, who gives them the bulk of
giants, or dwarfs, as best suits his purpose; we do not know what allowance to
make; and the eye un-used to such large masses, is confounded, and
incapacitated from forming a right judgment of an object six feet high, or any
other dimensions with which it is not previously acquainted.

It has been frequently remarked, that the proportions of this church are so
fine, and the symmetry of its different parts so exquisite, that the whole
seems considerably smaller than it really is. It was, however, certainly
intended to appear a great and sublime object, and to produce admiration from
the vastness of its dimensions. It should seem therefore, that any thing which
has a tendency to defeat this effect, cannot, with propriety, be called an
excellence.

Having noticed St. Peter's church, unquestionably the finest piece of modern
architecture in Rome, we will mention some of the best specimens of the
ancient. And first, the Pantheon; which, though not the largest of the Roman
temples, is the most perfect which now remains. The temple of Jupiter
Capitolinus, and the temple of Peace, if we may trust to the accounts we have
of the first, and to the ruins of the second, were both much larger than the
Pantheon. In spite of the depredations which this last has sustained from
Goths, Vandals, and Popes, it still remains a beautiful monument of Roman
taste. The pavilion of the great altar, which stands under the cupola of St.
Peter's, and the four wreathed pillars of Corinthian brass which support it,
were formed out of the spoils of the Pantheon; which, after all, and with the
weight of eight hundred years upon its head, has still a probability of
outliving its proud rapacious rival. From the round form of this temple, it has
obtained the name of Rotunda. Its height is a hundred and fifty feet, and its
diameter nearly the same. Within, it is divided into eight parts; the gate at
which you enter forming one; the other seven compartments, if they may be so
called, are each of them distinguished by two fluted Corinthian pillars, and as
many pilastres of Giallo Antico. The capitals and bases are of white marble;
these support a circular entablature. The wall is perpendicular for half the
height of the temple; it then slopes forward as it ascends, the circumference
gradually diminishing, till it terminates in an opening of about five and
twenty feet in diameter. There are no windows; the central opening in the vault
admitting a sufficiency of light, has a much finer effect than windows could
have had. No great inconvenience can happen from this opening. The conical form
of the temple prevents the rain from falling near the walls, where the altars
now are, and where the statues of the gods were formerly placed. The rain which
falls in the middle, immediately drills through holes, which perforate a large
piece of porphyry, that forms the center of the pavements; the whole of which
consists of various pieces of marble, agate, and other materials, which have
been picked up from the ruins, and now compose a kind of Mosaic work.

The portico was added by Marcus Agrippa, the son-in-law of Augustus. It is
supported by sixteen pillows of granite, five feet in diameter, and of a single
piece each. Upon the frieze in the front is an inscription in large capitals,
signifying that it was founded by Marcus Agrippa, the son of Lucius, during his
third consulship. Some are of opinion, that the Pantheon is much more ancient
than the Augustan age; and that the porticos, which is the only part those
antiquarians admit to be the work of Agrippa, though beautiful in itself, does
not correspond with the simplicity of the temple.

As the Pantheon is the most entire, the amphitheatre of Vespasian is the most
stupendous, monument of antiquity in Rome. It was finished by his son Titus,
and obtained the name of Colosseum, afterward corrupted into Coliseum, from a
colossal statue of Apollo, which was placed before it. This vast structure was
built of Tiburtine stone, which is remarkably durable. Had the public
buildings, of the ancient Romans, met with no more inveterate enemy than Time,
we might, at this day, contemplate the greater number in all their original
perfection; they were formed for the admiration of much later ages than the
present. This amphitheatre, in particular, might have stood entire for two
thousand years to come: for what are the slow corrosions of time, in comparison
with the rapid destruction from barbarians, the zeal of bigots, and the avarice
of popes and cardinals? The first depredation, made on this stupendous
building, was by the inhabitants of Rome themselves; at that time greater Goths
than their conquerors. We are told they applied to Theodoric, whose court was
then at Ravenna, for liberty to take the stone of this amphitheatre, for some
public work they were carrying on. The marble cornices, the frieze, and other
ornaments of this building, have been carried away, at various times, to adorn
palaces; and the stones have been taken to build churches; and, sometimes, to
repair the walls of Rome, the most useless work of all. For of what importance
are walls to a city, without a garrison? About one half of the external circuit
still remains; from which, and the ruins of the other parts, a pretty exact
idea may be formed of the original structure. By a computation made by Mr.
Byres it could contain eighty five thousand spectators, making a convenient
allowance for each. Fourteen chapels are now erected within. This expedient has
saved some of the finest remains of heathen magnificence, from utter
destruction.

Our admiration of the Romans is tempered with horror, when we reflect on the
use formerly made of this immense building, and the dreadful scenes which were
acted in the arena; when not only criminals condemned to death, but also
prisoners taken in war, were obliged to butcher each other, for the
entertainment of an inhuman populace. The combats of gladiators were at first
used at Rome, at funerals only; where prisoners were obliged to assume that
profession, and fight before the tombs of deceased generals, or magistrates, in
imitation of the barbarous custom of the Greeks, of sacrificing captives at the
tombs of their heroes.

This horrid magnificence, which at first was exhibited only on the death of
consuls, and men of the highest distinction, came, gradually, to be claimed by
every citizen, who was sufficiently rich to defray the expense; and as the
people's fondness, for these combats, increased every day, they were no longer
confined to funeral solemnities; but became customary on days of public
rejoicings, and were exhibited, at an amazing expense, by some generals, after
victories. In the progress of riches, luxury and vice, it became a profession
in Rome to deal in gladiators. Men, called Lanistee, made it their business to
purchase prisoners, and slaves; to have them instructed in the use of the
various weapons; and, when any Roman chose to amuse the people with their
favorite show, or to entertain a select company of his own friends, upon any
particular occasion, he applied to the Lanistee; who, for a small price,
furnished him with as many pair of these unhappy combatants, as he required.
They had various names given to them, according to the different manner in
which they were armed. Toward the end of the republic, some of the rich, and
powerful citizens, had great numbers of gladiators of their own, who were daily
exercised by the Lanistee; and always kept ready for fighting, when ordered by
their proprietor. Those who were often victorious, or had the good fortune to
please their masters, had their liberty granted them; on which they generally
quitted the profession; though it sometimes happened that those who were
remarkably skilful, continued it, either from vanity, or poverty, even after
they had obtained their freedom; and the applause, bestowed on those
gladiators, had the effect of inducing men, born free, to choose this for a
profession, which they exercised for money, till age impaired their strength,
and address. They then hung up their arms in the temple of Hercules, and
appeared no more on the arena.

There were many amphitheatres at Rome, as well as in other towns of Italy, and
in many provinces of the empire; but this of Vespasian was the largest that
ever was built. That of Verma is the next in size, in Italy; and the remains of
the amphitheatre at Nismes prove, that it was the most magnificent structure,
of this kind, in any of the Roman provinces. The Romans were so excessively
fond of these exhibitions, that where colonies were established, it was found
necessary to give public shows of this kind, to induce the emigrants to remain
in their new country; and, in the provinces in which it was thought necessary,
that a considerable body of troops should remain constantly; structures of this
kind were erected at vast labor and expense, and were found the best means of
inducing the young officers to submit cheerfully, to a long absence from the
capital, and preventing the common soldiers from desertion. The profusion of
human blood, which was shed in the arena, by the cruel prodigality of the
emperors, and the refinements which were invented, to augment the barbarous
pleasure of the spectators, are proofs of the dreadful corruption and
depravity, to which human nature is capable of attaining, even among a learned
and enlightened people, when unrestrained by the mild precepts of a benevolent
religion. We are told that the gladiators bred for the use of particular
patricians, as well as those kept for hire by the Lanistee, were, for some
weeks, before they appeared in the arena, fed upon such succulent diet, as
would soonest fill their veins, that they might bleed freely at every wound.
They were instructed by the Lanistee, not only in the art of fighting, but also
in the most graceful manner of dying; and, when these wretched men felt
themselves mortally wounded, they assumed such attitudes, as they knew pleased
the beholders; and, they seemed to receive pleasure themselves, from the
applause bestowed upon them in their last moments.

When a gladiator was thrown by his antagonist to the ground, and directly laid
down his arms, it was a sign that he could resist no longer, and declared
himself vanquished, but still his life depended on the spectators. If they were
pleased with his performance, or in a merciful disposition, they held up their
hands, with the thumb folded down, and the life of the man was spared; but, if
they were in the humor to see him die, they held up the hand clenched, with
thumb only erect. As soon as the prostrate victim beheld that fatal signal, he
knew all hopes of life were vain, and immediately presented his breast to the
sword of his adversary; who, whatever his own inclinations might be, was
obliged to put him to death instantly.

As these combats formed the supreme pleasure of the inhabitants of Rome, the
most cruel of their emperors were sometimes the most popular; merely, because
they gratified the people, without restraint, in their favorite amusement.
When Marcus Aurelius thought it necessary, for the public service, to recruit
his army from the gladiators of Rome; it raised more discontent among the
populace, than many of the wildest pranks of Caligula. In the times of some of
the Roman emperors, the lower class of Roman citizens were certainly as
worthless a set of men as ever existed; stained with all the vices which arise
from idleness and dependence; living upon the largesses of the great; passing
their whole time in the circus and amphitheatres, where every sentiment of
humanity was annihilated within their breasts, and where the agonies and
torments of their fellow creatures were their chief pastime. That no occasion
might be lost, of indulging this savage taste of the populace, criminals were
condemned to sight with wild beasts, in the arena, or were exposed, unarmed, to
be torn in pieces by them; and other times they were blindfolded; and, in that
condition, obliged to cut and slaughter each other. So that, instead of victims
solemnly sacrificed to public justice, they seemed to be brought in as
buffoons, to raise the mirth of the spectators.

Whilst we express horror and indignation at the fondness, which the Romans
displayed for the combats of the amphitheatres, let us reflect whether this
proceeded from any cruelty of disposition, inherent in that people, or belongs
to mankind in general; let us reflect, whether it is probable, that the people
of any other nation would be gradually led, by the same degrees, to an equal
passion for such horrid entertainments: let us consider whether there is reason
to suspect that those who arm cocks with steel, and take pleasure in beholding
the spirited little animals cut one another to death, would not take the same,
or superior delight, in obliging men to slaughter each other, if they had the
power. It is not long since that boxing, cudgelling, and fighting with the
broad sword, was introduced into London; and prize-fighters were found, who
would cut and flash each other for the amusement of the spectators. And what
restrains the continuance, but benevolent laws? Is there no reason to believe,
that the influence of a purer religion, and brighter example, than were known
to the heathen world, prevents mankind from those enormities, at this time,
which were countenanced formerly? As soon as the benevolent principles of
christianity were received by the Romans, as the laws of the Deity, the
prisoners, and the slaves, were treated with humanity; and the bloody
exhibitions in the amphitheatre were abolished.

CHAP. IV. Forum Romanum -- Triumphal Arches -- Tarpeian Rock. Trajan's Pillar,
and other Remains of Antiquity.
FROM the back view of the capitol is beheld the Forum Romanum, now exhibiting
a melancholy, but interesting view of the devastation wrought by the united
force of time, avarice and bigotry. The first objects which meet the eye, on
this side of the hill, are three fine pillars, two-thirds of them buried in the
ruins of the old capitol. They are said to be the remains of the temple of
Jupiter Tonans, built by Augustus, in gratitude for having escaped death, from
a stroke of lightning. Near these are the remains of Jupiter Stator; consisting
of three very elegant small Corinthian pillars, with their entablature; the
temple of Concord, where Cicero assembled the senate, on the discovery of
Cataline's conspiracy; the temple of Romulus and Remus, and that of Antoninus
and Faustina, just by it, both converted into modern churches; the ruins of the
magnificent temple of Peace, built immediately after the taking of Jerusalem,
the Roman empire being then in profound peace. This is said to have been the
finest temple in Old Rome; part of the materials of Nero's golden horse, which
Vespasian pulled down, were used in erecting this grand edifice. The only
entire pillar remaining, of this temple, was placed, by Paul V. before the
church of Santa Maria Maggiore. It is a most beautiful fluted Corinthian
column, and gives a very high idea of the temple, to which it originally
belonged. His holiness has crowned it with an image of the Virgin Mary; and, in
the inscription on the pedestal, he gives his reason for choosing a column
belonging to the temple of Peace, as an ornament to a church dedicated to the
virgin.

Ex cujus visceribus princeps verae pacis genitus est.
i.e. From whose bowels the prince of true peace sprang.
Of many triumphal arches, which formerly stood in Rome, there are only three
now remaining, all near the capitol, and forming entrances to the Forum; those
of Titus, Septimus Severus, and Constantine. The last is by much the finest of
the three; but its chief beauties are not genuine; nor, properly speaking, its
own; they consist of some admirable bas-reliefs, stolen from the Forum of
Trajan, and representing that emperor's victories over the Dacians. This theft
might, perhaps, not have been so notorious to posterity, if the artists of
Constantine's time had not added some figures which make the fraud apparent;
and, by their great inferiority, evince the degeneracy of the art, in the
interval between the reign of these two emperors.

The bas-reliefs of the arch of Titus represent the table of shewbread, the
trumpets, the golden candle-sticks, with seven branches, and other utensils
brought from the temple of Jerusalem. The quarter which is allotted for the
Jews is not at a great distance from this arch. There are about nine thousand
of that unfortunate nation at present in Rome; the lineal descendants of those
brought captive, by Titus, from Jerusalem. A striking instance of sensibility
in this people is, that they ever cautiously avoid passing through this arch,
though it is directly in their way to the Campo Vaccino, choosing rather to make
a circuit, and enter the forum at another place.

There are many other interesting ruins in and about the Campo Vaccino, but of
some structures which we know formerly stood here, no vestige is now to be
seen. This is the case with the arch which was erected in honor of the Fabian
family. There is the strongest reason to believe, that the ancient forum was
entirely surrounded with temples; basilicae, and public buildings of various
kinds, and adorned with porticos and colonades. In the time of the republic
assemblies of the people were held there, laws proposed, and justice
administered. In it was the rostrum from whence the orators harangued the
people. All, who aspired at dignities, came hither to canvass suffrages. The
bankers had their office near the forum, as well as those who received the
revenues of the commonwealth; and all kind of business was transacted in this
place.

The Tarpeian rock is a continuation of that on which the capitol was built; I
went to that part, says Moore, from which criminals condemned to death were
thrown. M. Byres has measured the height; it is exactly fifty-eight feet
perpendicular; and, he thinks the ground at the bottom, from evident marks, is
twenty feet higher than it was originally; so that, before, this accumulation
of rubbish, the precipice must have been eighty feet perpendicular. In reading
the history of the Romans, the vast idea we form of that people naturally
extends to the city of Rome; the hills on which it was built, and every thing
belonging to it. We imagine the Tarpeian rock as a tremendous precipice; and,
if afterward we ever have an opportunity of actually seeing it, the height
falls so short of our expectations, that we are apt to believe it a great deal
less than it is in reality. A mistake of this kind, says Moore, has led bishop
Burnet into the strange assertion, that the Tarpeian rock is so very low, that
a man would think it no great matter to leap down it for his diversion.
Criminals, thrown from this precipice, were literally thrown out of the city of
old Rome, into the Campus Martius, which was a large plain, of a triangular
shape; two sides of the triangle being formed by the Tyber, and the base by the
capitol, and by buildings extending three miles nearly in a parallel line with
it. The Campus Martius had its name from a small temple, built in it, at a very
early period and dedicated to Mars; or it might have this name from the
military exercises performed there. In this field, the great assemblies of the
people, called census, or lustrum, were held every fifth year; the consuls,
censors, and tribunes were elected; the levies of troops were made; and there
the Roman youth exercised themselves in riding, driving the chariot, shooting
with the bow, using the sling, darting the javelin, throwing the discus or
quoit, in wrestling or running; and, when covered with sweat and dust, in
consequence of these exercises, they washed their bodies clean by swimming in
the Tiber.

The dead bodies, of the most illustrious citizens, were also burnt in this
field, which was adorned gradually by statues and trophies, erected to the
memory of distinguished men. But every feature of its ancient appearance is now
hid, by the streets and buildings of modern Rome.

The inhabitants of modern Rome may be excused in choosing this situation for
their houses; though, by so doing, they have deprived us of a view of the
Campus Martius. But, surely they ought to show more solicitude for preserving
the antiquities than they do; and they might, without inconvenience, find some
place for a cow-market, of less importance than the ancient Forum. It is not in
their power to restore it to its former splendour; but they might, at least,
have prevented its falling back to the state in which Aeneas found it, when he
went to visit the poor Evander.

As Rome increased in size, and number of inhabitants, one Forum was found too
small, and many others were erected in process of time; but, when we, speak of
the Forum, without any distinguishing epithet, the ancient one is understood.
In these Basilicae were built, justice administered, and business likewise
transacted. The emperors were fond of having such places named after them. The
accounts we have of the Forums of Nerva, and that of Trajan, give the highest
idea of their grandeur and elegance; three Corinthian pillars, with their
entablature, are all that remain of the former; of the latter, the noble
column, placed in the middle, still preserves all its original beauty. It
consists of twenty-three circular pieces of white marble, horizontally placed
one above the other; it is about twelve feet diameter at the bottom, and ten at
the top. The plinth of the base is a piece of marble twenty-one feet square. A
staircase, consisting of one hundred and eighty-three steps, and sufficiently
wide to admit a person to ascend, is cut out of the solid marble, leaving a
small pillar in the middle, round which the stairs wind, from the bottom to the
top. The stairs are lighted by forty-one windows, exceedingly narrow on the
outside, that they might not interrupt the connection of the bas-reliefs, but
which gradually widen within, and by that means give sufficient light. The most
remarkable events of Trajan's expedition against the Dacians, are admirably
wrought in a continued spiral line, from the bottom of the column to the top.
The figures, toward the top, are too far removed from the eye to be seen
perfectly. Viewed from any considerable distance, all the sculpture is lost;
and a plain fluted pillar, of the same proportions, would have had as fine an
effect. But such a frugal plan would not have been so glorious to the prince,
whose victories are engraven; or so interesting to the legionary soldiers, many
of whom, no doubt, are here personally represented.

Exclusive of the statue, this beautiful pillar is one hundred and twenty feet
high. The ashes of Trajan were deposited in an urn at the bottom, and his
statue at the top. Pope Sixtus V. in the room of Trajan, has placed a statue of
St. Peter upon this column. I observed, says Moore, to a gentleman with whom I
visited this pillar, that there did not seem to be much propriety in placing
the figure of St. Peter upon a monument representing the victories, and erected
in honor of the emperor Trajan. "There is some propriety, however," replied
he, "in having made the statue of brass."

Amongst other ruins, of this once imperial mistress of the world, Caracalla's
baths are in high estimation, with all the lovers of antiquity. They appear to
occupy as much ground as a moderate sized town; and, not only afforded
conveniences for near three thousand persons to bathe at one time, without
being seen by each other, together with squares and courts for all kinds of
sports and other public spectacles; but even science found a place in the
circumference of these baths. There were porticos for philosophers to assemble
in. The whole adorned with a profusion of statues, and the most precious
ornaments luxury could find or invent. What, alas remains! Nothing but broken
walls and naked bricks; yet, even these last ate fine in their way, as none can
be formed at this day of so large a size; they are also of an extraordinary
texture and color. The pipes, which conveyed the water to a prodigious height
into the upper apartments, are made of as fine clay as the old red china, and
equally smooth. One part of this immense building remains sufficiently entire,
to strike awe into the spectator; it consists of a prodigious dome, which has
no support but from the wall, whence it springs; and, like an unfinished
rainbow, seems suspended in the air. Close to these baths, stood Caracalla's
magnificent palace; but of this there is not the least vestige remaining.

Dioclesian's baths were twelve hundred feet square, and yet not so large as
those of Caracalla. They occupied all the gardens of the Carthusian convent,
the public granaries, the great square before them, and the church of St.
Bernardo, which is circular and antique. A great part of these thermae is
converted into a church. The remains of those of Titus are immense vaults, and
corridors under ground, painted with arabesques; from which it is said, Raphael
took the idea of his paintings, in the loggie of the vatican.

The therma Dioclesianoe, says Smollett, might be termed an august academy, for
the use and instruction of the Roman people. The Pinacotheca, of this building,
was a complete museum of all the curiosities of art and nature; and there were
public schools for all the sciences. They were adorned with all the charms of
painting, sculpture, and architecture. The pipes for conveying the water were
of silver. Many of the lavaera were of precious marble, illuminated by lamps of
crystal. Among the statues were found, the famous Toro and Hercules Farnese.

Bathing was certainly necessary to health and cleanliness, in a hot country
like Italy, especially before the use of linen was known; but these purposes
would have been much better answered by plunging into the Tyber, than by using
the warm bath in the thermae, which became altogether a point of luxury,
borrowed from the effeminate Asiatics, and tended to debilitate the fibers,
already too much relaxed by the heat of the climate. True it is, they had baths
of cold water for the summer; but, in general, they used them milk-warm, and
often perfumed: they likewise indulged in vapor baths, in order to enjoy a
pleasing relaxation, which they improved with odoriferous ointments. Of these
baths some were mercenary, and some opened gratis. When Marcus Agrippa was
Aedile, he opened one hundred and twenty private baths, for the use of the
people. In the public baths, where money was taken, each person paid a
quadrans, about the value of our halfpenny. But after the hour of bathing was
past, centumque petuntur quadrantes, says Martial, a hundred quadrans were
demanded.

Though there was no distinction in the places, between the first patrician,
and the lowest plebeian, yet the nobility used their silver and gold plate for
washing, eating, and drinking in the baths, together with towels of the finest
linen. They likewise made use of the instrument called strigil, a kind of
flesh-brush.

The circi and naumachia, if considered as buildings and artificial basins, are
admirable; but, if examined as arcae, intended for horse and chariot races, and
artificial seas for exhibiting naval engagements, they seem to prove, that the
ancient Romans were but indifferently skilled and exercised, either in
horsemanship, or naval engagements. The enclosure of the emperor Caracalla's
circus is still standing, and scarce affords breathing room for an English
hunter. The Circus Maximus, by far the largest in Rome, was not so long as the
Mall; and St. James's park would make a much more ample and convenient scene
for those diversions, This circus was but three hundred yards in breadth, and a
great part of it was taken up by spina, or middle space, adorned with temples,
and two great obelisks; as well as by the canal made by the order of Julius
Caesar, to contain crocodiles, and other aquatic animals, which were killed
occasionally. This canal was so large, that Heliogabalus, having filled it with
excellent wine, exhibited naval engagements in it for the amusement of the
people. It surrounded three sides of the square, so that the whole extent of
the race did not much exceed an English mile; and, when Probus was at the
expense of filling the plain of it with fir-trees, to form a wood, for the
chase of wild beasts, this forest was scarce more extensive than the plantation
in St. James's park, on the South side of the canals.

The Roman emperors seemed more disposed to elevate and surprise, than to
conduct the public diversions, according to the rules of reason and propriety.
One would imagine it was with that view, they instituted their naumachia, or
naval engagements, performed by half a dozen small galleys of a side, in an
artificial basin of fresh water. These galleys were not so large as fishing
smacks, for they were moved by two, three, and four oars on a side, according
to their different rates, biremes, triremes, and quadriremes. Some
antiquarians, indeed, believe the Roman galleys had different tires, or decks
of oars; but this notion is quite contrary to all the figures of them,
preserved on ancient coins and medals. Suetonius, in the reign of Domitian,
speaks of this emperor giving a mock sea-engagement, in a lake formed on
purpose, in the Tyber; the vessels of which were nearly large enough for actual
service. Yet, this artificial lake was not larger than the piece of water in
Hyde-park. How would it sound in the ears of a British sailor, that a mock
engagement, between two squadrons of men of war, would be exhibited on such a
day, on the Serpentine river! Or that the ships of the line, taken from the
enemy, would be carried in procession, from Hydepark corner to Tower wharf.
Certain it is, that Lucallus, in one of his triumphs, had one hundred and ten
ships of war carried through the streets of Rome. Nothing can give a more
contemptible idea of their naval power, than this testimony of their
historians, that their seamen were formed by exercising small row-boats, in an
enclosed pool of fresh water. Half-a-dozen English frigates, one may venture to
affirm, would have been able to defeat both the contending fleets at the battle
of Actium, which has been so much celebrated in the annals of antiquity, as an
event that decided the fate of empire.

The common sewers were first made by order of Tarquinius Priscus, not so much
with a view to cleanliness, as for subterranean drains to the Vilabrum, which
was marshy; and, in order to carry off the stagnant water, which remained in
the lower parts, after heavy rains. The different branches of their channels
united at the Forum, from whence by the Cloaca maxima, their contents were
conveyed into the Tyber. This great cloaca, was the work of Tarquinius
Superbus. Other sewers were added by M. Cato, and V. Flaccus, censors. All
these drains, having been choked up and become ruinous, were cleared and
restored by M. Agrippa, who likewise undermined the whole city with canals of
the same kind, for carrying off the filth; he strengthened and enlarged the
cloaca maxima, so as to make it capable of receiving a large cart loaded with
hay, and directed seven streams of water into these subterraneous passages, in
order to keep them always clean and open. If, notwithstanding all their
conveniences, Vespasian was put to great expenses in removing the ordure from
the public streets; we may fairly conclude, that the ancient Romans were not
more cleanly than the modern Italians.

Those who have real pleasure in contemplating the remains of antique, and the
noblest specimens of modern, architecture, and who have an unwearied admiration
of the charms of painting, may employ a full year with satisfaction in this
city.

What is called a regular course with an antiquarian, generally takes up about
six weeks; employing three hours a day; in that time, every thing worth seeing,
in or near Rome, may be visited. But, after having made this course, says
Moore, however distinctly every thing may have been explained by the
antiquarian, if the traveller does not visit the most interesting again and
again, and reflect on them at more leisure, his labor will be of little use;
for the objects are so various, and those seen one day, so apt to be effaced or
confounded with, those beheld on another, that he must carry away a very faint
and indistinct recollection of any. Many travelers have experienced the truth
of this observation.

One young gentleman, says Moore, who happened not to be violently smitten with
the charms of virtu, and scorned to affect what he did not feel, thought that
two or three hours a day, were rather too much time to bestow on a pursuit in
which he felt no pleasure, and saw little utility. The only advantage which, in
his opinion, the greatest part of us reaped from our six weeks tour, was, that
we could say we had seen a great many fine things, which he had not seen. This
was a superiority he could not brook, and which he resolved we should not long
enjoy. Being fully convinced the business might, with a little exertion, be
dispatched in a short space of time, he prevailed on a proper person to attend
him; ordered a post chaise and four horses to be ready early in the morning;
and, driving through churches, palaces, villas, and ruins, with all possible
expedition, he fairly saw in two days, all that we had beheld during our
crawling course of six weeks. I found afterward, by the list he kept of what
he had seen, that we had not the advantage of him in a single picture, or the
most mutilated remnant of a statue.

Those travelers who cannot remain a considerable time at Rome, would do well
to get a judicious list of the most interesting objects in architecture,
sculpture, and painting; these they ought to visit frequently, and these only,
by which means they will acquire a strong and distinct impression of what they
have seen; instead of that transient and confused idea which a vast number of
things viewed superficially, leave in the mind.

CHAP. V. Papal and other Palaces, with their Antique Statues, etc.
THE Pope has three superb palaces; that of the Campidaglio, or ancient
capitol; the palace of the Vatican; and that of the Monte Cavallo.

The approach to the modern Campidaglio is very noble, and worthy of the genius
of Michael Angelo, who was the architect. This building is raised on part of
the ruins of the ancient capitol, and fronts St. Peter's church, with its back
to the Forum and old Rome. There are very little remains of the old capitol, or
temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, yet enough to make a Christian church. It had
the denomination of Capitolinus, says Livy, from the head of a man, casually
found here, in digging for the foundations of the famous temple of Jupiter. The
capitol was the effect of a vow, made by Tarquinius Priscus, in the Sabine war.
The structure stood on a high ridge, taking in four acres of ground. This
temple was first consumed by fire in the Marian war, and then rebuilt by
Scylla. This too was demolished in the Vitellian sedition. Vespasian undertook
a third, which was burnt down about the time of his death. Domitian raised the
last and most glorious of them all, in which the very gilding amounted to two
millions and a quarter sterling; which immense expenditure, in that single
article, gave Plutarch occasion to observe, that he was like Midas, desirous of
turning every thing into gold.

The present building was erected in the pontificate of Gregory XIII. It is a
large and magnificent palace, with two spacious wings, containing very grand
apartments. At the bottom of the stairs are two Egyptian lions, which form two
fountains; and, at the top, stand Castor and Pollux, holding their horses, both
colossal, in white marble, and representing those heroes as they came express
to Rome, with the news of the victory gained over the Tarquins. These two lions
are, by some writers, called Sphinxes; so little is the dependence that can be
put on the relation of travelers.

The two sphinxes of Basalte, at the bottom of the ascent, though excellent
specimens of Egyptian sculpture, says Moore, engage little your attention. Warm
with the glory of Rome, you cannot bestow a thought on the hieroglyphics of
Egypt. On the other hand, Northall has an express note on this subject, and
quotes two other authors in support of his assertion, that they are lions. So
very contradictory in their testimony in this particular.

In the center of the area, fronting the city, stands the famous equestrian
bronze statue, of the Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Pius, which was
erected to him by the senate and people of Rome. From this exalted station, the
emperor seems to take a survey of the city; and, with his hand extended, to be
now giving laws to Rome. It is esteemed the finest statue in the world, and was
anciently in very high repute. The Romans boast much of this statue at present;
and say, the Venetians offered as many sequins of gold for it, as could be
enclosed in the belly of the horse, which was refused. What Carlo Maratti is
reported to have said to the horse, may give some idea of the excellence of the
sculpture. Why do thou not walk? Have thou forgot that thou art alive?

At the upper end of the area, says Moore, the eye is caught by a majestic
female figure, in a sitting attitude, which, we are told, is a Roma triumphans,
brought from Cori, one of the oldest towns of Latium. We view her, says the
above writer, with all the warmth of fond enthusiasm, but we recollect she is
no longer triumphant; we cast an indignant eye on St. Peter's, to which she
also seems to look with indignation. Is there such another instance of the
vicissitudes of human things; the proud mistress of the world under the
dominion of a priest?

In the two wings of this modern palace, called the Campidaglio, the
conservators of the city have apartments; their office is analagous to that of
the ancient Aediles. In the main body, an Italian nobleman, appointed by the
Pope, has his residence, with the title of Senator of Rome; the miserable
representation of that senate, which gave laws to the world. The most defaced
ruin, the most shapeless heap of antique rubbish in all Rome, cannot convey a
feebler image of the building, to which they belonged, than this deputy of the
Pope does of that august assembly.

The upper apartments, and galleries of this place, are filled with a
surprising collection of antiquities; all the curious statues and pieces of
antiquity, found in and throughout the neighborhood of the city, having been
brought here to the embellishment of the Campidaglio. An antiquarian cannot
help being delighted with the chamber of the emperor, where on two rows of
steps is displayed a long range of alabaster and marble busts, representing the
ancient Roman emperors, and their consorts. There is also a very fine
collection of Egyptian deities; each of them quite perfect. In the main
building is the gaol for criminals. Near the capitol, is still seen the statue
of Marforio. This is a colossal figure lying down, but without much merit, and
remarkable, only, that against it are pasted the answers to those satirical
verses, stuck upon another antique statue, called Pasquino, from whence the
term Pasquinade arose, so frequently given to scurrilous and abusive poems.

Among other curious antiques in the capitol, says Lady Millar, is a vase of
fine bronze, fluted, and in shape somewhat like flower-pots, intended to
ornament gardens. This was the favorite cup of Mithridates, king of Pontus,
who always had it carried with his baggage, to his encampments, and constantly
drank out of it Pompey took a like fancy to it, and had it brought to Rome,
where it was borne in triumph. It holds more than six gallons; but seems of the
most inconvenient shape imaginable for a drinking cup; no modern mouth could
easily take the brim; the capacious jaws of a Polypheme, might, indeed, fill it
well.

Here are also the feet, and one hand of a mutilated colossal statue of Apollo,
supposed to have been forty-one feet high; the great toe measures thirty-seven
inches round.

The superb palace, called the Vatican, is attached to St. Peter's church, and
was for many years the residence of the pontiffs. But they have of late
preferred Monte Cavallo as a drier and healthier situation. The Vatican, or
Mons Vaticanus, owes its name to the answers of the Vates, or prophets, that
used to be given here; or from the god Vaticanus; but it seems not to have been
enclosed within the walls till the time of Aurelian. This hill was formerly
famous for the sepulcher of Scipio Africanus, some remains of which are here
still to be seen.

The Vatican is a palace extremely irregular, very lofty, and very spacious. It
contains eleven thousand and five hundred apartments. No traveller can be
supposed to have either opportunity, or inclination, to examine into the truth
of this account, so that we must depend on the veracity of the Pope's officers
and domestics, whose authority for what they advance, is the wooden model of
this palace, which at present is not to be seen.

This palace having been built and enlarged at different times, there is no
proportion or symmetry observed in its several parts; and, to avoid damaging
the fine area before St. Peter's church, it has not so much as a portico in
front.

The best painters of Italy have striven to display the utmost of their art, in
the beautiful pictures that are every where to be seen in these apartments; and
Raphael, especially, has done wonders. His masterpiece, is a picture
representing the history of Attila.

Exclusive of the paintings, the library and the antique statutes are the
principal objects, meriting the attention of a traveller.

The Vatican library is the finest, and noblest in the world, being full of
manuscripts in Hebrew, Greek, and other languages. Pope Sixtus V. caused it to
be built from the very foundation, and spared no cost to enrich it with the
best books; but, since his death, it has been augmented by the Heidelberg
library, and that of Christina, queen of Sweden. It is generally divided into
two parts, the public and private; the one is three hundred feet long, and
sixty broad: the other consists of two rooms, into which admittance is not so
easily obtained, because of the very scarce manuscripts contained there.

This library is so constructed, as to afford a very agreeable coup d'aeil at
the entrance; but, the books being enclosed in presses, which are painted,
deprives it entirely of the appearance of a library.

In this library stands a white and transparent column of oriental alabaster,
about ten feet high, which is solid and beautifully fluted. Opposite to this
pillar is a sarcophagus of white marble, and in it a winding sheet made of
linen, which readily catches fire, but does not consume thereby. This linen is
secured by iron-work; and, in order to prove that it stands the fire, our
Ciceroni, says Lady Millar, pulled one end of it through the iron, and set fire
to it with a lighted bougie. It burnt fast, and presently extinguished of its
own accord. The corner, which had endured the flame, appeared rather cleaner
and whiter than the rest of the sheet, which was all the effect that the fire
produced. There are painted, on large pilasters ranged in the middle of the
library, those persons who were reputed to have been the inventors of letters
in the ancient languages, with the letters which each are said to have
invented, written under their pictures.

They told us, says Lady Millar, that the presses contained seventy thousand
printed volumes, and forty thousand manuscripts. They show a Greek testament,
written in capitals, with the accents, nine hundred years old; several curious
antique bibles in Hebrew, Syriac, Arabic, etc. an elegant Greek manuscript of
the Acts of the Apostles, in gold letters, given by one of the Popes to
Charlotte queen of Cyprus; and several others, with curious and high-finished
miniatures. Among these is a Pliny, with the pictures of all the animals; a
Virgil of the 5th century, written entirely in capitals, with the figures of
the Trojans and Latins in their proper habits; a beautiful manuscript of Tasso,
and a Dante, with miniatures at the top of each page descriptive of the
subjects. Here are also carefully preserved, the original love letters from
King Henry VIII. to Anne Boleyn; and his treatise on the seven sacraments
written against Luther; with his dedication, in his own handwriting, to Pope
Leo X.

In the middle of this palace is a spacious square, surrounded with
orange trees and antique statues, and therefore called, says Keysler, il
giardino delle statue antiche. It is also called the Belvidere, on account of
the glorious prospect seen from it. Here is that noble repository of antique
sculpture, called the Clementine Museum; and the present Pope has fitted up a
set of apartments, worthy them and him for their better reception. It is said
to be the most superb assemblage of the finest statues in the whole world;
there are eight in all.

The first remarkable object we meet with is, a large mutilated statue,
possibly of Hercules, without head, hands, or feet; but, for the exquisite
representation of the muscles, etc. preferred by Michael Angelo, to all the
other remains of antiquity. This piece, which is commonly called il tronco di
Belvidere, is enclosed with iron-work; and, according to Lancivi's account, was
dug up in the Campo di Fiori. In the niche of a portico, surrounding a small
open court, is the famous Apollo Belvidere, and the no less famous Laocoon; the
former incomparably the finest single figure, and the latter the finest group
in the world. Apollo is supposed to have just discharged his arrow at the
Python: his attitude is beautiful, natural, and unaffected; his countenance
composed and elegant; the workmanship of every part exquisite: he is longer
from the middle downwards than nature, says Martyn; but this deviation, from
the proportion of the human figure, adds greatly to his dignity; and, upon the
whole, he has an unspeakable sublimity, that inspires admiration, awe, and
reverence.

When the folding doors were thrown open, of the niche which conceals the
statue of Apollo, says Lady Millar, I started back with surprise. Never did I
see any sculpture come so near the life, nor animation express so much majesty
and dignity. I was struck with awe. The beautiful proportions of the limbs, the
grandeur and noble air diffused over the whole figure, his commanding aspect,
blended with angelic sweetness, joined to the most perfect feature, made me
almost fancy he breathed and was about to speak.

The point of view, says Sherlock, from whence is seen the most perfect union
of the sublime and beautiful in nature, is from the top of Vesuvius. The point
of view, from whence is seen the most perfect union of the sublime and
beautiful in art, is in the court of the Apollo of Belvidere. From the former
we see the mouth of the volcano; fields desolated by rivers of lava now frozen;
a country of vineyards, of considerable extent, diversified by the most
beautiful mixture of plains and hills; the city of Naples, the hill of
Paufilippo, a number of islands scattered in a vast sea, etc. etc. In the court
we see the Apollo, the Laocoon, the Antinous, and the celebrated torso of
Hercules, called the torso of Michael Angelo, on account of the admiration
which he had for this precious fragment. Here we see what the Greek nation was.
Let me not be told of prejudice for the ancients, I have none; I only do
justice to the merit of things, and it is very indifferent to me, says
Sherlock, where they are found, or who are their authors. To be just, we must
sometimes appear extravagant; when an object is transcendently beautiful, or
great, suitable encouragement ought to be given to it. The pen of man cannot do
justice to the poetry of Shakspeare, the genius of the King of Prussia, or the
works of the Greeks. Many, I know, will condemn me for this last expression;
but, I deny them to be judges; they will condemn me only, because they know not
my subjects.

It is in the Belvidere that we see the superiority of the Greeks to all the
nations of the world. The distance that is between the Apollo, the Laocoon, and
all the best works of the French and the Italians, is so great, that it is
almost ridiculous to name them together.

Let the young traveller, when he views the Apollo, recollect that what he sees
has been a rude block of marble. The first step of the artist was to create the
character of this god. Before, therefore, the marble was touched, the sculptor
had made an effort of genius; and that effort of genius was so great, that all
the men who have succeeded him to this moment, have never been able to make one
like it. This eulogium, it may be said, is too strong; it is not an eulogium,
it is a fact: if the fact be not true, name me a statue equal in invention. Is
it the Susannah of Fiamingo, the Justice of Gulielmo della porta, the Santa
Bibiena of Bernini, or is it the Moses of Michael Angelo? No man of sense will
ever compare them. The Moses is not inferior to any Italian or French statue;
but had we not seen the torso, from which it is evident that Michael Angelo
took the original idea of his statue, we should never be astonished at the
invention of that production. The invention of the Apollo astonishes all men,
and astonishes them in proportion to the time, and attention with which they
examine it.

The Apollo of Bernini is a fine statue; it appears indifferent, only because
we compare it, often, imperceptibly with the Apollo of Belvidere. Neither is
the Apollo of Bouchardon, an indifferent production; but compare the original
French statue, with the copy of the Greek statue, in the gardens of Versailles,
the difference is incredible; it is the difference between a man and a god. We
cannot say what a heathen deity was; but we always feel, on viewing this
statue, that it was something more than human.

When genius is unaccompanied by taste, it is often surprised at missing its
effect; the character created, it remained for taste to choose a moment to show
this divinity; that moment ought to be animating and interesting; it ought to
be favorable to grace, majesty, and expression; and, it ought to be so chosen,
that the disposition of the whole, and the distribution of each part of the
statue, should seem to flow from it with simplicity and ease. The artist there
has chosen the instant in which this god gives the sublimest proof of his
divinity, by an act of benevolence, in destroying an enemy of mankind; it is
the instant after he has shot his arrow at the serpent Python; the arrow
discharged, he follows it with his eyes to observe its effect; the expression
of each part of the body corresponds to that of the face; and, from an idea so
simple, this Grecian has been able to form a work which has obtained the
applauses of all men, and has made every artist despair.

When a perfect execution is added to genius and taste, man cannot then go
farther. The finish of this Apollo is inconceivable, even to the most minute
particulars; but the artist might almost have been excused the trouble of so
perfectly completing his work; his conception is so sublime, and his
distribution so happy, that they alone would have commanded the admiration of
all men in all countries; and, a proof of this, is the homage every where paid
to the casts of this breathing god.

The best way to give an idea of the superiority, of Greek execution, is to
cite a fact. The Laocoon was found only with one arm; they wished to have
another; several artists attempted it, and all failed. Michael Angelo, the
boldest genius that Italy ever had, who conceived the idea of placing the
Pantheon in the air, and who made the dome of St. Peter's on the same
dimensions, thought that he could succeed in it; and, after having worked at it
for two years, abashed and despairing, be broke his work to pieces. Gulielmo
della Porta, whose superb mausoleum, in St. Peter's, shows, that he was an
artist of the first rank, said, that it was impossible to make it in marble,
but that he would make it in clay; and he made the right-arm in clay, as we see
it at present; an incontestible proof of the unattainable perfection of the
Greek execution.

I allow it, says Sherlock, to be a bad proof of our being in the right, that a
celebrated man is of our opinion; but, I think every reasonable being should
well examine, before he determines against a judgment so solid as that of
Poussin, and a genius so bright as that of Montesquieu: the former studied
incessantly the best works, ancient and modern, on which this was his decision:
" Raphael, compared with the moderns, is an angel; compared with the ancients,
he is an ass." Compare the most beautiful figure of Raphael, detached, with the
Apollo, and his finest group with the Laocoon, and judge for yourself.

France has no man who does her more honor in foreign countries, or who will
do her more with posterity than Montesquieu; it is well known that he made some
stay in Italy, and that he did not view objects like a superficial observer:
this was his idea with regard to the Greeks; "Taste, and the arts have been
carried by them to such a height, that to think to surpass them, will be always
not to know them."

The Laocoon astonishes and terrifies. There is not a feature, or muscle, which
does not express the deepest anguish. Laocoon is represented in the greatest
agony, and with his eyes lifted up to heaven. Near him are his two sons, with
the serpents turned about them, whom Virgil represents at some distance from
the father, and expiring when he came to their relief. The youngest son is
fallen down in the agonies of death; the other is not yet hurt, and looking
toward his father, wishing to help him, and at the same time wanting help
himself. The principle figure, viz. the father, has lost the right-arm, and
that of plaster or clay, which has been substituted in its room, is not to be
compared to the other parts of the statue, either for color or workmanship;
even Michael Angelo himself, being ordered to execute another arm for this
statue, is said, designedly, never to have put the finishing hand to it.

For me, says Moore, to attempt a description of the fine specimens of antique
sculpture in the Vatican, which have been described a thousand times, and
imitated as often, without once having justice done them, would be equally vain
and superfluous. I shall, therefore, confine myself to a very few observations.
The most insensible of mankind must be struck with horror at sight of the
Laocoon. On one of my visits to the Vatican, I was accompanied by two persons
who had never been there before; one of them was accused of being perfectly
callous to every thing which did not immediately touch his own person; the
other is a worthy good man: the first, after staring for some time with marks
of terror at the groupe, at length recovered himself; exclaiming with a laugh,
-- "Egad, I was afraid these d -- d serpents would have left the fellows they
are devouring, and made a snap at me; but I am happy to recollect they are of
marble." -- "I thank you, Sir, most heartily," said the other, for putting me
in mind of that circumstance; till you mentioned it, I was in agony for those
two youths."

Nothing can be conceived more admirably executed, than this affecting groupe;
in all probability, it never would have entered into my imagination that it
could have been in any respect improved. But, Mr. Lock, the famous sculptor,
it seems has observed, after mentioning the execution of this piece in the
highest terms of praise, that, had the figure of Laocoon been alone, it would
have been perfect. As a man suffering the most excruciating bodily pain with
becoming fortitude, it admits of no improvement; his proportions, his form, his
action, his expression, are exquisite. But, when his sons appear, he is no
longer an insulated suffering individual; who, when he has met pain and death
with dignity, has done all that could be expected from man; he commences
father, and a much wider field is opened to the artist. We expect the deepest
pathos, in the exhibition of the sublimest character, that art can offer to the
contemplation of the human mind; a father forgetting pain, and instant death,
to save his children. This sublime and pathetic the artist did not see, or
despaired of attaining. Laocoon's sufferings are merely corporal; he is deaf to
the cries of his agonizing children, who are calling on him for assistance.
But, had he been throwing a look of anguish on his sons, had he seemed to have
forgotten his own sufferings in theirs, he would have commanded the sympathy of
the spectator in a much higher degree. On the whole, Mr. Lock is of opinion,
that the execution of this groupe is perfect, but that the conception is not
equal to the execution. Such are Mr. Locke's sentiments; we have only to
remark, whether a sudden and instantaneous unexpected pain of the most
excruciating kind, possible to be conceived for the human mind to suffer, does
not destroy every other sentiment.

Reflecting on the dreadful condition of three persons, entangled in the horrid
twinings of serpents, and, after contemplating the varied anguish, so strongly
expressed in their countenances, it is a relief to turn the eye to the heavenly
figure of the Apollo. To form an adequate idea of the beauty of this statue, it
is absolutely necessary to have seen it. With all the advantages of color and
life, the human form never appeared so beautiful; and, we can never
sufficiently admire the artist, who has endowed marble with a finer expression
of grace, dignity, and understanding, than ever were seen in living figures.

The admired statue of Antinous is in the same court. Nothing can be more
light, elegant, and easy; the proportions are exact, and the execution perfect.
It is an exquisite representation of the most beautiful youth that ever lived.

The statue of the Apollo represents something superior; and the emotions it
excites are all of the sublime cast.

Monte cavallo, the Pope's summer palace, on the Quirinal hill, has its name
from two colossal statues, with each a horse, which they formerly held by the
bridle. They bear the name of Phidias and Praxiteles; but, whoever was the
sculptor, they are certainly Grecian, and much the most pleasing colossal
statues in Rome. That which is ascribed to Phidias is the best. The horses have
great spirit, but their necks are too thick, and their heads too little. The
bridles are lost. Constantine the Great, is said to have brought them out of
Greece, and to have placed them in his baths on the Quirinal mount. The
figures, in both, have been supposed to represent Alexander and Bucephalus.

Over the doors of the palace is a balcony, supported by two Ionic pillars,
from whence the Pope, on solemn occasions, gives his benediction to the people.
This palace, from the salubrity of the air, and its fine prospect over a large
part of the city of Rome, is preferred by the popes, as a residence to the two
former palaces. The building is round a large court, which is surrounded by a
portico. A wide double staircase conducts to the great hall.

The gardens belonging to this palace are large, and laid out in good taste,
but not taken care of as they deserve. They are surrounded with very lofty
cypress-trees, and laurels, with some hedges of myrtles, and are about a mile
in circuit. A delightful laurel-grove leads from hence to a lower garden, where
the waterworks are very surprising. Some, by the means of organs, imitate the
sound of trumpets and kettle-drums; others, the explosion of grenades and
rockets.

At one angle of the large garden, the Pope has built two elegant apartments
for his particular retirement, and furnished them after the English taste, even
to the most minute articles. This building is called the coffee-house.

The palaces of Rome line the streets and squares, which thus owe their
greatest ornament to these vast edifices. The architecture is good in very few;
but, in many, the prodigious extent, united to a magnificence of decoration, is
striking: such are the Barberini, Borghese, Bracciano, Altieri, and Colonna
palaces. In the interior distribution, magnificence is the leading feature, to
which convenience often gives place. Smollett says, he was told there were
above three hundred palaces in Rome; but that, in fact, their number did not
exceed fourscore; and, so far from there being scarce a Roman prince, whose
revenue did not exceed fifty thousand pounds; that he scarce found six
individuals who had ten thousand pounds.

Of the principal of these palaces we shall give a summary view. The Altieri
palace is one of the largest in Rome. It is plain on the outside, and a
remarkably good piece of brick-work. The staircase is grand. The library of
Clement X. in this palace, is rich in manuscripts, medals, etc. The princess's
apartments consist of seven noble rooms well furnished. In the bedchamber, of
the Prince Gasper Altieri, is the chariot of the sun in fresco, by F. Chiari;
and the cieling, of the room adjoining to it, was painted by Carlo Maratti. The
cardinal's bed of state is valued at thirty thousand crowns. Here is also shown
an octangular speculum of rock crystal, ten inches long, and six broad, in a
frame of gold set with amethysts, emeralds, sapphires, topazes, and diamonds;
the whole weighs twelve pounds, and is by some estimated at fifteen thousand
pounds.

The Barberini palace is exceeded only by the Vatican, and contains four
thousand rooms or apartments. The two main staircases are extremely grand; and,
on one of them is a very large antique lion, much admired for the excellence of
the workmanship. This palace resembles two or three joined together; and,
contiguous to it, is a very large garden, ornamented with fountains, statues,
etc. The collection of fine pictures, antiques, and other curiosities in this
palace, is prodigious. The library is in the upper story, one hundred and
ninety-seven steps leading up to it; they pretend that there are sixty thousand
volumes of printed books, and nine thousand manuscripts. The great room is one
hundred feet long, thirty-four broad, and twenty high; with a covered cieling.
There is a cabinet of medals, antique gems, bronzes, etc. The jewels of this
family, as is the custom with all the great and princely families in Italy, are
kept in a large cabinet, and form a kind of regalia. Here is an astonishing
quantity of precious stones and pearls. The jewels the duchess wears are
magnificent. The diamonds are of a much larger size than any in England, except
those belonging to the crown; and there are a vast number of large pearls, of
the finest water, and most exact formation.

The celebrated Borghese palace is very bad architecture, both within and
without; a vast extent of front without any break, order, or elegance. It is
all of brick, stuccoed. The great court has double porticos, supported by an
hundred granite columns. In this palace are seventeen hundred original
pictures, which are reckoned worth several millions of money.

As this palace exceeds any other in Rome, for paintings, etc. it is surprising
to see so much mean furniture, especially the chairs and seats, amidst so much
splendour and magnificence.

The palace of Prince Odiscalchi, was, formerly, for paintings and statues, one
of the most remarkable in Rome; but, at present, the front of it, by Bernini,
is the only thing worth observing. The finest pieces by Corregio and Paul
Veronese, as likewise all that belonged to Queen Christina's collection, were
sold to the Duke of Orleans, regent of France.

The Colonna palace, fronting to the square of the twelve apostles, is of great
extent; and the apartments are magnificent, and handsomely fitted up. They are
full of pictures by the best masters. The gallery is one of the finest and
richest in Europe, one hundred and thirty-nine feet long, thirty-four broad,
and seventy high, and has some capital paintings. Here is a cabinet, studded
with precious stones, which belonged to King Charles I. and was sold by
Cromwell to Cardinal Mazarine, whose niece married into the Colonna family.
Among other expensive furniture is a clock, showing the hour of the day, the
month, year, etc. which is wound up but once a year. Here is also a bed finely
gilt, and made in the form of a shell, drawn by four sea-horses, like Neptune's
triumphal car. This was the bed in which Maria Marcini, cardinal Mazarine's
niece, lay in of her first child. This lady was famous for the passion which
Lewis XIV. entertained for her. The constable Colonna's stables are inferior to
none in Rome, and well stocked with Spanish, Neapolitan and Barbary horses.

The Corsini is a noble palace, without architecture; twenty-two windows in
front, a fine suite of rooms, and a large garden, part of which is in the
Janiculeum, and commands one of the noblest views in Rome. The library is well
disposed and public. It consists of four rooms, twenty-four feet square, and
sixteen high; in one of which is a large collection of prints and drawings;
three others for new books, and a gallery seventy feet by twenty.

The Farnese palace, belonging to the king of the two Sicilies, is the most
superb in Rome. It was chiefly built by Michael Angelo. In the court are three
orders, Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian, with open arcades round it.

In the apartments, of this now deserted palace, are some good statues and
busts: but its great ornament is the gallery, painted in fresco, by A. Caracci.
The beauty of this palace is not viewed without concern; for not only the
famous cube, but several other ornaments, have been brought here from
Vespasian's theater, to the great detriment of that incomparable structure. In
the court are several ancient statues of a large size, viz. a gladiator, Flora,
and two statues of Hercules, exactly resembling each other, but not equally
well cut. That on the left hand is the Farnesian Hercules, and is the work of
Glycon, an Athenian, as appears from the inscription. The statue of Flora near
it, is mutilated; but, for the fineness of the drapery, few of the ancient
pieces can be compared with it. The Toro Farnesian is also much admired. The
subject of this piece is, Amphion and Zethus tying Dirce by the hair to the
tail of a bull, in revenge for her having robbed her mother Antiope, of their
father's love. Though the figures are larger than life, it is said to be one
entire piece of marble. According to Marlyn, these three statues have been very
recently removed to Naples.

The Farnesian Hercules, remarks Moore, has been long admired as an exquisite
model of masculine strength; yet, admirable as it is, it does not please all
the world. The women, in particular, find something unsatisfactory, and even
odious in this figure; which, however majestic, is deficient in the charms most
agreeable to them; and which might have been expected in the son of Jupiter,
and the beauteous Alcmene. A lady, adds Moore, whom I accompanied to the
Farnese palace, turned away from it with disgust. I could not imagine what had
shocked her. She told me, after recollection, that she could not bear the stern
severity of his countenance; that his large brawny limbs, and the club with
which he was armed, gave him more the appearance of one of those giants, that,
according to the old romances, carried away virgins, and shut them up in gloomy
castles, than the gallant Hercules, the lover of Omphale. Finally, the lady
declared, that she was convinced this statue could not be a just representation
of Hercules; for it was not in the nature of things, that a man so formed could
ever have been a reliever of distressed damsels.

Without such powerful supports as that of the fair sex, I should not have
exposed myself to the resentment of connoisseurs, by venturing to assert, that
the Farnese Hercules is faulty both in form and attitude: the former is too
wieldy for active exertion, and the latter exhibits vigor exhausted. A resting
attitude is not the most proper, in which the all-conquering god of strength
could be represented. Rest implies fatigue; and fatigue, strength exhausted A
reposing Hercules is almost a contradiction. Invincible activity, and
inexhaustible strength are his characteristics.

Next to Hercules, is a most beautiful statue of Flora. The great advantage,
remarks Moore, which the ancient artists had in attending the exercises of the
gymnasia, has been repeatedly urged as the reason of their superiority over the
moderns in sculpture. We are told that, besides the usual exercises of the
gymnasia, all those who proposed to contend at the Olympic games, were obliged
by the regulations to prepare themselves, by exercising publicly for a year;
and the statuaries and painters constantly attended on the arena, where they
beheld the most graceful of the Grecian youths employed in these sports, in
which the power of every muscle was exerted; and, where the human form appeared
in an infinite variety of attitudes. By constant attendance at such a school,
the artists are supposed to have acquired a more animated, true, and graceful
style, than can possibly be caught from viewing the tame, mercenary models
exhibited in our academies.

On the other hand it is asserted, that the artist, who formed the Farnesian
Flora, could not have improved his work, or derived any of its excellencies
from the circumstances above enumerated; because, the figure is in a standing
posture, and clothed. In the light easy flow of the drapery, the contour of
the body, being as distinctly perceptible, as if the statue was naked, the
chief merit of this statue is thought to consist. But this reasoning does not
seem just; for the daily opportunities which the ancient artists had of seeing
naked figures, in every variety of action and attitude, must have given them
advantages over the moderns, in forming even drapery figures. At Sparta, the
women, upon particular occasions, danced naked. In their own families, they
were seen every day clothed in light draperies; and, so secondary was every
consideration, even that of decency, to art, that the prettiest women of
Agrigentum, it is recorded, were called upon by the legislature, without
distinction, to show themselves naked to a painter, to enable him to paint a
Venus. Whilst the moderns, therefore, must acknowledge their inferiority to the
ancients in the art of sculpture; they may be allowed merit, on account of the
cause, to which it seems in some measure, at least, to be owing.

As prince Giustiniani's palace is one of the most remarkable for excellent
paintings, so it exceeds any in Rome for fine statues. The second story
consists of a suite of eleven spacious apartments; through all which is a noble
vista, superior to any of that kind in Rome. A particular description of the
original paintings, which are no less than seven hundred, and the antique
monuments which are nineteen hundred, five hundred of which are statues, occupy
two volumes folio.

On the spot where this palace stands were, anciently, the baths of Nero and
Severus; so that, at laying the new foundation, granates, basalte, and other
kinds of fine marbles, with a great number of statues, busts and bas-reliefs,
were found there, which are noble ornaments to the palace.

Some idea of the extent of the Pamfili palace may be formed, and which is
equally large and magnificent; when our readers are informed, that upwards of
four thousand persons were entertained in it; when Prince Doria, the present
possessor, received the archduke and archduchess of Austria, in the year 1780.
There are no less than eighteen palaces belonging to this family, seven of
which are in Rome.

CHAP VI. Churches, Colleges, Hospitals, and general Remarks.
IF a city is entitled to the appellation of holy, from the number of its
churches, Rome unquestionably merits it. They reckon up no less than three
hundred and thirty churches; and, there are few of them in which the
architecture does not merit commendation. Of these we shall only notice two or
three of the principal; which, exclusive of the paintings and architecture,
have some other peculiarities to interest the reader. It is not only the
architecture, but the prodigious number of paintings, by the most capital
masters, which render so many of the churches in Rome, objects of curiosity to
admirers of the arts. In some of them a profusion of riches dazzle the beholder.

Who, says Abbe Coyer, without considering their architecture, can calculate
all the riches accumulated in their churches? The chapel alone of S. Ignatius,
in the church dedicated to our Savior, would purchase a whole province. I
speak not of its pillars of verd antique, its niches of oriental alabaster, its
columns of lapis lazuli, and the gilded bronze, which every where dazzles the
eyes; I consider only the silver, the gold, and the precious stones, which are
worked up with so much taste.

The principal of these churches, is that of St. John de Lateran; which, though
inferior to St. Peter's in dimensions and architecture, is the metropolitan
church in Rome. It was built by Constantine, and styled matter orbis and urbis.
The emperors formerly received their crowns in this church; and here, the Pope
still takes possession of his dignity, and confers all ecclesiastical
benefices. The fabric of this church has been much enlarged, since the time of
Constantine, and is very beautiful. It has five doors, one of which is called
the 'holy door,' being opened only in the jubilee year. The number of its
precious shrines, and other valuable ornaments, is very great; but nothing is
more valued than a plain tin chalice, which is said to have been made use of by
S. Peter. The most valuable curiosity in this church, is the coffin of Helena,
mother to Constantine the Great, made of a single piece of porphyry, with large
bas-reliefs, representing horsemen, and other figures. This is even larger than
the supposed shrine of Bacchus, in St. Constantin's church, but is damaged in
several places. It was dug up in the Via Labicana, about three miles from Rome.

Here are also the famous chairs, or stools, called stellae stercoratoriae, or
exploratoriae. They are two in number, and between them is a chair of white
marble, elevated something above them; both are of porphyry. Before I had seen
them, says Keysler, I was assured they were only the common chairs used by the
ancient Romans, in which a hole had been made and lined with wood. But, in
viewing them, they did not seem at all adapted for the purpose of night stools;
the aperture not being of a sufficient size, and incommodiously placed. It is
certain, however, that the popes, at their taking possession of the Lateran,
were formerly placed on these stools, or chairs; this the popish writers cannot
deny; and Mabillon makes it an act of humility, perfectly agreeable to the
words which are sung at this ceremony: "He raises the needy from the dust, and
the poor from the dunghill, that he may sit with princes, and possess a throne
of glory." Hence this chair came to be called stella stercoraria.

The indecent examination of the Pope's sex, about which some writers have been
very jocose, may, perhaps, be justly exploded as fabulous; but, it is not a
protestant fable; Roman Catholic writers having first set it on foot, and
introduced it into their satyrs: as, for instance, the following epigram,
among many others of the same kind, by Marcelli, on the Cibo family.

Quid quaeris testes, sit mas an faemina Cibo?
Respice natorum pignora certa gregem.
"Why such the proofs of Cibo's sex? See the number of his children."

The whole history, or fable of pope Joan, passed current before Luther was
born; as is evident from the ancient manuscripts of Anastasius, M. Polonus, and
others. In a history of modern Rome, written by one Tentzell, and very scarce,
is the following passage respecting that lady, which was purloined from the
Vatican library. "In the papal succession, it appears, that John, an
Englishman, succeeded Leo, and held the pontificate two years, five months, and
four days, when there was a vacancy of a month, in the papal chair. This pope
is affirmed to have been a woman; who, being disguised like a young man, was
carried by her gallant to Athens, and made such a progress in all the sciences,
that she publicly read lectures at Rome for three years, the greatest masters
being among her auditors; nor was there any equal to her, for parts and
learning, in that city. At length, she rose to such a pitch of reputation, as
to be unanimously chosen pope; but, during her pontificate, she unhappily
conceived by her former gallant; and, being ignorant of the time of her
delivery, she fell in labor as she was returning from St. Peter's to the
Lateran, and was delivered between the Colisaeum and St. Clement's church,
where she is said to have expired. The Pope's custom of turning aside when he
passes this way, is said to be done, in order to express his detestation of
this affair; neither is she set down in the list of popes, on account of her
sex.

The Corsini chapel, belonging to this church, is probably the most elegant in
Europe, both for its proportions, and the disposition of the marbles.

The Scala Santa is opposite to this church; it consists of twenty-eight marble
steps, said to be brought from Pilate's palace at Jerusalem; and, in the
spacious area stands a great Egyptian obelisk.

St. Maria Maggiore, is so called from being the largest of the thirty
churches, which are dedicated to the Virgin Mary, in this city. The nave of
this church is supported by forty antique columns of Greek marble; they are
Ionic, and belonged to the temple of Juno Lucina. The roof is flat, and gilt
with the first gold which came from Peru. This church is also called St. Mary
ad praesepe, from its containing the manger, in which our Savior is said to
have been laid, together with the swaddling clothes he wore, and some straw on
which he was placed.

In one of the chapels is a profusion of rich marbles, opaque precious stones,
and other magnificent ornaments.

Under the church of St. Sebastian, the portico of which is supported by
antique granite columns, are the catacombs. They are very narrow, in comparison
with those at Naples, but are commonly said to extend forty miles. They were,
originally, quarries of puzzolana, then served for burial places of the
heathens, and afterward of the christians.

Under the church of St. Giuseppe is an ancient Roman prison, built by Tullus
Hostilius, and enlarged by Ancus Martius; it is called the prison of St. Peter,
who is said to have been here. It has a fine spring, which they tell you issued
miraculously, to enable the apostles to baptize the jailer, and forty-seven
other persons. A staircase near leads down to the dungeon, from the church; and
there is a hole into another dungeon, where Jugurtha ended his days.

St. Maria degli angeli is the noblest church in Rome, next to St. Peter's; it
was made out of Dioclesian's thermoe, by Michael Angelo. It was the room in
which the youths performed their exercises in bad weather.

St. Maria sopra Minerva, so called from being built where there was a temple
decicated to Minerva, by Pompey.

In the church of St. Maria della Pieta, is an epitaph, the thought of which
has something uncommon in it.

Fleres, si scires unum, tua tempora, mensem;
Rides cum non fit forsitan una dies.
"You would weep, if you knew that one month would put a period to your
existence; and yet you laugh, though not certain of a day."

Il fagro monte della pieta was instituted to prevent the extortions of
usurers, by which the distresses of the poor, in other countries, are so
extremely aggravated. Here any one receives two-thirds of the value of his
pledge; and, if it does not exceed thirty crowns, he pays no interest; but, if
above that sum, only two per cent. are required. In case eighteen months should
elapse before the pledge be redeemed, it is publicly sold, and the overplus
reserved for the owner of the pledge. This sale, however, may be prevented by
renewing the obligation.

The church of St. Onofrio is not without some good paintings; but what chiefly
draws a foreigner hither, is the fine view which this church affords all over
the city of Rome. The remains of the celebrated poet Torquato Tasso lie
interred here.

Those who are fond of horses may meet with great entertainment at St.
Anthony's church, on the 17th of January; that day being the festival of the
saint, when all the horses, mules, etc. belonging to the Pope, cardinals,
prelates, princes, and other great men, are drawn up before the church door,
where a priest sprinkles them with holy water. If the horses and mules receive
no benefit from this practice, the monks, at least, find the sweets of it. At
Sienna, the horses which are to run the race on the assumption of the Virgin
Mary, are, the day before, blessed in the same manner with holy water, at the
door of the cathedral; and the officiating priest has, at least a wax candle,
as an offering for every horse. This custom is supposed to have taken its rise
from the sprinkling of the horses at the Circensian games.

On the altar of the church of St. Pietro, in Montorio, is the most celebrated
picture, at present known in the whole world; it is the transfiguration of
Christ on Mount Tabor, and was the last work of Raphael's admirable pencil. No
monumental inscription having been thought sufficient to express the praise of
that great artist; this picture was set up, near his remains, as the most
affecting and strongest proof of the irreparable loss the world sustained, by
his premature exit; for he died in the thirty-seventh year of his age.

This transfiguration, says Sherlock, is a school of painting. If the art was
lost, and this picture remained, it would be alone sufficient to form painters.
All the parts of painting are united in it; the most exact drawing, the most
sensible and picturesque disposition, a perfect harmony of coloring, and a
sublimity in the upper part of the picture, which transports the spectator as
much as the groupes below interest him. Raphael was commanded to paint this
subject; and, it is in itself rather barren. A god, clothed in splendour, and
illuminated by the rays of his glory, presents, of itself, so sublime an idea,
that the artist could not miss it. But it is the only idea that the subject
offers. The painter was forced to create the rest. It is the property of
genius, said Leonardo di Vinci, to draw a grand production from a poor subject;
as it is that of mediocrity, to form a trifling work upon a rich ground. This
sentence, and the transfiguration, determine the rank of Raphael.

The studies of the belles-lettres, and antiquities, are more followed at Rome
than the sciences. La sapienza is the principal of the colleges; and, as it
were, the center of the university. There are eight professors of theology, six
of civil and canon law, eight of medicine, five of philosophy, one of
belles-lettres, and four of the Eastern and Greek languages.

The college of La Propaganda was founded by Gregory XV. There are several
professors belonging to it, who give lectures on theology, philosophy, the
belles-lettres, and the oriental languages, to the young ecclesiastics, who are
designed for foreign mission. The Roman college is a vast, heavy edifice, built
by Gregory XIII. This is dedicated to the education of youth, as are also the
Clementine and Nazarene colleges.

For the encouragement of learning, there are also many public libraries in
Rome. That of the Vatican is universally known. The other principal ones are in
the Altieri, Albani, Barberini, Borghese, Corsini, Ghizi, Imperiali, and
Pamfili palaces; at the Sapienza, Propaganda, and Roman colleges; in the
convents of St. Agostino, Gesu, St. Maria sopra Minerva, etc. Most religious
houses of note have, likewise, considerable libraries, which are easily
accessible.

It appears that there are very few students in these universities, the Jesuits
having every where monopolized the education of youth in the ecclesiastical
states.

Rome is full of those foundations, for which religion lays opulence under
contribution; such are the conservatories, some of which are for orphans, some
for children brought thither by their parents, and not seldom taken from them
when their poverty endangers their morals; there are also hours of reformation
for children who are disobedient, or taking bad courses; and other for wives,
under, the misfortune of having bad husbands. There are no less than thirty
hospitals, says Keysler, for the relief of the sick and poor in the city of
Rome, but none of them equal the Santo Spirito; in which there are, generally,
above a thousand patients, and all well taken care of.

Forty nurses are constantly kept in pay, to take care of the infants; which
every night are put into the machines at the foundling hospitals. Besides
these, above two thousand nurses, in the city and neighboring villages, have
wages for nursing the children till they are four or five years old; and then
the boys are brought to the hospital to be instructed in handicraft trades, or
polite arts, according to their different genius, when they are provided with
all necessaries, till they are able to maintain themselves. The girls, who
generally exceed five hundred in number, are educated under the inspection of a
convent of nuns, till they are fit for the convent, or marriageable. If the
latter be their choice, they have a portion of a hundred crowns. This hospital,
though part of its revenues has been curtailed by some of the popes, to endow
other charities which stood in need of its assistance, has still an annual
income of five and twenty thousand pounds sterling; besides the produce arising
from the circulation of the money, in the bank belonging to it.

The hospital of St. Michael is another admirable foundation for bringing up
poor orphans, who are allowed to choose their trade; and, when they are twenty
years old, and able to maintain themselves, they are dismissed from the house,
new clothed from head to foot, with five and twenty crowns in their pockets.
Into this hospital are also admitted, old disabled servants, and others
incapable, by age and infirmities, of earning their bread. In the chapel, the
two sexes are separated from each other by an iron grate; it being Lent, says
Keysler, when I visited this hospital, their food consisted of a piece of dried
fish, some chestnuts, and bread, with a can of wine.

Every country in Europe, where the Roman Catholic religion is professed, has
likewise its hospital for pilgrims, in Rome; but; the hospital of the Trinity,
receives all nations indiscriminately; and has frequently entertained fifteen
thousand pilgrims under its roof at once. The manner of receiving them is as
follows: the pilgrims, as soon as they arrive, present themselves before the
officers of the house; and, on producing their certificates, their names are
entered in the books of the hospital, and each person receives a medal, or
ticket of admission. They are then led into a large chamber; where a priest,
having said prayers, washes all their feet, and dresses the wounds of those,
whose feet have been hurt, or blistered by traveling; this done, they are led
into the refectory; and, having supped, are shown into the common dormitory,
where each individual has his bed assigned him.

The Pazzarella, or hospital for lunatics, very much resembles Bedlam in its
institution; except that this charity is more extensive, and provides for
people of all nations, who are disordered in their intellects, as appears from
two English quakers, who were merchants in Italy, and had learnt the Italian
language. These quakers, it seems, from an excess of zeal, looked upon it as
meritorious, to endeavor to make a convert of the Pope to quakerism; they,
accordingly, applied to his domestics for an audience; nor did they make any
secret of their business with his Holiness, which they told in their usual cant
terms and jargon. At first, they were laughed at, as people disposed to be
merry; but, repeatedly continuing their solicitations with great earnestness,
they were looked upon as madmen; and the Pope's officers, out of charity, sent
them to the Pazzarella, as it is called. The grvernor of the house, thinking
their zeal and transports to be certain indications of a disordered brain, shut
them in a dungeon, and treated them with great rigor. The physicians also
purged them most violently, repeating and strengthening their doses, as they
observed their ravings increase; but, all proving ineffectual, they were
neglected as persons incurable, and permitted to walk about the hospital with
the harmless lunatics, where they were seen by some English gentlemen, who,
being informed for what reason they were confined, procured their release, and
had them shipped off for England.

But, to return to the charitable institutions; almost every company of
artisans have their hospital, where they provide for such of their fraternity
as are infirm, or otherwise distressed. In the church of the Twelve Apostles,
are annually chosen twelve noblemen, and one prelate; who make it their
business to go into every corner of the city, in search of poor men ashamed to
beg, and relieve their wants. Even the lawyers set apart one day in every week,
to defend the causes of the poor, gratis.

CHAP. VII. Environs of Rome.
THE warmth of the climates necessarily makes the inhabitants fond of villas
and gardens; where, in summer, they may retire for the benefit of fresh air. Of
these there are ten or twelve, in the neighborhood of the city, usually
visited by strangers. From this we may judge what a task they undertake, who
resolve to go through the whole; and what kind of an idea they are likely to
carry away, who perform this task during a stay of a few months. Of these the
villa Borghese ranks first; it is one of the finest spots in all Italy; and, as
St. Peter's at Rome is the most superb church in the world; so this villa, for
beauty, ornaments, and curiosities, may be said to exceed all other country
seats in Italy, or elsewhere.

In short, remarks Smollet, these villas would make a complete academy for
painting, and sculpture, especially for the study of ancient marbles; for,
exclusive of the statues and busts in the garden, and the vast collection in
the different apartments, almost the whole outside of the house is covered with
curious pieces in basso, and alto relievo.

It stands at the distance of a quarter of a league from the Porta Pinciana,
and is enclosed within a wall, of five Italian miles in compass; containing a
variety of situations, high and low, which favor all the natural
embellishments one would expect to meet with in a garden, and exhibit a
diversity of noble views of the city and adjacent country. The part, says Lady
Millar, is fine, and with a few alterations would be esteemed such even in
England; the verdure is lively, and the trees old and well grown. To this part,
the English are permitted by the Borghese family to repair twice a week, and
play at cricket and football; we women, adds Lady Millar, go sometimes and see
the sport, as do the Roman ladies, attended by their abbes, who form a
brilliant body of spectators.

In the gardens are, at least, twenty beautiful walks; and all the vista's are
terminated by statues and fountains. The espaliers consist of jessamine or
orange trees, myrtle, etc. In other parts of the garden are separate little
parks for deers and hares, and a warren for rabbits. Here is also a large canal
stocked with swans, and all kinds of aquatic fowls. In two large and lofty
aviaries are to be seen all birds of the known feathered species; and the
flower-garden exhibits the most beautiful flowers and remarkable vegetables.

At the entrance are the following curious regulations, relating to the garden
of the Villa Borghese. "I, the keeper of the Villa Borghese, give notice, that
whoever thou art, if thou art free, thou need not fear any shackles of the
law should restrain thee here; go where thou will, gather what thou please,
and stay or go when it is agreeable to thee. All thou see, is rather for the
entertainment of strangers than of the owner; who, mindful of the inestimable
freedom of the golden age, banishes, from these tranquil mansions, laws
invented in the iron age: let good manners be the only law to be observed here.
But, should thou wantonly and deliberately break the golden rule, that good
breeding dictates; beware, left the provoked gardner should also break through
the bounds of civility and friendship."

Of the curiosities contained in the palace, we shall confine ourselves to a
few remarks on some of the most esteemed. The hermaphrodite, of which there are
so many prints and models, is accounted by many, one of the finest pieces of
sculpture in the world. The mattrass, upon which this fine figure reclines, is
the work of Bernini, and nothing can be more admirably executed. Some critics
say, he has performed his task too well, because the admiration of the
spectator is divided between the statue and the mattrass. This, however, ought
not to be imputed as a fault to that great artist; since he condescended to
make it at all, it was his business to make it as perfect as possible. It is
said, there was an artist at Versailles, in a different line, who attempted
something of the same nature; he had exerted all his abilities in making a
periwig for a celebrated preacher, who was to preach on a particular occasion
before the court; and, he imagined he had succeeded to a miracle. "I Will be
hanged," said he, to one of his companions, "if his Majesty, or any man of
taste, will pay much attention to the sermon today."

Among the antiques, there is a centaur in marble, with a cupid mounted on his
back. The latter has the cestus of Venus, and the ivy crown of Bacchus, in
allusion to beauty and wine; he beats the centaur with his fist, and seems to
kick with violence, to drive him along. The centaur throws back his head and
eyes with a look of remorse, as if he were unwilling, though forced, to
proceed. The execution of this groupe is admired by those who look upon it,
merely as a jeu d'esprit; but it acquires additional merit, when considered as
allegorical of men, hurried on by the violence of their passions, and lamenting
their own weakness, while they find themselves unable to resist.

There is another figure which claims attention, more on account of the
allegory than the sculpture. This is a small statue of Venus Cloacina,
trampling on an impregnated uterus, and tearing the wings of Cupid. The
allegory indicates, that prostitution is equally destructive of generation and
love.

This villa is also enriched by one of the most animated statues in the world;
and which, in the opinion many, comes nearest, and, in the judgment of some,
equals the Apollo of the Vatican; this is the statue of the fighting gladiator.
It is difficult, however, to compare two pieces whose merits are so different.
The Apollo is full of grace, majesty, and conscious superiority; he has shot
his arrow, and knows its success. There is, indeed, a strong expression of
indignation which opens his lips, distends his nostrils, and contrasts his
brows; but, it is the indignation of a superior being, who punishes, whilst he
scorns the efforts of his enemy. The gladiator, on the contrary, full of fire
and youthful courage, opposes an enemy he does not fear; but whom, it is
evident, he thinks worthy of his utmost exertion; every limb, nerve, and sinew
is in action; his ardent features indicate the strongest desire, the highest
expectation; but not a perfect security of victory. His shape is elegant as
well as nervous; expressive of agility as well as strength; and equally distant
from the brawny strength of the Farnesian Hercules, and the effeminate softness
of the Belvidere Antinous.

Though this fine figure generally goes by the name of the fighting gladiator,
some antiquarians cannot allow, that ever it was intended to represent a person
of that profession, but a victor at the Olympic games; and assert, that it is
the identical statue made by order of the Athenian state, in honor of their
countryman Chabrias; and, that it is precisely in the attitude which, according
to Cornelius Nepos, that hero assumed when he repulsed the army of Agesilaus.

There are eight or ten of these villas in the outskirts of Rome, highly
celebrated for their delightful prospects, their beautiful gardens, their
superb collection of antique statues and paintings, by the greatest masters of
the art; but, to enumerate them separately would be superfluous and tedious in
the description.

Exclusive of these villas belonging to the Roman princes within the precincts,
as it were, of the capital; there are several other places, at some small
distance from Rome, which have been illustrious in antiquity, and therefore
merit a more particular description. The principal of these are, Frescati,
Tivoli, and Albano.

Frescati is about twelve miles East of Rome, and situated on, or near, the
same spot where the ancient Tusculum stood, and derives its name from the
arbours, or tabernacles, built by the inhabitants of Tusculum, when their city
was demolished in 1191. This charming place is, at present, the summer
residence of several persons of the first rank, who have not only splendid
palaces and gardens here, but have taken advantage of this favorable
situation, among hills, for making very grand waterworks, such as would make a
figure even at Versailles. Tusculum is often marked, in ancient history, as the
scene of many memorable events; it was the birthplace of Cato the censor, the
great grandfather of Cato of Utica; it was rendered illustrious by the
celebrated villa of Cicero, to which he frequently retired, and where he
composed those so justly admired philosophical dissertations. This place boasts
likewise, of having given birth to Metastatio; unquestionably, the first poet
in Italy. The town is built on the declivity of a hill, and commands a fine
view of the country below, and of the many villas and gardens which clothe and
beautify the brow of the mountain.

The principal villa belongs to the Borghese family, and is situated on Monte
Dracone, a mile from the town; it is so called from the dragon borne by the
family of Borghese in their arms. This house is reckoned one of the largest in
Europe, and has a fine portico constructed by Vignoles.

The palace stands on an eminence, and at the end of a very beautiful avenue.
At the entrance are the following ostentatious mottos.

Thessala quid Tempe, quid quaeris Adonidis hortos
Haec tibi pro cunctis Villa Draconis erit;
That is, "Thessalian Tempe and Adonis' groves
No more shall charm, but yield to this recess."


And farther on, Hesperidum nostris quantum viridaria cedunt,
Custos est tanto mitior ore Draco.
" Hesperian groves are far surpassed by these;
No monster guards this rural calm retreat."


Some idea may be formed of the largeness of this palace from the number of its
windows, which are no less than three hundred and seventy-four; and, from one
of them, the noble owner has a prospect of part of his own estate to the amount
of fifteen thousand pounds sterling a year.

From the terrace is a most beautiful view of Rome, and the adjacent country,
till the sea bounds the prospect on that side: villages, ruins, and the Lago
Castilione, with mountains from another beautiful prospect; the tout ensemble
is truly wonderful and delightful, uniting all the advantages of a near, with
all the grandeur of an extensive, prospect.

Here we cannot omit the story of an unfortunate mother and daughter of the
family of Cenci, whose portraits are shown in one of these apartments. The
father of the latter was such an abandoned wretch, that he could not refrain
from acts of brutal, and even unnatural lust with his wife, in his daughter's
presence, and made several violent attempts on her person also. To put a period
to such indignities, she had recourse to a most desperate attempt, to which her
father's horrid villainy prompted her. She concealed two assassins in her
chamber, who were to murder her father in his sleep; but, when the dreadful
moment came, the two villains were seized with fear, or sudden remorse, and
showed a reluctance to perpetrate the murder. Upon this the daughter, in a
transport of rage, snatched a stiletto from the hands of one of the assassins,
and stabbed her father as he slept, who expired amidst a deluge of blood. This
dreadful catastrophe happened in the time of Paul V. and the mother and brother
being privy to the design, they were all three beheaded before the castle of S.
Angelo. The Pope showed them no other favor, notwithstanding they were of a
noble family, than that of ordering some guns to be fired, at the time of their
execution, from the castle of S. Angelo, as a signal for his Holiness to
pronounce a benediction in their behalf. The daughter died with great
resolution; and her youth and beauty drew a flood of tears from the spectators.

The villa Aldobrandini is also remarkable for its fine situation, extensive
gardens, airy terraces, its grottos and waterworks. These form a kind of
theater; and a brass globe, supported on the shoulders of Atlas, ejects water
on all sides. Near this statue are a lion and a tiger fighting; and, the water
issuing from the mouth and nostrils of the former, exactly imitates the
snarling of that animal when enraged. The column of water, in the center of the
fountain, rises to the height of seventy-four palmi, and is attended with a
noise like the whizzing of sky-rockets. Here is also a Francis, or Polypheme,
playing on one of the ancient pastoral pipes, and a Centaur blowing a horn,
which is said to be heard four Italian miles. In an arched hall, is also to be
seen Mount Parnassus, with Apollo, the Muses, and Pegasus; the music of the
choir proceeds from an artificial cuckoo, and an organ with a variety of stops,
put in play by water, as is another place before the theater. The keys of these
instruments are moved by brass pins, fixed in a cylinder, which turns on its
axis by means of a water-mill. Near Mount Parnassus stand the statues of
Corinna and Sappho; and, on the walls, Apollo's chief adventures are painted in
fresco. Over the door is this distich:

Huc ego migravi Musis comitatus, Apollo,
Hic Delphi, hic Helicon, hic mihi Delos erit.
"Hither resort with me, Apollo.
each tuneful muse;
This shall be Delphos, Delos, Helicon,
And all our famous haunts so famed of old."
This curious saloon is paved with fine small stones curiously arranged; and,
in the center of the pavement is a hole, over which a light globe, or ball, is
kept in a perfect equilibrium, at the distance of a span from the floor, only
by the impetus of the air, forced up by water through the hole. The cascade
consists of sixty-five steps, and on both sides are tortoises, dolphins, and
other aquatic animals, cut in stone, and spouting water at each other. In the
garden, not far from the cascade, is a wilderness, with several shady, narrow
walks in it.

The villa Conti is worth seeing, on account of its garden and waterworks, and
particularly for the ancient remains of eighteen vaulted buildings, said to
have formed part of the menagerie of Lucullus.

The ruins of the ancient town of Tusculum are to be traced above a villa
belonging to the Jesuits, called the grottos of Cicero; but, it is by no means
certain that these vestiges made part of his villa.

Frescati is the sea of a bishop, who is suffragan of Rome, and it is usually
held by one of the six eldest cardinals. At present, it belongs to the cardinal
of York, who passes the greatest part of his time in the duties and ceremonies
of a religion, of whose truth he seems to have the fullest conviction.

Near the bottom of the eminence, on which Tivoli stands, are the ruins of the
vast and magnificent villa, built by the Emperor Adrian. These remains cover a
large extent of ground. Several country houses have been built upon them, and
the greater number of the finest antiques in the Roman collections have been
found here. Various authors agree, that this villa was in length three miles;
and in breadth, a fifth of that space. Here still remain vestiges of colonades,
temples, aqueducts, etc. On part of the gardens is built a religious house for
the Jesuits; they are said to have been laid out, formerly, in the most
beautiful representation of the Elysian fields, contrasted with the regions of
Pluto. Much more may be said of this villa, even in its present ruined state;
but, what it has been, may be gathered from a variety of ancient authors.
Suffice it to say, that the utmost efforts of the arts and sciences were
exhausted in the improvement of a spot, kind and beautiful by nature.

A wet and marshy piece of ground, which was partly under water, and had been
an immense basin in front of this villa, is rented by a M. Hamilton, an
ingenious English artist, who keeps a great number of men at work upon it, and
has succeeded, so far as he has gone, in draining it, with great expense and
labor. He very sensibly fixed on this spot, concluding, that many valuable
antiques might have been thrown into the water, to preserve them from the
barbarous fury of those who demolished this superb edifice; and has already
found a great number of curious articles, which will yield him an ample
indemnification.

Tivoli is about fifteen miles distant from Frescati, and nearly the same
distance from Rome, and situated on a hill. It is the ancient Tibur, and said
to have been built by the Greeks. The town itself is a wretched place, and made
more disagreeable by a great number of forges. The inhabitants positively
affirm, this little town to have been built six hundred and SMALL CASCADE at
TIVOLI.
forty years before the city of Rome; and round its arms still retain the
ancient motto, superbum Tibur, "proud Tibur." The cathedral is built upon the
the ruins of the temple of Hercules; but the most remarkable antiquity here is
the temple of the Sibyl: the beautiful architecture, and fine proportions of
this small edifice, strike the eye at first view; its form is most elegant, its
sculpture perfect and peculiary graceful. The lines of beauty, so insisted upon
by Hogarth, are to be traced in all the ornaments of this building. Its
situation is on the brow of a hill; on one side appears the town, and in front
the great cascade. This beautiful little temple has been so accurately
described by Palladio, Vitruvius, and other architects, that it is surprising
it has not been copied in some of the fine gardens in England. The hill, on
which this temple stands, affords not only a charming prospect of the cascade,
but of the spots where the seats of Horace and Catullus are supposed to have
stood. The violence of the fall, or cataract, of the river Teverone, anciently
the Anio, down the precipice, turns the water entirely to foam, and has
considerably excavated the rocks beneath. About half a league farther up the
hill, is another water-fall; but neither of them is to be compared to the
cascade formed by the Rhine, near Schaffhausin, or of the Velino, in the
district of Terni.

The cascade of Terni is formed by the fall of the river Velino, which Virgil
mentions in the seventh Aeneid, Rosea rura Velini. The channel of this river
lies very high, and is shaded on all sides by a green forest, made up of
several kinds of trees, that preserve their verdure all the year. The
neighboring mountains are served with them; and, by reason of their height,
are more exposed to the dews, and drizzling rains, than any of the adjacent
parts, which gives occasion to Virgil's Rosea rura (dewy countries). The river
runs extremely rapid before its fall, and rushes down a precipice of a hundred
yards high; it throws itself into the hollow of a rock, which, probably, has
been worn by such a constant fall of water. It is impossible to see the bottom
on which it breaks, for the thickness of the mist that rises from it, which
looks at a distance like clouds of smoke, ascending from some vast furnace, and
distills in perpetual rains on all the places that lie near it. The river
Velino, after having found its way out from among the rocks, runs into the
river Nera. [ See the Plate. The figures on the fore-ground are in the costume,
or dress of the country.

After having passed these falls, this river, which takes its rise in the
Appenines, fifty miles above Tivoli, loses itself in the Tibur.

THE WATER FALL OF TERNI.


Besides the cascade and the Sibyl's temple, Tivoli has to boast of the villa
Estense, which is said to have cost the family, whose name it bears, three
millions of crowns; yet this fine house is going to decay as fast as time can
effect it. This palace has been much admired for its architecture, sculpture,
paintings, gardens, and waterworks. Most of the waterworks are still kept up;
for, being easily supplied from the river Anio, they are not very chargeable.
The large basin, before the palace, furnishes a great quantity of water. Near
this basin, is a very long row of some hundreds of eagles, pyramids, bases, and
other figures, cut in stone, and fixed on pedestals, with bas-reliefs of
stories taken from Ovid's Metamorphoses, and water is ejected from all of them.
This row of figures, being several hundred paces in length, is a very elegant
ornament; and, at the end, stands a ship with its masts and rigging, as it
were, engaged and vigorously defending itself, by ejecting water from all
parts. On an adjoining eminence, is a representation of ancient Rome, with its
temples, theaters, obelisks, baths, columns, triumphal arches and aqueducts.
The Girondola, or dragon fountain, throws up a vast column of water, to the
height of twenty palmi. The water-organ, is also a curious piece of work; and
the deep cascade is in a good taste. Upon the whole, the waterworks at Tivoli
surpass those at Frescati; but the latter afford a more agreeable prospect; for
Tivoli lies on the brow of a chain of hills, by which great part of its
prospect is intercepted on one side.

This was a populous and flourishing town in remoter antiquity; but, it appears
to have been thinly inhabited in the reign of Augustus. Horace, in an epistle
to Mecaenas, says, Parvum parva decent. Mihi jam non Regia Roma,
Sed vacuum Tibur placet.


That is, "Little things are adapted to little men. It is not royal Rome that
pleases me now, but the empty Tibur."

Though the town itself was not populous, the beauty of the situation, and
wholesomeness of the air, prompted great numbers of illustrious Romans, both
before the final destruction of the republic, and afterward, in Augustus's
time, to build country-houses in the neighborhood. Julius Caesar had a villa
here, which he was under the necessity of selling, to defray the expense of the
public shows and games he exhibited to the people during his Aedileship.
Plutarch says, that his liberality and magnificence, on this occasion, obscured
the glory of all who had preceded him in the office, and gained the hearts of
the people to such a degree; that they were ready to invent new offices, and
new honors for him. He then laid the foundation of that power and popularity,
which enabled him, in the end, to overturn the constitution of his country.
Caius Cassius had also a country house here; where Marcus Brutus and he are
said to have had frequent meetings, and to have formed the plan, which
terminated the ambition of Caesar; and again offered Rome that freedom, which
she had not the virtue to accept. Here also, was the villa of Augustus, whose
success in life arose at the field of Philippi, from which he fled; was
confirmed by the death of the most virtuous citizens of Rome; and who, without
the talents, reaped the fruits of the labor, and vast projects of Julius
Caesar. Lepidus the triumvir, Cecilius Metellus, Quintillius Varus, the poets
Catullus and Propertius, and other distinguished Romans, had villas in this
town, or its environs, and the spots are shown on which they stood; but nothing
renders Tibur so interesting, as the frequent mention which Horace makes of it
in his writings. His great patron and friend Mecoenas had a villa here, the
ruins of which are to be seen on the South bank of the Anio; and, it was pretty
generally supposed, that the poet's own house and farm were very near it, and
immediately without the walls of Tibur; but it has been of late asserted, with
great probability, that Horace's farm was situated nine miles above that of
Mecoenas's, at the side of a stream, called Licenza, formerly Digentia, near
the hill of Lucretilis, in the country of the ancient Sabines. Those who hold
this opinion say, that when Horace talks of Tibur, he alludes to the villa of
Mecoenas; but, when he mentions Digentia, or Lucretilis, his own house and farm
are to be understood.

But, whether the poet's house and farm were near the town of Tibur, or at a
distance from it; his writings sufficiently show, that he spent much of his
time there; and, it is probable, that he composed great part of his works in
that favorable retreat. This he, in some measure, declares in that fine ode
addressed to Julius Antoninus; the same whom Augustus first pardoned, and
afterward put privately to death, on account of an intrigue, into which he was
seduced by the abandoned Julia, the daughter of Augustus. If Tivoli had nothing
else to recommend it, but its being so often sung by the most elegant of the
poets, and its having been the residence of so many illustrious men, these
circumstances alone would render it worthy the attention of travelers.

On the road from Rome to Tivoli, about three miles from the latter, strangers
are desired to visit a kind of lake, called Solfatara, formerly Lacus Albulus,
and there shown certain substances, to which they give the name of floating
islands. They are nothing more than bunches of bullrushes, springing from a
thin soil, formed by dust and sand blown from the adjacent ground, and glued
together by the bitumen, which swims on the surface of this lake, and the
sulphur with which its waters are impregnated. Some of these islands are twelve
or fifteen yards in length; the soil sufficiently strong to bear five or six
people; who, by the means of a pole, may move to different parts of the lake,
as if they were in a boat. This lake empties itself by a whitish, muddy stream
in the Teverone; a vapor, of a sulphurous smell, arising from it as it flows.
The ground near this rivulet, as also around the borders of the lake, resounds
as if it were hollow, when a horse gallops over it. The water of this lake has
the singular quality of covering every substance which it touches, with a hard
stony matter. On throwing a bundle of small sticks, or shrubs into it, they
will, in a few days, be covered with a white crust; but what seems still more
extraordinary, this encrusting quality is not so strong in the lake itself, as
in the canal, or little rivulet that runs from it; and the further the water
has flowed from the lake, till it is quite lost in the Anio, the stronger is
this quality. These small, round encrustations, which cover the sand and
pebbles, resembling sugar-plumbs, are called Confetti di Tivoli. Fishes are
found in the Anio, both above and below Tivoli, till it receives the Albula;
after which, during the rest of the course to the Tibur, there are none. The
waters of this lake, had a high medical reputation anciently; but, at present,
they are in no esteem.

The road from Frescati to Rome, by Gensano, Marino, La Riccia, and Castle
Gondolfo, is delightful. All the villages, and villas, communicate with each
other, by fine walks, and avenues of lofty trees; whose intermingling branches
form a continual shade for the traveller. Castle Gondolfo is a little village,
near the lake of Albano; on one extremity of which is a castle, belonging to
his Holiness, from which the village takes its name. There is nothing
remarkably fine in this villa, except its situation. Near the village is
likewise the villa Barberini; within the gardens of which are the ruins of an
immense palace, built by the Emperor Domitian. There is a charming walk, about
a mile in length, along the side of the lake, from Castle Gondolfo, to the town
of Albano. The lake of Albano is an oval piece of water, about seven or eight
miles in circumference, whose margin is finely adorned with groves and trees of
various verdures, beautifully reflected from the lake; and which, with the
surrounding hills, and the Castle Gondolfo, which crowns one of them, forms a
fine picturesque appearance.

The grand scale on which the beauties of nature appear in Switzerland, and the
Alps, has been considered by some as too vast for the pencil; but, among the
sweet hills and valleys of Italy, her features are brought nearer the eye, are
fully seen and understood, and appear in all the bloom of rural loveliness.
Tivoli, Albano, and Frescati, therefore, are the favorite abodes of the
landscape-painters, who travel into this country for improvement; and, in the
opinion of some, these delightful villages furnish studies better, to the
powers of their art, than even Switzerland itself. Nothing can surpass the
admirable assemblage of hills, meadows, lakes, cascades, gardens, ruins,
groves, and terraces; which charm the eye in wandering amid the shades of
Frescati and Albano, appearing in new beauty as they are viewed from different
points, and captivating the beholder with endless variety.

The most commanding view is from the garden of a convent of capuchins, at no
great distance from Albano. Directly in front is the lake, with the mountains
and woods which surround it, and the castle of Gondolfo; on one hand is
Frescati, with all its villas; on the other, the towns of Albano, La Riccia,
and Gensano; beyond these an uninterrupted view of the Campagna, with St.
Peter's church, and the city of Rome in the middle; the whole prospect being
bounded by the hills of Tivoli, the Appenines, and the Mediterranean.

One of the scenes, generally taken by most painters, is a view near the
fountain, between Lericci and Albano, about twenty-five miles on the road from
Rome to Naples, with a distant prospect of part of the Campagnia, and the
Mediterranean. The figures are in the dress of the country. N. B. The ancient
Via Appia, from Rome to Brundusium, went close to this road, of which there are
now some remains. [See the Plate.]

While we were contemplating, says Moore, all these objects with pleasure and
admiration, an English gentleman observing, that there was not a prospect equal
to it in all France or Germany, and not many superior even in England, gave
occasion to the following humourous dialogue, between this latter, and a lively
old gentleman from Scotland, a man of worth, but no antiquarian; and, indeed,
no admirer of any thing ancient or modern, which had not some relation to his
native country. "That I well believe," replied the Caledonian; "but, if I had
you in Scotland, I could show you several, with which this is by no means to be
compared." "Indeed! Pray in what part of Scotland are they to be seen?" "I
presume you never was at the castle of Edinburgh, Sir?" "Never," "Did you ever
see Lock Lomond, Sir?" "I never did." "I suppose I need not ask, whether you
have ever been in Aberdeenshire, or the Highlands, or --," "I must confess once
for all," interrupted A VIEW between LORICCI and ALBANO
the Englishman, "that I have the misfortune never to have seen any part of
Scotland." "Then I am not surprised," said the Scot, taking a large pinch of
snuff, "that you think this is the finest view you ever saw." "I presume, you
think those in Scotland a great deal finer?" "A very great deal indeed, Sir;
why, that lake for example, is a pretty thing enough; I dare swear, many an
English nobleman would give a good deal to have such another before his house;
but, Loch Lomond, is thirty miles in length, Sir! There are above twenty
islands in it, Sir! That is a lake for you. As for their desert of a Campagna,
as they call it, no man who has eyes in his head, Sir, will compare the
Campagna of Rome, to the fertile valley of Sterling, with the Forth, the most
beautiful river in Europe twining through it." "Do you really in your
conscience imagine," said the Englishman, "that the Forth is a finer river than
the Thames?" "The Thames!" exclaimed the North Briton; "why, my dear Sir, the
Thames at London is a mere gutter, in comparison of the Frith of Forth at
Edinburgh." "I suppose then," said the Englishman recovering himself, "you do
not approve of the view from Windsor castle?" "I ask your pardon," replied the
other, "I approve of it very much; it is an exceeding pretty kind of a
prospect; the country appears from it, as agreeable to the sight as any plain
flat country, crowded by trees, and intersected by enclosures, can well do;
but, I own, I am of opinion, that mere fertile woods, rivers, and meadows, can
never of themselves perfectly satisfy the eye." "You imagine, no doubt," said
the Englishman, "that a few heath-covered mountains and rocks embellish a
country very much?" "I am precisely of that opinion," said the Scot; "and you
may as soon convince me, that a woman may be completely beautiful with fine
eyes, good teeth, and a fine complexion, though she should not have a nose on
her face, as that a landscape or country, can be completely beautiful without a
mountain." "Well, but here are mountains enough," resumed the other; "look
around you." "Mountains!" cried the Caledonian, "very pretty mountains, truly!
They call that Castle Gondolfo of theirs, a castle too, and a palace, forsooth!
but, does that make it a residence fit for a prince?" "Why, upon my word, I do
not think it much amiss," said the other; "it looks full as well as the palace
of St. James's." The palace of St. James," exclaimed the Scot, "is a scandal to
the nation; it is both a shame and a sin, that so great a monarch as the King
of Scotland, England, and Ireland, with his royal consort, and their large
family of small children, should live in a shabby old cloister, hardly good
enough for monks. The palace of Holyrood-house, indeed, is a residence meet for
a king." "And the gardens; pray what sort of gardens have you belonging to that
palace?" said the Englishman, "I have been told, you do not excel in those."
"But we excel in gardeners," replied the other, "which are as much preferable
as the creator is preferable to the created." "I am surprised, however, that in
a country like yours," rejoined the South Briton, "where there are so many
creators, so very few fruit-gardens should be created." "Why, Sir, it is not to
be expected," said the Scotchman, "that any one country should excel in every
thing. Some enjoy a climate more favorable for peaches, vines, and nectarines;
but, by God, Sir, no country on earth produces better men and women than
Scotland." "I dare say none does," replied the other. "So, as France excels in
wine, England in wool, and oxen; Arabia in horses, and other countries in
animals; you imagine Scotland excels all others in the human species." "What I
said, Sir, was, that the human species in no country excel those of Scotland;
and that I assert again, and will maintain, Sir, to my last gasp." "I do not
intend to deny it," said the Englishman; "but you will permit me to observe,
that men being its staple commodity, it must be owned that Scotland carries on
a brisk trade, for I know no country that has a greater exportation; for you
will find Scotchmen in all countries of the world." "So much the better for all
the countries of the world," said the Scotchman, "for every body knows that the
Scotch cultivate and improve the arts and sciences wherever they go." "They
certainly improve their own fortune wherever they go," rejoined the other:
"like their gardeners, though they can create little or nothing at home, they
often create very good fortunes in other countries; and this is one reason of
our having the pleasure of so much of their country in London." "Whether it
affords you pleasure or not, Sir, nothing can be more certain," replied the
Scot in the most serious tone, "than that you may improve very much by their
company and example. But there are various reasons," continued he, "for so many
of our country sojourning in London. The seat of government is there; the King
of Scotland, as well as of England, resides there; the Scotch nobility and
gentry, have as good a right to be near the person of their sovereign, as the
English; and you must allow, that if some Scotchmen make fortunes in England,
many of our best estates are also spent there. But you mean to say, that the
Scotch, in general, are poor, in comparison of the English. This we do not
deny, and cannot possibly forget, as your countrymen refresh our memories with
it so often. We all allow, therefore, that you have this advantage over us; and
the Persians had the same over the Macedonians, at the battle of Arbela. But,
whether Scotland be poor or rich, those Scots who settle in England must carry
industry, talents, or wealth with them, otherwise they will starve there as
well as elsewhere; and, when one country draws citizens of this description
from another, I leave you to judge which has the most reason to complain. And
let me tell you, Sir, upon the whole, the advantages, which England derives
from the union, are manifest and manifold." "I cannot say," replied the
Englishman, "that I have thought much on the subject; but I shall be obliged to
you, if you will enumerate a few of them." "In the first place," resumed the
Scot, "has she not greatly increased in wealth since that time?" "She has so,"
replied the other, smiling, "and I never knew the real cause before." "In the
next place, has she not acquired a million and a half of subjects, who,
otherwise, would have been her enemies? For this, and other reasons, they are
equivalent to three millions. In the third place, has she not acquired
security, without which, riches are of no value? There is no door open now,
Sir, by which the French can enter into your country. They dare as soon be
damned as attempt to invade Scotland; so, if you can only defend your own
coast, there is no fear of you; but, without a perfect union with Scotland,
England could not enjoy the principal benefit she derives from her insular
situation." "Not till Scotland shall be subdued," said the Englishman.
"Subdued!" repeated the astonished Scot; "let me tell you, Sir, that is a very
strange hypothesis; the fruitless attempts of many centuries, might have taught
you that the thing is impossible; and, if you are conversant in history, you
will find, that after the decline of the Roman empire, the course of conquest
was from North to South." "You mean," said the South Briton, "that Scotland
would have conquered England." "Sir," replied the other, "I think the English
as brave a nation as ever existed, and therefore I will not say the Scotch are
braver; far less shall I assert, that they, consisting of only a fifth part of
the number, could subdue the English; but I am sure, that rather than submit
they would try; and you will admit, that the trial would be no advantage to
either country." "Although I am fully convinced," said the Englishman, "how the
experiment would end, I should be sorry to see it made, particularly at this
time." "Yet, Sir," rejoined the Scot, "there are people of your country as I am
told, who, even at this time, endeavor to exasperate the minds of the
inhabitants, of one part of Great Britain against the natives of the other, and
to create dissensions between two countries, whose mutual safety depends on
their good agreement." I do assure you, Sir," said the English gentleman, "I am
not of the number of those who wish to raise such dissensions. I love the
Scotch; I always thought them a sensible gallant people; and some of the most
valued friends I have on earth are of your country." "You are a man of honor
and discernment," said the Caledonian, seizing him eagerly by the hand; "and I
protest, without prejudice and partiality, that I never knew a man of that
character who was not of your way of thinking."

CHAP. VIII. Amusements and Religious Functions.
THERE are no theatrical entertainments permitted in Rome, except during the
carnival; but, they are then attended with a degree of ardour unknown in
capitals, whose inhabitants are under no such restraint. Every kind of
amusement, indeed, in this gay season, is followed with the greatest eagerness.
The natural gravity of the Roman citizens is changed into a mirthful vivacity;
and the serious sombre city of Rome exceeds Paris itself, in sprightliness and
gaiety. This spirit seems gradually to augment, from its commencement; and is
at its height in the last of the six weeks which comprehend the carnival. The
citizens then appear in the streets, masked, in the characters of harlequins,
pantaloons, punchinellos, and all the fantastic variety of a masquerade. This
humor spreads to men, women, and children; descends to the lowest ranks, and
becomes universal. Even those who put on no masks, and have no desire to remain
unknown, reject their usual clothes, and assume some whimsical dress. The
coachmen, who are placed in a more conspicuous point of view than others of the
same rank in life, and who are perfectly known by the carriages they drive,
generally affect some ridiculous disguise; many of them assume a woman's dress,
and have their faces painted, and adorned with patches. However dull these
fellows may be, when in breeches, they are, in petticoats considered as the
pleasantest men in the world, and excite much laughter in every street in which
they appear.

The street called the Corso is the great scene of all these masquerades. It is
crowded every night with people of all conditions: those of rank come in
coaches, or in open carriages made on purpose. A kind of civil war is carried
on by the company as they pass each other. The greatest mark of attention,
people can show their friends and acquaintance, is to throw a handful of little
white balls, resembling sugar-plumbs, in their faces; and, if they are not
deficient in politeness, they will instantly return the compliment. All who
wish to make a figure in the corso, come well provided with this kind of
ammunition.

Sometimes two or three open carriages on a side, with five or six persons of
both sexes in each, draw up opposite to each other, and fight a pitched battle.
On these occasions, the combatants are provided with whole bags full of the
small shot abovementioned; which they throw at each other with much apparent
fury, till their ammunition is exhausted, and the field of battle is as white
as snow.

The peculiar dresses of every nation of the globe, and of every profession,
besides all the fantastic characters, usual at masquerades, are to be seen on
the corso. Those of harlequin and pantaloon are in great vogue among the men.
The citizens wives and daughters generally affect the pomp of women of quality;
while their brothers, or other relations, appear as train-bearers and
attendants. In general they seem to delight in characters the most remote from
their own. Young people assume the long beard; tottering step, and other
concomitants of old age; the aged choose the bib and rattle of childhood; and
the women of quality, and women of the town, appear in the characters of
country maidens, nuns, and vestal virgins. All endeavor to support the assumed
character to the best of their ability; but none succeed so well as those who
represent children.

Toward the dusk of the evening, the horse-race takes place. As soon as this
is announced, the coaches, cabriolets, triumphal cars, and carriages of every
kind, are drawn up and line the street, leaving a space in the middle for the
racers to pass. These are five or six horses trained on purpose for this
diversion; they are drawn up abreast in the Piazza del Popolo, exactly where
the corso begins. Certain balls, as at Florence, with little sharp spikes, are
hung along their sides, which serve to spur them on. As soon as they begin to
run, these animals, by their impatience to be gone, show, that they understand
what is required of them, and that they take as much pleasure as the spectators
in the sport. A broad piece of canvas, spread across the entrance of the
street, prevents them from starting too soon: the dropping that canvas is the
signal for the race to begin. The horses fly off together, and, without riders,
exert themselves to the utmost; impelled by emulation, the shouts of the
populace, and the spurs abovementioned. They run the whole length of the
corso; and the proprietor of the victor is rewarded by a certain quantity of
fine scarlet, or purple cloth, which is always furnished by the Jews.

This diversion, such as it is, seems highly entertaining to the Roman
populace; though it appears a a mighty foolish business in the eyes of
Englishmen.

Masking and horse-races are confined to the last eight days; but there are
theatrical entertainments of various kinds, during the whole six weeks of the
carnival. The serious opera is most frequented by people of fashion, who
generally take boxes for the whole season. The opera, with which this theater
opened, was received with applause, though the music only was new. The Italians
do not always think it necessary to compose new works, for what is called a new
opera; they often satisfy themselves with new music, to the affecting dramas of
Metastasio. The audience, here, seem to lend a more profound and continued
attention to the music, than at Venice. This is probably owing to the
entertainment being a greater rarity in the one city, than in the other; for I
could perceive, says Moore, that people of fashion, who came every night;
began, after the opera had been repeated several times, to abate in their
attention, to receive visitors in their boxes, and to listen only when some
favorite airs were singing; whereas, the audience in the pit uniformly
preserved the most perfect silence; which was only interrupted by gentle
murmurs of pleasure from a few individuals, or an universal burst of applause
from the whole assembly. The sensibility of some of the audience gave me an
idea of the power of sounds; which the dullness of my own auditory nerves could
never have conveyed to my mind. At certain airs, silent enjoyment was expressed
in every countenance; at others, the hands were clasped together, the eyes half
shut, and the breath drawn in with a prolonged sigh, as if the soul was
expiring in a torrent of delight. One young woman in the pit called out, O dio,
dove sono; che piacer via caccia l'alma? "Oh God, where am I! what pleasure
ravishes my soul?

On the first night of the opera, after one of these favorite airs, an
universal shout of applause took place, intermingled with demands that the
composer of the music should appear. Il maestro! il maestro! resounded from
every corner of the house. He was present and led the band of music, and was
obliged to stand on the bench; where he continued bowing to the spectators,
till they were tired of applauding him. One person in the pit, who had
displayed great signs of satisfaction from the beginning of the performance,
cried out, "He deserves to be made chief musician to the virgin, and to lead a
choir of angels." This expression would be thought strong in any country, but
it has peculiar energy here, where it is a popular opinion, that the Virgin
Mary is very fond, and an excellent judge, of music. I received this
information on Christmas morning, when I was looking at two poor Calabrian
pipers, says Moore, doing their utmost to please her, and the infant in her
arms. They played for a full hour to one of her images which stands at the
corner of a street. All the other statues of the virgin, placed in the streets,
are serenaded in the same manner every Christmas morning. On enquiry into the
meaning of that ceremony, I was told the abovementioned circumstance. My
informer was a pilgrim, who stood listening with great devotion to the pipers.
He told me, at the same time, that the virgin's taste was too refined to have
much satisfaction in the performance of these poor Calabrians, which was
chiefly intended for the infant; and he desired me to remark, that the tunes
were plain, simple, and such as might naturally be supposed agreeable to the
ear of a child at his time of life.

Though the serious opera is in the highest estimation, and more regularly
attended by people of the first fashion; yet, the opera buffon, or burlettas,
are not entirely neglected even by them, and are crowded every night by the
middle and lower classes. Some admired singers have performed these during the
carnival; and the musical composers have rendered them highly pleasing to the
general taste.

The prohibition of female performers renders the amusement, of the Roman
theater, very insipid to foreigners. The natural sweetness of the female voice
is ill supplied by the artificial trills of wretched castratos; and the awkward
agility of robust sinewy fellows, dressed in women's clothes, is a most
deplorable substitute for the graceful movements of elegant female dancers.
This horrid practice, which is encouraged by their manner of supplying the
place of female fingers, is a greater outrage on religion and morality, than
can be produced by the evils which their prohibition is intended to prevent. So
far from its being possible to believe that purity of sentiment will be
preserved, by bringing eunuchs on the stage, it is more than probable that it
has a different effect.

All civil and religious ceremonies, attended with pomp and splendour at Rome,
are distinguished by the appellation of functions, and are no mean succedaneum
to the shows, for which the Roman people had such a rage.

Of all these functions, the most brilliant is that of the Possesso, or the
Pope's cavalcade, when he goes to take possession of the church of St. John
Lateran, the most ancient of the churches in Rome, and the mother of all the
churches in christendom. This ceremony is equivalent to our coronation; and is
performed by every Pope, as soon as convenience will permit, after the conclave
has declared in his favor. From St. John's Lateran, he proceeds to the
capitol, and receives the keys of that fortress. This is the only ceremony in
which the Pope appears in all his spiritual and temporal grandeur. He is
preceded, and followed, by above two thousand horsemen, divided into squadrons;
the variety of which makes a very entertaining show. The cardinals, the upper
and lower dignitaries, and all the Pope's household, in ceremonial habits, make
a part in this cavalcade. The least showy, and at the same time the least
convenient accoutrements, are those of the cardinal: their hats, which are
quite flat, are fastened to their head only by strings tied under the chin;
their long mantles cover the horse's whole body, like a caparison; and the two
corners of the cloak being made fast between his ears, the rider has no means
of clearing himself in case of any accident; which, indeed, is little to be
apprehended, several footmen going on each side of the horse, and watching its
steps. All the finest horses, from Spain and Sicily, are produced on this
occasion; and their beauty, and graceful stateliness of motion, add no small
addition to the spectacle.

We had a full view of the cavalcade, says Moore, on its return from the
church, as it ascended the capitol. The officers, of the Pope's horse-guards,
were dressed in a style equally rich and becoming. It was something between the
Hungarian and Spanish dress. The Swiss guards were, on this occasion, dressed
with less propriety; their uniforms were real coats of mail, with iron helmets
on their heads, as if they had been going to take the capitol by storm, and
expected a vigorous resistance. Their appearance was strongly contrasted with
that of the Roman barons, who were on horseback, without boots, and in full
dress; each of them was preceded by four pages; their hair hanging in ringlets
to the middle of their backs: they were followed by a number of servants in
rich liveries. Bishops, and other ecclesiastics succeeded the barons; and then
came the cardinals, on horseback, in their purple robes, which covered every
part of the horses, except the head. There is no doubt but that the horses,
employed at such ceremonies, are the gentlest that can be found; for, if they
were at all unruly, they might not only injure the surrounding crowd, but throw
their eminences, who are not celebrated for their skill in horsemanship. Last
of all comes the Pope himself, mounted on a milk-white mule, distributing
blessings with an unsparing hand among the multitude, who follow him with
acclamations of Viva il Santo Padre! i. e. Long live the holy father! and,
prostrating themselves on the ground before his mule, Benedizione, Santo Padre,
i. e. Your blessing, holy father. The Pope took particular care to wave his
hand in the form of a cross, that the blessings he pronounced might have the
greater efficacy. As his Holiness is employed in this manner, during the whole
procession, he cannot be supposed to give the least attention to his mule, the
bridle of which is held by two persons, who walk by his side; with some others,
to catch him, and prevent his being thrown to the ground, in case the mule
should stumble.

At the entrance of the capitol, he was met by the senator of Rome; who,
falling on his knees, delivered the keys into the hands of his Holiness, who
pronounced a blessing over him, and restored them to him again. Proceeding from
the capitol, the Pope was met by a deputation of Jews, soon after he had passed
through the arch of Titus. They were headed by the chief Rabbi, who presented
him with a long scroll of parchment, on which was written the whole law of
Moses, in Hebrew. His Holiness received the parchment in a very gracious
manner; telling the Rabbi, at the same time, that he accepted his present out
of respect to the law itself, but entirely rejected his interpretation; for the
ancient law, having been fulfilled by the coming of the Messiah, was no longer
in force. As this was not a convenient time, or place, for the Rabbi to enter
into a controversy on this subject, he bowed in silence, and retired with his
countrymen; in full conviction, that the falsehood of the Pope's assertion,
would be made manifest to the whole universe in due time. His Holiness,
meanwhile, proceeded in triumph, through the principal streets, to the Vatican.

Among the most remarkable functions, during the Santa Settimana, are, first,
the ceremonies of Palm Sunday, which commence in the chapel at Monte Cavallo,
where the Pope blesses the palms, and hears mass. Two sorts of cardinals are
drawn up on each side the altar; the cardinal priests, and cardinal deacons;
their vestments violet-colour, ornamented with ermine and lace. Just as the
function is about to begin, the cardinals take off their furs and outward
drapery, and put on vestments embroidered with gold; they then rise and
approach his Holiness, from whose hands they receive the palms. When mass is
sung, the passion is recited by two ecclesiastics; one narrates the words and
accusation of Jesus Christ, from the evangelists; and the other answers for our
blessed Savior; the clamor and uproar of the Jews is imitated by the clergy.
A most curious procession makes part of this function: the streets of Rome,
through which it is to pass, are strewed with sand; and the Pontiff,
accompanied by the cardinal, makes a public entry, in imitation of our Savior
into Jerusalem, all mounted upon mules, and bearing branches of box-tree in
their hands. Vain were the attempt to describe the horsemanship upon this
occasion; the obstinacy of the mules, their kicking and curvetting, and the
embarrassments arising from the cardinals garments. A litter, covered with
crimson velvet, is provided for the Pope's use, in case his Holiness should
come to the ground.

The next principal ceremony is the tenebrae of the holy Wednesday, performed
at five o'clock in the afternoon, in the chapel of St. Paulina, in the Vatican.
The tenebrae are chaunted as in other Roman Catholic churches, but executed
with more judgment, and better voices. The miserere d'Allegri, concludes this
function, and is performed by vocal musicians only. I own, says Lady Millar, I
never heard music before. I supposed I had formed some idea of the power and
effects of the human voice; but, had I been conveyed blindfold into this
chapel, and no intimation given whence the sounds proceeded, I should should
have believed myself in Paradise. How then shall I attempt to convey the
slightest idea of this celestial melody, by any description! I must say no more
than that I have heard enough to make me dissatisfied with the finest opera,
and the most perfect performers, that are to be found out of the chapel of St.
Paulina.

On Maundy Thursday, the Pope pronounces his benediction to the people, from a
balcony in St. Peter's, where an infinite crowd is collected on the occasion.
The manner and the form are more suitable to the holiness of his character,
says Sharp, than I was aware. I understood he cursed all Turks and heretics on
the face of the earth; whereas, that part of the function is performed by two
of the cardinal deacons, who read the curse, one in Italian, the other in
Latin; and the words are no sooner out of their mouths, than he pronounces the
benediction, and wipes off all its efficacy. The Pope is, during this ceremony,
supported on the shoulders of twelve men, in an armed chair, holding in his
hand a large lighted wax taper; and, in the very instant that the last words of
the curse are uttered, the bell tolls, and he throws it down among the people;
which circumstance clearly explains the sense of a proverb well known in
England, of swearing, or cursing by bell, book and candle. There are three or
four exhortations delivered by his Holiness, previous to his reading the
benediction; these are, that, if the assembly would sincerely repent of their
sins, there was room for absolution; and the benediction seemed to be as little
arrogant as that pronounced by our ministers at the end of the liturgy. In the
moment that he speaks the benediction, the bell tolls, the drums beat, and the
cannon at the castle of St. Angelo fire; which adds to the awfulness of the
scene, and renders the performance truly solemn.

There is another curious ceremony performed this day; that of the Pope washing
the pilgrim's feet, as it is expressed, and serving them at the table. These
are thirteen poor priests of different nations. The priest who sits in the
middle represents our Savior; and the six, on each side of him, his apostles.

On Good Friday and Easter-eve, there are no extraordinary ceremonies. The
common miserere is chaunted; but, in the evening, the church of St. Peter is
crowded with people, who walk about and converse. It is remarkable, that Friday
and Saturday are not esteemed so sacred as the foregoing days of the holy week;
and that, during the said week, no shops are shut; but trade and business go on
as usual.

On Easter Day, the same function that was performed on Thursday is repeated;
with this difference, that there is no curse, only the benediction. The
concourse of people is also greater, as the peasants from the adjacent
countries are more at leisure on Sunday, to come and partake of the blessing.
As it is a religious ceremony, and the mob make all their religion consist in
ceremony, and due submission to the church and the priesthood; there are no
riots here as there would be with us. The moment the cannon at the castle of
St. Angelo fire, the good people in the neighborhood, who hear the report,
prostrate themselves, and are supposed to have received the benefit of the
benediction. There are both days two squadrons of horse, and a battalion of
infantry, which are no small ornament of the festival; for, though the troops
of his Holiness might possibly make no great figure in a field of battle; they
are well clothed, and add much to the glory of the day, and the beauty of St.
Peter's churchyard.

Another very important function, in the church of Rome, is in the Jubilee
year. The first Jubilee was instituted by Boniface the Eighth, in the year
1300. Many ceremonies, and institutions of the Roman Catholic church, are
founded on those of the old heathens. This is evidently in imitation of the
Roman secular games, which were exhibited every hundredth year, in honor of
the gods; they lasted three days and three nights; they were attended with
great pomp, and drew vast numbers of people to Rome, from all parts of Italy,
and the most distant provinces. Boniface recollecting this, determined to
institute something analogous, which would immortalize his own name, and
promote the interest of the Roman Catholic religion in general, and that of the
city of Rome in particular. He embraced the favorable opportunity, which the
beginning of a century presented; he invented a few extraordinary ceremonies,
and declared the year 1300 the first Jubilee year; during which, he assured
mankind that Heaven would be in a particular manner propitious, in granting
indulgences and remission of sins, to all who should come to Rome, and attend
the functions there to be performed, at this fortunate period, which was not to
occur again for a hundred years. This drew a great concourse of wealthy sinners
to Rome; and, the extraordinary circulation of money it occasioned, was
strongly felt all over the Pope's dominions. Clement the Sixth, regretting that
these advantages should occur so seldom, abridged the period, and declared
there would be a Jubilee every fifty years; the second was, accordingly,
celebrated in the year 1350. Sixtus the Fifth, imagining that the interval was
still too long, once more retrenched the half; and, ever since, there has been
a Jubilee every twenty-fifth year. It is not likely that any future Pope will
think of shortening this period; if any alteration were again to place, it most
probably would be, to restore the ancient period of fifty, or a hundred years;
for, instead of the wealthy pilgrims who flocked to Rome, from every quarter of
Christendom, ninety-nine in a hundred of those who come now, are supported by
alms, during their journey, or are barely able to defray their own expenses by
the strictest economy; and his Holiness is supposed, at present, to derive no
other advantage, from the uncommon fatigue he is obliged to go through on the
Jubilee year, except the satisfaction he feels in reflecting on the benefit his
labors confer on the souls of beggars, and other travelers, who resort from
all corners of Italy to Rome, on this blessed occasion. The states, which
border on the Pope's dominions, suffer many temporal inconveniences from the
zeal of the peasants and manufacturers; the greater part of whom still make a
point of visiting St. Peter's on the Jubilee year; the loss sustained by the
countries, which such emigrants abandon, is not balanced by any advantage
transferred to that to which they resort. By far the greater number of pilgrims
come from the kingdom of Naples; whose inhabitants, are said to be of a very
devout and amorous disposition. The first prompts them to go to Rome, in search
of that absolution which the second renders necessary; and, on the year of the
Jubilee, when indulgences are to be had at an easier rate than at any other
time, those who can afford it, generally carry away such a stock, as not only
is sufficient to clear old scores, but will also serve as an indemnifying fund
for future transgressions.

There is one door, into the church of St. Peter's, which is called the holy
door. This is always walled up, except on this distinguished year; and even
then, no person is permitted to enter by it, but in the humblest posture. The
pilgrims, and many others, prefer crawling into the church upon their knees, by
this door, to walking in, in the usual way, by any other. The shutting up of
this door is performed with great ceremony. The Pope being seated on a raised
seat, or kind of throne, surrounded by cardinals and other ecclesiastics; an
anthem is sung, accompanied by all sorts of musical instruments. During the
performance, his Holiness descends from the throne, with a golden trowel in his
hand places the first brick, and applies some mortar; he then returns to his
seat, and the door is instantly built up, by more expert workmen, so to remain
till the next Jubilee; when it is opened with the same solemnity that it is
shut. At the beginning of the last Jubilee, when the wall was thrown down; men,
women, and children scrambled, and fought for the fragments with the same
eagerness which less enlightened mobs display on days of public rejoicing, when
handfuls of money are thrown among them. The Catholics assert, that these
pieces of brick have the virtue of curing many of the most obstinate diseases:
and, if newspapers were permitted at Rome, there is not the least reason to
doubt, that these cures would be attested publicly by the patients, in a manner
as satisfactory and convincing, as are the cures performed daily by the pills,
powders, drops, and balsams, advertised in the London newspapers. After
shutting the holy door, mass is celebrated at midnight, and the ceremony
attended by vast multitudes of people.

For my part, says Moore, from whom we have taken the description of this
ceremony. I suspended my curiosity till next day, which was Christmas Day, when
I went to St. Peter's church, and saw the Pope perform mass on this solemn
occasion.

After mass, the Pope gave the benediction to the people assembled, in the
grand court, before the church of St. Peter. It was a remarkably fine day; an
immense multitude filled that spacious and magnificent area; the horse and foot
guards were drawn up in their most showy uniforms. The Pope seated in an open,
portable chair, in all the splendour which his wardrobe could give, with the
tiara on his head, was carried out of a large window, which opens on a balcony
in the front of St. Peter's. The silk hangings, and gold trappings, with which
the chair was embellished, concealed the men who carried it, so that to those
who viewed him from the area below, his Holiness seemed to sail forward from
the window, self-balanced in the air like a celestial being. The instant he
appeared, the music struck up, the bells rang from every church, and the cannon
thundered from the castle of St. Angelo, in repeated peals. During the
intervals, the church of St. Peter's, the palace of the Vatican, and the banks
of the Tibur, re-echoed the acclamations of the populace. At length, his
Holiness arose from his seat, and an immediate and awful silence ensued. The
multitude fell upon their knees, with their hands and eyes raised toward his
Holiness, as to a benign deity. After a solemn pause, he pronounced the
benediction, with great fervor, elevating his outstretched arms as high as he
could; then closing them together, and bringing them back to his breast, with a
slow motion, as if he had got hold of the blessing, and was drawing it gently
from Heaven. Finally, he threw his arms open, waving them for some time, as if
his intention had been to scatter the benediction, with impartiality, among the
people.

No ceremony can be better calculated for striking the senses, and imposing on
the understanding, than this of the supreme Pontiff, giving the blessing from
the balcony of St. Peter's. For my own part, says Moore, (and other writers
have made similar remarks) had I not, in my early youth, received impressions
highly unfavourable to the chief actor in this magnificent interlude; I should
have been in danger of paying him a degree of respect, very inconsistent with
the religion in which I was educated.

CHAP. IX. People, their Character, Customs, and Manners.
THE condition of all the citizens of Rome is as singular as the constitution
under which they live; and, it is in this particular, that modern Rome is most
like the ancient city. In its most happy times, that is to the year 650, from
the foundation, according to Cicero, there were scarce two thousand
housekeepers who had any property; "qui rem haberent." And it is much to be
feared, whether as many could be found among the hundred and fifty, or two
hundred thousand inhabitants, which modern Rome is supposed to contain.

The great officers of state, and eight or ten ancient families, but eclipsed
by four or five, whom the triple crown has enriched and promoted; these,
together, with foreigners, supply the public luxury; but, in this luxury, alms
bear a considerable part. We have seen the richest Roman prince, not spending
above one shilling per day on his table, and the furniture of his house
suitable to such parsimony, yet distributing thousands of pounds in alms of
various kinds. This superabundance of charity, which is to sloth, as honey to
hornets, corresponds with the congiaria of the Roman emperors, and is
productive of the same effect.

The middle state, every where else formed by citizens and trades-people, is
unknown at Rome. There is no medium between opulence and poverty. The rich are
the richest of men, and the poor, the most indigent creatures in the world; an
excess never known in a well-governed state. Extremities touch each other;
every member of the state either gives, or receives alms. No small part of the
wages, of the numerous retinue of the cardinals and nobles, consists in alms,
under the softening appellation of of buon mancie; "good festivals:" far
agosto: "welcomes," or "good journies." The eldest of every family, under the
respectable title of decano, is, in this respect, the solicitor, receiver, and
cash-keeper to his fellow servants. In short, it is a saying among the Romans
themselves, that there is not a burgess of Rome, but would sell the very sun
for a sixpence.

Persons of easy circumstances are not to be met with, among the lower
dignitaries of the church; nor among the set of lawyers called curiales; nor
among those marquisses and counts, who, with the title of Maestri di camera and
Scudieri, are as profoundly versed in all matters of ceremony, as the Germans
in civil law; nor, in short, among the placemen belonging to the different
officers of the court; all these live more on hope than substance. The demise
of a Pope, and the vacancy occasioned thereby, reduces them to alms. The only
class of people, whose competence puts them on a footing with the other ranks,
are the consistorial counselors. A fondness for ornament, and parade, is the
hobbyhorse of the Roman people, to this all other inclinations give way: it
regulates and directs the expenses of the rich and great; what they save in
good cheer, and on comfortable living, they lavish on entertainments,
equipages, liveries, and external show. Equally ambitious of this are the
people, amid all their penury: the shambles, the butchers, and their stalls,
are all set off with linen as white as snow: the fruiterers shops are dispersed
in curious designs, as if for a fight: the shoemaker, and even the cobbler,
decorates his shop with scraps of gilded leather. When some public festival
approaches, a whole family shall, for a day or two in a week, abate of their
usual sustenance, to furnish coach-hire on these occasions. This passion for
glitter and parade opens the door to intrigues. It is found with the lowest
poverty. All those of the lower class, decked out so very fine at the public
places, have scarce a gown to their backs when at home; one shift is their
whole stock, which good housewifery will not allow them to lie in, and which
every Saturday, after going through a slop-wash, is displayed at the windows
till perfectly dry.

Magnificence, hypocrisy, and sadness reign here: the number of fine palaces,
of beautiful churches, of superb fountains, of the treasures of art, and
venerable remains of antiquity give an air of grandeur to Rome, which is not to
be found in any other country.

The want of public entertainments, the little population, in proportion to the
extent of the city; and its situation, surrounded by hills, which prevent a
free circulation of air, added to the oppressive weight of the plumbeus auster
of Horace; the Scirocco wind, seem to me the chief causes of its real sadness;
but what increases this apparent gloom, is the air of sanctity which the Romans
affect, and the general dress of the country, which is black. The habit of an
Abbe is the court-dress; and, as it is also the cheapest, every one wears it.
Every court is the abode of dissimulation; at Rome, there are as many courts as
cardinals; every cardinal is a kind of prince, and may become a sovereign; this
reason alone is sufficient to show, that this country must have more
hypocritical characters than any other.

Of all the sovereigns whom I have seen, says Sherlock, the Pope represents
majesty the best; the cardinals are like Martial's epigrams; some good, some
bad, but many more indifferent. Almost all derive honor from their rank.

The women are reserved in public; and in private, extravagant to a degree; the
prelates effeminate; the nobility, with some few exceptions, illiterate; and
the people, wicked.

The studies, generally pursued, are, the law, antiquities, and divinity;
because these are the three principal roads that here lead to fortune. A poet
is considered as a dangerous, or at best, as an useless being; and, for this
reason, a poetic talent is rather oppressed than encouraged. Metastasio could
not there find bread.

We see here frequent occasion to admire the genius of Corneille, for the truth
with which he has drawn the Roman women. The assurance of their eye, the
firmness of their step, every feature of their face, and every movement of
their body, declare the boldness of their souls. They have a very noble air,
which is heightened by trailing robes, and which they all wear, down to the
women of the third degree.

The nation, adds Sherlock, has something like pride, which is not displeasing
to me; it is that sort of haughtiness we see in a man of ancient family fallen
to decay. But it has a desire of disguising itself, which pleases no one. The
first proverb of the country is, he who knows not how ta dissemble, knows not
how to live; and they all know how to live. They love obscurity in every thing.

The Roman has naturally a depth of understanding and strength of character; he
is easily moved; and, when he is moved, he is violent to an excess. If the
dress of the country were military, we should think ourselves, as we walk the
streets, in ancient Rome; the faces we meet, so much resemble the characters
that history has transmitted to us. This idea has often struck me among the
men; and it is still more striking in the women. You will often say, "There is
a woman who might well be the mother of Gracchus, and there is another who
might produce a Sylla!" The number of Messalinas is small, that of Lucretias
less; and for Sempronias, Qui soepius petunt viros quam petuntur, i. e. "Who
oftener seek for gallants, than gallants for them;" they are to be found rather
at Naples than at Rome.

The following, says Sherlock, is a mark of national distinction, between a
Roman and a Neapolitan woman; a woman of Naples is less modest than one of
Rome, and more bashful; Neapolitan women have been often seen to blush, but it
is not possible to put a Roman woman out of countenance.

In their external deportment, the Italians, remarks Moore, have a grave
solemnity of manner, which is sometimes thought to arise from a natural gloom
of disposition. The French, above all other nations, are apt to impute to
melancholy, the sedate, serious air which accompanies reflection.

Though in a pulpit, on the theater, and even in common conversation, the
Italians make use of a great deal of action; yet, Italian vivacity is different
from the French; the former proceeds from sensibility, the latter from animal
spirits.

The inhabitants of this country have not the brisk look, and elastic trip,
which is universal in France; they move rather with a flow, composed pace; and
the people of the most finished fashion, as well as the neglected vulgar, seem
to prefer the unconstrained attitude of the Antinous, and other antique
statues, to the artificial graces of a French dancing master, or the erect
strut of a German soldier.

Of all the countries in Europe, Switzerland is that in which the beauties of
nature appear in the greatest variety of forms, and on the most magnificent
scale; in that country, therefore, the young landscape painter has the best
chance of seizing the most sublime ideas; but, Italy is the best school for the
historic one, not only from its being enriched with works of the greatest
masters, and the noblest models of antique sculpture; but also, on account of
the fine expressive style of the Italian countenance. Here are few, or none, of
those fair, flat, glistening, unmeaning faces, so common in the more northern
parts of Europe. I happened, says Moore, once, to sit by a foreigner of my
acquaintance, at the opera in London, when a certain nobleman, who was then a
good deal talked of, entered. I whispered him -- "This is Lord --." "Not,
surely, the famous Lord --," said he. "Yes," said I, "the very same." "It must
then be acknowled," continued he, "that the noble earl does infinite honor to
those who had the care of his education." "How so?" rejoined I; "Because,"
replied the foreigner, "as a countenance, so completely vacant, strongly
indicates a deficience of natural abilities; it is to be presumed, the
respectable figure he makes in the senate, is entirely owing to instruction."

Strangers, on their arrival at Rome, form no high idea of the beauty of the
Roman women, from the specimens they see in the fashionable circles, to which
they are first introduced. There are some exceptions; but, in general, it must
be acknowledged, that the present race of women, of high rank, are more
distinguished by other ornaments, than their beauty. For brilliant red and
white, and all the charms of complexion, no women can equal the English. If a
hundred English women were taken at random, and compared with the same number
at Rome; ninety of the English would be found handsomer than ninety of the
Romans; but, probably, two or three in the hundred Italians, might have finer
countenances than any of the English. Beauty, in England, is more remarkable in
the country, than in towns; the peasantry of no country in Europe can stand a
competition, in point of looks, with those of England. This race of people have
the conveniences of life, in no other country, in such perfection; they are no
where so well fed, so well defended from the injuries of the seasons; and, no
where else do they keep themselves so perfectly clean, and free, from all
vilifying effects of dirt. In other countries, the female peasants are so hard
worked, so ill sed, so tanned, and so dirty, that it is difficult to know
whether they have any beauty or not.

With countenances so favorable for the pencil, it will naturally be imagined,
that portrait-painting is in the highest perfection in Rome. The reverse,
however, of this, is true; that branch of the art is in the lowest estimation
all over Italy. In palaces, the best furnished with pictures, a portrait is
seldom seen of the proprietor, or of any of his family. A quarter-length of the
reigning Pope is, sometimes, the only portrait of a living person, to be seen
in the whole palace. Several of the Roman princes affect to have a room of
state, or audience-chamber, in which is a raised seat, like a throne, with a
canopy over it. In those rooms, the effigies of the pontiffs are hung; they are
the works of very inferior artists, and seldom cost above three or four
sequins. As soon as his Holiness departs this life, the portrait disappears;
and the face of his successor is, in due time, hung up in its stead. This, it
may be said, is treating their old sovereign rather unkindly, and paying no
very expensive compliment to the new; it is not so economical, however, as what
was practiced by a certain person in another country. He had a full-length
picture of his sovereign, in the principal room of his house; on his Majesty's
death, to save himself the expense of a fresh body, and a new suit of ermine,
he employed a painter to brush out the face and perriwig, and clap the new
king's head on his grandfather's shoulders; which he declared were in the
utmost preservation, and fully able to wear out three or four such heads, as
painters usually give in these degenerate days.

The Italians very seldom take the trouble of sitting for their pictures. They
consider a portrait as a piece of painting, which engages the admiration of no
one but the person it represents, or the painter who drew it. Those who are in
circumstances to pay the best artists, generally employ them in subjects more
universally interesting, than the representation of human countenances, staring
out of a piece of canvas.

The summers, at Rome, are very tedious, every one keeping close at home the
whole day, and taking their naps at Rome; so that, it is a common saying there,
"That none but dogs, idiots, and Frenchmen, walk the streets in the daytime."
The heat of the climate makes the Romans passionately fond of spring water,
iced and cooling liquors; and great quantities of snow and ice, brought from
the mountains, and preserved in ice-houses, are consumed there.

In regard to the unwholesomeness of the air, the dog days, and some weeks
after, are mostly dreaded at Rome. The precautions taken by the Romans, for the
preservation of health during these heats, would not be thought of by a
foreigner. One of their good rules is expressed in this sentence: "In June,
July, and August, a person must have no commerce with the ladies.

But, possibly, this rule is but little observed. It is farther affirmed that a
person, used to live at Rome, cannot, without manifest danger, keep within
fifteen or twenty miles of that city. And, in traveling to Rome, they take
care, in the last day's journey, not to put up within that distance. Even
within the city they seldom change their bedchamber, though it be for another
in the same house. Removals from one house to another, between St. Peter's and
All Saints days, are supposed to be so dangerous at Rome, that a tenant, or
lodger, cannot be compelled to leave a house within that term. As mutual
compliments pass between friends, in other places, at the beginning of the new
year, the like civility is paid here, at the beginning of the month of August.
At this time of the year, few people go abroad in the day time; but, after
sunset, divert themselves with taking the air on foot, or in coaches; and the
first of August is a great day, in Rome, for feasting and friendly
entertainments.

In England, observes Keysler, suicides are most frequent in the beginning, or
toward the close of winter, when the Easterly winds most prevail. But, in Rome,
the greatest enormities are perpetrated in the two hottest summer months. This
is imputed to the blood's being overheated at this season; however, the
exertion of proper severity, and the abolition of asylums in churches, would
soon cool this pretended ardour, that prompts the Romans to all manner of
wickedness.

That London should be more subject to fevers, and fluxes, when the North-east
wind blows, proceeds from the noxious effluvia, which that wind brings from the
fens and marshes of Cambridgeshire, Lincolnshire, and Essex. In Rome, the most
sickly seasons are, when the South, or South-east wind blows, which the
Italians call Sirocco, from the Arabic word Haloque; its course being over the
boggy uncultivated coasts of Africa, and the morasses that lie South of Rome.

After all, the Romans make too much ado about the danger of their summer
heats; foreigners, who use very little precaution in this respect, enjoy as
good a state of health as the natives. How many cardinals come from other
countries to Rome, in summer, when a conclave is to be held, without so many
timorous fears, and return as well as they came? But no one will pretend to
say, that heat has a respect to persons. This chimerical danger, seems to have
been unknown in the time of Cicero; from whose epistles it appears, that he
frequently resided at Rome, during the summer months, and took many journies
to, and from Rome, at that season of the year.

There are few countries, where a true judgment is so formed of strangers, as
at Rome, gens emunctae naris, natura cui verba non potuit dare, says a famous
Jesuit of the modern Romans. That is, they are people of an acute discernment,
to whom nature has not given the power of unfolding their thoughts. Their
custom of studying one another, produces this habit of sagacity; this is the
polar star, by which they steer their behavior toward those with whom they
have any intercourse. They cannot be long imposed upon, either by a dull or
promising physiognomy: to them, this is no more than the persona tragica, the
mask to the fox. An appearance of frankness, an air of gaiety, entirely
unhinges them; and puzzles them the more, as being less allied to that gravity,
in which they muffle themselves up, that others may not see into them.

This gravity never leaves them in public, nor even in the parties of pleasure,
which seem contrived to shake it off. In private, however, they make themselves
amends. Nothing can be more cheerful than their clubs; where a select party
freely give themselves up to that tranquil gaiety, suited to the natural
seriousness of their character, and in which consisted the urbanitas of the
ancient Romans. There one may laugh, even at persons who form part of the
company; there the spropositi of a foreigner, esteemed so far as to be admitted
among them, and who is never reproved in public, for not speaking the language
correct, are made matters of merriment; there they laugh more, and more
heartily, than in any other place; and circulate a number of tales, of which
they have an inexorable fund; and such excellent relaters are the Romans, that
their manner always gives an air of novelty to their story. Let the following
serve as a specimen.

In the engagement between the devil and St. Michael the archangel, finding his
spear was rather an encumbrance than of any use to him, darted up again to
Heaven; and catching up a thunderbolt, hurled it headlong at Lucifer, so that
his body flew about in pieces: his legs fell in France; and hence the petulance
of the French, and their passion for rambling: Lucifer's head went into Spain;
and to this is owing the pride, stiffness, and overbearing carriage of the
Spaniards: the hand, with which the fiend used to pilfer, Naples got; and that,
with which he squeezed people, was Genoa's portion: his stomach was picked up
in Germany; and the least honorable parts of his body alighted in Rome; and
this, adds the Romans, has made all of us such whore-masters as we are.

The Italians have retained those words, which other nations have cashiered; as
politeness and good manners began to prevail among them. The objects, expressed
by these words, are an ample field for the convivial muses. In short, Italy
swarms both with obscene and devout sonnets. They are, from their infancy,
accustomed to nudities, as were the Greeks and Romans. Their ears are as little
moved with the expression, as their eyes with the representation of objects;
the indecency of which has been lessened by habit. It was from a deep-rooted
custom, that after Benedict IV. was exalted to the Pontificate, one of the most
obscene words in the Italian language, equally escaped him, both in his anger
and mirth; that is, it was almost always on his tongue. This word, and its
counterpart, are the most common oaths, or rather interjections, among the
Romans. Per dio (by God) is seldom or ever heard, on account of the penalties
pronounced against persons guilty of blasphemy; but, per dio Bacco, is in every
one's mouth.

The merriment of private clubs never shows itself in public, but during the
carnival; in no part of Italy, is that festival carried to such a pitch of
extravagance and folly, as at Rome; it is a perfect transcript of the ancient
saturnalia, in all its mad frolics.

Breach of chastity, in females of low rank, is not considered here in the same
heinous light, as in some parts of Germany and Great Britain; where it is
deemed a crime of such magnitude, as to require expiation, by a public rebuke
from the officiating minister, in the middle of the church. In these countries,
those who live in an open and avowed breach of chastity, are generally more
daringly wicked and devoid of principle, than the Italian women, who take the
same liberties. In Italy, says Moore, women, who never put any value on the
virtue of chastity, those who sell their favors for money, display a goodness
of character in other respects, and continue their duty and attachment to their
parents, as long as they live. Foreigners, who form a connection with a girl in
this country, find themselves very often obliged to maintain the father,
mother, and whole family to which she belongs. The lover generally considers
this as a very troublesome circumstance; and, endeavors to inspire his Italian
mistress with that total neglect of her family, which prevails among women of
her stamp in other countries; but he very seldom succeeds. An Italian woman is
unwilling to quit her native city, and her family, even for a man she loves;
and seldom does, till he makes some provision for her nearest relations. They
attend mass, and the ceremonies of devotion, with as much punctuality as if
their lives were regular in all other respects.

Of their attending to the external functions of their religion, with
scrupulous exactness, the above writer cites a remarkable trait in an Italian
woman of fashion, who refused to have any farther connection with her cicisbeo,
or lover, because her confessor had refused her absolution. This lady was
distinguished at Rome, for a punctilious observance of all the ceremonies
appointed by the church; she could not eat meat on a meagre day, or deviate
from the canonical regulation, in any point of equal importance, without
remorse; but, in matters of gallantry, she had the reputation of being
infinitely more liberal, both in her sentiments and practice. She had been, for
some time, provided with a very able and respectable lover, of her own country.
This did not make her blind to the qualities of a young Englishman, with whom
she formed a very intimate connection, soon after his arrival at Rome; not that
she preferred him to her last lover, but, merely from a strong sense of the
truth and beauty of this arithmetical axiom, that one and one make two. The new
arrangement with our countryman, however pleasing to the lady, gave offense to
her father confessor. The scrupulous ecclesiastic was of opinion, that a
connection of this nature, with a heretic, was more criminal, than with a man
of her own communion. The Englishman entered her apartments one day as the
confessor went out; she shut the door after him, with a violence that shook the
whole house, muttering, as she returned to her seat, "The devil go along with
you for an old goose." Her lover expressed his concern on seeing her so much
agitated. "No wonder," said she, "that stubborn animalaccio, who has just gone
out, has had the insolence to refuse me absolution. As I expected you this
morning, I sent for him betimes, that the matter might have been expedited
before you should come; but here have I been above an hour, endeavoring to
persuade him, but all to no purpose; nothing I could say, was able to mollify
the obstinate old greasy scoundrel." The Englishman joined in abusing the
confessor's perverseness; hinting, at the same time, she ought to despise it as
a matter of no importance; that she was sure of receiving absolution sooner or
later; and that, whenever it happened, all the transactions of the internal,
would be comprehended in that one act of grace. Upon the strength of this
reasoning, he was proceeding to fulfill the purpose of his visit, with as much
alacrity, as if the most complete discharge had been granted for all past
proceedings -- Pian Piano idol mio, "softly, softly, my love," cried the lady,
bisogna rimettersi alla volunta di dio. "We must submit to the will of Heaven."
She then told her lover, that, although she despised the confessor as much as
he could do, yet she must take care of her soul; that, not having settled her
accounts with Heaven for a long time, she was determined not to begin a new
score till the old was cleared off; adding, for her principal reason, Patto
chiaro, amico caro. "Short accounts make long friends."

END OF VOL. XVI.
Error in the Writing to two Plates of Vol. XVI.
For View of the Lake of Nerne, called Speculum Diannae, read View of the Lake
of Nemi, called Speculum Dianae. Celesten III. kicking the Crown, read Celestin
III. etc.

