THE POOR MAN's MEDICINE CHEST; OR, THOMPSON's Box of Antibilious Alterative
Pills.

WITH A FEW BRIEF REMARKS ON THE STOMACH; CLEARLY DEMONSTRATING HOW MUCH HEALTH
DEPENDS UPON PAYING ATTENTION TO THAT VENTRICLE IN PARTICULAR, AND THE BOWELS
IN GENERAL.

The mind that is conscious in rectitude fears no assailant! Men's sibi conscia
recti

VIRG. BY JOHN-WEEKS THOMPSON, SURGEON, MAN-MIDWIFE, etc.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR; And Sold by J. and J. TAILOR, at the
Architectural Library, No 56, HIGH HOLBORN.

M.DCC.XCI.

[PRICE ONE SHILLING.]

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD RAWDON.
MY LORD,
THE very slight personal knowledge which I have of your Lordship could not
have justified me in the liberty I take in prefixing to this most humble little
work your Lordship's name, had I not been well informed, by gentlemen of the
highest integrity and honor, who are perfectly acquainted with your Lordship,
of your uncommon philanthropy and goodness of heart -- General report, my Lord,
has indeed said sufficient in your praise to entitle you to the world's
approbation -- But when these were signed, sealed, and delivered to me, by the
very respectable characters before mentioned, it became a most complete
ratification of your inestimable worth.

It is not, then, my Lord, to your rank in life that I wish here to pay my
respects, but to those virtues which adorn your mind, giving to nobility that
true and unsading luster which can alone render it complete, and which have so
eminently distinguished your Lordship as the hero in the field, the real and
independent patriot in the senate, in private life the friend to merit, and
incessant benefactor to the poor!

It is these, and these alone, my Lord, that I admire -- and had they been
placed in any other well-formed bosom of inferior rank in life to your Lordship
I should equally have paid my tribute to them, "The widow's mite;" convinced
that the offering, however small, that breathes good will toward mankind
cannot fail of being acceptable to one of your Lordship's exalted character:
and if in the subsequent pages I should be so happy as to have given any hints
that prove of service to my fellow citizens, etc., and be found worthy of your
Lordship's approbation, it will be of no little satisfaction to a person who
has the honor to subscribe himself,

With the most profound respect, MY LORD, Your Lordship's most obedient And
most humble Servant, J. W. THOMPSON.

TO THE PUBLIC.
THE title of this pamphlet required that it should be written in the plainest
and most simple language, which I have endeavored to do by avoiding as much as
possible all technical words, a few excepted, (and those by no means essential
to many whether they understand them or not, as they cannot be embarrassed for
want of knowing them in the use of the pills, the directions for which are
clear and intelligible to the lowest capacity) but what may be found in an
English dictionary, to which such as read can have recourse, and they who are
so unfortunate as not to be able will receive information from those that can,
which I am certain every truly generous mind will be happy to give them. For
the preceding reasons the Author trusts that such recapitulations as the
judicious reader meets with in the course of this work will be excused, his
wish being to render every thing respecting the medicine it treats of, etc., as
plain and easy as possible to the common reader.

The Antibilious Alterative Pills is a most incomparable remedy for all
indispositions of the stomach and bowels arising from bile, foulness,
indigestion, worms, acidity, ardor ventriculi, (or heartburn, so called)
predigestion, flatulency, (that many headed monster), costiveness, etc., etc.,
which last often produces several of the foregoing, as well as many other,
complaints, owing to the feces or excrement becoming highly putrid from too
long retention in the body, thereby forming a nidus, or nest of predisposing
putrefaction, which meeting with malignant exhalations in the air, or those
arising from infected persons or places, etc., etc., etc., the most dreadful
fevers, agues, inflammatory disorders of various kinds, scurvy, erysipelas or
St. Anthony's fire, rheumatism, leprosy, jaundice, cruptive complaints, and
numberless others, are occasioned: hence arises the necessity of paying the
most religious attention to the first passages of the body, which the able and
judicious physician never fails to make the first object of his consideration.
The stomach is the grand reservoir which receives and prepares whatever is to
support and nourish the whole machine, consequently if that is out of repair,
or diseased from any of the beforementioned causes, or others, whatever is
taken into such a stomach must assuredly fail, more or less, of producing the
natural and intended effect, and, instead of properly nourishing the body,
sends periodically into the circulation -- since blood is made from what we eat
and drink -- a portion of diseased matter, which, congregating by degrees, must
inevitably occasion various disorders in the system; and although the efforts
of nature to relieve herself from the variety of attacks made upon her are
often great and wonderful, (and always should be attended to) yet without the
assistance of art, seasonably and properly administered, she frequently finks
under the burden. The same All-good Being that provided remedies for the brute
part of the creation, made them also for man; the former are directed by
instinct to theirs, the latter should have recourse to reason and experience.

Those Pills, then, which, in conscious rectitude, I now venture to offer to
the Public, are the attentive result of thirty years extensive practice in
various parts of the world, (upwards of twenty of which I passed in His
Majesty's service, in the army); the officers and soldiers of which, (to whom I
have the honor to be known) and whom I beg leave, in this humble, little
pamphlet, to invoke, will, I doubt not, do me the justice to speak as, I
presume to think, my conduct and character merit, that of being indefatigable,
attentive, and candid, in my profession, and successful in my practice: I have
the same expectations from those amongst whom I have now practiced above ten
years in this capital.

I am, however, well aware that this address (and the object of it) is likely
to subject me to the sarcastical sneers of some of the wonderful geniuses of
the faculty, many of whom owe, however, perhaps their most exalted fame to the
secret use of Dr. James's powder, and other medicines of that description.
There are besides, I make no doubt, some other thrusts I must be prepared to
parry from those uninformed, contracted minds, who term every medicine, the
constituent parts of which the proprietor keeps in secret, a quack medicine,
and refuse to take it on that account; at the same time swallow abundantly the
prescriptions of the apothecary and physician, of which they have just as much
knowledge as of the ingredients that compose my pills. But to such I shall only
observe, that they are totally ignorant of the true meaning of the word quack,
that epithet being only applicable to illiterate pretenders, not properly bred
to the profession, and unacquainted with its practice; otherwise it must
necessarily follow that every man, of whatever art, science, or profession, who
improves an old, or invents any new thing, because he will not divulge the
secret, becomes indisputably a quack; consequently there must be quack lawyers
and preachers, who profit well by keeping mankind in secret darkness; quack
painters, cobblers, tinkers, and tailors; and it may not be unfair to add, quack
physicians of State, who, notwithstanding their feeling regard for His
Majesty's loyal subjects, will not blush to crib a shilling's worth of pills
out of The poor Man's Medicine Chest (stamp duty) to administer to the hectic
constitution of the State, and relieve the canine appetite of minions, placemen
and pensioners. Here stop for a moment, Humanity! and reflect upon what the
sensations of that man's heart must be who first suggested this benevolent tax,
extorted from the painful afflictions and miseries of the sick, particularly
the lower orders of society, who are frequently obliged to seek relief from
what are termed quack medicines, after perhaps having spent nearly their little
all in vain endeavors to obtain it from the most eminent gentlemen of the
faculty. -- A nostrum they may term my medicine, if they please, for such it
is, (and of which most of the faculty have to boast a few); but which I shall
be ready to make known to the Public for a proper gratuity, whenever it shall
be found to answer, as I am confident it will do, to all such as give it a fair
and impartial trial.

I should not have presumed to take up so much of the reader's time as I have
done in this address, or have appeared so much my own panegyrist, as most
probably I shall be thought, but with a view to remove as much as possible the
prejudices which generally (and sometimes justly) attend on addresses of this
sort, particularly when unsanctioned by a voluminous publication entered at
Stationers' Hall -- a mode quite in fashion with modern practitioners, who
begin their career that way to attract public notice; in works of which
description the press already teems with too many in the medical line, the mere
offspring of lectures, and stuffed with the writer's own and borrowed
hypotheses, unestablished and inadmissible in practice, serving only to
bewilder and lead the Public into fatal errors.

Hippocrates says the description of the causes and treatment of diseases
should not be the suppositions of ingenious men, (for all hypotheses, says that
learned father of the faculty, I reject as useless, nay dangerous, in physic)
but from certain means often tried on human bodies, the effects of which bear
evident proof to our senses, all our reasonings should be drawn; not but I ever
wish to see in print the well-digested sentiments of able and experienced men
of the profession: it is their duty to give them, and the world are indebted to
them for such -- such as will stand the test and command the sanction of the
critical reviewer without fear, partiality, or bribe.

In short, in my private opinion, the study of physic is by no means so
difficult, or involved in such labyrinths, as many writers would make the world
believe. A proper knowledge of the human system, with strict attention to the
efforts and operations of nature, joined to a quick perceptibility on the part
of the practitioner to watch and catch the critical period when she cannot
relieve herself, and then to assist her cautiously by the proper and
experienced use of such aid as Providence has provided for that purpose, is the
only task of a physician.

Having now said as much as I think is necessary to offer (in this place) to a
discerning Public in behalf of my Box of Pills, etc., I shall proceed to give
as clear and concise directions as possible for their use in the complaints
already mentioned, and some others, making some farther remarks as I go along.

DIRECTIONS.
For a grown person, a common dose of these pills is three, one to be taken
going to bed, and two the next morning. Strong constitutions may take two night
and morning, and some have taken three night and morning; but in general one at
night and two in the morning is sufficient, and many require only one night and
morning.

A child of one year old may take a third part of one of the pills; from three
years to five, half a pill, and from five to ten a whole pill; and so on in
proportion to age and strength. As it may be difficult to make children swallow
a pill, it may be dissolved in any simple liquid, or mixed with a little pap or
current jelly.

My reason for preferring part of the dose to be taken over night is, that, by
gradually dissolving whilst the body is at rest, it mixes more readily with the
offending matter in the stomach, etc., thereby exciting it into action, renders
the remaining part of the dose more effectual and speedy in its operation in
the morning.

As these pills are a declared enemy to bile, whenever that is in the stomach
they never fail to vomit, and sometimes one pill in the course of the night
will operate both ways; not owing to the violence or strength of the medicine,
as some may be induced to think, but from the great soulness and plenitude of
the stomach and bowels at the time being overloaded with bilious filth or
too-long-retained feces -- a self-evident position which must appear clear to
every intelligent capacity -- therefore should the night pill only operate by
vomit, the patient must not be deterred from taking more in the morning; for
after the stomach has been well cleansed of its contents, two or three more
pills will only occasion as many stools without any farther sickness. If after
the first dose any part of the cause which induced taking them should appear to
remain, they may be taken daily, or every other day, until all the offending
matter is carried off.

During their operation it will be proper to drink a draught of gruel, beef or
chamomile tea, or some such simple liquid, to sacilitate each operation, and
render it more effectual, which the patient will do well to have in readiness
previous to taking the pills.

This efficacious medicine, though sometimes so brisk in operating, is
notwithstanding, I do aver, as innocent and as safe as a dose of salts,
rhubarb, or a common emetic, and may be taken at all times and seasons with as
little risk or danger, as they will always find their way out of the body by
vomit, stool, or urine, and quietly by the latter, unless when they meet with
such humors in their passage as required being carried off by the other
outlets.

The advantages, then, arising from these pills, according to this unvarnished
account, must be many, and great.

First, By effectually cleansing the stomach, that grand reservoir is put in a
proper state to perform the important offices, for which nature intended it, of
digestion, etc. Secondly, By removing all long-retained feces, and bilious,
slimy matter from the lower bowels, fevers, jaundice, agues, cholic, worms,
flatulency, inslammatory tendency, rhcumatism, etc., etc., are cut off in the
bud and destroyed. Thirdly, In filtering by the kidneys and urinary passages,
gravelly concretions, dropsy, etc., are happily relieved and prevented; and
lastly, by conveying accumulated salts and other acrid and feculant humors out
of the blood by this channel, leprosy, scurvy, scrophulous humors, and many
eruptive complaints, and other foulnesses of the blood arising from thence, as
well as all that tribe of complaints termed nervous, originating from the same
source, (since the nerves as well as the rest of the body receive their
nourishment from the blood) are prevented, and often cured.
Hence it will appear that these pills are not only an effectual cleanser of
the stomach and bowels, but also a most POWERFUL ALTERATIVE.

To which end, after having properly prepared the body by two or three common
doses, taken in the space of a week or ten days, the patient should then enter
on the alterative course, first by taking one pill at night for four or five
nights successively, afterward take one night and morning; continuing these as
long as any part of the cause or effect which induced taking them appears to
remain; and it will not be amiss to continue them some little time longer, (for
it sometimes happens that causes remain after effects vanish; and frequently it
happens, as, for instance, in the small pox, that effects, such as a redness of
the skin, etc., remain for some time after the cause is removed) observing to
increase the night or morning dose occasionally to keep the body gently open.
It having been already remarked, that after the stomach has been well cleansed
they cease to act as an emetic; for as the bodies of some are constitutionally
costive, it may become necessary in such habits to increase the dose as just
mentioned, yet, in general, a pill night and morning not only relieves the most
costive habits, but one will prove sufficient in most constitutions for that
purpose. Here it may not be improper to remark, that costive habits are more
subject than others to offensive and fetid breath, (particularly children whose
powers of digestion are by no means equal to the too great quantity of strong
and improper food they commonly take in); which idea perhaps may be one motive
why the French have such frequent recourse to lavement, or clyster. I say it
has been already observed that our blood is made from what we take into the
stomach, from whence is prepared that milky liquid called chyle, which forms
the basis of the blood, the whole process of which is performed within the
space of twenty-four hours; after which period the feces or excrement can
answer no good purpose by remaining in the body, since all their nutritive and
essential parts (good or bad, which depends upon the nature of the food so
taken in and state of the stomach) has been extracted for the above purpose.
Now as the feces in the most healthy constitutions are rendered highly
offensive when discharged at the end, or in the course of that time, how much
more putrid must they inevitably become if retained for days or weeks, as is
very often the case in relaxed and weak habits, more especially such as lead
sedentary and inactive lives!

During the alterative course it will be highly necessary for the patient to
observe such mode in diet as is calculated to aid and assist the intention of
the medicine, by avoiding all salted, high-seasoned, and inflammatory food; yet
notwithstanding to partake of such proper innocent and nourishing food as is
sufficient to keep up the bodily strength and produce good juices; for my wish
is not to reduce the patient's strength, only to conquer the disease, and by
supporting the constitution properly they will be the better enabled to obtain
that end. But as it is impossible to give a bill of fare suitable to every
constitution, palate, and situation in life, suffice it, therefore, to say,
that the food should be simple, easy of digestion, nutritive, plain dressed,
and moderately taken; that is, not to load the stomach with too much at one
time, but rather to eat as instinctive animals do in a state of nature, little
and often -- a hint from thence is no bad precedent, for nature will ever be
found to exceed the best philosophical reasonings of art.

After what has been already said, I think it almost unnecessary to add, that
such as are accustomed to take physic in the spring and autumn will find this
the best they can have recourse to. Indeed no person, however healthy, would be
the worse for employing this friendly scavenger once or twice a month; and all
such who are so unfortunate as to labor under a very fashionable disease will
find these pills a most certain remedy, (taken agreeable to the alterative
course just laid down), without having their bodies loaded, like a barometer,
with mercury, owing to the too liberal use of which, in the present practice,
many unsortunate beings (though cured of that disease) are left a wreck,
subject, like the mathematical instrument, to every vicissitude of weather, to
trail out a miserable existence.

Women also at the turn of life would do well to pay strict attention to this
medicine, being in every respect calculated to carry off the humors which
nature often, embarrassed with at that critical period, throws on the legs and
other parts of the body, rendering the remainder of their days painful, and
often burdensome.

And even women with child need not be afraid to take these pills (because they
sometimes vomit) to remove that costiveness they are commonly subject to in
that situation. Since vomiting is a natural attendant upon pregnant women, (and
sometimes violently so) particularly in their first pregnancy, which the wisdom
of Providence has so ordered, no doubt, for the best of ends; and if any danger
was likely to ensue from that operation, we might surely expect it at that
time, when all the bowels are more than ordinarily compressed from the
extension of the uterus and weight of the foetus; yet who ever heard of any
such women being injured by vomiting?

In the course of my practice I never met with any instance of the kind; on the
contrary, I always found it relieved, and made them more cheerful and easy.
Again, how frequently do people at sea go through that operation several times
a day for weeks together without any bad consequences from the operation
itself? And even hectic people, and others who have been to all appearance at
the last gasp, and given over by their physician, by making a sea voyage have
been effectually relieved by that operation, and returned home, to the
astonishment of all that knew them, perfectly sound and hearty; and yet
notwithstanding all these evident proofs before their eyes, most people are
terrisied at taking an emetic.

As the greatest inconveniency which attends this operation (particularly in
costive habits) arises from wind pent up in the bowels, which sometimes
occasion griping pains therein during the action of an emetic; that might in a
great measure, if not altogether, be prevented by administering the following
or some such clyster previous to taking any thing of the emetic kind, viz. Take
about half a pint of gruel or broth of any kind, a table spoonful of common
salt, three large spoonsuls of vinegar, and as much of oil, mixed, makes one
for a grown person. In short, wind being, from that necessary delicacy observed
in society, often kept back when nature is disposed to discharge it, lays the
foundation of innumerable tormenting complaints; the wind so restrained I have
frequently, when sitting in company, heard rumbling for a considerable time in
the bowels of a person several seats from me. And once traveling in a stage
coach, (from Stamford to London) a poor woman therein, from a circumstance of
this sort, was greatly embarrassed and put to the blush from the tittering of
two unfeeling young men (farmers to appearance) fellow travelers: she soon
after grew pale, and was about to faint when I stopped the coach, and got her
out in the air; upon which she fell into a strong hysteric fit, that held above
half an hour, in the course of which she expelled an immense deal of wind both
upwards, etc., which contributed to her recovery. I mention this just to prove
how little a matter will put the boasted human machine out of sorts, and to
reprobate the unfeeling conduct of such as can enjoy a laugh at the painful
misfortunes of their fellow creatures, particularly of that sex who command our
most humane and affectionate attention, being, from the peculiar restraint
their modesty lays them under, liable to many inconveniences which men are not.

In the year 1770 the following extraordinary case occurred at Mahon, in the
island of Minorca: -- William Kearns, a soldier of the Old Buffs, was sitting
on a stone seat by the guard-room door, between the hours of nine and ten at
night, with several others of the guard. His comrade, on passing by him to the
guard room, in play, put himself in a boxing attitude, saying, "Have at you,
Kearns; I can lick you now." Upon which Kearns threw his head back suddenly
against the wall, the distance about six inches, which made him call out,
seemingly dipleased, "Damn you, messmate, that is no joke -- I believe you have
made me break my sconce." Then taking off his hat, he rubbed the back of his
head with his hand, saying, "I will be up with you for this." The other ran
laughing into the guard room. -- Kearns continued afterward above half an hour
sitting at the door, talking as usual to the other men, without appearing the
least indisposed, or saying any thing more about his head. He then went in and
laid down on the guard bed. At twelve o'clock, being to go sentinel, and not
turning out with the relief, the corporal, thinking he was asleep, went in to
rouse him, and sound him lying on his side foaming at the mouth, speechless,
and his eyes wide open. The corporal then called to some of the men to come and
see him, and they tried to raise him up; upon which he fetched a deep groan and
expired. One of the men ran to Mr. Duffy, surgeon to the 67th regiment, who
lived almost opposite the guard house, and another to me, about half a mile
distant. Mr. Duffy went to him immediately, and opened the temple artery; but
it was too late -- he was dead. Upon my arrival soon after I learnt the
preceding account. We then out off his hair, and carefully examined the head
and every part, but could not perceive the smallest external injury whatsoever,
except a very slight extravasation of blood behind the left ear, the side he
lay on the guard bed. About one o'clock that day I opened the head of the
deceased in presence of Dr. Monro, physician to the garrison, Mr. Duffy, and
anoher surgeon; when we found about two ounces (not more) of coagulated blood
on the right anterior hemisphere of the brain, which appeared to have issued
from a vessel of the dura matter; every other part of the membranes, brain,
ventricles, etc., etc., were in as sound and perfect a state as possible; the
head was uncommonly full of brain, and the scull remarkably thin, and in many
places quite diaphanous.

Dr. Monro immediately waited on General Johnston, the Governor of the Island,
to report his own and our opinion of this case; and Mr. Duffy and I proceeded
to open the body, not in expectation of finding any thing farther relative to
the cause of this man's death, but from a custom I always followed of opening
the body of every soldier that died. Upon raising the breast bone a very
uncommon fullness appeared on the left side about the heart, and on dividing the
pericardium a great quantity of very fetid wind issued forth, and about four
table spoonfuls of clear lymph. The heart of this man (who was a very stout,
well-made soldier, thirty-two years of age, and about five feet eight inches
high) was uncommonly small indeed, (weighing only fifteen ounces five drams
Troy) and looked as if it had been parboiled. The lungs, liver, stomach, and
all the other entrails, were in as sound and perfect a state as possible, and
in every other respect formed as much for longevity as any I ever saw in my
life. I have been the more particular in stating all the circumstances of this
case from the supposed cause of his death, and the very extraordinary contents
of the pericardium and state of the heart, leaving the decision of the real
cause of this man's death to those whose superior skill and microscopic
discernment may enable them to give a better solution to it than I choose to
risk my opinion in giving; at the same time to show that windy complaints are
(what I have already said of them) numerous, wonderful, and often puzzling, and
therefore how necessary it is that all dead bodies should be opened for
information sake, since the dead cannot be injured, and the living may benefit
by it. -- This case I have singled out from several others which I have in my
possession relative to windy tumors discovered by dissection. I beg leave to
add, that this man had once or twice been troubled with a slight asthmatic
complaint; but in every other respect was as healthy, to all appearance, as any
soldier in the regiment.

To return again to the subject of emetics.

Some time ago I was called to a gentleman, a very free liver, and an
extraordinary hard drinker, who I make no doubt had a hundred times in his life
vomited most severely from inebriety, infinitely more so than he would have
done from any common emetic given by the faculty; notwithstanding which, upon
my proposing a vomit for him, which his situation absolutely required, he
immediately held up his hands, begging for God's sake he might not take an
emetic; that he was too weak; that it would strain him to pieces and kill him.
He, however, got an emetic, and obtained the wanted relief. -- I say again,
that, after all these incontrovertible examples, it seems to me most strange
that a rational being should be so much afraid of this operation, when many of
the brute part of the creation (that feed carnivorously) take such things as
instinct directs them to in order to discharge the offending contents of their
stomach that way; and I have seen a hawk disgorge the contents of his craw: but
I believe no person ever saw an ox, or an ass, a goat, or gander, vomit, of
course nature never intended it.

Here, by the by, though foreign to the subject of these leaves, permit me,
however, to offer a hint about the treatment of horses, which noble animal I am
clearly of opinion has been often tortured, if not killed, by having things of
the emetic kind administered, since a horse can no more vomit than an ass,
though I once heard a gentleman declare that he saw a dead horse vomit after
having Dr. James's powders given him when alive; but as this is a matter I may
perhaps treat more at large on some future day, I shall close it here, only
adding, that I am satisfied from all I have seen and heard that many medicines
that are used by mankind are totally improper and highly dangerous for such
animals as feed granivorously and cannot vomit. But how this erroneous method
of treating horses as human beings has become the practice could be very easily
accounted for.

Vomiting is, I must, however, confess, a very unpleasant operation; but,
believe me, it is a much more speedy and effectual method of relieving the
stomach of its offending contents than carrying it off by the other channel,
through all the turnings, festoonings, and curvatures of the lower bowels, in
the cells of which some of the feces will frequently stick and lodge for weeks,
nay months together, forming that nidus of mischief I have before mentioned, of
which the following is a case in point: -- A soldier of the third regiment of
foot (in which I served several years) was seized with a cholic in the latter
end of September, 1771, at Exeter, where we were at that time quartered after
returning from Minorca, which place we left in the month of May preceding, and
arrived in England the beginning of June. As we were in a cider country, I
suspected his complaint might arise from drinking that liquor: but he assured
me that he had not drank any cider; that he did not like it. However, after
taking a few doses of rhubarb, and some other little things, his complaint went
off, and he returned to his duty; but being a few days after attacked again
with the same disorder in a most violent degree, he was taken into the hospital
-- every thing he took came off his stomach immediately, and, in spite of every
effort, no passage could be procured downwards. Being now exceedingly alarmed
for the safety of my patient, I directed one of my pills to be given every hour
until they should operate by stool; the two first pills made him rather sick,
but did not vomit him: after taking six, they began to operate downwards, and
in one of the discharges he brought off a great quantity, near a handful, of
grape skins, highly putrid and offensive. From that hour his violent pain went
off, and in a week he was perfectly recovered.

Questioning him now about this appearance and evident cause of his complaint,
I asked if he had eat any raisins, either alone or in pudding. He assured me he
had not taken any thing of the kind since he was on ship board; but that on his
leaving Minorca a friend gave him several pounds of dried grapes by way of sea
stock; that he eat them all on his passage, and from that time had never tasted
any thing of the kind. He remembered, he said, that the grapes griped him often
in the same place as when he first applied to me, but not so much as to
occasion an application then, as the pain generally went off with a motion, and
he thought they did him good. However, it is very clear that a part of this
trash remained in his body near four months. Besides this, several other
similar cases have occurred to me in the course of practice.

Gouty habits, and all those who live freely either in eating or drinking, (for
the reasons already stated concerning the stomach and bowels) will find this a
sovereign remedy for the sudden and violent attacks which such are often
subject to.

Perhaps it will be asked how can any one medicine be good for so many
different complaints as the author has mentioned? To which I answer, BECAUSE IT
IS AN ALTERATIVE! By which it is meant, that all such offending humors in the
body as nature is not able of herself to throw off, are, by means of this
medicine, so changed, disposed, and rendered capable of expulsion by the proper
channels or outlets, as to assist her efforts in removing them effectually. --
And now I beg leave, in turn, to ask of all those good folks who strain at a
gnat and swallow a camel, how it happens that antimony, bark, mercury, and even
several insignificant and other medicines which I could mention, are made use
of by all and every physician and medical practitioner as general remedies for
almost every disease that falls under their cognizance? And lastly, though
often too late, why the patient is recommended to that universal remedy, Bath
water, etc., when the doctor can do no more for him?

I shall not, however, presume to impose so far upon the understanding of the
Public as to endeavor to maintain that my pills are an infallible remedy for
all the diseases to which human nature is incident: but thus much I venture
positively and boldly to assert, that I do not believe it is in the power of
chemical or medical art to compose a better medicine, a milder and more
COMPLETE ALTERATIVE out of the drugs, etc. in present use. But what future time
may produce I cannot pretend to say.

Surgeons of the army and navy, (without derogating from their abilities) by
providing themselves with these pills, would have a remedy immediately at hand,
(which their situations sometimes will not admit them to get seasonably
prepared) by which means many valuable lives might be saved, and themselves
spared much trouble and expense; but particularly masters of merchant ships,
who have no medical assistance, (more especially such as visit warm climates,
where bilious complaints are most prevalent) and also those who live in the
country remote from such aid, would find The poor Man's Medicine Chest (what I
have justly termed it) a most invaluable remedy.

Here it may not be improper to give a little advice to those also who visit
Margate and other watering places, in the season, for the benefit of their
healths, from whence many return worse than they went, and numbers lose their
lives from injudicious bathing. Though I am convinced from experience that the
use of the cold bath, when properly applied, is of the highest importance
toward preserving of health, yet it should never be had recourse to until the
body is first properly prepared, not by a few doses of salt water, as is
usually the case, which slips quickly through the bowels, leaving behind the
long-retained feces, etc., which I have so pointedly described, possessing no
powers to act upon them effectually: for give me leave to acquaint those who
think that one thing that opens the body is as good as another, that they are
most egregiously mistaken, for, in fact, there is as much difference between
one purgative and another as between wine and water; for though both of these
will allay thirst, yet they will not equally exhilerate the spirits and produce
intoxication. Permit me, therefore, most humbly to recommend to all such as
visit those places, for their health's sake, previously to prepare themselves
for a fortnight or three weeks with my pills, agreeable to the alterative
course laid down in page 10, convinced they will find their advantage in so
doing. Afterward, I have no objection to their drinking occasionally a dose of
salt water, if they like it, to keep the body gently open, being perfectly
proper the body should be so kept during a course of bathing.

There is one hint more, and that of no small importance, which I shall presume
to offer to bathers, which is to live temperately and regularly whilst they are
seeking relief from the bath, and not go into it hissing hot, like an iron out
of a smith's forge plunged into his trough, after sitting up all night, and
partaking most unmercifully of all the luxuries of the season; which misconduct
I am fully persuaded has brought numbers to an untimely grave!

I could offer some other useful remarks upon this subject; but as it would
extend this little work beyond the limits proposed, I shall reserve them for
another place. For the same reason I shall also omit many respectable and
well-authenticated vouchers, which I have in my possession, of the wonderful
effects my pills have already produced; but indeed I could rather wish they
should establish themselves by their future good works, than endeavor to
support them by anterior authorities.

Before I conclude, I think it a duty I owe the Public, as well as myself, to
make a remark or two more; and although it is neither my talent nor wish to
depreciate the productions of others with a view to enhance the value of my
own, yet it is but justice to draw a fair line between mine and some of the
pills which are at present in much-esteemed use, not doubting at the same time
but such are justly entitled to the approbation they have obtained from the
benefit those who used them have experienced, and who think themselves, no
doubt, as much indebted to them for such relief as they would have been to the
prescriptions of the late Sir Richard Jebb, or any great physician of the
present day, of the ingredients of whose prescriptions they had no more
knowledge than of those that constituted such pills; and therefore I humbly
presume it is of very little consequence to the party who is so relieved,
whether obtained from Sir Jeffery Dunstan, Mayor of Garratt, or the Vicar of
Bray! But as one watch excels another in regulating time, so may one medicine
surpass another in momentous essicacy. Many of those pills, then, which I shall
forbear to call by name, lest I should incur the appellation of being envious,
and increase the number of my opponents, being only calculated to act merely as
a purgative, can by no means come in competition with what I have asserted (and
on which I pledge my reputation) mine will be sound to persorm; consequently a
medicine of this sort has long been wanting. Therefore, without entertaining an
iota of doubt but I shall in due time receive from a generous Public the
approbation I seek for the offering made, I shall now conclude with an old but
just proverb --

-- Siquid novisti reslius islis, Candidus imperti: si non, his utere me^um.
Having entitled my box of pills The poor Man's Medicine Chest! it remains for
me to maintain that appellation. These pills, then, are put up in boxes at four
shillings and six pence, and ton shillings and six pence, slamps included. The
small box contains forty-eight pills, or twelve large doses. Now as a common
dose is but three, and some require only two pills, it will often happen that
this box may contain twenty doses; and whoever is obliged to have recourse to
an apothecary for an equal number of doses of medicine would have at least
twenty shillings to pay, exclusive of some consideration for his trouble and
attendance, and perhaps not receive as much benefit from the whole as from one
dose of these pills. The large box contains one hundred and twenty pills, or
thirty large doses.

For the present, the pills will be sold by the Proprietor only, at his Patent
Baume of Arquebusade Warehouse, No. 13, Leicester Street, Leicester Square;
(the use of which Baume has been found, as will appear by the annexed letters,
of the highest importance); but as soon as proper persons are appointed to vend
them, their names will be affixed to this publication; and the better to
prevent impositions, each box is sealed with his coat of arms -- Motto, Confido
in Deo!

The Public are requested to pay strict attention to these circumstances, since
there are a number of medicasters and other piratical wretches ever ready to
obtrude on the world their own dangerous imitations for the works of others,
(preying like the hornet on the honey of the industrious be) under a pretense
of being able to analyze, without knowing the nature of that arduous and nice
process, and many of those pretenders not even the meaning of the word; by
which means a most valuable medicine loses its reputation, and the Public are
deceived.

LETTERS.
THE BAUME
Was first made public in February, 1786, since which Time the following are a
Part of upwards of a hundred Letters addressed to the Patentee, (Originals of
which are now in his Possession) by those who have experienced its happy
Effects.
"Facts are stubborn things which speak for themselves." SIR, Woolwich, Aug.
11, 1786.
I SHOULD think myself lost to all sense of gratitude if I did not acknowledge
that, under God, you have been the saver of my life by the use of your Baume
d'Arquebusade; and I am now happy in acquainting you that all those violent
pains in my stomach and bowels, as well as my loins and kidneys, disagreeable
belchings, cold clammy sweats, costiveness, sloppage of urine, restless nights,
etc., etc., occasioned by a bilious complaint which I contracted in America,
have all entirely left me, and I am now, thank God, in perfect health. -- For
the first ten or twelve days I took the Baume I thought myself worse, and left
it off; but at your particular request I began to use it again, and in about a
week found myself better, and began to void gravel of a hard red substance,
which I continued voiding, more or less, every day for upwards of two months;
sometimes found the quantity of a tea-spoonsul of this gravel in my pot of a
morning. Indeed when I took to the Baume a second time I had little or no hopes
of myself, (whatever you might have) having been under the care of one or other
of the faculty for upwards of three years, and could get no relief until I
applied to you. In humanity to my fellow creatures I should wish this letter to
be made public; but that as you please --

And am, With true heart-selt gratitude, Sir, Yours, etc. BASIL, CUNNINGHAM,
Lieut. Royal Artillery.


SIR, No. 7, Boston Row, Brompton, Sept. 16, 1787.
I BEG leave to express my gratitude, as an individual, for the obligation you
have conserred on mankind by the discovery of your Baume d'Arquebusade, and
also to inform you of the benefit I have derived from it. I had been afflicted
three years with a violent bilious complaint, attended with constant severs,
lowness of spirits, violent head-achs, etc., etc. I applied to several of the
most eminent of the faculty, and took all the medicines which were recommended:
went twice to Bath for the benesit of the waters; the first time of using them
found myself much worse, as they increased my fever, headache, etc.; the second
time they had little or no effect. I at length despaired of a remedy, and
thought all I could hope was to prevent the complaint's increasing by a strict
regard to diet, when I heard of the wonderful effects of your Baume
d'Arquebusade, and resolved to try it. At first it would not stay on my
stomach, and occasioned saintness and burning sensation in my throat: though I
was rather discouraged by those unpleasant effects, I however determined to
give it a fair trial, and by the time I had sinished the first bottle these
effects ceased, and I began to find benefit. In about three months I became
perfectly free from all complaints, and have ever since enjoyed a confirmed
state of health. -- I have no objection to your publishing this letter, if you
think proper; and am ready to answer, in person, to any who may wish to
question me upon the subject.

I am, Sir, Your obliged, humble servant, MARY HALCOT.


* This lady has since been married, and has had two fine children, of both
which I delivered her.

The following Extract of a Letter from a respectable Merchant at Plymouth,
dated Plymouth, June 9, 1787.
"I CANNOT conclude my letter without rendering your merit the tribute of
praise so justly due for presenting to mankind that most excellent medicine,
the concentrated Balsam of Arquebusade, which, by having taken a sew bottles,
has relieved me from a very dangerous bilious complaint, and for which I tried
the Bath waters last summer, upwards of six weeks, in vain, after having
previously been under the care of a very eminent physician a considerable time.
-- If this declaration of mine can be of any service to you, you have sull
permission to show it to all asslicted with that dreadful disorder, from which
I have been so happily relieved. But I could wish you not to publish in the
newspapers my name, as a reference to yourself for a sight of this declaration
must answer every purpose. -- Lieut. Scott, of the Royal Navy, has also, to my
knowledge, been entirely cured of a violent bilious disorder by your medicine,
and been free from any return for upwards of eight months."

Extract of a Letter from a most respectable Planter in the Island of Nevis,
dated Nevis, October 4, 1787.
"YOUR Arquebusade Concentre is of the utmost use to us. I have never yet
applied it inwardly; but in bruises, sprains, severe cuts, and rheumntic
complaints, it has never failed. One negro, who chopped half his finger off at
the joint, had his wound healed by it as if it had been by magic: another,
whose leg was violently tore by a dog, equally so. My Overseer's foot was
jammed by a cart, and it cured him in a sew days. We use it for all sores in
negroes legs, and it never fails. From this you may guess that my provision
thereof is much diminished; therefore beg you will send me double the quantity
I had the last year. Out of what I have I shall, however, give Mr. Walter
Nesbit and Mr. J. Tailor a little for a trial: they are two of our first
planters here; and on your account, as well as theirs, I am sorry I did not do
it sooner.

"P. S. You are perfectly welcome to make any use you please of the paragragh
about your Arquebusade Balsam, for what I have said is true, so help me, etc.

G. FORBES."

SIR, Portugal Street, Grosvenor Square, January 19, 1788.
HAVING received so much benefit from your much-esteemed and valuable Balsam, I
should be glad if you would have my case inserted in the public papers, both
for your credit and the good of the Public at large. -- I received about two
months ago a very violent stroke from a horse on my kneepan, and was so very
bad that all who saw me expected I must lose my leg at least -- I was advised
to apply to you -- you gave me a few bottles of your Balsam, by the use of
which, in a few days, I was much relieved, and in three weeks time got
perfectly sound and well, to the great astonishment of all our family, and of
all who had seen my knee; so your publishing this will greatly oblige,

Sir, your humble servant, GEORGE WALKER, Servant to Capt. Scott, Equerry to
His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales.


SIR,
HAVING, by repeated trials, experienced the good effects of your excellent
Baume d'Arquebusade, which entirely cured me of a violent dropsical complaint
that threatened the most serious consequences, I think it but justice in me to
avow it. I have also the pleasure to inform you of a remarkable cure it lately
performed upon one of my servants in the country, who had the misfortune to
tear her arm by falling upon a rusty spike, (where she hung for some time)
which made a hole as large and half as deep as my finger: I immediately filled
the wound with the Baume, and after dressing it with the Baume a few days had
the satisfaction to see her arm perfectly healed, and she could do her work as
usual.

I am, etc. MARY ELFORD.
Hollyport, Berks, December 4, 1789.

SIR,
WE have a number of people ill in this neighborhood, particularly of sore
throats. I have found your Baume d'Arquebusade to be more efficacious than any
other medicine, it having given almost immediate relief, and only from an
outward application. Great numbers have died of this virulent sore throat; but
I hope the timely application of this useful medicine may, through the blessing
of God, prevent its direful effects. -- Beg you will immediately send by the
Boston Coach six bottles, at 6s. 10d. per bottle, and write upon the direction
to come in the inside of the coach.

I am, Sir, Yours, etc. RICHARD BRACKENBURY.
Raithby Hall, near Spilsby, Lincolnshire, November 12, 1788.

This incomparable antiseptic, chemical Balsam is prepared from the
concentrated juices of the most salatiferous, aromatic, saponaceous roots,
plants, etc., and is of so pervading a nature, that it enters speedily into the
system when rubbed upon the surface of the body, gradually opens the obstructed
capillary vessels, and passes through the whole course of circulation: its
happy effects having exceeded the Patentee's ablest panegyric in the following
cases, viz. violent sprains, bruises, fractures, gunshot and all kinds of
wounds, cuts, old obstinate ulcers, and swellings of the joints and other
parts, scalds, burns, chilblains, etc.; for all of which, as well as for its
internal use, a bill of directions is given with each bottle.

THE END.

