NATURAL HISTORY, GENERAL AND PARTICULAR, BY THE COUNT DE BUFFON, TRANSLATED
INTO ENGLISH.

ILLUSTRATED With three hundred and one COPPER PLATES; AND OCCASIONAL NOTES AND
OBSERVATIONS BY THE TRANSLATOR.

VOLUME VIII.

EDINBURGH: Printed for WILLIAM CREECH. M,DCC,LXXX.

CONTENTS.
Dissertation on Mules page 1 The Nomenclature of Apes page 39 Natural History
of the Orang-Outangs, or the Pongo and Jocko page 77 Natural History of the
Pigmy page 106 Natural History of the Gibbon, or long-armed Ape page 113
Natural History of the Magot, or Barbary Ape page 117 Natural History of the
Baboon properly so called page 121 Natural History of the Great Baboon page 125
Natural History of the Mandrill, or ribbed nose Baboon page 129 Natural History
of the Ouanderou and the Lowando page 132 Natural History of the Maimon, or
pig-tailed Baboon page 137 Natural History of the Macaque, or hare-lipped
Monkey, and the Egret page 140 Natural History of the Patas, or Red Monkey page
144 Natural History of the Malbrouck and Chinese-Bonnet page 148 Natural
History of the Mangabey page 154 Natural History of the Mona, or varied Monkey
page 156 Natural History of the Callitrix, or Green Monkey page 160 Natural
History of the Mustache page 163 Natural History of the Talapoin page 165
Natural History of the Douc, or Cochin-China Monkey page 168 Natural History of
the Sapajous and Sagoins page 172 Natural History of the Ouarine and Alouate
page 176 Natural History of the Coaita and Exquima page 184 Natural History of
the Sajou, or Capuchin Monkey page 193 Natural History of the Sai, or Weeper
page 196 Natural History of the Saimiri, or Orange Monkey page 199 Natural
History of the Saki, or Fox-tailed Monkey page 201 Natural History of the
Tamarin, or Great-eared Monkey page 203 Natural History of the Ouistiti, or
striated Monkey page 205 Natural History of the Marikina, or silky Monkey page
209 Natural History of the Pinche, or red-tailed Monkey page 211 Natural
History of the Mico, or fair Monkey page 214 Natural History of the White, or
Polar Bear page 216 Natural History of the Cow of Tartary page 225 Natural
History of the Baikal Hare page 228 Natural History of the Zisel page 229
Natural History of the Zemni page 232 Natural History of the Pouc page 233
Natural History of the Perouasca page 234 Natural History of the Souslik page
234 Natural History of the gilded Mole page 238 Natural History of the white
water Rat ib. Natural History of the Guiney Hog page 239 Natural History of the
Cape de Verd Boar page 241 Natural History of the Mexican Wolf page 258 Natural
History of the Alco page 261 Natural History of the Tayra, or Guiney Weasel
page 265 Natural History of the Merian Opossum page 267 Natural History of the
Akouchi page 269 Natural History of the Tucan, or Mexican Shrew page 271
Natural History of the Brasilian Shrew page 273 Natural History of the Rock
Cavy page 274 Natural History of the Tapeti, or Brasilian Hare page 276 Natural
History of the Crab-eater page 279 Natural History of an Anonymous Animal page
283 Natural History of the Madagascar Rat page 284 Systematic Index. page 287
DIRECTIONS to the BINDER.
Place Plate CCLII. between page 104 and page 105. Place Plate CCLIII. CCLIV.
between page 116 and page 117. Place Plate CCLV. CCLVI. between page 120 and
page 121. Place Plate CCLVII. CCLVIII. between page 124. and page 125. Place
Plate CCLIX. CCLX. between page 128 and page 129. Place Plate CCLXI. between
page 132 and page 133. Place Plate CCLXIII. between page 136 and page 137.
Place Plate CCLXII. between page 138 and page 139. Place Plate CCLXIV. CCLXV.
between page 142 and page 143. Place Plate CCLXVI. CCLXVII. between page 146
and page 147. Place Plate CCLXVIII. CCLXIX. between page 152 and page 153.
Place Plate CCLXX. CCLXXI. between page 154 and page 155. Place Plate CCLXXII.
between page 158 and page 159. Place Plate CCLXXIII. between page 162 and page
163. Place Plate CCLXXIV. between page 164 and page 165. Place Plate CCLXXV.
between page 166 and page 167. Place Plate CCLXXVI. between page 170 and page
171. Place Plate CCLXXVII. between page 192 and page 193. Place Plate
CCLXXVIII. CCLXXIX. between page 194 and page 195. Place Plate CCLXXX. CCLXXXI.
between page 198 and page 199. Place Plate CCLXXXII. between page 200 and page
201. Place Plate CCLXXXIII. between page 202 and page 203. Place Plate
CCLXXXIV. between page 204 and page 205. Place Plate CCLXXXV. between page 208
and page 209. Place Plate CCLXXXVI. between page 210 and page 211. Place Plate
CCLXXXVII. between page 212 and page 213. Place Plate CCLXXXVIII. between page
216 and page 217. Place Plate CCLXXXIX. between page 224 and page 225. Place
Plate CCXC. between page 236 and page 237. Place Plate CCXCI. between page 256
and page 257. Place Plate CCXCII. between page 270 and page 271. Place Plate
CCXCIII. CCXCIV. between page 282 and page 283. Place Plate CCXCV. between page
284 and page 285.
N. B. Place plate 2d CCXL. 3d CCXL. and 4th CCXL. in vol. VII. p. 294. -- The
Dedication to be prefixed to vol. 1.

ERRATA.
Page 8. line 16. for his read her. Page 62. line 29. after organs add of. Page
118. line 2. for grinded read ground. Page 122. line 19. for suum read suam.
Page 146. line 22. for body read nose. Page 168. line 13. after douc add alone.
Page 207. line 4. for china golden fish read gold-fish. Page 214. line 14.
read, and, when almost in sight of the French coast, it was still alive. Page
263. line 3. for it read his head.
Plate CCLX. for Mandrill read Great Baboon.

NATURAL HISTORY.
OF MULES.
[From the supplementary Volume.]
WE shall retain the name of Mule to the animal produced by the jack-ass and
mare; and to that procreated between the horse and she-ass, we shall give the
denomination of bardeau. The differences which subsist between these two
mongrel animals have never hitherto been marked by any author. These
differences, however, afford the most certain criterion of distinguishing the
relative influence of males and females in the product of generation. A
comparison of these two mules, and other mongrels proceeding from a mixture of
different species, will give us more precise ideas concerning this relative
influence, than could be obtained by simply comparing two individuals of the
same species.

The bardeau is much smaller than the mule, and seems to preserve the
dimensions of its mother, the she-ass; and the mule retains the dimensions of
the mare. Hence, in mixed species, the size of the body appears to depend more
upon the mother than the father. Now, these two animals differ in figure. The
neck of the bardeau is thinner, the back sharper, and the crupper more pointed;
while the forehead of the mule is better shaped, the neck more beautiful, the
sides rounder, and the crupper more plump. Hence both of these animals retain
more of the mother than of the father, not only in magnitude, but in figure of
body. This remark, however, does not apply to the head, limbs, and tail. The
head of the bardeau is longer, and not so thick in proportion as that of the
ass; and the head of the mule is shorter and thicker than that of the horse.
Hence, in the figure and dimensions of the head, they have a greater
resemblance to the father than to the mother. The tail of the bardeau is
garnished with hair nearly in the same manner as that of the horse; and the
tail of the mule is almost naked, like that of the ass. In this extreme part of
the body, therefore, the similarity to the father predominates. The ears of the
mule are longer than those of the horse; and the ears of the bardeau are
shorter than those of the ass. The limbs of the mule are hard and limber, like
those of the horse; and the limbs of the bardeau are more fleshy. Hence these
two animals, in the form of the head, limbs, and other extremities of the body,
have a greater resemblance to the father than to the mother.

In the years 1751 and 1752, I made two hegoats copulate with several ewes, and
I obtained nine mules, seven males and and two females. Struck with this
difference between the number of males and females, I endeavored to discover
whether the number of male mules, produced by the ass and mare, predominated in
the same proportion. The information I received did not ascertain this point;
but I learned that the number of male mules always exceeded that of the
females. The Marquis de Spontin-Beaufort made a dog intermix with a she-wolf,
and procured four mules, three of which were males Letter from the Marquis de
Spontin-Beaufort to M. de Buffon, dated Namur, July 14. 1773, and attested by
two letters from M. Surirey de Boisly, likewise dated Namur, June 9. and July
19. 1773.
. In fine, having made inquiries concerning mules which are more easily
obtained, I learned, that the number of males greatly exceeded that of the
females. In the article, Canary-birds See tom. 4. de l'Hist. Not. des Oiseaux.
, I remarked, that of nine young produced between a gold-finch and a
Canary-bird, there were only three females. These are the only certain facts I
could collect on this subject What is related by different authors, concerning
the jumars, appears to be very suspicious. The Sicur Ledger, in his history of
the Vaudois, tells us, That, in the valleys of Piedmont, there are mongrel
animals, called jumars; that, when engendered by a bull and a mare, they are
denominated baf or buf, and when produced by a bull and a she-ass, they receive
the appellation of bif; that these jumars have no horns, and are of the size of
mules; that they are very swift; that he mounted one of them on the 30th day of
September, and performed, in a single day, a journey of eighteen leagues, or
fifty four Italian miles; and that they were surer, and more easy than a horse.

From an assertion of this kind, we would be led to believe, that these jumars,
produced by the bull and the mare and she-ass, either exist, or did formerly
exist; yet I have never been able to discover any confirmation of these facts.

Dr Shaw, in his history of Algiers, p. 166. says, To the mule we may join the
Kumrab, as the Algerines call a little serviceable beast of burden, begot
betwixt an ass and a cow. That which I saw at Algiers (where it was not looked
upon as a rarity), was single hoofed, like the ass, but distinguished from it,
in having a sleeker skin, with the tail and the head (though without horns) in
fashion of the dam's. Dr Shaw is an author who deserves credit. However, having
consulted several persons who had been in Barbary, and particularly the
Chevalier James Bruce, they all assured me, that they had no knowledge
concerning these animals engendered by an ass and a cow.


, which merits more attention than it has yet received; for the mysteries of
generation by the concourse of different species, and the ascertaining of the
proportional effective powers of males and females in every kind of
reproduction, can alone be developed by an assemblage of similar facts.

Of my nine mules produced by the he-goat and the ewes, the first was brought
forth on the 15th day of April. When examined three days after birth, and
compared with lambs of the same age, it differed from them in the following
particulars: The ears, upper part of the head, as well as the distance between
the eyes, were larger. It had, besides, a band of whitish gray hair from the
nap of the neck to the extremity of the tail. The four legs, the superior part
of the neck, the breast, and belly, were covered with the same white, coarse
hair. There was a small quantity of wool upon the flanks only; and even this
short, curled wool, was mixed with a great deal of hair. The legs of this mule
were also a foot and a half longer than those of a lamb of the same age. When
examined, eighteen days after birth, the white hairs were partly fallen off,
and replaced by brown hairs, similar in color to those of the he-goat, and
nearly as coarse. The limbs continued to be more than a foot and a half longer
than those of the lamb; and, on account of this length of limbs, it did not
walk so well as the lamb. This lamb was killed by an accident; and I took no
farther notice of the mule till four months afterward, when I compared it with
a sheep of the same age. In the mule, from the space between the eyes to the
extremity of the muzzle, the distance was at least an inch shorter than in the
sheep; and the head of the mule was more than half an inch broader, at the
broadest part. Hence the head of this mule was thicker and shorter than that of
a sheep of equal age. The curvature of the upper jaw, taken from the corner of
the mouth, was near half an inch longer in the mule than in the sheep. The head
of the mule was not covered with wool, but with long, bushy hair. The tail was
two inches shorter than that of the sheep.

In the beginning of the year 1752, I obtained, from the union of a he-goat
with ewes, eight other mules, six of which were males, and two females. Two of
them died before I could examine them; but they seemed to resemble those who
survived. Two of them, a male and a female, had four teats, two on each side,
like those of the goats. In general, these mules had long hair on the belly,
and particularly about the penis, as in the he-goat, and also on the feet, and
particularly those behind. Most of them had the chanfrin less arched than is
common to lambs, the distance between the hoofs larger, and the tail shorter.

Under the article Dog, I related some experiments made with a view to procure
an intermixture between a dog and a wolf, where all the precautions employed
for that purpose were abortive See vol. IV. p. 24.
. The conclusion drawn from these experiments was in the following words: 'I
pretend not absolutely to affirm, that the wolf, in no age or country, never
intermixed with dogs. The contrary is asserted positively by the ancients.
Aristotle remarks, that, though animals of different species seldom intermix;
yet it certainly happens among dogs, foxes, and wolves.' I have since learned
the propriety of being thus cautious in my conclusions; for M. le Marquis de
Spontin-Beaufort has succeeded in the junction of a dog and a wolf. I was
informed of this fact by M. Surirey de Boissy, in a letter which he wrote me in
the following terms:

Namur, June 9. 1773.
The Marquis de Spontin has in this place reared a very young she-wolf, to whom
he gave, as a companion, a dog of nearly the same age. They were left at full
liberty, and came into the apartments, the kitchen, the stable, etc. They live
in the most intimate friendship, and are extremely caressing, lying under the
table, and upon the feet of the persons who sit round it.

The dog is a kind of mongrel mastiff, and full of vigor. During the first six
months, the wolf was fed with milk, and afterward with raw flesh, which it
preferred to what was roasted. When she eat, no person durst approach her. At
other times, she permitted every freedom, except abuse. She caressed all the
dogs which came near her, till she began to give a preference to her old
companion; after which, she was enraged at every other. She was covered, for
the first time, on the 25th day of March last. Her amors continued fifteen
days, with pretty frequent repetitions; and she brought forth her young on the
sixth day of June at eight o'clock in the morning. Hence the time of her
gestation was seventy-three days. The young were four in number, and of a
blackish color. Some of them have the half of the breast, and the pats, white.
These colors are derived from the dog, who is black and white. From the moment
of littering, she growled and attacked all who approached her. She no longer
distinguished her masters; and would even have devoured the dog, if he had come
near her.

I add, that she has been chained ever since she made a break at her gallant,
who had leaped a neighboring wall, in order to come at a bitch in season; that
she nearly worried his rival; and that the coachman separated them by repeated
blows of a large bludgeon, and conducted her to her lodge, where, imprudently
commencing his chastisement, her fury rose to such a degree, that she bit him
twice in the thigh, and the wounds confined him six weeks to his bed.


In my answer to this letter, I thanked M. de Boissy, and added some remarks,
with a view to remove my doubts. M. le Marquis de Spontin having seen my
answer, obligingly wrote me in the following terms:

Namur, July 14. 1773.
I read with much satisfaction the judicious remarks you transmitted to M.
Surirey de Boissy, whom I had begged to communicate to you, during my absence,
a fact, which cannot be denied, notwithstanding the force of your arguments,
and the opinion I have always entertained, as well as the rest of the world, of
the excellence of the many learned productions by which you have enlightened
the republic of letters. But, whether it was an effect of chance, or one of
those sports of Nature, who, as you remark, sometimes departs from her
established laws, the fact is incontestible; and you will be convinced of its
truth, if you give credit to what I have the honor of writing you, which can
be attested by two hundred persons at least, who were witnesses to it as well
as myself. This she-wolf was only three days old when I purchased it from a
peasant, who had carried it off, after killing the mother. I fed it with milk
till it was able to eat flesh. I recommended to those who had the care of it,
to caress, and handle it often, with a view to render it as tame as possible.
At last, it became so familiar that I have taken it to hunt in the woods at the
distance of a league from my house, without any danger of losing it. Sometimes,
when I was unable to call it back, it returned of its own accord in the night.
I was always more certain of keeping it at home when I had a dog; for it was
fond of dogs; and those, who had overcome their natural repugnance, sported
with it, as if they had been animals of the same species. During all this time,
it attacked only cats and poultry, whom it strangled, without discovering any
inclination to eat them. As soon as she attained the age of twelve months, her
ferocity increased, and I began to perceive that she had a strong desire to
attack sheep and bitches. I then chained her; because she frequently sprung
upon her master, when he attempted to restrain her. she was at least one year
old when I introduced her to the acquaintance of the dog who covered her. She
has been kept in my garden, which is situated in the center of the town, since
the end of November last; and, therefore, no male wolf can be supposed to have
had any communication with her. As soon as she came in season, she discovered
such an affection for the dog, and the dog for her, that each of them howled
frightfully when they were not together. She was first covered on the 28th day
of March, and twice each day during the two following weeks. They continued
attached to each other more than a quarter of an hour at every embrace, during
which time the wolf complained, and seemed to suffer pain; but the dog was
perfectly at his ease. Three weeks after, her pregnancy was perceptible. On the
6th day of June, she brought forth four young, whom she still suckles, though
they are five weeks old, and have pretty long sharp teeth. They have a perfect
resemblance to puppies, having long pendulous ears. One of them is black, with
a white breast, which was the color of the dog. The others will probably be of
the color of the mother. The hair of each of them is courser than that of
ordinary dogs. There is but one female, with a very short tail, like the dog,
who had scarcely any tail. They promise to be large, strong, and very
ferocious. The mother is extremely solicitous concerning their welfare...... I
doubt whether I shall keep her any longer, having been chagrined by an accident
that befell my coachman, whom she bit so cruelly, that he has been confined to
his bed these six weeks past. But I will engage, that, if preserved, she will
again have puppies by the same dog, who is white, with large black spots on the
back. I hope, Sir, that what I have said will answer for a reply to your
remarks, and that you will no longer hesitate concerning the truth of this
singular event.


My doubts are entirely removed, and I am happy to embrace this opportunity of
expressing my thanks. The establishment of a rare fact in natural history is a
great acquisition. The means of obtaining such facts are always difficult, and
often, as we have seen, very dangerous. It was for this last reason that I
fequestered my wolf and dog from all society. I had formerly reared a young
wolf, who, till the age of twelve months, did no mischief, and followed his
master like a dog. But, in the second year, he committed so many excesses that
it was necessary to kill him. I learned by experience, that these animals,
though softened by education, resume, with age, their natural ferocity. Willing
to prevent these inconveniences, I kept my shewolf always confined along with
the dog; and I acknowledge that this method of procuring an union between them,
was ill imagined; for, in this state of slavery and disgust, the dispositions
of the wolf, instead of being softened, were soured to such a degree, that she
was more ferocious than if she had been at full liberty; and the dog, having
been early detached from his equals, and from the society of men, had assumed a
savage and cruel character, which the bad humor of the wolf served only to
augment; so that, during the two last years, their antipathy rose to such a
degree, that they desired nothing so much as to devour each other. In the
experiment made by the Marquis de Spontin, every circumstance was reversed. The
dog was in his ordinary condition: He had all the mildness and other qualities
which this docile animal acquires by his intercourse with man. The wolf was
likewise reared in perfect freedom and familiarity along with the dog, which,
by being under no restraint, had lost his repugnance to her; and she, by the
same mild management, became susceptible of attachment to him. She, therefore,
received him with cordiality, whenever the hour of Nature struck: And, though
she seemed to complain and to suffer, she felt more pleasure than pain; for she
allowed the operation to be repeated every day, during all the time she was in
season. Besides, the proper moment for this unnatural union was seized. The
wolf felt the impression of love for the first time. She was only in the second
year of her age; and, of course, had not entirely resumed her natural ferocity.

All these circumstances, and perhaps some others which were not observed,
contributed to the success of this fertile embrace. From what has been
remarked, it would appear, that the most certain method of rendering animals
unfaithful to their species, is to place them, like man, in society, and to
accustom them gradually to individuals which, without such precautions, would
not only be indifferent, but hostile to each other. However this matter stands,
the Marquis de Spontin has ascertained the fact, that the dog can produce with
the wolf even in our climates. I could have wished that the success of this
experiment had induced its author to try the union of a wolf with a bitch, and
of foxes with dogs. But if this desire should be considered as exorbitant, he
must ascribe it to the insatiable enthusiasm of a naturalist A similar fact has
been announced by M. Bourgelat, in a letter to me, dated April 15. 1775: 'My
Lord Pembroke,' says he, 'informed me, that, within these few days, he saw a
large mastiff copulate with a she-wolf; that the wolf is tame; that she is
always in her master's chamber, and consequently under his eye; that she never
goes out alone; and that she follows her master with all the fidelity of a dog.
He adds, that an animal merchant has had, at four different times, mules
produced by the wolf and dog. He alleges, that the wolf is only a wild dog;
and in this opinion he is joined by the celebrated anatomist Mr Hunter. He
thinks differently with regard to the fox. He tells me, that a bitch, who was a
daughter of a wolf, and belonged to Lord Clanbrazil, intermixed with a setting
dog, and produced puppies, which, according to his hunter, will be excellent
pointers.'
.

But to return to our mules. In those I obtained from the he-goat and ewe, the
number of males was as seven to two; in those from the dog and she-wolf, the
males were as three to one; and, in those from the goldfinch and Canary bird,
the mules were as sixteen to three. It appears, therefore, to be certain, that
the number of males, which is always greater than that of females in pure
species, is still greater in mixed species. Hence, the male, in general, has a
greater influence on the produce of generation than the female, because he
transmits his sex to the greatest number, and because the number of males
augments in proportion to the remoteness of the species who intermix. The same
thing must happen in the conjunction of different races: By crossing the
remotest of these, we will not only procure the most beautiful productions, but
the greatest number of males. I have often endeavored to investigate the
reason why any religion, or any government, should prohibit the marriage of
brothers and sisters. Did men learn, by very ancient experience, that the union
of brother and sister was less fertile than an intermixture with strangers, or
that the former produced fewer males, and feebler and more unhandsome children?
It is certain, however, that, from a thousand experiments, both in men and the
other animals, crossing the breed is the only mode of ennobling and preserving
the perfection of the species.

To these facts and experiments, let us add what the ancients have said upon
this subject. Aristotle tells us, that the mule engenders with the mare, and
that the junction produces an animal which the Greeks called hinnus or ginnus.
He likewise remarks, that the she-mule easily conceives, but seldom brings the
foetus to perfection Arist. hist. animal. lib. 6. cap. 24.
. Of these two facts, the second is more rare than the first; and both happen
only in warm climates. M. de Bory, of the royal academy of Sciences, and
formerly governor of the American islands, communicated to me a recent fact of
this kind, in a letter, dated May 7. 1770, of which the following is an extrat.

You will perhaps recollect, Sir, that M. d' Almbert read, last year, in the
Academy of Sciences, a letter, which informed him, that a she-mule, in the
island of St Domingo, had brought forth a foal. I was desired to write for
proper vouchers of the fact; and I have now the honor of sending you the
certificate which I received..... My correspondent is worthy of the highest
credit. He adds, that he has seen mules cover, indiscriminately, she-mules and
mares, and likewise she-mules covered by stallions and he-mules.


This certificate is judicially attested, and signed by witnesses of
unquestionable veracity. The substance of it is, that, on the 14th day of May
1769, M. de Nort, Knight of St Louis, and late Major of the Royal Legion of St
Domingo, had a she-mule brought to him, which was said to be sick; that her
belly was remarkably large, and a membrance protruded through the vagina. M. de
Nort, believing the animal to be inflated, sent for a Negro farrier, who had
been accustomed to take care of diseased animals; that this Negro, who arrived
in the absence of M. de Nort, had thrown down the mule, in order to give her a
draught; that, the moment after the fall, she brought forth a young mule,
perfectly formed, and covered with long and very black hair; that the young
mule lived an hour; but that, having been both hurt by the fall, and foal died
soon after birth, and the mother ten hours after; and, in fine, that the young
mule was skinned, and the skin sent, says M. de Nort, to Doctor Matty, who
deposited it in the Musaeum of the Royal Society at London.

Other eyewitnesses, and particularly M. Cazavant, surgeon, add, that the
young mule seemed to have been mature, and well formed; that, from the
appearance of its hair, head, and ears, it had a greater resemblance to the ass
than common mules; that the paps of the mother were swelled, and full of milk;
that, when the ignorant Negro perceived the feet issuing from the vagina, he
drew so forcibly as to invert the uterus, and lacerate the parts, which
occasioned the death of both mother and foal.

These facts, which appear to be well ascertained, demonstrate, that, in warm
climates, the mule is not only capable of conception, but of bringing the
foetus to full maturity. From my correspondents in Spain and Italy, I learn,
that similar events have happened in these countries: But the facts are not so
completely authenticated. It still remains to be inquired, whether this St
Domingo mule was impregnated by an ass or a mule. The superior resemblance of
the young mule to the former seems to indicate, that she had been covered by an
ass. The ferocious ardour of the ass renders him very indifferent in the choice
of females, and makes him attack, with nearly the same avidity, the she-ass,
the mare, and the mule.

We may, therefore, consider it as an established fact, that the he-mule can
generate, and the she-mule produce. Like other animals, they have a seminal
liquor, and all the organs necessary to generation. But mongrel animals are
always less fertile, and more tardy than those of a pure species. Besides,
mules have never produced in cold climates, seldom in warm regions, and still
more seldom in temperate countries To the above facts, the Translator has to
add an instance of the prolific powers of a she mule in the North of Scotland.
Having heard that a mule, belonging to Mr. David Tullo, farmer in Auchtertyre,
in the county of Forfar, had some years ago brought forth a foal, he
transmitted a few queries to be put to Mr Tullo; and requested that his answers
might be legally attested before a magistrate. This request was cheerfully
complied with; and the following is an exact copy of the queries, answers, and
attestations.

Interrogatories to be put to Mr Tullo tenant in Auchtertyre, parish of
Newtyle, and county of Forfar, with his answers thereto.

1 mo, Had you ever a she-mule? At what period? Is it true that the mule had a
foal? At what time was she covered; and when did she foal?

Answered by Mr Tullo: That he bought a she-mule about twenty years ago: That
she was constantly in season for a horse: That, about some years thereafter, he
gave her a horse; and that she, thereafter, gave him a foal, about the 10th of
June. The mule's price was four pounds five shillings Sterling.

2 do, What was the color of the foal? Was there any thing particular in its
figure?

Answer: The foal was exactly the color of its mother, inclined to black, with
a very large head, big ears, and small tail; and the declarant thinks, had its
head been weighed when foaled, it would have weighted nearly as much as its
body.

3 tio, How long was the animal allowed to live?

Answer: The next day after the mule foaled, it was sent, with its mother, to
the Loch of Lundie, in order to let the foal die, as the declarant could not
want the mule's work, and the mother seemed not fond of the foal: That it was
accordingly left, and next day came to Auchtertyre, about two miles distance,
over a hill, with the cattle of Auchtertyre. that had been grazing near to that
place, and was drowned in a ditch the day following.

4 to, Was its skin preserved, or the head, or any other bones of the skeleton?
Could any part thereof be still found?

Answered: neither the skin, nor any part of the skeleton was preserved, nor
can now be had; though the declarant has often regretted the not preserving the
foal, as its mother always performed any work that a horse of fifteen pounds
value could do.

5 to, Is the mother still alive? What is her age?

Answer: The mother died, about eight years ago, of an epidemic cold that was
raging among the horses in this country: The mule had little or no milk after
foaling, and the foal got some cow's milk: And this is all that he remembers of
the matter.

DAVID TULLO.

Auchtertyre, 4th February 1780.
We James Small tenant in Burnmouth, and Rober Ramsay tenant in Newtyle, hereby
certify, That we have often seen the mule above described, and we know that she
had a foal, as is narrated by David Tullo.

JAMES SMALL. ROB. RAMSAY.


Ballantyne house, 4th February 1780.
The within interrogatories were put to David Tullo, tenant in Auchtertyre,
anent the mule he had, and the foal she produced, to which he gave the answers
subjoined to each query, and signed them, as did James small and Robert Ramsay,
attesting the truth thereof, in presence of

GEORGE WATSON, J. P.

The original attestation is in the possession of the Translator; and he lately
transmitted ^otorial or authenticated copies of it to the Count de Buffon, and
to Thomas Pennant, Esquire of Downing, in Flintshire.


. Hence their barrenness, without being absolute, may be regarded as positive;
since their productions are so rare, that a few examples only can be collected.
But men were wrong in asserting that mules were absolutely barren, and that all
animals proceeding from a mixture of different species were, like the mules,
incapable of producing. The facts formerly related concerning the produce of a
he-goat and a ewe, of a dog and a she-wolf, and of Canary birds and
gold-finches, demonstrate, that these mongrels are by no means barren, and that
some of them are equally prolific with their parents.

It is an unhappy circumstance, that a small, and often nominal error, extends
over every object to which it has any relation, and at last not only becomes in
an error in fact, but gives rise to a general prejudice, that is more difficult
to remove than the particular opinion from which it originated. A single word,
a name like that of mule, which ought solely to represent the idea of the
animla proceeding from the ass and mare, has been improperly applied to the
animal produced by the horse and the she-ass, and afterward, with still greater
impropriety, to all quadrupeds, and all birds, of mixed species: And, as this
word mule, in its original acceptance, included the idea of the barrenness
common to the animal proceeding from the ass and mare, this idea of barrenness
has been conveyed to all beings who have the denomination of mules; I say to
all beings; for, independent of quadrupeds, birds, and fishes, mule plants have
been fancied, to which, without hesitation, this general sterility has also
been ascribed. None of these beings, however, is absolutely barren. The mule,
properly so called, or the animal produced by the ass mare, is not absolutely
barren; but its prolific powers, when compared with those of pure species, or
even with those of other animals of a mixed species, are much more feeble and
uncertain.

All mules, says Prejudice, are vitiated animals, incapable of producing: No
animal, says Reason and Experience, though proceeding from two species, is
absolutely barren. It ought to be remarked, however, that, in pure, as well as
mixed species, the degrees of fertility are very different. In the first, some,
like the fishes and insects, multiply, annually, by millions; others, as the
birds and small quadrupeds, produce by twenties and dozens; in fine, others, as
man, and the larger quadrupeds, produce only one in twelve months. The number
produced may be said to be in the inverse proportion of the magnitude of
animals. The horse and ass bring forth but one in a year; and, in the same
period, the mouse and Guinea pig produce thirty or forty. Hence the fecundity
of these small animals is thirty or forty times greater; and, if a scale were
formed of the different degrees of fertility, the small animals above
enumerated would occupy the highest points, while the horse and ass would be
found nearly in the lowest; for the elephant alone is less fertile.

In mixed species, there are also differnt degrees of fecundity; for animals
proceeding from two species partake of two natures, and are, in general, less
fertile; and this want of fertility increases in proportion to the infecundity
of the parents. Hence, if the horse and ass, two animals naturally not very
fertile, mix, the original infecundity, instead of diminishing in the mongrel
race, must be augemented. The mule will not only be less fertile than its
parents, but, perhaps, the most unfertile of all mongrels; because all the
other mules which produce, such as those proceeding from the he-goat and ewe,
from the goldfinch and Canary bird, etc. are much more fruitful than the ass
and horse. It is to this original and particular cause, that the infecundity of
the mule and bardeau should be referred. A second cause, still more particular,
renders the last animal less prolific than the first. The mule proceeding from
the ass and mare retains the ardent temperament of the father, and, of course,
possesses a high degree of prolific power; while the bardeau proceeding from
the horse and ass is, like its father, less potent, and less able to engender.
Besides, the mare being less ardent than the she-ass, is likewise more fertile,
since she conceives and retains with more certainty. Thus every circumstance
concurs in rendering the mule more prolific than the bardeau; for ardour of
temperament in the male, which is so necessary to successful generation and the
number produced, is hurtful in the female, and almost always prevents
conception and retention.

This fact holds generally both in man and the other animals. Cold women,
joined to ardent men, produce a number of children. A woman, on the contrary,
who feels too acutely the emotions of love, is seldom fertile. But, in most
women who are merely passive, the effect is more certain; because the fruit of
generation is less disturbed by the convulsions of pleasure. These are so
marked, and so destructive to conception, in some females, such as the sheass,
that she requires cold water to be thrown on her crupper, and even heavy blows,
in order to repress them. Without such disagreeable aids, the she-ass would
never be impregnated, till age abated the fury of her passion. The same means
are sometimes employed to make mares conceive.

But, it may be said, that female dogs and cats, who seem to be more ardent
than the mare and she-ass, never fail to conceive; and, therefore, that the
fact advanced concerning the infecundity of females whose feelings are
exquisite, is too general, and admits of many exceptions. But the example of
dogs and cats, instead of being an exception, is rather a confirmation of the
general rule; for, in the bitch, however violent the convulsions of the
internal organs may be supposed, they have full time to be appeased during the
long interval between consummation and the retreat of the male, who cannot
detach himself till the turgidity and irritation of the parts subside. The
female cat is in a similar situation. Of all females, she appears to be the
most ardent in her amors; for she calls to the males with lamentable cries,
which announce the most pressing necessity. But, as in the dog, from a
particular conformation of the male cat, this violent female never misses
conception. Her desires, which are excessive, are necessarily tempered with a
pain almost equally acute. The glans of the male cat is covered with large
sharp prickles. The intromission of it, therefore, must be extremely painful to
the female, who announces her sufferings by loud cries. The pain is so great,
that she instantly makes every effort to escape, and the male, to retain her,
is obliged to seize her by the neck with his teeth, and to compel submission
from the very female who had invited his embraces

In domestic animals, who are well fed and taken care of, multiplication is
greater than in those who continue in a wild state. Of this we have an example
in domestic dogs and cats, who produce several times every year; but, when in a
natural state, they produce only once in the same period. Domestic birds
furnish an example still more striking: Can the fecundity of any species of
wild birds be compared to that of a well fed hen, when properly served with a
cock? And, even in the human species, what a vast difference between the scanty
propagation of savages, and the immense population of civilized nations, under
the administration of a wise government? But we here confine ourselves to the
fecundity natural to animals in full possession of liberty, the relative
fertility of whom is exhibited in the following Table, from which some
important conclusions may be drawn.

TABLE of the Relative Fecundity of ANIMALS.
Names. Age at which males can engender, and females produce. Times of
gestation. Number of young produced at a litter. Age at which males cease to
engender, and females to produce. MALE. FEMALE. MALE. FEMALE. Years. Years.
Years. Years. Elephant 30 30 2 years 1 in 3 or 4 years lives 200 Rhinoceros 15
or 20 15 or 20.... 1 lives 70 or 80 Hippopotamus............ 1....
Walrus........ 9 months 1.... Camel 4 4 1 year nearly 1 lives 40 or 50
Dromedary 4 4 idem 1 lives 40 or 50 Horse 2 2 11 months 1, sometimes 2 at 25 or
30 at 18 or 20 Zebra 2 2 11 ditto 1, rarely 2 at 25 or 30 at 18 or 20 Ass 2 2
11 do. and more 1, rarely 2 at 25 or 30 at 25 or 30 Buffalo 3 3 9 months 1
lives 15 or 18 Ox 2 1 9 ditto 1, rarely 2 at 9 at 9 Stag 1 1 8 do. and more 1,
rarely 2 lives 30 or 35 Rain-deer 2 2 8 months 1 lives 16 Lama 3 3.... 1,
rarely 2 at 12 at 12 Man 14 12 9 months 1, sometimes 2 Large apes 3 3.... 1,
sometimes 2 Mouflon 1 1 5 ditto 1, sometimes 2, twice a year in hot climates at
8 at 10 or 12 Saiga 1 1 5 months 1, sometimes 2 lives 15 or 20 Roebuck 1 2 5
ditto 1, 2, sometimes 3 lives 12 or 15 Chamois goat 1 1 5 ditto 1, 2, rarely 3
lives 20 Goat 1 7 months 5 ditto 1, 2, rarely 3, and never above 4 at 7 at 7
Sheep 1 1 5 ditto 1, sometimes 2, twice a year, in warm climates at 8 at 10 or
12 Seal........ several months 2 or 3 Bear 2 2 ditto 1, 2, 3, 4, and never
above 5 lives 20 or 25 Badger............ 3 or 4 Lion 2 2.... 3 or 4 once a
year lives 20 or 25 Leopards and Tiger 2 2.... 4 or 5 once a year Wolf 2 2 73
days or more 5, 6, to 9, once a year at 15 or 20 at 15 or 20 Dog in a natural
state 9 or 10 months 9 or 10 months 63 days 3, 4, 5, 6 at 15 at 15
Isatis........ 63 days 6 and 7 Fox 1 1 In season in winter, and produces in
April 3, 4, to 6 at 10 or 11 at 10 or 11 Jackal............ 2, 3, or 4 Cat in a
natural state before 1 before 1 56 days 4, 5, or 6 at 9 at 9 Martin 1 1 56
days, it is said 3, 4, and 6 at 8 or 10 at 8 or 10 Pine Weasel 1 1 idem 3, 4,
and 6 at 8 or 10 at 8 or 10 Polecat 1 1 idem 3, 4, and 5 gener. dur. life prod.
during life Weasel 1st year 1 st year.... 3, 4, and 5 idem idem Ermine idem
idem.... idem idem idem Squirrel 1 1 copulates in March, and produces in May 3
or 4 idem idem Flying Squirrel............ 3 or 4 Hedgehog 1 1 40 days 3, 4,
and 5 Dormice 1st year 1 st year.... 3, 4, and 5 lives 6 Musk Rats............
4, 5, or 6 Opossums............ 4, 5, 6, and 7 Hogs 1 year or 9 mos. 1 year or
9 mos. 4 months 10, 12, 15, to 20, twice a year at 15 at 15
Armadillos............ 4 several times a year Hare 1st year 1st year 30 or 31
days 2, 3, 4, several times a year lives 7 or 8 Rabbit 5 or 6 months 5 or 6
months idem 4, 5, to 8, several times a year idem Ferret 1st year 1st year 40
days 5, 6, to 9, twice a year during life Rats idem idem 5 or 6 weeks 5 or 6
several times a year idem Field Mice idem idem 1 month or 5 weeks 9 or 10
several times a year Mouse idem idem idem 5 or 6 several times a year idem
Brown Rat idem idem.... 12 to 19 thrice a year idem Guinea pig 5 or 6 weeks 5
or 6 weeks 3 weeks eight times a year; 1st litter 4 or 5; 2d, 5 or 6; and the
others 7, 8, to 11 lives 6 or 7, and produces during life

This is the order in which Nature has presented to us the different degrees of
fecundity in quadrupeds; and from it we perceive, that this fecundity
diminishes in proportion to the magnitude of the animal. In general, this same
scale of fecundity extends to all the other tribes of animated Nature. Small
birds are more prolific than the larger kinds. The same thing holds in fishes,
and perhaps in insects. But, confining our remarks to quadrupeds alone, it
appears from the above table, that the hog is the only exception to the general
rule; for, from the size of his body, he should be ranked with those animals
which produce only two or three, once in twelve months, while, in fact, he is
equally prolific with the small quadrupeds.

This table contains all that is known with regard to the fertility of pure
species. But the fecundity of mixed species, which is always less than that of
the pure, merits particular attention. The reason will be apparent, by
supposing, for example, that all the males in the horse species, and all the
she-asses, or, rather, all the jack-asses and all the mares, were destroyed: In
this case, those mixed animals alone, which we call mules and bardeaux, would
be produced; and the number brought forth would be much fewer than that of
horses or asses; because the natural conformities or relations between the
horse and she-ass, or between the jack-ass and mare, are less than between the
horse and mare, or the male and female ass. It is the number of conformities
and dissimilarities which constitutes or distinguishes species; and, since the
species of the ass has at all times been separated from that of the horse, it
is apparent, that, by mixing these two species, whether by means of females or
males, we diminish the number of conformities which constitute the species.
Hence the males will engender and the females produce seldomer, and with more
difficulty; and even those mixed species, if their conformities were fewer,
would become entirely barren. Mules of every kind, therefore, must be rare;
because it is only from being deprived of its natural female, that any animal
will intermix with a female of a different species. Even when mongrel animals
approach each other with some degree of warmth, their produce is neither so
certain nor so frequent as in pure species, where the number of conformities is
greater. Now, the produce of mixed species will be less frequent, in proportion
to the infecundity of the pure species from whom they proceed; and the produce
of animals proceeding from mixed species will always diminish in proportion as
they recede from the original stock; because the conformities between them and
any other animal are augmented. For example, I am persuaded, from the reasons
above assigned, that an intercourse between two bardeaux would be abortive.
Besides, these animals proceed from two species which are not very fertile, and
are also under the influence of the same causs which often prevent the she-ass
from conceiving with her own male. I am more uncertain with regard to the
sterility of mules properly so called; because they are not liable to the last
cause of barrenness; for, as the mare conceives more easily than the she-ass,
and the jack-ass is more ardent than the horse, their respective prolific
powers are greater, and their produce not so rare as that of the she-ass and
horse. The mules, of course, will be less barren than the bardeaux. I suspect,
however, that two mules never engender; and I presume, even from the examples
of fertile mules, that they owe their impregnation to the ass, rather than to
the mule; for we ought not to regard the he-mule as the natural male of the
she-mule, though they both have the same name, or rather, differ only in sex.

To explain this matter, let us suppose an order of kindred in species, like
that which takes place in families. The horse and mare will be brother and
sister in species, and parents in the first degree. It is the same with the
male and female ass. But, if the male ass is given to the mare, they are only
counsins in species, or kindred in the second degree. The mule produced by
them, participating one half of both species, will be removed to the third
degree of kindred. Hence the male and female mule, though proceeding from the
same father and mother, instead of being brother and sister in species, are
only kindred in the fourth degree; and, of course, will produce more
difficultly between themselves, than the jack-ass and mare, who are kindred
species in the second degree. For the same reason, the male and female mules
will not produce so easily between themselves, as with the mare or ass; because
the kindred of the latter in species is only in the third degree, while that of
the former is in the fourth degree. The infecundity, which appears in the
second degree, should be more conspicuous in the third, and perhaps absolute in
the fourth.

In general, kindred of species is one of those mysteries of Nature, which man
can never unravel, without a long continued and difficult series of
experiments. How can we otherwise learn, than by the union of different species
of animals many thousand times repeated, the degree of their kindred? Is the
ass more allied to the horse than the zebra? Does the wolf approach nearer to
the dog than the fox or jackal? At what distance from man shall we place the
large apes, who resemble him so perfectly in conformation of body? Are all the
species of animals the same now that they were orginally? Has not their number
augmented, instead of being diminished? Have not the feeble species been
destroyed by the stronger, or by the tyranny of man, the number of whom has
become a thousand times greater than that of any other large animal? What
relations can be established between kindred species, and another kindred still
better known, that of different races in the same species? Does not a race,
like the mixed species, proceed from an anomalous individual, which forms the
original stock? In the dog species, there is, perhaps, a race so rare, that it
is more difficult to procreate than the mixed species proceeding from the ass
and mare. How many questions does this subject admit of; and how few of them
are we in a condition to resolve? How many facts must be discovered before we
can even form probable conjectures? However, instead of being discouraged, the
philosopher ought to applaud Nature, even when she is most mysterious, and to
rejoice that, in proportion as he removes one part of her veil, she exhibits an
immensity of other objects, all worthy of his researches. For, what we already
know ought to point out what may still be known. There is no boundary to the
human intellect. It extends in proportion as the universe is displayed. Hence
man can and ought to attempt every thing: He wants nothing but time to enable
him to obtain universal knowledge. By multiplying his observations, he might
foresee all the phenomenon and all the events of Nature with equal certainty,
as if he deduced them from their immediate causs: And what enthusiasm can be
more pardonable, or rather more noble, than to believe that man is capable, by
his labors, to discover all the powers and mysteries of Nature!

These labors consist chiefly in making observations and experiments, from
which we discover new truths. For example, the union of animals of different
species, by which alone we can learn their kindred, has never been sufficiently
tried. The facts we have been able to collect concerning this union, whether
voluntary or forced, are so few, that we are not in a condition to ascertain
the existence of jumars. This name was first given to mules said to have
proceeded from the bull and mare; but it has likewise been applied to denote
mongrels alleged to have been procreated by the jack-ass and cow. Dr Shaw
tells us, that, in the provinces of Tunis and Algiers, 'there is a little
serviceable beast of burden, called Kumrah, begot betwixt an ass and a cow.
That which I saw at Algiers (where it was not looked upon as a rarity) was
single hoofed like the ass, but distinguished from it in having a sleeker skin,
with the tail and the head (though without horns) in fashion of the dam's
Shaw's Travels, p. 166.
.

Thus we have already two kinds of jumars, the one proceeding from the bull and
mare, and the other from the jack-ass and cow. A third is mentioned by Merolle,
and is pretended to proceed from the bull and she-ass. 'There was a beast of
burden which proceeds from the bull and she-ass, and is obtained by covering
the ass with a cow's skin, in order to deceive the bull Voyage de Merolle au
Congo, en 1682.
.'

But I am equally doubtful concerning the existence of all the three kinds of
jumar; though I pretend not to deny the possibility of the fact. I have even
enumerated some facts which prove an actual copulation between animals of very
different species: But their embraces were ineffectual. Nothing seems to be
more remote from the amiable character of the dog than the brutal manners and
instinct of the hog; and the form of their bodies is as different as their
natural dispositions. I have seen, however, two examples of a violent
attachment between a dog and a sow. Even during this very summer 1774, a large
spaniel discovered a violent passion for a sow which was in season: They were
shut up together for several days; and all the domestics were witnesses of the
mutual ardour of these two animals. The dog exerted many violent efforts to
copulate with the sow; but the dissimilarity of their organs prevented their
union This fact happened in the house of M. le Conte de la Feuillee, in
Burgundy.
. The same thing happened some years before At Billy, near Chanceau in Burgundy.
. Hence animals, though of very different species, may contract a strong
affection to each other; for it is certain, that, in the above examples,
nothing prevented the union of the dog and sow but the conformation of their
organs. It is not equally certain, however, that, if consummation had taken
place, production would have followed. It often happens, that animals of
different species spontaneously unite. These voluntary unions ought to be
prolific, since they imply that the natural repugnance, which is the chief
obstacle, is surmounted, and also a conformity between the organs. No
fertility, however, has resulted from such commixtures. Of this an example
recently passed before my own eyes. In 1767, and some succeeding years, the
miller at my estate of Buffon kept a mare and a bull in the same stable, who
contracted such a passion for each other, that, as often as the mare came in
season, the bull covered her three or four times every day. These embraces were
repeated during several years, and gave the master of the animals great hopes
of seeing their offspring. Nothing, however, resulted from them. All the
inhabitants of the place were witnesses to this fact, which proves, that, in
our climate at least, the bull cannot procreate with the mare, and renders this
first kind of jumar extremely suspicious. I have not equal evidence to oppose
to the second kind, which Dr Shaw says proceeds from the jack-ass and cow. I
acknowledge, that, though the dissimilarities in structure appear to be nearly
equal in both cases, the positive testimony of a traveller so well informed as
Dr Shaw, seems to give a greater degree of probability to the existence of this
second kind of jumar than we have for the first. With regard to the third
jumar, proceeding from the bull and she-ass, I am persuaded, notwithstanding
the authority of Merolle, that it has no more existence than the one supposed
to be produced by the bull and mare. The nature of the bull is still farther
removed from that of the she-ass, than from that of the mare: And the
unfertility of the mare and bull, which is ascertained by the above examples,
should apply with greater force to the union of the bull and ass.

The NOMENCLATURE of APES.
TO teach children, and to address men, are two very different tasks. Children
receive, without examination, and even with avidity, the arbitrary and the
real, the true and the false, whenever they are presented to them under the
form of precepts. Men, on the contrary, reject with contempt all precepts which
are not founded on solid principles. We shall, therefore, adopt none of those
methodical distributions by which, under the appellation of Ape, a multitude of
animals, belonging to very different species, have been huddled together in one
indiscriminate mass.

What I call an ape is an animal without a tail, whose face is flat, whose
teeth, hands, fingers, and nails resemble those of man, and who, like him, walk
erect on two feet. This definition, derived from the nature of the animal
itself, and from its relations to man, excludes all animals who have tails; all
those who have prominent faces or long muzzles; all those who have crooked or
sharp claws; and all those who walk more willingly on four than on two legs.
According to this precise idea, let us examine how many species of animals
ought to be ranked under the denomination of ape. The ancients knew only one.
The pithecos of the Greeks, and the simia of the Latins, is a true ape, and was
the subject upon which Aristotle, Pliny, and Galen instituted all the physical
relations they discovered between that animal and man. But this ape, or pigmy
of the ancients, which so strongly resembles man in external structure, and
still more strongly in its internal organization, differs from him, however, by
a quality, which, though relative in itself, is not the less essential. This
quality is magnitude. The stature of man, in general, exceeds five feet; that
of the pithecus, or pigmy, never rises above one fourth of this height. Hence,
if this ape had been still more similar to man, the ancients would have been
justified for regarding it only as an homunculus, an imperfect dwarf, a pigmy,
capable of combating with cranes; while man knew how to tame the elephant and
conquer the lion.

But, since the discovery of the southern regions of Africa and India, we have
found another ape possessing this quality of magnitude; an ape as tall and as
strong as man, and equally ardent for women as for its own females; an ape who
knows how to bear arms, to attack his enemies with stones, and to defend
himself with clubs. Besides, he resembles man still more than the pigmy; for,
independent of his having no tail, of his flat face, of the resemblance of his
arms, hands, toes, and nails to ours, and of his walking constantly on end, he
has a kind of visage with features which approach to those of the human
countenance, a beard on his chin, and no more hair on his body than men have,
when in a state of nature. Hence the inhabitants of his country, the civilized
Indians, have not hesitated to associate him with the human species, under the
denomination of Orang-outang, or wild man; while the Negroes, almost equally
wild, and as ugly as these apes, who imagine not that civilization exalts our
nature, have given it the appellation of Pongo, which is the name of a beast,
and has no relation to man. This orang-outang or pongo is only a brute, but a
brute of a kind so singular, that man cannot behold it without contemplating
himself, and without being thoroughly convinced that his body is not the most
essential part of his nature.

Thus, we have discovered two animals, the pigmy and the orang-outang, to which
the name of ape ought to be applied. There is a third, to which, though more
deformed both in relation to man and to the ape, this appellation cannot be
refused. This animal, which till now was unknown, and was brought from the East
Indies, under the name of gibbon, walks on end, like the other two, and has a
flat face. He likewise wants a tail. But his arms, instead of being
proportioned to the height of his body, like those of man, the orang-outang, or
the pigmy, are so enormously long, that, when standing on his two feet, he
touches the ground with his hands, without bending either his body or limbs.
This ape is the third and last to which the name ought to be applied: In this
genus, he constitutes a singular or monstrous species, like the race of
thick-legged men, said to inhabit the island of Saint-Thomas See the
Dissertation on the Varieties of the Human Species, Vol. III. of this work.
.

After the apes, another tribe of animals present themselves, to which we shall
give the generic name of baboon. To distinguish them more accurately from the
other kinds, let it be remarked, that the baboon has a short tail, a long face,
a broad high muzzle, canine teeth, proportionally larger than those of man, and
callosities on its buttocks. By this definition, we exclude from the baboon
tribe all the apes, who have no tail; all the monkeys, whose tails are as long
or longer than their bodies; and all those who have thin, sharp pointed
muzzles. The ancients had no proper names for these animals. Aristotle alone
seems to have pointed out one of the baboons under the name simia porcaria The
denomination Simia Porcaria, which is employed by no other author but
Aristotle, was not improperly applied to denote the baboon; for I find in the
works of several travelers, who probably never read Aristotle, the muzzle of
the baboon compared to the snout of a hog. Besides, these animals have some
resemblance in the form of their bodies.
, though he has given but a very imperfect idea of the animal. The Italians
first called it babuino; the Germans, bavion; the French, babouin; the British,
baboon; and all the modern writers of Latin, papio. We shall call it baboon, to
distinguish it from the other species which have since been discovered in the
southern regions of Africa and India. We are acquainted with three species of
these animals: 1. The baboon properly so called, which is found in Lybia,
Arabia, etc. and is probably the simia porcaria of Aristotle. 2. The mandrill,
or ribbed-nose, is still larger than the baboon, has a violet colored face,
the nose and cheeks ribbed with deep oblique furrows, and is found in Guinea
and in the warmest provinces of Africa. 3. The ouanderou, which is smaller than
the baboon and mandrill; its body is thinner, its head and face are surrounded
with a kind of long bushy mane, and is found in Ceylon, Malabar, and other
southern regions of India. Thus we have properly defined three species of apes,
and three species of baboons, which are all very different from one another.

But, as Nature knows none of our definitions, as she has not classed her
productions by bundles or genera, and as her progress is always gradual and
marked by minute shades, some intermediate animal should be found between the
ape and baboon. This intermediate species actually exists, and is the animal
which we call magot, or the Barbary ape. It occupies a middle station between
our two definitions. It forms the shade between the apes and baboons. It
differs from the first by having a long muzzle and large canine teeth; and,
from the second, because it actually wants the tail, though it has an appendix
of skin, which has the appearance of a very small tail. Of course, it is
neither an ape nor a baboon, but, at the same time, partakes of the nature of
both. This animal, which is very common in Higher Egypt, as well as in Barbary,
was known to the ancients. The Greeks and Romans called it cynocephalus,
because its muzzle resembled that of a dog. Let us now arrange these animals in
their proper order: The orang-outang is the first ape; the pigmy the second;
and the gibbon, though different in figure, the third; the cynocephalus or
magot the fourth ape, or the first baboon; the papio is the first baboon; the
mandrill the second; and the ouanderou, or little baboon, the third. This order
is neither arbitrary nor fictitious, but agreeable to the scale of Nature.

After the apes and baboons, come the guenons, or monkeys; that is, animals
resembling the apes and baboons, but which have tails as long, or longer than
their bodies. The word guenon has, for some ages, had two acceptations
different from that we have here given it: It is generally employed to signify
small apes, and sometimes to denote the female of the ape. But, more anciently,
we called singes, or magots, the apes without a tail, and guenons, or mones,
those which had long tails. This fact appears from the works of some travelers
In Senegal there are several species of apes, as the guenons, with a long tail;
and the magots, who have no tail; Voyage de le Maire, p. 101. -- In the
mountains of South America, there is a kind of mones, or long-tailed monkeys,
which the savages call cacuyen. They are of the same size with the common kind,
from which they differ only by having a beard on their chin. -- Along with
these mones, there are found a number of small yellow animals, called sagouins;
Singularites da la Fr. Antarct. par Thevet, p. 103.
in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. The word guenon is probably
derived from kebos, or kepos, which the Greeks employed to denote the
long-tailed apes. These kebes, or guenons, are smaller and weaker than the apes
and baboons. They are easily distinguishable from one another by this
difference, and particularly by their long tail. With equal ease, they may be
distinguished from the makis or maucaucos; because they have not a sharp
muzzle, and instead of six cutting teeth, like the makis, they have only four,
like the apes and baboons. We know eight species of guenons; and, to prevent
confusion, we shall bestow on each a proper name: 1. The macaque, or
hare-lipped monkey; 2. The patas, or red monkey; 3. The malbrouk; 4. The
mangabey, or monkey with the upper eyelids of a pure white color; 5. The moon, or varied monkey; 6 The callitrix, or green monkey: 7. The moustac, or
whiskered monkey; 8. The talapoin; 9. The douc, or monkey of Cochinchina. The
ancient Greeks knew only two of these guenons, or long-tailed monkeys, namely,
the moon and the callitrix, who are natives of Arabia and the northern parts of
Africa. They had no idea of the other kinds; because these are only found in
the southern provinces of Africa and the East Indies, countries entirely
unknown in the days of Aristotle. This great philosopher, and the Greeks in
general, were too wise to confound beings by common, and, therefore, equivocal
names. They called the ape without a tail pithecos, and the monkey with a long
tail, kebos. As they knew these animals to be distinct species, they gave to
each a proper name, derived from their most striking characters. All the apes
and baboons which they knew, namely, the pigmy, the cynocephalus, or magot, and
the simia porcaria, or papio, have their hair nearly of a uniform color. But
the monkey, which we have called moan, and the Greeks kebos, has hair of
different colors, and is generally known by the name of the varied ape. This
species of monkey was most common, and best known in the days of Aristotle;
and, from its most distinguished character, he called it kebos, which, in
Greek, signifies varieties in color. Thus all the animals belonging to the
class of apes, baboons, and monkeys, mentioned by Aristotle, are reduced to
four, the pithecos, the cynocephalos, the simia porcaria, and the kebos; which
we believe to be the pigmy, the magot, or Barbary ape, the baboon, and the moon, or varied monkey, not only because they agree with the characters given
of them by Aristotle, but likewise because the other species must have been
unknown to the ancients, since they are natives of countries into which the
Greek travelers had never penetrated.

Two or three centuries after Aristotle, we find, in the Greek writers, two new
names, callithrix and cercopithecos, both relative to the guenons, or
long-tailed monkeys. In proportion as discoveries were made of the southern
regions of Africa and Asia, we found new animals, and other species of monkeys:
And, as most of these monkeys had not, like the kebos, various colors, the
Greeks invented the generic name cercopithecos, or tailed ape, to denote all
the species of monkeys or apes with long tails; and, having remarked, among
these new species, a monkey with hair of a lively greenish color, they called
it callithrix, which signifies beautiful hair. This callithrix is found in the
south part of Mauritania, and in the neighborhood of Cape de Verd, and is
commonly known by the name of the green ape.

With regard to the other seven species of monkeys, mentioned above under the
appellations of makaque, patas, malbrouk, mangabey, moustac, talapoin, and
douc, they were unknown to the Greeks and Latins. The makaque is a native of
Congo; the patas, of Senegal; the mangabey, of Madagascar; the malbrouk, of
Bengal; the moustac, of Guinea; the talapoin, of Siam; and the douc, of
Cochinchina. All these territories were equally unknown to the ancients.

As the progress of Nature is uniform and gradual, we find between the baboons
and monkeys an intermediate species, like that of the magot between the apes
and baboons. The animal which fills this interval has a great resemblance to
the monkeys, particularly to the makaque; its muzzle, at the same time, is very
broad, and its tail short, like that of the baboons. Being ignorant of its
name, we have called it maimon, or pig-tailed baboon, to distinguish it from
the others. It is a native of Sumatra. Of all the monkeys or baboons, it alone
has a naked tail; and, for this reason, several authors have given it the
denomination of the pig-tailed, or rat-tailed ape.

We have now enumerated all the animals of the Old World, to whom the common
name of ape has been applied, though they belong not only to different species,
but to different genera. To augment the confusion, the same names of ape,
cynocephalus, kebos, and cercopithecos, which had been invented by the Greeks
fifteen centuries ago, have been bestowed on animals peculiar to the New World,
though so recently discovered. They never dreamed that none of the African or
East Indian animals had any existence in the southern regions of the New
Continent. In America, we have discovered animals with hands and fingers. This
similarity was alone sufficient to procure to them the name of apes, without
considering that, for the transference of a name, identity of genus, and even
of species, is necessary. Now, these American animals, of which we shall make
two classes, under the appellations of sapajous, or monkeys with prehensile
tails; and sagoins, or monkeys with long tails, which are not prehensile, or
want the faculty of laying hold of any object, are very different from the apes
of Asia and Africa; and, in the same manner, as no apes, baboons, or monkeys
are to be found in the New World, there are neither sapajous nor sagoins in the
Old. Though we have already given a general view of these facts, in our
dissertation concerning the animals of both Continents, we can now prove them
in a more particular manner, and demonstrate, that, of seventeen species, to
which all the animals of the Old World called apes, may be reduced, and, of
twelve or thirteen in the New World, to whom this name has been transferred,
none of them are the same, or to be found equally in both Worlds; for, of the
seventeen species in the Old Continent, three or four apes must first be
retrenched, who certainly exist not in America, and to whom the sapajous and
sagoins have no resemblance. In the second place, three or four baboons must
likewise be retrenched: They are larger than the sapajous and sagoins, and also
very different in figure. There remain only nine monkeys with whom any
comparison can be instituted. Now, all these monkeys, as well as the apes and
baboons, have general and particular characters, which separate them entirely
from the sapajous and sagoins. The first of these characters is to have naked
buttocks, and natural callosities peculiar to these parts: The second is to
have abajoues, or pouches under the cheeks, in which they can keep their
victuals. The third is to have a narrow partition between the nostrils, and the
apertures of the nostrils themselves placed in the under part of the nose, like
those of man. The sapajous and sagoins have none of these characters. The
partition between their nostrils is always very thick; the apertures of their
nostrils are situated in the sides of the nose, and not in the under part of
it. They have hair on their buttocks, and no callosities. They have no pouches
under the cheeks. Hence they differ from the monkeys not only in species, but
in genus, since they possess none of the general characters which are common to
the whole tribe of monkeys. This difference of genus necessarily implies
greater differences in species, and shows that these animals are very remote
from each other.

It is with much impropriety, therefore, that the names ape and monkey have
been applied to the sapajous and sagoins. We must preserve their names, and,
instead of associating them with the apes, we should begin by comparing them
with one another. These two tribes differ from each other by a remarkable
character: All the sapajous use their tail as a finger to hang upon branches,
or to lay hold of any object they cannot reach with their hand. The sagoins, on
the contrary, have not the power of employing their tail in this manner. Their
face, ears, and hair are also different: We may, therefore, separate them into
two distinct genera. In giving the history of the species, I shall avoid all
those denominations which can only apply to the apes, baboons, and monkeys, and
preserve the names they receive in their native country.

We are acquainted with six or seven species of sapajous, and six of sagoins,
most of which have some varieties. We have carefully searched all the writings
of travelers in order to discover the proper name of each species; because the
names they receive in the places they inhabit, generally point out some
peculiar characteristic, which alone is sufficient to distinguish them from one
another.

With regard to the varieties, which, in this class of animals, are perhaps
more numerous than the species, we shall endeavor to refer each of them to
their proper kinds. We have had forty of these animals alive, each of which
differed more or less from one another; and to us it appears that the whole may
be reduced to thirty species, namely, three apes, and an intermediate species
between them and the baboons; three baboons, and an intermediate species
between them and the monkeys; nine monkeys; seven sapajous; and six sagoins.
All the others, or at least most of them, ought to be regarded as varieties
only. But, as we are uncertain whether some of these varieties may not be
distinct species, we shall endeavor to give all of them proper names.

On this occasion, let us consider terrestrial animals, some of which have a
great resemblance to man, in a new point of view. The whole have improperly
received the general name of quadrupeds. If the exceptions were few, we would
not have found fault with the application of this name. It was formerly
remarked, that our definitions and denominations, however general, never
comprehend the whole; that beings always exist which elude the most cautious
definitions which ever were invented; that intermediate beings are always
discovered; that several of them, though apparently holding a middle station,
escape from the list; and that the general names, under which we mean to
include them, are incomplete; because Nature should only be considered by
unities, and not by aggregates; because man has invented general denominations
with the sole view of aiding his memory, and supplying the defects of his
understanding; and because he afterward foolishly considered these general
names as realities; and, in fine, because he has endeavored to comprehend
under them beings, and even whole classes of beings, which required different
appellations. I can give an example, without departing from the class of
quadrupeds, which, of all animals, we are best acquainted with, and, of course,
were in a condition to have bestowed on them the most precise denominations.

The name quadruped supposes that the animal has four feet. If it wants two
feet, like the manati; if it has arms and hands, like the ape; or if it has
wings, like the bat, it is not a quadruped. Hence this general term, when
applied to these animals, is abused. To obtain precision in words, the ideas
they present must be strictly true. If we had a term for two hands similar to
that which denotes two feet, we might then say that man was the only biped and
bimanus, because he alone has two hands and two feet; that the manati is a
bimonus; that the bat is only a biped; and that the ape is a quadrimanus, or
four-handed animal. Let us now apply these new denominations to all the
particular beings to which they belong, and we shall find, that, from about two
hundred animals who go under the common name of quadrupeds, thirty-five species
of apes, baboons, monkeys, sapajous, sagoins, and makis, must be retrenched,
because they are quadrimani, or four-handed; and that to these thirty-five
species, the loris, or tailless maucauco, the Virginian, murine, and Mexican
opossum, the Egyptian and woolly jerboa's, etc. should be added, because they
are fourhanded like the apes and monkeys. Thus the list of four-handed animals
being at least forty species, the real number of quadrupeds is one fifth
diminished. We must likewise retrench twelve or fifteen species of bipeds,
namely, the bats, whose fore-feet are rather wings than feet, and likewise
three or four jerboa's, because they can walk on their hind feet only, the
fore-feet being too short. If we subtract also the manati, which has no hind
feet, the arctic and Indian walrus, and the seals, to whom the hind feet are
useless; and, if we still retrench those animals which use their fore-feet like
hands, as the bears, the marmots, the coati's the agouti's, the squirrels, the
rats, and many others, the denomination of quadruped will appear to be applied
improperly to more than one half of these animals. The whole and cloven-hoofed
are indeed the only real quadrupeds. When we descend to the digitated class, we
find four-handed, or ambiguous quadrupeds, who use their fore-feet as hands,
and ought to be separated or distinguished from the others. Of whole-hoofed
animals, there are three species, the horse, the ass, and the zebra. If to
these we add the elephant, the rhinoceros, the hippopotamus, and the camel,
whose feet, though terminated by nails, are solid, and serve the animals for
walking only, we shall have seven species to which the name of quadruped is
perfectly applicable. The number of cloven-hoofed animals greatly exceeds that
of the wholehoofed. The oxen, the sheep, the goats, the antilopes, the bubalus,
the lama, the pacos, the the giraffe, the elk, the rain-deer, the stag, the
fallow-deer, the roebuck, etc. are all clovenfooted, and constitute about forty
species. Thus we have already fifty animals, ten whole and forty cloven-hoofed,
to whom the name quadruped is properly applied. In the digitated animals, the
lion, tiger, panther, leopard, lynx, cat, wolf, dog, fox, hyaena, badger,
polecat, weasels, ferret, porcupines, hedgehogs, armadillos, ant-eaters, and
hogs, which last constitute the shade between the digitated and clovenfooted
tribes, form a number consisting of more than forty species, to which the term
of quadruped applies with perfect precision; because, though their fore-feet be
divided into four or five toes, they are never used as hands. But all the other
digitated species, who use their fore-feet in carrying food to their mouths,
are not, in strict propriety of language, quadrupeds. These species, which
likewise amount to forty, make an intermediate class between quadrupeds and
four-handed animals, being neither the one nor the other. Hence, to more than a
fourth of our animals, the name of quadruped does not apply: and, to more than
a half of them, the application of it is incomplete.

The four-handed animals fill the interval between man and the animals; and the
two-handed species constitute a mean term in the distance between man and the
cetaceous tribes. The bipeds with wings form the shade between quadrupeds and
birds; and the digitated species, who use their fore-feet as hands, fill the
whole space between the quadrupeds and the fourhanded kinds. But I will pursue
this subject no farther: However useful it may be for acquiring a distinct
knowledge of animals, it is still more so by affording a fresh proof, that all
our definitions or general terms want precision, when applied to the objects or
beings which they represent.

But why are these definitions and general terms, which appear to be the most
brilliant exertions of the human intellect, so defective in their application?
Does the error necessarily arise from the narrow limits of our understanding?
Or, rather, does it not proceed solely from our incapacity of combining and
perceiving at one time a great number of objects? Let us compare the works of
Nature with those of man. Let us examine how both operate, and inquire whether
the mind, however acute, can follow the same route, without loosing itself in
the immensity of space, in the obscurity of time, or in the infinity of related
beings. When man directs his mind to any object, if his perceptions be
accurate, he takes the straight line, runs over the smallest space, and employs
the least possible time in accomplishing his end. What an expense of thought,
how many combinations are necessary to avoid those deceitful and fallacious
roads which at first present themselves in such numbers, that the choice of the
right path requires the nicest discrnment? This path, however, is not beyond
the reach of the human intellect, which can proceed without deviating from the
straight line. The mind is enabled to arrive at a point by means of a line;
and, if another point must be gained, it can only be attained by another line.
The train of our ideas is a delicate thread, which extends in length, without
any other dimensions. Nature, on the contrary, never moves a step which extends
not on all sides, and runs at once through the three dimensions of length,
breadth, and thickness. While man reaches but one point, Nature accomplishes a
solid, by penetrating the whole parts which compose a mass. In bestowing form
on brute matter, our statuaries, by the union of art and time, are enabled to
make a surface which exactly represents the outside of an object. Every point
of this surface requires a thousand combinations. Their genius is directly
exerted upon as many lines as there are strokes in the figure. The smallest
deviation would be a deformity. This marble, so perfect that it seems to
breathe, is, of course, only a multitude of points at which the artist arrives
by a long succession of labor; because human genius, being unable to seize
more than one dimension at the same time, and our senses reaching no farther
than surfaces, we cannot penetrate matter: But Nature, in a moment, puts every
particle in motion. She produces forms by exertions almost instantaneous. She
at once developes them in all their dimensions. As soon as her movements reach
the surface, the penetrating forces with which she is animated operate
internally. The smallest atom, when she chooses to employ it, is instantly
compelled to obey. Hence she acts, at the same time, on all sides, before,
behind, above, below, on the right and left; and, consequently, she embraces
not only the surface, but every particle of the mass. How different likewise is
the product? What comparison is there between a statue and an organized body?
How unequal, at the same time, are the powers, how disproportioned the
instruments? Man can employ only the power he possesses. Limited to a small
quantity of motion, which he can only communicate by the mode of impulsion, his
exertions are confined to surfaces; because, in general, the impulsive force is
only transmitted by superficial contact. He neither sees nor touches more than
the surfaces of bodies; and, when he wishes to attain a more intimate
knowledge, though he opens and divides, still he sees and touches nothing more
than their surfaces. To penetrate the interior parts of bodies, he would
require a portion of that force which acts upon the mass, or, of gravity, which
is Nature's chief instrument. If man could employ this penetrating force as he
does that of impulsion, or if he had a sense relative to it, he would be
enabled to perceive the essence of matter, and to arrange small portions of it,
in the same manner as Nature operates at large. It is owing to the want of
instruments, therefore, that human art cannot approach that of Nature. His
figures, his pictures, his designs, are only surfaces, or imitations of
surfaces; because the images he receives by his senses are all superficial, and
he has no mode of giving them a body.

What is true with regard to the arts, applies likewise to the sciences. The
latter, however, are not so much limited; because the mind is their chief
instrument, and because, in the former, it is subordinate to the senses. But,
in the sciences, the mind commands the senses as often as it is employed in
thinking and not in operating, in comparing and not in imitating. Now, the
mind, though bound up by the senses, though often deceived by their fallacious
reports, is neither diminished in its purity nor activity. Man, who naturally
loves knowledge, commenced by rectifying and demonstrating the errors of the
senses. He has treated them as mechanical instruments, the effects of which
must be submitted to the test of experiment. Proceeding thus with the balance
in one hand, and the compass in the other, he has measured both time and space.
He has cognised the whole outside of Nature; and, being unable to penetrate her
internal parts by his senses, his deductions concerning them have been drawn
from comparison and analogy. He discovered that there exists in matter a
general force, different from that of impulsion, a force which falls not under
the cognizance of our senses, and which, though we are incapable of using it,
Nature employs as her universal agent. He has demonstrated, that this force
belongs equally to all matter, in proportion to its mass or real quantity; and
that its action extends to immense distances, decreasing as the spaces augment.
Then, turning his views upon living beings, he perceived that heat was another
force necessary to their production; that light was a matter endowed with
infinite elasticity and activity; that the formation and expansion of organized
bodies were effects of a combination of all these forces; that the extension
and growth of animals and vegetables follow the laws of the attractive force,
and are effected by an augmentation in the three dimensions at the same time;
and that a mould, when once formed, must, by these laws of affinity, produce a
succession of other moulds perfectly similar to the original. By combining
these attributes, common to the animal and vegetable, he recognized, that there
existed in both an inexhaustible, circulating store of organic substance; a
substance equally real as brute matter; a substance which continues always in a
live as the other does in a dead state; a substance universally diffused, which
passes from vegetables to animals by means of nutrition, returns from animals
to vegetables by the process of putrefaction, and maintains a perpetual
circulation for the animation of beings. He perceived, that these active
organic particles existed in all organized bodies; that they were combined, in
smaller or greater quantities, with dead matter; that they were more abundant
in animals, in whom every thing is alive, and more rare in vegetables, in which
death predominates, and life seems to be extinct, organization being surcharged
with brute matter; and that plants are, of course, deprived of progressive
motion, of heat, and of life, exhibiting no other quality of animation but
expansion and reproduction. Reflecting on the manner in which these last are
accomplished, he discovered that every living being is a mould that has the
power of assimilating the substances with which it is nourished; that growth is
an effect of this assimilation; that the development of a living body is not a
simple augmentation of volume, but an extension in all dimensions, a
penetration of new matter through all parts of the mass; that these parts, by
increasing proportionally to the whole, and the whole proportionally to the
parts, the form is preserved and continues always the same, till growth is
completed; that, when the body has acquired its full expansion, the same
matter, formerly employed in augmenting its volume, is returned, as
superfluous, from all the parts to which it had been assimilated, and, by
uniting in a common point, forms a new being perfectly similar to the first,
and, to attain the same dimensions, requires only to be developed by the same
mode of nutrition. He perceived that man, quadrupeds, cetaceous animals, birds,
reptiles, insects, trees, and herbs, were nourished, expanded, and reproduced
by the same law; and that the mode of their nutrition and generation, though
depending on the same general cause, appeared to be very different, because it
could not operate but in a manner relative to the form of each particular
species of being. Proceeding gradually in this investigation, he began, after a
sucession of ages, to compare objects. To distinguish them from each other, he
gave them particular names; and, to unite them under one point of view, he
invented general terms. Taking his own body as the physical model of all
animated beings, he measured, examined, and compared all their parts, and he
discovered that the form of every animal that breathes is nearly the same;
that, by dissecting an ape we may learn the anatomy of a man; that, taking
another animal, we always find the same fund of organization, the same senses,
the same viscera, the sames bones, the same flesh, the same motion of the
fluids, the same play and action of the solids. In all of them he found a
heart, veins, and arteries, and the same organs, circulation, respiration,
digestion, nutrition, and secretion; in all of them, he found a solid structure
composed of the same pieces, and nearly situated in the same manner. This plan
proceeds uniformly from man to the ape, from the ape to quadrupeds, from
quadrupeds to cetaceous animals, to birds, to fishes, and to reptiles: This
plan, I say, when well apprehended by the human intellect, exhibits a faithful
picture of animated Nature, and affords the most general as well as the most
simple view under which she can be considered: And, when we want to extend it,
and to pass from the animal to the vegetable, we perceive this plan, which had
at first varied only by shades, gradually degenerating from reptiles to
insects, from insects to worms, from worms to zoophytes, from zoophytes to
plants; and, though changed in all its external parts, still preserving the
same character, the principal features of which are nutrition, growth, and
reproduction. These features are common to all organized substances. They are
eternal and divine; and, instead of being effaced by time, it only renews and
renders them more conspicuous.

If, from this grand picture of resemblances exhibited in animated Nature, as
constituting but one family, we pass to that of the differences, where each
species claims a separate apartment, and a distinct portrait, we shall find,
that, with the exception of a few large kinds, such as the elephant, the
rhinoceros, the hippopotamus, the tiger, and the lion, which ought to have
particular frames, all the others seem to unite with their neighbors, and to
form groups of degraded similarities, or genera, represented by our nomeclators
in a network of figures, some of which are supported by the feet, others by
the teeth, by the hair, and others by relations still more minute: And, even
the apes, whose form seems to be most perfect, or approaches nearest to that of
man, present themselves in a group, and require the utmost attention to be
distinguished from each other; because the privilege of separate species
depends less on figure than magnitude; and man himself, though a distinct
species, and infinitely removed from that of all other animals, being only of a
middle size, has a greater number of neighboring species than the very large
kinds. In the history of the orang-outang, we shall find, that, if figure alone
be regarded, we might consider this animal as the first of apes, or the most
imperfect of men; because, except the intellect, the orang-outang wants nothing
that we possess, and, in his body, differs less from man that from the other
animals which receive the denomination of apes.

Hence mind, reflection, and language depend not on figure, or on the
organization of the body. These are endowments peculiar to man. The
orang-outang, though he neither thinks nor speaks, has a body, members, senses,
a brain, and a tongue perfectly similar to those of man: He counterfiets every
human movement; but her performs no action that is characteristic of man. This
imperfection is perhaps owing to want of education, or to an error in our
judgment. You compare, it may be said, an ape in the woods with a man in
polished society. But, in order to form a proper judgment of them, a savage man
and an ape should be viewed together; for we have no just idea of man in a pure
state of nature. The head covered with bristly hair, or with curled wool; the
face veiled with a long beard; two crescents of hairs still grosser, by their
length and prominency contract the front, and not only obscure the eyes, but
sink and round them like those of the brutes; the lips thick and protruded; the
nose flat; the aspect wild and stupid; the ears, the body, and the members
covered with hair; the breasts of the female long and flabby, and the skin of
her belly hanging down as far as her knees; the children wallowing in filth,
and crawling on their hands and feet; the father and mother sitting squat on
their hams, both hideous, and besmeared with corrupted grease. This sketch,
drawn from a savage Hottentot, is a flattering portrait; for the distance
between man in a pure state of nature and a Hottentot, is greater than between
a Hottentot and us. But, if we want to compare the ape to man, we must add the
relations of organization, the conformities of temperament, the vehement
appetite of the males for the females, the same structure of genitals in both
sexes, the periodic courses of the female, the voluntary or forced intermixture
of the Negresses with the apes, the produce of which has entered into both
species; and then consider, on the supposition that they are not the same, how
difficult it is to perceive the interval by which they are separated.

If our judgment were limited to figure alone, I acknowledge that the ape might
be regarded as a variety of the human species. The Creator has not formed man's
body on a model absolutely different from that of the mere animal. He has
comprehended the figure of man, as well as that of all other animals, under one
general plan. But, at the same time that he has given him a material form
similar to that of the ape, he has penetrated this animal body with a divine
spirit. If he had conferred the same privilege, not on the ape, but on the
meanest, and what appears to us to be the worst constructed animal, this
species would soon have become the rival of man; it would have excelled all the
other animals by thinking and speaking. Whatever resemblance, therefore, takes
place between the Hottentot and the ape, the interval which separates them is
immense; because the former is endowed with the faculties of thought and of
speech.

Who will ever be able to ascertain how the organization of an idiot differs
from that of another man? Yet the defect is certainly in the material organs,
since the idiot is likewise endowed with a soul. Now, as between one man and
another, where the whole structure is perfectly similar, a difference so small
that it cannot be perceived is sufficient to prevent thought, we should not be
surprised that it never appears in the ape, who is deprived of the necessary
principle.

The soul, in general, has a proper action totally independent of matter. But,
as its divine Author has been pleased to unite it to the body, the exercise of
its particular acts depends on the state of the material organs. This
dependence is apparent, not only from the case of idiots, but from people
affected with delirium, from sleep, from new born infants, who cannot think,
and from very old men, whom the power of thinking has forsaken. It is even
probable, that the chief effect of education consists not so much in
instructing the mind, or maturing its operations, as in modifying the material
organs, and bringing them into the most favorable state for the exercise of
the sentient principle. Now, there are two kinds of education, which ought to
be carefully distinguished, because their effects are extremely different; the
education of the individual, which is common to man and the other animals; and
the education of the species, which appertains to man alone. A young animal,
both from natural encitements and from example, learns, in a few weeks, to do
every thing its parents can perform. To an infant, several years are necessary
before it acquires this degree of perfection; because, when brought forth, it
is incomparably less advanced, weaker, and more imperfectly formed, than the
smaller animals. In early infancy, the mind is nothing, when compared to the
powers it will afterward acquire. In receiving individual education,
therefore, the infant is much slower than the brute; but, for this very reason,
it becomes susceptible of that of the species. The multiplicity of succors,
the continual cares, which this state of imbecility for a long time requires,
cherish and augment the attachment of the parents. In training the body, they
cultivate the mind. The time employed in strengthening the former gives an
advantage to the latter. The bodily powers of most animals are more advanced in
two months than those of the infant in two years. Hence the time employed in
bestowing on the infant its individual education is as twelve to one, without
estimating the fruits of what follows after this period, without considering
that animals separate from their parents as soon as they can provide for
themselves, and that, not long after this separation, they know each other no
more. All education ceases the moment that the aid of the parents become
unnecessary. This time of education being so short, its effects must be very
limited: It is even astonishing that the animals acquire, in two months, all
that is necessary for them during the rest of life: If we suppose that a child,
in an equal period, were strong enough to quit his parents, and never return to
them, would there be any perceptible difference between this infant and a
brute? However ingenious the parents, they would not have time sufficient to
modify and prepare his organs, or to establish the smallest communication of
thought between their minds and his. They could not excite his memory by
impressions frequently enough reiterated. They could not even mollify or unfold
the organs of speech. Before a child can pronounce a single word, his ears must
be struck many thousand times with the same sound; and, before he can make a
proper application of it, the same combination of the word and the object to
which it relates, must be many thousand times presented to him. Education,
therefore, which alone can develope the powers of the mind, must be
uninterruptedly continued for a long time. If stopped, not at two months, as in
the animals, but even at the age of one year, the mind of the infant, having
received no instruction, would remain inactive like that of the idiot, the
defect of whose organs prevents the reception of knowledge. This reasoning
would acquire redoubled strength, if the infant were born in a pure state of
nature, if it were confined to the sole tutorage of a Hottentot mother, and
were enabled by its bodily powers to separate from her at the age of two
months, would it not sink below the condition of the idiot, and, with regard to
its material part, be entirely levelled with the brutes? But in this condition
of nature, the first education requires an equal time as in the civilized
state; for in both, the infant is equally feeble, and equally slow in its
growth; and, consequently, demands the care of its parents during an equal
period. In a word, if abandoned before the age of three years, it would
infallibly perish. Now, this necessary, and so long continued intercourse
between the mother and child, is sufficient to communicate to it all that she
possesses: And though we should falsely suppose, that a mother, in a state of
nature, possesses nothing, not even the faculty of speech, would not this long
intercourse with her infant produce a language? Hence a state of pure nature,
in which man is supposed neither to think nor speak, is imaginary, and never
had an existence. This necessity of a long intercourse between parents and
children produces society in the midst of a desert. The family understand each
other both by signs and sounds; and this first ray of intelligence, when
cherished, cultivated, and communicated, unfolds, in process of time, all the
germs of cogitation. As this habitual intercourse could not subsist so long,
without producing mutual signs and sounds, these signs and sounds, always
repeated and gradually engraven on the memory of the child, would become
permanent expressions. The catalogue of words, though short, forms a language
which will soon extend as the family augments, and will always follow, in its
improvement, the progress of society. As soon as society begins to be formed,
the education of the infant is no longer individual, since the parents
communicate to it not only what they derive from Nature, but likewise what they
have received from their progenitors, and from the society to which they
belong. It is no longer a communication between detached individuals, which, as
in the animals, would be limited to the transmission of simple faculties, but
an institution of which the whole species participate, and whose produce
constitutes the basis and bond of society.

Even among brute animals, though deprived of the sentient principle, those
whose education is longest appear to have most intelligence. The elephant,
which takes the longest time in acquiring its full growth, and requires the
succor of its mother during the whole first year of its existence, is also the
most intelligent of all animals. The Guiney-pig, which is full grown, and
capable of generating at the age of three weeks, is for this reason alone,
perhaps, one of the most stupid species. With regard to the ape, whose nature
we are endeavoring to ascertain, however similar to man, he is so strongly
marked with the features of brutality, that it is distinguishable from the
moment of his birth. He is then proportionally stronger and better formed than
the infant: He grows faster: The support of his mother is only necessary for a
few months: His education is purely individual, and consequently as limited as
that of the other animals.

Hence the ape, notwithstanding his resemblance to man, is a brute, and,
instead of approaching our species, holds not the first rank among the animals;
because he is by no means the most intelligent. The relation of corporeal
resemblance alone has given rise to the prejudice in favor of the great
faculties of the ape. He resembles man, it has been said, both externally and
internally; and, therefore, he must not only imitate us, but do every thing
which we perform. We have seen, that all the actions which ought to be
denominated human, are relative to society; that they depend, at first, on the
mind, and afterward on education, the physical principle of which is the long
intercourse that necessarily subsists between the parents and children; that,
in the ape, this intercourse is very short; that, like the other animals, he
receives only an individual education; and that he is not susceptible of that
of the species. Of course, he can perform no human actions, since no action of
the ape has the same principle, or the same design. With regard to imitation,
which appears to be the most striking character of the ape-kind, and which the
vulgar have attributed to him as a peculiar talent, before we decide, it is
necessary to inquire whether this imitation be spontaneous or forced. Does the
ape imitate us from inclination, or because, without any exertion of the will,
he feels the capacity of doing it? I appeal to all those who have examined this
animal without prejudice, and I am convinced that they will agree with me, that
there is nothing voluntary in this imitation. The ape, having arms and hands,
uses them as we do, but without thinking of us. The similarity of his members
and organs necessarily produces movements, and sometimes successions of
movements, which resemble ours. Being endowed with the human structure, the ape
must move like man. But the same motions imply not that he acts from imitation.
Two bodies which receive the same impulse, two similar pendulums or machines,
will move in the same manner. But these bodies or machines can never be said to
intimate each other in their motions. The ape and the human body are two
machines similarly constructed, and necessarily move nearly in the same manner.
But parity is not imitation. The one depends on matter and the other on mind.
Imitation presupposes the design of imitating. The ape is incapable of forming
this design, which requires a train of thinking; and, consequently, man, if he
inclines, can imitate the ape; but the ape cannot even incline to imitate man.

This parity is only the physical part of imitation, and by no means so
complete as the similitude, from which, however, it proceeds as an immediate
effect. The ape has a greater resemblance to us in his body and members, than
in the use he makes of them. By observing him attentively, we easily perceive,
that all his movements are brisk, intermittent, and precipitous; and that, in
order to compare them with those of man, we must adopt another scale, or rather
a different model. All the actions of the ape are derived from his education,
which is purely animal. To us they appear ridiculous, inconsequent, and
extravagant; because, by referring them to our own, we assume a false scale,
and a deceitful mode of measuring. As his nature is vivacious, his temperament
warm, his dispositions petulant, and none of his affections have been softened
or restrained by education, all his habitudes are excessive, and resemble more
the movements of a maniac than the actions of a man, or even of a peaceable
animal. It is for this reason that we find him indocile, and that he receives
with difficulty the impressions we wish to make on him. He is insensible to
caresses, and is rendered obedient by chastisement alone. He may be kept in
captivity, but not in a domestic state. Always melancholy, stubborn, repugnant,
or making grimaces, he may be said to be rather conquered than tamed. The
species, of course, have never been rendered domestic in any part of the world,
and, consequently, is farther removed from man than most other animals: For
docility implies some analogy between the giver and the receiver of
instruction. It is a relative quality, which cannot be exerted but when there
is a certain number of common faculties on both sides, that differ only between
themselves, because they are active in the master, and passive in the scholar.
Now, the passive qualities of the ape have less relation to the active
qualities of man than those of the dog or elephant, who require no more than
good treatment to communicate to them the delicate and gentle sensations of
faithful attachment, voluntary obedience, grateful service, and unreserved
devotion.

In relative qualities, therefore, the ape is farther removed from the human
race than most other animals. His temperament is also very different. Man can
inhabit every climate. He lives and multiplies in the northern as well as the
southern regions of the earth. But the ape exists with difficulty in temperate
countries, and can multiply only in those which are warm. This difference of
temperament implies others in organization, which, though concealed, are not
the less real: It must likewise have a great influence on his natural
dispositions. The excess of heat, which is necessary to the constitution and
vigor of this animal, renders all his qualities and affections inordinate. No
other cause is requisite to account for his petulance, his salaciousness, and
his other passions, which appear to be equally violent and disorderly.

Thus the ape, which philosophers, as well as the vulgar, have regarded as a
being difficult to define, and whose nature was at least equivocal, and
intermediate between that of man and the animals, is, in fact, nothing but a
real brute, endowed with the external mark of humanity, but deprived of
thought, and of every faculty which properly constitutes the human species; a
brute inferior to many others in his relative powers, and still more
essentially different from the human race by his nature, his temperament, and
the time necessary to his education, gestation, growth, and duration of life;
that is, by all the real habitudes which constitute what is called Nature in a
particular being.

The ORANG OUTANGS, or the PONGO In the East Indies this animal is called
Orang-outang; in Lowando, a province of Congo, Pongo; and, in some parts of the
East Indies, according to Kjoep, chap. 86. quoted by Linnaeus, Kukurlacko.

Homo sylvestris. Orang-outang; Bontius, p. 84.

Satyri sylvestres. Orang-outang dicti; Icones arborum, ut et animalium, Lugd.
Bat. apud Vanderaa, tab. antepenult.

Traglodytes. Homo nocturnus; Linn. Syst. p. 33.

Oran-outan; Beakman's Travels.

Oerangs-oetangs; Voyages de Gauthier Schoutten aux Indes Orientales.

Drill; Charleton, Exercit. p. 16.

Smitten; Bosman, Voyage de Guinee, p. 528.

Barris, according to several voyagers, Pongo; Battle, Purchass, etc.


and JOCKO Jocko, Enjocko, the names of this animal in Congo; Baris in Guiney,
according to Pyrard, p. 369. Nieremberg, p. 179.

Chimpanzee; Scotin's print, 1738.

Man of the wood; Edwards, p. 213.

Barrys; Barbet's Guiney, p. 101.

Quojas marrou; ibid. p. 115.

Satyrus Indicus; Tulpii observe. med. lib. 3. c. 56.

Homo sylvestris, Ourang-outang; Tyson's anatomy of a pigmy, p. 108.

Simia satyrus, ecaudata, ferruginea, lacertorum pilis reversis, natibus
tectis; Linn. Syst. Not. p. 34.

L'homme de bois, simia unguibus omnibus planis et rotundatis, caesarie faciem
cingente; Brisson, quad. p. 134.

Mr Pennant, in his Synopsis of Quadrupeds, p. 96. makes but one species of the
pongo and jocko, of which he gives the following description:

Great ape with a flat face, and a deformed resemblance of the human; ears
exactly like those of a man; hair on the head longer than on the body; body and
limbs covered with reddish and shaggy hair; longest hair on the back, thinnest
on the fore parts; face and paws swarthy; buttocks covered with hair.


.
WE shall give the history of these two animals under one article; because it
is not improbable they belong to the same species. Of all the apes, they have
the greatest resemblance to man; and, consequently, deserve particular
attention. We have seen the small orangoutang, or jocko, alive, and have
preserved its skin. But, of the pongo, or great orang-outang, we can only give
the relations of travelers. If these were faithful, if they were not often
obscure, false, and exaggerated, we could not hesitate in pronouncing it to be
a different species from the jocko, a species more perfect, and approaching
nearer to that of man. Bontius, who was chief physician of Batavia, and has
left us some excellent remarks on the natural history of that part of the
Indies, says expressly Quod meretur admirationem, vidi ego aliquot utriusque
sexus erecte incedentes imprimis (cujus effigiem hic exhibeo) satyram femellam
tanta verecundia ab ignotis fibi hominibus occulentem, tum quoque faciem
manibus (liceat ita dicere) tegentem, ubertimque lacrymantem, gemitus cientem,
et caeteros humanos actus exprimentem, ut nihil humani ei deesse diceres
praeter loquelam.... Nomen ei indunt Ourang. outang, quod hominem silvae
significat; Jac. Bont. Hist. not. Ind. cap. 32. p. 84. et 85.
, that he saw, with admiration, some individuals of this species walking on
their two feet, and, among others, a female (of which he gives a figure) who
seemed to have a sense of modesty, who covered herself with her hand when men
appeared of whom she had no acquaintance, who wept, groaned, and seemed to want
nothing of humanity but the faculty of speech. Linnaeus Homo nocturnus. Homo
sylvestris Orang-outang Bontii. Corpus album, incessu erectum, nostro dimidio
minus, pili albi contortuplicati, oculi orbiculati, iridi pupillaque aurea.
Palpebrae antice incumbentes cum membrana nictitante. Visus lateralis,
nocturnus. AEtas viginti quinque annorum. Die caecutit, latet; noctu videt,
exit, furatur. Loquitur sibilo, cogitat, credit sui causa factam tellurem, se
aliquando iterum fore imperantem, si fides peregrinatoribus..... Habitat in
Javae, Amboinae, Ternatae speluncis; Linn. Syst. not. edit. x. p. 24.
, upon the authority of Kjoep, and some other voyagers, tells us, that the
orang-outang is not deprived of this faculty; that he thinks, speaks, and
expresses himself by a kind of hissing words. This author calls him homo
nocturnus, and, at the same time, gives such a description of him, that it is
impossible to ascertain whether he is a brute or a man. It may, however, be
remarked, that, according to Linnaeus, this being, whatever he is, exceeds not
the half of the human stature; and, as Bontius takes no notice of the magnitude
of his orang-outang, we may presume that they are the same. But this
orangoutang of Linnaeus and Bontius would not be the true kind, which is larger
than the tallest man. Neither is he the jocko, which I have seen alive; for,
though he was of the same size with that described by Linnaeus, he differed in
every other character. I saw him frequently, and I can affirm, that he neither
spoke, nor expressed himself by hissing, and that he did nothing which a well
trained dog could not perform. Besides, he differs in almost every article from
Linnaeus's description of the orang-outang, and corresponds better with the
satyrus of the same author. For these reasons, I suspect the truth of the
description of this homo nocturnus. I even doubt of his existence. It has
probably been a white Negro, a Chacrelas See vol. 3. Art. Varieties of the
human species.
, whom the voyagers quoted by Linnaeus have superficially examined and falsely
described: For the Chacrelas, like the homo nocturnus of this author, have
white, woolly, frizled hair, red eyes, a feeble voice, etc. But they are men,
and neither hiss, nor are they pigmies of thirty inches high: They think and
act like other men, and are also of the same size.

Throwing aside, therefore, this ill described being, and supposing a little
exaggeration in the recital of Bontius concerning the modesty of his female
orang-outang, there only remains a brute creature, an ape, of which we shall
find more pointed information in writers of better credit. Edward Tyson The
anatomy of a Pygmie.
, a celebrated English anatomist, who has given an excellent description both
of the external and internal parts of the orang-outang, tell us, that there are
two species, and that the one he described is not so large as the other, which
is called barris The baris or barris, which they describe to be much taller
than our animal, probably may be what we call a drill; Tyson, anat. of a
pygmie, p. 1.
or baris by travelers, and drill by the English. This barris or drill is the
large orang-outang of the East Indies, or the Pongo of Guiney. Gassendi having
advanced, upon the authority of a voyager called St Amand, that, in the island
of Java, there was creature which constituted the shade between man and the
ape, the fact was strenuously denied. To prove it, Peiresc produced a letter
from M. Noel, ( Natalis), a physician who resided in Africa, from which it
appeared Sunt in Guinea simiae, barba procera canaque, et pexa propemodum
venerabiles; incedunt lent, ac videntur prae caeteris sapere; maximi sunt et
barris dicuntur; pollent maxim judicio, semel dumtazat quidpiam docendi. Vest
induti illico bipedes incedunt. Site ludunt fistula, cythara, aliisque id
genus.... Foeminae denique in iis patiuntur menstrua, et mares mulierum sunt
appetentissimi; Gassendi, lib. 5.
, that large apes were found in Guiney under the denomination of barris, who
walk on two legs, have much more gravity and intelligence than the other
species, and are extremely desirous of women. Darcos, and afterward Nieremberg
Nieremberg, Hist. Not. Peregr. lib. 9. cap. 44.
and Dapper Descript de l'Afrique, par Dapper, p. 249.
, give nearly the same account of the barris. Battle calls it pongo, and
describes it in the following manner: 'The greatest of these two monsters is
called Pongo, in their language; and the lesser is called Engeco. This Pongo is
in all proportion like a man; but that he is more like a giant in stature than
a man; for he is very tall, and has a man's face, hollow eyed, with long hair
upon his brows. His face and ears are without hair, and his hands also. His
body is full of hair, but not very thick, and it is of a dunnish color. He
differs not from a man, but in his legs, for they have no calf. He goes
always upon his legs, and carries his hands clasped on the nap of his neck,
when he goes upon the ground. They sleep in the trees, and build shelters for
the rain. They feed upon fruit that they find in the woods, and upon nuts, for
they eat no kind of flesh. They cannot speak, and have no understanding more
than a beast. The people of the country, when they travel in the woods, make
fires where they sleep in the night; and in the morning, when they are gone,
the Pongoes will come and sit about the sire, till it goes out; for they have
no understanding to lay the wood together. They go many together, and kill many
Negroes that travail in the woods. Many times they fall upon the elephants,
which come to feed where they be, and so beat them with their clubbed fists,
and pieces of wood, that they will run roaring away from them. Those Pongoes
are never taken alive, because they are so strong, that ten men cannot hold one
of them; but yet they take many of their young ones with poisoned arrows. The
young Pongo hangs on his mother's belly, with his hands fast clasped about
her; so that, when the country people kill any of the females, they take the
young one, which hangs fast upon his mother. Purchas's Pilgrims, part 2. p.
982.
.' It is from this explicit passage that I have derived the names pongo and
jocko. Battle farther remarks, that, when one of these animals dies, the others
cover his body with branches and leaves of trees. Purchase adds in a note, that,
in the conversations he had with Battle, he learned that a pongo carried off a
young Negro from him, who lived a whole year in the society of these animals;
that, on his return, the Negro said, that they had never injured him; that they
were generally as tall as a man, but much thicker; and that they were nearly
double the volume of an ordinary man. Jobson assures us, that, in places
frequented by these animals, he saw a kind of habitations composed of
interlaced branches of trees, which would at least protect them from the
scorching rays of the sun Hist. genesis des Voyages, tom. 3. p. 295.
. 'The apes of Guiney,' says Bosman Voyage de Guinee, p. 258.
, 'which are called smitten by the Flemish, are of a yellow color, and grow to
a great size. I saw with my eyes one which was five feet high. These apes have
an ugly appearance, as well as those of another species perfectly similar in
every respect, except that four of them would hardly be as large as one of the
former kind.... They are capable of being taught almost every thing we choose.'
Gauthier Schoutten remarks Voyage de Gaut. Schoutten.
, 'that the apes called orang-outangs by the Indians are nearly of the same
figure and size with men, only their back and reins are covered with hair,
though there is no hair on the fore part of their bodies; that the females have
two large breasts; that their visage is coarse, their nose flat, and even sunk,
and their ears like those of men; that they are robust and active; that they
defend themselves against armed men; that they are passionately fond of women,
who cannot pass through the woods, without being suddenly attacked and ravished
by these apes.' Dampier, Froger, and other travelers, assure us, that the
orang-outangs carry off girls of eight or ten years of age to the tops of
trees, and that it is extremely difficult to rescue them. To these testimonies
we may add that of M. de la Brosse, who assures us, in his voyage to Angola in
the year 1738, that the orang-outangs, which he calls quimpezes, 'endeavour to
surprise the Negresses, whom they detain for the purpose of enjoying them, and
entertain them plentifully. I knew a Negress at Loango who remained three years
with these animals. They grow from six to seven feet high. They erect huts, and
use bludgeons in their own defense. They have flat faces, broad flat noses,
flat ears, skins clearer than those of Molattoes, long thinly scattered hairs
in several parts of their bodies, bellies extremely tense, and flat heels
raised behind about half an inch. They walk upon two or four feet, at pleasure.
We purchased two young ones, a male of fourteen months of age, and a female of
twelve,' etc.

We have thus enumerated the most certain facts we could collect concerning the
great orangoutang or pongo; and, as magnitude is the chief character by which
it differs from the jocko, I persist in thinking that they are of the same
species: For, two circumstances are at least possible: 1. The jocko may be a
permanent variety, a race much smaller than that of the pongo. In fact, they
both inhabit the same climate; they live in the same manner; and, of course,
ought to resemble each other in every article, since they both receive equally
the influences of the same soil and sky. In the human species, have we not an
example of a similar variety? The Laplander and Fin, though they live under the
same climate, differ nearly as much in stature, and much more in other
qualities, than the jocko differs from the great orang-outang. 2. The jocko, or
small orang-outang, which we have seen alive, as well as those of Tulpius,
Tyson, and others which have been brought to Europe, were all, perhaps, young
animals, who had acquired only a part of their growth. The one I saw was about
two feet and a half high; and the Sieur Nonfoux, to whom it belonged, assured
me that it exceeded not two years of age. On the supposition, therefore, that
its growth were proportional to that of man, it might, if it had lived, arrived
at the height of more than five feet. The orang-outang of Tyson was still
younger; for it was only about two feet high, and its teeth were not perfectly
formed. Those of Tulpius and Edwards were nearly of the same stature with the
one I saw. Hence it is probable, that these young animals, if possessed of
liberty in their own climate, would have acquired with age the same height and
dimensions which travelers have ascribed to the great orang-outang. Of course,
till better information be received, we must regard these two animals as
constituting but one species.

The orang-outang which I saw, walked always on two feet, even when carrying
things of considerable weight. His air was melancholy, his gate grave, his
movements measured, his dispositions gentle, and very different from those of
other apes. He had neither the impatience of the Barbary ape, the maliciousness
of the baboon, nor the extravagance of the monkeys. It may be alleged, that he
had the benefit of instruction; but the other apes, which I shall compare with
him, were educated in the same manner. Signs and words were alone sufficient to
make our orang-outang act: But the baboon required a cudgel, and the other apes
a whip; for none of them would obey without blows. I have seen this animal
present his hand to conduct the people who came to visit him, and walk as
gravely along with them as if he had formed a part of the company. I have seen
him sit down at table, unfold his towel, wipe his lips, use a spoon or a fork
to carry the victuals to his mouth, pour his liquor into a glass, and make it
touch that of the person who drank along with him. When invited to take tea, he
brought a cup and saucer, placed them on the table, put in sugar, poured out
the tea, and allowed it to cool before he drank it. All these actions he
performed, without any other instigation than the signs or verbal orders of his
master, and often of his own accord. He did no injury to any person: He even
approached company with circumspection, and presented himself as if he wanted
to be caressed. He was very fond of dainties, which every body gave him: And,
as his breast was diseased, and he was afflicted with a teazing cough, this
quantity of sweetmeats undoubtedly contributed to shorten his life. He lived
one summer in Paris, and died in London the following winter. He eat almost
every thing; but preferred ripe and dried fruits to all other kinds of food. He
drank a little wine; but spontaneously left it for milk, tea, or other mild
liquors. Tulpius Erat hic satyrus quadrupes, sed ab humana specie quam prae se
fert vocatur Indis ourang-outang, homo silvestris, uti Africanis Quojasinorrou:
Exprimens longitudine puerum trimum, ut crassitie sexennem; corpore erat nec
obeso nec gracili, sed quadrato, habilissimo tamen ac pernicissimo. Artubus
vero tam strictis et musculis adeo vastis, ut quidvis et auderet et posset.
Anterius undique glaber at pone hirsutus ac nigris crinibus obsitus. Facies
mentiebatur hominem; sed nares simae et aduncae rugosam et edentulam anum.
Aures vero nil discrepant ab humana forma, uti neque pectus ornatum utrinque
mamma praetumida (erat enim sexus foeminei). Venture habebat umbilicum
profundiorem, et artus, cum superiores tum inferiores, tam exactam cum homine
similitudinem ut vix ovum ovo videris similius. Nec cubito defuit debita
commissura, nec manibus digitorum ordo; nedum pollici figura humana vel
cruribus surae vel pedi calcis fulcrum. Quae concinna ac decens membrorum forma
in caussa fuit, quod multoties incederet erectus, neque attolleret minus
gravate, quam transferret facile qualecumque gravissimi oneris pondus.
Bibiturus praehendebat canthari ansam manu altera; alteram vero vasis fundo
supponens, abstergebat deinde madorem labiis relictum. -- Eandem dexteritatem
observabat cubitum iturus; inclinans caput in pulvinar et corpus stragulis
convenienter operiens, etc.; Tulpii. Observe. Medicae, lib. 3. c. 56.
, who gives a good description and a figure of one of these animals, that had
been presented to Frederick Henry, Prince of Orange, makes nearly the same
observations with regard to it, as I have already related. But, if we wish to
distinguish the instincts peculiar to this animal from the improvement it
receives by education, we must compare the facts of which we have been
eyewitnesses, with the relations of travelers who have seen it in a state of
nature, in the full possession of liberty, and in captivity. M. de la Brosse,
who purchased from a Negro two orang-outangs, whose age exceeded not twelve
months, does not say that they had been instructed by the Negro. It appears, on
the contrary, that they spontaneously performed most of the actions above
recited. 'These animals,' he remarks, 'have the instinct of sitting at table
like men. They eat every kind of food, without distinction. They use a knife, a
fork, or a spoon, to cut or lay hold of what is put on their plate. They drink
wine and other liquors. We carried them aboard. At table, when they wanted any
thing, they made themselves be understood to the cabbin-boy: And, when the boy
refused to give them what they demanded, they sometimes became enraged, seized
him by the arm, bit, and threw him down...... The male was seized with sickness
in the road. He made himself be attended as a human being. He was even bled
twice in the right arm: And, whenever he found himself afterward in the same
condition, he held out his arm to be bled, as if he knew that he had formerly
received benefit from that operation.'

Henry Gross informs us, vol. 1. page 233. That some places toward the hills
are covered with immense impenetrable forests, that afford a shelter for wild
beasts of all sorts. But in that which forms the inland boundary of the
Carnatic Rajah's dominions, there is one singular species of creatures, of
which I had heard much in India, and of the truth of which the following fact,
that happened some time before my arrival there, may serve for an attestation.

Vancajee, a merchant of that country, and an inhabitant on the sea coast, sent
up to Bombay to the then governor of it, Mr Horn, a couple of those creatures
before mentioned, as a present, by a coasting vessel, of which one Captain Boag
was the master, and the make of which, according to his description, and that
of others, was as follows.

They were scarcely two feet high, walked erect, and had perfectly an human
form. They were of a sallow white, without any hair, except in those parts that
it is customary for mankind to have it. By their melancholy, they seemed to
have a rational sense of their captivity, and had many of the human actions.
They made their bed very orderly in the cage in which they were sent up, and on
being viewed, would endeavor to conceal, with their hands, those parts that
modesty forbids manifesting. The joints of their knees were not re-entering,
like those of monkeys, but saliant, like those of men; a circumstance they have
(if I mistake not), in common with the orangoutangs in the eastern parts of
India, in Sumatra, Java, and the Spice-islands, of which these seem to be the
diminutives, though with nearer approaches of resemblance to the human species.
But, though the navigation from the Carnatic coast to Bombay is of a very short
run, of not above six or seven degrees, whether the sea air did not agree with
them, or that they could not brook their confinement, or that Captain Boag had
not properly consulted their provision, the female sickening first, died; and
the male giving all the demonstrations of grief, seemed to take it to heart so,
that he refused to eat, and, in two days after, followed her. The Captain, on
his return to Bombay, reporting this to the governor, was by him asked, What
he had done with the bodies? He said he had flung them over board. Being
further asked, why he did not keep them in spirits? He replied bluntly, that he
did not think of it. Upon this, the governor wrote afresh to Vancajee, and
desired him to procure another couple, at any rate, as he should grudge no
expense to be master of such a curiosity. Vancajee's answer was, he should very
willingly oblige him, but that he was afraid it would not be in his power: That
these creatures came from a forest about seventy leagues up the country, where
the inhabitants would sometimes catch them on the skirts of it; but that they
were so exquisitely cunning and fly, that this scarcely happened once in a
century.



Francis Pyrard Voyages de Francois Pyrard, tom. 2. p. 331.
relates, 'That, in the province of Sierra Leona, there is a species of animals
called baris, who are strong and well limbed, and so industrious, that, when
properly trained and fed, they work like servants; that they generally walk on
the two hind feet; that they pound any substances in a mortar; that they go to
bring water from the river in small pitchers, which they carry full on their
heads. But, when they arrive at the door, if the pitchers are not soon taken
off, they allow them to fall; and, when they perceive the pitcher overturned
and broken, they weep and lament. Father Jarric, quoted by Nieremberg Euf.
Nieremberg. Hist. Not. peregrin. lib. 9. cap. 45.
, says the same thing, nearly in the same terms. With regard to the education
of these animals, the testimony of Schoutten Voyages de Guat. Schoutten aux
Indes Orientales.
accords with that of Pyrard. 'They are taken,' he remarks, 'with snares,
taught to walk on their hind feet, and to use their fore feet as hands in
performing different operations, as rinsing glasses, carrying drink round the
company, turning a spit,' etc. 'I saw, at Java,' says Guat Voyages de Fr. le
Guat. tom. 2. p. 96.
, 'a very extraordinary ape. It was a female. She was very tall, and often
walked erect on her hind feet. On these occasions, she concealed with her hands
the parts which distinguish the sex. Except the eyebrows, there was no hair on
her face, which pretty much resembled the grotesque female faces I saw among
the Hottentots at the Cape. She made her bed very neatly every day, lay upon
her side, and covered herself with the bed-clothes.... When her head ached, she
bound it up with a handkerchief; and it was amusing to see her thus hooded in
bed. I could relate many other little articles which appeared to be extremely
singular. But I admired them not so much as the multitude; because, as I knew
the design of bringing her to Europe to be exhibited as a show, I was inclined
to think that she had been taught many of these monkey-tricks, which the people
considered as being natural to the animal. She died in our ship, about the
latitude of the Cape of Good Hope. The figure of this ape had a very great
resemblance to that of man,' etc. Gemelli Carreri tells us, that he saw one of
these apes, which cried like an infant, walked upon its hind feet, and carried
a matt under its arm to lie down and sleep upon. These apes, he adds, appear,
in some respects, to have more sagacity than men: For, when the fruits on the
mountains are exhausted, they come down to the sea coasts, where they feed upon
carbs, oysters, and other shell-fishes. There is a species of oyster called
taclovo, which weighs several pounds, and commonly lies open on the shore. The
ape, when he wants to eat one of them, being afraid left it should close on his
paw, puts a stone into the shell, which prevents it from shutting, and then
eats the oyster at his ease.

'The apes along the banks of the river Gambia,' says Froger, 'are larger and
more mischieveous than in any part of Africa: The Negroes dread them, and
cannot travel alone in the country, without running the hazard of being
attacked by these animals, who often present them with a stick, and force them
to fight. I have heard the Portuguese say, that they have often seen them hoist
up young girls, about seven or eight years old, into trees, and that they could
not be wrested from them without a great deal of difficulty. The most part of
the Negroes imagine them to be a foreign nation come to inhabit their country,
and that they do not speak for fear of being compelled to work.'

'We might dispense,' another traveller Descript. historique du royaume de
Macacar, p. 51.
remarks, 'with seeing a number of apes at Macacar; because a rencounter with
them is often fatal. It is necessary to be always well armed to defend
ourselves against their attacks.... They have no tail, and walk always erect on
their two hind feet, like men.'



These are nearly all the facts, concerning this animal, which have been
related by voyagers who are least credulous, and deserve most credit. I have
quoted the passages entire, because every article is important in the history
of a brute which has so great a resemblance to man. And, that we may be enabled
to ascertain the nature of this animal with the greater precision, we shall now
mark the differences and conformities which make him approach or recede from
the human species. He differs from man externally by the flatness of his nose,
by the shortness of his front, and by his chin, which is not elevated at the
base. His ears are proportionally too large, his eyes too near each other, and
the distance between his nose and mouth is too great. These are the only
differences between the face of an orang-outang and that of a man. With regard
to the body and members, the thighs are proportionally too short, the arms too
long, the fingers too small, the palm of the hands too long and narrow, and the
feet rather resemble hands than the human foot. The male organs of generation
differ not from those of man, except that the prepuce has no fraenum. The
female organs are extremely similar to those of a woman.

The orang-outang differs internally from the human species in the number of
ribs: Man has only twelve; but the orang-outang has thirteen. The vertebrae of
the neck are also shorter, the bones of the pelvis narrow, the buttocks
flatter, and the orbits of the eyes sunk deeper. He has no spinal process on
the first vertebra of the neck. The kidneys are rounder than those of man, and
the ureters have a different figure, as well as the bladder and gallbladder,
which are narrower and longer than in the human species. All the other parts of
the body, head, and members, both external and internal, so perfectly resemble
those of man, that we cannot make the comparison without being astonished that
such a similarity in structure and organization should not produce the same
effects. The tongue, and all the organs of speech, for example, are the same as
in man; and yet the orang-outang enjoys not the faculty of speaking; the brain
has the same figure and proportions; and yet he possesses not the power of
thinking. Can there be a more evident proof than is exhibited in the
orang-outang, that matter alone, though perfectly organized, can produce
neither language nor thought, unless it be animated by a superior principle?
Man and the orang-outang are the only animals who have buttocks and calves of
the legs, and who, of course, are formed for walking erect; the only animals
who have a broad chest, flat shoulders, and vertebrae of the same structure;
and the only animals whose brain, heart, lungs, liver, spleen, stomach, and
intestines are perfectly similar, and who have an appendix vermiformis or
blind-gut. In fine, the orang-outang has a greater resemblance to man than even
to the baboons or monkeys, not only in all the parts we have mentioned, but in
the largeness of the face, the figure of the cranium, of the jaws, of the
teeth, and of the other bones of the head and face; in the thickness of the
fingers and thumb, the figure of the nails, and the number of vertebrae; and,
lastly, in the conformity of the articulations, the magnitude and figure of the
rotula, sternum, etc. Hence, as there is a greater similarity between this
animal and man, than between those creatures which resemble him most, as the
Barbary ape, the baboon, and monkey, who have all been designed by the general
name of apes, the Indians are to be excused for associating him with the human
species, under the denomination of orang-outang, or wild man. As some of the
facts we have related may appear suspicious to those who never saw this animal,
we shall support them by the authority of two celebrated anatomists. Tyson The
orang-outang has a greater resemblance to man than to the apes or monkeys;
because, 1. The hairs on his shoulders are directed downward, and those of the
arms upward. 2. His face is broader and flatter than that of the apes. 3. The
figure of his ear has a greater resemblance to that of man, except the
cartilaginous part, which is thin, as in the apes. 4. His fingers are
proportionally thicker than those of the apes. 5. He is in every article formed
for walking erect, which is by no means the case with the apes and monkeys. 6.
He has thicker buttocks than all the other apes. 7. He has calves to his legs.
8. His breast and shoulders are broader than those of the apes. 9. His heel is
longer. 10. He has a cellular membrane, placed, as in man, under the skin. 11.
His peritonaeum is entire, and not pierced or lengthened, as it is in the apes.
12. His intestines are longer than those of the apes. 13. The intestinal canal
is of different diameters, as in man, and not equal or nearly equal, as in the
apes. 14. His caecum has a vermicular appendix as in man; but this appendix is
wanting in all the other apes: Besides, the neck of the colon is not so long as
that of the apes. 15. The insertions of the biliary and pancreatic ducts have
but one common orifice in man and the orang-outang; but, in the monkeys, these
insertions are two inches asunder. 16. The colon is longer than that of the
apes. 17. The liver is not divided into lobes, as in the apes, but entire, as
in man. 18. The biliary vessels are the same as in man. 19. The spleen, and,
20. the pancreas, are the same. 21. The number of lobes in the lungs is the
same. 22. The pericardium is attached to the diaphragm, as in man. 23. The cone
of the heart is blunter than in the apes. 24. He has no pouches at the bottom
of the cheeks, as the other apes and monkeys have. 25. His brain is larger than
that of the apes, and exactly formed like the human brain. 26. The cranium is
rounder, and double the size of that of the monkeys. 27. All the sutures of the
cranium are similar to those of man; and the bones called ossa triquetra
Wormiana are found in the lambdoid future, which is not the case in the other
apes or monkeys. 28. He has the os cribriforme and the crista galli, which are
wanting in the monkeys. 29. He has the sella equina exactly as in man; but, in
the apes and monkeys, this part is more elevated and prominent. 30. The
processus pteregoideus is the same as in man; but it is wanting in the apes and
monkeys. 31. The temporal bones, and those called ossa bregmatis, are the same
as in man; but, in the apes and monkeys, these bones are of a different form.
32. The os zygomaticus is small; but it is large in the apes and monkeys. 33.
The teeth, and particularly the dog-teeth and grinders, are more similar to the
human teeth than to those of the apes. 34. The transverse processes of the
vertebrae of the neck, and the sixth and seventh vertebrae, have a greater
resemblance to those of man than to those of the apes and monkeys. 35. The
vertebrae of the neck are not perforated, as in the apes, for the transmission
of nerves, but plain and entire, as in man. 36. The vertebrae of the back and
their processes are the same as in man; and, in the lower vertebrae, there are
only two inferior processes; but, in the apes, there are four. 37. As in man,
there are only five lumbar vertebrae; but, in the monkeys, there are six or
seven. 38. The spinal processes of the lumbar vertebrae are straight, as in
man. 39. The os sacrum is composed of five vertebrae, as in man; but, in the
apes and monkeys, it consists only of three. 40. The coccix is composed of four
bones, as in man, and these bones are not perforated; but, in the apes and
monkeys, the coccix is composed of a greater number of bones, which are all
perforated. 41. In the orang-outang, there are only seven true ribs ( costae
verae,) and the extremities of the false ribs ( costae nothae) are
cartilaginous, and articulated with the bodies of the vertebrae; but, in the
apes and monkeys, there are eight true ribs, and the extremities of the false
ribs are osseous, and their articulations are placed in the interstices between
the vertebrae. 42. The sternum of the orang-outang is as broad as that of man,
and not narrow, as in the monkeys. 43. The bones of the four fingers are
thicker than those of the apes. 44. The thigh bone is perfectly similar to that
of man. 45. The rotula is round, and not long, single, and not double, as it is
in the apes. 46. The heel, the tarsus, and metatarsus, are the same as those of
man. 47. The middle toe is not so long as in the apes. 48. The obliquus
inserior capitis, pyriformis, and biceps femoris muscles, are similar to those
of man; but they are different in the apes and monkeys, etc.

The orang-outang differs from the human species more than from the apes or
monkeys in the following articles. 1. The thumb is proportionally smaller than
that of man; but it is larger than that of the other apes. 2. The palm of the
hand is longer and narrower than in man. 3. He differs from man and approaches
the apes by the length of his toes. 4. He differs from man by having the large
toe of the foot removed nearly to the distance of an inch from the next one,
and he should be rather considered as a four-handed animal than a quadruped. 5.
His thighs are shorter than those of man; and, 6. his arms are longer. 7. The
testicles are not pendulous. 8. The epiploon is larger than in man. 9. The
gallbladder is longer and narrower. 10. The kidneys are rounder than in man;
and the ureters are also different. 11. The bladder is longer. 12. He has no
fraenum to the prepuce. 13. The bone in the orbit of the eye is sunk deeper.
14. He wants the two cavities below the sella turcica. 15. The mastoid and
styloid processes are extremely small. 16. The bones of the nose are flat. 17.
The vertebrae of the neck are short, as in the apes, flat before and not round,
and their spinal processes are not forked, as in man. 18. He has no spinal
process in the first vertebra of the neck. 19. He has thirteen ribs on each
side, and man has only twelve. 20. The ossa illa are perfectly similar to those
of the apes, being longer, narrower, and less concave than in man. 21. The
following muscles are found in man, and are wanting in the orang-outang,
Occipitales, frontales, dilatatores alarm nasi, seu elevatores labii
superioris, interspinales colli, glutaei minimi, extensor digitorum pedis
brevis, et transversalis pedis. 22. The muscles which appear not in the
orang-outang, and are sometimes found in man, are those called pyramidales,
caro musculosa quadrata, the long tendon and fleshy body of the palmaris, the
(...) and (...) auriculam. 23. The orang-outang, has the elevator muscles of
the clavicles like those of the apes, and different from those of man. 24. The
following are the muscles by which the orang-outang resembles the apes, and
differs from man: Longus colli, pectoralis, latissimus dorsi, glutaeus maximus
et medius, psoas magnus et parvus, iliacus inter nus, et gastrocnemius
internus. 25. He differs from man in the figure of the deltoides, pronator
radii teres, et extensor pollicis brevis. Anatomy of the orang-outang by Tyson.


and Cowper dissected him with the most scrupulous exactness, and have given us
the results of the comparisons they made between the different parts of his
body with that of man. I have translated this article from the English, that
the reader may be enabled to form a judgment of the almost entire resemblance
between this animal and the human species. I shall only remark, for the better
understanding of this note, that the English are not confined, like the French,
to a single name to denote apes. Like the Greeks, they have two denominations,
the one for the apes without tails, which they call apes Simiae dividuntur in
cauda carentes, quae simiae simpliciter dicuntur; et caudatas, quae
cercopitheci appellantur; quae prioris generis sunt Anglice Apes dicuntur; quae
posterioris Monkeys; Raii synops. quad. p. 149.
, and the other for the apes with tails, which they call monkeys. The apes of
Tyson could be no other than those which we denominate pithecus or pigmy, and
the cynocephalus or Barbary ape. I should likewise remark, that this author
gives some resemblances and differences which are not sufficiently accurate.

1. Tyson makes it peculiar to man and the orang-outang, to have the hair on
the shoulders directed downward, and that of the arms upward. The hair of most
animals, it is true, is directed backward or downward; but there are some
exceptions. The sloth, and the least ant-eater have the hair of their anterior
parts directed backward, and that of the crupper and reins directed forward.
Hence this character is of no great moment in the comparison of the
orang-outang with man.

2. In the passage quoted from Tyson, I took no notice of the four first
differences; because they are either too slight, or ill founded. The first is
the difference of stature, which is an uncertain and gratuitous character,
especially as the author acknowledges that his animal was very young. The
second, third, and fourth are derived from the form of the nose, the quantity
of hair, and other minute relations. I retrenched several other differences;
for example, the twenty-first, drawn from the number of teeth. It is certain
that both the human species and this animal have an equal number of teeth. If
the latter had only twenty-eight, as our author remarks, it was owing to his
youth; and, it is well known, that man, when young, has not a greater number.

3. The seventh difference is also very equivocal: The testicles of children
are situated very high; and this animal, being young, ought not to have had
them pendulous.

4. The forty-eight mark of resemblance, and the twenty-first, twenty-second,
twenty-third, twenty-fourth, and twenty-fifth marks of difference, are derived
from the figure or presence of certain muscles, which, as they vary in most
individuals of the human species, ought not to be regarded as essential
characters.

5. All the resemblances and differences drawn from parts too minute, as the
processes of the vertebrae, or derived from the position and magnitude of
certain parts, should only be considered as accessory characters; so that the
whole detail of Tyson's table may be reduced to the resemblances and
differences we have pointed out.

6. I shall mention some characters of a more general nature, some of which
have been omitted by Tyson, and others imperfectly related. 1. Of all the apes,
baboons, and monkeys, the orang-outang alone wants those pouches within the
cheeks, into which they put their food, before they swallow it; for the inside
of his mouth is the same as in man. 2. The gibbon, the Barbary ape, all the
baboons, and all the monkeys, except the douc, have flat buttocks, with
callosities on them. The orang-outang alone has plump buttocks without
callosities. The douc likewise has no callosities; but his buttocks are flat
and covered with hair; so that, in this respect, the douc forms the shade
between the orang-outang and the monkeys. 3. The orang-outang alone has calves
of the legs and fleshy buttocks. This single character shows that he is best
formed for walking erect; only his toes are very long, and his heel rests with
more difficulty on the ground than that of man. He runs with more ease than he
walks; and, to enable him to walk easily and long, he would require artificial
heels higher than those of our shoes. 4. Though the orang-outang has thirteen
ribs, and man but twelve. This difference does not make him approach nearer to
the baboons or monkeys than it removes him from man; because the number of ribs
varies in most of those species, some of them having twelve, others eleven,
others ten, etc. Hence the only differences between the body of this animal and
that of man are reduced to two, namely, the figure of the bones of the pelvis,
and the conformation of the feet. These are the only parts worthy of
consideration, by which the orang-outang has a greater resemblance to the other
apes than he has to man.

From this expiscation, which I have made with all the exactness I was capable
of, a judgment may be formed concerning the orang-outang. If there were a scale
by which we could descend from human nature to that of the brutes, and if the
essence of this nature consisted entirely in the form of the body, and depended
on its organization, the orang-outang would approach nearer to man than any
other animal. Placed in the second rank of beings, he would make the other
animals feel his superiority, and oblige them to obey him. If the principle of
imitation, by which he seems to mimic human actions, were a result of thought,
this ape would be still farther removed from the brutes, and have a greater
affinity to man. But, as we formerly Plate CCLII. JOCKO.
remarked, the interval which separates them is immense; and the resemblance in
figure and organization, and the movements of imitation which seem to result
from these similarities, neither make him approach the nature of man, nor
elevate him above that of the brutes.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The orang-outang has no pouches within his cheeks, no tail, and no callosities
on his buttocks; which last are plump and fleshy. All his teeth are similar to
those of man. His face is flat, naked, and tawny. His ears, hands, feet,
breast, and belly, are likewise naked. The hair of his head descends on both
temples in the form of tresses. He has hair on his back and loins, but in small
quantities. He is five or six feet high, and walks always erect on his two
feet. We have not been able to ascertain whether the females, like women, are
subject to periodical courses; but analogy renders this matter almost
unquestionable.

THE PIGMY Ape with a flattish face; ears like those of a man; body of the size
of a cat; color above an olive brown, beneath yellowish; nails flat; buttocks
naked; fits upright; Pennant's Synops. of quad. p. 98.

(...) in Greek; Simia in Latin; Le Pitheque in French; Chinchin in Tartary;
and Sinsin in China.

Pithecus; Arist. Hist. anim. lib. 2. cap. 8.

Simia; Gesner, quad. p. 847. Raii Synops. quad. p. 149. Johnston de quad. tab.
59.

Ape, 2d spec. Bosman's Guinea, p. 242.

Le Singe. Simia unguibus omnibus planis et rotundatis; Brisson, quad. p. 133.

Figura prima est earum simiarum quae caudas non habent: Hae caeteris facilius
et citius mansuefiunt; caeterisque solertiori ingenio praestant, hilarioresque
et versutiores existunt; Prosp. Alp. Hist. Egypt. lib. 4. tab. 20. fig. 1.

Simia sylvanus, ecaudata, natibus calvis, capite subrotundo; Linn. Syst. Not.
p. 34.


.
ARISTOTLE remarks, 'that there are animals whose nature is ambiguous, and are
partly allied to man, and partly to quadrupeds; such as the pigmies, the kebes,
and the cynocephali. The kebe is a pigmy with a tail; and the cynocephalus is
perfectly similar to the pigmy, except that it is larger and stronger, and has
a longer muzzle, approaching nearly to that of the bull-dog, from which
circumstance its name has been derived. Its manners are likewise more
ferocious, and its teeth are stronger than those of the pigmy, and have a
greater resemblance to those of the dog.' From this passage, it is apparent,
that neither the pigmy nor the cynocephalus mentioned by Aristotle have a tail;
for he says, that the pigmies with tails are called kebes, and that the
cynocephalus resembles the pigmy in every article, except the muzzle and teeth.
Hence Aristotle takes notice of two apes without tails, the pigmy and
cynocephalus, and other apes with tails, to which he gives the denomination of
kebes. Now, to compare our own knowledge with that of Aristotle, we shall
remark, that we have seen three species of apes without tails, the
orang-outang, the gibbon, or long armed ape, and the magot, or Barbary ape, and
that the pigmy is none of these three species; for the orang-outang and gibbon
could not be known to Aristotle, since these animals are only found in the
southern parts of Africa and India, which were not discovered in his time;
besides, they have characters very different from those he ascribes to the
pigmy. But the third species, which we call the magot, or Barbary ape, is the
cynocephalus of Aristotle; for it has no tail; its muzzle resembles that of a
bull-dog; and its canine teeth are long and thick. Besides, this animal is
common in Asia Minor, and other eastern provinces which were known to the
Greeks. The pigmy belongs to the same country; but we know it only from the
relations of travelers. But, though we have never been able to procure this
ape, its existence is equally real with that of the cynocephalus. Gesner and
Johnston have given figures of the pigmy. M. Brisson mentions his having seen
it, and he distinguishes it from the cynocephalus or Barbary ape, which he
likewise saw. He confirms Aristotle's remark, that these two animals resemble
each other in every thing, except that the cynocephalus has a longer muzzle
than the pigmy The first race of apes, which have no tail, and a short muzzle:
1. The ape. I saw several apes which differed only in magnitude: Their face,
ears, and nails, were very similar to those of man. The hair which covered
their bodies, except the buttocks, which are naked, is a mixture of green and
yellow. The green predominates on the superior part of the body, and the yellow
on the inferior.... The second race of apes, which have no tail, and a long
muzzle: 1. The cynocephalus differs from the ape only in having a long muzzle,
like that of a dog. I saw several of them which had no difference but in size;
Brisson. regn. anim. p. 189. 191.
.

We remarked, that the orang-outang, the pigmy, the gibbon, and the Barbary
ape, are the only animals to which the generic name ape ought to be applied;
because they alone want the tail, and walk spontaneously, and oftener on two
feet than on four. The orang-outang and the gibbon are very different from the
pigmy and Barbary ape. But, as the two latter have a perfect resemblance,
except in the length of the muzzle and the largeness of the canine teeth, the
one has frequently been mistaken for the other. They have always been mentioned
under the common appellation of ape, even in languages which have one name for
apes without tails, and another for those which have tails. In German, both the
pigmy and Barbary ape are called aff, and ape in English. It is only in the
Greek language that each of these animals has a proper name. Cynocephalus is
rather an adjective than a proper substantive; and for that reason we have not
adopted it.

From the testimony of the ancients, it appears, that the pigmy is more mild
and docile than all the other apes with which they were acquainted, and that it
was common in Asia as well as in Lybia, and other provinces of Africa which
were frequented by the Greek and Roman travelers. Hence I presume that the
following passages of Leo Africanus and Marmol ought to be applied to the
pigmy. They tell us, that the apes with long tails, which are shown in
Mauritania, and which the Africans call mones, come from the Negro country; but
that the apes without tails are natives, and very numerous in the mountains of
Mauritania, Bugia, and Constantina: 'They have,' says Marmol, 'the feet, the
hands, and the countenance of a man, and are extremely malicious and full of
spirit. They live upon herbs, corn, and all kinds of fruits. They go in troops
into the gardens or fields; but, before they leave the thickets, one of them
ascends an eminence, from which he views the country; and, when he sees no
person, he gives the signal, by a cry for the rest to proceed, and removes not
from his station as long as they continue abroad. But, whenever he perceives
any person approaching, he screams with a loud voice; and, by leaping from tree
to tree, they all fly to the mountains. Their flight is worthy of admiration;
for the females, though they carry four or five young ones on their backs, make
great springs from branch to branch. Though extremely cunning, vast numbers of
them are taken by different arts. When wild, they bite desperately; but by
carresses they are easily tamed. They do much mischief to the fruits and corn;
for they gather it together in heaps, cut it, and throw it on the ground,
whether it be ripe or not, and destroy more than they eat or carry off. Those
who are tamed perform things which are almost incredible, and imitate every
human action L'Afrique de Marmol, tom. 1. p. 57.
.' Kolbe relates nearly the same facts with regard to the apes of the Cape of
Good Hope. But, from his figure and description, it is obvious, that these apes
are baboons, and have a short tail, a long muzzle, pointed nails, etc.; and
that they are much larger and stronger than the apes of Mauritania See below,
Art. Baboon.
. We may, therefore, presume, that Kolbe has copied the passage from Marmol,
and attributed to the baboons of the Cape the manners and dispositions of
Mauritanian pigmies.

The pigmy, the Barbary ape, and the baboon, were known to the ancients; these
animals are found in Asia Minor, Arabia, Upper Egypt, and in all the northern
parts of Africa. Hence this passage of Marmol may be applied to all the three.
But it corresponds not with the baboon; for it mentions, that these apes have
no tails. Neither is it the Barbary ape, but the pigmy, of which this author
treats; for the Barbary ape is not easily tamed, and, instead of four or five,
it generally produces only two young. But the pigmy, being smaller, should
produce a greater number. Besides, it is milder and more docile than the
Barbary ape, who is never perfectly tamed. For these reasons, I am convinced
that it is not the Barbary ape, but the pigmy, to which the passage in the
above author ought to be applied. The same remark is applicable to a passage of
Rubruquis; when mentioning the apes of Cathay, he remarks, 'That, in every
article, they are fashioned like man.... That they are more than a foot and a
half high, and all covered with hair; that they live in caverns; that, in order
to seize them, the natives put strong inebriating liquors in the caverns they
frequent;.... that they assemble together to drink these liquors, crying
chinchin, from which they have obtained the name of chinchin; and that, after
intoxicating themselves, they fall asleep, when they are easily taken by the
hunters.' These characters correspond with the pigmy, and by no means with the
Barbary ape. The latter we have seen alive, and never heard it cry chinchin.
Besides, it is much more than a foot and a half high, and has not so great a
resemblance to man as the author alleges. We have the same reasons for
applying to the pigmy the figure and remark of Prosper Alpinus: He tells us,
that the small apes without tails, which he saw in Egypt, tame sooner and more
easily than any other; that they have likewise more sagacity and industry, and
are gayer and more frolicsome. Now, the Barbary ape is thick, and of a
considerable stature; it is a dirty, ferocious, melancholy animal, and is never
fully tamed. Hence the characters given by Prosper Alpinus to his ape without a
tail, apply not to the Barbary ape, and can belong to no other animal than the
pigmy.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The pigmy has no tail, and his canine teeth are not proportionally larger than
those of man. He has a flat face; his nails are likewise flat, and rounded like
those of the human species. He walks on two feet, and is about a foot and a
half in length. His disposition is mild, and he is easily tamed. The ancients
allege, that the female is subject to the menstrual discharge, and analogy
permits us not to doubt the fact.

The GIBBON, or Long-armed APE Long-armed ape, with a flat swarthy face,
surrounded with gray hairs; hair on the body black and rough; buttocks bare;
nails on the hands flat, on the feet long; arms of a disproportioned length,
reaching quite to the ground when the animal is erect, its natural-posture; of
a hideous deformity; Pennant's synops. of quad. p. 100.

Gibbon is the name under which M. Dupleix gave us this animal, which he
brought from the East Indies. I first imagined this to be an Indian word. But I
found, in a note upon Piiny by Dalechamp, that Strabo had denoted the cephus by
the word keipon, from which guibon or gibbon had probably been derived. The
following is the passage of Pliny, with Dalechamp's note; 'Pompeii Magni primum
Iudi ostenderunt ex Ethiopia quas vocant cephos Cephos; Strabo. lib. 15. (...)
vocat, esseque tradit facie satyro similem; Dal. Plin. Hist. Not. lib. 8. cap.
19. Nota. It appears that the cebus of the Greeks, and the cephus of Pliny,
which ought to be pronounced kebus and kephus, may have originally come from
koph or kophin, the Hebrew and Chaldean name of the ape.
, quarum pedes posteriores pedibus humanis et cruribus, priores manibus fuere
similes: Hoc animal postea Roma non vidit.'


.
THE Gibbon keeps himself always erect, even when he walks on four feet;
because his arms are as long as both his body and legs. We have seen him alive.
He exceeded not three feet in height; but he was young, and in captivity. Hence
we may presume, that he had not acquired his full dimensions, and that, in a
natural state, he might arrive at four feet. He has not the vestige of a tail.
But he is distinguished from the other apes by the prodigious length of his
arms: When standing erect on his hind feet, his hands touch the ground; and he
can walk on his four feet without bending his body. Round the face there is a
circle of white, which gives him a very extraordinary appearance. His eyes are
large, but deep sunk. His ears are naked. His face is flat, of a tawny color,
and pretty similar to that of man. After the orang-outang and the pigmy, the
gibbon would make the nearest approach to the human figure, if he was not
deformed by the excessive length of his arms; for, in a state of nature, man
would likewise have a strange aspect. The hair and the beard, if neglected,
would form round his countenance a circle similar to that which surrounds the
face of the gibbon.

This ape appeared to be of a tranquil disposition, and of gentle manners. His
movements were neither too brisk nor precipitant. He received mildly what was
given him to eat. He was fed with bread, fruits, almonds, etc. He was afraid of
cold and moisture, and did not live long in a foreign climate. He is a native
of the East Indies, and particularly of Coromandel, Malacca, and the Molucca
islands Father le Comte tells us, that he saw in the Molucca's a kind of ape,
which walked naturally on two feet, used its hands like a man, and had a face
like that of a Hottentot. But the whole body was covered with a kind of gray
wool. It had an exact resemblance to an infant, and expressed its passions and
appetites in the most perfect manner. He adds, that these apes are extremely
gentle; that they show great attachment to the people with whom they are
acquainted, and embrace them with transport; that one of them, which he saw,
was, at least, four feet high, and was very dexterous and agile; Mem. sur la
China, par Louis le Comte, p. 510.
. It appears that he is likewise found in more northern provinces, and that we
ought to refer to the gibbon, the ape of the kingdom of Gannaura, on the
frontier of China, to which some travelers have given the name of fefe In the
kingdom of Gannaura, on the frontier of China, there is a very rare animal
called fese. It is nearly of the human figure. Its arms are very long; the body
is black, and covered with hair; and it moves lightly and very quick; Recueil
des voyages, etc. tom. 3. p. 168. Nota. 1. This character of very long arms
belongs only to the gibbon; and, consequently, indicates that the fefe is the
same animal. 2. We may presume, that the word fefe comes from jesef or sesef,
the name of the baboon in the provinces of Africa which border upon Arabia, and
that it has been transferred from the baboon to the gibbon; for the arms of the
baboon are not longer than those of the other apes.
.

The gibbon varies in size and color. There are two in the royal cabinet, of
which the second, though an adult, is much smaller than the first, and is brown
in all the parts where the other is black. But they so perfectly resemble each
other in every other article, that they unquestionably belong to the same
species.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The gibbon has no tail. There are slight callosities on his buttocks. His face
is flat, brown, and surrounded with a circle of gray hairs. His canine teeth
are proportionally larger than those of man. The ears are naked, black, and
round. The arms are enormously long. He walks on his two hind feet, and is
about a foot and a half or three feet high. The female, like women, is subject
to a periodical evacuation.

Plate CCLIII. GREAT GIBBON.


Plate CCLV. MAGOT.


The MAGOT, or BARBARY APE Barbary ape, with a long face, not unlike that of a
dog; canine teeth long and strong; ears like the human; nails flat; buttocks
bare; color of the upper part of the body a dirty greenish brown; belly of a
dull pale yellow; grows to above the length of four feet; Pennant's synops. of
quad. p. 100.

Magot, the old French name of this ape, which we have adopted. Momenet,
according to Johnston. It is likewise called Tartarin, because it is very
common in South Tartary.

Cynocephalus; Arist. Hist. anim. lib. 2. cap. 8. Plinii lib. 8. cap. 54.
Gesner, quad. p. 859. Prosper Alpin. Egypt. vol. 2. p. 241. tab. 16. Simia
cynocephala..... Le singe cynocephale: Brisson, quad.

Simia inuus, ecaudata, natibus calvis, capite oblongo; Linn. Syst. not. p. 35.


.
OF all the apes without tails It is certain that this ape has no tail, though
there is a slight appearance of one, formed by a small appendix of skin about
half an inch long, and situated above the anus. But this appendix has no
vertebrae, and is only a portion of skin, which adheres not more to the coccix
than to the rest of the skin.
, the Magot agrees best with the temperature of our climate. We kept one
several years. In summer, he delighted to be in the open air; and, in winter,
he might be kept in a room without fire. Though by no means delicate, he was
always melancholy, and sometimes dirty. He used the same grimaces to mark his
anger, or to express his appetite. His movements were brisk, his manners gross,
and his aspect more ugly than ridiculous. When agitated with passion, he
exhibited and grinded his teeth. He filled the pouches of his cheeks with the
food which was given him, and generally eat every thing, except raw flesh,
cheese, and whatever had undergone a kind of fermentation. When about to sleep,
he loved to perch upon an iron or wooden bar. He was always chained; because,
though he had been long in a domestic state, he was not civilized, and had no
attachment to his masters. He seems to have been ill educated; for I have seen
others of the same species more intelligent, more obedient, more gay, and so
docile as to learn to dance, to make gesticulations in cadence, and to allow
themselves peaceably to be clothed.

This ape, when erect upon his two hind legs, is generally two feet and a half,
or three feet high; the female is smaller than the male. He walks more
willingly on four feet than on two. When resting, he commonly supports his body
on two prominent callosities, which are situated where the buttocks ought to
be: The anus is placed higher. Hence his body is more inclined than that of a
man, when sitting. He differs from the pigmy or ape properly so called: 1.
Because his muzzle is thick and long, as in the dog; but the face of the pigmy
is flat; 2. Because he has very long canine teeth; 3. Because his nails and
fingers are neither so flat nor so round; and, 4. Because he is larger, more
squat, and of a more ferocious and untractable disposition.

There are some varieties in this species. We have seen magots of different
sizes, and with hair more or less deeply colored, and more or less bushy. It
even appears, that the five animals described and drawn by Prosper Alpinus,
under the denomination of cynocephali Prosper. Alpin. Hist. Not. Egypt. lib.
4. tab. 15. fig. 1. et tab. 16. 17. 18. 19.
, are all magots, which differ only in magnitude, and in some other characters
too slight to constitute distinct species. It likewise appears that the species
is pretty generally diffused over all the warm climates of the Old Continent,
and that they are found in Tartary, Arabia, AEthiopia, Malabar The third
species of Malabarian ape is ash-colored, and has no tail, or a very short
one. It is familiar, and easily apprehends what it is taught. -- I received one
in a present; and, one day I thought proper to beat it; but its cries brought
about me such a number of its neighbors in a wild state, that, to prevent
accidents, I restored it to liberty; Voyage du P. Vincent Marie, p. 405.
, Barbary, Mauritania, and as far as the Cape of Good Hope It is probably this
species of ape which Robert Lade mentions in the following terms: 'We traversed
a large mountain in the neighborhood of the Cape of Good Hope, and amused
ourselves with hunting large apes, which are very numerous in that place. -- I
can neither describe all the arts practiced by these animals, nor the
nimbleness and impudence with which they returned, after being pursued by us.
Sometimes they allowed us to approach so near them, that I was almost certain
of seizing them. But, when I made the attempt, they sprung, at a single leap,
ten paces from me, and mounted trees with equal agility, from which they looked
at us with great indifference, and seemed to derive pleasure from our
astonishment. Some of them were so large, that, if our interpreter had not
assured us that they were neither ferocious nor dangerous, our number would not
have appeared to be sufficient to protect us from their attacks. As it could
serve no purpose to kill them, we did not use our guns. But the Captain
happened to aim at a very large one which sat on the top of a tree, after
having fatigued us a long time in pursuing him: This kind of menace, however,
of which the animal, perhaps, recollected his having sometimes seen the
consequences, terrified him to such a degree, that he fell down motionless at
our feet, and we had no difficulty in seizing him. But, whenever he recovered
from his stupor, it required all our dexterity and efforts to keep him. We tied
his patts together. But he bit so furiously, that we were under the necessity
of covering his head with our handkerchiefs;' Voyages by Robert Lade.
.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The magot has no tail, though there is a small portion of skin which has the
appearance of one. He has cheek-pouches, large prominent callosities on his
buttocks, canine teeth, proportionally longer than those of man, and the under
part of the face turned up, like the muzzle of a bull-dog. He has down on his
face; the hair on his body is of a greenish brown color, and that on his belly
is a whitish yellow. He walks on the two hind feet, but oftener on four. He is
three feet or three feet and a half high; and some of this species appear to be
still larger. The females are subject to a periodical discharge.

Plate CCLIV. SMALL GIBBON.


Plate CCLVI. MAGOT.


The BABOON, properly so called In Latin Papio; in English, Baboon; in German,
Pavyon; at the Cape of Good Hope, Choac-kama; in French, le Papion, or Babouin.

Papio; Gesner. Icon. quad. p. 76. Brisson. Regn. anim. p. 192.

Simia sphinx, semicaudata, ore vibrissato, unguibus acuminatis, natibus
calvis; Linn. syst. Not. p. 35. Nota. Linnaeus erred in making whiskers a
distinctive character of this animal; for the real baboon has no whiskers. See
our figure, which was drawn from the life.


.
IN man, the physiognomy is deceitful, and the figure of his body gives no
indication of the qualities of his mind. But, in the brute creation, we may
judge of the disposition by the aspect; for every internal quality appears
externally. For example, in looking at the apes and baboons, it is easy to
perceive, that the latter ought to be the most savage and mischievous. Their
manners differ as much as their figures. The orang-outang has the greatest
resemblance to man; and he is the most grave, docile, and intelligent of the
whole race. The Barbary ape, which begins to recede from the human figure, and
approaches to that of the brutes by his muzzle and canine teeth, is brisk,
disobedient, and nasty. The baboons, who resemble man in the hands only, and
who have a tail, sharp nails, a large muzzle, etc. have the air of ferocious
beasts, which they are in effect. The baboon, of which a figure is here given,
I saw alive. He was not perfectly hideous; and yet he excited a degree of
horror. Perpetually grinding his teeth, fretting and chafing with rage, his
owner was obliged to keep him confined in an iron cage, the bars of which he
moved so powerfully with his hands, that he inspired the spectators with
terror. He is a squat animal, whose compact body and nervous members indicate
strength and agility. He is covered with long close hair, which gives him the
appearance of being larger than he is in reality. His strength, however, is so
great, that he would easily overcome one or several men, if not provided with
arms It is to this species that the animal called tree, tree, tree, tree, at
Madagascar, ought to be referred. It is as large, says Flacourt, as a calf of
two years old. It has a round head, and the face of a man. The fore and hind
feet are like those of the ape. The hair is crisped, the tail short, and the
ears resemble those of man. It is similar to the tanach described by Ambrose
Pary. It is a solitary animal, and much dreaded by the natives; Voyage a
Madagascar, p. 151.
. Besides, he is continually agitated by that passion which renders the
gentlest animals ferocious. He is insolently salacious, affects to show himself
in this situation, and seems to gratify his desires, per manum suum, before the
whole world. This detestable action recalls the idea of vice, and renders
disgustful the aspect of an animal, which Nature seems to have particularly
devoted to such an uncommon species of impudence; for, in all other animals,
and even in man, she has covered these parts with a veil. In the baboon, on the
contrary, they are perpetually naked, and the more conspicuous, because the
rest of the body is covered with long hair. The buttocks are likewise naked,
and of a blood red color; the testicles are pendulous; the anus is uncovered,
and the tail always elevated. He seems to be proud of all those nudities; for
the presents his hind parts more frequently than his front, especially when he
sees women, before whom he displays an effrontery so matchless, that it can
originate from nothing but the most inordinate desire Papio, animal ad
libidinem pronum, cum mulieres videt alacritatem suam ostendit. -- Papio quem
vidi vivum, ad nutum haud secus, atque caput reliqua animalia, anum vertebat
frequentibus populo ostentans; Gesner. Icon. quad. p. 77. -- In the Philippine
islands, the baboons are so salacious, that the women dare not go far from
their own houses; Voyage de Gemelli Carreri, tom. 5. p. 209 -- The baboons have
no hair on their buttocks, which are so full of cicatrices and scratches, that
they seem to be even deprived of skin. These animals are inexpressibly
lascivious; Descript. du Cap de Bonneesperance, par Kolbe, tom. 3. p. 59. --
'Papio, animal libidinosum, mulieribus facile vim inferens, robustum et ferox;'
Linn. syst. not. p. 35.
. The magot, and some others, have the same inclinations; but, as they are
smaller and not so petulant, they are taught modesty by the whip. The baboon,
however, is perfectly incorrigible, and nothing can tame him.

Notwithstanding the violence of their passion, these animals produce not in
temperate climates. The female generally brings forth but one young at a time,
which she carries between her arms, in a manner fixed to her pap. Like women,
she is subject to a periodical evacuation, which is common to her with the
other female apes who have naked buttocks. These baboons, though mischievous
and fierce, are not carnivorous. They live chiefly on fruits, roots, and seeds
The baboons are passionately fond of raisins, apples, and, in general, of all
fruits which grow in gardens..... Their teeth and paws render them formidable
to dogs, who overcome them with difficulty, unless when excess of eating has
made them heavy and inactive. -- I remarked that they neither eat fish nor
flesh, except when boiled or roasted, and then they devour both with avidity --
In their expeditions to rob orchards, gardens, or vineyards, they generally go
in troops. Some of them enter the enclosure, while others remain on the wall as
sentinels, to give notice of any approaching danger. The rest of the troop are
stationed without the garden, at convenient distances from each other, and thus
form a line which extends from the place of pillage to that of their
rendezvous. Matters being disposed in this manner, the baboons begin the
operation; and throw to those on the wall, melons, gourds, apples, pears, etc.
Those on the walls throw these fruits to their neighbors below; and thus the
spoils are handed along the whole line, which generally terminates on some
mountain. They are so dexterous, and quick-sighted, that they seldom allow the
fruit to fall in throwing it from one to another. All this is performed with
profound silence and great despatch. When the sentinels perceive any person,
they cry; and, at this signal, the whole troop fly off with astonishing
rapidity; Descript. du Cap de Bonne-esperance, par Kolbe, tom. 3. p. 57.
. They assemble in troops for the purpose of robbing gardens: They throw the
fruit from hand to hand, and over the walls; and they make great havoc in all
the cultivated lands.

Plate CCLVII. LARGE BABOON.


Plate CCLVIII. SMALL BABOON.


Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The baboon has cheek-pouches and large callosities on his thighs, which are
naked, and of a blood color. His tail is arched, and about seven or eight
inches long. The canine teeth are proportionally much longer and larger than
those of man. The muzzle is very thick and long; the ears are naked; the body
is massy and contracted; the members are thick and short; the organs of
generation are naked and flesh-coloured. The hair is long, bushy, of a reddish
brown, and pretty uniform over the whole body. He walks oftener on four than on
two feet. When erect, he is three or four feet high. In this species, there
seem to be races still larger, and others much smaller. We have given figures
both of the large and small kinds, in which we can perceive no other difference
but that of magnitude. This difference, however, proceeds not from age; for the
small baboon appeared to be an adult as well as the large. The females are
subject to the menstrual discharge*

* In August 1779, a male baboon, remarkable for its magnitude, strength, and
beautiful colors, was exihibited at Edinburgh. It was generally thought to be
a variety of the mandrill described by Gesner, Buffon, Ray, Linnaeus, and
Brisson. But, as it differed from the mandrill of these authors in a number of
characters, the Translator caused a drawing of it to be made. [See the plate].
The mandrill is said not to exceed two feet in length. But this baboon, when
erect, was near five feet high. The mandrill is represented as a good-natured,
though not a sportive animal. This baboon, on the contrary, was excessively
fierce, presented uniformly to the spectators the most threatening aspect, and
attempted to seize every person who came within reach of his chain. On such
occasions, he made a deep grunting noise, and tossed up his head almost
perpetually. The baboon described by Buffon presented his hind parts more
frequently than his front, especially when he saw women. But this baboon
uniformly presented his face, and allowed no person to approach him behind. The
Count de Buffon remarks, that the mandrill is an animal of the most disgusting
deformity, and that he perpetually licks a snot which runs from his nose. But
the baboon under consideration was an animal of great beauty, and had no
visible distillation from his nostrils.

Since writing the above, Mr Pennant obligingly communicated to the Translator
the proof sheet of a new and elegant edition of his excellent Synopsis of
Quadrupeds, in which is contained the following accurate description of this
animal, under the appellation of the Great Baboon.

GREAT BABOON.
Papio; Gesner. quad. p. 560. Simia Sphynx; Linn. syst. not. p. 35. Le Choras.
Simia mormon; Alstroemar Schreber. p. 92. tab. 8. MUS. LEV.
Baboon with hazel irides; ears small and naked; face canine, and very thick;
middle of the face and forehead naked, and of a bright vermilion color; tip of
the nose of the same; it ended truncated like that of a hog: Sides of the nose
broadly ribbed, and of a fine violet blue; the opening of the mouth small;
cheeks, throat, and goat-like beard, yellow: Hair on the forehead is very long,
turns back, is black, and forms a kind of pointed crest. Head, arms, and legs,
covered with short hair, yellow and black intermixed; the breast with long,
whitish, yellow hairs; the shoulders with long brown hair.

Nails flat; feet and hands black: Tail four inches long, and very hairy:
Buttocks bare, red, and filthy; but the space about them is of a most elegant
purple color, which reaches to the inside of the upper part of the thighs.

This was described from a stuffed specimen in Sir Ashton Lever's museum. In
October 1779, a live animal of this species was shown at Chester, which
differed a little in color from the above, being in general much darker. Eyes
much sunk in the head, and small. On the internal side of each ear was a white
line, pointing upwards. The hair on the forehead turned up, like a toupee. Feet
black; in other respects resembled the former.

In this I had an opportunity of examining the teeth. The cutting teeth were
like those of the rest of the genus; but, in the upper and lower jaw, were two
canine, or rather tusks, near three inches long, and exceedingly sharp and
pointed.

This animal was five feet high, of a most tremendous strength in all its
parts; was excessively fierce, libidinous, and strong.

Mr Schreber says, that this species lives on succulent fruits, and on nuts; is
very fond of eggs, and will put eight at once into its pouches, and, taking
them out one by one, break them at the end, and swallow the yolk and white:
Rejects all flesh-meat, unless it be dressed: Would drink quantities of wine or
brandy: Was less agile than other baboons: Very cleanly; for it would
immediately fling its excrements out of its hut.

That which was shown at Chester was particularly fond of cheese. Its voice was
a kind of roar, not unlike that of a lion, but low and somewhat inward. It went
upon all fours, and never stood on its hind legs, unless forced by the keeper;
but would frequently sit on its rump in a crouching manner, and drop its arms
before the belly.

Inhabits the hotter parts of Africa; Pennant's Synops. of quad. Edit. 2. in 4
to, p. 173.

To this description very little can be added. In the individual shown at
Edinburgh, which was probably the same that Mr Pennant afterward saw at
Chester, the colors of the face were distinct and unmixed. The ribbed cheeks
were of a sky-blue color. A vermilion line began a little above the eyes, and
running down between them, and on each side of the nose, spread over the snout.
The inside of the ears was blue, which, softening from purple, terminated in
vermilion. The beard, at the roots, was of the same dark brown color with that
on upper part of the body; but it soon changed into a deep orange, and ended in
yellow. The hairs on the belly were of an ash color, and speckled like the
sides of a partridge. The rump was of a vermillion color; and the beautiful
colors on the hips were only gradations from red to blue. If it had any
callosities on the buttocks, they were not apparent. The penis was nearly of
the same red color with the rump; that of the testicles was more fiery, and
softened into a light blue, which likewise spread over the inside of the
thighs. -- It was very fond of the ears of wheat, the grains of which it
dexterously picked out, one by one, with its teeth.

Plate CCLIX. MANDRILL.
Plate CCLX. MANDRILL.

The MANDRILL Ribbed nose baboon, with a long naked nose compressed sidewise,
of a a purple color, and ribbed obliquely on each side; on the chin, a short
picked orange beard; tail very hairy, about two inches long, which it carries
erect; buttocks naked; hair soft, dusky mottled with yellow; length, from nose
to tail, about two feet; Pennant's synops. of quad. p. 103.

Simia maimon, caudata, subbarbata, genis caeruleis striatis, natibus calvis;
Linn. syst. not. p. 35.

Cercopithecus cynocephalus, part corporis anteriore longis pilis obsita, naso
violaceo nudo; Brisson. regn. anim. p. 214.

Mandrill, the name which the British, who frequent the coast of Guinea, have
given to this animal.

There is a strange sort of animal, called by the White men in Guiney a
Mandrill; but, why it is so called, I know not, nor did I ever hear of the name
before; neither can those who call them so tell, except it be for their near
resemblance of a human creature, though nothing at all like an ape; Smith's
voyage to Guiney, p. 52.


, or Ribbed Nose BABOON.
THE uggliness of this baboon is perfectly disgusting. His nose, or rather his
two nostrils, are flat, from which a snot perpetually runs, and he licks it
into his mouth with his tongue. His head is very large, and his muzzle long.
His body is squat, and his buttocks are of a blood color. His anus is
conspicuous, and situated almost as high as the loins. His face is of a violet
color, and surrounded on each side with deep longitudinal wrinkles, which
augment the sullenness and deformity of his aspect. He is likewise larger, and
perhaps stronger than the baboon; but, at the same time, he is more peaceable,
and less ferocious. We here give figures of both the male and the female, which
we have seen alive. Whether they had received a better education, or if they be
naturally more gentle than the baboon, they appeared to be more tractable and
less impudent; but they were equally disagreeable.

This species of baboon is found on the Gold Coast, and in the other southern
provinces of Africa, where he is called boggo by the Negroes, and mandrill by
the Europeans. Next to the orang-outang, he is the largest of all the apes or
baboons. Smith relates The bodies of the mandrill, when full grown, are as big
in circumference as a middle-sized man's. Their legs much shorter, and their
feet longer, their arms and hands in proportion. The head is monstrously big,
and the face broad and flat, without any other hair but the eyebrows; the nose
very small, the mouth wide, and the lips thin. The face, which is covered by a
white skin, is extremely ugly, being all over wrinkled as with old age; the
teeth broad and very yellow; the hands have no more hair than the face, but the
same white skin, though all the rest of the body is covered with long black
hair like a bear. They never go upon all four like apes, but cry when vexed or
teazed, just like children. It is said, that the males often attack and use
violence to the Black women, wherever they meet them alone in the woods. They
are generally very snotty-nosed, and take great delight in scraping it down
from their noses to their mouths. When I was at Skerbro one Mr Cummerbus made
me a present of one of these strange animals, which are called by the natives
Boggoe. It was a she-cub of six months age, but was then larger than a baboon:
Smith's voyage to Guinea, p. 51. In the same country, this animal is called
boogoc or boggo, and mandrill, and they likewise call the orang-outang, pongo
and drill. There is much similarity in these names, and they are probably
derived from each other: And, in fact, the pongo and boggo, or the drill and
mandrill, have several common characters. But the first is an ape without a
tail, almost naked, and with a flat oval face; and the second is a baboon with
a tail, long hair, and a thick and long muzzle. Man, in the German and English
languages, signifies man in general; and drill, in the jargon of some of our
French provinces, denotes a vigorous libertine.
, that he had a present of a female mandrill, which was only six months old,
and that it was as large as an adult baboon. He adds, that these mandrills walk
always on two feet; that they weep and groan like men; that they have a violent
passion for women, which they never fail to gratify when they find a woman at a
distance from relief.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The mandrill has cheek-pouches, and callosities on the buttocks. The tail
exceeds not two or three inches. The canine teeth are much thicker and longer
than those of man. The muzzle is very thick, very long, and furrowed on each
side with deep longitudinal wrinkles. The face is naked, and of a blueish
color. The ears, as well as the palm of the hands and soles of the feet, are
naked. The hair is long, of a reddish brown upon the body, and gray upon the
breast and belly. He walks on two feet oftener than on four. When erect, he is
four or four and a half feet high; and some of them seem to be still larger.
The females are subject to the menses.

Plate CCLXI. FEMALE MANDRILL.


The OUANDEROU Ouanderou, Wanderu, the names of this animal in Ceylon.

Simia ex Egypto Venetias deducta; Prosper. Alpin. vol. 2. p. 245. tab. 20.

Ouanderou, a kind of ape in Ceylon, of which there appears to be two species;
Relation de Ceylon, par Knox, tom. 1. p. 105. 111. fig. ibid.

Cercopithecus niger, barba incana promissa, Wanderu Zeylonensibus; Raii
synops. quad. p. 158.

Cercopithecus barbatus niger, barba incana; Brisson. regn. anim. p. 207.


and the LOWANDO Lowando, Elwandu, the names of this animal in Ceylon. Nota. 1.
It appears to be only a variety of the ouanderou. 2. There seems to be another
variety of these animals; the ouanderou with a black body and white beard, and
the lowando with a gray body and black beard. Others of the same species are
totally white.
.
THOUGH these two animals appear to belong to the same species, we have
preserved to each of them the proper names they receive in Ceylon, which is
their native country; because they constitute, at least, two distinct and
permanent races. The body of the ouanderou is covered with brown and black
hairs; it has a bushy head, and a large beard. The body of the lowando, on the
contrary, is covered with whitish hairs, and the hair on its head and beard is
black. In the same country, there is a third race or variety, which is probably
the common stock of the other two; for the hair on its body, head, and beard,
is of one uniform white color. These three animals are not apes, but baboons,
of which they have all the characters both in figure and dispositions. They are
wild, and even ferocious. Their muzzle is long, their tail short, and they are
nearly of the same size and strength as the baboons. Their bodies are indeed
less squat, and their hind parts seem to be more feeble. That of which we have
given a figure, was exhibited to us under false appellations, both with regard
to its name and climate. Its owners told us, that it came from the continent of
America, and that it was called cayouvassou. I soon recollected that this word
cayouvassou is a Brasilian term, which is pronounced sajuouassou, and signifies
sapajou; and, consequently, that it was improperly applied; since all the
sapajous have very long tails. But the animal under consideration is a baboon
with a very short tail. Besides, not a single species of baboon exists in
America. Errors with regard to climate are very common, especially among those
who exhibit wild beasts: When they are ignorant of the climate and the name of
an animal, they fail not to give it a foreign denomination, which, whether true
or false, equally serves their purpose.

These baboon-ouanderous, when not tamed, are so mischievous, that they must be
kept in iron cages, where they are frequently agitated with vast fury. But,
when taken young, they are easily tamed, and appear to be even more susceptible
of education than the other baboons. The Indians delight in instructing these
animals, and pretend that the other apes, that is, the monkeys, have a great
respect for the baboons, who are possessed of more gravity and intelligence. In
a state of liberty In Malabar, we find four species of apes: The first is all
black and lustrous, with a white beard, which surrounds its chin, and is more
than a palm in length. The other apes have such a respect for this species,
that they humble themselves in its presence, as if they were conscious of its
superiority. The Princes and Nobles esteem those bearded apes; because they
appear to have more gravity and intelligence than the other kinds. They are
educated for ceremonies and sports, in which they acquit themselves to the
admiration of the spectators; Voyage du Pere Vincent Marie, p. 405.
, they are extremely wild, and keep perpetually in the woods In Ceylon, there
are monkeys as large as our spaniels. They have gray hair, a black visage, and
a white beard which extends from the one ear to the other..... We meet with
others of the same size, but of a different color. This difference in color
appears not to alter the species; for they equally receive the denomination of
ouanderous. They do little injury to the cultivated lands, and generally remain
in the woods, where they live upon leaves and buds; but, when taken, they eat
any thing; Relation de Knox, tom. 1. p. 107. and 111. -- Hist. des voyages,
tom. 8. p. 545.
. If we may credit travelers, those which are all white are the strongest and
most mischievous. They are violently fond of women, strong enough to ravish
them when found alone The white apes, which are sometimes of the size of the
largest bull-dogs, are more dangerous than the black. They have a great desire
for women, and, after committing many outrages on them, terminate the scene by
strangling them. They sometimes come to the very houses; but the natives of
Macacar, who are extremely jealous of their wives, take care to prevent the
admission of such hideous gallants; Descript. de Macacar, p. 50.
, and often injure them so as to prove fatal.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The ouanderous has cheek-pouches, and callosities on the buttocks. The tail is
seven or eight inches in length. The canine teeth are longer and larger than
those of man. The muzzle is thick and long. The head is environed with a broad
mane, and a large beard of coarse hairs. The body is pretty long, and thin
behind. In this species, there are races which vary in color. Some have the
hair on the body black, and a white beard; in others, the hair on the body is
whitish, and the beard black. They walk more frequently on four than on two
feet; and, when erect, they are three or three and a half feet high. The
females are subject to the periodical evacuation.

Plate CCLXIII. OUANDEROU.


The MAIMON, or Pig-tailed BABOON Pig-tailed baboon, with a pointed face; eyes
hazel; above and beneath the mouth some few black hairs; face naked, of a
swarthy redness; two sharp canine teeth; ears like the human; crown of the head
dusky; hair on the limbs and body brown, inclining to ash color; palest on the
belly; fingers black; nails long and flat; thumbs on the hind feet very long,
connected to the nearest toe by a broad membrane; tail four inches long,
exactly like a pig's, and almost naked; the bare spaces on the rump red, and
but small; length from head to tail twenty-two inches.

Pig-tailed monkey; Edwards, p. 8.

Simia Nemestrina, semicaudata, sub-barbata, grisea, iridibus brunneis, natibus
calvis; Linn. Syst. Not. p. 35. Brit. Mus.


.
THE apes, baboons, and monkeys, form three tribes, with intervals between
each, the first of which is filled by the magot, and the second by the maimon.
The latter constitutes the link or shade between the baboons and monkeys, as
the magot does between the apes and baboons. In effect, the maimon resembles
the baboons by the thickness and largeness of his muzzle, and by his short,
arched tail; but he differs from them, and approaches the monkeys, by the
smallness of his size, and the mildness of his nature. Mr Edwards has given a
figure and description of the maimon, under the denomination of the pig-tailed
ape. This peculiar character is sufficient to distinguish him; for, of all the
baboons or monkeys, he alone has a naked, slender, and arched tail, like that
of a pig. He is nearly of the size of the magot, and has so strong a
resemblance to the macaque, or hare-lipped monkey, that he might be regarded as
a variety of this species, if his tail were not totally different. He has a
naked, tawny face, chesnut-coloured eyes, black eyelids, a flat nose, and thin
lips, with some stiff hairs, but too short to form whiskers. He has not, like
the apes and baboons, his testicles and penis prominent and apparent; the whole
organs are concealed under the skin. Hence the maimon, though vivacious and
full of fire, has none of that impudent petulance peculiar to the baboons. He
is gentle, tractable, and even caressing. He is found in Sumatra, and probably
in other southern provinces of India; of course, he endures with difficulty the
cold of our climate. The one we saw in Paris lived only a short time, and that
which Mr Edwards described, existed only twelve months in London The pig-tailed
monkey, from the island of Sumatra, in the Indian Sea, was brought to England
in the year 1752..... It was extremely lively and full of action. It was about
the bigness of a common house-cat. It was a male.... But, since I purchased
this, which lived a year with me, I have seen a female of the same species
shown in Bartholomew fair, London. It was larger by half than mine, which I
carried to compare with it. They seemed highly pleased with each other's
company, though it was the first time of their meeting; Edwards's Gleanings, p.
8.
.

Plate CCLXII. MAIMON


Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The maimon has cheek-pouches, callosities on the buttocks, and a naked, curled
up tail from five to six inches in length. The canine teeth are not
proportionally longer than those of man. The muzzle is very large; the orbits
of the eyes are prominent above; the face, the ears, the hands, and the feet
are naked and flesh-coloured. The hair on the body is of an olive black color,
and of a reddish yellow on the belly. He sometimes walks on two, and sometimes
on four feet. When erect, he is two feet, or two feet and a half high. The
female is subject to the menstrual flux.

The MACAQUE or Hare-lipped MONKEY Hare-lipped monkey, with the nostrils
divided like those of a hare; nose thick, flat, and wrinkled; head large; eyes
small; teeth very white; body thick and clumsy; buttocks naked; tail long;
color varies, sometimes like that of a wolf, but others are brown, tinged with
yellow or olive. The tail is rather shorter than the body, and is always
carried arched; Pennant's Synops. of quad. p. 111.

Cercopithecus Angolensis major, macquo; Marcgrave, Brasil. p. 227. Raii
Synops. quad. p. 155. Klein. quad. p. 89.

Cercopithecus cynocephalus, naribus bifidis elatis, natibus calvis; Brisson.
quad. p. 152.

Simia cynomolgus, caudata, imberbis, naribus bifidis elatis, cauda arcuata,
natibus calvis; Linn. Syst. Not. p. 38.

Simia AEgyptiaca, cauda elongata, clunibus tuberosis nudis; Hasselquist. Here
the epithet AEgyptiaca is improperly applied; for Egypt is not the native
country of any species of monkeys. Etsi in AEgypto nullum simiarum genus
nascatur, cujuslibet tamen generis et ex Arabia felici, et ex AEthiopia
immensae mercaturae causa illuc convehuntur; Prosper. Alpin. Hist. Egypt. lib.
4. p. 240.


, and the EGRET The egret monkey, with a long face, and an upright sharp
pointed tuft on the top of the head; hair on the fore head black; the tuft and
upper part of the body light gray; eyebrows large; beard small. It is of the
size of a small cat; Pennant's Synops. of quad. p. 116.

Simia aygula, caudata, subimberbis, grisea, eminentia pilosa verticis reversa
longitudinali; Linn. Syst. Not. p. 39. Os^^^'s voyage, vol. 1. p. 151.

Cercopithecus Angolensis, Macaquo.... Caudam portat arcuatam.... Clamat hah,
hah; dentes habet albissimos.... Penem habet humano similem, instar pueri;
Marcgr. Hist. Not. Brasil. p. 227.


.
OF all the guenons, or monkeys with long tails, the macaque makes the nearest
approach to the baboons. Like them, his body is short and squat, his head and
muzzle large, his nose flat, his cheeks wrinkled, and, at the same time, he
exceeds most of the other monkeys in size. He is also extremely ugly; so that
he might be regarded as a small species of baboon, if his tail were not long
and bushy, while that of the baboons in general is very short. This species is
a native of Congo, and other southern provinces of Africa. It is numerous, and
subject to several varieties in size, in color, and in the disposition of the
hair. The body of that described by Hasselquist was more than two feet long;
and those we have seen exceeded not a foot and a half. The one we have
denominated egret, because it has a crest or tuft of hair on the top of the
head, appears to be only a variety of the macaque, which it resembles in every
article, except this, and some other slight differences in the hair. They are
both of mild manners, and extremely tractable. But, independent of a
disagreeable musky odor which they both diffuse, they are so dirty, so ugly,
and so loathsome, that, when they make their grimaces, they cannot be viewed
without horror and disgust. These monkeys go often in troops, especially in
their expeditions to rob gardens. Bosman relates, that they take in each paw a
quantity of millet, and an equal quantity under their arms and in their mouths;
that they return thus loaded leaping on their hind feet, and, when pursued,
they drop the stalks which they held under their arms and in their hands,
preserving only what they carry in their teeth, to enable them to run with more
speed on their four feet. He adds, that they examine, with the most scrupulous
accuracy, every stalk of millet they pull, and, if it does not please them,
they throw it on the ground, and tear up others. By this delicacy of choice,
they do more damage than by their robberies Voyage de Bosman, p. 258.
.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The macaque has cheek-pouches and callosities on his buttocks. His tail is
from eighteen to twenty inches long. His head is large, his muzzle very thick,
and his face naked, livid, and wrinkled. His ears are covered with hair. His
body is short and squat, and his limbs thick and short. The hair on the
superior parts of his body is of a greenish ash color, and of a yellowish gray
on the breast and belly. He has a small crest of hair on the top of the head.
He walks on four and sometimes on two feet. The length of his body,
comprehending that of the head, is about eighteen or twenty inches. In this
species, there appear to be races much larger, Plate CCLXIV. MACAQUE.
Plate CCLXV. AIGRETTE.
and others much smaller, such as that of the following.

The egret seems to be only a variety of the macaque: He is about one third
less in all his dimensions. Instead of a small crest of hair on the top of the
head, as in the macaque, the egret has an erect, pointed tuft. The hair on his
front is black; but that on the front of the macaque is greenish. The tail of
the egret is likewise proportionally larger than that of the macaque. The
females of both kinds have periodic evacuations.

The PATAS The name of this monkey in Senegal, its native country. It is
commonly called the red ape of Senegal.

Brue found in Tabao a new species of ape, of so lively a red color, that a
person would have imagined it to be painted. The Negroes call it Patas; Relat.
de Brue, Hist. genesis des voyages, tom. 2. p. 520.

Red monkey with a long nose; eyes sunk in the head; ears furnished with pretty
long hairs; body slender: Over each eye, from ear to ear, extends a black line:
The upper part of the body of a most beautiful and bright bay, almost red, so
vivid as to appear painted; the lower parts ash color, tinged with yellow. The
tail is not so long as the body, the length of which is about one foot six
inches; Pennant's Synops. of quad. p. 116.


or red MONKEY.
THE Patas belongs to the same country, and is nearly of the same size with the
macaque; but his body is longer, his face less hideous, and his hair more
beautiful. He is remarkable for the brilliancy of his robe, which is of so
vivid a red as to have the appearance of being painted. We have seen two
varieties of this species. The first has a black line above the eyes, which
extends from ear to ear. The second differs from the first only in the color
of this line, which is white. Both have long hair under the chin and round the
cheeks, which makes a fine beard: But, in the first, it is yellow, and, in the
second, white. This variety seems to indicate others in the color of the hair;
and I am inclined to think, that the monkey mentioned by Marmol The apes of the
color of a wild cat, with a long tail, and a white or black muzzle, commonly
called in Spain Galospaules, come from the Negro country; L'Afrique de Marmol,
tom. 1. p. 57.
, which is of the color of a wild cat, and said to come from the Negro
country, is a variety of the patas.

These monkeys are not equally dexterous as the other kinds; and, at the same
time, they are extremely inquisitive. 'I have seen them,' says Brue, 'descend
from the tops of the trees to the extremities of the branches, in order to
admire the barks as they passed. They stare for some time, seem to be
entertained with what they have seen, and then give place to those who come
after. They became so familiar as to throw branches at the Frenchmen, who
returned the compliment by the shot of their muskets. Some of them sell, others
were wounded, and the rest were struck with a strange consternation. One party
raised hideous cries; another collected stones to throw at the enemy: Some of
them, with their bowels in their hands, attempted to throw their intrails at
the spectators. At last, perceiving the combat to be at least equal, they
retired Relat. de Brue, Hist. genesis des voyages, tom. 2. p. 521.
.'

It is probably of this species of monkey which le Maire speaks of in the
following terms: 'The havoc which these monkeys make in the fields of Senegal,
when the millet and other grains are ripe, is not to be expressed. They
assemble to the number of forty or fifty. One of them stands sentinel on a
tree, listens, and looks about on all sides, while the others are busy. When he
perceives any person, he sets up loud shrieks to alarm the band, who obey the
signal, fly off with their prey, leaping from tree to tree with prodigious
agility. The females, who carry their young in their arms, fly with the rest,
and leap as if they were loaded with no burden Voyage de le Maire, p. 103.
'

Though, in every region of Africa, the species of apes, baboons, and monkeys,
are very numerous, some of which are pretty similar; yet it is remarked by
travelers, that they never intermix, and that each species commonly inhabits a
different quarter of the country It would be endless to describe all the
species of apes which are found from Arquin to Sierra-Leona. It is remarkable,
that they do not intermix, and that two kinds are never seen in the same
quarter; Hist. genesis des voyages, tom. 2. p. 221.


Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The patas has cheek-pouches and callosities on his buttocks. His tail is as
long as both his body and head. The top of his head is flat. His muzzle, body,
and legs, are long. He has black hair on his body, and a narrow band of the
same color above his eyes, which extends from ear to ear. The hair on the
upper parts of his Plate CCLXVI. BLACK BANDED PATAS.
Plate CCLXVII. WHITE BANDED PATAS.
body is almost red, and that on the under parts, as the throat, breast, and
belly, is of a yellow gray color. This species varies in the color of the
band above the eyes. It is black in some, and white in others. They walk
oftener on four than on two feet. When enraged, they agitate not their jaws,
like the other monkeys. From the point of the muzzle to the origin of the tail,
they are about a foot and a half or two feet in length. Some of them, as
appears from the relations of travelers, are larger. The females menstruate.

The MALBROUCK The name of this animal in Bengal, its native country.
Cercopithecus primus Clusii, p. 37. Clusius is wrong, when he says, that this
monkey's tail terminates in a tuft.
, and CHINESE-BONNET Chinese monkey with a long smooth nose, of a whitish
color; hair on the crown of the head long, lying flat, and parted like that of
a man; color, a pale cinereous brown; Pennant's Synops. of quad. p. 117.
Rillow; Knox's Celyon. p. 26.

THESE two monkeys seem to be of the same species, which, though different in
some respects from that of the Macaque, makes so near an approach to it, that
we are doubtful whether the macaque, the egret, the malbrouck, and the
Chinese-bonnet, are only four varieties, or permanent races, of the same
species. As these animals produce not in our climate, we cannot ascertain the
identity or diversity of their species, but must judge from the differences in
their figure and in their external qualities. The macaque and the egret are so
similar, that we presumed them to be one species. It is the same with the
malbrouck and Chinese-bonnet. But, as the latter differ from the former more
than they differ between themselves, we thought it best to separate them.

Our presumption, with regard to the diversity of these two species, is
founded, 1. On the difference in their figure; 2. On that of the color and
disposition of the hair; 3. On the different proportions in the skeletons of
the two kinds; and, in fine, on the two former being natives of the southern
regions of Africa, while the two latter are natives of Bengal. This last
consideration is of equal weight with any of the others; for we have shown,
that, in wild animals totally independent of man, the distance of climate is a
pretty certain indication of remoteness of species. Besides, the malbrouck and
Chinese-bonnet are not the only species or races of monkeys found in Bengal The
monkey of Calicut, with grayish hair, mentioned by Pyrard, should probably be
referred to the malbrouck species. In this country, the killing of monkeys is
prohibited. They are so importunate, troublesome, and numerous, that they do
much damage. The inhabitants of the towns and villages are obliged to lattice
their windows, to prevent the monkeys from entering their houses; Voyages de
Fr. Pyrard, tom. 1. p. 427.
It appears, from the evidence of travelers, that there are four varieties,
namely, white, black, red, and gray monkeys. They allege that the black kind
are most easily tamed. Those we saw were of a reddish gray color, and appeared
to be tame, and even docile.

'These animals,' travelers remark Voyages d'Inigo de Biervillas, p. 172.
'steal fruits, and particularly the sugar cane. One stands sentinel on a tree,
while the others load themselves with the booty. If he perceives any person, he
cries houp, houp, houp, with a loud and distinct voice. The moment this signal
is given, the whole troop throw down the canes they held in their left hand,
and run off on three feet. When pursued hard, they quit what they had in their
right hand, and save themselves by climbing trees, which are the usual places
of their abode. They leap from tree to tree; and even the females, though
loaded with their young, which they hold firmly, leap like the others; but they
sometimes fall. These animals are never more than half-tamed, and always
require a chain. Even in their own country, they never produce, when in
bondage: They require to be at perfect freedom in the woods. When fruits and
succulent plants fail, they eat insects, and sometimes descend to the margins
of rivers, and the seacoast, to catch fishes and crabs. They put their tail
between the pincers of the crab, and, whenever the pincers are closed, they
carry it quickly off, and eat it at their leisure. They gather cocoa nuts, and
are well acquainted with the method of extracting the juice for drink, and the
kernel for food. They likewise drink the zari which drops from the bamboos,
which they place on the tops of trees, in order to extract the liquors; and
they use it occasionally. They are taken by means of a cocoa nut, with a small
hole made in it. They put their paw into the hole with difficulty because it is
narrow; and the people who are watching, seize them before they can disengage
themselves. In the provinces of India inhabited by the Bramins, who kill no
animals, the number of monkeys, which are highly venerated, is almost infinite.
They come in troops into the cities, and enter the houses at all times with
perfect freedom; so that those who sell provisions, and particularly fruits,
pot herbs, etc. have much difficulty in preserving their commodities.' In
Amadabad, the capital of Guzarat, there are three hospitals for animals, where
lame and sick monkeys, and even those who, without being diseased, choose to
dwell there, are fed and cherished. Twice every week, the monkeys in the
neighborhood assemble spontaneously in the streets of the city. They then
mount upon the houses, each of which has a small terrace, or flat roof, where
they lie during the great heats. On these two days, the inhabitants fail not to
lay upon these terraces rice, millet, sugar canes, and other fruits in their
season; for, if these animals, by any accident, find not their provisions in
the accustomed place, they break the tiles which cover the rest of the house,
and commit great outrages. They never eat any thing, without thoroughly
examining it; and, when full, they fill their cheek-pouches for another
occasion. In places frequented by the monkeys, the birds dare not build their
nests on the trees; for they never fail to destroy the nests, and dash the eggs
on the ground See les voyages de la Boulaye le Gouz, p. 253. Relat. de
Thevenot, tom. 3. p. 20. Voyage de Gemelli Carreri, tom. 5. p. 164. Le Recueil
des voyages qui ont servi a l'etablissement de la Compagnie des Indes
Orientales, tom. 7. p. 36. Voyage d'Orient du P. Philippe, p. 312. et Voyage de
Tavernier, tom. 3. p. 64.
.

Neither the tiger nor other ferocious animals are the most formidable enemies
to the monkeys; for they easily make their escape by their nimbleness, and by
living on the tops of trees, where nothing but serpents have the art of
surprising them. 'The apes,' a traveller remarks, 'are masters of the forests;
for their dominion is not disputed either by the tiger or lion. The only
animals they have to dread are the serpents, who make perpetual war upon them.
Some of these serpents are of a prodigious size, and swallow an ape in a
moment. Others are smaller, but more agile, and go in quest of the apes on the
trees..... They watch the time when the apes sleep Descript. Historique de
Macacar, p. 51.
etc.'

Distinctive Characters of these Species.
The malbrouck has cheek-pouches and callosities on his buttocks. The tail is
nearly as long as both the body and head. The eyelids are flesh-coloured, and
the face of a cinereous Plate CCLXVIII. MALBROUK
Plate CCLXIX. CHINESE BONNET.
gray. The eyes and muzzle are large. The ears are large, thin, and
flesh-coloured. He has a band of gray hair, like the moon or varied monkey; but
the superior parts of his body are of a uniform yellowish brown color, and the
inferior are of a yellowish gray. He walks on four feet, and is about a foot
and a half long from the point of the muzzle to the origin of the tail.

The Chinese-bonnet appears to be a variety of the malbrouck. They differ in
the two following articles: In the former, the hair on the top of the head is
disposed in the form of a flat bonnet, from which its name has been derived,
and its tail is proportionally longer. The females of both these races are
subject to a periodic evacuation.

The MANGABEY Monkey with a long, black, naked, and dog-like face; the upper
eyelids of a pure white; ears black, and like the human; no canine teeth;
hairs on the sides of the face, beneath the cheeks, longer than the rest; tail
long; color of the whole body tawny and black; flat nails on the thumbs and
fore fingers; blunt claws on the others; hands and feet black; Pennant's
synops. of quad. p. 114.

Simia AEthiops, caudata, imberbis, capillitio arrecto, Innulaque frontis
albis; Linn. Syst. Not. p. 39.


, or MONKEY with white EYELIDS.
WE have had two individuals of this species, both of which were sent to us
under the appellation of Madagascar apes. It is easy to distinguish the
mangabeys from all the other monkeys by a very remarkable character. Their
eyelids are naked, and of a very splendid white color. They have a thick,
broad, long muzzle, and a prominent ring round their eyes. Some of them have
the hair on the head, neck, and upper part of the body, of a yellow brown
color, and that on the belly white. In others, the hair on the head and body
is lighter; and they are distinguished from the rest by a broad collar of white
hair, which surrounds their neck and cheeks. Both carry their tail arched, and
the hair on it is long and bushy. They come from the same country as the vari,
or ruffed maucauco; and, as they resemble him in the length Plate CCLXX.
MANGABEY.
Plate CCLXXI. MANGABEY with a white Collar.
of the muzzle and tail, in the manner of carrying the latter, and in the
varieties of color, they seem to form the shade between the makis and the
guenons, or long-tailed monkeys.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The mangabey has cheek-pouches and callosities on the buttocks. The tail is as
long as both the body and head. He has a prominent ring round the eyes, and the
upper eyelid is extremely white. The muzzle is thick and long. The eyebrows
consist of stiff, crisped hair, and the ears are black and almost naked. The
hair on the superior parts of the body is brown, and that on the inferior is
gray. There are varieties in this species: Some of them are of a uniform
color; others have a white circle round the neck, and round the cheeks, in the
form of a beard. They walk on four feet, and are nearly a foot and a half long,
from the extremity of the muzzle to the origin of the tail. The females of
these species menstruate.

The MONA, Moan, mona, monina, mounina, the names of the long-tailed monkeys in
the Moresk, Spanish, and Provencal languages. -- 'Peperiuntur in Mauritaniae
sylvis simiarum variae species, quarum quae caudam gerunt Monae dicuntur;' Leo
Afric. Descrip. Afric vol. 2. p. 757. -- 'Simii caudati et barbati, qui vulgo
Monichi vocantur;' Prosper. Alpin. Hist. Egypt. p. 242. Nota. The term Monkey,
which the British give to the long-tailed apes, is derived from monichi; and
both seem to come from mona, or monina, the original names of those animals.

Varied monkey, with a short thick nose, of a dirty flesh color; hair on the
sides of the face, and under the throat, long; the color yellow and black; on
the forehead, gray; above the eyes, from ear to ear, a black line; the upper
part of the body dusky and red; the belly whitish; outside of the thighs, and
the feet, black; the tail of a cinereous brown; length about a foot and a half,
the tail above two; Pennant's synops. of quad. p. 118.

Kebes, and Kipor, names by which the Greeks and Arabs denote the long-tailed
apes, with variegated colors.

Cercopithecus pilis ex nigro et rufo variegatis vestitus, pedibus nigris,
cauda cinerea: Le singe vary; Brisson. quad. p. 141.


or varied MONKEY.
THE mona is the most common of the monkeys. We had one alive for several
years. The mona and the magot agree best with the temperature of our climate.
This circumstance is alone sufficient to prove, that the mona is not a native
of the southern regions of Africa and the East Indies; and, in fact, it is
found in Barbary, Arabia, Persia, and other parts of Asia which were known to
the ancients Monichi simii caudati et barbati ex AEthiopia locis conterminis in
Egyptum deducuntur; suntque admodum cicures et mundi; Prosper. Alpin. Hist.
Egypt. p. 242.
, who called it kebos, cebus, or coephus, on account of the variety of its
colors. Its face is brown, with a kind of beard interspersed with white,
yellow, and a little black. The hair on the top of the head and neck is a
mixture of yellow and black: That on the back is a mixture of red and black.
The belly, as well as the inside of the thighs and legs, are whitish. The
external parts of the legs and feet are black, and the tail is of a deep gray
color. There are two small white spots, one on each side of the root of the
tail, a crescent of gray hair on the front, and a black band from the eyes to
the ears, and from the ears to the shoulder and arms. Some have called it nonne
from a corruption of moan or mona, and others the old man, on account of its
gray beard. But the vulgar appellation of varied monkey is best known, and
corresponds with the Greek name kebos, and Aristotle's definition of the monkey
with a long tail, and various colors.

In general, the monkeys have milder dispositions than the baboons, and their
character is less melancholy than that of the apes. They are extravagantly
vivacious; but have no ferocity; for they become tractable the moment their
attention is fixed by fear or restraint. The mona is particularly susceptible
of education, and even of some attachment to those who take care of him. The
one we kept allowed himself to be touched and carried about by the people with
whom he was acquainted; but, to others, he permitted not this freedom, and even
bit them. He likewise endeavored to obtain his liberty: He was fixed with a
long chain. When he could either break the chain or disengage himself, he fled
to the fields, and, though he did not spontaneously return, he allowed himself
to be taken by his master. He eat every thing, roasted meat, bread, and
particularly fruits. He likewise searched for spiders, ants, and insects It is
probably this species which Ludolf mentions under the denomination of the
Abyssinian ape. 'They come,' says he, 'in great troops. As they are exceedingly
fond of ants and worms, they reverse every stone, in order to catch the insects
they cover;' Hist. de l'Abyssinie. p. 41.
When several morsels were thrown to him at once, he filled his cheeks with
them. This practice is common to all the baboons and monkeys, to whom Nature
has given pouches in their cheeks, where they can keep a quantity of food
sufficient to nourish them for a day or two.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The mona has cheek-pouches, and callosities on the buttocks. The tail is about
two feet long, and more than half a foot longer than both the body and head.
The head is small Plate CCLXXII. MONA.
and round; the muzzle is thick and short; and the face is of a bright tawny
color. He has a gray band upon the front, and a black band extending from the
eyes to the ears, and from the ears to the shoulders and arms. He has a kind of
gray beard, formed by the hairs on his throat, which is longer than the others.
The hair on the body is a reddish black, and whitish on the belly. The outside
of the legs and feet are black; and the tail is of a grayish brown color, with
two white spots on each side of its root. He walks on four feet; and his
length, from the point of the muzzle to the origin of the tail, is about a foot
and a half. The female is subject to the menses.

The CALLITRIX, or GREEN-MONKEY Green monkey, with a black and flattish face,
the sides of it bounded by long white hairs, falling backwards, and almost
covering the ears, which are black, and like the human; head, limbs, and whole
upper part of the body and tail, covered with soft hairs, of a yellowish green
color at their ends, and cinereous at their roots; under side of the body and
tail, and inner side of the limbs, of a silvery color; tail very long and
slender; size of a small cat; Pennant's synops. of quad. p. 113.

Simius callitrichus; Prosper. Alpin. Egypt. vol. 1.

Simia Sabaea, caudata, imberbis, facie atra, cauda cinerea, natibus calvis;
Linn. syst. not. p. 38.

Cercopithecus ex cinereo flavescens, genis longis pilis albis obsitis;
Brisson. quad. p. 145.

Green monkey; Edward's Gleanings, p. 10.

In the Cape de Verd islands, there are apes with a long tail, and a black
face; Dampier's voyage, tom. 4.


.
CALLITRIX is a term employed by Homer, to denote, in general, the beautiful
color of the hair of animals. It was not till several ages after Homer's time,
that the Greeks applied this name to particular species of monkeys. Its
application to the animal under consideration is peculiarly proper. The body is
of a beautiful green color, the throat and belly are white, and the face is of
a fine black. He is found in Mauritania, and in the territories of ancient
Carthage. Hence it is probable that he was known to the Greeks and Romans, and
that it was one of those long-tailed monkeys to which they gave the name of
callitrix. In the neighborhood of Egypt, both on the Ethiopian and Arabian
side, there are white monkeys, which the ancients have likewise denoted by the
generic name of callitrix. Prosper Alpinus and Pietro della Valle Simium
Callitrichum Cairi in aedibus habuimus, selem magnam quadamtenus magnitudine
aemulantem, prolixiori corporis figura, capite parvo erat et rotundo -- corpore
circa ilia gracilissimo, toto corpore rufo rutilove spectabatur, facies vero
humanae similis fuit nigra, undique barbata, sed barba albi erat coloris --
caudamque longam rutilamque habebat; Prosp. Alp. Hist. Egypt. lib. 4. p. 244.
fig. tab. 20. No. 4. -- In Cairo, I likewise saw several living animals, as
callitrices, or white monkeys; Voyage de Pietro della Valle, tom. 1. p. 401.
mention these white monkeys. We have not seen this white species: It is
perhaps only a variety of the green monkey, or of the mona, which is very
common in these countries.

The green monkey seems also to be found in Senegal, as well as in Mauritania
and the Cape de Verd islands. M. Adanson relates, that the woods of Podor,
along the river Niger, are filled with green apes. 'I discovered apes,' says
he, 'only by the branches they throw down from the tops of the trees; for, in
other respects, they are so silent and nimble in their gambols, that it would
be difficult to perceive them. I killed one, two, and even three, before the
others seemed to be alarmed. However, after most of them were wounded, they
began to take shelter; some of them concealed themselves behind the large
branches, some descended on the ground, and the greatest number sprung from the
top of one tree to another....... During this operation, I continued to shoot,
and, in the space of twenty fathoms, I killed twenty-three in less than an
hour, and not one one of them uttered the smallest cry, though they frequently
assembled in troops, grinded their teeth, and assumed a threatening aspect, as
if they meant to attack me;' Voyage au Senegal, par M. Adanson, p. 178.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The callitrix has cheek-pouches and callosities on the buttocks. The tail is
much longer than both the body and head. The head is small, the muzzle long,
and the face and ears are black. Instead of eyebrows, a band of black hairs
runs along the bottom of the front. The body is of a vivid green mixed with a
little yellow. He walks on four feet; and the length of his body, comprehending
that of the head, is about fifteen inches. The female is subject to the
menstrual flux.

Plate CCLXXIII. CALLITRIX.


THE MUSTACHE Mustache monkey, with ashort nose, the end marked with a
transverse line of pure white; the face naked, and of a dusky blue; on the
cheeks, before the eyes, two large tufts of yellow hairs, like mustaches; the
hair on the top of the head long and upright; round the mouth are some black
hairs; the color of the hair on the head yellow, on the body and limbs, a
mixture of red and ash color; the part of the tail next the body of the same
color; the rest yellowish; the under part of the body paler than the upper;
the feet black; the nails flat: Its length one foot, that of the tail eighteen
inches; Pennant's Synops. of quad. p. 114.

Cercopithecus alius, Guineensis; Marcgr. Brasil. p. 228. Raii synops. quad. p.
156.

Simia cephus, candata, buccis barbatis, vertice flavescente, pedibus nigris,
cauda apice ferruginea; Linn. Syst. Not. p. 114.

Cercopithecus nigricans, genis et auriculis longis pilis ex albo flavicantibus
obsitis, ore caerulescente; Brisson. quad. p. 146.


.
THE mustache seems to belong to the same country as the macaque; because, like
the latter, his body is shorter and more squat than in the other monkeys. It is
probably the same animal which the voyagers to Guinea have called white-nose
There are other apes on the Gold coast, which are called white-noses, because
that is the only part of their body which is of that color. They are ferocious
and stinking animals; Relat. d'Artus, Hist. genesis des Voyages, tom. 4. p. 238.
; because the lips below the nose are of a bright white color, and the rest of
the face is of a blackish blue. There are also two tufts of yellow hair under
the ears, which give it a singular appearance; and, as it is, at the same time,
very small, it appears to be the most beautiful of all the monkeys.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The mustache has cheek-pouches and callosities on the thighs. Its tail is much
longer than the body and head, being nineteen or twenty inches in length. Its
face is of a blueish black color, with a large white mark which extends over
the whole upper lip, which is naked, except a border of black hairs that
surrounds the margins of both lips. Its body is short and squat. It has two
tufts of bright yellow hair under the ears, and likewise a tuft of curled hair
on the top of the head. The hair on the body is of a greenish ash color, and
that on the breast and belly is of a whitish ash color. It walks on four feet;
and, from nose to tail, exceeds not eighteen inches in length. The female is
subject to the menstrual flux.

Plate CCLXXIV. MUSTAX.


THE TALAPOIN The talapoin monkey, with a sharp nose, round head, large black
naked ears; eyes and end of the nose, flesh-coloured; hair on the cheeks very
long, and reflected toward the ears: On the chin a small beard; the color of
the whole upper part of the body, and the outside of the limbs, a mixture of
dusky yellow and green; the lower part white tinged with yellow; the tail very
long and slender, above, of an olive color; beneath, cinereous; the paws
black. Its length is about one foot, and that of the tail, one foot five
inches; Pennant's synops. of quad. p. 115.
.
THOUGH the size of this monkey be small, its figure is beautiful. Its name
seems to indicate that it comes from Siam, and the other eastern provinces of
Asia. It is certain, however, that it is a native of the Old Continent, and
exists not in the New; because it has cheek-pouches and callosities on the
buttocks, neither of which characters belong to the sagoins or sapajous, the
only American animals who can be compared to the monkeys. But, independent of
the name, I am inclined to think that this monkey is more common in the East
Indies than in Africa; because it is affirmed by voyagers, that most of the
apes in this part of Asia are of a brownish green color. 'The apes of Guzarat
are of a brownish green color, and have long white beards and eyebrows. These
animals, which the Banians, from a religious principle, allow to multiply
without end, are so familiar, that numbers of them perpetually enter the
houses; and the sellers of fruits and confections have much difficulty in
preserving their wares Hist. genesis des Voyages, tom. 10. p. 67.
.'

M. Edwards has given a figure and description of a monkey, under the
denomination of the middle-sized black ape, which seems to make a nearer
approach to the talapoin than any other. I here add Edwards's description This
monkey was about the size of a large cat, of a gentle nature in respect to any
one. He loved playing with a kitten, as most monkeys do. He was a little
vicious, according to their nature, being a male.

His head was pretty round; the skin of the face of a tawny flesh-colors,
thinly covered with black hair: The ears were shaped like the human. The eyes
were of a reddish hazel color, with black pupils. The hair was long above the
eyes, and the eyebrows joined together; it was also long on the temples, which
partly covered the ears. The head, back, arms, legs, and tail, were covered
with pretty long, loose, dusky, black hair, not very harsh, or over soft. His
breast, belly, etc. were almost bare of hair, of a dusky flesh color, with two
nipples on the breast. The four paws were all of them formed something like a
human hand: they are covered with black soft skin, having little or no hair on
them; the nails are flat; Edwards's Gleanings, p. 221.


, and refer to the figure he has given, that the reader may compare the two
animals. If the size and color be excepted, they have such a resemblance to
each other, that they may be regarded as species very nearly allied, if not
varieties of the same species. In this case, as we are not certain Plate
CCLXXV. TALAPOIN
that our talapoin is a native of the East Indies, and as Edwards assures us,
that his monkey came from Guinea, we must refer the talapoin to the same
climate, or rather suppose that it is common to the southern regions of both
Africa and Asia. It is probably the same species of black apes mentioned by
Bosman, under the name of Baurdmannetjes, whose skin, he remarks, is an
excellent fur In Guinea, there is a third species of ape, which is very
beautiful, and generally exceeds not two feet in length. Its hair is extremely
black, and more than an inch long, and its beard is white; from which
circumstance the Dutch call it Bourd-mannetje. Bonnets are made of their skins,
and each fur sells at four crowns; Voyage de Bosman, p. 258.
.

The DOUC The name of this animal in Cochin-China. It is called Sisac in
Madagascar.

Cochin-China monkey, with a short flattish face, bounded on each side by long
hairs of a yellowish white color; on the neck a collar of purplish brown; the
lower part of the arms, thighs, and tail, are white; the upper part of the arms
and thighs black; the back, belly, and sides, gray, tinged with yellow: Above
the root of the tail is a spot of white, which extends, beneath, as far as the
lower part of the belly and part of the thighs: The feet are black, and the
buttocks covered with hair. This is a very large species, about four feet long,
from the nose to the tail; but the tail not so long; Pennant's Synops. of quad.
p. 119.

Cercopithecus cinereus, genis longis pilis ex albo flavicantibus obsitis,
torque ex castaneo purpurascente. Le grand singe de la Cochin-Chine; Brisson.
quad. p. 146.


, or Cochin-China Monkey.
THE Douc is the last of that class of animals which we have called apes,
baboons, and monkeys. Without being precisely any of these three kinds, he
participates of each. He is allied to the monkeys by the length of his tail, to
the baboons by his size, and to the apes by his flat face. He seems, by a
particular character, to form the shade between the monkey's and sapajous: In
these two tribes of animals, the monkeys are distinguished by naked buttocks,
and all the sapajous have these parts covered with hair: Of all the monkeys the
douc has hair on the buttocks, like the sapajous. He resembles them also in the
flatness of the muzzle. But, upon the whole, he has much more affinity to the
monkeys than to the sapajous, from which he differs by his tail not being
prehensile, and by other essential characters. Besides, the interval which
separates the two tribes is immense; for the douc and all the monkeys belong to
the Old Continent, and all the sapajous are natives of the New World. It may
likewise be remarked, that, as the douc, like the monkeys, has a long tail, but
has no callosities on the buttocks, he forms the shade between the
orang-outangs and monkeys; as the gibbon does on another account, having no
tail, like the orang-outangs, but, like the monkeys, having callosities on the
buttocks. Independent of these general relations, the douc has peculiar
characters which render him distinguishable, at first sight, from the apes,
baboons, monkeys, and sapajous. His robe, which is variegated with many
colors, seems to indicate the ambiguity of his nature, and distinguishes his
species in a conspicuous manner. Round his neck there is a collar of a purplish
blue color. A white beard surrounds his cheeks. His lips are black, and he has
a black ring round his eyes. His face and ears are red, the top of his head and
body gray, the breast and belly yellow. His legs are white below and black
above. His tail is white, with a large spot of the same color on the loins.
The feet are black, with several shades of different colors.

This animal, which I was assured came from Cochin-China, is likewise found in
Madagascar; and it is the same with what Flacourt mentions, under the name of
Sifac, in the following terms: 'In Madagascar, there is another species of
white monkey, with a tawny collar, which frequently walks on the two hind legs.
It has a white tail, and two tawny spots on the flanks. It is larger than the
vari (maucauco), and smaller than the varicossi (vari). This species is called
Sifac, and feeds upon beans. It is very frequent about Andrivoura, Dambourlomb,
and Ranafoulchy Voyage de Flacourt, p. 153.
.' The tawny collar, the white tail, and the spots on the flanks, indicate, in
the clearest manner, that the Sifac of Madagascar is the same species with the
douc of Cochin-China.

Travelers assure us, that, in the stomachs of the large apes in the southern
provinces of Asia, bezoars are found of a superior quality to those of the
goats and gazelles. These large apes are the ouanderou and the douc; and, of
course, to them the production of the bezoars must be referred. It is alleged,
that the bezoars of the ape are always round, while the other kinds are of
different figures As the apes, as well as the goats, eat the buds of certain
shrubs, bezoar stones are produced in their bellies. They are often found in
the excrements which they discharge when flying from danger. These stones are
dearer and more esteemed than any other kind: They are likewise rounder, and
have more powerful virtues. One grain of this bezoar has been found to have an
equal effect with two of that produced by the goats; Descript. Hist. de
Macacar, p. 51. Nota. From comparing this passage with that of Knox, related in
the article ouanderou, it appears, that the ouanderous feed upon the buds of
trees, and, of course, most commonly produce bezoars.
.

Plate CCLXXVI. DOUC.


Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The douc has no callosities on the buttocks, but is every where covered with
hair. His tail is not so long as his body and head. His face is covered with a
reddish down. The ears are naked, and of the same color with the face. The
lips, as well as the orbits of the eyes, are brown. The colors of the hair are
vivid and various. He has a purplish brown collar round his neck. He has white
on his front, head, body, arms, legs, etc. and a kind of yellowish white beard.
The top of the front and the upper part of the arms, are black. The under parts
of the body are of a cinereous gray and a whitish yellow color. The tail and
under part of the loins are white. He walks as often on two as on four feet.
When erect, he is three and a half or four feet high. It is uncertain whether
the females of this species be subject to the menstrual discharge.

The SAPAJOUS Sapejou, a word derived from cayouassou, the name of these
animals in Brasil, and which is pronounced sajouassou.
and the SAGOINS Sagoin, a word derived from cagui, which is pronounced sagcui,
and is the name of these animals in Brasil.

WE now pass from the Old Continent to the New. All the four-handed animals
formerly described, and which were comprehended under the generic names of
apes, baboons, and monkeys, belong exclusively to the Old Continent; and all
the rest, whose history we are about to relate, are found only in the New
World. We first distinguish them by the two generic names sapajous and sagoins.
The feet of both are constructed nearly in the same manner with those of the
apes, baboon, and monkeys. But they differ from the apes by having tails. They
differ from the baboons by the want of cheek-pouches and callosities on their
buttocks. In fine, they differ from the apes, baboons, and monkeys, by having
the portion between their nostrils very broad and thick, and the apertures
placed to a side and not under the nose. Hence the sapajous and sagoins differ
not only specifically, but generically from the apes, baboons, and monkeys.
When compared with each other, we likewise find that they differ in generic
characters; for all the sapajous have prehensile tails, which are so
constructed that the animals can use them as fingers to lay hold of any thing.
This under part of the tail, which they fold, extend, curl up, or unfold at
pleasure, and by the extremity of which they suspend themselves on the branches
of trees, is generally deprived of hair, and covered with a smooth skin. The
tails of all the sagoins, on the contrary, are proportionally longer than those
of the sapajous, and are straight, flaccid, and entirely covered with hair; so
that they can neither use the tail in laying hold of any thing, nor in
suspending themselves. This differnce alone is sufficient to distinguish a
sapajou from a sagoin.

We know eight sapajous, which may be reduced to five species: 1. The ouarine
or gouariba of Brasil. This sapajou is as large as a fox, and differs from the
alouate of Cayenne in color only. The hair of the ouarine is black, and that
of the alouate is reddish; and, as they resemble each other in every other
respect, I consider them as belonging to the same species. 2. The coaita, which
is black like the ouarine, but not so large. The exquima seems to be a variety
of this species. 3. The sajou, or sapajou properly so called, is small, of a
brown color, and commonly known by the name of the capuchin monkey. Of this
species there is a variety, which we shall call the gray sajou, to distinguish
it from the brown sajou. 4. The sai, which some travelers have called the
weeper, is somewhat larger than the sajou, and has a broader muzzle. There are
two kinds, which differ only in color, the one being reddish brown, and the
other whitish red. 5. The saimiri, which is commonly called the orange monkey.
It is the smallest and most beautiful of the sapajous.

We are acquainted with six species of sagoins: 1. The saki, which is the
largest, and whose tail is covered with hair so long and bushy, that it has
been called the fox-tailed monkey. There seems to be a variety in this species.
I have seen two, both of which appeared to be adults; but the one was almost
twice as large as the other. 2. The tamarin is generally black, with the four
feet yellow. But they vary in color; for I have seen some of them brown, and
spotted with yellow. 3. The ouistiti, which is remarkable for large tufts of
hair round its face, and an annulated tail. 4. The marikina, which has a mane
round the neck, and bushy hair, like the lion, at the end of the tail. From
this circumstance it has received the appellation of the lionmonkey. 5. The
pinche, whose face is of a beautiful black color, with hair which descends
from the top and each side of the head, in the form of long smooth tresses. 6.
The mico is the most beautiful of the sagoins. Its hair is of a silver white
color, and its face is as red as vermilion.

We proceed to the history and description of each of these sapajous and
sagoins, most of which have hitherto been unknown.

The OUARINE Ouarine, the name of this animal at Maragnon.

The preacher monkey, with black shining eyes, short round ears, and a round
beard under the chin and throat. The hairs on the body are of a shining black,
long, yet lie so close on each other, that the animal appears quite smooth. The
feet and end of the tail are brown. The tail is very long, and always twisted
at the end. It is of the size of a fox: Pennant's synops. of quad. p. 122.

The monkeys called ouarines are all black, and of the size of large dogs. They
cry so loud as to be heard at the distance of a league; Miss. du P. Abbeville.
p. 152.

Guariba; Marcgr. Brasil. p. 226. Raii Synops. quad. p. 153.

Aquiqui; De Laet, p. 486. Grew's Mus. p. 133.

Howling baboons; Guariba; Bancroft's Guiana, p. 153.

Simia Beelzebub, caudata, barbata, nigra, cauda prehensili, extremo pedibusque
fuscis; Linn. syst. Not. p. 37.

Cercopithecus niger, pedibus fuscis; Brisson, quad. p. 137.


and ALOUATE Alouate, aleuata at Cayenne, is only a variety of the ouarine. It
is of a ferruginous or reddish bay color; and the Indians call it the king of
the monkey's.

Cercopithecus barbatus maximus, ferruginosus, ste ntorosus. Alouata. Singe
rouge; Barrere, Hist. Franc. Equin. p. 150.

Cercopithecus baratus saturate rufus; Brisson. quad. p. 147.

Simia seniculus, caudata, barbata, rufa, cauda prehensili; Linn. Syst. Not. p
37.

Arabata; Gurnilla Orenoque, tom. 2. p. 8. Bancroft's Guiana, p. 135.


.
THE Ouarine and Alouate are the largest four-handed animals in the New
Continent. In size they much exceed the largest monkeys, and approach to the
magnitude of baboons. They have prehensile tails, and consequently belong to
the family of sapajous, in which they hold a distinguished rank, not only by
their stature, but also by their voice, which resounds like a drum, and is
heard at a great distance. Maregrave relates Marcgrav. Hist. Bras. p. 226.
, 'That, every morning and evening, the ouarines assemble in the woods; that
one of them takes a more elevated station, and gives a signal with his hand for
the others to sit around and listen to him; that, when he peceives them to be
all seated, he begins a discourse, in a tone so loud and rapid as to be heard
at a great distance; and a person would be led to think that the whole were
crying together; that all the rest, however, keep the most profound silence;
that, when he stops, he gives a signal with his hand for the others to reply;
that, in an instant, the whole cry together, till he commands silence by
another signal, which they obey in a moment; that the first resumes his
discourse or song; and that, after hearing him attentively for a considerable
time, the assembly breaks up.' These facts, which Marcgrave says he has often
witnessed, may perhaps be exaggerated, and seasoned a little with the
mavelous: The whole may be founded on the terrible noise made by these
animals. They have a kind of osseous drum in their throat, in the concavity of
which the sound is augmented, multiplied, and makes a howling noise. Hence
these sapajous have been distinguished from all others by the name of howlers.
We have never seen the ouarine, but have the skin of an alouate, and likewise a
dried foetus of the same species, in which the bone of the throat, the
instrument of the great noise he makes, is already perceptible The alouate
monkey is a savage animal, of a reddish bay color, very large, and, by means
of the singular structure of the os hyoides, makes a terrible rattling noise,
which is heard at a great distance: Barrere, Hist. Franc. Equin. p. 150. -- In
the island of St. George, under the Tropic, and about two leagues from the
continent of America, there are monkeys as large as calves, which make such a
strange noise, that people who are not accustomed to it think the mountains are
falling. -- They are exceedingly wild; Voyage de Gentil, tom. 1. p. 15.
. According to Marcgrave, the ouarine has a large square face, black and
brilliant eyes, short, roundish ears, and a tail naked at the extremity, which
adheres firmly to every thing it can embrace. The hair on the whole body is
black, long, smooth, and lustrous; that on the chin and throat is longer, and
forms a kind of round beard; and that on the hands, feet, and part of the tail,
is brown. The female is of the same color with the male, and differs from him
only in being smaller. The females carry their young on their back, and leap
with them from branch to branch, and from tree to tree. The young embrace with
their arms and hands the narrowest part of the mother's body, and remain firmly
fixed as long as she is in motion. Besides, these animals are so wild and
mischievous, that they can neither be conquered nor tamed. They bite cruelly;
and, though not carnivorous, they fail not to excite terror by their frightful
voice, and their ferocious aspect. As they feed only upon fruits, pot herbs,
grain, and some insects, their flesh is not bad eating Monkeys are the most
common game, and the most agreeable to the taste of the Amazon Indians. -- Some
of them are as large as a greyhound; Voyage sur la riviere de l'Amazone, par M.
de la Condamine, p. 164. -- Cayenne is the country of monkeys. -- When the
reluctance at eating them is once overcome, it is certain that their flesh is
very good. It is white, and, though generally not overcharged with fat, it
fails not to be tender, delicate, and well tasted. Fine soup is made of their
heads, which are served up like boiled capons; Voyage de Desmarchais, tom. 3.
p. 311. et 338. -- There are monkeys in Cayenne of the size of large dogs, and
of a reddish color. They are called howlers; because, when in troops, they
make a noise like a flock of hogs fighting. They inspire terror, and have very
large mouths. I believe they are ferocious. When the Savages shoot them with
arrows, they extract the arrow out of their bodies with their hands, like a
human creature. The flesh of the howlers is very good, and resembles mutton.
One of them is a meal to six persons. They have a horn in their throat, which
renders their cries hideous; Voyage de Binet, p. 341. -- The Achagua savages
along the river Oronoko are fond of the yellow monkeys called arabata, which
make an insupportable noise every morning and evening; Hist. de l'Orenoque, par
Gumilla, p. 8.
. 'The hunters,' Oexmelin remarks, 'bring home in the evening the monkeys they
kill in the country of Cape Gracias-a-Dio. They roast one part of these
monkeys, and boil the other: The flesh is good, and resembles that of the hare;
but it is sweetish, and requires a great deal of salt in dressing. The fat is
very good, and as yellow as that of a capon. We lived upon these animals during
all the time we remained there, because we could procure no other food, and the
hunters supplied us daily with as many as we could eat. I went to see this
species of hunting, and was surprised at the sagacity of these animals, not
only in distinguishing particularly those who make war against them, but, when
attacked, in defending themselves and providing for their own safety. When we
approached, they all assembled together, uttered loud and frightful cries, and
threw at us dried branches which they broke off from the trees. Some of them
voided their excrements in their hands, and threw them at our heads. I likewise
remarked, that they never abandoned one another; that they leapt from tree to
tree with incredible agility; and that they flung themselves headlong from
branch to branch, without ever falling to the ground; because, before reaching
the earth, they always caught hold of a branch either with their hands or tail;
so that, if not shot dead at once, they could not be laid hold of; for, even
when mortally wounded, they remain fixed to the trees, where they often die,
and fall not till they are corrupted. More than four days after death, I have
seen them firmly fixed to the trees; and fifteen or sixteen of them are
frequently shot before three or four of them can be obtained. What is singular,
as soon as one is wounded, the rest collect about him, and put their fingers
into the wound, as if they meant to sound it; and, when much blood is
discharged, some of them keep the wound shut, while others make a mash of
leaves, and dexterously stop up the aperture. This operation I have often
observed with much admiration. The females bring forth but one young, which
they carry in the same manner as the Negresses do their children. The young
monkey embraces its mother's neck with the two fore-feet, and with the two hind
it lays hold of the middle of her back. When she wants to give it suck, she
takes it in her paws, and presents the breast to it, like a woman.... There is
no other method of obtaining the young but by killing the mother; for she never
abandons it. When she is killed, it falls from her, and may then be seized.
When these animals are embarrassed, they assist each other in passing a brook,
or from one tree to another.... Their cries are heard at the distance of more
than a league Hist. des Aventuriers, par Oxemelin, tom. 2. p. 251.
.'

Most of these facts are confirmed by Dampier The monkey's found in the
neighborhood of the Bay of Campeachy, are the ugliest I ever saw. They are
much bigger than a hare, and have great tails, about two feet and a half long.
The under side of their tails is all bare, with a black hard skin; but the
upper side, and all the body, is covered with coarse, long, black, staring
hair. These creatures keep together 20 or 30 in a company, and ramble over the
woods, leaping from tree to tree. If they meet with a single person, they will
threaten to devour him. When I have been alone, I have been afraid to shoot
them, especially the first time I met them. They were a great company dancing
from tree to tree, over my head, chattering and making a terrible noise, and a
great many grim faces, and showing antic gestures. Some broke down dry sticks
and threw at me; others scattered their urine and dung about my ears; at last,
one bigger than the rest, came to a small limb just over my head, and leaping
directly at me, made me start back; but the monkey caught hold of the bough
with the tip of his tail, and there continued swinging to and fro, and making
mouths at me. -- At last I past on, they still keeping me company, with the
like menacing postures, till I came to our huts. The tails of these monkeys are
as good to them as one of their hands; and they will hold as fast by them. If
two or more of us were together, they would hasten from us. The females with
their young ones are much troubled to leap after the males; for they have
commonly two: One she carries under one of her arms; the other sits on her
back, and clasps her two fore-paws about its neck. These monkeys are the most
sullen I ever met with, for all the art we could use would never tame them. It
is a hard matter to shoot one of them, so as to take it, for if it gets hold
with its claws or tail, it will not fall as long as one breath of life remains.
After I have shot at one and broke a leg or an arm, I have pitied the poor
creatures to see it look and handle the wounded limb, and turn it about from
side to side. These monkeys are very rarely, or (as some say) never on the
ground; Dampier, vol. 2. part 2. p. 60.
: He assures us, however, that the females generally produce two young, one of
which the mother carries between her arms, and the other on her back. In
general, the sapajous, even of the smallest species, are not very prolific; and
it is probable that the largest produce not above one or two at a time.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The ouarine has the apertures of the nostrils placed at a side, and not under
the nose; the partition of the nostrils is very thick. He has neither
cheek-pouches, nor callosities on the buttocks, which are covered with hair,
like the rest of the body. He has a long, prehensile tail, black, long hair,
and a large concave bone in his throat. He is of the size of a greyhound; and
the long hair under his neck forms a kind of round beard. He generally walks on
four feet.

The alouate has the same characters with the ouarine, and only differs from
him by having a larger beard, and the hair of a reddish brown color. I know
not whether the females of these species be subject to the menses: From
analogy, I should presume that they are not, having generally found, that the
apes, baboons, and monkeys with naked buttocks, are alone subject to this
evacuation.

The COAITA Four-fingered monkey, with a long flat face, of a swarthy flesh
color; eyes sunk in the head; ears like the human; limbs of a great length,
and uncommonly slender; hair black, long, and rough; only four fingers on the
hand, being quite destitute of a thumb; five toes on the feet; nails flat; tail
long, and naked below, near the end; body slender; about a foot and a half
long; tail near two feet, and so prehensile as to serve every purpose of a hand.

Coaita or quoata, the name of this animal in Guiana.

Cercopithecus major niger, saciem humanam referens. Quoata; Barrere Hist. not.
de la Franc. Equin. p. 150.

Quato; Bancroft's Guiana, p. 131.

Cercopithecus in pedibus anterioribus pollice carens, cauda inferius versus
apicem pilis destituta; Le Beelzebub; Brisson, quad. p. 150.

Simia paniscus, caudata, imberbis, atra, cauda prehensili, et apicem subtus
nuda; Linn. Syst. not. p. 37.

Spider monkey; Edwards's Gleanings, vol. 3. p. 222.

Simia fusca major, palmis tetradactylis, cauda prehensili, ad apicem subtus
nuda; the four-fingered monkey; Brown's Hist. of Jamaica, chap. 5. sect. 5.


and EXQUIMA Spotted monkey, with a long white beard; color of the upper parts
of the body reddish, as if they had been singed, marked with white specks; the
belly and chin whitish; tail very long: Is a species of a middle size.

Cercopithecus barbatus Guineensis, Exquima; Marcgrav. Hist. Not. Brasil. p.
227. Raii Syn. quad. p. 156.

Cercopithecus barbatus fuscus, punctis albis interspersis, barba alba;
Brisson. quad. p. 147. No. 23. p. 148. No. 24.

Simia Diana, caudata, barbata, front barbaque fastigiata; Linn. Syst. not. p.
38.


.
NEXT to the ouarine and alouate, the coaita is the largest of the sapajous. I
saw one of them at the palace of the Duke of Bouillon, where, by its
familiarity, and even its caresses, it procured the affection of those who had
the charge of it. But, notwithstanding all the care and attention it received,
it was unable to resist the cold of the winter 1764. It died, to the regret of
its master, who was so obliging as to send it to me, to be placed in the Royal
Cabinet. I saw another in the house of the Marquis de Montmirail. This was a
male, and the former a female. Both were equally tractable and well tamed.
Hence this sapajou, by its mild and docile disposition, differs much from the
ouarine and alouate, who are so wild that no art can tame them. Neither has it,
like them, an osseous pouch in the throat. Like the ouarine, its hair is black,
but rough. The coaita likewise differs from all the other sapajous, by having
only four fingers on his hands. By this character and his prehensile tail, he
is easily distinguished from the monkeys, who have all five fingers, and a
flaccid tail.

The animal called exquima by Marcgrave, is a species very nearly allied to the
coaita, and is perhaps only a variety of it. This author seems to have been
deceived when he tells us, that the exquima is a native of Guiney and Congo.
The figure he has given of it was alone sufficient to have convinced him of his
error; for it represents this animal with a tail rolled up at the point, a
character which belongs exclusively to the sapajous. Of course, Marcgrave's
exquima is not a monkey of Guiney, but a sapajou with a prehensile tail, which
had been transported thither from Brasil. The name exquima, or quima, by
abstracting the article ex, and which ought to be pronounced quoima, is not
very different from quoaita, the manner in which several authors spell the name
coaita, Hence every circumstance concurs in establishing Marcgrave's exquima,
which he calls a Guiney monkey, to be a Brasilian sapajou, and a variety only
of the coaita, which it resembles in dispositions, size, color, and the
prehensile tail. The most remarkable difference is, that the exquima has
whitish hair on the belly, and a white beard, two inches long, under the chin
Cercopithecus barbatus Guineensis; in Congo vocatur Exquima, pilos habet
suscos, sed per totum dorsum quasi adustos seu ferrugineos; fuscis autem
punctulatim inspersus color albus: venture albicat er mentum inferius; barbam
quoque egregie albam habet, constantem capillis duos digitos longis et amplius
passis quasi ordinatim pexa fuisset; quando haec species irascitur, os ample
diducendo et mandibulas celeriter movendo exagitat hominem; egregie saltant,
varios fructus comedunt; Maregr. Hist. not. Brasil. p. 227. et 228. Ubi vide
figuram.
. Our coaitas have neither a beard nor white hair on the belly. But these
differences seem not sufficient to constitute two distinct species; for we
learn from the evidence of travelers, that some coaitas are black and others
white, and some have beards and others no beards: 'There are,' says Dampier,
'great droves of monkeys, some of them white, but most of them black; some have
beards, others are beardless. They are of a middle size, yet extraordinary fat
at the dry season, when the fruits are ripe; and they are very good meat, for
we ate of them very plentifully. The Indians were shy of eating them for a
while; but they soon were persuaded to it, by seeing us feed on them so
heartily. In the rainy season they have worms in their bowels. I have taken a
handful of them out of one monkey we cut open; and some of them seven or eight
feet long. They are a very waggish kind of monkey, and played a thousand antic
tricks as we marched at any time through the woods, skipping from bough to
bough, with the young ones hanging at the old ones backs, making faces at us,
chattering, and, if they had opportunity, pissing down purposely on our heads.
To pass from top to top of high trees, whose branches are a little too far
asunder for their leaping, they will sometimes hang down by one another's tails
in a chain; and swinging in that manner, the lowermost catches hold of a bough
of the other tree, and draws up the rest of them Dampier's voyages, vol. 3. p.
330.
.' All these facts, even the worms in the intestines, correspond with our
coaitas. M. Daubenton, in dissecting these animals, found a great number of
worms, some of which were from twelve to thirteen inches long. It is obvious,
therefore, that the exquima of Marcgrave is a sapajou of the same species, or,
at least, of a species very nearly allied to that of the coaita.

We must likewise remark, that, if the animal mentioned by Linnaeus, under the
name of Diana Diana simia caudata barbata, front barbaque fastigiata.
Cercopithecus barbatus Guincensis. Marcgravii. -- Habit at in Guinea, magnitudo
felis majoris; nigra punctis albidis. Dursum postice ferrugineum, femora subtus
helvola, gula pectusque alba, frons pilis erectis albis fastigiatis, linea
transversa in sormam lunae crescentis, barba fastigiata nigra subrus alba
insidens tuberi adiposo, linea alba ab ano ad genua ab exteriori latere femorum
ducta. Ludibunda omnia dejicit, peregrinos nutitando salutat, irata ore hiat
maxillasque exagitat: vocata respondet greek; Linn. Syst. not. p. 38.
, is really, as he says, the exquima of Marcgrave, he has omitted the
prehensile tail, which is the most essential character, and ought alone to
determine whether this diana belongs to the genus of sapajous, or to that of
the monkeys, and, of course, whether it is found in the Old or the New
Continent.

Independent of this variety, the characters of which are conspicuous, there
are other varieties, though less remarkable, in the species of the coaita. That
described by M. Brisson had whitish hair on all the under parts of the body.
But those I have seen were entirely black, and had very few hairs on the
inferior parts of the body, where the skin appeared, and was equally black with
the hair. Of the two coaitas mentioned by Mr Edwards Gleanings, p. 222.
, the one was black and the other brown. On account of the length and
slenderness of their legs and tail, they were called spider monkeys.

Some years ago, a coaita was sent me, under the denomination of chamek, which,
I was told, came from the coast of Peru. I shall give a description of it in
the margin This animal was brought from the coast of Bancet in Peru, when
thirteen months old. It weighed about six pounds. The whole body was black. The
skin of the face was naked, of a coarse grain, and of the color of a Mulatto.
The hair was coarse, and from two to three inches in length. The ears, which
resembled those of man, were naked, and of the same color with the face. The
tail was one foot ten inches long, five inches thick at the base, and about one
inch at the point. It was round, and garnished with hair above and below about
thirteen inches from the origin, but naked below nine inches from the
extremity, where the under part of it is flat and furrowed in the middle, and
round above. This animal suspends itself by the tail, and likewise uses it as a
fifth hand to lay hold of any thing it wants. Its length was thirteen inches
from the point of the nose to the origin of the tail. It had only two paps,
placed nearly under the armpits.
, from which it will appear that this chamek of Peru, with the exception of a
few varieties, is the same animal with the coaita of Guiana.

These sapajous are very dexterous and intelligent. They go in companies, and
mutually warn and assist each other. It uses its tail as a fifth hand, and
seems to employ this instrument more than either its hands or feet This
creature has no more than four fingers to each of its fore paws, but the top of
the tail is smooth underneath, and on this it depends for its chief actions;
for the creature holds every thing by it, and slings itself with the greatest
ease from every tree and post by its means. -- It is a native of the main
continent; and a part of the food of the Indians; Russel. Hist. of Jamaica,
chap. 5. sect. 5.
. To balance this advantage, Nature has deprived this animal of a thumb. We are
assured that it seizes fishes with its tail; which is by no means incredible;
for we have seen one of our coaitas lay hold in this manner of a squirrel,
which had been put into its chamber as a companion. They have the address to
break the shells of oysters, in order to eat them At the island of Gorgonia, on
the coast of Peru, we took notice of several monkeys who lived partly upon
oysters, which they got out of the sea at low water. Their way was to take up
an oyster, and lay it upon a stone, and with another stone to keep beating of
it till they had broke the shell in pieces; Dampier's voyages, vol. 3. p. 382.
. It is certain, that, in order to pass from one tree to another, whose
branches are too distant for a leap, they form a chain, by hanging down In
traveling to Panama, I saw, at Capira, one of these monkeys leap from one tree
to another, which was on the opposite side of the river. When they want to
reach a place which they cannot accomplish by one leap, they link themselves to
each other's tail, and by this means form a long chain. They then spring
forward, and the first, being aided by the impulse of the rest, reaches the
intended branch; and, after fixing himself, he continues to assist the progress
of the others till the whole attain their end; Hist. Not. du Indes, par Joseph
Acosta, p. 200.
, linked to each other by their tails, and swinging in that manner till the
lowest catches hold of a branch, and draws up the rest. They sometimes pass
rivers by the same expedient. The females bring forth but one or two young,
which they always carry on their back. They eat fish, worms, and insects; but
fruits are their common food. When the fruits are ripe, they become very fat,
and their flesh is then said to be excellent They are of a middle size, yet
extraordinary fat at the dry season, when the fruits are ripe; and they are
very good meat, for we ate of them very plentifully; Dampier's voyages, vol. 3.
p. 330.
.

Distinctive Characters of these Species.
The coaita has neither cheek-pouches nor callosities on the buttocks. He has a
very long, prehensile tail. The partition of the nostrils is very thick, and
their apertures are placed at a side, and not under the nose. He has only four
fingers on his hands or fore feet. Both his hair and skin are black. His face
is naked and tawny. His ears are also naked, and resemble those of man. He is
about a foot and a half in length; and his tail is longer than the body and
head together. He walks on four feet.

The exquima is nearly of the same size with the coaita, and has likewise a
prehensile tail. But his color, instead of being black, is variegated. The
hairs on his back are black and yellow, and white on the throat and belly. He
has, besides, a remarkable beard. These differences, however, are not
sufficient to constitute two distinct species; especially as some coaitas are
not entirely black, but are whitish on the throat and belly. The females of
these two species are not subject to the periodical evacuation.

Plate CCLXXVII. COAITA.


The SAJOU The capuchin monkey, with a round head, and a short flesh-coloured
face, with a little down on it; hair on the fore head more or less high and
erect in different subjects; top of the head black and dusky, hair on it pretty
long; hind part of the neck, and middle of the back, covered with long dusky
airs; rest of the back and the limbs of a reddish brown; hands and feet covered
with a black skin; tail longer than the head and body, and often carried over
the shoulders; the hair on it very long, of a deep brown color, and appear
very bushy from beginning to end: It is a species that varies a little in
colors, which induced Linnaeus to form three species out of this one;
Pennant's synops. of quad. p. 126.

Sajou, a word abridged from Cayouassou or Sajouassou, the name of these
animals in Maragnon.

Simia trepida, caudata, imberbis, capillitio arrecto, manibus pedibusque
caeruleis, cauda prehensili villosa; Linn. syst. not. p. 39.

Simia capucina, caudata, imberbis, fusca, cauda prehensili hirsuta, pileo
artubusque nigris, natibus tectis; Linn. syst. mat. p. 42.

Simia apella, caudata, imberbis, cauda subprehensili, corpore fusco, pedibus
nigris, natibus tectis; Ibid.

Cercopithecus fuscus, capitis vertice fusco; Brisson. quad. p. 137.

Bush-tailed monkey; Edw. p. 312.

Simiolus Ceylonicus; Seb. Mus. tom. 1. p. 77. tab. 48. This animal is not
found in Ceylon, but in America.

Cayouassou; Miss. du. P. d'Abbeville, p. 252.


, or Capuchin Monkey.
WE are acquainted with two varieties of this species, the brown sajou, or
capuchin monkey; and the gray sajou, which differs from the brown in color
only. They are both of the same size, and have the same figure and
dispositions. They are both very agile, and their nimbleness and dexterity are
extremely amusing. We have had them alive; and, of all the sapajous, their
constitution seems to be best adapted to our climate. If kept in a chamber
during the winter, they live comfortably for several years. We can even give
several examples of their producing in this country. Two young ones were
brought forth in the M. de Pompadour's lodging at Versailles; one in the house
of M. de Reaumur at Paris, and another in Mad. de Poursel's in Gatinois M.
Sanches, formerly first physician to the court of Russia, communicated this
last fact to me, in a letter from Mad. de Poursel, of which the following is an
extract: 'Bordeaux, Jan. 26. 1764. On the 13th day of this month, the female
sapajou brought forth a young one, whose head was almost as large as that of
the mother. During two hours, she suffered great pain; and we were obliged to
cut the belt by which she was fixed, otherwise she could not have brought
forth. Nothing could be more beautiful than to see the father and mother
occupied with their little one, which they teazed incessantly, either by
carrying it about, or by caressing it. ^ernambuco, the name given to the male,
because he was brought from that part of Brasil, loves his child to
distraction. The father and mother carry it alternately; and, when it does not
hold properly, they give it a pretty severe bite.'
. But, in this country, they never produced above one at a time, while, in
their native climate, they often produce two. Besides, these sajous are very
whimsical in their taste and affections. They are fond of particular persons,
and discover the greatest aversion to others.

Plate CCLXXVIII. BROWN CAPUCHIN MONKEY.


Plate CCLXXIX. GRAY CAPUCHIN MONKEY.


We remarked a singularity in these animals, which makes the females be often
mistaken for the males. The clitoris is prominent, and appears to be as large
as the penis of the male.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The sajous have neither cheek-pouches, nor callosities on their buttocks.
Their face and ears are flesh-coloured, with a little down above. The partition
of the nostrils is thick, and their apertures are placed at a side, and not
under the nose. The eyes are chesnut-coloured, and situated near each other.
The tail is prehensile, naked below at the point, and very bushy every where
else. In some, the hair is black and brown, both round the face, and upon all
the upper parts of the body. In others, the hair round the face is gray, and of
a brownish yellow on the body. The hands are always black and naked. From the
point of the muzzle to the origin of the tail, they exceed not a foot in
length. They walk on four feet. The females are not subject to the menses.

The SAI Cay, pronounced Sai, the Brasilian name of this animal.

Monkey with a round and flat face, of a reddish brown color, very deformed;
the hair on the head and upper part of the body black, tinged with brown;
beneath, and on the limbs, tinged with red; tail black, and much longer than
the head and body: The young are excessively deformed; their hair very long,
and thinly dispersed; Pennant's synops. of quad. p. 127.

Cercopithecus Brasiliensis secundus; Claus. exot. p. 372.

Cay; De Laet, p. 486. Raii syn. quad. p. 155.

Cercopithecus totus niger; Brisson. quad. p. 139.


, or WEEPER.
WE have seen two varieties of this species; the first was of a blackish brown
color; and the second, which I have called Sai with a white throat, has white
hair on the breast, throat, and round the ears and cheeks. It differs from the
first by having less hair on the face. But, in every other article, they
perfectly resemble each other. Their dispositions, size, and figure, are the
same. Travelers have mentioned these animals under the name of weepers In the
island of St George, two leagues distant from the continent of America, there
are monkeys called weepers, because they imitate the cries of an infant; Voyage
de la Gentil, tom. 1. p. 15.
; because they make a plaintive noise, and, when irritated, have the appearance
of crying. Others have called them musk monkeys, because, like the maucauco,
they have a musky odor In the neighborhood of the bay of All Saints, there
are small monkeys, who are extremely ugly, and have a great scent of musk;
Dampier's voyages.
. Others have given them the name of macaque At the bay of All Saints, I saw
two species of monkeys, the one called sagouins, and the other macaques. The
sagouins are of the size of a squirrel. Some of them are gray, and others of a
fine yellow color. They are extremely beautiful. -- The macaques are larger,
and of a brown color: They weep perpetually, etc.; Voyages de de Gennes, par
Froger, p. 150.
, which they borrowed from the macaque of Guiney. But the macaques are monkeys
with flaccid tails; while the former belong to the sapajous, because their
tails are prehensile. The females have only two paps, and produce two young at
a time. They are mild, docile, and so timid, that their common cry, which
resembles that of a rat, becomes a kind of groaning when they are threatened
with danger. In this country, they eat May-bugs and snails All the monkeys of
South America live upon fruits, flowers, and particular insects; Hist. des
Avanturiers, par Oexmelin, tom. 2. p. 256.
in preference to all other food. But, in Brasil, their native climate, they
live chiefly on grains and wild fruits The Cays or Sais never remove from the
top of a tree that bears fruit in a pod as large as our beans, which is their
principal food. They assemble in troops, and particularly when it rains. It is
pleasant to hear them chattering on the trees. The female produces but one at a
time; and the young, as soon as brought forth, holds firm by the neck of its
mother or father. When pursued by the hunters, they save themselves by leaping
from branch to branch, carrying their young on their backs. The savages,
therefore, being unable to seize either the young or the old, are obliged to
wound them with arrows; after which they fall from the tops of the trees,
either stunned or wounded. When cured of the wounds, and rendered somewhat
tame, they are sold by the Savages; for, when first taken, they are so
ferocious, and bite so obstinately, that they quit not their hold till they are
torn in pieces; Voyage de Lery, p. 164.
, which they gather from the trees, and rarely descend upon the earth.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The sais have neither cheek-pouches nor callosities on their buttocks. The
partition of their nostrils is very thick, and the apertures are placed at a
side, and not under the nose. The face is round and flat, and the ears are
almost naked. The tail is prehensile, and naked below toward its extremity.
Upon the upper parts of the body, the hair is of a blackish brown color, and,
on the inferior parts, of a pale yellow or dirty white. These animals exceed
not fourteen inches in length; and their tail is longer than both body and
head. They walk on four feet. The females are not subjected to the menses.

Plate CCLXXXI. SAI with a WHITE THROAT


Plate CCLXXX. SAI or WEEPER.


The SAIMIRI Orange monkey, with a round head, nose a little pointed, and the
end of it dusky; orbits flesh-coloured; ears hairy; hair on the body short and
fine, of a yellow and brown color; but, in its native country, when in
perfection, of a brilliant gold color; the feet orange; nails of the hands
flat, of the feet like claws; tail very long, and less useful for prehensile
purposes than that of the rest; body of the size of a squirrel; Pennant's
synops. of quad. p. 128.

Caymiri, or Saimiri, the name of this animal in the country of Maragnon.

Caitaia; Marcgr. p. 227. Raii synops. quad. p. 175.

Cercopithecus pilis ex fusco flavescente, et candicante variegatus, vestitus,
pedibus ex flavo rufescentibus; Brisson. quad. p. 140.

Cercopithecus minor luteus; le sapajou jaune; Barrere, Franc. Equin. p. 151.

Simia sciurea, caudata, imberbis, occipite prominulo, unguibus quatuor
plantarum subulatis, natibus tectis; Linn, Syst. Not. p. 43.


, or Orange Monkey.
THE Saimiri is commonly known by the name of the golden, orange, or yellow
sapajou. It is common in Guiana; and therefore has received from some voyagers
the appellation of the Cayenne Sapajou. From the gracefulness of its movements,
the smallness of its size, the brilliant color of its hair, the largeness and
vivacity of its eyes, and its round visage, the saimiri has uniformly been
preferred to all the other sapajous: It is indeed the most beautiful of this
tribe. But it is likewise the most delicate The Cayenne sapajou is a yellowish
monkey. It has large eyes, a white face, a black chin, and a slender make. It
is alert and caressing; but it is equally injured by cold as the sagions of
Brasil; Relat. du voyage de Gennes, par Froger, p. 163.
, and the most difficult to transport and preserve. From these characters, and
particularly from that of the tail, which is only half-prehensile, and, though
not so muscular as that of the sapajous, is not absolutely useless and flaccid,
the saimiri seems to form the shade between the sapajous and the sagoins.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The saimiri has neither cheek-pouches nor callosities on the buttocks. The
partition of his nostrils is thick, and their apertures are placed at a side,
and not under the nose. He may be said to have no fore head. His hair is of a
brilliant yellow color; and he has two fleshcoloured rings round his eyes. His
nose is elevated at the base, and flattened at the point. The mouth is small,
the face flat and naked; and the ears are garnished with hair, and a little
pointed. The tail is half-prehensile, and longer than the body. From the point
of the muzzle to the origin of the tail, he exceeds not ten or eleven inches in
length. He stands with ease on his two hind legs; but he commonly walks on
four. The female is not subject to the menses.

Plate CCLXXXII. SAMIRI or ORANGE MONKEY.


The SAKI Fox-tailed monkey, with a swarthy face, covered with short down; fore
head and sides of the face with whitish and pretty long hair; body with long
dusky brown hairs, white or yellowish at their tips; hair on the tail very long
and bushy, sometimes black, sometimes reddish; belly and lower part of the
limbs a reddish white. Length from nose to tail near a foot and a half, tail
longer, and like to that of a fox: Hands and feet black, with claws instead of
nails; Pennant's synops. of quad. p. 130.

Saki. Simia minima, capite albido, dorso susco, pone rufescente, cauda
crinita. Sakee Winkee; Brown's not. hist. of Jamaica, chap. 5. sect. 5.

Cagui major Brasiliensibus; Marcgr. p. 227.

Cercopithecus pilis nigris, apice albido, vestitus, cauda pilis longissimis
nigris obsita; Brisson. quad. p. 138. 141.

Simia pithecia, caudata, imberbis, vellere nigro, apice albo, cauda nigra
villosissima; Linn. syst. not. p. 40.

Saccawinkee; Bancroft's Guiana, p. 135.


, or Fox-tailed Monkey.
THE Saki, which is commonly called the fox-tailed monkey, because its tail is
garnished with very long hair, is the largest of the sagoins. When full grown,
it is about seventeen inches long, while the largest of the other five species
exceeds not nine or ten. The hair on the body of the saki is very long, and
that on the tail is still longer. His face is reddish, and covered with a
whitish down. He is easily distinguished from all the other sagoins, sapajous,
and monkeys, by the following characters.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The saki has neither cheek-pouches nor callosities on his buttocks. His tail
is flaccid, not prehensile, and one half longer than both head and body. The
partition of the nostrils is very thick, and the apertures placed at a side.
The face is tawny, and covered with a fine, short, whitish down. The hair on
the upper parts of the body is blackish brown, and that on the belly and other
inferior parts is reddish white. The hair on the body is still longer than that
on the tail, beyond the point of which it hangs near two inches. The hair on
the tail is generally blackish brown, like that on the body. This species seems
to vary in color. Some sakis have the hair both on the body and tail of a
reddish yellow color. This animal walks on four feet, and is near a foot and a
half in length. The females are not subjected to the periodical evacuation.

Plate CCLXXXIII. SAKI or FOX TAILD MONKEY.


The TAMARIN Great-eared monkey, with a round head, and a swarthy,
flesh-coloured, naked face; upper lip a little divided; ears very large, erect,
naked, and almost square; hair on the forehead upright and long; on the body
soft, but shaggy: The head, whole body, and upper part of the limbs, black,
except the lower part of the back, which is tinged with yellow; hands and feet
covered with light orange colored hairs, very fine and smooth; nails long and
crooked; tail black, and twice the length of the body; teeth very white;
Pennant's synops. of quad. p. 131.

Cercopithecus minimus niger leontocephalus, auribus elephantinis; Barrere,
Franc. Equin. p. 151.

Simia midas, caudata, imberbis, labio superiore fisso, auribus quadratis
nudis, unguibus subulatis, pedibus croceis; Linn. Syst. Not. p. 42.

The little black monkey; Edwards's Hist. of Birds, p. 196.

Tamarin, the name of this animal in Cayenne; Binet, p. 341.


, or Great-eared Monkey.
THIS species is much smaller than the preceding, and differs from it in
several characters. The tail of the tamarin is covered with short hair, while
that of the saki is garnished with hair remarkably long. The tamarin has also
large ears, and yellow feet. It is a beautiful animal In Cayenne, there are
very small monkeys called tamarins, which are extremely beautiful. They exceed
not the size of a squirrel, and have the head and face of a lion, small teeth
as white as ivory, and arranged with great symmetry. They are black, with
yellowish spots on the shoulders. The pats are like those of the monkey, and
orange colored. They are very familiar and playsome; Voyage a Cayenne, par
Antoine Binet, p. 341.
, very lively, and easily tamed, but so delicate that it cannot long resist the
inclemency of our climate.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The tamarin has neither cheek-pouches nor callosities on the buttocks. The
tail is flaccid, and twice the length of the body and head. The partition
between the nostrils is very thick, and the apertures are placed at a side. The
face is of a dusky flesh-colors. The ears are square, large, naked, and of the
same color; and the eyes are chestnut. The upper lip is divided nearly like
that of the hare. The head, body, and tail, are covered with soft, blackish
brown hair, and the hands and feet with short orange colored hair. The body
and limbs are finely proportioned. This animal walks on four feet; and the head
and body together exceed not seven or eight inches in length. The females are
not subject to the menses.

Plate CCLXXXIV. TAMARIN or GREAT EARD MONKEY.


The OUISTITI Ouistiti, a sound articulated by this animal, and which we have
adopted for its name.

The striated monkey, with a very round head. About the ears are two very full
tufts of white hairs standing out on each side; irides reddish; face a swarthy
flesh-colors; ears like the human; head black; body ash-colored, reddish, and
dusky, the last forms striated bars cross the body; tail full of hair,
annulated with ash color and black; body seven inches long; tail near eleven;
hands and feet covered with short hairs; fingers like those of a squirrel;
nails, or rather claws, sharp; Pennant's synops. of quad. p. 132.

Galeopithecus, sagoin a Brasiliensibus nominatus; Gesner. Icon. quad. p. 96.

Sagouy; Mission au Maragnon, par le P. d' Abbeville, p. 252.

Cagui minor; Marcgr. Hist. Not. Brasil. p. 227.

Cercopithecus Brasilianus tertius sagouin; Claus. Exot. p. 372. Gesner. quad.
p. 869. Raii Synops. quad. p. 154. Klein. quad. p. 87. tab. 3. Ludolph. Com.
AEthiop. p. 58.

Cercopithecus teniis transversis alternatim fuscis, et e cinereo albis
variegatus, auriculis pilis albis circumdatis; Brisson, quad. p. 143.

Simia Jaccus, caudata, auribus villosis patulis, cauda hirsutissima, curvata,
unguibus subulatis, pollicum rotundatis; Linn. syst. Not. p. 40.


, or Striated Monkey.
THE Ouistiti is still smaller than the tamarin, both the head and body not
exceeding half a foot in length. His tail is more than a foot long, and, like
that of the maucauco, marked with alternate rings of black and white; the hair
on the tail is still longer, and more bushy than that of the maucauco. The face
of the ouistiti is naked, and of a dark flesh-colors. He has two tufts of long
white hair before his ears, which conceal them when we look the animal in the
face. Mr Parsons has given a good description of this animal in the
Philosophical Transactions Phil. Trans. vol. 47. p. 146.
; and Mr Edwards, in his Gleanings, has given an excellent figure of it. He
remarks, that, of several he saw, the largest weighed not above six ounces, and
the smallest only four and a half; and judiciously adds, That the supposition
that the small Ethiopian monkey mentioned by Ludolph, under the denomination
of fonkes, or guereza, was the same animal with the ouistiti, is without any
foundation J. Ludolphus, in his history of AEthiopia or Abyssinia, has given
two figures of this animal. They are described, p. 58. in the English
translation of that work. He calls it Fonkes, or Guereza: but his description
does not agree at all with the figures: So that I imagine this was met with in
Holland, and supposed to be the little monkey described by Ludolphus, though it
was really brought from Brasil, which was possessed by the Hollanders at the
time of the publication of that history; Edwards's Gleanings, p. 16.
. It is certain, that neither the ouistiti, nor any other sagoin, exists in
AEthiopia; and the fonkes or guereza of Ludolph is probably the maucauco or
loris, which are common in the southern regions of the Old Continent. Mr
Edwards farther remarks, that, when the ouistiti is in good health, its hair is
very bushy; that one of those he saw, which was very vigorous, fed upon several
things, as biskets, fruits, pot herbs, insects, and snails; that, one day,
being unchained, it darted upon a small china golden fish that was in a basin,
which it killed and devoured with avidity; and that, afterward, small eels were
presented to it, which, at first, frighted it, by twisting round its neck; but
that it soon overcame and ate them. Mr Edwards subjoins a fact, which proves
that these small animals might be multiplied in the southern parts of Europe:
He tells us that they produced young in Portugal, where the climate is
favorable to them. They are at first very ugly, having hardly any hair on
their bodies; and they adhere firmly to the teats of the mother. When they have
become a little larger, they fix themselves upon her back or shoulders; and,
when she is fatigued by carrying them, she rubs them off against a wall, and
the father instantly allows them to mount upon his back, in order to assist the
mother Edwards's gleanings, p. 17.
.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The ouistiti has neither cheek-pouches nor callosities on the buttocks. His
tail is flaccid, very bushy, annulated with alternate bars of black and white,
or rather of brown and gray, and twice as long as the head and body. The
partition of the nostrils is very thick, and the apertures are placed at a
side. The head is round. The top of the front is covered with black hair; and
above the nose there is a white spot without hair. The face is likewise almost
naked, and of a deep flesh-colors. On each side of the head, before the ears,
is a tuft of long white hairs. The ears are roundish, flat, thin, and naked.
The eyes are of a reddish chestnut color. The body is covered with gray
ashcoloured hair, interspersed with a little yellow on the throat, breast, and
belly. He walks on four feet; and often exceeds not half a foot in length. The
females do not menstruate.

Plate CCLXXXV. OISTITI or STRIATED MONKEY.


The MARIKINA Marikina, the name of this animal in Maragnon; Mission du P. d'
Abbeville, p. 252.

The silky monkey, with a flat face, of a dull purple color; ears round and
naked; on the sides of the face the hairs very long, turned backwards, of a
bright bay color; sometimes yellow, and the former only in patches; the hair
on the body long, very fine, silky, glossy, and of a pale bright yellow; hands
and feet naked, and of a dull purple color; claws instead of nails to each
finger; length of head and body ten inches; tail thirteen and a half, a little
bushy at the end; Pennant's synops. of quad. p. 133.

Cercopithecus minor dilute olivaceus, parvo capite, Acarima a Cayenne;
Barrere, Franc. Equin. p. 151.

Cercopithecus ex albo flavicans, faciei circumferentia saturate rufa; le petit
singe-lion; Brisson. quad. p. 142.

Simia rosalia, caudata, imberbis, capite piloso, faciei circumferentia
pedibusque rubris, unguibus subulatis; Linn. Syst. Not. p. 41.


, or Silky Monkey.
THE Marikina is commonly distinguished by the name of the small lion-ape. We
reject this compound denomination, because the markina is not an ape, but a
sagoin. Besides, he has no more resemblance to a lion than a lark has to an
ostrich, there being no other relation between them but a kind of mane round
the face of the marikina, and a tuft of hair at the end of his tail. His hair
is long, silky, and vivid. He has a round head, a brown face, red eyes, and
round naked ears, concealed under the long hair which surround his face: These
hairs are of a bright red color, and those on the body and tail are pale
yellow, almost white. This animal has the same manners, the same vivacity, and
the same inclinations with the other sagoins. Its constitution seems to be more
robust; for we have seen one that lived five or six years in Paris, without
anyother precaution than keeping in during the winter in a warm room.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The marikina has neither cheek-pouches nor callosities on the buttocks. His
tail is flaccid, or not prehensile, and almost twice as long as both the head
and body. He has round naked ears, long reddish hairs around the face, and
bright yellowish white hairs, nearly of an equal length, on the rest of the
body, with a considerable tuft at the extremity of the tail. He walks upon four
feet; and exceeds not eight or nine inches in length. The female is not subject
to the menses.

Plate CCLXXXVI. MARIKINI or SILKY MONKEY.


The PINCHE Pinche, the name of this animal at Maynas; Condamine's voy. p. 83.

Red-tailed monkey with a round head and black pointed face; ears round and
dusky; hair on the head white, long, and spreading over the shoulders: The
shoulders and back are covered with long and loose brown hairs; rump and half
the tail deep orange colored, almost red; the remaining part black; the throat
black; breast, belly, and legs, white; insides of the hands and feet black;
claws crooked and sharp; length of the head and body eight inches; tail above
twice as long; Pennant's synops. of quad. p. 134.

Cercopithecus pilis ex fusco et rufo vestitus, facie ultra auriculas usque
nuda et nigra, vertice longis pilis obsita; Brisson. quad. p. 150.

Simia Oedipus, candata, imberbis, capillo dependente, cauda rubra, unguibus
subulatis; Linn. Syst. Not. p. 41.

The little lion-monkey; Edward's Hist. of Birds, p. 195.


, or Red-tailed Monkey.
THE Pinche, though very small, is larger than either the ouistiti or the
tamarin. Including head and body, it is about nine inches long, and the length
of the tail is, at least, eighteen inches. It is rendered remarkable by a kind
of smooth white hair upon the top and sides of the head, especially as this
color is wonderfully contrasted by that of the face, which is black, and
interspersed with a gray down. The eyes are black, and the tail, from its
origin to near the middle, is of a lively red, where it changes to a brownish
black, which continues to the point. The hair on the superior parts of the body
is of a yellowish brown color; that on the breast, belly, hands, and feet, is
white. The whole skin is black. The throat is naked and black, like the face.
Though its figure be singular, it is a beautiful animal. Its voice is soft, and
rather resembles the chanting of a small bird than the cry of a quadruped. It
is extremely delicate, and requires great precautions to be transported from
America to Europe In Brasil, de Lery remarks, there is a marmot, which the
savages call sagoin. It exceeds not the size of a squirrel, and is of the same
reddish color. Its muzzle resembles that of the lion. It is one of the most
beautiful animals I have ever seen; and, if it were as easily transported as
the monkey, it would be much more esteemed. It is so delicate, that it cannot
endure the motion of a ship; and, besides, it is so haughty, that the smallest
affront makes it die with chargin; Voyage de Jean de Lery, p. 163.
.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The pinche has neither cheek-pouches nor callosities on the buttocks. His tail
is not prehensile, and is more than twice the length of the head and body. The
partition of the nostrils is thick, and the apertures are placed at a side. The
face, throat, and ears are black; on the head are long white hairs. The muzzle
is broad, and the face round. The hair on the body is pretty long, of a
yellowish brown or reddish color till near the tail, where it becomes Plate
CCLXXXVII. PINCHE or RED MONKEY.
orange; on the breast, belly, hands, and feet, it is white, and shorter than
on the body. The tail, from the origin to one half of its length, is a vivid
red, then brownish red, and toward the point it is black. He is about nine
inches in length, and walks on four feet. The females are not subject to the
menstrual evacuation.

The MICO The fair monkey, with a small round head; face and ears of the most
lively vermilion color; body covered with most beautiful long hairs of a
bright and silvery whiteness, of matchless elegance; tail of a shining dark
chestnut; head and body eight inches long; tail twelve; Pennant's synops. of
quad. p. 134.

Cercopithecus ex cinereo albus argenteus, facie auriculisque rubris
splendentibus, cauda castanei coloris; Brisson. quad. p. 142.


, or fair MONKEY.
WE owe our knowledge of this animal to M. de la Condamine; and, therefore, we
shall transcribe the account he has given of it: 'The monkey, of which the
Governor of Para made me a present, is the only one of the kind that had been
seen in this country. The hair on its body was of a beautiful silvery white
color; and that on its tail was a shining chestnut approaching to black. Its
ears, cheeks, and muzzle, were of so lively a vermilion color, that it had the
appearance of being the work of art. I kept it for twelve months; and, now that
I am in sight of the French coast, it is still alive. But, notwithstanding all
my precautions to defend it against the cold, it fell a victim to the rigor of
the season before my arrival.... I have preserved it in aquavitae, which will
be sufficient to show that my description is not exaggerated Voyage sur la
riviere des Amazones, par M. de la Condamine, p. 165.
.' From this narration it is obvious, that M. de la Condamine's description
will apply to no other animal than the Mico; and that it is a distinct, and
probably a very rare species. Though remarkable for the beauty of its hair, and
the lively red which adorns its face, it was never mentioned by any former
author or traveller.

Distinctive Characters of this Species.
The mico has neither cheek-pouches nor callosities on-the buttocks. The tail
is about one half longer than the head and body, and is not prehensile. The
partition of the nostrils is thinner than that of the other sagoins; but their
apertures are placed at a side. Its face and ears are naked, and of a vermilion
color. The muzzle is short; the eyes are distant from each other; the ears are
large; the hair is of a beautiful silvery white color, and that of the tail of
a glossy brown, approaching to black. It walks on four feet, and exceeds not
seven or eight inches in length. The females are not subject to the menses.

NOTICES of some Animals which are not expressly treated of in the Course of
this Work.
WE have now finished, according to the extent of our ability, the history of
quadrupeds. But, to render it still more complete, those of which we could not
procure an exact knowledge must not be passed over in silence. Their number is
small; and, even of this small number, several of them are only varieties of
the species already described.

NOTICE I.
The White, or POLAR BEAR Polar bear, with long head and neck; short round
ears, end of the nose black; vast teeth; hair long, soft white, and tinged in
some parts with yellow; limbs of great size and strength. It grows to a vast
size, the skins of some being thirteen feet long; Pennant's Synops. of quad. p.
192.

White bear; Martin's Spitzbergen, p. 100. Egede, Greenl. p. 59. Ellis's voy.
p. 41. Crantz, Greenl. vol. 1. p. 73. Barentz's voy. p. 18 and 45. La Hontan's
voy. vol. 1. p. 235. Catesby's Carolina, app. p. 26.

Ursus albus Martensii; Klein. quad. p. 82.

L'Ours blanc; Brisson. quad p. 128.


.
THE white bear is a famous animal in our most northern regions. It is
mentioned by Marten, and some other voyagers. But none Plate CCLXXXVIII MICO or
FAIR MONKEY
of their descriptions are so complete as to enable us to ascertain whether it
differs in species from the common bear. If what they have said, however, be
exact, it is probably a distinct species. But, as we know that the wolf varies
in different climates, some of them being black, others brown, others white,
and others variegated, color is a character of no value in constituting
different species. I saw two small bears which had been brought from Russia,
and were entirely white We find white land-bears not only in Russia, but in
Poland, Siberia, and Tartary. The mountains of Great Tartary furnish great
numbers of white bears; Relat. de Grande Tartarie, p. 8. These mountain bears
do not frequent the sea, and yet they are white. This color, therefore, seems
rather to proceed from the difference of climate than from that of the element
inhabited by these animals.
; and yet they were unquestionably of the same species with our Alpine bears.
These animals likewise vary greatly in size. As they live long, and become very
thick and fat in places where they have plenty of nourishment, and are not
disturbed, the character drawn from magnitude is equivocal. Hence we are not
authorized to conclude, that the bear of the northern seas is a peculiar
species, solely because he is white and larger than the common kind Ursus in
Polonia variat, maximus nigricans, minor fulvus, minimus argentinus, in
confiniis Moschoviae pilis nigris et argentei coloris mixti... ex Urso occiso
pellis detracta fere ad ulnas sex protendebatur in terra Chelmensi, altera in
Palatinatu Braclaviensi, tertia ad ulnas quinque in Bondargout^ pago
Palatinatus Pomeraniae.... non raro ex Lithuania advehuntur Gedanum pelles octo
pedum; Rzaczinski, p. 322. -- Nota. This passage proves that there are white
land-bears as large as those of the Northern seas.
, The difference of habits seems not to be more decisive than that of color
and magnitude. The bear of the northern seas feeds upon fishes. He never quits
the margins of the sea, and often inhabits the floating islands of ice. But, if
we consider that the bear is an animal which eats every thing, that, when
pressed with hunger, he has no choice, and that he is not afraid of water,
these habits will not appear sufficient to form distinct species. The fish
eaten by the sea-bears is rather a kind of flesh, being chiefly the carcasses
of whales, walruses, and seals. The climate produces no other animals. Neither
does it afford grains or fruits; and, consequently, the bear is under the
necessity of subsisting on the productions of the sea. Is it not probable that
our bears, if transported to the mountains of Spitzbergen, and finding no food
upon land, would take to the sea in quest of subsistence?

Color, size, and mode of living, being insufficient, no other essential
characters remain but those which may be derived from figure. Now all that
voyagers have said of the sea-bear, amounts only to this, that his head, body,
and hair are longer than those of our bear, and that his skull is much harder.
If these differences were real and considerable, they would be sufficient to
constitute another species. But I am not certain that Marten has examined with
accuracy, and that the other writers who copied him, have not exaggerated
Anderson's hist. of Greenland; and Ellis Voy. to Hudson's Bay.
. 'These white bears,' he remarks, 'are quite otherwise shaped than those that
are seen in our country; they have a long head like unto a dog, and a long
neck, and they bark like dogs that are hoarse, and all their whole body is much
otherwise shaped than ours. They are slenderer in the body, and a great deal
swifter;' Marten's voyage to Spitzbergen, p. 100. This description furnishes
the following remarks: 1. That the author does not make these bears larger than
ours; and, consequently, that we ought to suspect the evidence of those who
tell us that the sea-bear is sometimes thirteen feet in length A white bear,
which had been killed, was brought aboard. Its skin was thirteen feet long;
Troisieme voyage des Hollandois par le Nord, p. 35.
. 2. That hair as soft as wool is not a specific character; for, to render hair
soft, and even more bushy, it is only necessary that an animal be frequently in
the water, as appears from the land and water beavers. The latter, who dwelt
oftener in the water than on land, have coarser and less bushy hair: And, I am
inclined to think, that the other differences are neither real nor so
conspicuous as Marten would have us to believe; for Dithmar Blefken, in his
description of Iceland, mentions these bears, and assures us that he saw one
killed in Greenland, which raised itself on the two hind feet, like our bears;
but he says not one word which indicates that the white bear of Greenland is
not entirely similar to ours Habet Islandia coloris albi ingentes Ursos... in
Groenlandia ursum magnum et album habuimus obviam, qui neque nos timebat neque
nostro clamore abigi poterat, verum recta ad nos tanquam ad certam praedam
contendebat, cumque proprius nos accessisset, is bonbarda trajectus, ibi demum
erectus, posterioribus pedibus tanquam homo stabat donec tertio trajiceretur,
atque ita exanimatus concidit; Dithmar Blefken. p. 64.
. Besides, when these animals find prey on land, they never go to sea in quest
of food. They devour rain-deer, and such other animals as they can seize. They
even attack men, and never fail to dig up dead bodies The white bears live upon
dead whales, and, in the neighborhood of these carcasses, they are most
frequently found. They likewise devour men, when they can surprise them. If
they scent the place where a dead body is interred, they remove the earth and
stones, open the coffin, and eat the carcass; Recueil des voyages du Nord, tom.
2. p. 126.
. But hunger, which they often feel in these desert and barren lands, obliges
them to frequent the water, in quest of seals, young walruses, and whales. They
take up their residence on islands of ice, on which they are often seen
floating at a distance, and never abandon their station as long as they can
find abundance of food. When these boards of ice are detached in the spring,
the bears allow themselves to be carried along; and, as they cannot regain the
land, or abandon the ice on which they are embarked, they often perish in the
open sea. Those who arrive with the ice on the coasts of Iceland or Norway When
the islands of ice separate from the North of Greenland, and are driven
southward, the white bears dare not depart from them. When they arrive in
Norway, or at any island, they are mad with hunger; and strange stories are
told of the ravages made by these animals; Recueil des voyages du Nord, tom. 1.
p. 100.
, are starved to such a degree, that they devour every thing they meet, which
may have given rise to the prejudice, that these sea-bears are more fierce and
voracious than the common kind. Some authors tell us, that the sea-bears are
amphibious like the seals, and that they can live as long as they please under
water. But the contrary is evident from the manner of hunting them: They are
incapable of swimming long, and never accomplish above a league at a time. They
are followed by a small boat, and are soon worn out with fatigue. If they could
dispense with respiration, they would dive to the bottom, in order to rest
themselves. But, when they dive, it is only for a few seconds; and, for fear of
drowning, they allow themselves to be killed on the surface of the water This
white bear swam about a mile. We pursued him briskly with three boats; and,
after he was fatigued, we killed him; Trois navigations des Hollandois au Nora,
par Gerard de Vera, p. 110. -- They swim from one board of ice to another: When
we pursued them in our boats they dived at one end of the boat and came up at
the other. They likewise run very well upon land; Recueil des Voyages du Nord,
tom. 2. p. 116. -- Upon the coast of Spitzbergen, a white bear took the water,
and swam more than a league. We followed with our boats, and killed him, etc.;
Troisieme voyage des Hollandois, p. 34.
.

Seals are the common prey of the white bears When we killed this white bear,
his stomach was opened, in which we found entire pieces of the sea-dog, with
the hair and skin on them, which shows that he had but lately devoured them;
Ibid. p. 36.
. But the walrus, from whom they sometimes carry off the young, pierces them
with its tusks, and puts them to flight. The whale likewise overwhelms them by
its weight, and banishes them from the places they frequent. They sometimes,
however, devour the young whales. All bears are naturally very fat; and the
whitebears, who live upon animals loaded with grease, are fatter than the
common kind. Their fat is very like that of the whale. The flesh of these bears
is not bad, and their skin makes a very warm and durable fur The white bears go
in quest of wolves and sea-dogs, and prefer whales to any other fish.... They
dread the whale, who scent and pursues them from a natural antipathy; because
they eat her young; Recueil des voy. du Nord, tom. 1. p. 99. -- The skins of
the white bear are of great use to those who travel in winter. They are
dressed, even at Spitzbergen, by steeping them in warm water, which extracts
the grease; and they are afterward dried.... Their grease is like suet, and,
after being well melted, it becomes as clear as whale oil. It is generally
burnt in lamps, and has not so bad a smell as fish oil. Our sailors sell it for
whale oil. The flesh of these bears is fat and whitish. -- Their milk is very
white and fat; Troisieme voy. des Hollandois, tom. 2. p. 115.
.

SUPPLEMENT.
I here give a figure of the white sea bear, from a drawing sent me by the late
Mr Colinson. If this drawing be exact, it is certain that the sea bear is a
different species from the land bear. The head is so long, when compared with
that of the common bear, that this character alone is sufficient to constitute
a distinct species: And those voyagers adhere to truth when they tell us, that
the figure of the sea bear is totally different from ours, and that its head
and neck are much longer. From the drawing it likewise appears, that the feet,
instead of resembling the human hand, like those of the land bear, are formed
nearly like the feet of a large dog, and other carnivorous animals of this
kind. Besides, from several relations, it appears, that some of these bears are
much larger than the land bear. Gerard de Veira asserts, that, after killing
one of these bears, he measured the skin, and found it to be twenty-three feet
long, which is more than triple the length of the common bear Trois navigations
admirables faites par les Hollandois au Septentrion, p. 110.
. We likewise find, from the Collection of Voyages to the North, that these sea
bears are larger and more ferocious than ours. But, in the same Collection, it
is said, that, though these bears are differently formed, and have the head and
neck much longer, and the body more slender and agile, they are nearly of the
same size with the common kind Recueil de Voyages du Nord, tom. 2. p. 115.
.

All voyagers also agree, that the sea bears have the bones of the head so
hard, that no blow of a club, though sufficient to bring an ox to the ground,
can stun them; and that their voice rather resembles the barking of an engraged
dog than the deep murmuring cry of the common bear. Robert Lade assures us,
that, in the environs of the river Rupper, he killed two sea bears of a
prodigious size; that these famished and ferocious animals attacked the hunters
with such impetuosity, that they killed several Savages, and wounded two
Englishmen. In page 34. of the third Dutch Voyages to the North, we are told,
that the sailors killed, on the coast of Nova Zembla, a sea bear whose skin was
thirteen feet long. Upon the whole, therefore, I Plate CCLXXXIX. WHITE or POLAR
BEAR.
am inclined to believe, that this animal, so much celebrated for its ferocity,
is really a much larger species than our bear.

II.
The COW of TARTARY Grunting ox, with a mane on the neck; whole body covered
with long hair, reaching almost to the ground; back hunched; tail like that of
a horse, covered with full white and long hairs; strikes with its head like a
goat; is very unruly; found in the country of the Calmucks; Pennant's Synops.
of quad. p. 5.

Vacca grunniens, villosa, cauda equina, Sarluk; Nov. Com. Petrop. tom. 5. p.
339. Rubruquis voy. Harris's coll. vol. 1. p. 571.

Bos grunniens, cornibus teretibus, extrorsum curvatis, vellere propondente,
cauda undique jubata; Linn. Syst. Not. p. 99.

Le boeuf velu; Le Brun Voy. Moscov. tom. 1. p. 120.

Bubul; Bell's Trav. vol. 1. p. 224.


.
M. GMELIN, in the New Memoirs of the Academy of Petersburg, has given a
description of a Tartarian cow, which, at first sight, appears to differ from
all those we have enumerated under the article buffalo. 'This cow,' says he,
'which I saw alive, and had a drawing made of it is Siberia, came from Calmuck.
It was about two and a half Russian else in length. By this standard we may
judge of its other dimensions, the proportions of which have been accurately
observed by the painter. The body resembles that of a common cow. The horns are
bended inward. The hair on the body and head is back, except on the front and
ridge of the back, where it is white. It has a mane on the neck; and the whole
body, like that of a buck, is covered with very long hair, which descends as
far as the knees, and makes the legs appear short. It has a bunch on the back.
The tail resembles that of a horse, and is white and very bushy. The fore legs
are black, the hind ones white, and the whole resemble those of the ox. Upon
the heels of the hind feet, there are two tufts of long hair, the one before
and the other behind; and, on the fore feet, there is but one tuft placed
behind. The excrements are more solid than those of cows; and, when the animal
discharges urine, it draws its body backward. It lows not like an ox, but
grunts like a hog. It is wild, and even ferocious; for, except the man from
whom it receives its food, it gives blows with its head to every person who
comes near it. It hardly suffers the presence of domestic cows: Whenever it
perceives one of them, it grunts, which it seldom does on any other occasion.'
To this description M. Gmelin adds, 'That it is the same animal mentioned by
Rubruquis in his travels into Tartary: That there are two species of it among
the Calmucks, the first called Sarluk, which I have already described, and the
second Chainuk, which differs from the other by the largeness of its head and
horns, and also by the tail, which at its origin resembles that of the horse,
and terminates like that of a cow. But they both have the same natural
dispositions.'

In the whole of this description, there is only a single character which
indicates the Calmuck cows to be a particular species, and that is their
grunting instead of a lowing. It every other article, they have so strong a
resemblance to the bison, that they must belong to the same species, or rathe
the same race. Besides, though the author says, that these cows do not low, but
grunt, he acknowledges that they very rarely utter that kind of sound. Perhaps
it was an affection peculiar to the individual he saw; for Rubruquis, and the
other writers whom he quotes, mention not this grunting. Perhaps the bisons,
when enraged, likewise make a grunting noise. Even our bulls, particularly in
the rutting season, have a hollow, interrupted voice, which has a greater
resemblance to grunting than to lowing. I am persuaded, therefore, that this
grunting cow of Gmelin is nothing else but the bison, and does not constitute a
particular species.

III.
The TOLAI, or BAIKAL HARE Baikal hare, with a tail somewhat longer than that
of a rabbit; fur of the color of the common hare; red about the neck and feet;
tail black above, white beneath. It is larger than a rabbit, and inhabits the
country beyond Lake Baikal; Pennant's synops. of quad. p. 253.

Lepus cauda in supina part nigra, in prona alba; Brissn. quad. p. 97.


.
THIS animal is very common in the neighborhood of Lake Baikal in Tartary. It
is somewhat larger than the rabbit, which it resembles in the figure of the
body, the fur, the gait, the color, the taste of the flesh, and the habit of
digging a retreat in the earth. Their internal structure is likewise the same
Cuniculus insigniter caudatus coloris leporini. -- Circa internas parts haec
observavi. Caecum colo paulo angustius erat, sed longius, utpote octo pollicum
longitudinem aequans: prope ilei insertionem caerulescens, digiti medii capax,
sensimque decrescens, in extremitate vix calamum scriptorium latitudine capit,
color ibidem albente gaudens. Oesophagus uti in lepore ventriculum medium
subit. A Mongolis Tolar dicitur, idemque nomen Russis etiam harum regionum
usitatum est; Gmelin, nov comment. Ac. Petrop. tom. 5. tab. 15. fig. 2.
; and there is no difference but in the length of the tail, that of the tolai
being considerably longer. Hence it is extremely probable that this animal is
only a variety in the species of the rabbit. Rubruquis, when treating of the
animals in Tartary, says, 'There are rabbits with a long tail, and black and
white hairs at the point.... There are no stags, few hares, a vast number of
gazelles,' etc. This passage seems to insinuate, that our short-tailed rabbit
is not found in Tartary Relation des voyages en Tartarie, par Rubruquis, p. 25.
, or rather, that it has undergone some variations in that climate, and
particularly in the length of the tail; for, as the tolai resembles the rabbit
in every other respect, it is unnecessary to consider them as belonging to
different species.

IV.
The ZISEL Marmot without external ears, having only a small orifice on each
side of the head for the admittance of sunds. It has a blunt nose, a long
slender body, and a very short tail. The color is dark gray, or cinereous
brown; Pennant's Synops. of quad. p. 276.

Mus Noricus; Gesner, quad. p. 737. Raii synops. quad. p. 220.

Ziesel; Schwenkfelt. Theriotroph. p. 86.

Mus citellus, cauda abbreviata, corpore cinereo, auriculis nullis; Linn. Syst.
Not. p. 80.

Cuniculus caudatus auriculus nullis, cinereus; Brisson. quad. p. 101.


, or EARLESS MARMOT.
SOME authors, and among others Linnaeus, have doubted whether the Zisel or
Ziesel Mus Noricus quem citellum appellant, in terrae cavernis habitat, ei
corpus ut mustelae domesticae longum et tenue, cauda admodum brevis, color
pilis ut cuniculorum quorumdam pilis, cinereus, sed obscurior. Sicut talpa
caret auribus, sed non caret foraminibus quibus sonum ut avis recipit. Dentes
habet muris dentium similes; ex hujus etiam pellibus, quanquam non sint
preciosae, vestes solent confici; Georg. Agricola de animantibus subterraneis,
p. 488.
, ( citellus) be a different animal from the hamster ( cricetus). They have,
indeed, a great resemblance to each other, and inhabit nearly the same
countries The hamster is found in Misnia, Thuringia, and Hannover; and the
zisel in Hungary, Austria, and Poland, where it is called suset.
. They differ, however, in so many characters, that I am convinced they
constitute two distinct species. The zisel is smaller than the hamster. Its
body is long and slender, like the weasel; but that of the hamster is thick
like the rat. It has no external ears, but two auditory passages concealed
under the hair. The ears of the hamster are short; but they are broad, and very
conspicuous. The zisel is of a uniform cinereous gray color; but the hamster
has three large white spots on each side of the breast. These differences, when
joined to this circumstance, that the two animals, though they inhabit the same
regions, never intermix, are sufficient to remove every doubt with regard to
the diversity of their species, though they resemble one another in the
shortness of the tail and legs, in having teeth like those of the rat, and even
in natural habits, such as digging retreats in the earth, laying up magazines
of provisions, destroying the corn, etc. Besides, what must remove every doubt
on this subject, Agricola, an exact and judicious writer, in his treatise on
subterraneous animals, gives a description of both animals, and distinguishes
them so clearly, that it is impossible to confound them Istius (viverrae
scilicet) ferocitatis est etiam agri vastator et cereris hostis hamster, quem
quidam cricetum nominant. -- Existit iracundus et mordax. -- In terrae cavernis
habitat non aliter atque cuniculus, sed angustis, et idcirco pellis qua part
utrinque coxam tegit a pilis est nuda. Major paulo quam domestica mustela
existit; pedes habet admodum breves: Pilis in dorso color est fere leporis, in
ventre niger, in lateribus rutilus; sed utrinque latus maculis albis tribus
numero distinguitur. Suprema capitis pars, ut etiam cervix, eundem quem dorsum
habet colorem; tempora rutila sunt; guttur est candidum. Caudae quae ad tres
digitos transversos longa ut similiter leporis color. Pili autem sic inhaerent
cuti ut ex ea difficulter evelli possint. Ac cutis quidem a carne facilius
avellitur quam pili ex cute radicitus extrahantur, atque ob hanc causam et
varietatem pelles ejus sunt preciosae; Georg. Agricol. de anim. subt. page 490.
-- This description of the hamster, when compared with that of the zisel given
by the same author, and which the reader will find in a note on the preceding
page, is sufficient to demonstrate that these animals are very different from
one another.
. Hence we may conclude, that the hamster and zisel are very different species,
and perhaps as remote from each other as the weasel from the rat.

V.
The ZEMNI, or PODOLIAN MARMOT Podolian marmot, with the cutting teeth of the
lower jaw half as long again as those of the upper; eyes very minute, and as
much hid in the fur as those of the mole; four toes, and a claw instead of the
fifth, on the fore feet; five on the hind; tail short; color cinereous; size
of a squirrel; Pennant's Synops. of quad. p. 277.

Zits-jan; Le Brun, voyag. Muscov. vol. 2. p. 402.


.
IN Poland and Russia there is another animal called ziemni or zemni, which is
of the same genus with the zisel, but larger, stronger, and more mischievous.
The head is pretty thick, the body slender, and the ears short and rounded. It
has four large cutting teeth, which project out of the mouth, the two in the
under jaw being thrice as long as the two in the upper. The feet are very
short, covered with hair, divided into five toes, and armed with crooked claws.
The hair is soft, short, and of a mouse-gray color. The tail is of a moderate
size. The eyes are as small, and equally concealed as those of the mole.
Rzaczinski gives it the denomination of the little earth dog. This author seems
to be the only one who mentions the zemni, though it be very common in some of
the Northern provinces Reperitur hoc animal in Podolia, Ukraina, Volhinia circa
Suraz, Chodaki, Rienki, Mossezenica, Sezurowee, et alibi; non raro eruitur ab
agricolis ibidem vomeribus; Rzaczinski, Auct. page 325. et 326.
. Its natural dispositions and habits are nearly the same with those of the
hamster and zisel. It bites cruelly, eats voraciously, and lays waste the corn
fields and gardens. It digs a habitation in the earth, and feeds upon grains,
fruits, and pot herbs, of which it lays up magazines in its retreat, where it
passes the winter.

VI.
THE POUC.
RZACZINSKI mentions another animal which is larger than the domestic rat, and
called pouch by the Russians. It digs a retreat in the earth, and lays waste
the gardens. This animal was so numerous near Suraz in Volhinia, that the
inhabitants were obliged to abandon the culture of their gardens. It is perhaps
the same with Seba's Norwegian rat, of which he gives a figure and description
Mus ex Norvegia cinereo fuscus; rostro gaudet snillo, capite longiusculo,
brevibus latisque auriculis, promisso mystace utrinque ad latera narium
rigente, dorsum ejus latum et incurvum est, abdomen pendulum, femora grossa,
pedum digiti longi acutis unguibus ad fodiendum adaptatis; talparum enim instar
in erutis sub terra antris degit; pilus ex dilute cinereo fuscus est; Seba,
vol. 2. p. 64. fig. tab. 63. fig. 5.
.

VII.
THE PEROUASCA.
RUSSIA and Poland furnish another animal: In the language of the former
country it is called perewiazka, and in that of the latter przewiaska
Rzaczinski, Auct. page 328.
, or gridled weasel. It is smaller than the polecat, and covered with whitish
hair, rayed transversely with several bands of yellowish red. It lives in the
woods, and burrows in the ground. Its skin is a beautiful fur.

VIII.
The SOUSLIK, or CASAN MARMOT Casan marmot, with short round ears; smooth hair,
of a yellowish brown color, marked with faint round spots of white; above and
below the eye, a bar of white; face, breast, belly, and legs, of a pale yellow;
four toes before, five behind; tail half the length of the body, covered with
short hair of the color of the body; size of a large rat; Pennant's Synops. of
quad. p. 273.

Mus marmotta, sp. 15.; Forster, Hist. Not. Volgae. Phil. Trans. vol. 57. p.
343.


.
IN Casan, and the provinces watered by the Wolga, as far as Austria, there is
a small animal called souslik in the Russian language, which furnishes a
beautiful fur. In figure and shortness of tail, it has a great resemblance to
the short-tailed field mouse. But it is distinguished from the mouse or rat
kind by its fur, which is every where interspersed with small spots of a bright
and shining white. These spots exceed not a line in diameter, and are placed at
the distance of two or three lines from each other. They are more conspicuous
and better defined upon the loins than on the shoulders and head. Mr Pennant, a
well known and very able Naturalist, favored me with one of these sousliks,
which had been transmitted to him from Austria, as an animal unknown to the
Naturalists. I recognized it to be the same animal with that of which I had a
skin in my possession, and of which M. Sanchez Formerly physician to the court
of Russia.
sent me the following notice: 'Great numbers of the rats called Sousliks are
taken in the barks loaded with salt in the river Kama, which desend from
Solikamski, where there are salt pits, and fall into the Wolga, above the town
of Casan, at the confluence of the Teluschin. The Wolga, from Simbuski to
Somtof, is covered with these salt barks; and it is in the lands adjacent to
these rivers, as well as in the barks, where the sousliks are taken. They have
obtained the denomination of souslik, which signifies nice-tased, because they
are extremely fond of salt.'.

SUPPLEMENT.
I now give a figure of this animal, which is not in the original work. Prince
Galitzin, at the desire of M. de Buffon, was so obliging as to send eight
sousliks, with the necessary precautions for preserving them alive, till they
should arrive in France. These eight animals arrived in Petersburg, after a
long journey from Siberia. But, notwithstanding all the attention paid to them,
they died in passing from Petersburg to France. The instructions from Siberia
were, to feed them only with grain or hempseed; to give them as much air as
possible; to put a considerable quantity of sand in their cage, because, in
their natural state, they burrow in light soils.

Plate CCXC. SOUSLIK


These animals generally dwell in the deserts, and dig holes in the declivities
of mountains, provided the earth be blackish. Their holes are not of equal
depths, and are seven or eight feet long, never straight, but winding, and have
from two to five entries, the distances of which are unequal, being from two to
seven feet asunder. In these holes they make different apartments, and amass in
them their winter provisions during the summer. In the cultivated fields, they
collect ears of corn, pease, lint, and hemp seeds, and place them separately in
different departments of their holes. In uncultivated lands, they collect the
seeds of various herbs. During summer, they feed upon grains, herbs, roots, and
young mice; for, when the mice are large, the souslik is unable to kill them.
Beside their magazines of provisions, these animals dig separate holes some
feet distant from the former, in which they repose. They throw all their ordure
out of their retreats. The females bring forth from two to five young at a
litter, which are blind and naked, and begin not to see till after the hair
appears. The time of gestation is not exactly known.

IX.
The SIBERIAN, or GILDED MOLE Siberian mole, with a very short nose; no ears;
three toes on the fore feet, on the utmost toe a very large claw; four toes on
the hind feet; body of an equal thickness; rump quite round; no tail; of a
beautiful green and gold color, variable with the light; Pennant's Synops. of
quad. p. 313.

Talpa Sibericus versicolor, Aspalax dictus; Seb. Mus. tom. 1. p. 51. tab. 32.
fig. 4. 5. Klein. quad. p. 60.

Talpa Asiatica, ecaudata, palmis tridactylis; Linn. Syst. Not. p. 73.

Talpa ecaudata, ex viridi aurea, pedibus anticis tridactylis, posticis
tetradactylis; Brisson. quad. p. 206.


.
IN Siberia, there is a mole called the gilded mole, whose species is probably
different from the common kind; because it wants the tail, has a very short
muzzle, the hair mixed with green and a gold-colour, and only three toes on the
fore feet, and four on those behind, while the common mole has five toes on all
the feet. We are ignorant of the proper name of this animal.

X.
The WHITE WATER RAT.
THE water rat of Europe is found in Canada; but its colors are different. It
is brown on the back; and the rest of the body is white, and in some places
yellow. The head, muzzle, and end of the tail are white. The hair is softer and
more glossy than that of our water-rat. But, in every other article, these
animals are perfectly similar, and undoubtedly belong to the same species. The
white hair is an effect of cold; and it is probable, that white water-rats may
be found in the North of Europe, as well as in Canada.

XI.
THE GUINEY HOG Hog with a lesser head than the common kind; very long,
slender, and sharp pointed ears; tail hanging down to the heels, without hairs;
the body covered with short red shining hairs, but about the neck and lower
part of the back a little longer, no bristles; a domestic variety of the common
kind; Pennant's Synops. of quad. p. 69.

Porcus Guineensis; Marcgrave, Brasil. p. 230. Raii Synops. quad. p. 96.

Sus porcus, dorso postice setoso, cauda longitudine pedum; Linn. Syst. Not. p.
103.


.
THOUGH this animal differs from the common hog in some characters, I presume
that it is the same species, and that these differences are only varieties
produced by the influence of climate. Of this we have an example in the Siam
hog, which likewise differs from that of Europe; and yet it is unquestionably
the same species, since they intermix and produce together. The Guiney hog is
nearly of the same figure with ours, and of the same size with the Siam hog,
that is, smaller than the wild boar, or the domestic hog. It is an original
native of Guiney, and has been transported to Brasil, where it has multiplied
prodigiously. It is domestic, and perfectly tame. It has short, red, shining
hair, and no bristles, even on the back. The neck and crupper, near the origin
of the tail, are covered with longer hairs than those on the rest of the body.
Its head is not so large as that of the European hog, from which it differs in
the figure of the ears, which are very long, sharp-pointed, and lie back upon
the neck. Its tail is also much longer, reaching near the ground, and entirely
destitute of hair. This race, which, according to Marcgrave, is peculiar to
Guiney, is found likewise in Asia, and particularly in the island of Java In
the island of Java the hogs have no bristles; and they are so fat, that their
bellies drag upon the ground; Voyage de Mandelso, tom. 2. p. 349.
, from whence they seem to have been transported by the Dutch to the Cape of
Good Hope The hogs which have been brought from Java to the Cape have very
short legs; and they are black, and without bristles. Their belly is so large
that it nearly reaches the ground. Their lard is not so firm as that of the
European hog. -- Their flesh is extremely good; Descript. du Cap. de Bonne
esperance, par Kolbe, tom. 3. p. 48.
.

XII.
The ETHIOPIAN, or CAPE VERD BOAR Ethiopian hog with small tusks in the lower
jaws; very large ones in the upper, in old boars, bending up toward the
forehead in form of a semicircle; no fore teeth; nose broad, depressed, and
almost of a horny hardness; head very large and broad; beneath each eye a
hollow, formed of loose skin, very soft, and wrinkled; under these a great lobe
or wattle, lying almost horizontal, broad, flat, and rounded at the end, placed
so as to intercept the view of any thing below from the animal. Between these
and the mouth, on each side, a hard callous protuberance; mouth small; skin
dusky; bristles disposed in fasciculi, of about five each; longest between the
ears, and on the beginning of the back, and but thinly dispersed on the rest of
the back. Ears large and sharp-pointed, inside lined with long whitish hairs;
tail slender and (...); does not reach lower than the thighs, and covered with
hairs disposed in fasciculi; Pennant's synops. of quad. p. 70.

Engalla; Sorranto's voyage in Churchill, vol. 1. p. 667. Barbot, p. 487.
Dampier's voyage, vol. 1. p. 320.

African wild boar; Adanson's voyage, p. 139. Deslandes Martyns, Mem. Acad.
tom. 5 p. 386.

Sus AEthiopicus, Hardlooper; Pallas Miscel. Zool. p. 16. tab. 11. Specil fasc.
2. p. 1. tab. 1. Flacourt Hist. Madagasc. p. 511.

Sus AEthiopicus, sacculo molli sub oculis; Linn. Syst. Not. Append. tom 3. p.
223.


.
IN the neighborhood of Cape Verd, there is another hog or boar, which, from
the number of his teeth, and the enormous size of the tusks in his upper-jaw,
appears to be a peculiar race, if not a different species from that of all the
other hogs, and approaches toward the babiroussa. These tusks have a greater
resemblance to ivory horns than to teeth. They are half a foot long, five
inches in circumference at the base, and bended nearly like the horns of a
bull. This character alone is not sufficient to constitute a difference in
species. But, what supports this presumption, he likewise differs from all
other hogs in the length of the aperture of his nostrils, in the great breadth
and figure of his jaws, and in the number and form of his grinders. However, we
have seen the tusks of a wild boar, which was killed in the woods of Burgundy,
and made an approach to the Cape Verd boar: Its tusks were about three inches
and a half long, and four inches in circumference at the base. They had also a
double bend, like the horns of a bull. They appeared likewise to consist of
solid ivory; and, it is certain, that this boar must have had larger jaws than
the common kind. Hence we may presume, that the Cape Verd boar is only a simple
variety, a particular race, in the species of the common hog.

SUPPLEMENT.
We formerly suggested, that the wild boar of Cape Verd appeared to be a
different race, and perhaps a different species from all the other hogs. The
celebrated M. Allamand, professor of Natural History at Leyden, was kind enough
to send us an engraving of this animal, and afterward wrote M. Daubenton in
the following terms:

I believe, Sir, that the wild boar represented in the plate which I sent you,
is the same with that pointed out by you under the denomination of the Wild
Boar of Cape Verd. This animal is still living (May 5. 1767) in the menagerie
of the Prince of Orange. I visit him occasionally, and always with fresh
pleasure. I cannot help admiring the singular form of his head. I have written
to the Governor of the Cape of Good Hope, begging him, if possible, to
transmit me another. But of this I have little hope; because, even at the Cape,
it was regarded as a monster, which had never hitherto been seen by any person.
If, however, I succeed in my request, I shall send the animal to France, that
you and M. de Buffon may have an opportunity of examining it. We tried to make
the one in our possession copulate with a sow; but, as soon as she was
presented to him, he darted upon her with fury, and tore her to pieces. We have
copied the engraving transmitted to us by M. Allamand. M. Pallas, and M.
Vosmaer have used the same figure, and each of them have given a description of
this animal. M. Allamand, in his letter to M. Daubenton, dated at Leyden,
October 31. 1766, remarks, that the head is the most singular part of this
boar, which chiefly differs from that of our hogs by two uncommon appendixes,
in the form of ears, at the side of each eye.

We shall here remark, that the disdain and cruelty, mentioned by M. Allamand,
of this wild boar to the sow when in season, seems to prove it to be a
different species from our hogs. A farther proof arises from the difference in
the form of the head, both external and internal. However, as it approaches the
hog much nearer than any other animal, and as it is found not only in the
neighborhood of Cape Verd, but not very distant from the Cape of Good Hope, we
shall call it the African boar, and give the history and description of it from
the writings of Pallas and Vosmaer.

Vosmaer calls it the wild African boar, or the boar with a large snout, and
distinguishes it, with propriety, from the Guiney hog with long pointed ears,
from the American pecari, and from the Indian babiroussa.

'M. de Buffon,' he remarks, 'speaking of a part of the jaws, the tail and feet
of a singular wild boar of Cape Verd, preserved in the royal cabinet, says,
that it has cutting teeth: But no such teeth appear in our subject.' Hence M.
Vosmaer insinuates, that it is not the same animal. We have seen, however, that
M. Allamand and I agree, that this Cape de Verd boar, of which I have had an
opportunity of examining a part of the head only, is found, notwithstanding, to
be the same large snouted hog which M. Vosmaer said was unknown to all the
naturalists.

M. Tulbagh, Governor of the Cape of Good Hope, who transmitted this wild boar
to Europe, writes, that it was taken between Caffraria and the country of the
great Namaquas, about two hundred leagues from the Cape, and that it was the
only one of the species which had been there seen alive. M. Vosmaer likewise
received the skin of an animal of the same species, which appeared to differ in
some particulars, from the live animal.

This animal was kept in a cage; and, as I was informed,' M. Vosmaer remarks,
'that he was not mischievous, I opened the door of his cage. He came out,
without showing any marks of rage. He gaily frisked about in quest of food, and
greedily devoured whatever was given him. Having left him alone for a few
moments, I found him, on my return, busy in digging the earth, where,
notwithstanding the pavement was made of small bricks well cemented, he had
already made a hole of an incredible size, with a view, as we afterward
discovered, to reach a common sewer which passed below at a great depth. I
caused his labor to be interrupted; and it was not without much trouble, and
the assistance of several men, that we could overcome his resistance, and make
him return to his cage. His resentment was expressed by sharp and mournful
cries. He seems to have been taken in the African woods when he was very young;
for he has grown considerably since his arrival in Europe, and is still alive
(1767). He passed the last winter very well, though the frost was severe, and
he was confined during the greatest part of that season.

In agility, he exceeds the hogs of this country. He freely allows himself to
be stroaked with the hand, and even with a stick. He seems to be pleased with
rough friction; for it was by this means that we made him remain quiet when the
painter drew his picture. When provoked or rudely pushed, he retires backward,
always facing the assailant, and shaking or striking forcibly with his head.
When let loose after long confinement, he is very gay, leaps, and pursues
fallow-deer, and other animals. On these occasions, he erects his tail, which
is commonly pendulous. He emits a strong odor, which is not disagreeable; but
I cannot compare it to any other smell. When I stroaked him with the hand, this
odor approached to that of new cheese. He eats all kinds of grains. His food,
when on shipboard, was maize, and as much fresh herbage as could be procured.
But, after he had tasted barely and European wheat, with which other animals in
our menagerie are fed, he preferred this kind of food, and roots dug out of the
earth. He was so fond of rye-bread, that he followed any person who had a piece
of it. When he eats or drinks, he supports himself on the knees of his fore
feet; and he often rests in this position. His senses of hearing and smelling
are very acute; but his sight is limited by the smallness and situation of his
eyes, which prevent his seeing objects around him, because they are placed
higher and nearer each other than in other hogs, and there are two large
excrescences at the sides and below the eyes. He has more sagacity than the
common hog.

The figure of the head is terrible. The flatness and breadth of the nose,
joined to the length of the snout, the singular excrescences rising from the
sides of the eyes, and the strong tusks, give to the animal a monstrous aspect.
The length of the body is about four Rhenish feet.

The figure of the body makes a near approach to that of the domestic hog: He
appears to be smaller, hsi back being flatter, and his legs shorter.

When compared with other hogs, his head is deformed both in figure and
dimensions. The muzzle is large, flat, and very hard. The nose is moveable, a
little bended laterally toward the base, and terminates obliquely. The nostrils
are large, distant from each other, and appear only when the head is raised.
The upper lip is hard, and thick at the side. Round the tusks it is prominent
and pendulous, forming behind them a kind of oval cartilaginous protuberance,
which covers the corners of the muzzle.

This animal wants fore teeth both above and below but the gums are smooth,
rounded, and hard.

The tusks of the upper jaw are an inch thick at the base, crooked, and project
out of the mouth five inches and a half, and terminate in an obtuse point. On
the side of each of them there is a kind of furrow. Those of the under jaw are
much smaller, less crooked, and almost triangular. By continual friction
against the upper tusks, they appear to be cut obliquely. We were prevented
from examining the grinders by the furious resistance of the animal.

In proportion to the head, the eyes are small, placed higher, and nearer each
other and the' ears, than in the common hog. The iris is of a deep brown
color, and the cornea white. The upper eyelids are garnished with brown,
stiff, erect, and very close ciliae, which are longer in the middle than at the
two sides. There are no ciliae on the under eyelids.

The ears are pretty large, more round than pointed, covered in the inside with
close yellow hair, and bend back toward the animal's body. Under the eyes there
is a kind of bulbous or glandular fac; and immediately below that, appear two
round, flat, thick, and horizontal excrescences, about two inches and a quarter
in diameter...... In a straight line between these excrescences and the muzzle,
there is, on each side of the head, a hard, round, sharp protuberance.

The skin seems to be very thick, filled with lard in the ordinary places, but
flaccid on the neck, groin, and dewlap. In some places it appears to be
slightly furrowed, unequal, and as if the upper part of it fell off by
intervals. Thinly dispersed over the body are some tufts of hairs, consisting
of three, four, or five, longer and shorter, and placed in a straight line near
one another. The front, and between the ears, seem to be wrinkled, and are
adorned with very close, white, and brown hairs. From thence, toward the base
of the muzzle, descends a narrow band of black and gray hairs, which,
separating in the middle, fall upon each side of the head. On the nap of the
neck, and the anterior part of the back, the bristles are the longest and most
close: Their color is a dusky brown and gray. Some of them are seven or eight
inches long: In thickness they exceed not those of the common hog, and they
split in the same manner. These bristles are not straight, but slightly
inclined. Upon the back, their number is so small, that the skin appears to be
naked. The flanks, breast, belly, sides of the head and neck, are garnished
with small white bristles.

The feet, like those of our hogs, are divided into two black, pointed hoofs.
The tail is naked, hangs perpendicularly, and terminates almost in a point.

The color of the head is blackish; but that of the back and belly is a bright
reddish gray.'



Notwithstanding these differences pointed out by M. Vosmaer, and the
repugnance which this boar discovered to the sow that was presented to it, I am
uncertain whether it is not a variety only of our European hog. This species
varies greatly in Asia, Siam, and China. My uncertainty is increased by having
found, about thirty years ago, an enormous head of a wild boar that was killed
in my own woods, the tusks of which were nearly as large as those of the Cape
boar.

Besides, M. Comerson informs me, that there are wild boars in Madagascar,
whose head, from the ears to the eyes, is of the ordinary form; but that below
the eyes is a protuberance which gradually tapers to the end of the snout, so
that the animal appears to have two heads, the half of the one sunk into the
other. The flesh of this hog is slimy and insipid. This information made me
suspect, that the animal I had first mentioned under the denomination of the
Wild Boar of Cape Verd, because its head was brought from the neighborhood of
that Cape, and afterward called it the Wild African Boar, because it exists in
the neighborhood of the Cape of Good Hope, is likewise found in the island of
Madagascar.

Addition by Professor Allamand.
M. de Buffon, in his history of the hog, has shown, that the hog eludes all
those methodical distributions into classes and genera, the distinguishing
characters of which are derived from particular parts of the body. Though his
reasons are not to be answered, they would have acquired additional force, if
he had been acquainted with the animal under consideration. It is a wild boar
sent from the Cape of Good Hope, in the year 1765, to the menagerie of the
Prince of Orange, which has hitherto been unknown to the Naturalists. Beside
the many singularities which make the European hog a detached species, this
animal exhibits fresh anomalies, which distinguish him from all the other
varieties of the same genus; for the figure of his head is not only different,
but he has no cutting teeth, from which most of our Nomenclators have drawn
their distinctive characters, though the number of the teeth is by no means
uniform, even in our domestic hogs.

To M. Tulbagh, Governor of the Cape of Good Hope, who misses no opportunity
of transmitting to Europe the curious productions of that country, we are
indebted for this wild boar. In his letter, he remarks, that this animal was
taken about two hundred leagues from the Cape, and that it was the first which
had ever been seen there alive. The last year, however, he sent another, which
is still living; and, in 1767, he transmitted a skin, of which we have only
been able to preserve the head. These circumstances seem to indicate, that this
animal is not rare in its native country. I know not whether Kolbe means to
speak of these boars in the following passage. 'In the country occupied by the
Dutch, we rarely meet with wild hogs: As there are few woods, which are their
common retreats, they have no motive to frequent these territories. Besides,
the lions, tigers, and other rapacious pacious animals, prevent the
multiplication of the hogs, by devouring great numbers of them Descript. du Cap
de Bonne-esperance, tom. 3. p. 43.
.' He adds no description; and, therefore, no conclusion can be drawn. Besides,
he ranks among the number of Cape hogs the large ant-eater, which is an
American animal, and has no resemblance to the hog. What credit is due to an
author so ill informed?

The body of our African boar resembles that of the European kind: But it
differs widely in the form of the head, which is of an enormous size. The most
conspicuous objects are the large tusks which spring from each side of the
upper jaw, and are directed almost perpendicularly upward. They are near seven
inches long, and terminate in a blunt point. Two similar tusks, but smaller and
thinner, rise from the under jaw, and apply themselves exactly to the external
side of the superior tusks when the mouth is shut. These are powerful arms,
which he may use to advantage in his native country, where he must be often
exposed to the attacks of carnivorous animals.

His head, which is large and flat before, terminates in an ample snout, nearly
equal in diameter to the breadth of the head, and of a hardness which
approaches to that of horn. He uses it, like our hogs, in digging the earth.
His eyes are small, and situated so far forward in the head, that he can only
see straight before him. They are nearer each other and the ears, than in our
European boars. Below the eyes, there is a depression in the skin, which forms
a kind of wrinkled sac. The inside of his ears are closely covered with hair. A
little lower, and near the side of the eyes, the skin rises and forms two
excrescences, which, when viewed at a certain distance, have a perfect
resemblance to a couple of ears, being of the same figure and size, and, though
not moveable, they lie nearly in the same plane with the forehead. Still
lower, between these excrescences and the tusks, there is a large wart on each
side of the head. It is easy to perceive, that a configuration of this kind
must give a very singular aspect to the animal. When viewed in front, we think
we see four ears upon a head which has no resemblance to that of any known
animal, and inspires terror by the largeness of its tusks.

Pallas Pallas, Miscellanea Zoologica; et ejusdem Spicilegia Zoologica,
Fasciculus Secundus.
and Vosmaer, who have given good descriptions of this boar, tell us, that,
when he arrived in Holland, he was very mild and tame; that, as he had been
several months on board the vessel, and had been taken young, he was become
almost domestic; but that, when pursued by strangers, he retired slowly
backward, and presented his front with a menacing air; and even those who were
daily near him were not without apprehensions of danger. One day he conceived a
resentment against his keeper, whom he wounded so desperately in the thigh with
his tusks, that the poor man died next day. To prevent similar accidents, he
was taken out of the menagerie, and so closely imprisoned that no body could
approach him. He died in about twelve months, and his skin is preserved in the
Prince of Orange's cabinet. The other one, which is now in the same menagerie,
is still very young, and his tusks exceed not two inches in length. When
allowed to come out of the place where he is confined, he testifies his joy by
leaping, bounding, and running with much more agility than our hogs. On these
occasions he carries his tail perfectly erect. The inhabitants of the Cape, on
account of his swiftness, give him the denomination of hartlooper, or courser.

This animal unquestionably forms a genus distinct from all the other known
races of hogs. Though he resembles them in the body, the want of cutting teeth,
and the singular structure of the head, are characters too marked to be
ascribed to the influence of climate, especially as there are hogs in Africa
which differ from ours only by being smaller. Besides, it would appear that he
cannot produce with our hogs. A Guiney sow was presented to him. After smelling
her for some time, he pursued her into a narrow place from which she could not
escape, and tore her to pieces with his tusks. He afterward abused a common
sow to such a degree, that she was carried off, in order to save her from
destruction.

It is wonderful that this animal, which, as I formerly remarked, seems not to
be rare in its native country, has not been mentioned by any traveller, or at
least in terms so vague, that no idea can be formed of it. Flacourt Hist. de la
grand isle Madagascar, p. 152.
tells us, that in Madagascar there are wild boars which have two horns on the
side of the nose, resembling two callosities; and that these animals are nearly
as dangerous as in France. M. de Buffon imagines, that this passage relates to
the babiroussa, and perhaps he may be right: But it may, with equal
probability, relate to our boar. These horns, which resembled two callosities,
may have been the tusks of this boar, as well as those of the babiroussa,
though extremely ill described; and, what Flacourt adds, that these animals are
dangerous, seems to correspond better with our African boar. M. Adanson Hist.
Not. du Senegal, p. 76.
, when speaking of a wild boar he saw in Africa, expresses himself in these
terms: 'I saw,' says he, 'one of those enormous wild boars peculiar to Africa,
and which, I believe, have never been mentioned by any Naturalist. It was
black, like the European wild boar, but vastly larger in size. It had four
large tusks, the two superior of which bended in a semicircular form toward the
front, and had the appearance of Plate CCXCI. BOAR of CAPE VERDE
horns.' M. de Buffon supposes, that M. Adanson means to describe the
babiroussa; and, were it not for his authority, I should have been led to
believe, that M. Adanson intended to point out our African boar; for, if he had
the babiroussa under his inspection, I cannot comprehend how he should remark,
that it had never been mentioned by any Naturalist. He is too much conversant
in Natural History, not to know that the babiroussa has been often described,
and that its head is found in almost every Musaeum in Europe.

But in Africa there is, perhaps, another species of wild boar, with which we
are still unacquainted, and was the animal seen by M. Adanson. This conjecture
is supported by the description which M. Daubenton has given of a part of the
jaws of a Cape Verd wild boar. His remarks clearly prove, that it differs from
our boars, and would apply directly to the one under consideration, if there
had not been cutting teeth in each of these jaws.

I willingly assent to most of M. Allamand's reflections. But I persist in
believing, as he himself at first believed, that the Cape Verd boar which I
mentioned, and the jaws described by M. Daubenton, belong to the same species,
though the former had no cutting teeth; for in no animal is the number and order
of the teeth so various as in the hog kind. This difference alone seems not
sufficient to constitute two species of the African wild boar and that of Cape
Verd, especially as all the other characters of the head appear to be the same.

XIII.
THE MEXICAN WOLF Wolf with a very large head; great jaws; vast teeth; on the
upper lips very strong bristles, reflected backwards, not unlike the softer
spines of a porcupine; and of a gray and white color; large erect cinereous
ears; the space between marked with broad tawny spots: The head ash-colored,
striped transversely with bending dusky lines; neck fat and thick, covered with
a loose skin, marked with a long tawny stroke: On the breast is another of the
same kind: Body ash-colored, spotted with black; and the sides striped, from
the back downwards, with the same color; belly cinereous; tail long, of the
color of the belly, tinged in the middle with tawny; legs and feet striped
with black and ash color: Sometimes this variety is found white; Pennant's
synops. of quad. p. 151.

Xoloizcuintli; Hernand. Mex. p. 479.

Cuetlachtli, seu lupus Indicus; Fernand. Ann. Nov. Hisp. p. 7.

Canis cinereus, maculis fulvis variegatus, taeniis subnigris a dorso ad latera
deorsum hinc inde deductis; Brisson. quad. p. 172.

Canis Mexicanus, cauda deflexa, laevi, corpore cinereo, fasciis fuscis
maculisque fulvis variegato; Linn. Syst. Not. p. 60.


.
AS the wolf is a native of cold climates, he must have passed by the northern
lands, as he is found equally in both Continents. We have mentioned black and
gray wolves in North America. It appears that this species is diffused as far
as New Spain and Mexico; and that, in this warm climate, it has undergone some
alterations, without having his nature or dispositions changed; for the Mexican
wolf has the same figure, appetites, and habits as the European or North
American wolf; and all of them appear to be the same species. The Mexican wolf,
or rather the wolf of New Spain, where he is more common than in Mexico, has
five toes on the fore feet, and four on those behind. The ears are long and
erect; and the eyes sparkle like those of our wolf. But the head is twice as
large, the neck thicker, and the tail less bushy. Above the mouth, there are
some bristles as large, but not so stiff, as those of the hedgehog. Upon an
ash-colored ground, the body is marked with some yellow spots. The head is of
the same color with the body, and marked with transverse brownish lines, and
the front is spotted with yellow. The ears are gray, like the head and body.
There is a long yellow spot on the neck, another on the breast, and a third on
the belly. On the flanks are transverse bands from the back to the belly. The
tail is gray, with a yellow spot in the middle. The legs are barred with gray
and brown. This is the most beautiful of all wolves, and its skin should be
esteemed for its variety of colors It might be supposed, on account of the
variety of colors, that the Mexican wolf is a lynx, which, like the wolf, is
found in both Continents. But a bare inspection of the figure given by Recchi
will show, that it has a perfect resemblance to the wolf, and none at all to
the lynx.
. But nothing indicates it to be a different species from the common kind,
which varies from gray to white, from white to black, and a mixture of both,
without changing its species: And we learn from Fernandes, that those wolves of
New Spain vary like the European wolf; for, even in this country, they are not
all marked according to our description, some of them being of a uniform
color, and even totally white Cuetlachtli, seu lupus Indicus Jo. Fabri.
Xoloitscuintli. Forma, color, moribus, et mole corporis lupo nostrati similis
est, atque adeo ejus (ut mihi quidem videtur) speciei, sed ampliori capite.
Tauros vero sicut et nostras lupus aggreditur, et interdum etiam homines;
reperiuntur nonnulli candentes. -- Vivit in calidis Novae Hispaniae locis;
Fernand. Hist. Anim. Nov. Hisp. p. 7.
.

XIV.
THE ALCO.
WE formerly remarked, that, in Peru and Mexico, before the arrival of the
Europeans, there were domestic animals called alco, which were nearly of the
same size and dispositions with our small dogs; and that, from this conformity,
and because they were equally faithful and attached to their masters, the
Spaniards gave them the name of Mexican or Peruvian dogs. The species of these
animals, indeed, seems not to differ essentially from that of the dog. Besides,
the word alco might, perhaps, be a generic and not a specific term. Recchi has
left us a figure of one of these alcos, which, in the Mexican language, was
called Ytzcuinte Porzotli. It was prodigiously fat, and probably degraded by
its domestic state, and by too much nourishment. The head is represented to be
so small, that it has no proportion to the size of the body. Its ears are
pendulous, which is another mark of slavery. The muzzle resembles that of a
dog; the fore part of the head is white, and the ears are pretty yellow. The
neck is so short, that there is no interval between the head and shoulders. The
back is arched, and covered with yellow hair. The tail is white, short, and
pendulous, and descends no lower than the thighs. The belly is large, tense,
and marked with black spots. It has six conspicuous paps. The legs and feet are
white; and the toes, like those of the dog, are armed with long sharp claws
Ytzcuinte porzotli. Canis Mexicana. -- Ad unguem animal quod hic prostat,
nanum, pingue, et mansuetum effigiatum mihi videtur illud esse quod Americani
nomine communi Alco vocabant; Hernand. Hist. Mex. p. 466. et 478. fig. p. 466.
. Fabri, who gives this description, concludes, after a long dissertation, that
this animal is the same with the alco; and I believe his conclusion is well
founded. But this appellation must not be regarded as exclusive; for there is
another race of dogs in America to which it applies with equal propriety.
Beside the dogs, Fernandes remarks, which the Spaniards transported from Europe
to America, there are three other species, which are pretty similar to ours,
both in their nature and dispositions; neither is their figure altogether
different. The first and largest of these American dogs is called
Xoloiztcuintli. He is often three cubits long; and, what is remarkable, he is
totally destitute of hair, and only covered with a soft close skin, marked with
yellow and blue spots. The second is covered with hair, and of the size of our
small Maltese dogs. He is marked with white, black, and yellow. His deformity,
though singular, is not disagreeable: His back is arched; and his neck so
short, that it seems to proceed immediately from the shoulders. He is named in
his own country michuacanens. The third, which likewise resembles our small
dogs, is called techichi. But he has a wild and melancholy aspect. The
Americans eat his flesh Fernand. Hist. Anim. Nov. Hisp. p. 6. cap. 20. et p.
10. cap. 21.
.

From comparing the testimonies of Fabri and Fernandes, it is obvious, that the
second dog, which this last author calls michuacanens, is the same with the
ytzcuinte porzotli, and that this species of animal existed in America before
the arrival of the Europeans; and the same must have been the case with the
techichi. I am persuaded, therefore, that the word alco was a generic name,
which applied equally to both, and perhaps to other races or varieties that we
are unacquainted with. But, as to the first, Fernandes seems to have been
deceived both with regard to the name and the animal. No author mentions naked
dogs in New Spain. This race, commonly called Turkish dogs, come from India,
and other warm climates of the Old Continent; and, it is probable, that those
seen in America by Fernandes, had been transported thither, especially as he
mentions his having seen this kind in Spain, before his departure for America.
The proof is still farther corroborated by the circumstance of this animal's
having no American name: Fernandes gives it the borrowed one of Xoloitzcuintli,
which is the name of the Mexican wolf. Thus, of these three species or
varieties of American dogs, there remain only two, which are called
indiscriminately alco; for, independent of the far alco, which served as a
lap-dog to the Peruvian ladies, there was a meagre and melancholy alco, which
was employed in the chase; and, it is by no means impossible, that the three
races, apparently different from those of our dogs, spring from the same stock.
The dogs of Lapland, Siberia, Iceland, etc. must have passed, like the foxes
and wolves, from the one Continent to the other, and degenerated by the
influence of the climate and a domestic state. The first alco, with the short
neck, approaches the Iceland dog; and the techichi of New Spain is, perhaps,
the same animal with the koupara Canis ferus, major, cancrosus, vulgo dictus
koupara; Barrere, Franc. Equin. p. 149.
, or crab-dog of Guiana, which in figure resembles the fox, and in hair the
jackal. He has been called the crab-dog, because he chiefly lives upon crabs
and other crustaceous animals. I have seen only one skin of this Guiana animal;
and I am unable to determine whether it is a particular species, or whether it
should be referred to those of the dog, fox, or jackal.

XV.
THE TAYRA, GALERA, OR GUINEY WEASEL Guiney weasel, with the upper jaw much
longer than the lower; eyes placed midway between the ears and tip of the
nose; ears like the human; tongue rough; tail declining downwards, lesseuing
toward the point; feet strong, and formed for digging; shape of the body like
that of the rat; size of a small rabbit; of a dusky color; the hair rough;
Pennant's synops. of quad. p. 225.

Galera subfusca, cauda elongata, auribus subnudis appressis; Brown's Hist. of
Jamaica, p. 485. tab. 49.


.
THIS animal, of which Mr Brown has given a figure and description, is of the
size of a small rabbit, and has a considerable resemblance to the weasel or
martin. He digs an habitation in the earth, and has great strength in his
fore-feet, which are much shorter than those behind. His muzzle is long, a
little sharp, and garnished with whiskers. The under jaw is much shorter than
the upper. He has six cutting and two canine teeth in each jaw, without
reckoning the grinders. His tongue is rough, like that of the cat. His head is
oblong, as well as the eyes, which last are placed at an equal distance between
the ears and the point of the muzzle. His ears are flat, and resemble those of
man. His feet are strong, and adapted for digging. The metatarsal bones are
long; and he has five toes on all his feet. His tail is long, and tapers to a
point. His body is oblong, and has a great resemblance to that of a large rat.
He is covered with brown hairs, some of which are longer than others. This
animal appears to be a small species of martin or polecat. Linnaeus imagined,
that the black weasel of Brasil might be the galera of Mr Brown; and, indeed,
the two descriptions afford some reason for the conjecture Mustela atra collo
subtus macula alba triloba. Habitat in Brasilia.... Holmens. Confer. Brown,
Jam. 485. tab. 49. fig. 1. Galera, statura martis, at nigra, pilis
rigidioribus, auriculae rotundae villosae. Area ante oculos cinerascens,
maculae sub medio collo non vero sub gula. Mammae pone umbilicum quatuor. --
Nota. Mr Brown says, that he saw only two paps on the lower part of the belly;
but the other two might escape his observation. He also says, that the galera
is found in Guiney, and the black weasel in Brasil. But this assertion ought
not to stumble us; for it happens daily, that Brasilian animals are first
transported to Guiney, and afterward pass for animals belonging to that
country; and vice versa. I agree, therefore, with Linnaeus, in thinking that
the galera of Mr Brown is the same animal with the black weasel of Brasil.
. Besides, this black weasel of Brasil is likewise found in Guiana, where it is
called tayra Mustela maxima atra, Moschum redolens. Tayra. Gross belette. This
animal, by rubbing itself against trees, leaves a kind of unctuous humor which
has a strong odor of musk; Barrere, Franc. Equin. p. 155.
; and I suspect that the word galera is a corruption derived from tayra, which
is the true name of this animal.

XVI.
THE MERIAN OPOSSUM Merian opossum, with long, sharp pointed, naked ears; head,
and upper part of the body, of a yellowish brown color; the belly white,
tinged with yellow; the fore feet divided into five fingers; the hind into four
and a thumb, each furnished with flat nails; tail very long, slender, and,
except at the base, quite naked; Pennant's synops. of quad. p. 210.

Dezak; Merian. Insect. Surinam. p. 66. tab. 66. -- Merian is the name of a
German paintress, who first discovered this species at Surinam.

Mus sylvestris Americanus; Seb. Mus. tom. 1. p. 49. tab. 31. fig. 5.

Philander ex rufo helvus in dorso, in ventre ex flavo albicans; Brisson quad.
p. 212.

Mus sylvestris Americanus, catulos in dorso gerens; Klein. quad. p. 58.

Didelphis dorsigera, cauda basi pilosa, corpore longiore, digitis manuum
muticis; Linn. syst. not. p. 72. Le Philandre de Surinam; Buffon.


.
THIS animal is a native of the same climate, and belongs to a neighboring
species with the other opossums. Sibilla Merian is the first writer who has
given a figure and a short account of it Hic genus gliris sylvestris depictum
est, qui catulos quorum vulgo quinque vel sex una foetura enititur in dorso
secum portat; ex flavo fusci coloris, at subucula ejus alba est: Cum antra
exeunt alimenti causa, a catulis circum curruntur, qui jam saturi vel molestias
suspicantes, illico matris dorsum ascendunt, et caudas suas parentum caudis
involvunt, qui illos statim in antra apportant; Mar. Sibil. Merian. Insect.
Surinam. p. 66. fig. tab. 66.
. Seba afterward gave Merian's figure for the female, and added a new figure
for the male, with a kind of description. This animal, says he, has very
brilliant eyes, which are surrounded with a circle of deep brown hair. The body
is covered with soft hair, or rather wool of a reddish yellow color, but of a
bright red on the back. The front, muzzle, belly, and feet, are whitish yellow.
The ears are naked, and pretty hard. On the upper lip, and also above the eyes,
there are long hairs in the form of whiskers. Its teeth, like those of the
dormouse, are very sharp. Upon the tail of the male, which is naked, and of a
pale red color, there are dusky red spots, which appear not on the tail of the
female. The feet resemble the hands of an ape; those before have the four toes,
and the thumb garnished with short, blunt, nails; but on the hind feet the
thumb alone has a flat, blunt nail, the other four toes being armed with small
sharp claws. The young of these animals grunt nearly in the same manner as a
pig. The paps of the female resemble those of the murine opossum. Seba properly
remarks, that, in the figure given by Merian, the feet and toes are ill
represented Seba, vol. 1. p. 49. tab. 21. fig. 4.
. The females produce five or six at a litter. The tail is very long, and
prehensile, like that of the sapajous. The young mount upon the back of the
mother, and adhere firmly with their tails twisted round hers. In this
situation she carries them about with great nimbleness and security.

XVII.
The AKOUCHI, or OLIVE CAVY.
THE akouchi is pretty common in Guiana and other parts of South America. It
differs from the agouti by having a tail, which is wanting in the agouti. The
akouchi is generally smaller than the agouti, and its hair is not red, but of
an olive color Cuniculis minor, caudatus, olivaceus; Akouchi. Barrere, hist.
not. de la Fr. Equin. p. 153.
.

These are the only differences we know between the akouchi and agouti, which,
however, seem to be sufficient to constitute two distinct species.

SUPPLEMENT.
In the original work we remarked, that the akouchi was a different species
from the agouti; because the former had a tail, and the latter had no tail. The
akouchi differs from the agouti still more in magnitude, being no larger than a
young rabbit of six months old. The akouchi is found only in extensive woods.
He feeds on the same fruits, and has nearly the same manners with the agouti.
In the islands of Saint Lucia and Grenada he is called agouti. His flesh is
white, and has the flavor of a young rabbit; and he is ranked amongst the
finest game in South America. When the akouchis are pursued by dogs, rather
than take the water, they allow themselves to be taken. M. de la Board informs
us, though I doubt the fact, that the females produce only one, or at most two
young at a litter. They are easily tamed, and have a small cry like that of the
Guiney pig; but it is seldom heard.

We have given a figure of this animal, drawn from a well preserved skin.
Messrs Aublet and Olivier assure me, that, in Cayenne, the hare is called
agouti, and the rabbit akouchi; but that the agouti is the best food; and,
speaking of the game of this country, they inform me, that Plate CCXCII.
ACOUCHI.
the armadillos are still better food, except the nine-banded armadillo, which
has a strong smell of musk; that, after the armadillos, the paca is the best
game, because its flesh is wholesome and fat: The next in order are the agouti
and akouchi. They likewise maintain, that the red couguar is used as food, and
that its flesh has the taste of veal.

XVIII.
The TUCAN, or MEXICAN SHREW Mexican shrew, with a sharp nose; small round
ears; without sight; two long fore teeth above and below; thick, fat, fleshy
body, short legs, so that the belly almost touches the ground; long crooked
claws; tawny hair; short tail; length from nose to tail, nine inches; Pennant's
synops. of quad. p. 310.
.
FERNANDES has given the name of Tucan to a small quadruped of New Spain, whose
size, figure, and natural habits, make it approach nearer to the mole than to
any other species. It appears to be the same animal described by Seba under the
denomination of the red mole of America Seba, vol. 1. p. 51. tab. 32. fig. 2.
; at least, the descriptions of the two authors correspond sufficiently to
justify this conjecture. The tucan is perhaps somewhat larger than our mole. It
is equally fat and fleshy, and its legs are so short that the belly touches the
ground. The tail is short; the ears are small and round; and the eyes are so
minute that they can scarcely be of any use to the animal. But it differs from
the mole in the color of the hair, which is reddish yellow, and in the number
of toes, having only three before and four behind, while the mole has five toes
on all the feet. It seems to differ from the mole in other articles: Its flesh
is good eating, and it possesses not the instinct of discovering its retreat
after having once left it, but, at every time, is obliged to dig a new hole; so
that, in certain soils, which are agreeable to these animals Fernand. hist.
anim. Nov. Hisp. p. 9. cap. 24.
, the holes are so numerous, and so near each other, that circumspection is
necessary to walk there with safety.

XIX
The BRASILIAN SHREW Brasilian shrew, with a sharp nose and teeth; pendulous
scrotum. It is of a dusky color, marked along the back with three broad black
strokes. The length from nose to tail, five inches; that of the tail two;
Pennant's Synops. of quad. p. 309.

Mus araneus figura muris; Marcgr. Brasil. p. 229.


.
WE mention this animal under the denomination of the Brasilian shrew; because
we are ignorant of its proper name, and it has a greater resemblance to the
shrew than to any other animal. It is, however, considerably larger, being
about five inches long from the extremity of the muzzle to the origin of the
tail, which is not two inches, and, consequently, is proportionally shorter
than that of the common shrew. It has a pointed muzzle, and very sharp teeth.
Upon a brown ground-colour, three pretty large black bands extend
longitudinally from the head to the tail, under which the scrotum appears
hanging between the hind feet. This animal, says Marcgrave, sports with the
cats, who discover no inclination to eat it. In the same manner the cats kill
the European shrews, but never eat them.

XX
THE ROCK CAVY Rock cavy, with divided upper lip; short ears; four toes on the
fore feet, and three on the hind: Color of the upper part of the body like
that of the common hare; belly white: The length one foot; Pennant's synops. of
quad. p. 244.

Aperea Brasiliensibus, nobis vel dratte vel boschratte; Marcgr. Brasil. p.
223. Piso, Brasil. p. 103. Raii synops. quad. p. 206.


.
THIS animal, which is a native of Brasil, is neither a rabbit nor rat, but
seems to partake of both. It is about a foot long, by seven inches in
circumference. Its general color is the same with that of our hares; and its
belly is white: Its upper lipe is divided in the same manner, and it has the
same large cutting teeth, and whiskers round the mouth and on the sides of the
eyes. But its ears are rounded like those of the rat, and so short that they
exceed not the height of a finger's breadth. The fore legs are not above three
inches in length, and those behind are a little longer. The fore feet have four
toes covered with a black skin, and armed with small short claws. The hind feet
have only three toes, and the middle one is the longest. It has no tail. Its
head is somewhat longer than that of the hare, and its flesh is like that of
the rabbit, which it resembles in its manner of living Mrcgrav. hist. not.
Brasil. p. 223.
It likewise retires into holes: It does not, however, dig the earth, like the
rabbit, but conceals itself in the clefts of rocks. Hence it is easily seized
in its retreat. It is hunted as game, and its flesh is preferable to that of
our best rabbits Piso, hist. Brasil. p. 103.
. The animal mentioned by Oviedo, and afterward by Charlevoix Oviedo remarks,
that the cori resembles a small rabbit; and that some of them are totally
white, and others a mixture of different colors; Hist. de St Dominique, par le
P. Charlevoix, tom. 1. p. 35.
and du Perrier de Montfraisier, under the denomination of cori, appears to be
the same with the aperea or rock cavy The cori is a small quadruped, somewhat
resembling our rabbits and moles. It has small ears, which it carries so flatly
reclined backward, that it is difficult to perceive them. It has no tail. Some
of them are white, others black, and others spotted with black and white. Some
of them are totally red, and others spotted with red and white. They are tamed,
and never defile the houses. They eat herbage, and are easily maintained. Their
flesh has the taste and flavor of the best rabbits; Hist. des voyages, par
Duperrier de Monifraizier, p. 343.
. In some parts of the West Indies, these animals may, perhaps, be reared in
warrens, or in houses, like our rabbits; and this may be the reason why some of
them are red, white, black, and variegated. This conjecture is not without
foundation; for Garcilasso informs us, that, in Peru, there are wild and
domestic rabbits which have no resemblance to those of Spain Hist. des Incas,
tom 2. p. 267.
.

XXI.
THE TAPETI, or BRASILIAN HARE Brasilian hare, with very long ears; a white
ring round the neck; face of a reddish color; chin white; black eyes; color
of the body like the common hare, only darker; belly whitish; no tail; some
want the white ring round the neck; Pennant's synops. of quad. p. 252.

Tapeti; Marcgr. Brasil. p. 223. Piso, Brasil, p. 102.

Cuniculus Brasiliensis tapeti dictus; Raii synops. quad. p. 205.

Lepus Brasiliensis, cauda nulla; Linn. Syst. Not. p. 78.

Lepus e caudus; Brisson. quad. p. 97.

Collared rabbit; Wafer's voyage, in Dampier.


.
THE tapeti Tapity, according to P. d'Abbeville; Miss. au Maragnon. p. 251.
seems to make a near approach to the species of the hare or rabbit. It is
found in Brasil, and many other parts of America. In figure, it resembles the
European rabbit; and it resembles the hare in size and color, only it is a
little browner. Its ears are very long, and shaped like those of the hare. Its
hair is red on the fore head, and whitish on the throat. Some of them have a
white circle round the neck; but others have a white throat, breast, and belly.
They have black eyes, and whiskers like our rabbits; but they want the tail
Marcgr. hist. not. Brasil. p. 223. fig. p. 224.
. The tapeti resembles the hare in its manner of living, in fecundity, and in
the quality of its flesh, which is extremely good. Like the hare, it dwells in
the fields or in the woods, and burrows not, like the rabbit Pison, hist.
Brasil. p. 102.
The animal of New Spain, mentioned by Fernandes, under the name of citli,
appears to be the same with the tapeti Citli. -- Lepores novae Hispaniae
nostratibus similes forma atque alimento sed auriculis longissimis pro corporis
magnitudine, latissimisque; Fernandes, hist. anim. nov. Hisp. p. 2. cap. 3.
of Brasil; and both are perhaps only varieties of the European hares, who have
passed by the northern lands from the one Continent to the other.

Some other species of animals might be added to the preceding list; but the
accounts given of them are so vague, that I choose rather to confine myself to
what is known with some degree of certainty, than to give way to conjecture, or
to exhibit creatures of imagination as real species. But, notwithstanding this
limitation, intelligent men will easily perceive, that my history of quadrupeds
is as complete as they could possibly expect. It comprehends a great number of
new animals, and none of those who were formerly known are omitted.

The preceding notices, though composed of twenty-one articles, contain not
above nine or ten distinct species; for all the others are only varieties. The
white bear is only a variety of the common kind; the Tartarian cow, of the
bison; the Guinea and Cape-Verd hogs, of the common hog, etc. Hence, by adding
these ten species to about one hundred and eighty, whose history we have given,
the total number of quadrupeds, the existence of which is properly ascertained,
exceeds not two hundred species upon the surface of the whole known world.

ADDITIONS from the Supplementary Volume.
THE CRAB-EATER Cayenne opossum, with a long slender face; ears erect, pointed,
and short; the coat woolly, mixed with very coarse hairs, three inches long, of
a dirty white from the roots to the middle; from thence to the ends of a deep
brown; sides and belly of a pale yellow; legs of a dusky brown; thumb on each
foot distinct; on the toes of the fore feet, and thumb on the hind, are nails;
on the toes of the hind feet crooked claws; tail very long, taper, naked, and
scaly. Length seventeen inches; that of the tail fifteen and a half. The
subject measured was very young; Pennant's synops. of quad. Edit. 2. p. 309.

Canis ferus major, Cancrosus vulgo dictus. Koupara; Barrere, Franc. Equin. p.
149.


.
THE name crab-eater, or crab-dog, has been given to this animal, because crabs
are his principal food. He has a very little relation to the dog or fox, to
which some travelers have compared him. He seems to be more nearly allied to
the opossums; but he is much larger, and the female crab-eater carries not her
young, like the female opossum, in a pouch under her belly. Hence the
crab-eater appears to be a detached species, and different from all those we
have formerly described.

In the figure, the long naked, scaly tail, the large thumbs without claws on
the hind feet, and the flat claws on the fore feet, are remarkable. This
animal, whose skin is preserved in the royal cabinet, was young when it was
transmitted to us. It is a male; and the following is a description of it.

The length of the whole body, from the nose to the origin of the tail, is
about seventeen inches. Before, it is six inches three lines high, and six
inches and a half behind. The tail, which is grayish, scaly, and naked, is
fifteen inches and a half long, ten lines in circumference at the origin, and
gradually tapers to a point.

As the legs of this animal are very short, he has, at a distance, some
resemblance to a terrier. The head is not very different from that of a dog,
and exceeds not four inches one line in length, from the point of the nose to
the occiput. The eye is not large; the edges of the eyebrows are black; and,
above the eye, there are hairs of an inch and a quarter in length. There are
similar hairs on the side of the cheek near the ear. The whiskers are black,
and about an inch and a half long. The opening of the mouth is near two inches.
The upper jaw is armed, on each side, with a crooked canine tooth, which
reaches beyond the under jaw. The ear is brown, naked, broad, and round at the
extremity.

The hair on the body is woolly, and interspersed with other long stiff black
hairs. These long hairs increase upon the thighs and the spine of the back,
which is totally covered with them, and form a kind of mane from the middle of
the back to the origin of the tail: They are three inches long, of a dirty
white color from the base to the middle, and afterward of a dark brown as far
as the point. The hair on the sides, as well as on the belly, is yellowish
white; but it approaches more to yellow toward the shoulders, and on the
thighs, neck, breast, and head, where this yellow tincture is mixed in some
places with brown. The sides of the neck are yellow; and the legs and feet are
of a blackish brown color. There are five toes on each foot. The fore foot is
an inch and three quarters long, the largest toe nine lines, and the furrowed
claw two lines. The toes are a little bended, like those of the rat, the thumb
alone being straight. The hind feet are an inch and eight lines long, the
largest toe nine lines, and the thumb half an inch. The thumb is thick, broad,
and at a distance from the toes, as in the apes. The nail of the thumb is flat;
but those of the other toes are crooked, and reach beyond their points. The
thumb of the fore foot is straight, and not removed from the other toe.

M. de la Board informs me, that this animal is very common in Cayenne, and
that it always frequents the savannahs, and other marshy places.

'It climbs trees,' he remarks, 'with great dexterity, and continues oftener
upon them than on the ground, especially during the day. It has fine teeth, and
defends itself against the dogs. Crabs are its principal nourishment, and it is
always fat. When unable to draw the crabs from their holes with its foot, it
introduces the tail, which it uses as a hook. The crab sometimes lays hold of
the tail, and makes the animal cry. This cry has some resemblance to that of a
man, and is heard at a great distance. But its ordinary voice is a kind of
grunting like pigs. The female produces four or five young at a litter, and
deposits them in the hollows of old trees. The natives of the country eat its
flesh, which resembles that of a hare. These animals are easily tamed, and they
are fed in the houses, like dogs and cats, with all kinds of victuals. Hence
their taste for crabs is by no means exclusive.' It is alleged, that there are
two species of crab-eaters in Cayenne. The first is the animal we have already
described: The other is not only a different species, but belongs to a
different genus. Its tail is totally covered with hair, and it seizes crabs
with its paws only. These two animals resemble each other in the head alone;
and they differ in the figure and proportions of the body, as well as in the
structure of the feet and claws.

Plate CCXCIII. CRAB EATER.


Plate CCXCIV. ANONYMOUS ANIMAL.


ANONYMOUS ANIMAL.
WE here give the figure of an undescribed animal, the drawing of which was
made by the Chevalier Bruce, who permitted me to copy it. This animal, which we
shall call anonymous, till we learn its real name, has some similarities to the
hare, and others to the squirrel. Mr Bruce gave the following account of it in
writing.

In Lybia, on the south side of the lake formerly called Palus Tritonides,
there is a very singular animal, from nine to ten inches long, with ears nearly
as long as the half of the body, and proportionally broad, a circumstance which
takes place in no other quadruped, except the long-eared bat. Its muzzle
resembles that of the fox; and yet it seems to approach nearer to that of the
squirrel. It lives on the palm trees, of which it eats the fruit. It has short
retractile claws, and is a very beautiful creature. Its color is white mixed
with a little gray and a bright yellow. The inside of the ears is naked in the
middle only. They are covered with brown hair mingled with yellow, and
garnished within with large white hairs. The end of the nose is black, the tail
yellow, and black at the point. The tail is pretty long, but of a different
form from that of the squirrel; and all the hair, both on the body and tail, is
very soft. MADAGASCAR RAT.
IN the figure is represented a small animal from Madagascar, which was drawn
alive, when in the possession of the Countess of Marsan. It appeared to make a
nearer approach to the species of the palm-squirrel than to that of the rat;
for I was assured that it frequented the palm trees. I have not been able to
procure farther information concerning this animal. It may be remarked,
however, that, as its claws did not project, it seemed to constitute a species
very different from that of the rat, and to approach nearer to the
palm-squirrel. To this animal may be referred the rat on the south-west coast
of Madagascar, mentioned by the Dutch voyagers; for they tell us, that these
rats live in the palm trees, and eat the dates; that their body is long, their
muzzle sharp, their legs short, and their tail long and spotted Recueil des
voyages qui ont servi a l'etablissement de la Compagnie des Indes Orientales,
tom. 1. p. 413.
. These characters correspond so well with those represented in the figure of
our Madagascar rat, as to induce us Plate CCXCV. MADAGASCAR RAT.
to believe that the animal formerly mentioned belongs to this species.

It lived several years with the Countess of Marsan. Its movements were
extremely brisk, and its cry was nearly similar, though much weaker, than that
of the squirrel. Like the squirrels, it carried its food to its mouth with the
fore paws, erected its tail, and leaped about. It bit desperately, and could
not be tamed. It was fed with almonds and fruits. It never came out of its
cage, except in the night; and it endured the winters very well in an apartment
where the cold was moderated by a small fire.

THE END.
[As the COUNT DE BUFFON has observed no systematic order in his History of
Quadrupeds, the following Index, in which the Animals are arranged according to
the improved Edition of MR PENNANT'S Synopsis, will, in some measure, supply
that defect.]
SYSTEMATIC INDEX.
DIV. I. HOOFED QUADRUPEDS.
PENNANT's Synopsis. BUFFON. No. Species. Page. No. Species. Vol. Page. GENUS
I. HORSE. GENUS I. HORSE. 1 GEnerous 1. HORSE iii 306 2 Dshiketei 4 3 Ass 8 3
Ass ib 398 4 Zebra 13 4 Zebra vi 264 5 Quacha 14 Mules viii 1 II. OX. II. BULL.
1 Bull 15 1 Ox iii 423 A. Great Indian 16 B. Small Indian 17 C. Abyssinian ib
D. Boury ib E. Tinian ib F. Lant ib G. European ib H. American 19 H. Bison vi
198 2 Grunting 20 2 Cow of Tartary viii 225 3 Buffalo 24 3 Buffalo vi 151 4
Musk 27 4 Musk ib 191 A. Cape 28 5 Dwarf 30 5 Dwarf vi 164 III. SHEEP. III.
SHEEP. 1 A. Common 33 1 A. Common iii 462 B. Cretan ib B. Cretan vi 211 C.
Hornless 34 C. Hornless iii 472 D. Many-horned ib D. Many-horned ib 484 E.
Long-hared ib F. African 35 F. African vi 212 G. Broad-tailed 35 G.
Broad-tailed ib 208 H. Fat-rumped 36 H*. Wild 38 2 Bearded 46 IV. GOAT. IV.
GOAT. 1 Ibex 49 1 Ibex vi 363 2 Caucasan 51 a. Domestic 53 a. Domestic iii 462
b. Angora 55 b. Angora ib 498 c. Syrian 56 c. Syrian vi 378 d. African 57 d.
African vi 379 e. Whidaw ib e. Juda vi 378. 390 f. Capricorn ib f. Capricorn ib
373 V. GIRAFFE. V. GIRAFFE. 1 Camelopard 58 1 Camelopard vii 109 VI. ANTILOPE.
VI. ANTILOPE. 1 Gnou 62 2 Chamois 64 2 Chamois v 363 3 Blue 66 4 Egyptian 67 4
Egyptian vi 408 5 Leucoryx 68 6 Algazel 69 6 Algazel ib 414 7 Indian 70 7
Indian vii 40 8 Harnessed 71 8 Harnessed ib 12 9 Guinea 72 9 Guiney, or Grimm
ib 14 10 Royal ib 10 Royal ib 27 11 Indostan 73 12 White-footed 74 13 Swift 76
13 Nanguer, or Swift vi 409 14 Red ib 14 Nagor, or red vii 39 15 Striped 77 15
Condoma, or striped ib 8 16 Common 78 16 Common vi 412 a. Brown 80 a. Brown, or
Lidmee ib 413 b. Smooth-horned ib b. Smooth-horned ib 414 17 Barbary 81 17
Barbary, or Gazelle ib 397 18 Flat-horned 81 18 Flat horned, or Kevel vi 400 19
White faced 82 19 White-faced, or Pygargus ib 417 20 Springer ib 21 Chinese 84
21 Chinese, or Tzeiran ib 405 22 Scythian 86 22 Scythian, or Saiga ib 393 23
Corine 89 23 Corine ib 401 24 Cervine 90 24 Cervine vii 1 25 Senegal 91 25
Senegal, or Koba vi 405 26 Gambian 92 26 Gambian, or Kob ib 406 VII. DEER. VII.
DEER. 1 Elk 93 1 Elk vi 315 2 Rain 99 2 Rain-deer ib 316 3 Fallow 101 3 Fallow
iv 113 4 Stag 102 4 Stag ib 72 5 Virginian 104 6 Spotted Axis 105 6 Axis vi 230
7 Middle-sized Axis 106 8 Great Axis ib 9 Porcine 107 10 Rib-faced ib 11 Roe
108 A. Tail-less 109 11 Mexican 110 11 Roe iv 120 12 Gray 111 12 Mexican, or
Cariacou vii 30 VIII. MUSK. VIII. MUSK. 1 Tibet 112 1 Tibet Musk vii 44 2
Brasilian 114 2 Brasilian, or Cuguacuete ib 31 3 Indian 115 3 Indian, or Memina
ib 28 4 Guinea ib 4 Guiney ib 27 IX. CAMEL. IX. CAMEL. 1 Arabian 117 1 Arabian
vi 119 b. Bactrian 120 a. Bactrian ib 18 2 Lama 121 2 Lama vii 133 3 Pacos 124
3 Pacos ib 134 X. HOG. X. HOG. 1 Common 126 1 Common iii 500 a. Guinea 128 a.
Guiney viii 239 b. Siam 128 b. Siam iii 522 c. Chinese 129 c. Chinese ib ib 2
Ethiopian ib 2 Ethiopian, or Cape Verd viii 241 3 Cape-Verd 132 4 Mexican 133
4 Mexican or Pecari v 271 5 Baby-roussa 134 5 Babiroussa vii 58 XI. RHINOCEROS.
XI. RHINOCEROS. 1 Two-horned 136 1 Two-horned vi 92 2 One-horned 138 2
One-horned ib 116 XII. HIPPOPOTAME. XII. HIPPOPOTAMUS. 1 Hippopotame 142 1
Hippopotamus vi 277 XIII. TAPIR. XIII. TAPIR. 1 Long-nosed 148 1 Tapir vi 243
XIV. ELEPHANT. XIV. ELEPHANT. 1 Great 150 1 Elephant vi 1 2 American 160

DIV. II. DIGITATED QUADRUPEDS.
SECT. I. ANTHROPOMORPHOUS.
PENNANT's Synopsis. BUFFON. No. Species. Page. No. Species. Vol. Page. * * XV.
APE. XV. APE. 1 GREAT 166 1 GREAT, or Jocko and Pongo viii 77 2 Pigmy 168 2
Pigmy ib 106 3 Long-armed 170 3 Long-armed, or Gibbon ib 112 a. Lesser ib a.
Lesser ib 115 4 Barbary 171 4 Barbary, or Magot ib 117 ** ** BABOONS. BABOONS.
5 Great 173 5 Great ib 125 6 Ribbed-nose 175 6 Ribbed nose ib 129 7 Wood 176 8
Yellow ib 9 Cinereous 176 10 Blue-faced 177 11 Brown ib 12 Little ib 13 Crested
178 14 Pigtail ib 14 Pigtail viii 137 15 Dog-faced 179 16 b. Ursine 181 17
Mottled 182 17 Mottled ib 121 b Little 183 18 Lion-tailed ib d. Bearded Men 184
*** *** MONKEYS. MONKEYS. 19 Purple faced ib 19 Purple-faced, or Ouanderou viii
132 20 Palatine 185 21 Hare-lipped ib 21 Hare-lipped, or Macaque ib 140 22
Spotted 186 22 Spotted, or Exquima ib 184 23 Long-nosed 187 24 Yellowish 188 25
Green ib 25 Green, or Callitrix ib 160 26 White-eyelid 189 26 White-eyelid, or
Mangabey ib 154 27 Mustache 190 27 Mustache ib 163 28 White-nose ib 29 Talapoin
191 29 Talapoin ib 165 30 Negro ib 31 Egret 192 31 Egret ib 140 32 Moan ib 33
Red 193 33 Red, or Patas ib 144 34 Chinese 194 34 Chinese ib 148 35 Bonnetted
195 36 Varied ib 36 Varied ib 156 37 Cochin China 196 37 Cochin-China ib 168 38
Tawny ib 39 Goat 197 40 Full-bottom ib 41 Bay 198 42 Annulated ib 43 Philippine
ib AMERICAN. AMERICAN. 44 Preacher 199 44 Preacher, or Ouarine viii 176 45 a.
Royal 200 45 a. Royal, or Alouate ib ib 46 Four-fingered 201 46 Four-fingered,
or Coaita ib 184 47 Fearful 202 47 Fearful, or Sajou ib 193 48 Capucin 203 48
Capuchin ib ib 49 Weeper 204 49 Weeper, or Sai ib 196 50 Orange 205 50 Orange,
or Saimiri ib 199 51 Horned 206 52 Antigua ib 53 Fox-tailed 207 53 Fox-tailed,
or Saki ib 201 54 Great-eared 208 54 Great-eared, or Tamarin ib 203 55 Striated
209 55 Striated, or Ouistiti ib 205 56 Silky 210 56 Silky, or Marikina ib 209
57 Red-tailed ib 57 Red-tailed, or Pinche ib 211 58 Fair 211 58 Fair, or Mico
ib 213 XVI. MAUCAUCO. XVI. MAUCAUCO. 1 Tail-less 212 1 Tail-less vii 232 2
Loris 213 3 Woolly ib 3 Woolly ib 223 4 Ringtail 214 4 Ringtail ib ib 5 Ruffed
215 5 Ruffed, or Mongous ib 226 6 Tarsier 216 6 Tarsier ib 171 7 Little 217 8
Flying 218

DIV II. SECT. II. SIMPLY DIGITATED.
PENNANT's Synopsis. BUFFON. No. Species. Page. No. Species. Vol. Page. XVII.
DOG. XVII. DOG. 1 FAITHFUL 219 1 FAITHFUL iv 1 2 Wolf 231 2 Wolf ib 20 3
Mexican 233 3 Mexican viii 258 4 Fox 234 4 Fox iv 214 b. Cross Fox ib b. Cross
Fox ib 222 c. Black Fox 235 d. Brant Fox ib e. Karagan Fox ib f. Corsak Fox 236
5 Arctic 238 5 Arctic vii 268 6 Antarctic 240 7 Gray 241 8 Silvery ib 9 Barbary
242 9 Barbary vii 355 10 Schakal ib 10 Jackal ib ib 11 Capesch 246 12 Surinam
247 13 Zerda 248 XVIII. HYAENA. XVIII. HYAENA. 1 Striped 250 1 Striped v 226 2
Spotted 252 XIX. CAT. XIX. CAT. 1 Lion 254 1 Lion v 64 2 Tiger 257 2 Tiger ib
153 3 Panther 260 3 Panther ib 167 4 Leopard 262 4 Leopard ib ib 5 Lesser
Leopard 263 6 Hunting 264 6 Hunting, or Guepard vii 249 7 Ounce 265 7 Ounce v
167 8 Brasilian 266 8 Brasilian, or Jaguar ib 187 9 Mexican 267 9 Mexican, or
Ocelot vii 243 10 Puma 269 10 Puma, or Couguar v 197 11 Jaguar 270 11 Jaguar,
or Jaguarette ib 190 12 Cape 271 13 Cayenne ib 13 Cayenne vii 249 14 Bengal 272
15 Manul 274 16 Common ib 16 Common iv 49 a. Angora 275 a. Angora ib 57 b.
Tortoise shell 276 c. Blue ib c. Blue ib 56 d. Longheaded ib 17 New Spain 277 *
* LYNX. LYNX. 18 Mountain ib 18 Mountain, or wild cat of Carolina vii 253 19
Serval 278 19 Serval ib 241 20 Lynx 279 20 Lynx v 206 21 Bay 281 22 Caspian ib
23 Persian 283 23 Persian, or Caracal v 221 b. Lybian 284 b. Lybian, or Caracal
of Bengal ib 224 XX. BEAR. XX. BEAR. 1 Black 285 1 Black v 16 a. American 286
a. American ib 19 2 Polar 288 2 Polar viii 216 3 Wolverene 291 3 Wolverene vii
282 4 Glutton 293 4 Glutton ib 274 5 Raccoon 295 5 Raccoon v 46 XXI. BADGER.
XXI. BADGER. 1 Common 297 1 Common iv 226 b. American 298 2 Indian 299 XXII.
OPOSSUM. XXII. OPOSSUM. 1 Virginian 301 1 Virginian v 404 2 Mollucca 303 2
Mollucca ib 430 3 Javan 305 4 Kanguru 306 5 Murine 308 5 Murine ib 435 6
Mexican 309 6 Mexican ib 438 7 Cayenne ib 7 Cayenne, or Crab-eater viii 279 8
New Holland 310 9 Short-tailed 311 10 Phalanger ib 10 Phalanger vii 174 11
Merian 312 11 Merian viii 267 XXIII. WEASEL. XXIII. WEASEL. 1 Common 313 1
Common iv 257 2 Stoat, or Ermine 314 2 Stoat, or Ermine ib 262 3 S. Am. fitchet
315 3 Martin of Guiana, iv 243 4 Fitcher 316 4 Fitchet, or Polecat ib 248 5
Sarmatian 317 6 Siberian 318 7 Ferret 319 7 Ferret ib 252 8 Martin 320 8 Martin
ib 249 9 Pine 321 9 Pine ib 245 10 Sable 322 10 Sable vii 309 11 Fisher 328 12
Madagascar 329 12 Madagascar, or Vansire ib 221 13 Pekan 330 13 Pecan ib 307 14
Vison 330 14 Vison vii 307 15 White-cheeked 331 16 Grison ib 16 Grison iv 266
17 Guiney 332 17 Guiney viii 265 18 Guiana ib 19 Woolly 333 20 Ichneumon ib 20
Ichneumon vii 210 21 Four toed 336 21 Four-toed ib 166 22 Yellow 337 23 Mexican
338 24 Brasilian 340 24 Brasilian v 53 25 Stifling 341 25 Stifling vii 296 26
Striated 342 26 Striated ib 297 27 Skunk 343 27 Skunk ib ib 28 Zorilla 344 28
Zorilla ib 298 29 Ratel ib 30 Quoll 345 31 Blotched 346 32 Civet ib 32 Civet v
239 b. Zibet 348 a. Zibet ib ib 33 Genet 349 33 Genet ib 254 34 Fossane ib 34
Fossane vii 219 XXIV. OTTER. XXIV. OTTER. 1 Greater 351 1 Greater iv 232 2
Brasilian 353 3 Lesser 354 4 Saricovienne 355 4 Saricovienne, or Cayenne otter
ib 237 5 Sea 356 5 Sea vii 321

DIV. II. SECT. III. Without Canine Teeth.
PENNANT's Synopsis. BUFFON. No. Species. Page. No. Species. Vol. Page. XXV.
CAVY. XXV. CAVY. 1 Capibara 360 1 Cabiai vii 64 2 Restless 361 2 Restless, or
Guiney-pig iv 296 3 Rock 362 3 Rock, or Aperea vii 274 4 Patagonian 363 5
Spotted, or Paca, v 392 5 Spotted ib 6 Long nose 364 6 Long-nosed ib 58 7 Olive
365 7 Olive vii 269 8 Javan 366 9 Cape 366 9 Cape iv 348 10 Musk 367 10 Musk v
261 XXVI. HARE. XXVI. HARE. 1 Common 368 1 Common iv 137 2 Varying 370 3
American 372 4 Rabbit 373 4 Rabbit ib 155 b. Angora 374 c. Hooded ib 5 Baikal
ib 5 Baikal vii 228 6 Cape 375 7 Brasilian 376 7 Brasilian ib 276 8 Alpine 377
9 Ogotona 379 10 Calling 380 XXVII. BEAVER. XXVII. BEAVER. 1 Castor 383 1
Castor v 21 2 Musk 388 2 Musk ib 260 XXVIII. PORCUPINE. XXVIII. PORCUPINE. 1
Crested 390 1 Crested vii 69 2 Brasilian 392 2 Brasilian ib 76 3 Canada 394 3
Canada ib 83 XXIX. MARMOT. XXIX. MARMOT. 1 Alpine 396 1 Alpine iv 339 2 Quebec
397 2 Canada ib 346 3 Maryland 398 3 Maryland ib ib 4 Hoary ib 5 Bobak 399 5
Bobak vii 198 6 Earless 403 6 Earless viii 229 7 Gundi 405 8 Quill-less ib XXX.
SQUIRREL. XXX. SQUIRREL. 1 Common 406 1 Common iv 268 c. White-legged 407 2
Ceylon 408 3 Abyffinian ib 4 Javan 409 5 Bombay ib 6 Ruddy ib 7 Gray 410 7 Gray
v 321 8 Black 411 9 Hudson's Bay 412 10 Varied 413 10 Varied vii 176 11 Fair ib
12 Brasilian 414 13 Mexican ib 14 Palm 415 14 Palm v 328 15 Barbary 416 15
Barbary ib ib c. Plantane ib * 16 Sailing 417 16 Sailing ib 312 17 Severn river
418 18 Flying ib 18 Flying ib 307 19 Hooded 419 XXXI. DORMOUSE. XXXI. DORMOUSE.
1 Striped 422 1 Striped, or ground squirrel v 329 2 Fat 423 2 Fat iv 325 3
Garden 424 3 Garden ib 332 4 Common 425 4 Common ib 334 5 Earless 426 XXXII.
JERBOA. XXXII. JERBOA. 1 Egyptian 427 1 Egyptian vii 201 2 Siberian 429 2
Siberian, or flying hare ib 202 b. Middle ib c. Pigmy 430 3 Cape 432 4 Torrid
433 XXXIII. RAT. XXXIII. RAT. 1 Labrador 435 2 Circassian 436 3 Tamarisk 437 4
Black 438 4 Black iv 275 5 Brown 439 5 Brown ib 336 6 American 441 b. Curaco ib
7 Water 442 7 Water ib 290 8 Mouse 443 8 Mouse ib 282 9 Field 444 9 Field ib
285 10 Harvest 445 11 Oriental 446 12 Barbary 447 13 Mexican 447 14 Virginian
ib 15 Wandering 447 16 Beech 448 17 Rustic ib 18 Little 449 ** ** 19 Rock 450
20 Oeconomic 451 21 Red 452 22 Garlic 453 23 Soricine ib *** *** 24 Lemming 454
24 Lemming vii 316 25 Ringed 457 26 Hudson's ib 27 Hare tailed 458 28 Social
459 29 Meadow 460 29 Meadow iv 293 30 Gregarions 461 **** **** 31 Hamster ib 31
Hamster vii 178 32 Vormela 465 33 Yaik ib 34 Zarizin 466 35 Sand ib 36 Songar
367 37 Baraba 368 ** ** *** *** 38 Blind 469 38 Blind, or Zemni viii 232 39
Danurian 471 40 African 472 41 Cape 473 42 Talpine 474 XXXIV. SHREW. XXXIV.
SHREW. 1 Musky 476 1 Musky v 261 2 Perfuming 477 3 Mexican 478 3 Tucan vii 271
4 Brasilian ib 4 Brasilian ib 273 5 Murine 479 6 Foetid ib 6 Foetid iv 305 7
Water 480 7 Water ib 308 8 Minute 481 9 Pigmy 481 10 White throated ib 11
Square-tailed 482 12 Carinated ib 13 Unicorn ib XXXV. MOLE. XXXV. MOLE. 1
European 483 1 European iv 309 b. Yellow 484 2 Varying 485 3 Radiated 486 3
Siberian viii 238 4 Long-tailed ib 5 Brown ib 6 Red 487 XXXVI. HEDGEHOG. XXXVI.
HEDGEHOG. 1 Common 488 1 Common iv 300 2 Siberian 489 3 Asiatic 490 3 Asiatic
vii 86 4 Guiana 491

DIV. II. SECT. IV. Without Fore-teeth.
PENNANT's Synopsis. BUFFON. No. Species. Page. No. Species. Vol. Page. XXXVII.
SLOTH. XXXVII. SLOTH. 1 Three-toed 494 1 Three-toed vii 150 2 Two-toed 496 2
Two-toed ib 151 XXXVIII. ARMADILLO. XXXVIII. ARMADILLO. 1 Three banded 497 1
Three-banded v 366 2 Six-banded 498 2 Six-banded ib 369 3 Eight banded 500 3
Eight banded ib 371 4 Nine-banded ib 4 Nine-banded ib 373 5 Twelve-banded 501 5
Twelve-banded ib 375 6 Eighteen-banded 502 6 Eighteen-banded ib 377

DIV. II. SECT. V. Without Teeth.
PENNANT's Synopsis. BUFFON. No. Species. Page. No. Species. Vol. Page. XXXIX.
MANIS. XXXIX. MANIS. 1 Long-tailed 504 1 Long tailed v 355 2 Short-tailed 505 2
Short tailed ib ib XL. ANT-EATER. XL. ANT-EATER. 1 Great 507 1 Great v 333 2
Middle 508 2 Middle ib 334 3 Striped 509 4 Least 510 4 Least ib ib

DIV. III. PINNATED QUADRUPEDS.
PENNANT's Synopsis. BUFFON. No. Species. Page. No. Species. Vol. Page. XLI.
WALRUS. XLI. WALRUS. 1 Arctic 514 1 Arctic vii 354 2 Indian 517 2 Indian ib 370
XLII. SEAL. XLII. SEAL. 1 Common 518 1 Common vii 336 2 Mediterranean 520 3
Long-necked 521 4 Falkland ib 5 Tortoise-headed 522 6 Rubbon 523 7 Leporine ib
8 Great 524 8 Great ib 340 9 Rough ib 10 Hooded 525 11 Harp ib 12 Little 526 12
Little ib 338 13 Ursine ib 14 Bottle-nose 531 14 Bottle-nose, or Sealion ib 347
15 Leonine 534 XLIII. MANATI. XLIII. MANATI. 1 Whale-tailed 536 2 Round-tailed
540 2 Round-tailed vii 374 3 Sea Ape 544

DIV. IV. WINGED.
PENNANT's Synopsis. BUFFON. No. Species. Page. No. Species. Vol. Page. XLIV.
BAT. XLIV. BAT. 1 Ternate 548 1 Ternate v 281 2 Roussette ib 3 Rougette 549 3
Rougette ib 282 4 Spectre 552 4 Spectre ib ib 5 Javelin 553 5 Javelin vii 234 6
Leaf ib 6 Leaf ib 235 7 Cordated 554 8 Peruvian ib 9 Bull-dog 555 9 Bull-dog v
303 10 Senegal 556 10 Senegal ib 302 11 Pouch ib 12 Bearded 557 12 Bearded ib
305 13 New York ib 14 Striped 558 14 Striped ib 306 15 Molucca ib 15 Molucca,
or Cephalote vii 236 16 Horse-shoe 559 16 Horse-shoe iv 324 17 Noctule ib 17
Noctule iv 322 18 Serotine 560 18 Serotine ib 323 19 Pipistrelle 561 19
Pipistrelle ib ib 20 Barbastelle ib 20 Barbastelle ib ib 21 Common 411 21
Common ib 319 22 Long-eared ib 22 Long-eared ib 322

INDEX.
A
ABUSSEID SERAFI gives an erroneous description of the musk, which is followed
by Aldrovandus, vol. vii. page 46. note. Abyss. See Deluge. Acara, a kingdom on
the Gold Coast, produces hinds of an exceeding small size, vii. 27. n. Addas,
or Addax, a name for the antilope, vi. 415. 417. Adil, the same with the
chryseos, or lupus aureus of the ancient Greeks, vii. 255. n. Adimain, or large
sheep of Senegal and India described, vi. 215. Adive described, vii. 257. n.;
is fond of leather, ib. seems to have an involuntary instinct for crying when
it hears others of the same species do so, ib.; is fond of human bodies, 265.
n. See Jackall. Aegagropili, a kind of balls found in the stomachs of
ruminating animals, vi. 441. Aethiopia said to be the only country which
produces the camelopard, vii. 117. n. Aetna; some account of its eruptions, i.
410.; their effects never extend to the distance of three or four hundred
leagues, 433. A proof that the fire is lodged in the upper part of the
mountain, 437. Africa; its interior parts as little known to us as to the
ancients, i. 148. iii. 133. Circumnavigated in the time of Alexander the Great,
ib. Accounts of a circumnavigation in the ninth century, 149. This continent
probably as rich in gold as Mexico and Peru, 152. Remarkable for the variety of
people it contains, iii. 194. Produces fewer lions now than formerly, v. 66.
Produces a greater number of elephants than Asia, vi. 37. None of the South
American animals found there, vii. 177. African sheep described, vi. 212. n.
Perhaps the adimain of Leo Africanus, ib. African goat the same with Seba's
American stag, vii. 39. African stag with reddish hair, vii. 24. Agouti, or
long nosed Cavy described, v. 58. Is a voracious and cunning animal, ib.; bites
fiercely, and is very mischievous, 59. Produces two or three at a time, 60.
Peculiar to the southern parts of America ib. A smaller species called agouchi,
61. Erroneously described by Marcgrave, whose error has been followed by all
other writers but Brisson and Buffon, ib. Is the most common quadruped in
Guiana, 62. Agricula described, vii. 36. n. Ai, the Brasilian name of a species
of sloth, derived from its voice, vii. 151. n. Aiotochtli, the Mexican name of
the armadillo, v. 138. Air subjected to the action of a number of power, vi.
256. Akonchi, or olive cavy described, viii. 269. Differs but little from the
agouti, ib. Reckoned among the finest game in South America, 270. Alagtaga, the
Tartarian name of a species of jerboa, vii. 202. n. The animal described, 204.
Albours, a famous volcano near Mount Taurus, i. 413. Alce. See Elk. Alco, the
Mexican or Peruvian dog, described, viii. 261. A species lives wholly on crabs
and crustaceous animals, 260. Aldrovandus copies an error of Abusseid Serasi in
describing the musk, vii. 46. Follows Gesner in describing the Porcupine, 74.
Has given an erroneous figure of a sow-badger, v. 4. Alexander the Great was
the first European who mounted an Elephant, vi. 29. Alexandrians keep tame
ichneumons, vii. 216. n. Algazel, the Arabic name of a species of antilope, vi.
407. The same with the Aleppo Gazelle. Alicant dog, iv. 41. All Saints Bay,
abounds with small ugly monkeys, viii. 197. n. Allocamelus of Gesner, the same
with the Lama, vii. 136. Alouate, or king of the monkeys, a variety of the
ouarine, viii. 176. n. A savage animal, and makes a horrid noise, 178. n.
Alpague vicuna, vii. 134. n. Amahut, the Indian name of a tree on which the
sloths live, vii. 157. n. Amadabad; three hospitals for animals in that city,
viii. 151. Strange relation of the behavior of the monkeys in that
neighborhood, ib. Amazon river runs more than 1000 leagues, i. 268. Receives
more than 60 considerable rivers, 273. Its course described, 319. The Indians
who dwell on its banks are fond of the flesh of monkeys, viii. 179. Ambergris
superseded the use of civet, and has itself ceased to be admired as a perfume,
v. 253. America much infested with volcano's, i. 416. Produces none of the
animals common in the warm parts of the Old Continent, vii. 77. Produced no
horned cattle similar to those of Europe, till they were imported, v. 96.; nor
sheep nor goats, 99.; wild boars, nor domestic hogs, 100.; nor dogs nor cats,
103. 107. American savages destitute of the principle of love, v. 130. 131.;
may be considered as a new race of men, iii. 188. v. 139.; make a kind of balls
of seals skin, which they use as rafts, vii. 347. Andira guacu, v. 283. n.
Animalcules in semine masculino. See Generation. Animals; analogies between
them and vegetables, ii. 1. Distinguished from vegetables by sensation, 6.
Uncertain whether brutes have sensation or not, 7. Exceed plants in the number
of species, 9. Differ more from each other than plants, ib. Distinguishable
from each other by their manner of copulation, 10. Of their reproduction. See
Reproduction. Their nutrition. See Nutrition. Their generation. See Generation.
Account of the idea conveyed by the word animal, ii. 216. Large animals less
prolific than small ones, 255. Those which produce but one at a birth, acquire
nearly their full growth before they are capable of propagation, 257. Many
animals propagate rather by a kind of compression than copulation, 259.
Difference among them with regard to sexes, 260. Alterations which happen in
the body, as preparatives to generation, 261. See Organic matter. Diversities
with regard to their teeth, 456. Animals furnished with hands seem to have the
most sagacity, iii. 46. 292. Such as have no hands, cannot have any idea of
magnitude, and, therefore, are often terrified, iii. 46. A dissertation on
their nature, 208. Animals have some senses of exquisite acuteness; but in
general they are not all equal to man, 229. Their feelings more exquisite than
those of man, 238. Of domestic animals. 301. Animals vary according to the
different climates in which they live, 356. Of their degeneracy, 407. Cruelly
treated by man, 426. Females more useful than males, 434. Most of them superior
to man in agility, swiftness, strength, and courage, iv. 5 Changes produced on
them by education, 60. Large animals fewer in number than small ones, 65. Of
wild animals, 66. Are less fierce in cold countries, 68. Are the least subject
to changes or variations of any kind, 71. Their faculties perpetually
diminishing, 73. Of carnivorous animals, 164. These are but few in number, ib.
Some of them detest sharp cries, v. 52. Of those peculiar to the Eastern
Continent, 90. A list of them 111. Of those peculiar to the New World, 112. Of
those common to both Continents, 123. Not above 200 species of them existing on
the earth, 146. Remarks on the ridiculous methods of classing them, 147. Those
of America proved to be distinct from the animals of the Eastern Continent, v.
112. Domestic animals differ considerably from wild ones of the same species,
vi. 155. Animals in general grow torpid, and avoid each other, in winter, vii.
90. The unity of species more fixed in large than in small animals, 98. Animals
in general more happy than men, 156. Notices of some which are not expressly
mentioned in the book, viii. 216. An anonymous animal of Lybia described by Mr
Bruce, 283. Ant-eater described, v. 333. Three species of them; the great, the
middle, and the least, ib. A fourth mentioned by Brisson, from Seba, but seems
to be suspicious, 338. Six species mentioned by Seba, ib. The great ant-eater
fights terribly with his fore-feet, and is almost invincible when he lies on
his back, and uses all the four, ib. Dr Maudhuit's description of the great
ant-eater, 347. M. de la Borde's observations concerning it, 348. His
description of the middle ant-eater, 350.; and of the least ant-eater, 352.
Anta, a kingdom of Africa, produces great numbers of elephants, vi. 35. n.
Anta, a name for the Tapir, vi. 243. n. Eats a kind of clay in the night. 246.
n. Is dazzled by the light of torches, and easily taken, 247. n. Ante, another
name for the Tapir, vi. 244. n. Antilopes; thirteen different species of them,
vi. 393. The common Antilope described, 412. Indian Antilopes have more spirit
than those of other countries, 414. n. All the different kinds of them found in
Asia and Africa, 415. Difficulty of arranging them, 416. The larger kinds more
common in Africa than India, 422. The eyes of those in the neighborhood of
Alexandria so beautiful, that they are spoken of figuratively in praising the
eyes of the ladies, 423. n. The different kinds particularly described, vii. 1.
et seq. Antiparos; Tournefort's description of a remarkable cavern in that
island, 1. 452. Appennine mountains abound with Porcupines, vii. 73. Aper in
India, vii. 58. n. Aper Mexicanus, v. 272. n. Aperea, viii. 274. n. Aperea
Brasiliensibus, v. 119. n. Apes imitate the actions of men completely, iii. 46.
This imitation proceeds not from their genius, but merely from their
organization, 280. Their bad character, vi. 3. Their nomenclature, viii. 39.
Definition of an ape, ib. The same with the Pithecus of the Greeks, and Simia
of the Latins, 40. The ape called Orang-Outang, very much resembles man, ib.
The name of Ape ought to be given to an East Indian animal called Gibbon, 41.
Several species of apes in Senegal, 45. n. The whole may be reduced to 30
species, 51. Apes of Guinea described, 83. Are very fond of women, 84.
Description of an ape which exactly resembled an infant, 115. Ape of Barbary
described, 117. See Barbary Ape, and Magot. Four species of apes found in
Malabar, 135. The white apes first ravish women and then strangle them, ib. n.
Immense numbers found in Africa, from Arquin to Sierra Leona, 146. A very
beautiful ape of Guinea described, 167. n. Apossums, v. 405. n. Aquiqui, viii.
176. n. Arabata, a kind of American monkeys, make an horrid noise, viii. 179.
n. Arabia Petraea, exceedingly destitute of water, i. 477. vi. 124. 127.
Arabians said to have invented the mariner's compass, i. 153. Their stature,
complexion, etc. iii. 109. Marmol and Boulaye's account of them 110. Remarks on
them by another traveller, ib. Their horses the most beautiful, iii. 357. Their
descent, way in which they are treated, swiftness, etc. 365. et seq. Surmount
many difficulties by means of their camels, vi. 128. First took notice of the
musk, vii. 45. Archipelago Islands, only the tops of mountains, i. 448. Their
inhabitants excellent swimmers and diverse, iii. 125. Arctic dog. See Isatis.
Aral, a salt water lake near the Caspian Sea, described, i. 328. Arequipa, a
celebrated American volcano, i. 416. Argali, or Siberian sheep, described, vi.
222. n. Monstrous size of the horns, 223. Young foxes very frequently take
shelter in them when knocked off, ib. Aries pilosus, vi. 212. n. Guineensis
five Angolensis, vi. 212. n. Aries laniger, vi. 208. Aristotle, the only
ancient writer on zoology who merits attention, pref. 1. His theory of
generation, ii. 71. A mistake of his concerning the seminal fluids of women,
241. Asserts that there were no asses in Scythia, 417. That they degenerate in
cold climates, ib. His remarks concerning the copulation of animals of
different species, iv. 28. His account of the lion, v. 73. 79. His errors
copied by other natural historians, ib. Makes no mention of the tiger, v. 87.
His remarks on the Bubalus, vi. 163. His Bonasus the same with the Bison of the
Latins, 168. His description of an animal called the Hippelaphus, vi. 236.
Applies almost equally to the rain-deer, and stag of Ardennes, ib. Makes no
mention of the Camelopard, vii. 110. Makes mention of six amphibious animals,
of which only three are now known, 325. Was acquainted with the seal, 342.
Observes that no animal possessed of crooked, or retractile claws, is social,
436. His assertions concerning the copulation of mules, viii. 15. His remarks
concerning pigmies, 106. Armadillo described, v. 361. Six different species of
it, 365. Three banded Armadillo, 366. Six banded, 369. Nine banded 373. Twelve
banded, 375. The last is the largest of the genus. ib. Eighteen banded, 377.
Called also the weasel Armadillo, ib. Mistakes of Linnaeus concerning this
animal, 379. The crust is a real bone composed of several pieces, 383. These
creatures are not afraid of the bite of a rattlesnake, 386. Asia may be
reckoned the most ancient country in the world, i. 32. Volcano's very numerous
there, 413. Beauty of the Asiatic women, iii. 123. Produces none of the South
American animals, vii. 77. Ass described, iii. 398. Has the appearance of a
degenerated horse, ib.; but is not so in reality, 411. Entirely different from
the horse in his disposition, 412. Least infested with vermin of all
quadrupeds, 414. The female exceedingly lascivious. 415. Directions with regard
to their breeding, ib. Different races of them, 416. Account of their
migrations, 417. Of the wild asses, 419. None found in America, 420. Asses
flesh more disagreeable than that of horses, 421. The skin applicable to many
purposes, 422. They can carry more weight, in proportion to their bulk, than
any other animal, ib. Description of a very beautiful ass sent to the Grand
Seignior from AEthiopia, vi. 270. n. These animals are now almost equally
diffused all over the globe, 272. An ass destroys the generation of a horse;
but the reverse does not take place, vii. 419. Has a tendency to sterility,
423. 425. Rules concerning the propagation of asses, 425. Asses less fertile
than mares, viii. 23. Means to be used to make them conceive, ib. Assapanick, a
name for the flying squirrel, v. 307. Avicenna's account of the musk, vii. 46.
n. Axis, Sardinian hind, or stag of the Ganges, described, vi. 230, 238. Is
found in Barbary, and is probably the same with the spotted fallow-deer of the
Cape of Good Hope, 233. Forms an intermediate shade between the stag and
fallow-deer, ib. Azore Islands, only the tops of mountains, 1. 448.
B
Babiroussa, or Indian hog, described, vii. 58. Has prodigious tusks; yet is
less formidable than the wild boar, 60. Is an excellent swimmer, 61. Baboon
differs very much from an ape, v. 121. Called papie by the Latins, 233. Has
been mistaken for the hyaena, ib. The animal described, viii. 121. Is a strong
and ferocious animal, ib. 126. Is excessively lascivious, 123. Great Baboon
described, 126. Description of the Ribbed-nose Baboon. See Mandril. Of the
Pig-tailed Baboon. See Maimon. Badger described, iv. 226. An unsocial animal,
who spends three-fourths of his life in his dark abode, ib. Is obliged to leave
his hole by the fox, 227. Defends himself furiously when pursued by dogs, ib.
Is an exceeding sleepy animal, 228.; and remarkably cleanly, ib. Cannot bear
cold, 229. Is subject to the itch, ib. Two species mentioned by Dufouilloux;
but this ought to be considered as a vulgar error, 230. Badgers perhaps exist
in America, ib.; but not in Asia or Africa, 231. Was unknown to the Greeks, ib.
Approaches to no other species of quadrupeds, ib. Baikal, a great lake of Asia,
described, i. 335. Baikal hare. See Tolai. Baltic Sea ought to be regarded as
an immense lake, supported by a great number of rivers, i. 292. Barbary horses
described, iii. 357. Barbastelle. See Bat. Baris, or Barris, a kind of
Orang-Outang, viii. 81. n. Barrere's notions concerning the formation of downs,
mountains, and the duration of the sea upon the earth, i. 498. His opinion
concerning the formation of mountains controverted, 500. Bat described, iv.
317. A monstrous animal, 318. The bats fly aukwardly, and with difficulty; yet
seize flies, gnats, and especially moths, during their flight, 319, 320. A vast
quantity of their dung found in a cavern by M. Buffon, 320. Are viviparous
animals, and will even carry their young when flying, 321. Sleep during the
winter, and at any time can remain several days without food, ib. There are
seven species, 322. All the species described, 322. 324. Ternate bat described,
v. 281. There are two species of Ternate bats; the lesser of the size of a
crow, and the larger as big as a large hen, 284. These large bats are very
mischievous, and often wound people in the face, 286. Probably furnished the
ancients with the notion of harpies, ib. These creatures will intoxicate
themselves with palm wine, 288. Are very numerous in the islands of Manilla,
where the natives kill them for food, ib. n. The American bats can suck the
blood of sleeping men and cattle, without waking them, 289. Their flesh tastes
like that of the hare, 291. The foregoing description, according to M. de la
Nux, is exaggerated, 291. His account of them, 292. Are not carnivorous, 300.
Senegal bat described, 302. Bull dog bat, 303. Bearded bat, 305. Striped bat,
306. Javelin bat, vii. 234. Bear described, v. 1. Two kinds, the land and sea
bear, or the white bear of the frozen sea, ib. The land bears distinguished
into the brown and black, 2. Brown bear described, 2. Black bears are not
carnivorous, 3. A red kind of bears are as carnivorous and voracious as wolves,
4. Three kinds of bears in Norway, ib. One of these species said to feed on
ants, 5. Bears are found in all rude and desert countries, 6. Are savage and
solitary animals, 7. Are not torpid during the winter, though they pass part of
that time without provisions, ib. The males of the brown species devour the
cubs, 8. In the northern countries, the bears are said to be intoxicated by
throwing ardent spirits on honey, after which they are easily taken, 11. In
Canada and Louisiana they live in decayed trees, and have their habitations 30
or 40 feet high, ib. Method of purifying their grease, 12. Bears are excellent
swimmers, 13. Enjoy, in an exquisite manner, the senses of seeing, hearing, and
feeling, 14. Have some gross resemblances to man, ib. Accounts of some domestic
bears, 15. Cannot endure each other's society, unless brought up together from
their earliest infancy, 17. Difference between an European and American bear,
19. White or Polar bear described, viii. 216. Is falsely said to be more
dangerous than the other kind, 221. Feeds commonly on seals, 223. Has the bones
of the head so hard, that no blow of a club can bring him to the ground, 224.
Beaver described, v. 21. Is said to be among quadrupeds what the be is among
insects, 22. Has no pretensions to rationality, 24.; on the contrary, he is
considerably inferior to some animals, 26. 27. Account of their method of
operating and building their huts, 28. When a society is ruined by hunters, the
rest disperse and become vagabond, 36. Some of these creatures are solitary, of
which kind are all the European beavers, 39. It has been falsely asserted,
that the beaver cannot live upon land without water, 41. Accounts of a tame
beaver, 26. 41. Beavers are enemies to the otter, 42. The perfectly black and
perfectly white furs most esteemed, 43. This animal furnishes the castoreum,
ib. See Castoreum. Beavers can be so effectually tamed, that they will fish for
their masters, 45. Have received from Nature a gift almost equal to that of
speech, vi. 4. Bedas, a race of Ceylonese savages described, iii. 100. Are a
peculiar race of men, ib. 180. Bees; an eulogium on them, iii. 283. Our
admiration of them ill founded, 284. The genius of solitary bees inferior to
that of the gregarious species, 285. Bees, taken separately, have less genius
than many other animals, ib.; why they act in concert with one another, 286.
The hexagonal cells of the be furnish an argument of its stupidity, 290. Bees
are not more ingenious than wasps, hornets, etc. 292. The provisions of the be
and other industrious animals, are only useless and disproportioned masses,
297. Behemoth, the Hebrew name of the hippopotamus, vi. 277. n. Beori, vi. 244.
n. Bergen; vast numbers of raw hides exported from thence, vi. 499. Bezoar,
said to be the production of one species of animals only, vi. 424; but without
sufficient reason, 426. 431. A kind of bezoar from apes, 429.; different from
the true bezoar, 430. The true kind described, ib. It is found in a great
number of different animals, 432. Most quadrupeds, and even crocodiles and
large serpents, produce a kind of bezoars, 440. Birds; their sagacity and
foresight arise merely from instinct, iii. 297. Instead of knowing the future,
they are ignorant even of the past, 298. Why domestic poultry make nests worse
than wild fowls, ib. Bison Jubatus, vi. 151. The bison is not properly a
distinct species of animals, 154. 157. 172. 188. Origin of the word bison 157.
The bison of the Latins the same with the bonasus of Aristotle, 168. Bison of
America might proceed originally from the European bison, 170. Bisons vary
greatly in size, etc. 185. They have degenerated in America, 187. Black sea
receives more water from the rivers which run into it than is sufficient for
its support, i. 36. Might have formerly been only a large lake joined by a
narrow communication to the Caspian, ib. Ought still to be considered rather as
a lake than a gulf of the ocean, 38. Is the only sea that freezes totally; and
why, 47. Its direction similar to that of rivers, 253. According to Diodorus
Siculus, it was originally a great lake or river, 323. A notion of Mr
Tournefort's concerning it refuted, ib. Receives more rivers than the
Mediterranean, 325. Is less clear and salt than the ocean, 327. Its tempests
more violent and dangerous, ib. Black cattle fond of licking themselves, by
which means balls of hair are formed in their stomachs, iii. 455. Blind mouse.
See Water shrew. Boar. See Wild Boar, and Ethiopic and Cape Verd boar. Bobak
described, vii. 198. Bonasus, vii. 150. The same with the bison of the Latins,
168. Bonavista: An incredible number of goats on that island, iii. 493. Bones;
the manner in which they grow, ii. 473. Analogy between their growth and that
of wood, 474. Become more solid as we advance in years, 477. Are softer in
women than in men, ib. Bos, iii. 423. n. vi. 151. n. Bosner, an East India
island, where much bezoar is found, vi. 437. n. Bosphorus will, in time,
probably, be filled up, i. 323. Bouc estain, vi. 363. n. Bouc savage, ib.
Bourguet gives a specimen of a theory of the earth, but would probably not have
succeeded had he gone on with it, i. 122. First remarked the regularity of the
angles of mountains, 240. See Mountain. Brain cannot be the fountain of
sensation, iv. 173. Is only a species of mucilage, and hardly organized, 174.
Is an organ of secretion and nutrition, 175. Is not proportionally larger in
man than other animals, 176. Ought not to be regarded as an organic part of the
nervous system, 177. Why the compression of it destroys sensation, ib. Facts
which show that the brain is not the organ of sensation, ib. Brasilian cat. See
Jaguar. Brasilian weasel. See Coati mondi. Britain formerly a part of the
Continent, i. 489. 491. Brittany, a province in it overwhelmed with sand, 508.
Brocks, a name for young dear, when their horns begin to be visible, iv. 87.
Brutes. See Animals. Bubalus, or cervine antilope, described, vii. 1. The name
improperly given to the buffalo by the modern Latins, vi. 152. vii. 1.
Resembles the stag, the gazelles, and the ox, 2.; has but little resemblance
to the elk, 4.; has been called the Barbary cow, ib. Described by Caius, under
the name of Buselaphus, 6. Bucks, vi. 384. n. Buffalo described, vi. 150. Has
no name either in Greek or Latin, ib. n. Is a native of the warm regions of
Africa and the Indies, and was not transported into Italy till the seventh
century, 152. Mistake of Belon concerning it, ib. Refuses to copulate with our
common black cattle, 192. Is the dirtiest of domestic animals next to the hog,
ib. The milk of the female buffalo is worse than that of the cow, but yielded
in larger quantity, 193. The skin is of more use than the flesh, ib. Very
robust buffaloes in the kingdoms of Aunau and Tonquin, 195. n. Are very
dangerous when attacked and wounded, 196. The sight of the buffaloes at the
Cape of Good Hope is bad, 203. Buffle, vi. 150. n. Buffon holds the most
distinguished rank among natural historians, Pref. xi. Some of his sentiments
of a dangerous tendency, xii. n. Vol. ii. 70. n. His meaning strangely
misrepresented by a former translator, Pref. xvii. n. Bull-dog, iv. 40.
Burnet's Theory of the Earth, i. 109. See Earth. Gives neither facts nor
observations in support of his theory, 119. Falls into an error with regard to
the deluge, 127. See Deluge.
C
Cabiai, or thick-nosed Tapir, described, vii. 64. Cannot live in a cold
climate, 65. This assertion contradicted, 67. Has some slight relations to the
hog, ib. Escapes from hunters by taking the water, ib.; a peaceable animal, and
a native of South America, 66. Cuby-bara, vii. 64. n. Cagui, viii. 201. n. 205.
n. 209. n. 211. n. 214. n. Cajeta; a mountain curiously split by an earthquake
near that place, i. 455. Caitaia, viii. 199. n. Calicut, formerly a celebrated
city, now decayed, and mostly covered with the sea, i. 495. The women there
have sometimes ten husbands, iii. 99. The inhabitants lengthen their ears to
such a degree, that they sometimes hang down below their shoulders, ib. Their
legs sometimes as thick as the body of an ordinary man, ib. People with such
thick legs also found in other places, 100. Callitrix, or Green Monkey
described, viii. 160.; found in Mauritania and the territories of ancient
Carthage, ib. Calmar; Needham's observations on the milt of that fish, ii. 62.
186. Animalcules in it of an extraordinary size, 186. Some bodies discovered in
it like spiral springs, ib. Particular description of these bodies, 187. 188.
Calmuck Tartars described, iii. 68. Camel described, vi. 118. Two species of
that animal, ib. n. The Persians have several kinds, 120. n. The Persian
Ambassador's account of the camel to M. Constance, 122. n. The whole species
limited to a zone of three or four hundred leagues in breadth, 123. A native of
Arabia, ib. Camels can live several days without drink, 124. Are of vast use to
the Arabs, 126. Can travel 50 leagues in one day, 127. Camels can smell water
at the distance of half a league, 131. Why they can live so long without
drinking. 134. Their nature considerably changed by constraint, slavery, and
labor, 135. Exist no where in a natural state, 138. Are guided by the sound of
the human voice, or some instrument, 139. Become furious during the rutting
season, 140. Are more valuable than elephants, 145. Method of preserving their
flesh for food, 146. n. Their dung makes excellent feuel, 147. Might be made to
live and be useful in other countries, 148. Camelus, vi. 118. n. 119. n. 122.
n. vii. 133. n. Camelopard described, vii. 109. One of the largest and most
beautiful of quadrupeds, ib. The species confined to the deserts of AEthiopia,
and some provinces in the fourth of Africa and India, 110. Belon's description
of the Camelopard, 112. Gillius's description, 113. Hasselquist's description
censured; 115. 122. Mr Allamand's description of the horns, 123. His
description of the whole animal, 129. The length of its fore legs
misrepresented, 129. Camelopardalis, vii. 112. et seq. Campagnol, iv. 293. n.
Canis, iv. 196. n. 214. n. 226. n. vii. 255. n. 268. n. viii. 264. n. 279. n.
Cape of Good Hope, famous for its tempests, i. 390. Account of the manner in
which they are produced, ib. Cape Verd boar described, viii. 241. A different
race from all other hogs, 243. Account of one kept in the menagerie of the
Prince of Orange, ib. Refused to copulate with a sow, and tore her in pieces,
244. M. Vosmaer's account of another tame one, 245. Digs the earth with
surprising ease and quickness, ib. The animal may, perhaps, be a variety of the
common hog, 250. M. Comerson's account of boars in the island of Madagascar,
251. Mr Allamand's description of the Cape Verd boar, 251. Runs much more
swiftly than the common hogs, 255. Mr Adanson's description of an African boar,
256. There may, perhaps, be another species which Adanson means to describe,
257. Capivard, vii. 64. n. Capra, iii. 486. n. iv. 120. n. vi. 363. n. 364. n.
394. n. 407. n. 408. n. 419. n. vii. 14. n. 38. n. 44. n. Capreolus, iv. 120.
n. vii. 44. n. Capriolus, iv. 120. n. Capricorn, vi. 363. n. Capybara, v. 116.
n. Caracal described, v. 221. Is different from the lynx, ib. Is common in
Arabia, Barbary, etc. 222. Is obliged to content himself with the remains of a
lion's, or other wild beast's meal, ib. Why he has been called the lion's
provider, ib. Is about the size of a fox, but much stronger and more ferocious,
223. May be trained to hunting, ib. Mr Bruce's description of a Nubian Caracal,
224. This species no larger than a common cat, 225. Cardites found in vast
numbers in some places, i. 221. Caribbees described, iii. 175. Caribou, vi.
328. n. Carigueya, v. 119. n. 405. n. Carmel; some curious petrefactions found
on that mount, i. 207. Carnivorous animals. See Animals. Caspian Sea is a real
lake, and communicates with no other sea in the world, i. 37. Is represented as
nearly round in ancient charts, 253. Castor, v. 21. n. 260. n. 261. n.
Castoreum, a substance found in the body of the beaver, and used in medicine,
v. 43. Has a very offensive smell, 270. Cat described, iv. 49. Is extremely
amorous, and the female more so than the male, 51. The male has an inclination
to devour the young, ib.; which the female will sometimes do, 52. In Cyprus,
the cats were trained to hunt serpents, ib. Physical cause of the cat's
watching, 53. These animals cannot be entirely tamed, ib. Are extremely hardy
and vivacious, 55. Wild cat described, ib. Wild cats found in all countries of
the world, 56. Pietro della Valle's description of a species of Persian cats,
ib. Have a perfect resemblance to the cat of Angora, 57. Whence the beauty of
these cats proceeds, ib. Father Tertre's description of American cats, 59. Cats
sometimes sleep so profoundly, that they can scarce be awaked, 63. Sometimes
their breath has an odor of musk, 64. Chinese cats have pendulous ears, ib.
Some cats observed in France with pencils of hair at their ears, 65.
Description of the Lion by the name of cat, etc. v. 64. n. Catanea destroyed by
an earthquake in 1683, i. 411. Cataract. See Cheselden. Catus, iv. 49. n.
Caverns; dissertation on them, i. 442. Are in a manner peculiar to mountains,
450. Frequent in the Archipelago Islands, ib. Description of the cavern in
Derbyshire, called the Devil's Hole, 451. Of the cavern in Antiparos, the cave
of Trophonius, and several others, 452. 453. Caverns are frequent in all
countries infested with volcanos and earthquakes, 454. The labyrinth of Crete
is a natural cavern augmented by art, ib. Cavia, iv. 296. n. v. 392. n. vii.
83. n. Cavy, a name for the Guinea-pig, iv. 296. n. Long nosed Cavy. See
Agouti. Spotted Cavy. See Paca. Cay. viii. 196. n. Caymiri, viii. 199. n.
Cayopollin, v. 438. n. Cayouassou, viii. 193. n. Cemas, vi. 410. n. Cephos,
viii. 113. n. Cerf, vii. 8. n. Cerigo; an island which abounds in porphyry, i.
206. Ceropithecus, viii. 129. n. 140. n. 141. n. 160. n. 163. n. 168. n. 176.
n. 184. n. 193. n. 196. n. 199. n. 201. n. 203. n. Cervus, iii. 74. n. 113. n.
120. n. vi. 316. n. 317. n. vii. 31. n. 32. n. 110. n. 114. n. Ceylon said to
have been separated from the peninsula of India by an earthquake, i. 488. 496.
Account of the natives, iii. 100. Chacal, vii. 255. n. Changes of land into
sea, and sea into land, i. 483. Chamean, vi. 119. n. Chamois goat described,
vi. 363. See Goat. Charlevoix's description of the cataract of Niagara, i. 280.
See Niagara. Chat, vii. 77. Cheselden's account of a man affected with a
strabismus, in consequence of a blow, iii. 6. Of a lad whom he cured of a
cataract, 9. Chevre, iii. 486. n. Chevrotains or small antilopes described,
vii. 22. Have a resemblance to the stag, but differ from him prodigiously in
size, ib. Different species of them described, 23. Hinds of the size of a hare
found in the East Indies, 26. n. Exceeding small ones found in some parts of
Africa, 27. n. Are very easily tamed, ib. There are only two species of them
known, 28. Are so delicate that they can scarce be transported to Europe, and
soon die there, ib. Chimpanzee, viii. 77. n. Chinche, vii. 297. n. Chinese
described, iii. 71. Chinese Bonnet, viii. 148. A variety of the Macaque, ib.
Found in the East Indies, 149. Their method of stealing sugar canes, ib.
Distinctive characters of the species, 153. Circassia produces very beautiful
women, iii. 119. Circumcision, a very ancient custom, ii. 401. How practiced in
Persia, the Maldivia Islands, etc. 402. Civet described, v. 239. Two species of
the animal, 240. Has nothing in common with the cat but agility of body, 243.
Description of the perfume called civet, ib. This must not be confounded with
the musk, ib. The two species of civets have never been properly distinguished,
244. The civets, though originally natives of Africa and Asia, can live in
temperate, and even cold countries, 249. Great numbers of civets kept in
Holland, ib. Manner of collecting the perfume, 250. Exceeding strength of civet
as a perfume, 251. These animals naturally savage, and even ferocious, 252.
Civet now little used, 253. Account of a civet kept at Fort Mine, on the
African coast, ib. Civette, v. 239. n. Clay perfectly analogous with sand, i.
184. Coaita, a species of monkey described, viii. 184. Cannot bear cold, 185.
Coal-mines sometimes take fire, but never burn like volcanos, i. 441. Coati, or
Brasilian weasel described, v. 53. Two varieties of the species, ib. Difference
between the Coati and the Racoon, 54. This animal, by some, confounded with the
sowbadger, ib. Mistake of Aldrovandus concerning it, ib. The Coati has a custom
of gnawing the extremity of his own tail, 55. Inferences from this fact, ib. Is
an animal of prey, 56. Coati-mondi, a name given by some authors to the Coati,
v. 53. Is a variety of the same species, ib. Account of one kept by Linnaeus,
56. Has an unaccountable aversion to hog's bristles, ib. Is a very sleepy
animal, 57. Cochon d'eau, vii. 64. n. Cockles; vast numbers of petrified ones
found in some places, i. 221. Comets must sometimes fall into the sun, i. 66.
Consequences of their falling perpendicularly, and of falling obliquely, i. 67.
How they may detach a quantity of matter from the sun, ib. Such an event might
possibly produce other changes in the solar system, ib. n. A comet of no great
size might detach a 650th part of the sun's bulk, 68. A comet, supposed by
Whiston to be the cause of the deluge, 99. 104. That the earth was at first an
uninhabitable comet, 101. Its atmosphere was a chaos of heterogeneous
materials, ib. Hence the heat of the earth may last 6000 years, ib. Whiston's
account of the formation of the earth, 103. Condoma, or striped antilope,
described, vii. 8. Has a head like a stag, but horns like those of a goat, 9.
Approaches to the Strepsiceros of Caius, ib. Greatly resembles the wild goat of
the Cape of Good Hope, 11. Coqualin, vii. 176. n. Cordeliers, the highest
mountains in the world, i. 237. Extend from the equator beyond the tropics on
both sides, ib. Terminate in vast plains watered by the greatest rivers in the
world, 243. Cornu ignotum, vi. 407, n. Cornu Ammonis, found in vast quantities
in some places, i. 221. Coudous, or Indian Antilope described, vii. 40. A very
large animal, 41. Perhaps is one of those called nil-gauts, 42. Couguar
described, v. 197. A very ferocious and cruel animal. 198. Is very common in
South America, ib. Is afraid of fire, 199. The flesh is good food, ib. Couguar
of Pensylvania described, 200. Black Couguar described, 201. This last species
sometimes called the black tiger or cat, 202. Mr Pennant's description of that
animal, ib. n. Is the same with the animal called Jaguarette, 203. M. de la
Borde's description of the animal, ib. Becomes perfectly tame and peaceable in
a domestic state, 205. Account of a tame one, called the Paltroon Tiger, ib.
Couti, v. 58. n. Cow. See Ox. Cow of Tartary described, viii. 225. Differs from
all the species of buffaloes, ib. The difference consists only in their
grunting, instead of lowing, 227. Crab-eater described, viii. 279. At a
distance resembles a terrier, 280. Is very common at Cayenne, 281. M. de la
Borde's description of it, 282. Crystal, a new and spurious production, i. 199.
Cuandu, v. 119. n. vii. 77. n. 79. n. Cuguacu, v. 118. n. 138. n. 197. n. 198.
n. Cuniculus, iv. 155. n. 296. n. v. 58. n. 392. n. vii. 202. n. 317. n. viii.
228. n. 230. n. Currents; a dissertation on them, i. 351. Of their origin, 359.
Ought to be regarded as large rivers, and subject to the same laws with the
land rivers, 361. Account of the most remarkable currents in the world, 362. In
mountainous places of the sea, the currents are necessarily violent, 364. Hence
they are very rapid and dangerous in the Indian ocean, ib. Are produced by the
coasts repelling the water of the sea to different distances, 365. The currents
of the ocean have scooped out our valleys, and formed our mountains, ib.
D
Dalenpatius pretends to have discovered several kinds of animals in the semen,
ii. 131. Dama, iv. 113. n. Dasypus, v. 366. n. Dead sea; account of the water
it receives by rivers, and of what it loses by evaporation, i. 271. Death; its
natural cause common to animals and vegetables, ii. 478. Cannot be avoided,
479. We ought not to be afraid of it, 487. Is not attended with much pain, ib.
The terror of death is greatest at a distance, 488. Death may be occasioned by
continued pain, 491. Account of the death of Charles XII. ib. Many of the
female sex die through the terror of death, 492. The author's doctrine
confirmed by the uncertainty of the signs of death, 493. A certain condition of
life has a great resemblance to death, 494. We ought not, therefore, to be
hasty in burying persons supposed to be dead, ib. Deer; that species of animals
described, iv. 74. n. Deluge could not have transported from the ocean all the
shells which are found on dry land, i. 14. Nor could it have dissolved the
substance of the earth, 15. According to Whiston, the deluge happened on
Wednesday 28th November, 104. Supposed to be occasioned by the tail of a comet,
ib. And by the waters of the abyss, 105. How, on this supposition, the waters
of the deluge were disposed of, 106. Burnet's hypothesis concerning it, 111.
Woodward's hypothesis of an universal dissolution by the water, 113. The face
of the earth before the deluge, much the same as now, 118. Wood-ward's
hypothesis insufficient, 120. And likewise Whiston's, 121. Bourguet's theory,
123. Scheutzer's opinion, 126. The face of the earth could not be changed by
the deluge, 129. Ought only to be considered as a supernatural mode of
punishing human wickedness, 130. Could not possibly be the effect of any
physical cause, 132. The earth, or at least some parts of it, must have been in
a different situation before the deluge, from what it is now, 193. Examples of
different deluges, 507. Delos arose from the bottom of the sea, i. 442. Why
called Pelagia, 443. Des Carts, the first who explained natural appearances on
the principles of mechanism, ii. 47. How he attempted to explain the formation
of the soetus on these principles, 81. Devil's hole; a cavern in Derbyshire,
described, i. 451. Didelphis, v. 407. n. Dog described, iv. 1. In a wild state
is formidable to all animals, 2. Importance of this species in the system of
nature, 4. Wild dogs differ from wolves only by the facility with which they
are tamed, 7. Vast numbers of wild dogs in America, 8. Great varieties among
dogs, 9. Shepherd's dog approaches nearer to the primitive race than any other,
16. The largest dogs found in those countries which produce the most beautiful
of the human race, 18. Irish gray hound called by the ancients the dog of
Epirus or Albania, ib. Pliny's description of a battle between one of these
dogs, first with a lion and then with an elephant, ib. Dogs degenerate in hot
climates 23. Their flesh preferred by the negroes to that of all other animals.
ib. An unsuccessful experiment made by Buffon, to make a dog copulate with a
she wolf, 24. Another unsuccessful attempt to make a fox copulate with a bitch,
26. A successful experiment of making a wolf copulate with a bitch. 27. n.
Another of the same kind, viii. 7. Thirty varieties of dogs enumerated, iv. 30.
Dogs not perfectly formed at birth, 33. Genealogical table of dogs explained,
37. Account of a bitch who suckled puppies and cats, without having any
connection with a male, 42. Siberian dogs of different kinds described, 43. Mr
Colinson's description of those which draw carriages in Siberia, 45. Of the
wild dogs, 47. The fox described under the name of dog, 214. n. Domestic
animals. See Animals. Dorcas, iv. 120. n. Dordrecht; a terrible inundation
there in 1446, i. 492. The city separated from the main land by a similar
inundation in 1421, p. 493. Dormouse, or sleeper, iv. 334. Specimens of these
animals not easily procured, ib. Two species of them found in Italy, 335.
Sleeps during the winter, ib. Douc, or Cochin-China monkey described, viii.
168. Drake's account of the Acridophagi, or locust eaters of AEthiopia, iii.
135. Dreams brought as a proof of the memory of brutes, iii. 256. Are produced
independent of the mind, 257. In dreaming we have sensations, but no ideas,
258. They never occur during profound sleep, 259. Difference between our dreams
and those of brutes, 261. Drill, viii. 77 n. Dromedary described, vi. 118.
Their great swiftness, 129. n. 130. n. Whence the bunches on the backs of these
animals, and of the camel, proceed, 137. Dromedaries produced at Dresden, 149.
Dugon, or Indian Walrus, described, vii. 370. Is distinct from the sea-lion,
371; called by some the sea-bear, or the sea-cow, 371. 372. Dumb people have no
abstract and general knowledge, iii. 36. Account of one who suddenly began to
speak, ib. Dumb persons taught to speak by Pereire, 38.; and by Mr Braid-wood
of Edinburgh, 39. n.
E
Earth, supposed by Whiston to have undergone various changes from the tail of
a comet, i. 2. Burnet's imaginations concerning it, 3. Principal appearances of
the globe explained by Woodward from the action of an internal; abyss, ib.
General description of the earth, 4. Shows itself to be only the ruins of a
world. Our knowledge of it only superficial, 6. Matter of which it is composed
four times heavier than that of the sun, ib. Its upper stratum composed of
decayed animals and vegetables, 12. Its strata always parallel to each other,
ib. 15. Great changes must have taken place on the surface of the earth in
those ages immediately succeeding the creation, 13. It must have acquired a
considerable degree of solidity before the deluge, 15. Could not have been
dissolved by the deluge, ib. 16. Horizontal position of its strata, owing to
the operation of waters, 15. 18. 28. Why the strata in mountains are inclined
to the horizon, 15. Figure of the earth not perfectly spherical, owing to its
diurnal revolution, 17. How a true theory of the earth is to be established,
34. Enumeration of its principal phenomenon as a planet, 59. Of its figure, and
the materials of which it is composed, 84. Whether its parts are homogeneous,
87. Whiston's theory of the earth, 97. -- 108. His hypothesis erroneous, but
ingenious, 99. Fertility of the earth before the deluge, occasioned by a
central fire, 103. Figure of the earth changed from a perfect sphere, 106.
Remarks on Whiston's theory, 107. Burnet's theory defective, 109. Woodward's
theory, 113 -- 117. Futility of his system pointed out, 114. Examination of
various theories and their absurdities, 118 -- 132. Bourguet's account of the
earth before and after the deluge, and how it is again to be destroyed, 123.
Leibnitz's theory different from all others, 124. The earth was formerly a
fixed and luminous star, ib. Division of the globe into two belts of land and
two of water, 133. Ancient continent the principal belt, ib. Number of square
leagues it contains, 135. New continent the other belt, 135. What parts of the
earth are to be reckoned the most ancient, 136. Remarks on the division of the
earth, 138. First discoveries of the New Continent, 140. Ignorance of the
ancients concerning the extent of the earth, 141. A much greater space occupied
by sea than land, 142. Discoveries by different circumnavigators, 143.
Formation of the different strata of the earth, 157 -- 187. Figure assumed by
the earth when in a melted state, 158. Interior parts composed of vitrified
matter, 159. Formerly the earth must have been covered with water, ib. Changes
on its surface, with the reasons of them, 160. Table of the different beds of
earth found at different depths, in certain places, 163. The upper stratum
composed of decayed vegetable and animal matter, 167. Arrangement of the
strata, 170. Fishes, the first inhabitants of the globe, 174. The strata of the
earth not arranged according to their specific gravities, 179. Probable
conjecture concerning the formation of the globe, 181. Sand and clay, the
scoriae of burnt matter, 187. Observations of different authors on the various
changes which have taken place on the surface of the earth, 223. Of the
inequalities on the earth's surface, 228 -- 250. These inequalities necessary
to life and vegetation, 228. Physical necessity for its irregularity, 229.
Proofs of the author's theory, 243. Of the materials of the earth, and how they
are arranged, 244. Surface of the earth most unequal in countries thinly
inhabited, 282. The author's theory first suggested, from observing the
correspondence between the angles of opposite mountains, 366. Summary of the
doctrine concerning the earth, 512. Earthquakes; dissertation upon them, i.
408.; are produced by volcanoes, 417. Accounts of several terrible earthquakes,
418. Gentile's remarks on earthquakes, 427. Whether earthquakes are capable of
raising mountains, 429. See Mountain. Earthquakes of two kinds described, 432.;
causes of those which extend their effects over wide regions, 434. Echinus, iv.
300. n. Ecureuil d'Amerique, v. 326. n. -- Suisse, v. 329. n. -- Volant, v.
307. n. Eggs; Experiments upon them by Fabricius ab Aquapendente, ii. 86.; how
they are disposed within the body of a hen, ib. Harvey's system of generation
by means of eggs, ii. 89. See Generation. Eggs constitute the first class of
organic beings, 219.; are only instruments for supplying the place of uteri in
those animals deprived of this organ, 242. The term Egg applied by anatomists
to things of a very opposite nature, 243. Elephant, the most respectable animal
in the world except man, vi. 1. Is able to kill a lion with his tusks, 6. His
immense strength, ib.; has been exceedingly esteemed in all ages, 7. Account
of the famous white elephant in India, said to be 300 years old, 8. n.
Elephants in a wild state are not sanguinary, 10. The hunters only dare attack
the straggling ones, 11. These animals are extremely suspicious, and sensible
of injuries, 12. Their sense of smelling is exceedingly acute, ib. They are
excellent swimmers, 13. An enraged elephant can be stopped only by fire, 14. n.
Account of their manner of generating, 15. Never generate in a domestic state,
16.; method of hunting and taming them, 18. A tame elephant is the most gentle
and obedient of all domestic animals, v. 25. Instance of his great strength and
sagacity, 26. n. 40. -- 43. Method of conducting an elephant, 27. Extreme
affection of the elephant for its guide, ib. The species extremely numerous,
and why, 28. Never change their climate, 29. Why elephants are no longer useful
in war, 30. Manner of using them in war in the East, 32. The African elephants
cannot be tamed without difficulty, 33 No wild elephants now found on this side
of Mount Atlas, 34. Mr Adanson's account of the elephants at Senegal, 34. n.
Are more numerous in Africa than in Asia, 37.; overturn the houses of the
negroes, ib. n. Have a contempt for all other animals, ib. The largest
elephants found in the south of India and the east of Africa, 38. The Asiatic
elephants in general larger than the African ones, ib. Those of Ceylon excel
all others, ib. n. Prince of elephants and manner of feeding them, 41. n. Of
their extreme longevity, 42. Elephants of a white or red color highly valued,
43. The properties of the elephant particularly considered, 47. Inconveniences
to which the elephant is subject from the figure of his body, 54. Water is as
necessary to the elephants as air, 63. Many of the Indians devoutly regard the
elephant's tail, 65. n. The growth of the elephant retarded by his being kept
in a domestic state, 67. He loves wine, arrack, the smoke of tobacco, but hates
bad smells, and will fly at the sight of a hog, 71. Some remarkable accounts of
the properties of the elephant by the Marquis de Montmirail and others, 72. --
81. The prodigious tusks and bones attributed to he mammouth, belonged in
reality to the elephant, 82. Some account of the vast size of over grown
elephants, and the bones of the mammouth found in Siberia, 82. -- 88. Mistake
corrected with regard to the manner of their copulation, 90. Elk described, vi
315. Unknown to the Greeks, 317.; and to the Latins before the time of Julius
Caesar, ib. Existed formerly in the forests of Gaul and Germany, 322. Is found
in lower latitudes in America than in Europe, 324. American elks described,
327. n. Comparison of the elk with the stag, 328. How the elk is killed by the
glutton, 340. Description of the Elk in the memoirs of the Academy, 344.
Particular description of the elk, and the manner of hunting him, 347. -- 350.
Is subject to the falling sickness, 348. n. Account of an elk kept by the Duke
of Richmond, 351. Elk of Africa described, vii. 3. n. Empacassa, an animal
resembling the buffalo, described, vii. 43 n. Equus, iii. 306. n. 399. n. vi.
264. n. Erinaceus, iv. 300. n. vii. 86. n. Ermine described, iv. 262. Becomes
white in winter, 263. Has always a slight tinge of yellow in the temperate
climates, ib. Pontoppidan's remarks on this animal, 264. Ethiopian boar. See
Cape Verd Boar. Ethiopians described, iii. 134. Eunuchs, their properties, ii.
407. Of the different modes of castration, 404. Euriceros, iv. 113 n. Exquima,
a kind of monkey described, viii. 184. Perhaps only a variety of the coaita,
185. The same with the animal called Diana by Linnaeus, 188. Differences
between the exquima and coaita, 191. Eyes of the human species strongly express
the passions, ii. 438. Of the different colors of the eyes, 439. Eyebrows and
eye lids, their use, ii. 441.
F
Fallow-deer described, iv. 113. Approaches nearly to the stag, ib. The flesh
of this animal preferred by dogs to all others, 114. Differences between the
fallow deer and the stags. 114. -- 118. Faras, or Ravale, v. 406. n. Fecundity
of different animals, table of it, viii. 26. Felis, iv. 49. n. v. 64. n. 153.
n. 168. n. 197. n. 206. n. 240. n. vii. 249. n. Ferret described, iv. 252. A
different species from the polecat, ib. Female ferrets die if their desires for
a male are not gratified, 253. Excessively sleepy animals, ib. A natural enemy
to the rabbit, ib; how employed to hunt the rabbits, 254. Brought from Africa
to Spain, according to Strabo, ib.; uncertain whether it is the ictis of the
Greeks, 255.; pretty strong proof against their identity, ib. Fial-mus, vii.
316. n. Fial rache, vii. 258. n. Field-mouse, iv. 42. 85. 293. -- Long-tailed
described, iv. 285. Very generally and copiously diffused, especially through
elevated countries, ib. A single animal will sometimes amass a whole bushel of
acorns, nuts, etc. 287. Is an exceedingly prolific animal, 289. They devour one
another, ib. -- Short-tailed field-mouse more generally diffused than the
former, iv. 293.; does great damage by cutting the stalks of corn, ib.;
resembles the water-rat in its internal structure more than any other animal,
294. Fishtal, vi. 206. n. Fissures of the earth necessarily assume a
perpendicular direction, and why, i. 42. Their sides correspond as exactly as
those of a split piece of wood, 43. 470.; vary greatly in their extent, ib.
470. Cause of the large fissures, ib. Dissertation on perpendicular fissures,
442.; their origin hitherto unexplained, 458.; are often filled with
concretions, sometimes regular and transparent, and sometimes earthy and
opaque, 463.; are found in flint rocks as well as in stone, 469. Foetus;
discourse on its formation, ii. 271. Is either male or female, according as the
organic particles prevail in the male or female semen, 274. Why a foetus cannot
be produced in the body of the male, 278. Placenta and membranes produced at
the same time with the foetus, 279. Why two foetuses are not produced instead
of one foetus with a placenta, etc. 80. Sexual parts of the male foetus derived
solely from the father, and the rest of the body from the mother, and vice
versa, 283. The foetus is formed by a mixture of the organic particles of both
sexes, 286. Attempt to explain its formation, 287. The whole foetus formed at
the same time, 289. The whole perhaps formed in a moment, 294. How foetuses may
be formed in the vagina, ib. Instances of their being found in the ovaria,
Fallopian tubes, etc. 295.; of their being formed in the testicles of men,
296.; how this may happen, and how virgins may produce moles, 297. 298. Of the
expansion, growth, and delivery of the foetus, 302. Two kinds of growth
distinguishable in the foetus, ib. How the fundamental and essential parts of
an animal body may be discovered, 304. The double parts of the body produced on
each side of the single parts by a species of vegetation, 305. The spinal
marrow and vertebrae appear to be the real axis of all the double parts of the
body, and the source from whence they proceed, ib. Prooss that the double parts
proceed from the single ones, 306. An attempt to explain the manner in which
the foetus is expanded, 309. Size of the foetus at different periods of
pregnancy, 314. -- 318. Why labor pains at last come on, 319. The most natural
birth is when the foetus escapes without bursting the membranes, 321.
Explanation of the uses of the umbilical chord, membranes, etc. to the foetus,
322. Of the existence of the alantois in the human species, 324. Whether the
child may respire before its birth, 325. Of the circulation of the blood before
birth, 326. Of the nourishment of the foetus, 328. The imagination of the
mother cannot affect the foetus, 332. Of the times of gestation, 334. Various
opinions concerning the causes of delivery, 336. The author's reasons for
supposing that it is occasioned by the menstrual blood, 339. Why delivery is
always followed by an haemorrhage in the human species, 344. No haemorrhage
attends the delivery of cows, sheep, and other animals, 344. Fossa, vii. 219.
n. Fossane described, vii. 219. Why called the genet of Madagascar, ib. The
genitals of the male have an odor of musk, ib. Is very difficult to tame, 220.
Is the same with the animal called Berbe in Guinea, ib. Fossil shells;
dissertation upon them, i. 188. Prodigious quantities of them found in some
places, ib. An ignorant porter in the 16th century, first asserted that they
were really shells, in opposition to the learned, 189. An astonishing mass of
shells discovered by Reaumur, 190. Mr Reaumur's observations concerning them,
191. 192. the above mentioned mass could not be the effect of the deluge, 193.
How such prodigious quantities might be collected, 194. Shells are the medium
employed by Nature in the formation of most kinds of stones, 195. Are never
found in common rock, granite, or free-stones, 199. Are found on the tops of
the highest mountains, 200. Strange opinion of Leibnitz and an Italian author
concerning them, 203. Are to be met with in almost all countries, 205. -- 214.
Woodward's opinion concerning their position, 217. His assertions not
universally true, 218. Whole mountains, rocks, and extensive quarries often
full of them, 221. Fox described, iv. 214. The method of hunting him, 216. How
he gets the better of wild bees, wasps, and hornets, 218. Will not copulate
with bitches, 221. Of the foxes of different countries, 224. Foyna, iv. 239. n.
Furo, iv. 252. n. Furunculus, iv. 252. n. Furor uterinus, a species of madness,
ii. 423. Sometimes proves fatal, 424.
G.
Gainus, iv. 239. n. Galeopithecus, viii. 205. n. Galera, or Guiney weasel
described, viii. 265. A small species of martin or polecat, 266.; has a strong
odor of musk, ib. n. Generation of animals; a dissertation upon it, ii. 49.
Attempt to solve it by the hypothesis of organic matter, 50. Proof of the
hypothesis drawn from the resemblance of children to their parents, 59.
Examination of different systems, 64. Plato's system, ib. Final causes not to
be admitted in reasoning on this subject, 69. Aristotle's system considered,
71. Opinions of Hippocrates, 81. His system preferable to that of Aristotle,
85. Aquapendente's observations on eggs, 86. Gives no clear idea of generation,
88. Harvey's system, ib. His observations concerning the growth of the chick,
91. -- 94. Concerning the growth of the foetus in deer, 94. -- 96. Supposes all
animals to proceed from eggs, and that generation is a work of the uterus
alone, 96. 97. His system uncertain and obscure, 98. Observations of Malphigius
on eggs, 101. -- 105. Harvey censured for want of accuracy, 105. His
experiments compared with those of De Graaf on rabbits, 107. -- 113. De Graaf
and Malphigius better observers than Harvey, 113. No eggs exist in the
testicles of females, 115. Malphigius and Valisnieri the most exact writers on
generation, 116. Account of their observations and experiments, 116. -- 126.
Lewenhoeck's system of generation by animalcules, 127. -- 137. Both the
ovicular and animalcular system attended with insuperable objections, 138. --
146. A celebrated experiment by Nuck in favor of eggs, 146. inconclusive, 147.
Experiments of the author, showing that the small moving bodies observed in the
seminal fluids are not animalcules, 150. -- 192. Comparison of these with the
experiments of Lewenhoeck, 193. -- 211. Reflections on these experiments, with
a full explanation of the author's system, 212. -- 254. Of the varieties in the
generation of animals, 255. -- 270. Genet described; v. 254. Is more easily
tamed than the martin, 255. Requires a warm climate for its subsistence and
multiplication, ib. A particular kind of genet described, 257. Genetta, v. 254.
n. Geography; a dissertation upon it, i. 133. -- 156. Gerboise; vii. 202. n.
Gerbua; ib. Germ; immense quantity of matter produced by a single one, ii. 35.
Gibbon, or long armed ape, described, viii. 113. Etymology of the word Gibbon,
ib. Is of a tranquil disposition and gentle manners, 114. Called the Fese in
the kingdom of Gannaura, on the frontier of China, 115. n. Derivation of the
word Fese, ib. Gibraltar; no double current runs through the Straits, as has
been asserted, i. 313. Giraffe; see Camelopard. Glis; iv. 235. -- 339. vii.
198. Glouton; vii. 274. n. Glutton described, vii. 274. First taken notice of
by Olaus Magnus, 275. His incredible voracity, 277. -- 280. n. Account of one
kept alive in France, 282. Description of a voracious American animal called
Carcajou, 285. A similar animal described, 289. Goat described, iii. 486. Is
superior to the sheep, 491. Is naturally a friend to man, 493. Does not thrive
well in plain countries, 495. -- Wild goat, Chamois goat, etc. described, vi.
363. Both these were unknown to the Greeks, ib. Are to be considered as one
species with the domestic goat, 377. All the ten species of goats, mentioned by
different authors, ought to be reduced to one, 380. Goats are subject to the
vertigo, 382. The wild and chamois goats only found in deserts, and on the
highest and most rugged mountains, 383. Hunting the wild goat is very
laborious, and sometimes dangerous, 385. Grimm, or Guinea antilope described,
vii. 14. Has a yellow humor secreted in its eyes, smelling like a mixture of
musk and castoreum, 18. Grison, or gray weasel described, iv. 266. Does not
belong to the weasel tribe, 267. Guariba, viii. 176. n. Guib, or harnessed
antilope, described, vii. 12. Guiney-pig described, iv. 296. Is an excessively
salacious and prolific animal, 297. Gulo wielfrass, vii. 274. n.
H
Hamster, or German marmot, described, vii. 178. Is the most destructive of all
the rats, ib. The hamsters destroyed by the pole-cats, 185. They likewise
devour each other, ib. Become torpid in winter, and cannot be awaked even by an
electrical shock, 187. Particular account of the appearance of the hamster,
when torpid, and in what manner he awakes, 193. -- 196. Seems to have no other
passion but that of rage, 196. Even the male and female hamsters devour each
other, 197. Is not a marmot, 198. Hare described, iv. 137. Multiplies very
fast, 143. Does not chew the cud, 145. Has an acute sense of hearing, but his
sight is bad, 146. Surprising instances of instinct in the hare to preserve
itself from danger, 147. Measled hares love marshy and watery grounds, 149.
Mountain hares larger and better than those of the plains, 149. Become white in
high mountains, and in northern regions, during winter, 149. Hares are equally
diffused over all climates, 150. Their flesh is not relished by the Eastern
nations, 151. Manner of hunting them, 152. Hares often make holes in the clefts
of rocks, 153. Will sometimes catch mice like cats, according to Pontoppidan,
ib. Haut, vii. 151. n. 158. n. Hearing; a discourse on that sense, iii. 26. Is
liable to deceptions in some instances, ib. Curious instance of a deception
with regard to the sound of a bell, 27. Of the different tones of sounds, 28.
Why some sounds are more agreeable than others, 31. Of the reflection of
sounds, and the organs of hearing, 33. Of deafness, 34. Those who have bad
ears, and unmusical voices, hear better with one ear than the other, 34. Of
trumpets and funnels for assisting the hearing, 35. Hedgehog described, iv.
300. The female devours her offspring when confined, 302. Is a malevolent
animal, ib. Very generally diffused, 303. Herinaceus, iv. 300. n. 304. n. Hiam,
vii. 44. Hippopotamus described, vi. 277. Imperfectly known to the ancients,
278. No precise information obtained concerning him till the middle of the 16th
century, 279. His skin is impenetrable, unless steeped in water, 281. Columna's
description of this animal inferior to Zerenghi's, 285. Prodigious strength of
the hippopotamus, 293. The species is not numerous, 295. Sometimes confounded
with the sea-cow, 297. The hippopotamus mentioned by Diodorus Siculus, 304.
Observations on the method of preparing the animal's skin, 305. His blood
employed by the Indian painters as one of their colors, 314. Hircus, vi. 206.
n. vii. 33. n. Hog, hog of Siam, and wild boar, described, iii. 500. Is not a
distinct species from the wild boar, 501. Is approached by no other species of
animals, ib. The fat of the hog differs from that of almost every other animal,
509. The hog is the most rude and brutal of all quadrupeds, 511. His sense of
feeling is very imperfect, insomuch that mice will sometimes eat into his back
without disturbing him, 512. Is subject to a leprous disease, ib. Best method
of fattening hogs, 513. Wild boars never attack or devour other animals, 518.
Method of hunting them, 520. Hogs have multiplied greatly in America, 521. The
boar, by becoming domestic, degenerates in cold countries, 522. -- Mexican hog
described, v. 271. Is the most numerous and remarkable of all the animals in
the New World, ib. Goes by a great variety of names, ib. n. Has a remarkable
aperture on his crupper, 272. Might easily be rendered domestic, 273. Never
intermixes with the European hogs, 275. Two distinct species of these animals
mentioned by M. de la Board, 276. His description of them, 277. -- Guiney-hog
described, viii. 239. Is domestic and perfectly tame, 240. Hog-stag described,
iv. 111. Hoitzlacuatzin, vii. 76. n. Homo duplex; or a dissertation upon the
internal qualities of man, iii. 264. Homo sylvestris, viii. 77. n. Hooded
serpent; a stone found in its head, vi. 440. Horse described, iii. 306. His
excellent character, ib. Is rarely seen in a natural state, 307. Is not
ferocious, even when wild, 308. Accounts of them by different authors, 309.
Directions for weaning foals, 314. 315. When the colts ought to be dressed,
316. The horse's mouth endowed with great sensibility, 318. Explanation of the
technical terms employed to express the different external parts of a horse,
320. n. Of the properties which distinguish a good horse, 320. -- 335. Of the
propagation of horses, 335. -- 344. Of crossing the breeds of horses, 346. Of
different kinds of horses, 357. Remarkable instance of the swiftness of an
English race-horse, 361. Of the feeding of horses in different countries, 385.
Horses often removed from the dominion of their masters form the link between
domestic and wild ones, 394. Hottentots are not true Negroes, iii. 176. Kolbe's
account of their method of extirpating one of the testicles of their males, ib.
Huanuca-Chama, vii. 133. n. Human species; varieties of it in the different
countries of the world, iii. 57. Hurricanes; dissertation on them, i. 386.
Hyaena described, v. 226. This animal confounded with the jackal, the civet,
the glutton, and the baboon, ib. He is solitary, extremely ferocious, and can
never be tamed, 235. Tears the dead bodies of men and animals out of the earth,
236. More absurdities related of the hyaena than of any other quadruped, ib.
Account of a hyaena shown at St Germain, 237. Great strength of the hyaena,
238. Hymen; whether that membrane exists or not, ii. 415. Hystrix, vii. 69. n.
76. n. 83. n.
I
Jackal described, vii. 255. Varies every where in size, 256. Diffused all over
Asia, from Armenia to Malabar, 259. The same with the Those of the ancients,
263. Dig up the bodies of men though buried ever so deep, 264. Will eat
leather, skins, tallow, and even excrements, 265. More troublesome than the
hyaena, ib. Jaguar described, v. 187. The most cruel and formidable animal in
America, 188. Is said to attack savages rather than Europeans, 189. Account of
one sent to France from New Spain, 193. Manoncour's remarks on the jaguars of
Guiana, 194. Is sometimes killed by the ant-eater, 196. Jaguara, v. 188. n.
Jaguarete, v. 94. n. Jarff, vii. 274. Javelin Bat. See Bat. Ibex, vi. 363. n.
394. n. Ichneumon described, vii. 210. Is domestic in Egypt like the cat in
Europe, ib. Hunts and eats every living creature, 211. Destroys the eggs of the
crocodile, and the young crocodiles themselves, 212. There are no distinct
species of ichneumons, 213. Hasselquist's description censured, 214. n.
Ichneumons cannot be easily reared in temperate climates, 217. Ignavus, vii.
151. n. Jerboas described, vii. 201. Four distinct species of them, ib. Cannot
walk, but advance by leaping, 207. M. Gmelin's remarks on its internal
structure, 207. Indian Walrus See Walrus. Infancy; discourse on it, ii. 269.
Infibulation; how performed, ii. 403. Jocko described, viii. 77. See Orang
Outang. Isatis, or Arctic dog described, vii. 268. Is peculiar to the northern
regions, 270. Why called the Cross Fox, 271. Mr Colinson's remarks on this
animal by the name of Cossac, 172. Islands; a discourse on the origin of new
ones, i. 442. Are either produced suddenly by the operation of subterraneous
fires, or accumulated by the sediment of the waters, ib. Accounts of the rising
of many new islands, 443. et seq. New islands never appear but in the
neighborhood of old ones, 449. Why there are few islands in open seas, ib.
Isthmus of Suez; would produce a great inundation if cut, i. 39.
K
Kebos, viii. 156. n. Kevel, or flat horned antilope, described, vi. 400.
Krietsch, vii. 178. n. Knmrak; a creature begot between an ass and a cow, viii.
35.
L
Lacerta, v. 356. n. Lacertus, v. 355. n. Lakes; a dissertation on them, i.
290. Wherein they differ from mediterranean seas, 322. Different kinds of lakes
described, 330. 331. How salt lakes may be produced, ib. Enumeration of some of
the most remarkable lakes, 333. Account of a lake in Bohemia, from whence often
issue violent winds, 338. Lama described, vii. 133. No exact history of this
animal hitherto given, 135. The animal mentioned by Gesner under the name of
Allocamelus, 136.; and by Matthiolus under that of Elaphocamelus, ib. Peru is
their native country, 138. Are extremely lascivious, yet copulate with
difficulty, 141. Cannot be made to quicken their pace, ib. n. When wild, they
will climb the highest rocks, 143. Lamantin, vii. 375. n. Land; a general view
of it, i. 10. Was formerly covered with the ocean, 12. -- 17. In what manner it
emerged from under the ocean, 30. Reasons for supposing the dry land and the
ocean to change places with each other, 31. 32. Instances of these changes, 40.
Dissertation on the changes of land into sea, 483. Leem, vii. 316. n. Leming,
or Lapland marmot described, vii. 316. Inhabit the mountains of Norway and
Lapland, 318. Sometimes appear in such numbers as to cover the whole surface of
the earth, ib. n. Are thought by the vulgar to fall from the clouds, 319.
Lemmar, vii. 316. n. Lemur, vii. 223. -- 231. Leo, v. 64. vii. 348. Leopard
described, v. 169. Was unknown to the ancients, ib. Is called Engoi at Congo,
and Antamba at Madagascar, 184. See Ouence and Panther. Lepus, iv. 137. n. 155.
n. viii. 228. n. 276. n. Lepusculus, 4. 155. n. Lidmee, or brown antilope
described, vi. 413. n. Life; table of the duration of it, ii. 498. Lion
described, v. 65. The species very numerous and fierce in the southern regions
of Africa, 68. The lion is capable of being tamed, 69. His generous temper, 70.
The American lion has no mane, 74. Lions may be kept alive, and even propagate,
in temperate countries, 77. Aristotle's mistakes concerning the lion, 79. The
senses of smelling and fight less acute in the lion than in other animals, 81.
His manner of hunting his prey, 82. Is fond of the flesh of camels and young
elephants, 85. How hunted, 85. Loris, or tail-less Maucauco described, vii.
231. Differs from all other quadrupeds in the number of its vertebrae, ib.
Thevenot's description of it, 233. Loutre, vii. 231. Lowando described, viii.
133. Lupus, iv. 196. n. v. 206. -- 226. vii. 255. Lutra, iv. 233. n. 236. n.
vii. 321. n. Lynx described, v. 206. The finest skins of lynxes come from
Siberia and Canada, 209. Mistake of Mr Klein concerning it, 208. -- 210. The
lynx prefers cold to temperate countries, 213. Fables of the ancients
concerning this animal, 215. Description of a Canadian lynx, 217. Norwegian
lynx described, 218.
M
Macaque and Egret described, viii. 140. Are mild and tractable animals, but
extremely dirty and disagreeable, 141. Macauco. See Maki. Madagascar; account
of the inhabitants of that island, iii. 160. Magot, or Barbary ape described,
viii. 117. Maimon, or pig-tailed baboon described, viii. 137. Makis, or
maucaucos, described, vii. 223. Seem to be confined to Madagascar, Mosambique,
and the lands adjacent to these islands, 229. Constitute the shade between the
long tailed monkeys and digitated quadrupeds, 230. Malbrook and Chinese bonnet
described, viii. 148. Approach very near to the Macaque, ib. Man; his natural
history, ii. 353. Is better acquainted with other objects than himself, ib.
Ought first to acquire distinct ideas of the two substances of which he is
composed, 354. All our knowledge derived from comparison, 355. Existence of the
soul self-evident, ib. We are less certain of the existence of external than of
internal objects, 357. Comparison of the mind with the body, 358. of man with
other animals, 361. Proofs of the immateriality of the human soul, 361. -- 367.
Man of the wood, viii. 375. Manati described, vii. 374. First described by
Oviedo, 376. Another description, 382. M. de la Condamine's description more
perfect than any other, 385. This animal found on the coasts and rivers of
Africa as well as in America, 387. Manatus, vii. 375. n. Mandrill, or ribbed
nose baboon described, viii. 129. Has a violent passion for women, 131.
Mangabey, or monkey with white eyelids described, viii. 154. Manhood;
discourse on that state of the human body, ii. 436. Mamcou, v. 406. n. Manis,
or scaly lizard described, v. 355. Two species of it, the long and short
tailed, ib. Seem to constitute the last shade between quadrupeds and insects,
360. How they defend themselves against beasts of prey, ib. n. Manitou, v. 406.
n. Margay, or Cayenne cat described, vii. 249. Is a ferocious and cruel animal,
250. The same with the Pichou of Louisiana, ib. The Guepard likewise belongs to
this genus, 251. and the tiger-wolf, ib. Descriptions of tiger-cats by M. de la
Board and M. Condamine, 252. 253. Marikina, or silky monkey described, viii.
209. Marmose, or Marmosa, v. 245. n. Marmot described, iv. 339. Is easily tamed
when taken young, 340. Has some resemblance both to the bear and to the rat,
341. Is very subject to be rendered torpid by cold, 342. Some of these animals
are said to allow themselves to be loaded with hay, and drawn by others like a
cart, 343. Become extremely lean toward the end of the sleeping season, 344.
The Greeks were unacquainted with this animal, and Pliny is the first Latin
author who takes notice of it, 345. Marmot of Canada described, 346. Marmot of
Kamtschatka, and of the Cape of Good Hope, described, 348. The latter sometimes
known by the name of the Rock badger, 349. Other marmots described, vii. 198.
Marriage. See Puberty. Marta, iv. 245. n. Martarus; iv. 245. n. Martes, iv.
229. n. 245. n. vii. 309. n. Martin described, iv. 239. Cannot be perfectly
tamed, 241, Sometimes sleeps two days successively, and at other times sleeps
none for as long, 242. Martin of Guiana described, 243. Marshes; of their
effects, i. 473. Account of the most remarkable marshes in Europe, 478. Mazames
described, vii. 30. The word, in the Mexican language, is a generic name for
the stag, the fallow-deer, and the roebuck. Meles, iv. 226. n. v. 239. n. vii.
210. n. Memina described, vii. 28. n. Merian opossum described, viii. 267.
Merian's mistake with regard to it, 269. Mico, or fair monkey described, viii.
214. Never described by any traveller but M. Condamine, 215. Modena;
peculiarity of the soil in that duchy, i. 481. Mole described, iv. 309. Is more
amply endowed with generative organs than any other animal, 310. Is most
annoyed by the inundations of rivers, 311. Curious method of forming an
habitation for its young, 312. Does not sleep during the winter, 313. Frequents
only cultivated countries, 314. Mole of the Cape of Good Hope described, 315.
Pensylvania mole described, 316. Raises not the earth like the European moles,
ib. Siberian mole described, viii. 238. Mona, or varied monkey described, viii.
156. Is fond of ants and other insects, 158. Monax, or marmot of Canada. See
Marmot. Moan, viii. 156. n. Monghos, vii. 210. n. Mongooz, vii. 224 n. Mongous,
vii. 224. n. Moschus grimmia, vii. 14. n. Moschus moschiferus, vii. 45. n.
Mouffetes, or stinking pole-cats described, vii. 295. Have been confounded with
each other, and with animals of very different species, 296. Diffuse a most
intolerable odor, 299. -- 305. Mouflon, and other sheep described, vi. 205.
Is the primaeval stockof all the other sheep, 228. Few now exist in Corsica,
229. Moulds, internal; attempt to define them, and explain generation by them,
ii. 33. Mountains; how formed by the motion of the waters, i. 20. -- 30.
Tropical mountains more elevated than those of the temperate climates, 231.
Their figures very different, 233. Their tops at a distance resemble the waves
of the sea, 234. The nearer we approach the Equator, the higher are the
mountains, 237. The contours of all mountains resemble the works of regular
fortifications, 241. Mountains have not been formed by subterraneous fires,
429. Nor by earthquakes, 43^. Composition of their internal parts, 461. Mouse
described. vi. 282. May be tamed to a certain degree, ib. Prodigious increase
of these animals, 283. Why some people have a horror at them, ib. White and red
mice found in different countries, 284. Mules; dissertation on them, viii. 1.
Differences between the mules produced by a jack-asa and a mare, and those
produed by a horse and a female ass, ib. Remarks on the mules produced by a
he-goat and ewes, 4. On those produced between a dog and wolf, 6. Aristotle's
remarks on the offspring of a mule with a mare, 15. Proofs of the fecundity of
common mules, 15 -- 21. Mus, iv. 275. n. 285. n. 290. n. 293. n. 296. n. 305.
n. 334. n. 339. n.; v. 58. n. 261. n. 392. n. 406. n. 435. n. 438. n.; vii.
202. n. 316. n.; viii. 229. n. 233. n. 235. n. 267. n. Musaraneus, iv. 305. n.
Mussascus, v. 260. n. Musk described, vii. 44. This animal first taken notice
of by the Arabians, 45. Guiney musk described, vii. 27. Musk rats of Canada and
Muscovey described, v. 260. These animals ought not to be confounded with each
other, or with the musk-rat of the Antilles, 261. M. Sarrasin's observations on
the Canadian musk-rat, 263. Differences between this animal and the beaver,
267. Their odor, though agreeable to the Europeans, is extremely disgustful to
savages, 269. Musk-rat of Muscovey has never been examined alive, or dissected
by any Naturalist, 270. Musmon, vi. 205. n. Musquask, v. 260. n. Mustache
monkey described, viii. 163. Called White-nose by the voyagers to Guinea, ib.
Is the most beautiful of all the monkeys, 164. Mustela, iv. 232. n. 239. n.
245. n. 248. n. 252. n. 257. n. 262. n.; v. 254. n. 328. n.; vii. 210. n. 220.
n. 274. n. 309. n. 321. n.; viii. 267. n. Myrmecophaga, v. 333.
N
Nature: First view of it, vi. 249.; may be considered as an immense living
power, ib.; wants only the power of creating and annihilating to render her
omnipotent, 250. View of the different bodies which constitute the system of
Nature, 252. Second view of Nature, vii. 89. Consideration of the different
species of animals by which the earth is inhabited, ib. Negroes; account of
different nations of them, iii. 140. et seq. Niagara; Charlevoix's account of
the famous cataract there, i. 280. Is not less than 140 or 150 feet high, 281.
Nil-gaux, vii. 42. n. Northwest, or Northeast passage to China; of its
existence, ^ 144. Nutrition and growth of animals; dissertation on it, ii. 39.
O
Ocean kept in perpetual motion since the beginning of time, i. 7. 17. Its
bottom as irregular as the surface of the dry land, 7. Mountains, currents,
calms, etc. in different parts of the ocean, 8. Different kinds of plants and
animals found in it, 9. Its waters must have remained for a great number of
years on the earth, 11. Flux and reflux of the ocean are the causes of the
horizontal position of the strata of the earth, 18. Waters of the ocean have a
constant motion from east to west, 31. 32. May again cover the earth, 41.
General account of the changes produced by its flux and reflux, 57. The
saltness of the ocean proceeds from banks of salt in its bottom, and likewise
from the salts brought down by rivers, 275. Its water excessively cold at great
depths, ib. Is not more salt at the bottom than at the surface, 276.
Sulphurous springs, beds of bitumen, etc. found at the bottom of the sea, 276.
Ocelot, or Mexican cat described, vii. 243. The most beautiful of all spotted
animals, 245. Is excessively fond of blood, 246. Cannot be tamed, 247.
Odobenus, vii. 355. n. Old age; dissertation upon it, ii. 470. Olive cavy. See
Akouchi. Onager, vi. 264. n. Opossum, v. 405. n. Opossum of Virginia described,
v. 404. Has a cavity under the belly, in which the young are received and
suckled, ib. The same with the great oriental philander of Seba, 407. Remarks
on his account of these animals, 411. The opossum is an original native of the
warm countries of America, 422. Its time of gestation probably much shorter
than that of other quadrupeds, 423. Its pouch not to be regarded as
indispensibly necessary for the preservation of the young, 424. The young
opossums never quit the teats with their mouths till they have strength to
walk, 425. Manner of the opossum's catching its prey, 427. Is easily tamed, but
has a disagreeable appearance and smell, 428. M. de la Borde's account of three
tame opossums, 429. The opossum is not the same with the East India animal
called coescoes, 430. Murine opossum described, 435. The birth of the young in
this species still more premature than in the former, 436. Mexican opossum
described, 438. Have an ugly aspect, 440. Orang-outang described, viii. 77. The
same with the pongo and Jocko, ib. Have the greatest resemblance to man of all
the apes, 78. Bontius's account of them, ib. This account suspicious, 80. Dr
Tyson's description, ib. Accounts by other authors, 81. Buffon's account of one
which he saw, 86. Of the natural instincts of these animals, distinguished from
what they acquire by education, 89. Comparison of the body of the orang-outang
with a human body, 95. Has a greater resemblance to man than to baboons or
monkeys, 97. Tyson's account of him criticized, 101. Organic matter defined,
ii. 36. How distinguished from brute matter, ib. By means of organic matter
Nature forms organized bodies, 37. Ortohula, vii. 306. n. Ossa, v. 406. n.
Otter described, iv. 232. The young otters less handsome than the old ones,
233. Is of a savage disposition, and cannot be tamed, 234. The species probably
extend over all temperate climates, 235. Cayenne otters described, 236. Sea
otters described, vii. 321. Canadian otter described, 324. Oanderou described,
viii. 133. Ouarine and alouate described, viii. 176. Exceed the largest monkeys
in size, and approach to that of the baboons, ib. Marcgrave's account of their
oratory, 177. Remarkable instances of their sagacity, 180. Ouaikare, vii. 151.
n. Ovis, iii. 462. n. vii. 133. n. Ouistiti, or striated monkey described,
viii. 205. Might be multiplied in the southern countries of Europe, 207. Ounce
described, v. 167. Taught by the Persians and others to hunt, 179. 182. Ox
described, iii. 423. The word, in common acceptance, denotes black cattle in
general, without regard to sex, ib. n. The cow may be used in ploughing, 435.
Of castrating black cattle, 436. The copulation or contact of oxen produces
warty tumors on cows, 437. This disease never appears in Britain, ib. n. Of
the propagation of black cattle, 438. Of their bellowing, 442. Marks of a good
ox, 443. Of rumination, 448. Of milk, 453. Of the use of salt in fattening
oxen, 454. They ought to be prevented from licking themselves, 455. Of the
Siberian and Norway oxen, etc. 459.
P
Paca, or spotted cavy described, v. 392. Is an animal peculiar to America, ib.
Is with difficulty taken alive, 394. Account of a tame one, 395. Is a very
cleanly animal, 396. Gnaws wood surprisingly, 400. M. de la Borde's account of
the animal, 402. Pacasse, a species of buffalo in Congo, described, vii. 42.
Pacos. See Lama. Page v. 392. n. 394. n. Panther described, v. 167. Papio,
viii. 121. n. Pardalis, vii. 243. n. Pasan, vi. 407. n. Patagonian giants;
account of them, iii. 186. Patas, or red monkey described, viii. 144. Is less
dexterous than the other monkeys, but extremely inquisitive, 145. Pecari, v.
271. n. Pekan and Vison described, vii. 307. The Pekan strongly resembles the
pine-weasel, 308. Perouasca described, viii. 234. Petit-gris, v. 321. n.
Phalanger, or Surinam oposssm described, vii. 174. Philander, v. 406. 436. 438.
vii. 174. Phoca, vii. 348. n. Pholidotus, v. 355. n. Pichou, vii. 249. n. Pigmy
described, viii. 106. Aristotle's remarks on pigmies, etc. ib. Pigmies were, by
the ancients, accounted more mild and docile than other apes, 109. Piloris, a
species of wood-rats described, v. 262. n. Pinche, or red-tailed monkey
described, viii. 211. Is a beautiful animal, but extremely delicate, 212.
Pine-weasel, or yellow-breasted martin described, iv. 235. The female seizes
the nests of squirrels, ducks, and buzzards, 246. Pismire-eater, v. 333. n.
Pithecus, viii. 206. n. Planets, how formed, i. 58. Discoveries made concerning
their revolutions by Galileo and Newton, 61. Difficulties attending the
explanation of the planetary motions, 62. Their revolutions accounted for, from
an impulsive and attractive force, 63. Probable cause of the impulsive forces,
ib. Orbits of the planets nearly circular, ib. Conjecture concerning the
formation of planets by the falling of a comet into the sun, 64. Have probably
received their centrifugal forces all at one time, 66. All of them, together
with their satellites, not equal to 1/^^^th of the sun, 67. Might be driven off
in a liquid state, all at once, by the stroke of a comet, 68. Their densities
decrease in proportion to their distance from the sun, and why, ib. Platyceros,
iv. 113. Polatouche, v. 307. n. Polecat described, iv. 248. Might be usefully
employed in diminishing the number of rabbits, 249. Is confined to the
temperate climates, 250. Pongo, See Orang-outang. Porc-epic, vii. 69.
Porcellus, vii. 178. n. Porcupine described, vii. 69. Cannot dart its quills to
a distance, 71. Can exist and multiply in cold countries, 73. Brasilian
porcupine described, 76. Canada porcupine described, 83. Is a sleepy animal,
85. Porcus, iv. 304. viii. 240. Pouc described, viii. 233. Preacher monkey
described, viii. 176. n. Prosimia, vii. 233. n. Pteropus, v. 283. Puberty;
dissertation on it, ii. 400. Marriage the natural state of the human species
after puberty, 422. Putorius, iv. 248. n.
Q
Quato, viii. 184. Quojas-marrou, viii. 77. n.
R
Rabbit described, iv. 155. Their surprising fecundity, 157. Have a great
respect for their fathers, 161. Are fond of heat, 162. Racoon described, v. 46.
Dilutes in water every thing he intends to eat, 48. Account of a tame one, 49.
Rains occasion great changes on the surface of the earth, i. 51. Dissertation
upon their effects, 473. Rain-deer described, vi. 315. Is mentioned by Julius
Caesar, 320. 322. Was confounded with the elk by Pliny, 323. Is found in more
northerly regions than the elk, 324. -- 326. Great advantages derived by the
Laplanders from these creatures, 330. -- 333. Cannot bear the warmth of a
southern climate, ib. The rain-deer for drawing sledges, produced by a mixture
of the wild and domestic kinds, ib. Manner of traveling in the sledges, 334.
Similarity between them and the stags, ib. The rain-deer defends himself
against the wolf, 339. But is killed by the glutton, 340. Methods used by the
Laplanders of hunting the wild rain-deer, 343. Rangier, vi. 317. n. Rat
described, iv. 275. Several small animals confounded under this name, 277. The
whole species are natives of temperate climates, 279. Have never multiplied
farther north than Sweden, 280. Brown rat described, 336. Approaches to the
nature of the water-rat, 337. Madagascar rat described, viii. 284. Water-rat
described, iv. 290. White water-rat described, viii. 239. Rat de bois, v. 406.
n. Rat savage, ib. Reproduction of animals; dissertation on it, ii. 16. Rhenos,
vi. 317. n. Rhinoceros described, vi. 92. Was unknown to the ancient Greeks,
ib. n. Account of one brought to London from Bengal, 99. The horn of the
rhinoceros esteemed by the Indians, on account of its imaginary medical
virtues, 105. The rhinoceros is an exceedingly brutal and untractable animal,
subject to paroxysins of rage, which nothing can appease, 106. Does great
damage to the cultivated fields, 108. Excessive hardness of his skin, 111. Has
the senses of hearing and smelling very acute, but bad eyes, 113. Account of
one brought to France, 114. Is capable of being tamed, 115. River-horse, vi.
278. n. River-pard, vi. 278. n. River-hog, vii. 64. n. Rivers generally run
perpendicular to the seacoasts where they empty themselves; i. 10. Follow the
direction of the mountains from whence they derive their origin, 11. Some bury
themselves under ground, ib, Sometimes block up seas, and form new lands; 36.
Produce great changes on the surface of the earth, 51. Have angles
corresponding to each other on their opposite banks, ib. Dissertation upon
them, 251. Rock cavy described, viii. 274. Partakes of the nature of the rabbit
and rat, ib. Roe-deer described, iv. 120. His method of escaping from hounds,
121. Their horns, while soft, are extremely sensible, 127. M. de la Borde's
account of the American rocdeer, 135. Rosmarus, vii. 355. n. Rosomaka, vii.
274. n. Rougette, v. 282. n. Rupicapra, v. 206. 363.
S
Sable described, vii. 309. Mr Gmelin, the first who gave a figure of the
animal, ib. Manner of hunting them, 313. -- 315. This animal is probably the
same with the Satherius of Aristotle, 313. Sable mice; vii. 316. n.
Saccawinkee, viii. 201. n. Sagouy, viii. 205. n. Sai, or weeper described,
viii. 196. Called also musk monkeys, ib. Are mild, docile, and very timid
animals, 197. Saimiri, or orange monkey, described, viii. 199. Is a very
beautiful animal; but very delicate, ib. Sajou, or capuchin monkey, described,
viii. 193. Their constitution well adapted to temperate climates, 194. Saki, or
fox-tailed monkey, described, viii. 201. Sapajous and Sagoins, described, viii.
172. Five different species of sapajous, 173. Six species of sagoins, 174.
Saricovienne, vii. 32. n. Sarigoy, v. 405. n. Satyri sylvestres, viii. 77. n.
Satyrus Indicus, ib. Sayga, or Scythian Antilope, described, vi. 393. Schismus,
iv. 239. n. Schwein, iii. 500. n. Sciurus, iv. 268. n. 325. n. v. 307. n. 312
n. 321. 328. n. Sea communicates with certain lakes, i. 11. Gains on some
places of the earth, and loses on others, 31. Its bottom perpetually filling
up, 33. Dissertation upon seas, 290. Upon the inequalities in the bottom of the
sea, 351. Sea-ox, vi. 278. n. Sea-lion. See Seal. Seals described, vii. 330. Is
the model from whence the poets formed the Tritons, Sirens, etc. 331. Color of
the seal's hair becomes white with age, 338. n. Account of a very big one shown
at London, 341. n. Three distinct species of this animal, 342. The seal seems
to be entertained with thunder and lightening, and is fond of receiving rain,
345. Is very tenacious of life, ib. The sea-lion perhaps a species of seal,
347. That animal described, 348. Seeing; dissertation on that sense, iii. 1.
Senses in general; dissertation upon them, 40. Serval, or mountain cat,
described, vii. 240. Is an exceedingly ferocious animal, 241. Seruoi, v. 405.
n. Sheep described. iii. 462. The species could not have subsisted without the
assistance of man, 463. Is the most stupid of all quadrupeds, 465. These two
positions controverted, 463. -- 465. n. Some other assertions controverted,
468. n. Worms frequently found in their livers, 478. Account of the sheep of
different countries, 482 -- 485. Shrew-mouse described, iv. 305. Seems to fill
the interval between the rat and the mole, ib. A disease of horses falsely
attributed to the bite of this animal, 306. Brasisian shrew described, viii.
273. Siegen-boek, iii. 469. n. Simi-vulpa, v. 406. n. Simia, vii. 223. 231. n.
viii. 77. n. 106. n. 117. n. 121. n. 129. n. 137. n. 140. n. 154. n. 160. n.
163. n. 176. n. 184. n. 194. n. 198. n. 201. n. 203. n. 205. n. 209. n. 211. n.
Singe, viii. 106. n. Siyah-gush, v. 221. n. Skunk, vii. 297. n. Sloths
described, vii. 151. Constitute the last term of existence in the order of
animals endowed with flesh and blood, 155. Their miserable situation, 156. Are
very tenacious of life, 158. Are peculiar to South America, 160. Account of a
tame one, 161. M. de la Borde's account of the sloths in Cayenne, 163. Sorax,
iv. 305. n. Souslik, or Casan marmot described, viii. 234. Is extremely fond of
salt, 236. Spider monkey, viii. 184. Squashe, vii. 296. n. Squirrel described,
iv. 268. Approaches to the nature of birds, 269. Sails over rivers on a piece
of the bark of a tree, ib. Few varieties of the species, 271. Squirrels are
natives of cold rather than warm climates, 272. Fat squirrel described, 325.
Sleeps during the winter, 327. The fat squirrels do not inhabit very cold
countries, 331. Garden squirrel described, 332. Flying squirrel, described, v.
307. Manner of its flying described, 309. Resembles the bat, 311. Sailing, or
great flying squirrel, described, 312. Account of a tame one, 316. Gray
squirrel, 321. Palm-squirrel, Barbary squirrel, and ground squirrel, 328.
Coquallin, or varied squirrel, vii. 176. Stag, or red deer, described, iv. 74.
Of the knowledge necessary for a huntsman, 77. Stein boek, vi. 363. n. Strata
of the earth; why always in a horizontal position, i. 15. 18. 28. Those of
stones in quarries almost all horizontal, or regularly inclined 25. Preserve
the same thickness throughout their whole extent, 26. Beds of sand and gravel
are an exception to the general rule concerning the formation of strata, 26.
Those formed by rivers, how distinguished from the original strata of the
earth, 27. No river-shells found in the original strata, 28. Dissertation on
the formation of strata, 157. Strepsiceros, vii. 8. n. Surikate, or four toed
weasel, described, vii. 167. Cannot subsist long in a cold climate, 168.
Surmulot, iv. 336. n. Sus, iii. 500. n. v. 272. vii. 59. 64. viii. 240. 242.
T
Tajacu, v. 272. n. Tajovanicus, v. 355. Talapoin monkey, described, viii. 165.
Talpa, iv. 309. n. viii. 239. n. Tamandua, v. 333. n. Tamanoir, v. 333. n.
Tamarin, or great-eared monkey, described, viii. 203. Tanrec and tendrac, or
Asiatic hedgehog, described, vii. 86. Sleep in the winter, during which time
their hair falls off, 88. Tapeti, or Brasilian hare, described, viii. 276.
Tapir described, vi. 243. The largest animal of America, ib. Supposed by some
naturalists to belong to the hippopotamus, 247. Is a mild and timid animal,
248. Tarandus, vi. 317. n. Tardigradus, vii. 151. n. Tarsier, or woolly jerboa,
described, vii. 171. Is remarkable for the length of its hind legs, ib. Tatu,
v. 369. n. Tatus, v. 369. n. Taxus, iv. 226. n. v. 226. n. Tayra, Galera, or
Guinea weasel, described, viii. 265. Is a small species of martin, or polecat,
266. Tepe Maxtlaton, vii. 249. n. Tides; dissertation on their causes and
effects, i. 339. Tiger described, v 153. Holds the second rank among
carnivorous animals, ib. Is said to follow the rhinoceros for the sake of
eating his dung, 155. His prodigious strength, 156. His excessive serocity,
159. Account of a combat between a tiger and two elephants, 160. The species
more rare than the lions, 164. The skin much esteemed in China, 165. Tiger cat,
vii. 241. Tigers; dissertation on them, v. 87. Tigris, v. 153. 188. 197.
Tlacootzlotl, vii. 243. Tolai, or Baikal hare, vii. 228. Resembles the rabbit,
ib. Tragelaphus, v. 205. Tragulus, vii. 14. n. 22. n. 27. n. 33. n. 45. n.
Tragus, vi. 412. n. vii. 45. n. 110. n. Trichecus, vii. 355. n. 375. n. Tucan,
or Mexican shrew, described, viii. 271. The same with the red mole of Seba, ib.
Has not sagacity sufficient to discover its retreat, after having once left it,
272.
V
Vacca, viii. 225. n. Vache, vii. 2. n. Vampire, or spectre, described, v. 281.
Vansire described, vii. 221. Is not a ferret, as some have thought, ib. The
same with the Java weasel of Seba, ib. Resembles an animal called the nems,
223. Description of that animal, ib. Vari, vii. 223. n. Vespertilio, iv. 381.
n. v. 281. n. vii. 234. n. Vesuvius; account of its first eruption, i. 412.
Viper; has been said to suck cows, goats, and sheep, iii. 497. n. Virginity;
its signs equivocal, ii. 417. Vison described, vi. 307. Has a great resemblance
to the martin, 308. Viverra, iv. 252. n. v. 53. n. 240. n. 254. n. vii. 210. n.
Unau. Se Sloths. Volcanoes may be the cause of considerable earthquakes, i. 47.
Dissertation on them, 408. Ursus, iv. 226. n. 313. n. vi. 46. n. 53. n. Urus,
vi. 151. n. Is the same animal with the common bull in its wild state, 171.
Vulpes, iv. 214. n. v. 46. n. 53. n. 406. n. vii. 268. n.
W
Walrus described, vii. 354. Is seldom seem but in the northern seas, 357.
Formerly much more diffused than at present, 365. Can live for some time in a
temperate climate, 367. Indian Walrus or dugon described, 370. Water;
subterraneous collections of it exist, especially under large plains, i. 54.
Water elephant, vi. 278. Water-shrew, or blind mouse described, iv. 308. Water
spouts; account of them and their causes, i. 398. Weasel described, iv. 257.
Rarely found in the northern countries, ib. Cannot be tamed, 258. This
assertion contradicted, 260. Whirlwinds; account of them, i. 394. Produced by
(...) winds, 395. Whirlpools accounted for, i. 396. Whiston's theory of the
earth, i. 97. See Earth. Widdor Schaaf, iii. 462. n. Wieprz lesny, iii. 500. n.
Wild animals. See Animals. Wild boar. See Hog. Winds: Of regular ones, i. 367.
Of irregular ones, 386. Wolf described, iv. 196. Has a very strong carnivorous
appetite, ib Frequently dies of hunger, ib. Has a great resemblance to the dog,
197. May be tamed whilst young, 198. Is a solitary animal, 199. Differences
between the wolf and dog, 201. Great strength of the wolf, 204 Method of
hunting this animal, 205. Ferocity of the wolf comes on about the age of
eighteen months, 208. Mistake of the author concerning the existence of wolves
in Scotland, 210. n. Black wolf described, 212. Mexican wolf described, viii.
258. Woodward's theory of the earth, i. 113.
X
Xoloizcuintli, viii. 258. n.
Y
Ysquipatl, vii. 296. n. Ysard, vi. 364. n. Ysarus, vi. 364. n. Ytzcuinte
porzotli, viii. 262. n.
Z
Zebra described, vi. 264. Is perhaps the most elegant of all quadrupeds, ib.
Is neither a horse nor an ass, 265. Is not the Onager of the ancients, 266.
Approaches to the nature of the ass and the horse, 272. 273. Of the same
species with the fertile mule of Tartary called Czigithai, 274. Zebu, or dwarf
ox described, vi. 150. 240. Zibet. See Civet. Zemni, or Podolian marmot
described, viii. 232. Zisel, or earless marmot described, viii. 229. Is very
different from the hamster, 231. Zits jan, viii. 232. n. Zobel, vii. 309. n.
Zobela, vii. 309. n.
FINIS

