THE LIFE OF John Buncle, Esquire CONTAINING Various OBSERVATIONS and REFLECTIONS,
Made in several Parts of the WORLD, AND Many Extraordinary RELATIONS.

(...). -- (...). etc.

Arr. Epict. L. III. C. 22. Enchirid. C. 23. VOL. II.

LONDON: Printed for J. JOHNSON and B. DAVENPORT, at the Globe in Paternoster
Row. MDCCLXVI.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IN a book published in the year 1756, I related the principal transactions of
my life, from my entrance into the university to the day of my marriage, in the
year 1725; and endeavored, by the way, to entertain my Readers with a variety
of notions and remarks.

I now proceed to tell the remainder of my story, and to lay before the Public
some more of my observations and hints: This second volume is chiefly a further
vindication of myself; and the observations I add on subjects and matters of
various kinds, are such reflections as resulted from the reason and nature of
things, and were formed by a judgment free, and unbiassed by any authority. My
own apology is the principal thing, interspersed with real characters of
several sorts; and the additions to it, are as many solid, natural, and
delicate adventitious things as came in my way. This is my book. I write with
modesty, and I purpose to do good. I imagine then, that all Critics (except the
Critical Reviewers) will wink at the blemishes of a laudable writing. Scholars
and men of sense (who are above malevolence and the supercilious temper,) can
bear deformities in a long work, and justly lay them on the imperfection of
human nature. They know it is incapable of faultless productions.

FELICES.

CONTENTS.
N. B. What refers to the Notes is distinguished thus ().

1 THE author's apology for the married state -- Page 1 2 The history of
Orlando and Belinda, rectified from a mistake in the Tatler Page 2 3 The
author's apology for the married state continued -- Page 11 4 The author's
manner of living at Orton-lodge -- Page 14 5 Description of Glencrow
water-falls, and of the great age and size of carp and tench in a fenny water
near Orton-lodge Page 15 6 Farther account of uncommonly large carp and tench
-- Page 16 7 (1 Description of the black cock, the moor cock, and the cock of
the woods) Page 17 8 The author loses his wife Charlotte, his friend Tom
Flemming, and others Page 18 9 A reflection on death -- Page 19 10 The author
departs from Orton-lodge, to try his fortune once more -- Page 24 11 Finds a
delightful spot among the fells of Westmoreland -- Page 25 12 His description
of Basil groves, the seat of Charles Henley, Esquire and of the library and
skeleton there -- Page 25 13 His description of John Henley, Esquire Page 32 14 His
description of Miss Statia Henley, and his conversation with John Henley, Esquire
Page 33 15 The author's account of himself to John Henley, Esquire -- Page 35 16
Mr. Henley's reply to his story, and commendation of him for his sentiments in
religious matters. -- Page 37 17 The history of Charles Henley, Esquire and of his
beautiful daughter Statia Page 38 18 J. Henley, Esquire offers his granddaughter
(Miss Statia) in marriage to the author Page 40 19 The author's reply on that
occasion Page 41 20 His stay and manner of living at Basil-grove. -- The death
of Mr. Henley, and Miss Statia's behavior thereupon Page 42 21 Conversation
between him and Miss Henley on the subject of matrimony -- Page 44 22 (2. The
author's reflections on celibacy and marriage) -- Page 48 23 Miss Henley's
answer to the author's remarks in favor of marriage -- Page 49 24 The author
marries Miss Statia Henley Page 51 25 They repair to Orton-lodge. -- Statia
dies there -- -- Page 52 26 The author leaves Orton-lodge, and sets out for
Harrogate spaw. -- Description of the romantic country over which he traveled
Page 53 27 Description of a society of protestant married friars in
Westmoreland, and of the regularity of their lives -- Page 54 28 Some thoughts
on the institution of married regulars, exploding the doctrine of celibacy --
Page 56 29 The author's farther account of the married regulars he met with
among the fells of Westmoreland, with their form of morning prayer -- Page 60
30 Their prayer for night -- Page 65 31 The author's observation on the prayers
of those recluses, and their account of their belief, which is unitarian --
Page 67 32 A reflection on true and false religion Page 71 33 Thoughts
exploding the invocation of saints Page 79 34 (3. A short account of the
councils, and of the several editors and editions of them) Page 79 35 Some
further remarks on the doctrine of the invocation of saints, showing the
absurdity of papists therein -- Page 91 36 The author leaves the religious in
Westmoreland, and proceeds on his journey to Harrogate. -- Misses his way Page
98 37 Description of a little country seat in the northern extremity of
Stanmore, and of a sleeping parlour in a grove -- Page 101 38 Where the author
passes the night Page 102 39 Receives the next day some account of Miss Antonia
Cranmer, a beautiful young lady of great fortune, mistress of that house Page
103 40 The author resolves, if possible, to get her. -- His manner of living
for several days in the cottage of a poor fisherman, in expectation of the
return of the beautiful Antonia from Cumberland -- Page 104 41 Description of a
charming little country seat, where a solitary gentleman lived Page 105 42 Some
account of this gentleman, Doric Watson, who had been bred a catholic in
France, and became a protestant hermit in England, with the motives for his
conversion -- Page 106 43 The hermit's observations on Cardinal Bellarmine's
notes of the church, showing them not to be at all applicable to the church of
Rome -- Page 107 44 (7. An abstract of Dr. Chandler's observations on
Bellarmine's sixth note of the church -- Page 109 45 Remarks on the Abbe Le
Blanc, and on his letters on the English nation, with some strictures on
Voltaire, and a defense of the English reformation -- Page 115 46 (9. Some
account of the character and writings of Mons. Bouhier, president of the French
academy) -- Page 118 47 The marriage of priests defended, and shown to have
been the primitive doctrine of the church -- Page 126 48 The beginning of the
author's acquaintance with Miss Antonia Cranmer, and how it ended in a marriage
-- Page 134 49 (10. Some remarks on the absurdity of transubstantiation) --
Page 134 50 The author buries his wife Antonia, and hastens to Harrogate to
dissipate his grief. -- His reason for not mentioning his children by his many
wives Page 137 51 Description of Harrogate; of it is wells, and of the company
there, with their manner of living; the nature and quality of these waters, for
what disorders fittest, and the same of several other mineral waters -- -- Page
139 52 The author meets at Harrogate six gentlemen of his acquaintance from
Dublin Page 146 53 Their characters -- Page 147 54 The history of the
unfortunate Miss Hunt Page 156 55 The picture of Miss Hunt, and her unhappy end
-- Page 157 56 The author falls in love with Miss Spence Page 162 57 An apology
for the author's marrying so often Page 163 58 Miss Spence's reply to his
addresses Page 167 59 The author removes to Oldfield spaw, on account of an
indisposition occasioned by a night's hard drinking, and his reflections on
hard drinking -- Page 171 60 Description of Oldfield spaw, with an account of
it is water -- Page 173 61 An observation on our people of fortune going to
other countries to drink mineral waters -- Page 174 62 An account of Moffat
wells, and of the virtues of these waters -- Page 174 63 The author sets out
from Oldfield spaw for Knaresborough, but arrives at another place. -- A
morning thought on the rising sun -- Page 178 64 Description of a beautiful
spot and charming country seat, in the west riding of Yorkshire -- Page 180 65
An account of two wonderful figures which played on the German flute -- Page
181 66 The history of Miss Wolf, who had known the author in Ireland, and
recollects him Page 182 67 An account of Oliver Wincup, Esquire with whom the
author accidentally becomes acquainted -- Page 184 68 And goes with him to his
seat, called Woodcester-house -- Page 185 69 The manner of living at Woodcester
Page 186 70 An account of a company of strolling players at Woodcester -- Page
187 71 The author leaves Woodcester, and rides to a lone silent place, called
Lasco Page 189 72 The history of two rich beauties, immured in a lone-house, in
a wood near Lasco Page 190 73 Character of their guardian, Jeremiah Cock, an
old lawyer -- Page 191 74 The author gets acquainted with him, and dines at his
house -- Page 194 75 Description of old Cock the lawyer Page 196 76 The author
finds means to propose to the ladies to carry them off -- Page 198 77 They
agree to it, and he carries them off Page 199 78 Is puzzled how to dispose of
them Page 202 79 Carries them to Orton-lodge -- Page 205 80 The author's
departure from Orton-lodge, where he leaves his two young heiresses: misses his
way a second time; description of the country -- Page 210 81 Description of
Mrs. Thurloe's seat in Westmoreland -- Page 213 82 An account of the two Miss
Thurloes Page 214 83 Account of a Carthusian monastery in Richmondshire -- Page
216 84 Reasons for reading the works of the Rabbis, fictitious and extravagant
as they are -- Page 217 85 (11. An account of the Talmuds -- Page 225 86 An
account of Knaresborough and it is waters. -- The fall and death of Gaveston
Page 225 87 Description of the dropping well near Knaresborough -- Page 227 88
Observations on petrifying waters -- Page 228 89 (12. Etymology of the word
Postilla) Page 231 90 An account of Wardrew sulphur-water, and a description of
Wardrew in Northumberland -- Page 232 91 The history of Claudius Hobart, a
recluse Page 233 92 Who gives the author a manuscript, entitled, The Rule of
Reason, with a few thoughts on religion -- Page 236 93 Specimens of this tract,
viz. Discourse on the rule of reason -- Page 237 94 Account of revelation --
Page 240 95 Of the mysteries, Trinity, and sacrifice of the cross -- Page 243
96 Defense of the Socinians -- Page 246 97 An account of Socinus -- Page 255 98
The author returns to Harrogate, and from thence goes to Cleator in
Westmoreland, to wait upon Miss Spence -- Page 259 99 (13. An excellent morning
and evening prayer, with observations thereon) Page 260 100 The author's
reception by Miss Spence Page 261 101 Manner in which he passed the evening at
Cleator the first night he was there Page 264 102 Conversation between the
author and Miss Spence's uncle, a clergyman, relating to the revolution, and
exclusion of James II. Page 270 103 A description of Cleator -- Page 277 104
Character of Miss Maria Spence Page 278 105 A reflection on the education of
women Page 281 106 The author's departure from Cleator to London, in company
with Miss Spence Page 282 107 A discourse on fluxions, between Miss Spence and
the author -- Page 284 108 An account of Martin Murdoch, Miss Maria Spence's
preceptor in the mathematics, and his method of instructing her Page 290 The
author's marriage with Miss Spence Page 300 109 Her death, and the author's
behavior thereupon -- Page 301 110 (14. Some account of the philosopher
Cleanthes) -- Page 301 111 The case of a lady (the author's wife) in a fever,
and an account of four physicians who attended her -- Page 303 112 Moral
thoughts; written by Miss Spence, viz. Of Morality -- Page 311 Of Religion --
Page 316 Of Reason and Truth -- Page 318 Of Integrity -- Page 319 Of
Priestcraft in the transmission of movables, from the dead to the living Page
321 Of the Athanasian creed -- Page 324 Of Faith -- Page 326 Avoidings. -- The
offices of a christian Page 330 The meaning of John, chap. vi. v. 44. Of
Baptisms in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit -- Page 332 Of
Christian idolatry. -- Churchisms and creeds -- Page 333
113 An account of Richmond the beau, and old Ribble the chemist -- Page 334
114 The picture of beau Richmond -- Page 337 115 The picture of a temperate man
born with a consumption -- Page 338 116 A history of metals. -- What phlogiston
is, Page 340 What semi-metals are. -- The nature and composition of antimony;
what butter of antimony is -- Page 341 Liver of antimony. -- How antimony
separates gold from other metals -- Page 342 The excellence of antimonial wine
Page 343 The nature of bismuth -- Page 344 An extraordinary sympathetic ink
Page 345 Of zinc. -- Of the nature of regulus of arsenic -- Page 347 The
characters of gold -- Page 348 The wonderful ductility of gold -- Page 353
117 Mr. Ribble's conclusion, containing his thoughts and advice concerning
riches Page 358 118 A charming vale and country house in Nottinghamshire, the
seat of Mr. Monckton Page 362 119 Character of Mr. Monckton -- Page 363 120 The
author baits at a lone inn, where arrives the beautiful Miss Turner of
Skalsmore vale -- Page 368 121 The picture of Miss Turner -- Page 369 122 The
author's address to Miss Turner Page 370 123 Miss Turner's answer to the
author, and their marriage -- Page 371 124 The unfortunate death of Miss
Turner, the author's fifth wife -- Page 375 125 (15. Some account of the temple
of Jupiter Ammon) -- ibid 126 (16. The story of Homonaea and Atimetus; and the
epitaph of Homonaea at large) Page 377 127 The picture and character of Curl
the bookseller -- Page 382 128 The picture of Carola Bennet -- Page 384 129
History of Miss Bennet -- Page 386 130 A description of a London convent, and
an adventure there -- Page 387 131 The history of Miss Bennet continued Page
390 132 A reflection on hypocrites -- Page 392 133 The Rev. Mr. Tench's
conversation with Miss Bennet, in relation to religion, and her conversion --
Page 395 134 A reflection on the conversion of Miss Bennet -- Page 400 135 Two
Irish gentlemen carry the author to a gaming-table, where he loses all his
fortune -- Page 402 136 Curl's scheme for the author to carry off an heiress,
which he does effectually, and by what means -- Page 404 137 The picture of
Miss Dunk -- Page 409 138 Supposed death of Miss Dunk, and her burial by the
author -- Page 412 139 A winter night-scene on the mountains of Westmoreland --
Page 413 140 The author arrives at Dr. Stainvil's house, and is introduced to
the doctor and company -- Page 414 141 Surprising story of Mrs. Stainvil, who
proves to be the lately buried Miss Dunk Page 415 142 A reflection on Miss
Dunk's marrying Dr. Stainvil -- Page 410 143 The author's departure from Dr.
Stainvirl's house -- Page 421 144 Some observations on Mrs. Stainvil's coming
to life again, after being taken out of the grave -- Page 422 145 The legend on
the monument of Homonaea translated into English -- Page 424 146 (17.
Strictures on the Rev. Mr. Collier's translation of the mythological picture of
Cebes, and another promised) -- Page 428 147 (18. Anecdote of the great Prince
of Conde) Page 429 148 The author puts up at an inn, where he is informed of an
old acquaintance of his, Dr. Fitzgibbons, who lived hard by Page 431 149 Is
most graciously received by the doctor, and why -- Page 432 150 The picture of
Miss Julia Fitzgibbons -- Page 437 151 The author marries Miss Fitzgibbons, his
seventh wife -- Page 439 152 And studies physic in a private manner, by which a
gentleman, with the purchase of a diploma, may turn out doctor, as well as if
he went to Padua, to hear Morganni. -- The method of study described, with some
account of the best writers, and best editions of their works -- Page 440 153
(20. Anecdote concerning the great anatomist Vesalius) -- Page 448 154 A
translation of the Table of Cebes, compared with the Rev. Mr. Collier's
translation of the same -- Page 453 155 (21. A remark on the Table of Cebes)
Page 476 156 The unfortunate death of the author's wife Julia -- Page 479 157
His reflection on that loss -- Page 482 158 His thoughts on wives and whores
Page 483 159 The author returns to Orton-lodge, in hopes of finding the two
heiresses he had left there -- Page 485 160 But finds only a letter of thanks
for his civilities, and no indication of the place they were gone to -- Page
486 161 The history of the beautiful and excellent Leonora, and of the
barbarous treatment she met with from an Irish villain whom she had married --
Page 488 162 A reflection on popery -- Page 492 163 (23. An address to the
protestant ladies of Great Britain, warning them against the dangers of popery,
and of popish husbands) -- Page 493 164 A remark on the unfortunate Leonora
Page 498 165 The tenth satire of Juvenal, translated into English verse -- Page
499 166 (24. Bishop Burnet's opinion of the excellence of this satire, and the
author's consequent reflections) -- Page 510 167 The author visits again Dr.
Stainvil and his lady -- Page 513 168 Discourse between Dr. Stainvil and the
author, concerning the manner in which the Spanish fly acts on the human body
when applied in blisters -- Page 514 169 Dr. Stainvil's sudden death by an
apoplexy; cause of apoplexies; and a reflection on death -- Page 516 170 Short
examination of the sentiments of Wollaston, Burnet, Caleb Fleming, Dr. Edmund
Law, and Bishop Sherlock, concerning the state of departed souls Page 518 171
The character of Dr. Stainvil -- Page 520 172 (25 and 26. Encomium of Dr. Law,
and character of Bishop Sherlock and Bishop Hoadley, with some account of their
writings) -- Page 520 173 The author's remarks on the sleeping and the
conscious schemes, concerning departed souls -- Page 522 174 Mrs. Stainvil's
behavior on the death of her husband. -- The author marries her, and they set
out for Ireland to pay a visit to his father -- Page 523 175 The author finds
his father become as strict an unitarian as himself -- Page 524 176 Death of
the author's father. -- The author returns to England with his wife Page 525
177 The author's wife dies, and he goes to sea as captain of a little ship of
his own; sails to the South-seas, China, and very many other places, returns to
Europe, after having spent nine years in traveling, and promises an account of
his observations in a future work -- Page 526 178 (27 and 28. Remarks on Dr.
Cheyne, and on Mr. William Law, the nonjuror, father of our methodists, and
disciple of the famous Jacob Behmen) -- Page 528 179 The author purchases a
little villa near London, and retires thither to indulge his contemplative
disposition -- Page 529 180 His praise of our king and present ministry Page
530
ERRATA.
PAGE 8. l. 29. read shared. I remember. p. 16. l. 16. after then add they. p.
46. l. 11. for bare read bear. p. 53. l. 17. of the marginal notes, for dedica
read dediee. p. 80. l. 23. for 1742 read 1472. p. 82. l. 9. for Regulieres read
Reguliers. p. 82. l. 23. dele the comma after John, and place it after first.
p. 83. l. 18. for Meux read Meaux. p. 85. l. 10. for Marcien read Marcian. p.
96. l. 20. for patrum read patrem. p. 102. l. 17. for lit read lits. p. 118. l.
26. after avoir add pour, and l. 29. for varron read Varron. p. 199. l. 6. for
it read them. p. 208. l. 7. for mere read perfect. p. 217. l. 7. for St. Benet
read St. Bruno. p. 220. l. 13. for keeping read keep. p. 238. l. 22. for
resentments read sensations. p. 265. l. 21. for 230 read 240. p. 343. l. 27.
for lasts read leasts. p. 344. l. 17. for purges read purge. p. 354. l. 29.
after cover add the. p. 355. l. 3. for is read are. p. 380. l. 5. for quit read
qui, and for men's read m'en. p. 386. l. 28. for mere read perfect. p. 517. l.
24. for teterrimi read teterrima. p. 527. l. 23. for was read were.

THE LIFE OF John Buncle, Esquire
PART II.
SECTION I.
Felices homines! quos stricto foedere jungit,
Et socios natura facit! sic cura levatur!
Sic augentur opes! sic mutua gaudia crescunt!
Thompson's Tuphlo-pero-gamia The author of Tuphlo-pero-gamia is the Rev. Mr.
William Thompson; a junior Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, when I was a
member of that university. He was a man of the finest parts and learning, and
was remarkable for a temper so vastly happy, that he was always called Benign
Billy. His Paraphrase on Job, in blank verse, is an admirable thing: It is, in
my opinion, far preferable to the ingenious Broome's paraphrase on this sacred
book.
. That is,

Go, happy pair! in strictest bonds allied!
Whom nature joins, and can, alone, divide:
It Is thus, their riches, and their joys increase,
Their cares grow lighter, and they smile in peace.

An apology for the married state.
. 1. WHEN I consider how happy I have been in the married state, and in a
succession of seven wives, never had one uneasy hour; that even a Paradise,
without an Eve, would have been a wilderness to me; that the woods, the groves,
the walks, the prospects, the flowers, the fruits, the day, the night, all
would have wanted a relish, without that dear, delightful companion, a wife; it
amazes me to hear many sensible people speak with abhorrence of matrimony, and
insist upon it, that wedlock produces so many troubles, even where the pair
have affection, and sorrows so very great, when they have no love for each
other, or begin to fail in the kind and obliging offices, that it is contrary
to reason to contract, if we have a just regard to peace and satisfaction of
mind, and would avoid, as much as possible, the woes and bewailings of this
turbid period. If you have acquired the divine habits, marriage may unhinge
them. It often forces even the pious into immoralities. True, unhappy are many
a wedded pair: years of calamity this engagement has produced to thousands of
mortals: it has made the most pious divines become very cruel, as I could
relate: it has caused the most generous, sensible men, to murder the women they
adored before they were their wives.

The History of Orlando and Bellinda.
. 2. This story has been told before by the Tatler, in his 172d paper; but as
he has related only by hear say, and was mistaken in several particulars, the
account I give of this extraordinary affair, may be grateful to the reader.

When I was a little boy in Dublin, between seven and eight, Mr. Eustace and
his Lady lived next door to my father, in Smithfield, and the two families were
intimate. Being a lively prating thing, Mrs. Eustace was fond of me, and by
tarts and fruit, encouraged me to run into her parlour as often as I could.
This made me well acquainted in the house; and, as I was a remarker so early in
my life, I had an opportunity of making the following observations.

Orlando Eustace was a tall, thin, strong man, well made, and a very genteel
person. His face was pale, and marked with the smallpox: his features were
good, and yet there was something fierce in his look, even when he was not
displeased. He had sense and learning, and, with a large fortune, was a
generous man; but passionate to an amazing degree, for his understanding; and a
trifle would throw him into a rage. He had been humoured in every thing from
his cradle, on account of his fine estate; from his infancy to his manhood, had
been continually flattered, and in every thing obeyed. This made him
opinionated and proud, obstinate, and incapable of bearing the least
contradiction.

Bellinda Coot, his Lady, with whom he had been passionately in love, was as
fine a figure as could be seen among the daughters of men. Her person was
charming; her face was beautiful, and had a sweetness in it that was pleasing
to look at. Her vivacity was great, and her understanding extraordinary; but
she had a satirical wit, and a vanity, which made her delight in showing the
weakness of other minds, and the clearness of her own conception. She was too
good, however, to have the least malice in such procedure. It was human
weakness, and a desire to make her neighbors wiser. Unfortunately for her, she
was married to a man, who, of all men in the world, was the unfittest subject
for her quick fancy to act on.

But, notwithstanding this, Eustace and Bellinda were, for the most of their
time, very fond. As she was formed in a prodigality of nature, to show mankind
a finished composition, and had wit and charms enough to fire the dullest and
most insensible heart; a man of Orlando's taste for the sex, could not be
without an inflamed heart, when so near the transporting object of desire. She
was his delight for almost a year, the dear support of his life. He seemed to
value her esteem, her respect, her love; and endeavored to merit them by the
virtues which fortify love: and therefore, when by his being short, positive,
and unreasonable in his dictates, as was too often his wont; and on her being
intemperate in the strong sentiments her imagination produced upon the
occasion, which was too frequently the case; when they seemed to forget the
Apostle's advice for a while, that ye love one another with a pure heart,
fervently; 1 Pet. i. 22. and had strifes and debates, which showed, for the
time they lasted, that they were far from being perfect and entire, wanting
nothing; then would her throwing her face into smiles, with some tender
expression, prove a reconciling method at once. Till the fatal night, this
always had a power to soften pain, to ease and calm the raging man.

But poor at best is the condition of human life here below; and, when to weak
and imperfect faculties, we add inconsistencies, and do not act up to the
eternal law of reason, and of God; when love of fame, curiosity, resentment, or
any of our particular propensities; when humor, vanity, or any of our inferior
powers, are permitted to act against justice and veracity, and instead of
reflecting on the reason of the thing, or the right of the case, that by the
influence this has on the mind, we may be constituted virtuous, and attached to
truth; we go down with the current of the passions, and let bent and humor
determine us, in opposition to what is decent and fit: if in a state so
unfriendly as this is, to the heavenly and divine life, where folly and vice
are for ever striving to introduce disorder into our frame, and it is difficult
indeed, to preserve, in any degree, an integrity of character, and peace
within: -- if, in such a situation, instead of laboring to destroy all the
seeds of envy, pride, ill will, and impatience, and endeavoring to establish
and maintain a due inward economy and harmony, by paying a perpetual regard to
truth, that is, to the real circumstances and relation of things in which we
stand, -- to the practice of reason in its just extent, according to the
capacities and natures of every being; we do, on the contrary, disregard the
moral faculty, and become a mere system of passions and affections, without any
thing at the head of them to govern them; -- what then can be expected, but
deficiency and deformity, degeneracy and guilty practice? This was the case of
Eustace and Bellinda. Passion and own-will were so near and intimate to him,
that he seemed to live under a deliberate resolution not to be governed by
reason. He would wink at the light he had, struggle to evade conviction, and
make his mind a chaos and a hell. Bellinda, at the same time, was too quick,
too vain, and too often forgot to take into her idea of a good character, a
continual subordination of the lower powers of our nature to the faculty of
reason. This produced the following scene.

Maria (sister to Bellinda) returned one evening with a five-guinea fan she had
bought that afternoon, and was tedious in praising some Indian figures that
were painted in it. Mrs. Eustace, who had a taste for pictures, said, the
colors were fine, but the images ridiculous and despicable; and her sister
must certainly be a little Indian-mad, or her fondness for every thing from
that side of the globe could not be so excessive and extravagant as it always
appeared to be.

To this Maria replied with some heat, and Eustace very peremptorily insisted
upon it, that she was right. With positiveness and passion, he magnified the
beauties of the figures in the fan, and with violence reflected so severely on
the good judgment Bellinda, upon all occasions, pretended to, (as he expressed
it) that at last, her imagination was fired, and, with too much eagerness, she
not only ridiculed the opinion of her sister, in respect of such things, but
spoke with too much warmth against the despotic tempers of self-sufficient
husbands.

To reverence and obey (she said) was not required by any obligation, when men
were unreasonable, and paid no regard to a wife's domestic and personal
felicity; nor would she give up her understanding to his weak determination,
since custom cannot confer an authority which nature has denied: It cannot
license a husband to be unjust, nor give right to treat her as a slave. If this
was to be the case in matrimony, and women were to suffer under conjugal
vexations, as she did, by his senseless arguments every day, they had better
bear the reproach and solitude of antiquated virginity, and be treated as the
refuse of the world, in the character of old maids.

This too lively, though just speech, enraged Eustace to the last degree, and
from a fury, he sunk in a few minutes into a total sullen silence, and sat for
half an hour, while I stayed, cruelly determining, I suppose, her sad doom.
Bellinda soon saw she had gone too far, and did all that could be done to
recover him from the fit he was in. She smiled, cried, asked pardon; but 'twas
all in vain. Every charm had lost its power, and he seemed no longer man. When
this beauty stood weeping by his chair, and said, My love, forgive me, as it
was in rallery only I spoke, and let our pleasures and pains be hereafter
honestly shared; I remember the tears burst from my eyes, and in that condition
I went away. It was frightful to look at Eustace, as he shook, started, and
wildly stared; and the distress his Lady appeared in, was enough to make the
most stony heart bleed: it was a dismal scene.

This happened at nine at night, and at ten Orlando withdrew to bed, without
speaking one word, as I was informed. Soon after he lay down, he pretended to
be fast asleep, and his wife rejoicing to find him so, as she believed, in
hopes that nature's soft nurse would lull the active instruments of motion, and
calm the raging operations of his mind: she resigned herself to slumbers, and
thought to abolish for that night every disagreeable sensation of pain: but no
sooner did this furious man find that his charming wife was really asleep, than
he plunged a dagger into her breast. The monster repeated the strokes, while
she had life to speak to him, in the tenderest manner, and conjured him, in
regard to his own happiness, to let her live, and not sink himself into
perdition here and hereafter, by her death. In vain she prayed; he gave her a
thousand wounds, and I saw her the next morning a bloody, mangled corpse, in
the great house in Smithfield, which stood at a distance from the street, with
a wall before it, and an avenue of high trees up to the door; and not in the
country, as the Tatler says.

Eustace fled, when he thought she was expiring, (though she lived for an hour
after, to relate the case to her maid, who heard her groan, and came into her
room) and went from Dublin to a little lodge he had in the country, about
twenty miles from town. The magistrates, in a short time, had information where
he was; and one John Mansel, a constable, a bold and strong man, undertook, for
a reward, to apprehend him. To this purpose, he set out immediately, with a
case of pistols, and a hanger, and lurked several days and nights in the
fields, before he could find an opportunity of coming at him; for Eustace lived
by himself in the house, well secured by strong doors and bars, and only went
out now and then, to an alehouse, the master of which was his friend. Near it,
at last, about break of day, Mansel chanced to find him, and, upon his refusing
to be made a prisoner, and cocking a pistol to shoot the officer of justice,
both their pistols were discharged at once, and they both dropped down dead men.
Eustace was shot in the heart, and the constable in the brain. They were both
brought to Dublin on one of the little low-back'd cars there used; and I was
one of the boys that followed the car, from the beginning of James-street, the
outside of the city, all through the town. Eustace's head hung dangling near the
ground, with his face upwards, and his torn bloody breast bare; and of all the
faces of the dead I have seen, none ever looked like his. There was an anxiety,
a rage, a horror, and a despair to be seen in it, that no pencil could express.



The apology for the married state continued.
. 3. Thus fell Eustace in the 29th year of his age, and by his hand his
virtuous, beautiful, and ingenious wife: and what are we to learn from thence?
is it, that on such accounts, we ought to dread wedlock, and never be concerned
with a wife; No, surely; but to be from thence convinced, that it is necessary,
in order to a happy marriage, to bring the will to the obedience of reason, and
acquire an equanimity in the general tenor of life. Of all things in this
world, moral dominion, or the empire over ourselves, is not only the most
glorious, as reason is the superior nature of man, but the most valuable, in
respect of real human happiness. A conformity to reason, or good sense, and to
the inclination of our neighbors, with very little money, may produce great
and lasting felicity; but without this subservience to our own reason,
complaisance to company, and softness and benevolence to all around us, the
greatest misery does frequently sprout from the largest stock of fortunes.

It was by ungoverned passions, that Eustace murdered his wife and died
himself, the most miserable and wretched of all human beings. He might have
been the happiest of mortals, if he had conformed to the dictates of reason,
and softened his passions, as well for his own ease, as in compliance to a
creature formed with a mind of a quite different make from his own. There is a
sort of sex in souls; and, exclusive of that love and patience which our
religion requires, every couple should remember, that there are things which
grow out of their very natures, that are pardonable, when considered as such.
Let them not, therefore, be spying out faults, nor find a satisfaction in
reproaching; but let them examine to what consequences their ideas tend, and
resolve to cease from cherishing them, when they lead to contention and
mischief. Let them both endeavor to amend what is wrong in each other, and act
as becomes their character, in practicing the social duties of married persons,
which are so frequently and strongly inculcated by revelation and natural
reason; and then, instead of matrimony's being a burden, and hanging a weight
upon our very beings, there will be no appearance of evil in it, but harmony
and joy will shed unmixed felicities on them: they will live in no low degree
of beatitude in the suburbs of heaven.

This was my case: wedlock to me became the greatest blessing; a scene of the
most refined friendship, and a condition to which nothing can be added to
complete the sum of human felicity. So I found the holy and sublime relation,
and in the wilds of Westmoreland, enjoyed a happiness as great as human nature
is capable of, on this planet. Sensible to all the ties of social truth and
honor, my partner and I lived in perfect felicity, on the products of our
solitary farm. The amiable dispositions of her mind, cheerfulness, good nature,
discretion, and diligence, gave a perpetual dignity and luster to the grace and
loveliness of her person; and as I did all that love and fidelity could do, by
practicing every rule of caution, prudence, and justice, to prevent variance,
soften cares, and preserve affection undiminished, the harmony of our state was
unmixed and divine. Since the primitive institution of the relation, it never
existed in a more delightful manner. Devoted to each other's heart, we desired
no other happiness in this world, than to pass life away together in the
solitude we were in. We lived, hoped, and feared but for each other; and made
it our daily study to be what revealed religion prescribes, and the concurrent
voice of nature requires, in the sacred tie. Do so likewise, ye mortals, who
intend to marry, and ye may, like us, be happy. As the instincts and passions
were wisely and kindly given us, to subserve many purposes of our present
state, let them have their proper, subaltern share of action; but let reason
ever have the sovereignty, (the divine law of reason and truth) and be, as it
were, sail and wind to the vessel of life.

Our manner of living at Orion-Lodge.
. 4. Two years, almost, this fine scene lasted, and during that period, the
business and diversions of our lone retreat appeared so various and pleasing,
that it was not possible to think a hundred years so spent, in the least degree
dull and tedious. Exclusive of books and gardening, and the improvement of the
farm, we had, during the sine season, a thousand charming amusements on the
mountains, and in the glens and valleys of that sweet silent place. Whole days
we would spend in fishing, and dine in some cool grot by the waterside, or
under an aged tree, on the margin of some beautiful stream. We generally used
the fly and rod; but, if in haste, had recourse to one of the little
water-falls, and, by fixing a net under one of them, would take a dozen or two
of very large trouts, in a few minutes time.

By a little water-fall, I mean one of those that are formed by some small
river, which tumbles there in various places, from rock to rock, about four
feet each fall, and makes a most beautiful view from top to bottom of a fall.
There are many of these falling waters among the vast mountains of
Westmoreland. I have seen them likewise in the Highlands of Scotland.

Glencrow water-falls.
At Glencrow, half way between Dumbarton and Inverary, there are some very fine
ones, and just by them one Campbell keeps a poor inn. There we were entertained
with water and whisky, oat-cakes, milk, butter, and trouts he took by the net,
at one of the little falls of a river that descends a prodigious mountain near
his lone house, and forms, like what we have at Orton-Lodge, a most beautiful
scene. Several happy days I passed at this place, with a dear creature, who is
now a saint in heaven.

The great age and size of carp and tench, in a fenny water near Orton-Lodge.
At other times we had the diversion of taking as much carp and tench as we
pleased, in a large, standing, fenny water, that lies about two miles from the
lodge, in a glen, and always found the fish of this water of an enormous size,
three feet long, though the general length of fish of this species is eleven
inches in our ponds: this vast bigness must be owing to the great age of these
fish; I may suppose, at least, an hundred years; for it is certain, that in
garden-ponds, which have, for experiment's sake, been left undisturbed for many
years, the carp and tench have been found alive, and grown to a surprising
bigness.

The state of carp and tench put into a pond by a gentleman of my acquaintance.
A gentleman, my near relation, who lived to a very long age, put some fish of
these species into a pond, the day that Colonel Ewer, at the head of seven
other officers, presented to the Commons that fatal remonstrance, which in fact
took off the head of Charles, that is, November 20, 1648; and in the year 1727,
seventy-nine years after, on his return to that seat, he found them all alive,
and near two feet and a half in length. This demonstrates that fish may live to
a very great age. It likewise proves that they continue to grow till they are
an hundred years old, and then are the finest eating.

Another of our amusements, during the summer's bright day, was the pointer and
gun, for the black cock, the moor cock, and the cock of the wood, which are in
great plenty on those vast hills. Charlotte was fond of this sport, and would
walk with me for hours, to see me knock down the game; till, late in the
evening, we would wander over the fells, and then return to our clean,
peaceful, little house, to sup as elegantly on our birds The black cock is as
large as our game cocks, Description of the black cock.
and flies very swift and strong. The head and eyes are large, and round the
eyes is a beautiful circle of red. The beak is strong, and black as the body;
the legs robust and red. It is very high eating; more so than any native in
England except the fen-ortolan; but in one particular it exceeds the fen birds,
for it has two tastes; it being brown and white meat: under a lay of brown is a
lay of white meat; both delicious: the brown is higher than the black moor
cock, and the white much richer than the pheasant.

The moor-cock.
The moor cock is likewise very rare, but is to be had sometimes in London, as
the sportsmen meet with it now and then on the hilly-heaths, not very far from
town; particularly on Hindhead-heath, in the way to Portsmouth. It is as large
as a good Darking fowl, and the color is a deep iron-grey. Its eyes are large
and fine as the black cock's; but, instead of the red circle round them, it has
bright and beautiful scarlet eyebrows.

The cock of the wood.
The cock of the wood, (as unknown in London as the black cock) is almost as
large as a turkey, but flies well. The back is a mixture of black, gray, and a
reddish brown; the belly gray, and the breast a pale brown, with transverse
lines of black, and a little white at the tips of the feathers. It has a large
round head, of the purest black, and over its fine hazle eyes, there is a naked
space, that looks like an eye-brow of bright scarlet. It is delicious eating,
but far inferior to the black cock.


, as the great could do, and with a harmony and unmixed joy they are for ever
strangers to. After supper, over some little nectared-bowl, we sweetly chatted,
till it was bedtime; or I played on my flute, and Charlotte divinely sung. It
was a happy life; all the riches and honors of the world cannot produce such
scenes of bliss as we experienced in a cottage, in the Wilds of Westmoreland.
Even the winter, which is ever boisterous and extreme cold in that part of the
world, was no severity to us. As we had most excellent provisions of every kind
in abundance, and plenty of firing from the ancient woods, which cover many of
those high hills; and two men servants, and two maids, to do whatever tended to
being and to well-being, to supply our wants, and to complete our happiness. --
This softened the hard rough scene, and the roaring waters, and the howling
winds, appeared pleasing sounds. In short, every season, and all our hours,
were quite charming, and full of delight. Good Tom Fleming, our friend, did
likewise enhance our felicity, by coming once or twice a week to see us, and
staying sometimes two or three days. In the summer time, we also went now and
then to visit him; and, if one was inclined to melancholy, yet it was
impossible to be dull while he was by. His humor, and his songs, over a bowl
of punch, were enough to charm the most splenetic, and make even rancour throw
its face into smiles.

The death of Charlotte, my friend Tom Fleming, and others. 1727. aetat, 24.
. 5. Two years, as I have said, this fine scene lasted; and during that soft,
transporting period, I was the happiest man on earth. But in came Death, when
we least expected him, snatched my charming partner from me, and melted all my
happiness into air, into thin air. A fever, in a few days, snapt off the thread
of her life, and made me the child of affliction, when I had not a thought of
the mourner. Language cannot paint the distress this calamity reduced me to;
nor give an idea of what I suffered, when I saw her eyes swimming in death, and
the throws of her departing spirit. Blessed as she was, in the exercise of every
virtue that adorns a woman, how inconsolable must her husband be! and, to add
to my distress, by the same fever fell my friend Tom Fleming, who came the day
before my wife sickened to see us. One of my lads likewise died, and the two
servant maids. They all lay dead around me, and I sat like one inanimate by the
corpse of Charlotte, till Friar Fleming, (the brother of Tom,) brought coffins
and buried them all. Thus did felicity vanish from my sight, and I remained
like a traveller in Greenland, who had lost the sun.

A reflection on death.
. 6. O eloquent, just, and mighty death! (says Raleigh) It is thou alone puts
wisdom into the human heart, and suddenly makes man to know himself. It is
death that makes the conquenor ashamed of his fame, and wish he had rather
stolen out of the world, than purchased the report of his actions, by rapine,
oppression, and cruelty; by giving in spoil the innocent and laboring soul to
the idle and insolent; by emptying the cities of the world of their ancient
inhabitants, and filling them again with so many; and so variable sorts of
sorrows. It is death tells the proud and insolent, that they are but objects,
and humbles them at the instant; makes them cry, complain, and repent; yea,
even to hate their former happiness. It is death takes the account of the rich,
and proves him a beggar, a naked beggar, which has interest in nothing but the
gravel which fills his mouth. It is death holds a glass before the eyes of the
most beautiful, and makes them see therein their deformity and rottenness; and
they acknowledge it.

Whom none could advise, thou have persuaded: what none have dared, thou have
done: and whom all the world has flattered, thou only have cast out of the
world, and despised. Thou have drawn together all the far-stretched greatness,
all the pride, cruelty, and ambition, of man; all the powerful charms of
beauty; and covered it all over with these two narrow words, Hic jacet.

Nor is this all, mighty death! It is thou that leadest to the resurrection of
the dead; the dissolution of the world; the judgment day; and the eternal state
of men. It is thou that finishes the trial of men, and seals their characters,
for happiness or misery for ever.

Be thou then, death, our morning and evening meditation: let us learn from
thee the vanity of all human things; and that it is the most amazing folly, to
melt away time, and mis-apply talents, as the generality of reasonable beings
do: that we were not made men, thinking, rational beings, capable of the
noblest contemplations, to spend all our thoughts and time in sense and
pleasure, in dressing, feeding, and sporting; or, in purchases, building and
planting; but to prepare for a dying hour; that, when at the call of God, we go
out of the body, not knowing whither we go, we may, like Abraham, travel by
faith, and trust to the conduct of the Lord of all countries. Since we must
die, and thy power, O death, we see, is uncontrolable: since to the dust we
must return, and take our trial at the bar of Almighty God, as intelligent and
free agents; (for under moral government, and God is a perfectly wise and
righteous governor, the wickedness of the wicked will be upon him, and the
righteousness of the righteous will be upon him;) -- since we must be numbered
with the dead, and our circumstances and condition indicate a future judgment,
surely we ought to remove our chief concern from this world to the other, and
transfer our principal regard to the immortal spirit; that in the hour of
agony, a virtuous mind, purity of conscience, and good actions, may procure us
the favor of God, and the guidance of his good spirit to the mansions of the
blessed, where new pleasures are for ever springing up, and the happiness of
the heavenly inhabitants is perpetually increasing. This is the one thing
needful. Death demonstrates, that this world of darkness and error, changes and
chances, is not worth fixing our heart on. To secure our passage into the
regions of perfect and eternal day, should be the employment of immortal
mortals.

. 7. Thus did I reflect as I sat among the dead, with my eyes fastened on the
breathless corpse of Charlotte, and I wished, if it was possible, to have leave
to depart, and in the hospitable grave, lie down from toil and pain, to take my
last repose; for I knew not what to do, nor where to go. I was not qualified
for the world; nor had I a friend, or even an acquaintance in it, that I knew
where to find. But in vain I prayed; it was otherwise decreed: I must go on, or
continue a solitary in the wild I was in. The latter it was not possible for me
to do, in the state of mind I was in; overwhelmed with sorrow, and without a
companion of any kind; and therefore, I must of necessity go to some other
place. I sold all the living things I had to Friar Fleming, and locked up my
doors. My furniture, linen, clothes, books, liquors, and some salt provisions,
instruments of various kinds, and such like things, I left in their several
places. There was no one to take them, or probability that any one would come
there to disturb them; and perhaps, some time or other, the fates might bring
me back again to the lone place. Though it was then a desolate, silent
habitation, a striking memento of the vanity and precarious existence of all
human good things; yet it was possible, that hearty friendship, festivity, and
social life, might once more be seen there. The force and operation of
casualties did wonders every day, and time might give me even a relish for the
solitude in a few years more. Thus did I settle affairs in that remote place;
and, taking leave of my friend, the friar, with my lad O Finn, rode off.

SECTION II.
Collect thy powers divine, and then drive off
That evil thing called fear, that slavish fiend.
Let hope, let joy, thy bosom inmates be,
Through life still cherished, and in death held fast.
A gracious God, loud-speaking to thy heart,
Through all his works, this truth inculcates still,
Nature's thy nurse, and providence thy friend.
Integrity, with fearless heart, ride on:
Undaunted tread the various path through life.
Day Thoughts.
August 4. 1727. The author's departure from Orton-Lodge, to try his fortune
once more.
. 1. THE sun was rising, when we mounted our horses, and I again went out to
try my fortune in the world; not like the Chevalier of La Mancha, in hopes of
conquering a kingdom, or marrying some great Princess; but to see if I could
find another good country girl for a wife, and get a little more money; as they
were the only two things united, that could secure me from melancholy, and
confer real happiness. To this purpose, as the day was extremely fine, and Finn
had something cold, and a couple of bottles at the end of his valife, I gave my
horse the rein, and let him take what way his fancy chose. For some time, he
gently trotted the path he had often gone, and over many a mountain made his
road: but at last, he brought me to a place I was quite a stranger to, and made
a full stop at a deep and rapid water, which ran by the bottom of a very high
hill I had not been up before. Over this river I made him go, though it was far
from being safe, and in an hour's ride from that flood, came to a fine rural
scene.

A delightful spot of earth among the fells of Westmoreland.
. 2. It was pasture-ground, of a large extent, and in many places covered with
groves of trees, of various kinds; walnuts, chestnuts, and oaks; the poplar, the
planetree, the mulberry, and maple. There was likewise the Phoenician cedar,
the larix, the large-leafed laurel, and the cytissus of Virgil. In the middle
of this place were the ruins of an old seat, overrun with shrubby plants; the
Virginia creeper, the box-thorn, the jessamine, the honey-suckle, the
periwinkle, the birdweed, the ivy, and the climber; and near the door was a
flowing spring of water, which formed a beautiful stream, and babbled to the
river we came from. Charming scene! so silent, sweet, and pretty, that I was
highly pleased with the discovery.

A description of Basil Groves, the seat of Charles Henley, Esquire
. 3. On the margin of the brook, under a mulberry tree, I dined, on something
which Finn produced from his wallet, tongue and ham, and potted black cock; and
having drank a pint of cider, set out again, to try what land lay right
onwards. In an hour, we came to a large and dangerous watery moor, which we
crossed over with great difficulty, and then arrived at a range of mountains,
through which there was a narrow pass, wet and stony, a long and tedious ride,
which ended on the border of a fine country: at four in the afternoon, we
arrived on the confines of a plain, about a hundred acres, which was strewed
with various flowers of the earth's natural produce, that rendered the glebe
delightful to behold, and was surrounded with groves. The place had all the
charms that verdure, forest, and vale, can give a country. In the center of
this ground was a handsome square building, and behind it a large and beautiful
garden, which had a low, thick, holly-hedge, that encompassed it. As the door
of this house was not locked, but opened by a silver spring turner, I went in,
and found it was one fine spacious room, filled on every side with books, bound
in an extraordinary manner. Globes, telescopes, and other instruments of
various kinds, were placed on stands, and there were two fine writingtables,
one at each end of the library, which had paper, ink, and pens. In the middle
of the room there was a readingdesk, which had a short inscription, and on it
leaned the skeleton of a man. The legend said, -- This skeleton was once
Charles Henley, Esquire

Amazed I stood, looking on these things, and wondered much at the figure of
the bones, tacked together with wires; once, to be sure, the master of this
grand collection of books and manuscripts, and this fine room, so sweetly
situated in the center of distant groves: this skeleton had a striking effect
on my mind; and the more so, as it held a scroll of parchment, on which was
beautifully written in the court-hand, (to appear more remarkable, I suppose)
the following lines:

"Fellow-mortal, whoever thou art, whom the fates shall conduct into this
chamber, remember, that before many years are passed, thou must be laid in the
bed of corruption, in the dark caverns of death, among the lifeless dust, and
rotten bones of others, and from the grave proceed to the general resurrection
of all. To new life and vigor thou will most certainly be raised, to be
brought to a great account. Naked and defenseless thou must stand before the
awful tribunal of the great God, and from him receive a final sentence, which
shall determine and fix thee in an eternal state of happiness or misery.

What an alarm should this be! Ponder, my fellow-mortal; and remember, God now
commands men every where to repent, because he has appointed a day, in which
he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man, whom he has ordained;
whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from
the dead. -- Judge the world! -- judgment! -- the very found is solemn. Should
it not deaden some part, at least, of your concern for things temporal, and
quicken your care and industry for the future life; -- ought it not to make us
condemn, before the dying hour, our vanity, and devotedness to bodily things,
and make us employ the greatest part of our time in the acquisition of wisdom,
and an improvement in virtue, that when we appear at the sessions of
righteousness, a sacred knowledge, a heavenly piety, and an angelic goodness,
may secure us from eternal punishment, and entitle us to a glorious eternity?
Since a future judgment is most certainly the case, and the consequence eternal
damnation or salvation, how contemptible a thing is a long busy life, spent in
raking through the mire of trade and business, in pursuit of riches and a large
estate; or in sweating up the steep hill of ambition, after fame and ambition;
or in living and dressing as if we were all body, and sent into time for no
other purpose, than to adorn like idols, gratify like brutes, and waste life in
sensuality and vanity: -- how contemptible and unreasonable is this kind of
existence for beings, who were created to no other end, than to be partakers of
a divine life with God, and sing hallelujahs to all eternity; to separate the
creature from error, fiction, impurity, and corruption, and acquire that purity
and holiness, which alone can see God. Away then with a worldly heart: away
with all those follies, which engage us like fools and madmen; and let the
principal thing be, to follow the steps of our great master, by patience and
resignation, by a charity and contempt of the world; and by keeping a
conscience void of offense, amidst the changes and chances of this mortal life;
that at his second coming, to judge the world, we may be found acceptable in
his sight.

What a scene must this second coming be! I saw, (says an apostle) a great
white throne, and him that sat on it; from whose face the earth and the heavens
fled away, and there was no place found for them; and I saw the dead small and
great stand before God; and the books were opened, and the dead were judged out
of those things which were written in the books: and the sea gave up her dead,
and death and hell delivered up their dead which were in them, and they were
judged every man, according to their works. The secret wickedness of men will
be brought to light; and concealed piety and persecuted virtue be acknowledged
and honored. While innocence and piety are set at the right hand of the judge,
and the righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their father
for ever and ever, shame and confusion must sit upon the faces of the sinner
and the ungodly. Damnation will stand before the brethren in iniquity, and when
the intolerable sentence is executed, what inexpressible agonies will they fall
into? what amazement and excesses of horror must seize upon them?

Ponder then, in time, fellow-mortal, and choose to be good, rather than to be
great: prefer your baptismal vows to the pomps and vanities of this world; and
value the secret whispers of a good conscience more than the noise of popular
applause.

Since you must appear before the judgment seat of Christ; that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad, let it be your work from morning till night, to keep Jesus in
your hearts; and long for nothing, desire nothing, hope for nothing, but to
have all that is within you changed into the spirit and temper of the holy
Jesus. Wherever you go, whatever you do, do all in imitation of his temper and
inclination; and look upon all as nothing, but that which exercises and
increases the spirit and life of Christ in your souls. -- Let this be your
Christianity, your church, and your religion, and the judgment-day will be a
charming scene. If in this world, the will of the creature, as an offspring of
the divine will, wills and works with the will of God, and labors, without
ceasing, to come as near as mortals can, to the purity and perfection of the
divine nature; then will the day of the Lord be a day of great joy, and with
unutterable pleasure, you shall hear that tremendous voice: Awake, ye dead, and
come to judgment. In transports, and full of honor and glory, the wise and
righteous, will hear the happy sentence, Come, ye blessed of my father, inherit
the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world."

This, and the skeleton, astonished me not a little; and my wonder at the whole
increased, as I could find no human creature living, nor discover any house or
cottage for an inhabitant. This I though exceeded all the strange things I had
seen in this wonderful country. But perhaps, (it occured at last,) there might
be a mansion in the woods before me, or somewhere in the groves on either side;
and therefore, leaving the library, after I had spent an hour in it, I walked
onwards, and came to a wood, which had private walks cut through it, and
strewed with sand. They showed only light enough to distinguish the blaze of
day from evening shade, and had feats dispersed, to sit and listen to the
chorus of the birds, which added to the pleasures of the soft silent place. For
about three hundred yards the walk I was in extended, and then terminated in
meadows, which formed an oval of twenty acres, surrounded by groves, like the
large plain I came from. Exactly in the middle of these fields, part of which
were turned into gardens, there stood a very handsome stone house, and not far
from the door of it, a fountain played. On either side of the water was a
garden-chair, of a very extraordinary make, curious and beautiful; and each of
them stood under an ever-green oak, the broad leaved Ilex, a charming shade.

A description of John Henley, Esquire
. 4. In one of these chairs sat an ancient gentleman, a venerable man, whose
hair was white as silver, and his countenance had dignity and goodness. His
dress and manner showed him to be a person of fortune and distinction, and by a
servant in waiting, it appeared, he was Lord of the seigneurie I was arrived
at. He was tall and graceful, and had not the least stoop, though he wanted but a
year of an hundred. I could not but admire the fine old gentleman.

Description of Statia Henley, the granddaughter of John Henley, Esquire
. 5. On the same chair, next to him, sat a young Lady, who was at this time
just turned of twenty, and had such diffusive charms as soon new fired my
heart, and gave my soul a softness even beyond what it had felt before. She was
a little taller than the middle size, and had a face that was perfectly
beautiful. Her eyes were extremely fine; full, black, sparkling; and her
conversation was as charming as her person; both easy, unconstrained, and
sprightly.

A conversation between John Henley, Esquire and the author.
. 6. When I came near two such personages, I bowed low to the ground, and asked
pardon for intruding into their fine retirement. But the stars had led me, a
wanderer, to this delightful solitude, without the least idea of there being
such a place in our island, and as their malignant rays had forced me to
offend, without intending it, I hoped they would pardon my breaking in upon
them.

To this the old Gentleman replied. You have not offended, Sir, I assure you,
but are welcome to the Groves of Basil. It gives me pleasure to see you here;
for it is very seldom we are favored with any one's company, It is hard to
discover or make out a road to this place, as we are surrounded almost by
impassable mountains, and a very dangerous morass: Nor can I conceive how you
found the way here without a guide, or ventured to travel this country, as
there are no towns in this part of the county. There must be something very
extraordinary in your case, and as you mentioned your being a wanderer, I
should be glad to hear the cause of your journeying in this uninhabited region.
But first (Mr. Henley said) as it is now near eight at night, and you must want
refreshment, having met with no inn the whole day, we will go in to supper. He
then arose, and brought me to an elegant parlour, where a table was soon
covered with the best cold things, and we immediately sat down. Every eatable
was excellent, and the wine and other liquors in perfection. Miss Henley sat at
the head of the table, her grandfather over against her, and placed me at her
right hand between them both. The young lady behaved in a very easy genteel
manner; and the old gentleman, with freedom, cheerfulness, and good manners.
'Till nine this scene lasted, and then Mr. Henley again requested I would
oblige him with an account of my travels in that part of the world. This I said
I would do in the best manner I could, and while he leaned back in his easy
chair, and the beautiful Statia fastened her glorious eyes upon me, I went on
in the following words.

A summary of the author's history, from the beginning of his 17th year till
his arrival at the groves of Basil in 1727, in the 25th year of his age.
. 7. I am an Englishman, Sir, but have passed the greatest part of my life in
Ireland, and from the western extremity of it I came. My father is one of the
rich men in that kingdom, and was, for many years, the tenderest and most
generous parent that ever son was blessed with. He spared no cost on my
education, and gave me leave to draw upon him, while I resided in the
university of Dublin five years, for what I pleased. Extravagant as I was in
several articles, he never set any bounds to my demands, nor asked me what I
did with the large sums I had yearly from him. My happiness was his felicity,
and the glory of his life to have me appear to the greatest advantage, and in
the most respected character, that money can gain a man.

But at last, he married his servant maid, an artful cruel woman, who obtained
by her wit and charms so great an ascendant over him, that he abandoned me, to
raise a young nephew this stepmother had, to what splendour and power she
pleased. He had every thing he could name that money could procure, and was
absolute master of the house and land. Not a shilling at this time could I get,
nor obtain the least thing I asked for, and because I refused to become
preceptor to this young man, and had made some alteration in my religion,
(having renounced that creed, which was composed, nobody knows by whom, and
introduced into the church in the darkest ages of popish ignorance; a symbol,
which strongly participates of the true nature and spirit of popery, in those
severe denunciations of God's wrath, which it pours so plentifully forth
against all those whose heads are not turned to believe it), my father was so
enraged that he would not even admit me to his table any longer, but bid me be
gone. My mother-in-law likewise for ever abused me, and her nephew, the lad,
insulted me when I came in his way.

Being thus compelled to withdraw, I set sail for England as soon as it was in
my power, and arrived in Cumberland by the force of a storm. I proceeded from
thence to the mountains of Stanemore, to look for a gentleman, my friend, who
lived among those hills; and as I journeyed over them, and missed him, I
chanced to meet with a fine northern girl, and a habitation to my purpose. I
married her, and for almost two years past was the happiest of the human race,
till the sable curtain fell between us, and the angel of death translated her
glorious soul to the fields of paradise. Not able to bear the place of our
residence, after I had lost my heart's fond idol, I left the charming spot and
mansion, where unmixed felicity had been for some time my portion, and I was
traveling on toward London, to see what is ordained there in reserve for me;
when by accident I lost my way, and the fates conducted me to the Groves of
Basil. Curiosity led me into the library I found in the plain, without this
wood, from whence, in search for some human creatures, I proceeded to the
fountain, where I had the pleasure of seeing you, Sir, and this young lady.
This is a summary of my past life; what is before me heaven only knows. My
fortune I trust with the Preserver of men, and the Father of spirits. One thing
I am certain of by observation, few as the days of the years of my pilgrimage
have been, that the emptiness, and unsatisfying nature of this world's
enjoyments, are enough to prevent my having any fondness to stay in this region
of darkness and sorrow. I shall never leap over the bars of life, let what will
happen: but the sooner I have leave to depart, I shall think it the better for
me.

The old gentleman's reply to the story.
. 8. The old gentleman seemed surprised at my story, and after some moments
silence, when I had done, he said, Your measure, Sir, is hard, and as it was,
in part, for declaring against a false religion at your years, you please me so
much, that if you will give me leave, I will be your friend, and as a subaltern
providence, recompense your loss as to fortune in this world. In what manner
you shall know tomorrow, when we breakfast at eight. It is now time to finish
our bottle, that we may, according to our custom, betimes retire.

The history of Chapter Henley, Esquire and his beautiful daughter Statia.
At the time appointed I met the old gentleman in the parlour, and just as we
had done saluting each other, Statia entered, bright and charming as Aurora.
She was in a rich dress, and her bright victorious eyes flashed a celestial
fire. She made our tea, and gave me some of her coffee. She asked me a few
civil questions, and said two or three good things on the beauties of the
morning, and the charms of the country. She left us the moment we had done
breakfast, and then the old gentleman addressed himself to me in the following
words.

I do not forget the promise I made you, but must first relate the history of
my family. I do it with the more pleasure, as I find you are of our religion,
and I cannot help having a regard for you, on your daring to throw up a fortune
for truth; for bravely daring to renounce those systems, which have an outward
orthodox roundness given to them by their eloquent defenders, and within are
mere corruption and apostasy.

The skeleton you saw in the library was once my son, Charles Henley, a most
extraordinary man. He had great abilities, and understood every thing a mortal
is capable of knowing, of things human and divine. -- When he was in his
nineteenth year, I took him to France and other countries, to see the world,
and, on our return to England, married him into a noble family, to a very
valuable young woman, of a large fortune, and by her he had the young lady you
saw sitting on the chair near the table by me. This son I lost, three years
after his marriage, and with him all relish for the world: and being naturally
inclined to retirement and a speculative life, never stirred since from this
country house. Here my son devoted himself entirely to study, and amused
himself with instructing his beloved Statia, the young lady you have seen. At
his death he consigned her to my care; and as her understanding is very great,
and her disposition sweet and charming, I have not only taken great pains in
educating her, but have been delighted with my employment. Young as she is,
Aug. 14, 1727.
but in the second month of her one and twentieth year, she not only knows more
than women of distinction generally do, but would be the admiration of learned
men, if her knowledge in languages, mathematics, and philosophy, were known to
them: and as her father taught her music and painting, perhaps there is not a
young woman of finer accomplishments in the kingdom.

Her father died toward the end of the year 1723, in the 39th year of his age,
when she was not quite sixteen, and, by his will, left her ten thousand pounds,
and Basil-House and estate; but she is not to inherit it, or marry, 'till she
is two and twenty. This was her father's will. As to the skeleton in the
library, it was my son's express order it should be so, and that the figure
should not be removed from the place it stands in, while the library remained
in that room; but continue a solemn memorial in his family, to perpetuate his
memory, and be a memento mori to the living.

Old Mr. Henley offers me his granddaughter in marriage.
. 10. This is the history of Basil Groves, and the late owner of this seat, and
his daughter Statia. We live a happy, religious life here, and enjoy every
blessing that can be desired in this lower hemisphere. But as I am not very far
from a hundred years, having passed that ninety-two which Sir William Temple
says, he never knew any one he was acquainted with arrive at, I must be on the
brink of the grave, and expect every day to drop into it. What may become of
Statia, then, gives me some trouble to think; as all her relations, except
myself, are in the other world. To spend her life here in this solitude, as
seems to be her inclination, is not proper; and to go into the world by
herself, when I am dead, without knowing any mortal in it, may involve her in
troubles and distresses. Hear then, my son, what I propose to you. You are a
young man, but serious. You have got some wisdom in the school of affliction,
and you have no aversion to matrimony, as you have just buried, you say, a
glorious woman, your wife. If you will stay with us here, till Statia is two
and twenty, and in that time render yourself agreeable to her, I promise you,
she shall be yours the day she enters the three and twentieth year of her age,
and you shall have with her fortune all that I am owner of, which is no small
sum. What do you say to this proposal?

My reply.
. 11. Sir, I replied, you do me vast honor, much more I am sure than my merits
can pretend to. I am infinitely obliged to you, and must be blind and
insensible, if I refused such a woman as Miss Henley, were she far from being
the fortune she is: But I have not vanity enough to imagine, I can gain her
affections; especially in my circumstances; and to get her by your authority,
or power of disposing of her, is what I cannot think of. I will stay however, a
few months here, since you so generously invite me, and let Miss Henley know, I
will be her humble servant, if she will allow me the honor of bearing that
title. This made the old gentleman laugh, and he took me by the hand, saying,
This is right. Come, let us go and take a walk before dinner.

My residence at Basil Groves for seven months, and manner of living.
. 12. There I passed the winter, and part of the spring, and lived in a
delightful manner. The mornings I generally spent in the library, reading, or
writing extracts from some curious MSS. or scarce books; and in the afternoons
Miss Henley and I walked in the lawns and woods, or sat down to cards. She was
a fine creature indeed in body and soul, had a beautiful understanding, and
charmed me to a high degree. Her conversation was rational and easy, without
the least affectation from the books she had read; and she would enliven it
sometimes by singing, in which kind of music she was as great a mistress as I
have heard. As to her heart, I found it was to be gained; but an accident
happened that put a stop to the amor.

The death. of old Mr. Henley, and Statia's behavior thereupon.
. 13. In the beginning of March, the old gentleman, the excellent Mr. Henley,
Statia's grandfather and guardian, and my great friend, died, and by his death
a great alteration ensued in my affair. I thought to have had Miss Henley
immediately, as there was no one to plead her father's will against the
marriage, and intended to send O Finn for Friar Fleming; but when Statia saw
herself her own mistress, without any superior, or control, and in possession
of large fortunes, money, and an estate, that she might do as she pleased; this
had an effect on her mind, and made a change. She told me, when I addressed
myself to her, after her grandfather was interred, that what she intended to
do, in obedience to him, had he lived, she thought required very serious
consideration now she was left to herself: That, exclusive of this, her
inclination really was for a single life; and had it been otherwise, yet it was
not proper, since her guardian was dead, that I should live with her till the
time limited by her father's will for her to marry was come; but that, as she
had too good an opinion of me, to imagine her fortune was what chiefly urged my
application, and must own she had a regard for me, she would be glad to hear
from me sometimes, if I could think her worth remembering, after I had left the
Groves of Basil. This she said with great seriousness, and seemed by her manner
to forbid my urging the thing any further.

My reply to Miss Henley: being an apology for matrimony, as it is by the
gospel made a memorial of the covenant of grace.
. 14. I assured her, however, that time only could wear out her charming image
from my mind, and that I had reason to fear, she would long remain the torment
of my heart. She had a right to be sure to dismiss me from her service; but in
respect of her inclination to live a single life, I begged leave to observe,
that it was certainly quite wrong, and what she could not answer to the wise
and bountiful Father of the Universe, as she was a Christian, and by being so,
must believe, that baptism was a memorial of the covenant of grace.

The Catholics, and the Vision-mongers of the protestant side, (the Rev. Mr.
Wm. Law, and others of his row) may magnify the excellence of celibacy as high
as they please, and work it into christian perfection, by sounding words and
eloquent pens; but most surely, revelation was directly against them, and
required the faithful to produce in a regular way.

Consider, illustrious Statia, that when the Most High gave the Abrahamic
covenant in these words, I will be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee,
and in thy seed shall all the families, or nations of the earth be blessed;
which includes an interest in God, as a God, father and friend for ever, and a
share in all the blessings wherewith the Messiah, in the gospel, has enriched
the world; these inestimable blessings and promises of life and favor, were
designed by the divine munificence for rising generations of mankind; and it
was most certainly intended, not only that they should be received with the
highest gratitude and duty, but that they should be strongly inculcated upon
the thoughts of succeeding generations, by an instituted sign or memorial, to
the end of the world.

Circumcision was the first appointed token or memorial, and at the same time,
an instruction in that moral rectitude to which the grace of God obliges: and
when the New Testament succeeded the Law, then was the covenant interest of
infants, or their right to the covenant of grace, to be confirmed by the token
or sign called baptism; that action being appointed to give the expected rising
generation an interest in the love of God, the grace of Christ, and the
fellowship of the Holy Spirit, that is, in all covenant blessings. But what
becomes of this great charter of heaven, if christian women, out of an idle
notion of perfection, will resolve to lead single lives, and thereby hinder
rising generations from sharing in the honors and privileges of the church of
Jesus Christ. Millions of the faithful must thereby be deprived of the token
instituted by God to convey to them those covenant blessings, which his love
and goodness designed for the rising generations of his people. Have a care
then what you do, illustrious Statia, in this particular. It must be a great
crime to hinder the regular propagation of a species, which God has declared
to be under his particular inspection and blessing, and by circumcision and
baptism, has made the special object of divine attention and care. Away then
with all thoughts of a virgin life, whatever becomes of me. As God has
appointed matrimony and baptism, let it be your pious endeavor to bare sons
and daughters, that may be related to God, their Father; to Jesus, their
Redeemer, and first born in the family; and to all the excellent, who are to
enjoy, through him, the blessings of the glorious world above. Marry, then,
illustrious Statia, marry, and let the blessing of Abraham come upon us
gentiles. Oppose not the gospel covenant; that covenant which was made with
that patriarch; but mind the comfortable promises; I will circumcise thy heart,
and the heart of thy seed. I will pour out my spirit upon thy seed, and my
blessing upon thine offspring. The seed of the righteous is blessed. They are
the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with them. Such is the
magna charta of our existence and future happiness; and as infants descending
from Abraham, in the line of election, to the end of the world, have as good a
right and claim as we to the blessings of this covenant, and immense promise, I
will be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, in their generations; it
must be a great crime, to deprive children of this intailed, heavenly
inheritance, by our resolving to live in a state of virginity. In my opinion,
it is a sin greater than murder. What is murder, but forcing one from his post
against the will of providence; and if the virgin hinders a being or beings
from coming on the post, against the will of providence, must she not be
culpable; and must she not be doubly criminal, if the being or beings she
hinders from coming on the stage, or into this first state, were to be a part
of the perpetual generations, who have a right to the inheritance, the
blessing, and were to be heirs according to the promise made to Abraham?
Ponder, illustrious Statia, on the important point. Consider what it is to die
a maid, when you may, in a regular way, pruduce heirs to that inestimable
blessing of life and favor, which the munificence of the Most High was pleased
freely to bestow, and which the great Christian mediator, agent, and
negociator, republished, confirmed, and sealed with his blood. Marry then in
regard to the gospel, and let it be the fine employment of your life, to open
gradually the treasures of revelation to the understandings of the little
christians you produce.

This I am sure your holy religion requires from you: and if from the sacred
oracles we turn to the book of nature, is it not in this volume written, that
there must be a malignity in the hearts of those mortals, who can remain
unconcerned at the destruction and extirpation of the rest of mankind; and who
want even so much good will as is requisite to propagate a creature, (in a
regular and hallowed way) though they received their own being from the mere
benevolence of their divine Master? What do you say, illustrious Statia? Shall
it be a succession, as you are an upright Christian? And may I hope to have the
high honor of sharing in the mutual satisfaction that must attend the
discharge of so momentous a duty? Of celibacy and marriage.
If succession be the main thing, and to prevent the extirpation of the rest of
mankind by junction, why may it not be carried on as well without marriage, as
in that confined way? I answer, that as the author and founder of marriage, was
the Ancient of Days, God himself, and at the creation, he appointed the
institution: as Christ, who was vested with authority to abrogate any laws, or
supersede any custom, in which were found any flaw or obliquity, or had not an
intrinsic goodness and rectitude in them, confirmed the ordinance, by reforming
the abuses that had crept into it, and restoring it to its original boundary:
As he gave a sanction to this amicable covenant, and statuted that men should
maintain the dignity of the conjugal state, and by virtue of this primordial
and most intimate bond of society, convey down the race of mankind, and
maintain its succession to the final dissolution; it is not therefore to be
neglected or disregarded. We must not dare to follow our fancies, and in
unhallowed mixtures, or an illegal method, have any posterity. As the great God
appointed and blessed this institution only, for the continuance of mankind,
the race is not to be preserved in another way. We must marry in the Lord, to
promote his glory, as the apostle says, 1 Cor. vii. 39. The earth is not to be
replenished by licentious junction, or the promiscuous use of women. Dreadful
hereafter must be the case of all who slight an institution of God.

I am sensible, the libertine who depreciates and vilifies the dignity of the
married state, will laugh at this assertion: The fop and debauchee will hiss
it, and still do their best to render wedlock the subject of contempt and
ridicule. The Roman clergy will likewise decry it, and injuriously treat it as
an impediment to devotion, a cramp upon the spiritual serving of God, and call
it an instrument of pollution and defilement, in respect of their heavenly
celibacy.

But as God thought marriage was suitable to a paradisaical state, and the
scriptures declare it honorable in all: as this is the way appointed by heaven
to people the earth; and the inslitution is necessary, in the reason and nature
of things, considering the circumstances in which mankind is placed; to prevent
confusion, and promote the general happiness; as the bond of society, and the
foundation of all human government; sure I am, the rake and the mass-priest,
must be in a dreadful situation at the sessions of righteousness; when the one
is charged with libertinism and gallantries, with madness and folly, and with
all the evils and mischief they have done by illicit gratification, contrary to
reason, and in direct opposition to the institutes of God; -- and when the
other, the miserable mass-priests, are called to an account, for vilifying the
honor and dignity of the married state, and for striving to seduce mankind
into the solitary retirements of celibacy, in violation of the laws of God; and
more especially of the primary law or ordinance of heaven. Wretched priests!
Your institutions are breaches in revealed religion, trespasses upon the common
rights of nature, and such oppressive yokes as it is not able to bear. Your
celibacy has not a grain of piety in it. It is policy and impiety.

Hear me then, ye libertines and mass-priests: I call upon you of the first
row, ye rakes of genius, to consider what you are doing, and in time, turn from
your iniquities: Be no longer profligate and licentious, blind to your true
interest and happiness, but become virtuous and honorable lovers, and in
regard to the advantages of this solemn institution, called wedlock, as well to
the general state of the world, as to individuals, marry in the Lord; so will
you avoid that dreadful sentence, Fornicators and adulterers God will judge,
that is, punish; and in this life, you may make things very agreeable, if you
please; though it is in the heavenly world alone, where there shall be all joy
and no sorrow. Let there be true beauty and gracefulness in the mind and
manners, and these with discretion, and other things in your power, will
furnish a fund of happiness commensurate with your lives. It is possible, I am
sure, to make marriage productive of as much happiness as falls to our share in
this lower hemisphere; as the nature of man can reach to in his present
condition. For, as to joy flowing in with a full, constant and equal tide,
without interruption and without allay, there is no such thing. Human nature
does not admit of this. "The sum of the matter is this: To the public the
advantages of marriage are certain, whether the parties will or no; but to the
parties engaging, not so: to them it is a fountain that sends forth both
sweet and bitter waters. To those who mind their duty and obligations sweet
ones; to those who neglect them bitter ones."

In the next place, ye monks, I would persuade you, if I could, to labor no
longer in striving to cancel the obligations to marriage by the pretense of
religion. The voice of heaven, and the whispers of sound and uncorrupted reason
are against it. It is will worship in opposition to revelation. It is such a
presumption for a creature against the author of our nature, as must draw down
uncommon wrath upon the head of every mass-priest, who does not repent their
preaching such wicked doctrine. Indeed I do not know any part of popery that
can be called christianity: but this in particular is so horrible and
diabolical, that I can consider the preachers for celibacy in no other light
than as so many devils. May you ponder in time on this horrible affair.




Miss Henley's answer.
. 15. All the smiles sat on the face of Statia, while I was haranguing in this
devout manner, and her countenance became a constellation of wonders. When I
had done, this beauty said, I thank you, Sir, for the information you have
given me. I am a Christian. There is no malignity in my heart. You have altered
my way of thinking, and I now declare for a succession. -- Let Father Flemming
be sent for, and without waiting for my being two and twenty, or minding my
father's will, as there is no one to oblige me to it, I will give you my hand.
Charming news! I dispatched my lad for the Friar. The priest arrived the next
day, and at night we were married. Three days after, we set out for Orton
Lodge, at my wife's request, as she longed to see the place. For two years more
I resided there; it being more agreeable to Statia than the improved Groves of
Basil. We lived there in as much happiness as it is possible to have in this
lower hemisphere, and much in the same manner as I did with Charlotte my first
wife. Statia had all the good qualities and perfections which rendered
Charlotte so dear and valuable to me; like her she studied to increase the
delights of every day, and by art, good humor, and love, rendered the married
state such a system of joys as might incline one to wish it could last a
thousand years: But it was too sublime and desirable to have a long existence
here. Statia was taken ill, of the smallpox, the morning we intended to return
to Basil-Groves; she died the 7th day, and I laid her by Charlotte's side. Thus
did I become again a mourner. I sat with my eyes shut for three days: But at
last, called for my horse, to try what air, exercise, and a variety of objects,
could do.

SECTION III.
'Twas when the faithful herald of the day,
The village-cock crows loud with trumpet shrill,
The warbling lark soars high, and morning gray
Lifts her glad forehead over the cloud-wrapt hill:
Nature's wild music fills the vocal vale;
The bleating flocks that bite the dewy ground;
The lowing herds that graze the woodland dale,
And cavern'd echo, swell the cheerful sound.

April 1, 1729, we leave Orton Lodge again, and set out for Harrigate Spaw. A
description of the country we rid over. Aetat. 27.
. 1. VERY early, as soon as I could see day, the first of April, 1729, I left
Orton-Lodge, and went to Basil-Groves, to order matters there. From thence I
set out for Harrigate, to amuse myself in that agreeable place; but I did not
go the way I came to Mr. Henley's house. To avoid the dangerous morass I had
passed, at the hazard of my life, we went over a wilder and more romantic
country than I had before seen. We had higher mountains to ascend than I had
ever passed before; and some valleys so very deep to ride through, that they
seemed as it were descents to hell. The patriarch Bermudez, in journeying over
Abyssinia, never traveled in more frightful Glins Relation de l'Ambassade,
dedica a Don Sebastien, roy de Portugal.
And yet, we often came to plains and vales which had all the charms a paradise
could have. Such is the nature of this country.

Through these scenes, an amazing mixture of the terrible and the beautiful, we
proceeded from five in the morning till one in the afternoon, when we arrived
at a vast water-fall, which descended from a precipice near two hundred yards
high, into a deep lake, that emptied itself into a swallow fifty yards from the
catadure or fall, and went I suppose to the abyss. The land from this headlong
river, for half a mile in length and breadth, till it ended at vast mountains
again, was a fine piece of ground, beautifully flowered with various
perennials, the acanthus, the aconus, the adonis or pheasant's eye, the purple
bistorta, the blue borago, the yellow bupthalmum, the white cacalia, the blue
campanula, and the sweet smelling cassia, the pretty double daisy, the crimson
dianthus, the white dictamnus, the red fruximella, and many other wild flowers.
They make the green valley look charming; and as here and there stood two or
three ever-green trees, the cypress, the larix, the balm of Gilead, and the
Swedish juniper, the whole spot has a fine and delightful effect. On my arrival
here, I was at a loss which way to turn.

The inhabitants of this fine valley, a society of married friars.
. 2. I could not however be long in suspense how to proceed, as I saw near the
water-fall a pretty thatched mansion, and (...) inhabitants in it. I found they
were a religious society of married people, ten friars and their ten wives, who
had agreed to retire to this still retreat, and form a holy house on the plan
of the famous Ivon, the disciple of Labadie, so celebrated on account of his
connection with Mrs. Schurman, and his many fanatical writings. See my 1st
volume, p. 347. where you will find a particular account of Labadie and Ivon.
A book called the Marriage Chretien, written by this Ivon, was their
directory, and from it they formed a protestant La Trappe; with this difference
from the Catholic religious men, that the friars of the reformed monastery were
to have wives in their convent; the better to enable them to obtain Christian
perfection in the religious life. These Regulars, men and women, were a most
industrious people, never idle; but between their hours of prayer always at
work: the men were employed in a garden of ten acres, to provide vegetables and
fruit, on which they chiefly lived; or in cutting down old trees, and fitting
them for their fire: and the women were knitting, spinning, or twisting what
they had spun into thread, which they sold for three shillings a pound: they
were all together in a large, handsome room: they sat quite silent, kept their
eyes on their work, and seemed more attentive to some inward meditations, than
to any thing that appeared, or passed by them. They looked as if they were
contented and happy. They were all extremely handsome, and quite clean: their
linen fine and white: their gowns a black stuff. The women dined at one table:
the men at another; but all sat in the same room. The whole house was in bed by
ten, and up by four in the morning, winter and summer. What they said at their
table I could not hear, as they spoke low and little, and were at a distance
from me, in a large apartment: but the conversation of the men, at table, was
very agreeable, rational and improving. I observed they had a great many
children, and kept four women-servants to attend them, and do the work of the
house. The whole pleased me very greatly. I thought it a happy institution.

Some thoughts on the institution of married regulars.
. 3. As to the marriage of the friars in this cloystral house, their founder,
Ivon, in my opinion, was quite right in this notion. Chaste junction cannot
have the least imperfection in it, as it is the appointment of God, and the
inclination to a coit is so strongly impressed on the machine by the author of
it; and since it is quite pure and perfect; since it was wisely intended as the
only best expedient to keep man for ever innocent, it must certainly be much
better for a regular or retreating priest, to have a lawful, female companion
with him; and so the woman, who chooses a convent, and dislikes the fashions of
the world, to have her good and lawful monk every night in her arms; to love
and procreate legally, when they have performed all the holy offices of the
day; and then, from love and holy generation, return again to prayer, and all
the heavenly duties of the cloystered life; than to live, against the
institution of nature and providence, a burning, tortured nun, and a burning,
tortured friar; locked up in walls they can never pass, and under the
government of some old, cross, impotent superior. There is some sense in such a
marriage chretien in a convent. Ivon's convent is well enough. A cloister may
do upon his plan, with the dear creature by ones side, after the daily labors
of the monk are over. It had been better, if that infallible man, the Pope, had
come into this scheme. How comfortable has Ivon made it to the human race, who
renounce the dress and pageantry, and all the vanities of time. Their days are
spent in piety and usefulness; and at night, after the completorium, they lie
down together in the most heavenly charity, and according to the first great
hail, endeavor to increase and multiply. This is a divine life. I am for a
cloister on these terms. It pleased me so much to see these monks march off
with their smiling partners, after the last psalm, that I could not help
wishing for a charmer there, that I might commence the Married Regular, and add
to the stock of children in this holy house. It is really a fine thing to monk
it on this plan. It is a divine institution: gentle and generous, useful and
pious.

On the contrary, how cruel is the Roman church, to make perfection consist in
celibacy, and cause so many millions of men and women to live at an eternal
distance from each other, without the least regard to the given points of
contact! How unfriendly to society! This is abusing christianity, and
perverting it to the most pernicious purposes; under a pretense of raising
piety, by giving more time and leisure for devotion. For it never can be pious
either in design or practice, to cancel any moral obligation, or to make void
any command of God: and as to prayer, it may go along with every other duty,
and be performed in every state. All states have their intermissions; and if it
should be otherwise sometimes, I can then, while discharging any duty, or
performing any office, pray as well in my heart, O God be merciful to me a
sinner, and bless me with the blessing of thy grace and providence, as if I was
prostrate before an altar. What Martha was reproved for, was on account of her
being too Yolicitous about the things of this life. Where this is not the case,
business and the world are far from being a hindrance to piety. God is as
really glorified in the discharge of relative duties, as in the discharge of
those which more immediately relate to himself. He is in truth more actively
glorified by our discharging well the relative duties, and we thereby may
become more extensively useful in the church and in the world, may be more
public blessings, than it is possible to be in a single pious state. In short,
this one thing, celibacy, (were there nothing else) the making the unmarried
state a more holy state than marriage, shows the prodigious nonsense and
impiety of the Church of Rome, and is reason enough to flee that communion, if
we had no other reasons for protesting against it. The tenet is so
superstitious and dangerous, that it may well be esteemed a doctrine of those
devils, who are the seducers and destroyers of mankind: but it is (says Wallace
Dissertation on the numbers of mankind.
) suitable to the views and designs of a church, which has discovered such an
enormous ambition, and made such havoc of the human race, in order to raise,
establish, and preserve an usurped and tyrannical power.

A further account of the Married Regulars I met with among the fells of
Westmoreland.
. 4. But as to the Married Regulars I have mentioned; they were very glad to
see me, and entertained me with great civility and goodness. I lived a week
with them, and was not only well fed with vegetables and puddings on their lean
days, Wednesdays and Fridays, and with plain meat, and good malt drink, on the
other days; but was greatly delighted with their manner and piety, their sense
and knowledge. I will give my pious readers a sample of their prayers, as I
imagine it may be to edification. These friars officiate in their turns,
changing every day; and the morning and evening prayers of one of them were in
the words following. I took them off in my shorthand.

A Prayer for Morning.
ALMIGHTY and everlasting God, the creator and preserver of all things, our
lawgiver, savior, and judge, we adore thee the author of our beings, and the
father of our spirits. We present ourselves, our acknowledgments, and our
homage, at the foot of thy throne, and yield thee the thanks of the most
grateful hearts for all the instances of thy favor which we have experienced.
We thank thee for ever, O Lord God Almighty, for all thy mercies and blessings
vouchsafed us; for defending us the past night from evil, and for that kind
provision which thou have made for our comfortable subsistence in this world.

But above all, most glorious Eternal, adored be thy goodness, for repeating
and reinforcing the laws and the religion of thy creation, by supernatural
revelation, and for giving us that reason of mind, which unites us to thee, and
makes us implore thy communications of righteousness, to create us again unto
good works in Christ Jesus.

We confess, O Lord, that we have done violence to our principles, and
alienated ourselves from the natural use we were fitted for: we have revolted
from thee into a state of sin, and by the operation of sense and passion, have
been moved to such practices as are exorbitant and irregular: but we are
heartily sorry for all our misdoings: to thee in Christ we now make our
address, and beseech thee to inform our understandings, and refine our spirits,
that we may reform our lives by repentance, redeem our time by righteousness,
and live as the glorious gospel of thy Son requires. Let the divine spirit
assist and enable us to overruled, conduct, and employ, the subordinate and
inferior powers, in the exercise of virtue, and the service of our creator, and
as far as the imperfections of our present state will admit, help us so to live
by the measures and laws of heaven, that we may have the humility and meekness,
the mortification and self-denial of the holy Jesus, his love of thee, his
desire of doing thy will, and seeking only thy honor. Let us not come covered
before thee under a form of godliness, a cloak of creeds, observances and
institutions of religion; but with that inward salvation and vital sanctity,
which renounces the spirit, wisdom, and honors of this world, dethrones
self-love and pride, subdues sensuality and covetousness, and opens a kingdom
of heaven within by the spirit of God. O let thy Christ be our Savior in this
world; and before we die, make us fit to live for ever with thee in the regions
of purity and perfection.

Since it is the peculiar privilege of our nature, through thy mercy and
goodness, that we are made for an eternal entertainment in those glorious
mansions, where the blessed society of saints and angels shall keep an
everlasting sabbath, and adore and glorify thee for ever, let thy inspiring
spirit raise our apprehensions and desires above all things that are here
below, and alienate our minds from the customs and principles of this mad,
degenerate, and apostate world: mind us of the shortness and uncertainty of
time, of the boundless duration, and the vast importance of eternity, and so
enable us to imitate the example of the holy Jesus in this world, that we may
hereafter ascend, with the greatest ardor of divine love, to those realms of
holiness, where our hearts will be filled with raptures of gladness and joy,
and we shall remain in the highest glory for ever and ever.

We live, O Lord, in reconciliation and friendship, in love and good will, with
thy whole creation, with every thing that derives from thee, holds of thee, is
owned by thee; and under the power of this affection, we pray for all mankind;
that they may be partakers of all the blessings which we enjoy or want, and
that we may all be happy in the world to come, and glorify thee together in
eternity. To this end bring all the human race to the knowledge of thy glorious
gospel, and let its influence transform them into the likeness of Christ.

But especially, we pray for all who suffer for truth and righteousness sake,
and beseech thee to prosper those that love thee. Defend, O Lord, the just
rights and liberties of mankind, and rescue thy religion from the corruptions
which have been introduced upon it, by length of time, and by decay of piety.
Infatuate the counsels, and frustrate the endeavors of the priests of Rome,
and against all the designs of those, who are enemies to the purity of the
gospel, and substitute human inventions in the place of revealed religion;
prosper the pious labors of those who teach mankind to worship one, eternal
and omnipresent being; in whose understanding, there is the perfection of
wisdom; in whose will, there is the perfection of goodness; in whose actions,
there is the perfection of power; a God without cause, the great creator,
benefactor, and savior of men: -- And that the duty of man is to obey, in
thought, word, and deed, the precepts of godliness and righteousness, without
regard to pleasure, gain, or honor; to pain, loss, or disgrace; diligently
imitating the life of the holy Jesus, and steadfastly confiding in his mediation.

In the last place, O Lord God. Almighty, we beseech thee to continue us under
thy protection, guidance, and blessing this day, as the followers and disciples
of thy Christ, through whom we recommend our souls and our bodies into thy
hands, and according to the doctrine of his religion, say, Our Father, etc.

In this manner, did these pious Ivonites begin their every day; and when the
sun was set, and they had finished their supper, they worshipped God again in
these words.

A Prayer for Night.
MOST blessed, glorious, and holy Lord God Almighty, who art from everlasting
to everlasting, God over all, magnified and adored for ever! we, thy unworthy
creatures, humble our souls in thy presence, and confess ourselves miserable
sinners. We acknowledge our miscarriages and faults, and condemn ourselves for
having done amiss. We deprecate thy just offense and displeasure. We cry thee
mercy. We ask thee pardon: and as we are quite sensible of our weakness and
inability, and know thou love the souls of men, when they turn and repent, we
beseech thee to give us true repentance, and endue us with the grace of thy
sanctifying spirit, that we may be delivered from the bondage and slavery of
iniquity, and have the law of the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus. Upon
thee our God, we call for that help which is never wanting, and beseech thee to
give us thy heavenly assistance, that we may recover our reasonable nature,
refine our spirits by goodness, and purify ourselves even as the Lord Jesus is
pure. O thou Father of Lights, and the God of all comforts, inform our
understandings with truth, and give us one ray of that divine wisdom which
sits on the right hand of thy throne. O let us be always under thy
communication and influence, and enable us, through the recommendation of thy
Son, our mediator and redeemer, to lay aside all passion, prejudice, and vice,
to receive thy truth in the love of it, and to serve thee with ingenuity of
mind, and freedom of spirit: that we may pass through a religious life to a
blessed immortality, and come to that eternal rest, where we shall behold thy
face in righteousness, and adore and bless thee to eternity, for our salvation
through him who has redeemed us by his blood.

We praise and magnify thy goodness, O Lord God Almighty, for our maintenance
and preservation; by thy constant providence over us, and we beseech thee to
take us into thy special care and protection this night. Defend us from all the
powers of darkness, and from evil men and evil things, and raise us in health
and safety. Do thou, most great and good God, protect us and bless us this
night, and when we awake in the morning, let our hearts be with thee, and thy
hand with us. And the same mercies we beg for all mankind; that thy goodness
and power may preserve them, and thy direction and influence secure their
eternal salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord, by whom thou have taught us
to call upon thee as our Father, etc.

An observation on the prayers of the Ivon recluses.
. 5. By the way, I cannot help observing, that these disciples of Ivon are much
reformed in respect of what his cloystered followers were in his time. It
appears from Ivon's books, that he was as great a visionary and tritheist as
his master Labadie, or any of our modern mystics now are. But these Regulars I
found among the Fells, though on Ivon's plan, are as rational Christians as ever
adorned the religion of our Master by a purity of faith. You see by their
prayers, that their devotions are quite reasonable and calm. There is no rant,
nor words without meaning: no feeling instead of seeing the truth; nor
expectation of covenant mercy on the belief of a point repugnant not only to
the reason and nature of things, but to the plain repeated declarations of God
in the Christian religion. Their prayer is a calm address to the great Maker,
Governor, and Benefactor of the universe; and honor and obedience to Christ as
Mediator, according to the will and appointment of God the Father.

An answer to a question I asked one of these Ivonites.
. 6. Upon my asking one of these gentlemen, how they came to differ so much
from Ivon, their founder, and cease to be the patrons of vision, and an
implicit incomprehensible faith? He told me, they had read all the books on
both sides of the question, that had been written of late years, and could not
resist the force of the evidence in favor of reason and the divine unity. They
saw it go against mechanical impulse, and strong persuasion without grounds,
and therefore, they dismissed Ivon's notions of believing without ideas, as
they became sensible it was the same thing as seeing without light or objects.
Without dealing any longer in a mist of words, or showing themselves orthodox,
by empty, insignificant sounds, they resolved, that the object of their
worship, for the time to come, should be, that one supreme self-existent being,
of absolute, infinite perfection, who is the first cause of all things, and
whose numerical identity and infinite perfections are demonstrable from certain
principles of reason, antecedent to any peculiar revelation; -- and confessed
that the blessing, with which Jesus Christ was sent by God to bless the world,
consists in turning men from their iniquities. They now perceived what the
creed-makers, and Ivon, their founder, could not see, to wit, that it is
against the sacred texts, to ascribe to Each Person of Three the nature and all
essential attributes and properties of the One only true God, and yet make the
Three the One true God only, when considered conjunctly; for if Each has all
possible perfections and attributes, then Each must be the same true God as if
and when conjoined; and of consequence, there must then be Three One true Gods,
or One Three true Gods; Three One Supreme Beings, or One Three Supreme Beings,
since to each of the three must be ascribed (as the orthodox say) any thing and
every thing, that is most peculiar and appropriated to the divine nature,
without any difference. In short, by conjobbling matters of faith in this
manner, they saw, we had three distinct selfs, or intelligent agents, equal in
power and all possible perfections, agreeing in one common essence, one sort of
species, (like a supreme magistracy of distinct persons, acting by a joint
exercise of the same power) and so the three are one, not by a numerical but
specific identity; three Omnipotents and one Almighty, in a collective sense.
This, (continued this gentleman) on searching the scriptures, we found was far
from being the truth of the case. We discovered, upon a fair examination, and
laying aside our old prejudices, that there was nothing like this in the New
Testament. It appeared to us to be the confused talk of weak heads. In the
Bible we got a just idea of One Eternal Cause, God the Father, almighty,
all-wise, unchangeable, infinite; and are there taught how to worship and serve
him. The greatest care is there taken to guard against the ill effects of
imagination and superstition; and in the plainest language, we are ordered to
pray to this blessed and only potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords,
who only, (or alone) has immortality; and this in imitation of Jesus, who in
the morning very early went out into a solitary place, and there prayed Mark i.
35.
. Who dismissing his disciples departed into a mountain to pray Mark vi. 46.
. And he continued all night in prayer to GOD Luke vi. 12.
: We are ordered to glorify and bless this only wise God for ever Romans xvi. 27.
. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ 2 Cor. i. 3.
. To God and our Father be glory for ever Phil. iv. 20.
. -- And to love him truly by keeping the commandments. Cui Jesus sic
respondit: primum omnium praeceptorum est: Mark xii. 29, 30, 31.
audi Israelita. Dominus Deus vester dominus unus est. Itaque dominum Deum tuum
toto cord, toto animo, tota mente, totisque viribus amato. Hoc primum est
praeceptum. Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. And thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength. This is the first Commandment.

Et voicy le second. Vous aimerez vostre prochain comme vous meme. And the
second is like the first. Hunc simile est alterum, alterum ut teipsum amato.
His majus aliud praeceptum nullum est. Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thyself. There is none other commandment greater than these.

To say it; -- we became fully satisfied, that the supreme God and Governor of
the world, who exists by a prior necessity, and therefore must be one, a
perfect moral agent, and possessed of all moral perfections, is the sole object
of religious worship: that Jesus Christ was a temporary minister, with a
legatarian power, to publish and declare the spiritual laws of this Great God:
and that it is incumbent on mankind to yield a perfect obedience to these
spiritual laws of this Supreme Being: that is, the duty of all, to make the
object proposed by Christ, his God and our God, his Father and our Father, the
sole object of faith; and to expect happiness or salvation, on the term of
being turned from all our inquities. This seemed a matter worthy of the Son of
God's appearing in the world. Every thing else must be enthusiasm and
usurpation.

A reflection on true and false religion.
. 7. Here the Ivonist had done, and I was greatly pleased with his sense and
piety. What a heavenly Christianity should we profess (I said) if the notions
of our modern enthusiasts were as consistent with Christ's great design and
profession! We should then set up the Kingdom of God among men, and be diligent
and active in promoting the laws of that kingdom. We should then believe, like
Jesus Christ and his apostles, that there is but One God, the Father Almighty.
There is no one good (so commonly called) but one, that is God; or only the one
God Mark x. 18.
. Nullus est bonus nisi unus Deus. Castalio. (And Cant. MS. Clem. Alex. adds,
-- My Father who is in Heaven.) This is life eternal, to acknowledge thee, O
Father, to be the only true GOD John xvii. throughout.
. It is one God who will justify Romans iii. 30.
. We know that there is none other Gods but one. For to us there is one GOD the
Father 1 Cor. viii. 4.6.
. There is one GOD and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in
you all Ephesians. iv. 6.
. And we should confess one Mediator, -- the man Christ Jesus. 2 Timothy ii. 5.
We should be consistent, and not throw off those principles upon which
christianity was founded, and alone could be first built. We should invite men
into our religion, by representing to them the perfection of that primary law
of God, reason or natural religion; by declaring the plainness and clearness of
it to all attentive and well-disposed minds; and then show them how worthy it
was of the Supreme Governor to give such creatures as he has made us the
gospel: that by the religion of favor, he has, with glory to himself,
displayed his paternal regard for us, by doing much more than what is strictly
necessary for our eternal good. God, on a principle of love, sends his Christ,
to advise us and awaken us to a sense of our danger in passing through this
world, in case (which he saw would be the thing) we should not constantly
attend to the light we might strike out ourselves with some trouble. He calls
us in an extraordinary manner to forsake vice and idolatry, and practice the
whole system of morality. We might expect, that a good God, would once at
least, interpose by such an extraordinary method as revelation, to turn and
incline his reasonable creatures, to the study and practice of the religion of
nature. This was acting like the Father of the Universe, considering the
negligence and corruption of the bulk of mankind. The reason he gave us, the
law of nature, was giving us all that was absolutely necessary. The gospel was
an addition of what is excellently useful. What, my beloved, (might a rational
divine say) can be more paternal, and worthy of the almighty Creator, than to
reveal plainly the motive of a judgment to come, in order to secure all
obedience to the religion of nature? Reason may, to be sure, be sufficient to
show men their duty, and to encourage their performance of it with the
assurance of obtaining a reward, if they would duly attend to its dictates, and
suffer them to have their due effect upon them: it may guide mankind to virtue,
and happiness consequent to it, as God must be a rewarder of all those who
diligently seek him, and was enough to bring them to the knowledge, and engage
them in the practice of true religion and righteousness, if they had not shut
their eyes to its light, and wilfully rejected the rule written in their
hearts. But as this was what mankind really did, and now do; as errors and
impieties, owing to an undue use or neglect of reason, became universal; (just
as the case of Christians is, by disregarding the New Testament); and reason,
through men's faults, was rendered ineffectual, though still sufficient, (which
justifies both the wisdom and goodness of God, in leaving man for so many ages
to his natural will, and so great a part of the globe to this day with no other
light than the law of nature); and reason, I say, was rendered ineffectual,
though still sufficient to teach men to worship God with pious hearts and sincere
affections, and to do his will by the practice of moral duties; to expect his
favor for their good deeds, and his condemnation of their evil works; then was
revelation a more powerful means of promoting true religion and godliness. The
gospel is a more effectual light. It is a clearer and more powerful guide: a
brighter motive and stronger obligation to universal obedience than reason can
with certainty propose. And therefore, though there was not a necessity for God
to give a new rule in vindication of his providence, and in order to render men
accountable to him for their actions; yet the divine goodness was pleased to
enforce the principles of reason and morality more powerfully by an express
sanction of future rewards and punishments, and by the gospel restore religious
worship to the original uncorrupted rational service of the Deity. This
displays his paternal regard to his children, with glory to himself. Love was
the moving principle of his sending Christ into the world, to reform the
corruptions of reason, to restore it to its purity, and most effectually to
promote the practice of the rules of it. The gospel-revelation considered in
this manner appears to be the pure effect of the divine goodness. It is a
conduct accompanied with the greatest propriety and glory.

If this representation of Christianity was as much the doctrine of the church
as it is of the Ivonites I have mentioned, we might then, with hopes of
success, call upon the rational infidels to come in. They could hardly refuse
the invitation, when we told them, our religion was the eternal law of reason
and of God restored, with a few excellently useful additions: that the gospel
makes the very religion of nature, a main part of what it requires, and submits
all that it reveals to the test of the law of reason: that the splendour of
God's original light, the light of nature, and the revelation of Jesus, are the
same; both made to deliver mankind from evils and madness of superstition, and
make their religion worthy of God, and worthy of men; to enable them, by the
voice of reason in conjunction with the words of the gospel, to know and
worship One God, the Maker, the Governor, the Judge, of the world; and to
practice all that is good and praiseworthy: that we may be blessed as we turn
from iniquity to virtue; and by entering cordially into the spirit of the
meritorious example or exemplary merits of Christ, be determined dead to sin,
and alive to righteousness: in short, my brethren, in the suffering and death
of Jesus, his patient, pious and meek, his benevolent and compassionate
behavior, under the most shocking insult, indignity, and torture, we have what
we could not learn from the religion of nature, a deportment that well deserves
both our admiration and imitation. We learn from the perfect example of Jesus,
recommended in his gospel, to bear patiently illusage, and to desire the
welfare of our most unreasonable and malicious enemies. This is improving by
religion to the best purpose; and as we resemble the Son of God, the man Christ
Jesus, in patience, piety, and benevolence, we become the approved children of
the Most High, who is kind and good to the unthankful and to the evil. In this
view of the gospel, all is fine, reasonable, and heavenly. The gentile can have
nothing to object. We have the religion of nature in its original perfection,
in the doctrine of the New Testament, enforced by pains and pleasures
everlasting; and we learn from the death of the Mediator, not only an
unprecedented patience, in bearing our sins in his own body on the tree; but
the divine compassion and piety with which he bore them. We have in this the
noblest example to follow, whenever called to suffer for welldoing, or for
righteousness-sake; and by the imitation, we manifest such a command of temper
and spirit, as can only be the result of the greatest piety and virtue. This
added to keeping the commandments must render men the blessed of the Father,
and entitle them to the kingdom prepared for the wife, the honest, and the
excellent.

But, alas! instead of giving such an account of christianity, the cry of the
doctors is, for the most part, Discard reason, and prostrate your understanding
before the adorable mysteries. Instead of a Supreme Independent First Cause of
all things to believe in and worship, they give Three true Gods in number,
Three infinite independent Beings, to be called One, as agreeing in one common
abstract essence, or species; as all mankind are one, in one common rational
nature, or abstract idea of humanity. Amazing account! A triune no infidel or
gentile of sense will ever worship.

Instead of fixing salvation or moral rectitude, and our preferring the will of
God, as delineated in the words of the gospel, before all other considerations,
we are told of an innocent, meritorious, propitiating blood, spilt by wicked
hands, and so made an acceptable sacrifice, to a Being who is of purer eyes
than to behold iniquity. This, we are assured, satisfies all the demands of the
law. Here is infinite satisfaction: -- and most certainly, I add, a cool
indifference as to personal rectitude. When such a faith or credulity becomes
the principal pillar of trust and dependence, then mere reliance on such
satisfaction to divine justice, may be a stupifying opiate, and make many
remiss in the labors of a penitential piety, and that exact rectitude of mind
and life, which even reason requires, to render us acceptable to the Deity.
Many an appetite and passion are indulged under this subterfuge; and with
little fervency or zeal for good works, men expect to partake of the heavenly
joys, by trusting to the merits of their Savior, in their last will and
testament. Deplorable case! Alas! how has Christianity suffered by its doctors!
The infidel laughs at it as thus preached. It becomes a byword, and a hissing
to them that pass by.

Some remarks on a passage in Binius; and a few thoughts in relation to the
invocation of saints.
. 8. As to the library of my friends, the Ivonites, it was far from being a
grand one, but I saw many curious books in it which had not come in my way
before. From them I made several extracts, and to gratify my reader's curiosity
a little, I will here favor him with one of them.

The first book I chanced to open in this library, was the second volume of
Severin Bini's edition of the Councils, Severin Bini, or Binius, Of councils,
and the editors of them.
as he is commonly called, was a doctor of divinity at Cologne, in the circle
of the Lower Rhine in Germany, and canon of that archiepiscopal cathedral. He
published in that city, in the year 1606, an elegant edition of all the
councils in four very large volumes, folio, and by this work, made the editions
or collections of James Merlin, Peter Crabb, and Lawrence Surius, of no value:
but the 2d edition published by Binius in the year 1618, in nine volumes
smaller folio, is far preferable to the first: and the Paris Edition of Bini's
Councils in 1638, in ten large volumes, folio, is enlarged, more correct, and
of consequence still better than the 2d edition of Binius. This is not however
the best edition to buy, if you love to read that theological stuff called
Councils. The Louvre edition des Conciles en 1644, in 37 volumes in folio, is
what you should purchase; or, that of 1672, Paris, by the Jesuits Labbe and
Cossart, in 18 large volumes in folio. This last is what I prefer, on account
of the additions, correctness, and beauty of the impression. Pere Hardouin did
likewise print a later very fine edition of the Councils, with explications and
free remarks; an extraordinary and curious work I have been told: but I could
not even see it in France, as the parliament of Paris had ordered the work to
be secreted, on account of the remarks.

N. B. Binius, whom I have mentioned, was born in the year 1543, and died 1620,
aet. 77.

N. B. James Merlin, the first editor of the Councils, was a doctor of
divinity, and chanoine of Notre-dame de Paris. Besides the Councils, two large
volumes in folio, he published the works of Richard de St. Victor, Paris, 1518.
-- the works of Peter de Blois, Paris, 1519. -- and the works of Durand de St.
Pourcain, Paris, 1515. His own work are, A Defense of Origin, in 4 to. a good
thing; and, Six Homilies on Gabriel's being sent to the Virgin Mary, in 8vo;
which homilies are not worth half a farthing. -- Merlin was born in the year
1742, and died 1541, aged 69.

N. B. Peter Crabb, the 2d editor of the councils, was a Franciscan friar. He
published two volumes in folio of Councils, at Cologne, in 1538; and a third
volume in 1550. -- Was born 1470; died 1553; aet. 83.

N. B. Lawrence Surius, the third editor of the Councils, a monk of the
Charireux, published his edition of them, in four large volumes in folio, 1560;
and a few years after printed his Lives of the Saints, in six tomes. He writ
likewise a short History of his own Time; and, An Apology for the Massacre of
St. Barthelemi. He was the most outrageous, abusive bigot that ever writ
against the Protestants. The great men of his own church despised him; and
Cardinal Perron, in particular, calls him beat and l'ignorant. He was born
1522; died 1578, aet. 56.

N. B. Philip Labbee, the Jesuit, the 5th editor of the councils, and the next
after Binius, was born in 1607; died 1667, aet. 60. He lived only to publish 11
vols. of the Councils, the 11th came out the year he died; and the other seven
were done by Cossart. Labbe was a man of learning, and besides his collection
of Councils, writ several other pieces. The best of them are, Bibliotheca
bibliothecarum: Concordia chronologica: Bellarmini philologica: and The Life of
Galen.

Gabriel Cossart, the continuator, published the other seven volumes in 1672,
and died at Paris, the 18th of December, 1674, aet. 59.

N. B. 1. Richard de St. Victor (whose works I said were published by Merlin,
at Paris, 1518) was a Scotchman, and prior of the abbey of St. Victor in Paris.
He died the 10th of March, 1173, aet. 91. -- He was the author of Three
critical and historical dissertations on the Tabernacle; two on the Temple;
three on the harmony of the chronology of the kings of Judea and Israel;
Commentaries on the Psalms, Canticles, the Epistles of St. Paul, and the
Revelation; Some treatises in divinity; and Several disquisitions relating to
spiritual life. There have been four editions of these pieces, and the best of
them is that of Rouen in 1650, in two volumes, by Father John de Toulouse, who
writ the life of Richard, and added it to his edition. The three other editions
are that of Paris, 1518; of Venice, 1592; of Cologne, 1621. Richard de Victor
has been highly commended by several celebrated writers, by Henri de Grand,
Trithem, Bellarmine, and Sixte de Sienne. There are many curious and fine
things in his writings, it must be allowed: but in general, he is too subtle,
too diffuse, and too full of digressions. His commentaries, for the most part,
are weak. I am sure he did not understand St. Paul. But, for the 12th century,
he was an extraordinary man.

But who was St. Victor, to whom the abbey of Chanoines Regulieres in Paris,
and the greater abbaye of Chanoines in Marseilles, are dedicated? He was a
Frenchman, who fought under the Emperors. Dioclesian and Maximian with great
applause, in the most honorable post; but in the year 302, suffered martyrdom
for refusing to sacrifice to the idols. He was executed on the spot where the
abbey of St. Victor in Marseilles now stands, and there they have his relics,
a la reserve du piee, that is, except his foot, which lies in the Abbaye de St.
Victor de Paris. William Grimaud, abbot of St. Victor de Marseille, on his
being made Pope Urban the 5th, A. D. 1362, took the foot of St. Victor from his
abbey, when he left it, and made a present of it to John, Duke of Berry, (one
of the sons of John* the first king of France, who was taken prisoner by Edward
the Black Prince, in the battle of Poitiers, Sept. 19, 1356): and this duke of
Berry gave the inestimable foot to the monks of St. Victor in Paris. There it
remains to this day; and though so small a part of the blessed Victor, sheds
immense benefits on the pious Catholics who adore it. Happy Catholics!

2. As to Peter de Blois, he was arch deacon of Bath, in the reign of Henry the
second, and died. in London, in the year 1200, aet. 71. His works are 183
letters on various subjects, 20 sermons, and 17 tracts of several kinds. They
were first printed at Mayence in 1500. -- Then by Merlin, Paris, 1519, as
before mentioned. -- Afterward, John Busee, the Jesuit, gave an edition of
them in 1600, which is far preferable to that of Merlin. But the most valuable
edition is that of Peter de Goussainville, in folio, Paris, 1667: to this
edition is prefixed the life of Peter de Blois, and very learned remarks on
Peter's writings, and the subjects he writ on, are added, by Goussainville. De
Blois's works contain many excellent things, and his life is a curious piece.
Some of his notions relating to the scriptures are very good, and he writes
well against vice. He is a good author for the age he lived in. His letters are
well worth reading; especially such of them as relate to his own time. King
Henry the second ordered him to make a collection of them for his (the king's)
use.

3. Durand de St. Pourcain, was bishop of Meux, in 1326, and died the 13th of
September, 1333, in the 89th year of his age. His works are, Liber de origin
jurisdictionum, (a learned piece); and Commentaries on the four books of
sentences. (The book called, The Sentences, was written by the famous Peter
Lombard, bishop of Paris, who died in the year 1164. aet. 82. In the Sentences,
one of the propositions argued on is this: Christus secundum quod est homo, non
est aliquod. Some call these Sentences excellent, which is what I cannot think
them: but in Durand's Commentary on them, there are several excellent things.)

As to the Jesuit, Jean Busee, (who published the 3d edition of Peter de Blois)
he died at Mayence the 30th of May, 1611, aged 64, and was the author of many
books not worth mentioning.

The learned Goussainville (who printed the last edition of De Blois, with
notes, and the life) died in the year 1683, extremely poor and miserable. He
likewise published the works of St. Gregory, the first pope of that name, with
many valuable remarks and notes. There are four editions of this pope's works;
that of Tussiniani, bishop of Venice, by order of pope Sixtus the 5th: the
Paris edition, 1640: Goussainville's edition: and the late Benedictine edition:
but Goussainville's is, in my opinion, the most valuable.

N. B. The Sermons in the first and second editions of Peter de Blois' works,
are not his, but Peter Comestor's. De Blois' sermons are only to be found in
Goussainville's edition of this arch-deacon's works. Note, Peter Comestor was a
regular canon of St. Victor's in Paris, and died in the year 1198, aet. 65. --
Besides the sermons published by mistake as the work of De Blois, he writ a
large scholastic history, which comprehends the sacred history from Genesis to
the end of the Acts. This is reckoned a good thing; and has been abridged by
one Hunter, an Englishman.

Of councils.
But as to Councils; we have the following account of the eighteen general ones
in the Vatican library, and are told, that the several inscriptions affixed to
them were made by pope Sixtus the 5th; the famous Felix Peretti, who was born
the 13th of December, 1521, and died the 27th of August, 1590, in the 69th year
of his age.

1 st Council, which is that of Nice in 325. St. Sylvester being pope, and
Constantine the great emperor, Jesus Christ the Son of God is declared
consubstantial with his Father; the impiety of Arius is condemned; and the
emperor, in obedience to a decree of the council, ordered all the books of the
Arians to be burnt. 2d Council, which is that of Constantinople in 38^. The
holy Damasus being pope, and Theodosius the elder emperor, the divinity of the
Holy Ghost is defended against the impious Macedonius, and his false doctrine
is anathematized. 3d Council, which is that of Ephesus in 431. St. Celestin
being pope, and Theodosius the younger emperor, Nestorius, who divided Jesus
Christ into two persons, is condemned; and the Holy Virgin is decreed to be the
mother of God. 4th Council, which is that of Chalcedonia in 451. St. Leo being
pope, and Marcian emperor, the unhappy Eutychius is anathematized, for
maintaining that Jesus Christ had but one nature. 5th Council, which is the
second of Constantinople in 553. Vigilius being pope, and Justinian, emperor,
the debates relating to the doctrine of Theodore, bishop of Mopsueste, Ibas,
bishop of Edessa, and Theodoret, bishop of Cyr, are suppressed, and the errors
of Origin are separated from the holy doctrine. 6th Council, which is the third
of Constantinople in 680. St. Agatho being pope, and Constantine Pagonatus,
emperor, the heretics called Monothelites, who admitted but one will in Jesus
Christ, are condemned. 7th Council, which is the second of Nice in 784. Adrian
being pope, and Constantine, the son of Irene, being emperor, the impiety of
the image-breakers is condemned, and the worship of the holy images is
established in the church. 8th Council, which is the fourth of Constantinople
in 689. Adrian the second being pope, and Basil, emperor, Ignatius, patriarch
of Constantinople, is re-established in his see, and Photius, the usurper, is
with ignominy driven away. 9th Council, which is the first of Lateran in 1122.
The canons of these two councils are wanting, and they have no inscription in
the Vatican.
10th Council, which is the second of Lateran in 1139. The canons of these two
councils are wanting, and they have no inscription in the Vatican.
11th Council, which is the third of Lateran in 1179. Alexander the third being
pope, and Frederick the first emperor, the errors of the Vandois are condemned.
12th Council, which is the fourth of Lateran in 1215. Innocent the third being
pope, and Frederick the second, emperor, the false opinions of the abbot
Joachim are condemned; the holy war, for the recovery of Jerusalem, is
resolved; and the croisades are appointed among christians. 13th Council, which
is the first of Lions in 1245. Under the pontificate of Innocent the 4th, the
emperor Frederick is declared an enemy to the church, and deprived of the
empire; they deliberate on the recovery of the Holy Land; St. Lewis, king of
France, is declared chief of that expedition. The cardinals are honored with
red hats. 14th Council, which is the second of Lions in 1274. Gregory the tenth
being sovereign pontiff, the Greeks are reunited to the church of Rome; St.
Bonaventure does signal service to the church in this council; Friar Jerome
brings the king of the Tartars to the council, and that prince receives, in the
most solemn manner, the blessed water of baptism. 15th Council, which is that
of Vienne in 1311. Under the pontificate of Clement the fifth, the Decretals,
called the Clementines from the name of this pope, are received and published;
the procession of the holy sacrament is instituted throughout Christendom; and
professors of the oriental languages are established in the four most famous
universities in Europe, for the propagation of the christian faith in the
Levant. 16th Council, which is that of Florence in 1439. The Greeks, the
Armenians, and the Ethiopians, are reunited to the catholic church, under the
pontificate of Eugene the fourth. 17th Council, which is the fifth of Lateran,
began in the year 1517. They declared war against the Turks, who had seized the
island of Cyprus, and possessed themselves of Egypt, on the death of the
sultan: the emperor Maximilian the first, and Francis the first, king of
France, are appointed generals of this war, under the the popes Julius the
second, and Leo the tenth. 18th Council, which is that of Trent, the last of
the ecumenical or general councils: held from the year 1545 to the year 1563.
Paul the third, Julius the third, and Pius the fifth, reigning at Rome, the
Lutherans and other heretics are condemned, and the ancient discipline of the
church is re-established in her exact and regular practice.
These, reader, are the eighteen famous General Councils; and if you will turn
to the third volume of a work, called, Notes relating to Men, and Things, and
Books, you will find my observations on them; my remarks on the popes, the
princes, and the fathers, assembled; their unchristian immoralities, and sad
acts against the laws of Christ, in order to establish for ever, that very
senseless, and very wicked religion, called Popery; that is, a composition of
sin and error so base and abominable, that we might expect such a thing from
the devil; but it is impossible it could come from heavenly-inspired fathers.
In that book, you will find many thoughts on the religion delivered to the
world by those Councils, and by them established, though it is in reality a
disgrace to christianity; a dishonor to the religion of nature; and a faction
against the common rights of mankind: what ought to be the just object of
universal contempt and abhorrence; whether we consider it as a system of
idolatry, impiety, and cruelty; or, as a political scheme, to destroy the
liberties, and engross the properties of mankind. Of these things, particularly
and largely, in the piece referred to.

Here I have only further to observe, that in the large collections of the
Councils, it is not only the eighteen ecumenical the collectors have gathered,
but so much of all the councils as they could find, their acts, letters,
formularies of faith, and canons, from the first council at Jerusalem, A. D.
49, to the last council in the 18th century; which was convoked by the
archbishop of Ambrun against Jean de Soanem, bishop of Senez. These amount to
above 1600 councils. Note, Reader, the condemnation, the banishment of old John
de Soanem (in the 80th year of his age) the most learned and excellent prelate
in France, of his time, by Firebrand Tartuff, archbishop of Ambrun, and his
council, (A. D. 1727, September 21) was on account of the bishop's admirable
pastoral instruction against the execrable constitution unigenitus, and the
antichristian formulary of pope Alexander the seventh; and because he
recommended the reading of Pere Quesnel's very pious and fine Reflections
Morales. -- This famous Jansenist, and father of the oratory, Psaquier Quesnel,
was the author of many books, (some of them very good) and lived to a great
age. He was born in 1636, and diet at last in prison (if I mistake not) a
sufferer for religion. He was severely persecuted for many years.


(edit. Paris, 1630) and over against a very remarkable passage from Cyril, (p.
548) I found several written leaves, bound up in the volume, and these leaves
referred to by an asterisk. The passage I call remarkable, is part of a homily
pronounced by the Alexandrian Patriarch before the council of Ephesus on St.
John's day, in a church dedicated to his names. In rehearsing his discourse to
the Holy Fathers, the Saint cites Heb. i. 6. and then addresses himself to the
apostle.

(...). -- "When he brings in the first-begotten into the world, he says,
Let all the angels of God worship him." -- (...), etc. -- O blessed John the
Evangelist, explain this mystery: Who is this first-begotten -- how came he
into the world? Mysterium hoc aperi, effare etiam nunc, qui voces habes
immortales. Resera nobis puteum vitae. Da, ut nunc quoque de salutis fontibus
hauriamus.

This passage of Cyril I have heard several learned Roman Catholic gentlemen
call a prayer, and affirm it was a proof of the Father's Invocation of saints,
in the beginning of the 5th century; for St. Cyril succeeded his uncle
Theophilus in the sea of Alexandria, October 16, 412. But to this it may be
answered, --

1. That Binius, though a zealous pleader for the catholic cause, (as the monks
of Rome miscall it) was of another opinion, for he takes no notice of this
passage in his notes (in calce part. 3, Council, Ephesini, tom. 2. p. 665, etc.)
and most certainly, he would not have failed to urge it, if he had considered
it as a prayer, and believed it did prove the invocation of saints.

2. Nor does Bellarmine, in his treatise de sanctorum beatitudine, Henricus
Vicus, de sanctorum invocatione, Gabriel Vasquez, de adoratione, or Gregorius
de Valentia, de oratione, make use of this passage of Cyril, though they do, ex
professo, and data, diligently quote all the councils and fathers they can, to
prove invocation of saints.

3. As rhetorical apostrophes, or prosopopaeias, are usual in all authors,
sacred or civil, this may be one in Cyril, and it seems very plain from the
passage, that it was intended for no more. It appears to be a rhetorical
figure, and not a prayer; such a figure as the Greek fathers were wont very
frequently to use in their orations and poems.

Cyril intending, as appears by the sequel, to answer his own question with a
passage in St. John's gospel, makes a long rhetorical apostrophe to the
apostle, as if he were there present, then adds, Annon dicentem audimus, (...)?
But do we not hear him saying? Or, as Binius has the reading, (...), let us
hear what St. John says, audiamus itaque dicentem, as if they had heard John
giving his answer, and then concludes with the first verse of the first chapter
of his gospel, (...), etc. In the beginning was the word, etc.

It is therefore very plain, that this passage of Cyril is only a part of his
homily or sermon, and that in a rhetorical manner, he quotes a text from a
gospel written by John about 330 years before, in answer to his own question,
who the word was? For Cyril to pray to John to tell them what he had told them
long before, were senseless and ridiculous; but to desire the apostle to do it
in a rhetorical apostrophe, was allowable. It amounts to no more than the
figurative expression in our liturgy, Hear what comfortable words our Savior
says. Hear what St. Paul says.

But if Cyril did in this passage truly pray to St. John, that could be no
argument for popish invocation of saints; for, if an hundred fathers in the
beginning of the fourth century, had preached up, and practiced invocation of
saints, yet that could not make it lawful and right, since we are taught by the
scriptures to direct our prayers neither to saint no angel, but to God only,
and in the name and mediation of Jesus Christ only. We are not only positively
ordered by the apostles to make all our addresses and prayers ot God only, and
by the mediation and intercession of Jesus Christ; but are told, that God is
omniscient, and so able to hear all our prayers; -- all-sufficient, and
therefore able to supply all our necessities; -- and that his mercies in Jesus
Christ are infinite. This makes our way sure in this particular.

On the contrary, the papists have no precept to pray to saints; nor any
promise that they shall be heard; nor any practice of the primitive church, for
300 years after Christ, to encourage them; and therefore, such popish
invocation is a novel, groundless, and impious error.

Some remarks on the doctrine of invocation of saints.
We are told by St. Peter, ( Acts v. 31.) that God had exalted the Lord Jesus
Christ to be a Prince and Savior, that is, an intercessor. -- By St. Paul, (
Heb. vii. 25.) that Christ is able to save to the uttermost all that come to
God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them; (chap. ix.
24.) that he is gone to haven (for this very end) to appear in the presence of
God for us: (1 Timothy ii.5.) that there is not other mediator betwixt God and men
but the man Christ Jesus, that is, whose prerogative it is to intercede for
sinners to the Divine Majesty; being an honor and dignity God has exalted him
unto, after his sufferings, and as a reward thereof: -- Thus are we informed by
the divine oracles, and yet, notwithstanding this, to make prayers and
supplications to the Virgin Mary, and a thousand other saints, for aid or help;
and to have by their merit and intercession, the gists and graces they pray for
conferred upon them; -- this is a doctrine of such dangerous consequence, as it
is a depriving of Christ Jesus of that grand dignity and prerogative he is now
in heaven exalted to, as much as in men lies, that I should have admired how it
ever came to be embraced by such as profess christianity, had not the spirit of
God foretold (1 Timothy iv. 4.) that some should depart from the faith, giving
heed to seducing spirits, (that is, seducing men) and doctrines of devils, that
is to say, doctrines concerning demons, or souls of famous men departed this
life; which the heathens called demons; and to whom they gave the worship of
prayer or invocation, as intercessors or inferior divinities. This prophecy
hinders my wondering at the thing: but then I must call such modern invocation
gentilism christianized; a deplorable corruption.

Ponder then, ye Catholics, in time, and think not to excuse yourselves by
arguing from the command Christians have here on earth to require each others
prayers to God for them: -- For, we have no command to supplicate any in heaven
but only God. ( Matt. vi. 8.) We have no reasonable assurance that the saints
in heaven do hear our prayers, and of consequence have not the same reasons to
request their prayers to God for us that we have to request the prayers of
saints on earth: nor is this all: our prayers to each other in this life are
only christian requests to recommend our conditions to God: offices only of
kindness: no acts of religious worship.

When St. Paul was on earth, had any one on bended knees, with hands and eyes
lifted up to heaven, in time of public prayer, and amidst the solemn prayers to
God, beseeched him for aid and help, and for the conference of gifts and
graces, he would have rent his clothes, and said, Why do ye these things? and
can we suppose, that now in heaven, the apostle is less careful to preserve
entire God's prerogative.

Beside, there is a great deal of difference betwixt St. Paul's saying,
Brethren, pray for us, or our requesting the prayers of the faithful here on
earth for us, and praying to saints in heaven, as practiced in the Roman
church. Our's, are only wishes and requests; their's, solemn prayers on bended
knees, made in the places and proper seasons of divine worship, and joined with
the prayers they make to God. They use the same postures and expressions of
devotions they use to God himself. They pray to them for help and aid, and make
them joint-petitioners with Christ; relying on their merits as the merits of
Christ.

In sum, in the tabernacle of this world, we are to request the prayers of
every good christian for us: but in the tabernacle of heaven, we are to call on
none but Him in whom we believe. As in the outward court of the Jewish
tabernacle, every priest was permitted to officiate, to receive and present the
devotions of the people to the divine majesty; but in the holy place, within
the vail, none but the high priest was to do any office or service: even so in
the tabernacle of this world, every christian being a priest to God, has this
honor conferred upon him; but in the holy of holies, in heaven, none but
Christ, our high priest, is to officiate. He only is there to appear in the
presence of God for us. It is his prerogative alone to receive our prayers, and
present them to the divine majesty. As none but the high priest was to offer
incense in the holy of holies, so none in heaven but Christ our high priest is
to offer our prayers to God his father. He alone is that angel to whom much
incense was given, that he should offer it with the prayers of all saints, upon
the golden altar that was before the throne. (Rev. viii. 3.) Which alludes to
the altar that was before the mercy-seat, on which the high priest only was to
offer incense.

But the catholic may say perhaps, that as on earth, men do not presently run
to kings to present their requests, but obtain his favors by the mediation of
courtiers and favorites; even so, it is fitting we have recourse to saints,
who are favorites in heaven, that we may obtain access to God, and have our
suits accepted of him. Thus have I heard some learned men of the church of Rome
argue. They should consider, however, in the first place, that if an earthly
prince had declared he would have no solicitor but his son, and that all
favors and royal graces should come to his subjects through his hands, and by
means of his mediation; such subjects could deserve no favor, if they make
their application to other favorites, contrary to their prince's command. --
In the next place, if the solicitor, the son, was out of the question, and no
such one had been declared by the king, yet as we petition earthly princes by
such as enjoy their presence, because they cannot give audience to all their
subjects, nor do they know the worthy; but God is omnipresent, his ears always
open, and his head bowed down to the prayers of his people; is no respecter of
persons, but gives a like access to the beggar as to the prince, and promises
to cast out none that make their application to him; it follows of consequence,
that we ought to address ourselves immediately to God, and ask from him. If an
earthly prince should thus invite his subjects to petition him for the supply
of their wants, I should account the man no better than a fool or a madman, who
would apply himself to any of the king's favorites.

The conclusion is; O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.
( Ps. lxv. 2.) Since God, who is infinite in mercy, omnipresent, and omnipotent
in wisdom and action, admits every man to the throne of grace, bids him ask in
the name of Jesus Christ, and promises, whatever we ask in his Son's name, he
will do it. -- Since the practice of praying to saints is injurious to Christ,
and does manifestly rob him of his royal prerogative, which is to be the one,
and only mediator betwixt God and man; for in this office, he has no sharers
or partners, according to the scripture account: As God is but one, and there
is no other; so the mediator (by the appointment of God) is but one, and there
is, there can be no other Quid tam proprium Christi quam advocatum apud deum
patrum adstare populorum. (Ambros. in Psalm. 39.) -- Pro quo nullus interpellat
sed ipse pro omnibus, hic unus verusque mediator est. (Aug. Cont. Parmen. l. 2.
c. 8.


-- And since, exclusive of these unalterable things, the Roman doctors cannot
be certain, that saints in heaven hear the requests of suppliants on earth, or
know whether our prayers are fit to be accepted of God The Roman doctors say,
the saints know the transactions that are done here below, by revelation or
intuition. -- To this I answer, if it is by revelation, that they know our
requests and prayers to them, then it must be either from God or from angels;
of which there is not the least assurance or certainty to be any where found;
but if we could be sure of it, then, in my opinion, we ought to pray to God or
angels to make known our prayers to saints; which would be strange religion. --
If it be by intuition, as the greatest part of the doctors say, and that the
saints see the requests in the divine essence, as men see things in a corporeal
glass; then, (exclusive of answering that the scriptures say no such thing) the
saints must see all things in the divine essence, or only such things as God is
pleased to permit them to see: if all things, they would be omniscient: if only
the things permitted to be seen, how is it possible for us to know whether God
is pleased to permit them to see therein our prayers, or to know the requests
we make to them, unless he had told us so. Let it be revelation or intuition,
it is sad stuff.


; let us reject that unlawful practice, the invocation of saints, and pray for
pardon and grace (as the gospel directs) to God the judge of all, through Jesus
Christ the mediator of the new covenant.

This do, and thou shall live.

N. B. Who was the author of these good remarks, these friars could not tell
me; as they were in the book when they bought it. If I mistake not, they are an
abstract from a letter of Bishop Barlow to Mr. Evelyn, with several additions.
I have not Bishop Barlow's works by me; but I think I have seen something to
this purpose, written by this prelate about one hundred years ago.

SECTION III.
Say why was man so eminently raised
Amid the vast creation; why ordained
Through life and death to dart his piercing eye,
With thoughts beyond the limits of his frame;
But that the omnipotent might send him forth
In sight of mortal and immortal powers,
As on a boundless theater, to run
The great career of justice; to exalt
His generous aim to all diviner deeds;
To shake each partial purpose from his breast;
And through the mists of passion and of sense,
And through the tossing tide of chance and pain,
To hold his course unfault' ring, while the voice
Of truth and virtue, up the steep ascent
Of nature, calls him to his high reward,
The applauding smile of heaven? Else wherefore burns
In mortal bosoms this unquenched hope,
That breathes from day to day sublimer things,
And mocks possession? Wherefore darts the mind
With such resistless ardor to embrace
Majestic forms; impatient to be free,
Spurning the gross control of wilful might;
Proud of the strong contention of her toils;
Proud to be daring?

April 8, 1729, we leave the religious, and proceed in the journey.
. 1. THE eighth of April, 1729, I bid the Ivonites adieu, and by their
directions walked up a very steep and stony mountain, which took me two hours,
and then arrived at what I had often seen before in this part of the world, a
great lake, the water of which was black as ink to look at as it stood, though
very bright in a cup, and must be owing, as I suppose, to its descending to the
abyss: by the side of this water, under the shade of oak-trees, many hundred
years old, we rid for an hour, on even ground, and then came to a descent so
very dangerous and dark, through a wood on the mountain's side, that we could
hardly creep it down on our feet, nor our horses keep their legs as we led them
to the bottom. This declivity was more than a mile, and ended in a narrow lane
between a range of precipices that almost met at top. This pass was knee-deep
in water, from a spring in the bottom of the mountain we had come down, which
ran through it, and so very stony, that it took us three hours to walk the
horses to the end of it, though it was not more than two miles: but at last we
came to a fine plain, over which we rid for an hour and a half, and arrived at
a wood, which seemed very large, and stood between two very high unpassable
hills. In this forest was our way, and the road so dark, and obstructed by the
branches of trees, that it was dismal and uneasy to go. On however we went for
a long time, and about the middle of it came to a circular opening of about
four acres, in which four very narrow roads met; that we had traveled, another
before us, and one on each hand. The way strait on we were cautioned by my
friends not to go, as it was a terrible ride; but whether to turn to the right
or left, we had forgot. I thought to the right; but my lad was positive, he
remembered the directions was to take the lefthand road. This caused a stop for
some time, and as I was a little fatigued, I thought it best while we paused to
dine. Finn brought immediately some meat, bread, and a bottle of cider, from
his valise, and under a great oak I sat down, while our horses fed on the
green. One hour we rested, and then went on again, to the left, as O Finn
advised. For several hours we rid, or rather, our horses walked, till we got
out of the wood, and then arrived at the bottom of a steep mountain; one side
of which is in the northern extremity of Westmoreland, and the other in the
north end of Stanemore-Richmondshire. This vast hill we ascended, and came down
the other side of the fell into a plain, which extends south-east for near half
a mile to the river Teese, that divides the north end of Stanemore from
Bishopric, or the county of Durham. Yorkshire here ends in an obtuse angle,
between two mountains, and the angle, for a quarter of a mile, is filled with
that beautiful tall ever-green tree, the broadleaved alaternus, intermixed here
and there in a charming manner, with the fir tree, the Norway spruce, and the
balm of Gilead. It is as fine a grove as can in any part of the world be seen.

A description of a little country seat, in the northern extremity of Stanemore.
. 2. Just at the entrance of it, by the side of a plentiful spring, which runs
into the Teese, there stood the prettiest little house I had ever beheld, and
over it crept the pretty rock-rose, the cassine, the seagreen coromilla, and
other ever-green shrubs. Before the house, was a large garden, seven or eight
acres of land, under fruit trees, and vegetables of every kind; very
beautifully laid out; and watered in a charming manner by the stream that
murmured a thousand ways from the spring by the house-door. I have not seen a
sweeter thing. It appeared so beautiful and useful, so still and delightful a
place, so judiciously cultivated, and happily disposed, that I could not help
wishing to be acquainted with the owner of such a lodge.

A description of a sleeping parlour in a grove.
. 3. As there was no other fence to this fine spot of ground but a ditch like a
ha to keep cattle out, I leaped into the gardens, and roamed about for some
time, to look at the curious things. I then went up to the house, in hopes of
seeing a human creature either high or low. I knocked at the door, but no one
could I find, though the mansion did not look like an uninhabited place. I then
sauntered into the grove behind, and in a winding way of three hundred yards,
that had been cut through the perennial wood, and was made between banks of
springing flowers, beautiful exotics, and various aromatic shrubs, crept on
till I arrived at a sleeping parlour, which stood in the middle of a circular
acre of ground, and was surrounded and shaded with a beautiful grove; the
larix, the phoenician cedar, and the upright savin. There was a little falling
water near the door, that was pleasing to look at, and charmed the ear. Entering
this room, I found the walls painted by some masterly hand, in baskets of
flowers, and the finest rural scenes. Two handsome couches were on either side
the chamber, and between these lits de repos was as curious a table for wood
and workmanship as could be seen. Pretty stools stood near it, and one
arm-chair. It was a sweet filent place, and in every respect, far beyond the
sleeping parlour in the gardens at Stow. Lord Cobham's, now Earl Temple's seat
in Buckinghamshire, 59 miles from London.


Passed the night in the sleeping parlour in the wood.
. 4. On one of the couches, as it was then evening, and I knew not what to do,
I threw myself down, and very soon fell fast asleep. I lay the whole night
without waking, and as soon as I could perceive any day, went to see what was
become of Finn and the horses. The beasts I found feeding on very good grass in
the green; and my lad still snoaring under a great tree: but he was soon on his
legs, and gave me the following account.

Finn's story.
. 5. About an hour after my departure from him, he saw a poor man pass over the
plain, who had come down the mountain we descended, and was going to cross the
Teese in a small skiff of his own, in order to go to his cottage on the other
side in Bishopric: that he lived by fishing and fowling, and sold what he got
by land and water to the quality and gentlefolk, twenty miles round him. And on
asking who lived in the house before us, on the skirts of the grove, he said,
it belonged to a young lady of great fortune, Miss Antonia Cranmer, whose
father had been dead about a year, (died in the house I saw): that she was the
greatest beauty in the world, and only nineteen, and for one so young, wise to
an astonishing degree: that she lived mostly at this seat, with her cousin,
Agnes Vane, who was almost as handsome as she: that Miss Cranmer had no relish
for the world, being used to still life, and seldom stirred from home, but to
visit an old lady, her aunt, who lived in Cumberland: that she was at present
there, about twenty miles off, and would soon return: that she kept four young
gentlewomen (who had no fortunes) to attend her and Miss Vane; two old men
servants, a gardner, and a cook; and two boys: that whenever she went from her
house, she took her whole family with her, and left every place locked up as I
faw. Finn's account surprised me. It set me a thinking if it was possible to
get this charming girl. I paused with my finger in my mouth for a few minutes,
and then bid him saddle the horses.

The author's manner of living for several days, in the cottage of a poor
fisherman in Bisheprick.
. 6. As soon as it was possible, I went over the river to the fisherman's
house, determining there to wait, till I could see the beautiful Antonia, and
her fair kinswoman, another Agnes de Castro, to be sure. My curiosity could not
pass two such glorious objects without any acquaintance with them.

The poor fisherman gave me a bed very readily for money, as he had one to
spare for a traveller, and he provided for me every thing I could desire. He
brought bread and ale from a village a few miles distant, and I had plenty of
fish and wild-fowl for my table. Every afternoon I crossed the water, went to
the sleeping parlour, and there waited for the charming Antonia. -- Twenty days
I went backwards and forwards, but the beauties in that time did not return.
Still however I resolved to wait; and, to amuse myself till they came, went a
little way off to see an extraordinary man.

A description of a charming little country seat, where a solitary gentleman
lived.
. 7. While I resided in this cottage, Christopher informed me, that about three
miles from his habitation, there lived, in a wild and beautiful glin, a
gentleman well worth my knowing, not only on account of his pretty lodge, and
lone manner of spending his time, but as he was a very extraordinary man. This
was enough to excite my curiosity, and as soon as it was light, the first of
May, I went to look for this solitary. I found him in a vale, romantic indeed,
among vast rocks, ill-shaped and rude, and surrounded with trees, as venerable
as the forest of Fontainbleau. His little house stood on the margin of a
fountain, and was encompassed with copses of different trees and greens. The
pine, the oak, the ash, the chestnut tree, cypresses, and the acasia,
diversified the ground, and the negligent rural air of the whole spot, had
charms that could always please. Variety and agreeableness were every where to
be seen. Here was an harbor of shrubs, with odoriferous flowers: and there, a
copse of trees was crowned with the enamel of a meadow. There was a collection
of the most beautiful vegetables in one part; and in another, an assembly of
ever-greens, to form a perpetual spring. Pan had an altar of green turf, under
the shade of elms and limes: and a water-nymph stood by the spring of a
murmuring stream. The whole was a fine imitation of nature; simple and rural to
a charming degree.

The history of Dorict Watson, the hermit.
. 8. Here lived Dorick Watson, an English gentleman, who had been bred a
catholic in France, and there married a sister of the famous Abbe le Blanc. But
on returning to his own country, being inclined by good sense and curiosity, to
see what the protestants had to say in defense of their reformation, he read
the best books he could get on the subject, and soon perceived, that Luther,
Melancthon, Calvin, Zuinglius, Bucer, and other ministers of Christ, had said
more against the Romish religion than the pretended catholics had been able to
give a solid answer to. He saw, that barbarity, policy, and sophistry, were the
main props of popery; and that, in doctrine and practice, it was one of the
greatest visible enemies that Christ has in the world. He found that even
Bellarmine's notes of his church were so far from being a clear and necessary
proof that the church of Rome is the body of Christ, or true church, that they
proved it to be the Great Babylon, or that great enemy of God's church, which
the apostles describe.

The hermit's observations on Bellarmine's notes of the church.
He saw, in the first place, that there has not been, since the writing of the
New Testament, any empire, but that of the church of Rome, so universal for
1260 years together, as to have all that dwell upon earth, peoples, and
multitudes, and nations, and tongues, to worship it; which is St. John's
description of the new power that prevailed on the inhabitants of the earth to
receive his idolatrous constitutions, and yield obedience to his tyrannical
authority. And all that dwell on the earth shall worship him, except those who
are enrolled in the registers, as heirs of eternal life, according to the
promises of the mediator of acceptance and blessing. ( Rev. xiii. 8.) The
waters which thou saw, where the whore sits, are peoples, and multitudes,
and nations, and tongues. (Rev. xvii. 15.) Bellarmine's Universality then is
directly against him.

The Cardinal's second note, (continued Dorick) is antiquity, and his third a
perpetual and uninterrupted duration. But on examination, I could find no
ruling power, except Rome papal, so ancient, as to have the blood of prophets,
and saints, and of all that were slain upon earth, of that kind for that space
of time, to be found in it. ( Rev. xviii. 24.) And what Rule but papal Rome had
ever so long a duration upon seven hills, so as to answer the whole length of
the time of the Saracen and Turkish empires.

The Cardinal's fourth note is amplitude, and it is most certain, that never
had any other church such a multitude and variety of believers, as to have all
nations drink of the wine of her fornication, and to gain a blasphemous power
over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations.

The fifth note is the Succession of its bishops; and the sixth, Agreement with
the doctrine of the ancient church: Now it is most true, that none but Rome was
ever so eminently conspicuous for so long a time for the succession of its
bishops under one supreme patriarch, as to be the living image of all the civil
dignities of the empire, where it was under one supreme church-head exercising
all the power of the civil head: nor did ever any enemy of God's church act for
so long a time like the red dragon in its bloody laws against the followers of
the lamb: and yet so far agree with the primitive church in fundamental
doctrines, as to answer the character of a false prophet with the horns of the
lamb, that is, Christ, but speaking like the red dragon to his followers, as
the church of Rome has done. An abstract of Dr. Chandler's observations on
Bellarmine's sixth note of the church.
Reader, it is well worth your while to turn to the first volume of that
admirable work, the Salter's-hall Sermons against Popery, and there see how the
Cardinal's notes of his church are considered by that learned and excellent
man, Dr. Samuel Chandler. His consideration of the 6th note more immediately
concerns me here, and therefore I give you an abstract of it.

The writings of the apostles are allowed even by our adversaries to be the
oldest records of christianity, and therefore to this ancient and infallible
rule we ought to appeal, to determine the controversy between us and the
papists, that is, to see how far this antiquity favors their doctrine and
practices, or is in agreement with ours.

1. The protestants renounce the Pope, and acknowledge one lawgiver, the Lord
Jesus Christ, for these reasons, -- That the Pope is not mentioned in the New
Testament; that Christ says, one is your master, even Christ; and St. Paul
says, there is but one Lord, and one Faith: the whole family in heaven and
earth is named of the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Protestants do not pay any worship at all to saints and angels, but as St.
Paul directs, consider Jesus Christ as their sole mediator and advocate; for
there is but one God, and one mediator between God and man, the man Jesus
Christ. They say, such veneration and prayer to saints and angels is
superstition and will worship, and only worship God with all their hearts and
souls, with the most raised affections, and the highst degrees of love and
fear, faith and confidence; for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord God,
and him only shall thou serve: And the angel in the Revelation said to John,
who fell down at his feet to worship him, See thou do it not, for I am thy
fellow servants.

3. We affirm, that in the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, after consecration,
there is nothing existent but bread and wine; for St. Paul says, Whosoever
shall eat this bread and drink this cup, and as often as you eat this bread and
drink this cup.

4. We affirm the eucharist is only a memorial of Christ's death; for Christ
says, do this in remembrance of me; and St. Paul assures the Corinthians from
Christ himself, (1 Cor. xi. 24) that they were to receive the elements with
this view only: and in his epistle to the Hebrews he tells us, that by one
offering Christ has for ever perfected those who are sanctified; and that
because there is remission of sins under the new covenant, there is no more
offering for sin; which proves; the eucharist is not a propitiatory sacrifice.

5. We renounce the doctrine of purgatory, and affirm that the future state is
no state of probation; for at death, the dust shall return to the earth as it
was, and the spirit shall return to God who gave it. And St. Paul declares,
that at the judgment seat of Christ every one shall receive the things done in
the body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad.

6. Protestants affirm, that the worship of God ought to be performed in a
language which all men understand; and that they have a right to search the
scriptures: For, if I speak with tongues; (says the apostle) in such a language
as those I speak to cannot understand, what shall I profit you? Let all things
be done to edifying. And Christ bids us search the scriptures: And how could
the word of Christ dwell richly in us in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing
one another in psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, if we had not the word of
Christ, and the scriptures of truth to read and consult for ourselves.

These are the protestant doctrines, and we see they were taught by Christ and
by his apostles. We have the sanction of the most venerable antiquity on our
side, and this note of the true church of Christ belongs to us in the highest
perfection.

When the papists then scornfully say, Where was your church before Luther and
Calvin? The answer is obvious: the doctrine of our church was in the writings
of the inspired apostles, where the church of Rome is never to be found; -- the
same that was taught by Christ himself, whom they have forsaken, and whose
faith they have corrupted. As to our predecessors and professors, they were the
persecuted disciples of the crucified Jesus, those martyrs and confessors,
whose blood the church of Rome has cruelly spilt. This is the genuine
antiquity the protestants have to boast of. Their doctrines are the word of
Christ, and their fathers were put to death by papists for the testimony of
Jesus.

But the papists on the contrary, exclusive of the example of the devil, who
was a murderer from the beginning, and Antiochus Epiphanus, Nero, Domitian, and
other monsters of mankind, who went before them in the measures of persecution,
cruelty, and blood; and excepting the idolatrous nations of the earth, and the
false prophets and deceivers among the Jews, by whose authority and example
they may vindicate their own idolatries, they have no genuine antiquity to
plead. Many of their doctrines were unknown to, or abhorred by the primitive
church, and are mere novelties and innovations, that were originally introduced
by superstition, and then maintained by cruelty and blood.




The seventh note of Bellarmine's holy Roman catholic church, is the Union of
the members among themselves, and with the head: And sure it is, that no where
else but in Rome papal, has there been such an union of head and members for
that length of time, as to apply the one mind of the ten kings for their
agreement together, to give their power, and strength, and their whole kingdoms
to the beast.

The eighth note produced by Cardinal Bellarmine, is Sanctity; and Watson saw
it fairly proved by the protestant writers, that no church but Rome did ever
appear so long together with such a medley of sanctity, in some doctrines, and
outward appearances of a strict holiness of life, joined with the most
abominable doctrines, and practices, to qualify it for the horns of the lamb,
and the speech of the dragon for the idolatrous and cruel commands of the
image; or, for having the form of godliness in the latter times, and yet
denying the power thereof.

In short, Dorick not only found, on a careful enquiry, that the system of the
church of Rome was error and turpitude, abomination, gain, and cruelty, -- and
her great design the very reverse of the gospel revelation, which came down
from heaven to prepare men, by the practice of universal holiness and virtue,
for eternal life; but likewise, that even her Cardinal's notes prove, this
church cannot be, in any sense, the true church of Christ; and Bellarmine was
perfectly infatuated to make choice of such things for the marks of his church,
as make it the very picture of Babylon the Great. He resolved then to come out
of Rome. He determined to forsake a church, which had altered the institutions
of Christ, and is therefore guilty of heresy as well as schism.

This change in religion gave Dorick the highest satisfaction, (as he told me)
and it was doubled by his being able to convert his beloved Adelaide from
popery to the church of Christ. But this joy had soon after some mitigation, by
losing one of the most agreeable women in the world. Death robbed him of his
heart's fond idol, and by that stroke he was so wounded, that he could not heal
himself for a long time. He became the real mourner. He kept the reasons of his
anguish continually before him, and was more intent upon spending his spirits,
than his sorrows. He grew fond of solitude and silence, that he might indulge
his passion, and provoke the emotion of that grief that was ready to devour
him. In short, he retreated to the silent place I found him in, which was a
part of his own estate, and turned hermit. He built the little villa I saw by
the waterside, and formed the ground into the natural garden I beheld. Le
Blanc mentions it in his letters, as an extraordinary thing, and very justly
prefers it to the labored and expensive Gardens at Chiswick, the work of the
late Lord Burlington, Here Watson laid in every thing he had a mind for, and
filled his closet with books. He amused and kept himself healthy by working in
his garden, and when he had done abroad, went in to read. His principal study
was the contemplation of the best learning, which is the true christian; and
from that he went to know what the Greeks and Romans have resolved and taught.
In some things, I found he was a learned agreeable man, and wondered greatly at
his whim in turning hermit. I said a great deal against it, as we sat over a
bottle of claret; told him he might employ his time and talents more usefully
in the world, by mixing and conversing with his fellow creatures, and by a
mutual participation and conveyance of the common blessings of nature and
providence; and as he was not forty yet, advised him to go over the Teese, and
make his addresses to Miss Cranmer or Miss Vane, both of them being most
glorious girls, as I was told, and capable of adding greatly to the delights of
philosophy. You have not seen two finer creatures, soul and body, than they
are, if I have been rightly informed; and I think, it would be a nobler and
more religious act to get one of them with child, in the state of holy wedlock,
than to write the best book that was ever printed. For my own part, I had
rather marry, and double-rib one of these dear creatures, than die with the
character of a father of the deserts. But in vain did I remonstrate to this
anchoret. Contemplation was become his Venus, from the hour he lost his
Adelaide; and he had lived so very happy in his lone state for seven years
past, that he could not think of hazarding felicity by a change of life. He had
all he desired. If at any time, and thing was wanting, Christopher the
fisherman, who came to see him once or twice a week, very quickly got him
whatever he required. This was Watson's answer to my advice, and seeing it was
to no purpose to say any more, I wished my hermit health, and bid him adieu.

A few remarks relating to the Abbe Le Blanc, and his letters.
. 9. Having, in the preceding article, mentioned the famous Abbe le Blanc, I
think I ought to say something of him in this place, by adding a few remarks in
relation to this extraordinary man. He was in England in the year 1735, and
writ two volumes of letters in octavo, which were translated into English, and
printed for Brindley in 1747. In this account of England, the French monk
pretends to describe the natural and political constitution of our country, and
the temper and manners of the nation; but, as is evident from his epistles,
knew nothing at all of any of them.

Voltaire, however, (that wonderful compound of a man, half infidel, half
papist; who seems to have no regard for christianity, and yet compliments
popery, at the expense of his understanding Voltaire's words are, -- And
notwithstanding all the troubles and infamy which the church of Rome has had to
encounter, she has always preserved a greater decency and gravity in her
worship than any of the other churches; and has given proofs, that when in a
state of freedom, and under due regulations, she was formed to give lessons to
all others. -- Is not this facing the world, and contradicting truth with a
bold front? Decency and gravity in the church of Rome! The licentious whore.
And formed to give lessons! Lessons, Voltaire! -- Is not her wisdom, in every
article of it, earthly, sensual, devilish; -- and her zeal, that bitter,
fierce, and cruel thing, which for ever produces confusion and every evil work?
With a just abhorrence, and a manly indignation, we must look upon this mystery
of iniquity, and never let that horror decay, which is necessary to guard us
against the gross corruptions of the Roman church; the idolatry of her worship,
-- the absurdity and impiety of her doctrines, -- the tyranny and cruelty of
her principles and practices. These are her lessons, Voltaire; and you ought to
ask the world pardon for daring to recommend a church, whose schemes and
pieties bid defiance to reason, and are inconsistent with the whole tenor of
revelation. This is the more incumbent on you, as you say you are a
philosopher, and let us know in more places than one in your writings, that by
that word, you mean a man who believes nothing at all of any revelation.


; who writes the history of England with a partiality and malevolence almost as
great as Smollet's, and pretends to describe the Britannic constitution, though
it is plain from what he says, that he has not one true idea of the primary
institutions of it, but taking this nation to be just such another kingdom of
slaves as his own country, rails at the Revolution, and like all the Jacobite
dunces, prates against the placing the Prince of Orange on the throne, and the
establishment of the succession in the present protestant heirs; though most
certain it be, that these things were the natural fruit and effect of our
incomparable constitution, and are de jure: -- In short, that Zoilus and
plagiary, -- that carping superficial critic, (as a good judge calls him); who
abuses the English nation in his letters, and denies Shakespeare almost every
dramatic excellence; though in his Mahomet, he pilfers from Macbeth almost
every capital scene: ( Shakespeare, who furnishes out more elegant, pleasing,
and interesting entertainment, in his plays, than all the other dramatic
writers, ancient and modern, have been able to do; and, without observing any
one unity but that of character, for ever diverts and instructs, by the variety
of his incidents, the propriety of his sentiments, the luxuriancy of his fancy,
and the purity and strength of his dialogue): Voltaire, I say, speaking of this
Abbe le Blanc, wishes he had traveled through all the world, and wrote on all
nations, for it becomes only a wise man to travel and write. Had I always such
cordials, I would not complain any more of my ills. I support life, when I
suffer. I enjoy it, when I read you. This is Voltaire's account of the Abbe.
How true and just it is, we shall see in a few observations on what this
reverend man says of our religion and clergy.

Some observations on the Abbe Le Blanc's fifty-eighth letter to the President
Bouhier, in which he misrepresents and blackens the reformation of England, and
abuses the English clergy.
The substance of what this French monk reports, vol. II. from p. 64 to p. 75,
in his letter to the President Bouhier, Of Mons. Bouhier, president of the
French academy.
Reader -- Bouhier, president of the French academy, (to whom Le Blanc
inscribes his 58th letter) died in 1746. He was a scholar. L'Abbe de Olivet,
(from whom he had the late fine edition of Cicero in seven volumes 4 to) speaks
of him in the following manner; -- Je me suis prete a ce nouveau travail, and
d'autant plus volontiers, que M. le President Bouhier a bien voulu le partager
avec moi. -- On sera, sans doubt, charm de voir Ciceron enter les mains d'un
traducteur aussi digne de lui, que Ciceron lui-meme etoit digne d'avoir
traducteur un savant du premier order. Tusc. tome 1. p. 13. -- And again; --
Feu M. Le President Bouhier, le Varron de notre siecle, and l'homme le plus
capable de bien render les vraies beautez d'un original Grec ou Latin, avoit
tellement retouche ses deux Tusculanes, qu'on aura peine a les reconnoitre dans
cette nouvelle edition. Tusc. tome 2. p. 1.

This is Olivet's account of Bouhier; and I have heard some gentlemen who knew
him say, that he was a very fine genius; but, they added, a popish bigot to the
last degree, and therefore, Le Blanc chose him as the fittest person of his
acquaintance, to write an epistle to, that abused the reformation, and the
English divines. Great is the prejudice of education! When so bright a mind as
Bouhier's cannot see the deformity of Popery, and the beauty of the
reformation; but, on the contrary, with pleasure reads the despicable
defamation in Le Blanc's letter.

N. B. The two Tusculans, so finely translated by Bouhier, are the 3d, De
aegritudine lenienda: and the 5th, Virtutem ad beat vivendum seipsa esse
contentam. De la virtue: Qu'elle suffit pour vivre heureux. -- See likewise, M.
Bouhier's curious and useful remarks on the three books, De Natura Deorum; the
five Tusculans; Scipio's dream; and on the Catilinaires, or three orations
against Catiline. These remarks are the third volume.


is this:

1. That Cranmer, and the other doctors, who introduced the reformation into
England, were downright enthusiasts, and compassed their designs by being
seconded by those, who were animated by a spirit of irreligion, and by a greedy
desire of seizing the possessions of the monks. It was the desire of a change
established the reformation. The new doctors seduced the people, and the people
having mistaken darkness for light, quitted the road of truth, to walk in the
ways of error.

2. As to morals, that this boasted reformation produced no change in that
respect; for the people are not purer than they were in former times, and the
ecclesiastics are despised and hated for the badness of their lives. The
bishops sacrifice every thing to their ambition; and the clergy of the second
rank have no respect for their office. They spend the whole day in public
places in smoking and drinking, and are remarkable for drunkenness, so
dishonorable to ecclesiastics. Their talk is the most dissolute, and the vice
that degrades these professors, sets a bad example to sober people, and makes
them the jest of libertines.

3. The only remarkable change produced by the reformation was the marriage of
priests; and, exclusive of this being against the decisions of the catholic
church, it is contrary to sound policy and experience. The marriage of priests
diminishes the respect we should have for them. The misconduct of a woman makes
the clergyman fall into contempt. The lewdness of the daughter makes the
priest, her father, the object of the most indecent jests; and for the most
part, the daughters of the clergy turn whores after the death of their father;
who, while living, spent more of his income in maintaining himself and children
in pleasure and luxury, than in works of charity. He lived profusely, and dies
poor.

Beside, if the English clergy were the greatest and most excellent men, yet a
great man in the eyes of the world, loses of the respect which is due to him,
in proportion as he has any thing in common with the rest of mankind. A Madam
Newton, and a Madam Fontenelle, would injure the illustrious men whose name
they bore. Nor is this all. Those who by their disposition cannot fix that
secret inclination, which induces us to love, on one person, are more humane
and charitable than others. The unmarried ecclesiastics are more animated with
that charitable spirit their function requires, as they have no worldly
affections to divert it. People very rarely (as Lord Bacon says) employ
themselves in watering plants, when they want water themselves. -- In short,
the English divines are the worst of men, and there is hardly any religion in
England. -- Thus does this French Abbe revile the English reformation and
divines. He misrepresents the whole nation, and with a falsehood and outrage
peculiar to popery and mass-priests, that is, to devils and the most execrable
religion, screams against the pure religion of the gospel, and dishonestly
blackens some of the finest characters that ever adorned human nature. So very
virulent is this reverend French papist against the clergy of England, that he
is even positive there is not a divine in the nation knows how to behave like a
gentleman.

In answer to the first article of impeachment, I observe, that it is so far
from being true, that Cranmer, and the other English divines, our reformers,
were enthusiasts, and compassed their designs by the assistance of those who
were animated by a spirit of irreligion, and by a greedy desire of seizing the
possession of the monks, (as this mass-priest asserts); that it is most
certain, on the contrary, Cranmer, and the other reformers, were wise and
upright christians, who, from a good understanding of religion, opposed the
false pretensions of the church of Rome. They saw that popery was contrary to
the true genius of christianity; its spirit insolent and cruel; and its
worship, not only a jumble of the most ridiculous fopperies and extravagancies,
borrowed from heathen customs and superstitions; but the impurest that ever
appeared in the world: that the designs of popish Rome were contrary to all the
principles of humanity; its doctrines abominable and sinful; and its offices
cursed and diabolical: it was evident, I say, to the conception of these great
men, (I mean Cranmer, and the other English reformers) that the Romish church
was treacherous and inhuman, blood-thirsty and antichristian; that her
devotions were horrible and impious; her ministers false prophets and liars,
covered and decked with the livery of Christ, but in every thing acting
contrary to the salvation wrought by Jesus; and therefore these wise and
excellent reformers renounced popery, and bravely declared for that religion,
which promotes the good of all mankind, and inspires men to worship the Father
only in spirit and in truth. They threw off the cloak and garments of
antichrist: they gloriously separated from him, and joined together in purity
and simplicity, to please the Lord Jehovah. There was no enthusiasm in the
case, (as Le Blanc, the mass-priest, has the front to say) but, when the light
of the gospel was obscured, and darkness had overspread the earth; when
ignorance and superstition universally prevailed, and the immoralities of the
Church of Rome were made to pass for christianity in the world; then did these
reformers call the people out of Rome, and preach to them the essential truths
of the faith. They called them from an idolatrous religion, and all its train
of direful effects; from that sin of the first rank, which strikes at the being
of a God, and ravishes from him the greatest honor that is due to him from his
creature, man; they called them from the horrible service of the mass, from
their addresses to angels and saints, and their worship of images; to the
inward knowledge of one true God, and the worship due to him only; to the
sanctification and honor, which is due to him above all things, and above
every name; to the living hope in God through Christ; to regeneration, and
inward renovation by faith, hope, and charity; to a holy conversation, and a
faithful performance of all the commandments; to true repentance, perseverance
to the end, and life eternal. To these truths, (not to be found in the religion
of our traveling mass-priest) did the great, the glorious English reformers
call mankind. They labored to establish them in every thing tending to a pure
faith, and good life. In this, there is not, there cannot be any enthusiasm.

And as to their being assisted by those who were animated by a spirit of
irreligion, and by a greedy desire of seizing the possessions of the monks, it
does not appear to be the truth of the case. Supposing there were such
irreligious men, the assistance the reformers had from any great men in Henry
the eighth's time, when the abbeys were destroyed, was so very little, that
malice only could mention it as an objection to the reformation. Popery, in
that monarch's reign, was still the established religion of England, and both
sides blame this king's persecutions. If papists were put to death for denying
the supremacy of Harry, protestants were no less sufferers, for opposing the
adoration of the host, and other religious impieties. And after the short reign
of his son, Edward the sixth, what assistance had the reformers under bloody
Mary? Did she not do all that infernal popery could suggest, to destroy
Cranmer, his brethren, and their reformation? And did not they, without any
other assistance than what they received from the spirit of God, continue to
vindicate the truth as it is in Jesus, and teach the pure doctrines of the
gospel, in opposition to the frauds and vile inventions of papal Rome. Without
minding the indignities, the torments, and the cruel death prepared for them,
the brave honest men went on with their heavenly work, and till, the flames
made them silent, endeavored to destroy the Romish artifices and immoralities,
and to spread the pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father. They
were zealous, with the truth of religion on their side, and labored to
convert, out of a pure and friendly regard to the eternal welfare of mankind.
They did the work, by the blessing of God, and therefore the malicious Le
Blanc, the mass-priest, reviles and blackens them.

What he says of usurpation, in respect of church lands, does not deserve any
notice. The reforming clergy were not the actors in that scene. It was the king
and his council. And as the Pope had showed them the way, by granting bulls for
the dissolution of the lesser monasteries, they thought, since the Pope's power
was taken away by a general consent of the nation, the king, the church, and
the people concurring, they might, with as little sacrilege, dissolve the rest.
The king and parliament (says Bishop Burnet) could not discern the difference
between greater and lesser as to the point of sacrilege. And although some uses
might cease by the doctrines of the reformation, as masses for souls departed,
and monks to pray the dead out of purgatory; yet there were others to employ
the church lands about, as some of them were in founding new bishoprics. And
if in this case, the reformers had been guilty of some wilful errors, that
could be no crime of the reformation. The culpable must answer it. For the
satisfaction of conscience about the reformation, there can be but three
questions fairly proposed. Was there sufficient cause for it? Was there
sufficient authority? And whether the proceedings of our reformation were
justifiable by the rule of scripture, and the ancient church? Upon these points
we ought to join issue, and I am sure the conclusion must be in the affirmative.

As to Le Blanc's second observation in relation to the marriage of priests,
which our reformation he says produced, it may be answered, that the doctrine
of a priest's marriage being unlawful, was borrowed by the church of Rome from
the ancient heretics; especially from the Manichees, who allowed marriage to
their hearers, as the church of Rome does to laymen; but forbad it to their
elect, as that church does to her priests. St. Augustine charges the Manichees
with this error. Hic non dubito vos esse clamaturos invidiamque factures,
castitatem perfectam vos vehementer commendare atque laudare, non tamen nuptias
prohibere; quandoquidem auditores vestri quorum apud vos secundus est gradus
ducere atque habere non prohibentur uxores. De moribus manichaeorum, Lib. 2. c.
18.

The first pope we read of that condemned the marriage of priests, was
Syricius, the Roman, A. D. 384 -- 398. And upon this account, I wonder Baronius
had not a regard to his memory: but it has been the misfortune of his holiness
since his death to fall under the displeasure of the Cardinal to that degree,
that he has struck him out of his catalogue of his Romish saints. He does not
tell us for what reason. Perhaps it was because this pope rather dissuaded
priests from marriage than peremptorily forbad it, as appears by his letters.
(Sir. epist. 1. and 4. apud Binium.)

The next pope, who distinguished himself against the marriage of priests, was
the son of Bald-head, count of Burgundy, (whose granddaughter was consort to
Lewis the 6th, king of France); I mean the celebrated Guy, archbishop of
Vienne, who succeeded Gelasius, A. D. 1119, and had for successor in the year
1124, Lambert of Bononia, commonly called Honorius the second. Calixtus the
second, pope and prince of Burgundy, was the first who absolutely forbad
priests marriage, and in case they were married, commanded them to be
separated. (Great. did. 27. c. 8.) This was in the beginning of the twelfth
century. And toward the end of it, A. D. 1198, the renowned son of Count
Trasimund, I mean Innocent the third, the ever memorable Cardinal Lotharius,
pronounced all the marriages of priests null. And afterward came on the
council of Trent, A. D. 1545 -- 1563, which anathematizes those who say such
marriages are valid. (Sess. 24. can. 9.)

But one would think, that God sufficiently declared his approbation of such
marriages, in that the whole world has by his appointment been twice peopled
by two married priests; first by Adam, secondly by Noah. And we are sure, the
holy scripture tells us, That marriage is honorable in all; (Heb. xiii. 4) and
places it among the qualifications of a bishop, That he be the husband of one
wife, having faithful children. (Tit. i. 6.) This, says St. Chrysostom, the
apostle prescribed to this end, that he might stop the mouths of heretics, who
reproached marriage; declaring thereby that marriage is no unclean thing, but
so honorable, that a married man may be exalted to the sacred throne of a
bishop. (Chrysostom. hom. 2. in c. 1. ad tit.) What do you say to this, Le Blanc?
I fancy you never read this homily of Chrysostom. -- And well might this saint
think it not unbecoming a bishop to marry, when our Lord thought it not
unbecoming an apostle, no not the prince of the apostles (as the Romanists will
have him), for it is without doubt, that St. Peter was married; in that the
scripture makes mention of his wife's mother. ( Matt. viii. 14.) And Clemens of
Alexandria tells us, that it was certainly reported, that when he saw his wise
led to death, he rejoiced; and having exhorted her and comforted her, he called
her by her name, and bid her remember the Lord. ( Clemens Alex. Stromat. l. 7.
p. 736. lut. 1629.) And that he was not only married, but begat children, the
same Clemens in another place affirms, ( Stromat. l. 3. p. 448.) Yea that St.
Philip and St. Jude were also married, and had children, Eusebius is witness. (
Eusebius. eccles. hist. l. 3. c. 20 -- 31.) And in like manner we find, that many
of the primitive bishops were married. Charemon bishop of Nilus, St. Spiridion,
St. Gregory Nazianzen, St. Gregory Nyssen, St. Hilary, and many more, were
married men.

Nor can it be said, that they took wives while they were laymen, and after
they took upon them the sacred ministry, were separated from them; since the
canons, commonly called the apostles, did prohibit either bishop, priest, or
deacon, to put away his wife upon pretense of religion. (See canon 5.) And if
any such shall abstain from marriage, as in itself abominable, command that he
be corrected, or deposed, and cast out of the church. (Canon 50.)

Now supposing these canons notwithstanding all that Whiston has said) were not
made by them whose name they bear, yet they are allowed by all to be of much
greater antiquity than the first Nicene council. And when in that council it
was moved, that bishops and priests, deacons and subdeacons, might not cohabit
with their wives, which they had taken before ordination, the motion was
presently dashed by the famous Paphnutius, who was himself a single person. (
Socrat. eccles. hist. l. 1. c. 11.) Yea a long time after this council, we meet
with many popes, who were sons of bishops and priests.

Pope Theodorus, Silverius, and Gelasius I. were the sons of bishops: pope
Boniface I. Felix II. and Agapetus II. were the sons of priests. ( Gratian.
did. 56. c. 2.) and that we may not think this strange, Gratian himself
informs us, that the marriage of priests was in those days lawful in the Latin
church. (Did. 56. c. 12.)

Nor is this doctrine to be rejected only as contrary to scripture, and to
primitive and apostolical practice, but because of the abominable fruits
produced in the church of Rome by it. For when the clergy might not have wives,
(which God allowed), instead of them they took whores; and that wickedness so
far prevailed in the church, that the Cardinal of Cambray informs us, (De
reform. eccles.) many clergymen were not ashamed publicly, in the face of the
world, to keep concubines. And the gloss upon Gratian says, A priest may not be
deposed for simple fornication, because there are few priests to be found
without that fault. This made Pius the second say, that though priests were by
the western church forbid to marry for good reason, yet there was stronger
reason to restore marriage to them again. (Hist. Council Trent. l. 7. p. 680.)
And many in that council, were so sensible of this, that they alleged the
great scandal given by incontinent priests, and that there was want of
continent persons fit to exercise the ministry. ( Paoli, p. 679. etc.) The
Emperor and the Duke of Bavaria did therefore require, that the marriage of
priests might be granted. ( Paoli, p. 680. etc.) And many bishops desired that
married persons might be promoted to holy orders; but this request was not
granted, because, as the fathers observed, if the clergy once come to be
married, they will no longer depend on the Pope, but on their prince.

To conclude this article, (and I shall do it in the words of a great man, a
prelate of the church of England, now living); To make war against the very
Being of their species, they, (the Romish priests) devote themselves to a
single life, in blasphemous opposition to that first great command and
blessing, increase and multiply.

As to Le Blanc's third observation, relating to the immoralities and bad
behavior of the English clergy; I answer, if there are several bad men among
so large a body as the protestant divines are, which is not strange, as it is
the common case of all societies, yet the majority of them, orthodox and other
dox, are as worthy men as can be found among the human race. I am very sure my
acquaintance among them has been much larger than Le Blanc's could possibly be;
and I can affirm from my own knowledge, that there are very many of this order
of men, not only as fine gentlemen as I have ever conversed with; but, a clergy
holy in heart; superior to pride, to anger, to foolish desires; who walk as
Christ also walked, and by their example and doctrine, labor to make the
people what the gospel requires they should be; that is, pious and useful, pure
and honest, meek and charitable; to walk by faith, and not by sight; and so
pass through things temporal, that they may be sure of obtaining the things
eternal. This I can say of many English divines of my acquaintance: and I may
add, that this testimony from me, who am not over-fond of the clergy, (as the
main of the christianity of too many of them lies in their opinion; decked with
a few outward observances, says Mr. Wesley very truly, in his letter to Bishop
Warburton) and only upon occasion, endeavor now to do them justice, is
certainly of more weight in their favor, than the calumny and abuse of a
furious bigot and mass-priest, can be to make the world have as bad an opinion
of them, as popery, and its wretched emissaries, would have the public
entertain. Consider this then when you read Le Blanc's letters.

On the other hand, I have had a very large and intimate acquaintance with
mass-priests in my time, in many parts of the world; and, a few excellent ones
excepted, I can affirm, that more wicked and more worthless men than these
Romish monks, I have never seen. If adultery, fornication, drunkenness, and
swearing, are crimes, then the greatest criminals I could name in these
respects, are Roman-catholic priests. Let this assertion of mine be set
over against the character the Ahbe Le Blanc gives the English protestant
ministers. Consider all I have said, when you read this mass-priest's
fifty-eighth letter, and then judge of our reformation and clergy. A word or
two relating to transubstantiation.
Note, reader, in the fourth volume of a work, called, Notes relating to Men,
and Things, and Books, you will find some more of my remarks on the Abbe Le
Blanc's epistles. You will see, among other observations on this monk, a
vindication of Archbishop Tillotson. The Abbe rails at one of this prelate's
fine sermons, with great malice and impudence, and has the vanity to think his
miserable declamation an answer. This wretched and despicable Romish apsstate
has the impudence and impiety to defend the worship of his God of dough, and
would, if it were in his power, persuade the readers of his letters, to adore
the tiny cake he prostrates himself before. For this the reader will find the
mass-priest well chastised in the work I have referred to; and see the doctrine
of the Lord's Supper set in a true light. You will find there a curious history
of the mass, from the time the popish doctors first drew it out of the
bottomless pit; and see it made quite evident, that in this abominable article
of their faith, as well as in every other part of their execrable religion,
they make void the law of God, and sink the human race into the vilest slavery
and idolatry. Beware then, Christians, of popery. Still bravely dare to protest
against her infernal schemes and inventions, and draw your religion from the
book of God, that holy volume of inestimable treasure. It is our light in
darkness, -- our comfort under affliction, -- our direction to heaven, -- and
let us die in defense of it, if ever there should be occasion, rather than
suffer the blood-thirsty papists, the red-handed idolaters, to snatch it out of
our hands. They will give us for it the despicable legends of fictitious saints
and false miracles; -- a history of diseases cured instantly by relics; --
accounts of speaking images; -- stories of traveling chapels; -- wonders done
by a Madona; -- and the devil knows what he has crowded into their wretched
heads. Down with popery then, the religion of hell, and may that happy state be
erected, when truth and love shall embrace and reign. Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly.


-- But it is time to return to the cottage of Christopher the fisherman, and
see what happened to Antonia and Agness.

The beginning of my acquaintance with Miss Cranmer, and how it ended in a
marriage.
. 10. When I came back to the poor man's cottage, he told me the ladies were
come home, and as he had given Miss Cranmer some account of me, as a traveller
who had journeyed into that remote corner of the world, in search of
antiquities and curiosities, he did not think this lady would be averse to
seeing me and hearing me too, if I contrived any plausible pretense to throw
myself in her way.

Immediately then I crossed the water, went up to the house, and as I saw her
and the fair Agness, her cousin, walking in the garden, near the ha, leaped it
over immediately, broad as it was, and with my hat in my hand, made her a low
bow, began an apology for presuming to introduce myself to her presence in such
a manner, and concluded with my being in love with her charming character,
before I had the honor and happiness of seeing her. What a condition then must
I be in, when a heaven-born maid, like her, appeared! Strange pleasures filled
my soul, unloosed my tongue, and my first talk could not be any thing but love.
A deal I said on the subject, not worth repeating to the reader; and the issue
of the matter was, that I became so well acquainted with this innocent beauty,
that, on taking my leave, I had an invitation to breakfast with her the next
morning. I was there by eight, and really and truly quite charmed with her. She
was pretty as it was possible for flesh and blood to be, had a beautiful
understanding; and as she had very little notion of men, having seen very few,
except the two old servants who lived with her, she had not a notion of any
danger that could come from conversing freely with a man she knew nothing of,
and who might be an enemy in disguise.

After breakfast, I offered to go, but she asked me to stay and dine; and to
sum up the matter, I did dine, sup, and breakfast with her every day, for a
month, till my good priest, Friar Fleming, arrived, on a letter I had sent him,
and we were married before the end of six weeks. We loved to excess, and did
enhance human happiness to a high degree. She was good as an angel; and for two
years we lived in unspeakable felicity. For the greatest part of that time, we
were at Orton-Lodge, as she liked the wild place. There she likewise died of
the smallpox, in the first month of the third year, and left me the most
disconsolate of men. Four days I sat with my eyes shut, on account of this
loss, and then left the Lodge once more, to live if I could, since my religion
ordered me so to do, and see what I was next to meet with in the world. As
grief sat powerfully on my spirits, and if not dislodged, would have drank them
all up very soon, I resolved to hasten to Harrogate, and in the festivities of
that place forget my departed partner as soon as I could. I laid my Antonia by
my Charlotte and my Statia, and then rode off. What happened at the Wells, and
all the observations I made there, and thereabout, the reader will find in my
fifth section.

N. B. As I mention nothing of any children by so many wives, some readers may
perhaps wonder at this, and therefore, to give a general answer, once for all,
I think it sufficient to observe, that I had a great many, to carry on the
succession; but as they never were concerned in any extraordinary affairs, nor
ever did any remarkable things, that I heard of; -- only rise and breakfast,
read and saunter, drink and eat, it would not be fair, in my opinion, to make
any one pay for their history.

SECTION V.
As once, ('it was in Astraea's reign)
The vernal powers renewed their train,
It happened that immortal Love
Was ranging through the spheres above,
And downward hither cast his eye
The year's returning pomp to spy;
He saw the radiant God of day
Lead round the globe the rosy May;
The fragrant airs and genial hours
Were shedding round him dews and flowers;
Before his wheels Aurora past,
And Hesper's golden lamp was last.
But, fairest of the blooming throng,
When HEALTH majestic moved along,
All gay with smiles, to see below
The joys which from her presence flow,
While earth inliven'd hears her voice,
And fields, and flocks, and swains rejoice;
Then mighty Love her charms confessed,
And soon his vows inclined her breast;
And known from that auspicious morn,
The pleasing CHEERFULNESS was born.
Thou, CHEERFULNESS, by heaven designed
To rule the pulse, that moves the mind,
Whatever fretful passion springs,
Whatever chance or nature brings
To strain the tuneful poize within,
And disarrange the sweet machine,
Thou, Goddess, with a master-hand,
Do each attemper'd key command,
Refine the soft, and swell the strong,
'Till all is concord, all is song.

The author goes to Harrogate.
. 1. IN the year 1731, I arrived at Harrogate, in the West Riding of Yorkshire,
in order to amuse my mind with the diversions and company of the place. An
account of the place, the wells, and company.
It is a small straggling village on a heath, two miles from Knaresborough,
which is thirteen miles from York, and 175 from London. The sulphur wells are
three, on the north side of the town, about 500 yards east of the bog. They
rise out of a little dry hill. The second is a yard from the first, and the
third is five yards and a half from the second. The water rises into
stone-basons, which are each enclosed in a small neat building of stone and
lime a yard square on the insides, and two yards high, covered over with thick
flagstones laid shelving.

The soil out of which these springs rise is, first, corn-mould, then a marle
limestone, and a stratum of plaster: the limestone is so abraded by the salt
in the water, that when dried, it swims: and where the water stagnates between
the basins and the brook, the earth is ink black, and has a dry white scum,
which smells like sulphur, and burns with a blue flame. The water does likewise
throw up much candied sea salts, that is, salts to which sulphur adheres, and
the pigeons resort from all parts to pick them up. In moist or rainy weather,
these waters send forth a strong smell at a distance, and before rain, they
bubble up with an impetuous force; yet neither rain nor drought increases or
decreases the springs.

From the large quantities of fine flower of brimstone which these waters throw
off, it is plain, that sulphur is the principal thing in them; but experiment
likewise proves, that besides sulphur, the stinking well has vitriol, nitre,
copper, and salt: These lie in solutis principiis in earth from which the water
comes, and may be separated by operation: some, I know, deny there is any
copper in these waters; but they do not consider that the glittering glebes of
a gold color found here, can be nothing else than glebes gilt with copper.

As to the diseases wherein this strong sulphur-water is proper, it is good for
every thing, except a consumption. For this I recommend the Scarborough
purging-chalybeate above all waters. But if, reader, you have obstructions in
your liver and other viscera, and are tormented with vicious humors in your
intestines; if your bowels are full of worms, the ascarides, or the broad round
worm, or the worms called the dog and the wolf, from their likeness to these
animals; or if, from a venereal cause, (the malady of many a priest and layman)
you have an ulcer in the anus, or in the neck of your bladder, go to Harrogate;
drink the stinking-water, live temperate, and you will be cured. For the
scurvy, that universal disease, it is better than all other medicines. It is
excellent in the jaundice, though of many years standing. It cures the asthma,
the scotomia, and palsy, and in many other deplorable cases gives wonderful
relief. Whatever ails you, (the consumption excepted) fly to Harrogate, and the
water will do you good, if your hour be not come: and if you are well, the
waters will promote long life, and make you the more able to dance with the
ladies.

Four pints of water are enough for a patient, to be taken from half an hour to
two hours after sun -rising, upon an empty stomach. You should take some
preparatory medicine; and walk drinking the waters to warm the body a little,
and make the passage the easier. Some people I have known drink their dose in
bed, and it does well enough: but exercise and the thin open air do better, and
contribute not a little to the patient's recovery: and there is no finer
fresher air in England than at this place.

In short, these wells are the strongest sulphur-water in Great Britain, and,
from the superior strength of the impregnating sulphur, it does not lose but
retain the sulphurous smell, even when exposed to a scalding, and almost a
violent heat; and, in distilling it, when three pints had been taken off from a
gallon of it, the last was as strong as the first, and stunk intolerably.

Make haste then to Harrogate, if you are sick, and have money, and in all
probability you will find the waters efficacious, unless thy distemper be a
consumption, or in its nature incurable, which is the case of many, as death is
the common fate of mankind.

Some advice to the drinkers of Harrogate waters.
. 2. But when you are there, let me advise you to exercise as much as you can
bear, without fatiguing yourself, -- and in the next place, to be regular in
meats and drinks, and as temperate as possible. Without these things, you will
lose the benefit of the waters. No good can be expected, if men will indulge
during a course of drinking the spaw, and be not only excessive in quantity,
but indiscreet as to the quality, of meats and liquors.

Some observations on spaw-waters, and advice to the drinkers in a mineral
course.
I have known some worn-out hard drinkers come to the Wells for relief, and at
the same time increase by intemperance what they had contracted by the same
measure. I have likewise seen some in a diabetes drink white wine; in a
cachexy, ale; in the stone and gravel, claret. I have known a man in a dropsy,
eat nothing but cooling, insipid, mucilaginous foods, and drink malt-drink
plentifully: -- a man in a jaundice, eat nothing but flesh meat and claret: --
in a scurvy, prefer the pungent, saline diet: -- in obstinate obstructions, and
a chronic hyppo, feed on thickning, hardening, and drying meats: -- and in a
hectic, vomiting, and spitting of blood, choose only such things as increase the
blood's momentum and velocity. I have known some gentlemen, who sat up late,
never exercised, could not eat a dinner, and therefore would indulge in a flesh
supper. -- All these, and many other irregularities, have I known expect
surprising effects from the waters, and when they received no benefit, say,
there were no sanative principles in them. Unreasonable, unhappy men! Be
temperate: regular: exercise: keep the passions within bounds: and you may
expect very astonishing cures; provided your bodies are not become irreparable,
and no longer tenantable: that your juices are not to the last degree glutinous
and acrimonious: that the corrosiveness of your blood is not bringing on
mortifications; -- nor inflammations, filling, dilating, and breaking your
vessels into suppuration and putrefactions. Then, live how you will, the waters
can be of no use. You must pay the debt of nature by an incurable disease.
Neither mineral waters, nor physic, can create and enliven new bodies, or make
and adapt particular members to the old. But if you are only hurt a little, and
the disease is curable, the waters will certainly be efficacious, and recover
you, if you use moderate exercise (riding especially) and diversion, a strict
regularity, and great temperance.

Conclusion of the author's advice.
O temperance! Divine temperance! Thou art the support of the other virtues, the
preserver and restorer of health, and the protracter of life! Thou art the
maintainer of the dignity and liberty of rational beings, from the wretched
inhuman slavery of sensuality, taste, custom, and examples; and the brightner
of the understanding and memory! Thou art the sweetner of life and all its
comforts, the companion of reason, and guard of the passions! Thou art the
bountiful rewarder of thy admirers and followers: thine enemies praise thee:
and thy friends with rapturous pleasure raise up a panegyric in thy praise.

O hunger, hunger, immortal hunger! Thou art the blessing of the poor, the
regale of the temperate rich, and the delicious gust of the plainest morsel.
Cursed is the man that has turned thee out of doors, and at whose table thou
art a stranger! Yea, thrice cursed is he, who always thirsts, and hungers no
more!

The company and manner of living at Harrogate.
. 3. As to the company at these wells, I found it very good, and was pleased
with the manner of living there. In the daytime we drank the waters, walked or
rid about, and lived in separate parties; lodging in one or other of the three
inns that are on the edge of the common: but at night, the company meet at one
of the public-houses, (the inns having the benefit of the meeting in their
turn), and sup together between eight and nine o'clock on the best substantial
things, such as hot shoulders of mutton, rump-stakes, hot pigeon pies,
veal-cutlets, and the like. For this supper, ladies and gentlemen pay
eight-pence each, and after sitting an hour, and drinking what wine, punch, and
ale, every one chooses, all who please get up to country-dances, which generally
last till one in the morning; those that dance, and those who do not, drinking
as they will. The ladies pay nothing for what liquor is brought in, either at
supper or after, and it costs the gentlemen five or six shillings a man. At one
the ladies withdraw, some to their houses in the neighborhood, and some to
their beds in the inns. The men who are temperate, do then likewise go to rest.

In short, of all the wells I know, Harrogate is in my opinion the most
charming. The waters are incomparable, no air can be better: and with the
greatest civility, cheerfulness, and good humor, there is a certain rural
plainness and freedom mixed, which are vastly pleasing. The lady of pleasure,
the well-drest tailor, and the gamester, are not to be found there. Gentlemen
of the country, and women of birth and fortune, their wives, sisters, and
daughters, are for the most part the company. There were at least fourscore
ladies in the country-dances every night, while I was there, and among them
many fine women.

The author meets at Harrogate six gentlemen of his acquaintance from Dublin.
. 4. Among the company I found at this agreeable place, were six Irish
gentlemen, who had been my contemporaries in Trinity-College, Dublin, and were
right glad to see me, as we had been Sociorums, (a word of Swift's) at the
conniving-house at Ringsend, for many a summer's evening, and their regard for
me was great. They thought I had been long numbered with the dead, as they
could not get any account of me for so many years; and when they saw me, at
their entering the public room, sitting by a beauty, in deep discourse,
God-zounds, (says one of them,) there he is, making love to the finest woman in
the world. These gentlemen were Mr. Gollogher, Mr. Gallaspy, Mr. Dunkley, Mr.
Makins, Mr. Monaghan, and Mr. O'Keefe, descended from the Irish kings, and
first cousin to the great O'Keefe, who was buried not long ago in Westminster
Abbey. They were all men of large fortunes, and, Mr. Makins excepted, were as
handsome, fine fellows as could be picked out in all the world. Makins was a
very low, thin man, not four feet high, and had but one eye, with which he
squinted most shockingly. He wore his own hair, which was short and bad, and
only dressed by his combing it himself in the morning, without oil or powder. But
as he was matchless on the fiddle, sung well, and chated agreeably, he was a
favorite with the ladies. They preferred ugly Makins (as he was called) to
many very handsome men. I will here give the public the character of these
Irish gentlemen, for the honor of Ireland, and as they were curiosities of the
human kind.

The characters of six Irish gentlemen. O'Keefe's character.
. 5. O'Keefe was as distinguished a character as I have ever known. He had read
and thought, traveled and conversed, was a man of sense, and a scholar. He had
a greatness of soul, which showed a pre-eminence of dignity, and by conduct and
behavior, the faithful interpreters of the heart, always attested the noblest
and most generous sentiments. He had an extreme abhorrence of meanness of all
kinds, treachery, revenge, envy, littleness of mind, and showed in all his
actions the qualities that adorn a man. -- His learning was of the genteel and
useful kind; a sort of agreeable knowledge, which he acquired rather from a
sound taste and good judgment than from the books he had read. He had a right
estimation of things, and had gathered up almost every thing that is amusing or
instructive. This rendered him a master in the art of pleasing: and as he had
added to these improvements the fashionable ornaments of life, languages and
bodily exercises, he was the delight of all that knew him.

Character of Mr. Makins.
Makins was possessed of all the excellent qualities and perfections that are
within the reach of human abilities. He had received from nature the happiest
talents, and he made singular improvements of them by a successful application
to the most useful and most ornamental studies. Music, as before observed, he
excelled in. His intellectual faculties were fine, and, to his honor I can
affirm, that he mostly employed them, as he did his great estate, to the good
of mankind, the advancement of morality, and the spread of pure theism, the
worship of God our Savior, who raised and sent Christ to be a Redeemer. This
gentleman was a zealous Unitarian, and, though but five and twenty, (when we
met at Harrogate) a religious man: but his religion was without any melancholy;
nor had it any thing of that severity of temper, which diffuses too often into
the hearts of the religious a morose contempt of the world, and an antipathy to
the pleasures of it. He avoided the assemblies of fools, knaves, and
blockheads, but was fond of good company, and condemned that doctrine which
taught men to retire from human society to seek God in the horrors of solitude.
He thought the Almighty may be best found among men, where his goodness is most
active, and his providence most employed.

Character of Mr. Gallaspy.
Gallaspy was the tallest and strongest man I have ever seen, well made, and
very handsome. He had wit and abilities, sung well, and talked with great
sweetness and fluency, but was so extremely wicked, that it were better for
him, if he had been a natural fool. By his vast strength and activity, his
riches and eloquence, few things could withstand him. He was the most profane
swearer I have known: fought every thing, whored every thing, and drank seven
in a hand; that is, seven glasses so placed between the fingers of his right
hand, that in drinking, the liquor fell into the next glasses, and thereby he
drank out of the first glass seven glasses at once. This was a common thing, I
find from a book in my possession, in the reign of Charles the Second, in the
madness that followed the restoration of that profligate and worthless prince.
But this gentleman was the only man I ever saw who could or would attempt to do
it; and he made but one gulp of whatever he drank; he did not swallow a fluid
like other people, but if it was a quart, poured it in as from pitcher to
pitcher. When he smoaked tobacco, he always blew two pipes at once, one at each
corner of his mouth, and threw the smoke of both out of his nostrils. He had
killed two men in duels before I left Ireland, and would have been hanged, but
that it was his good fortune to be tried before a Judge, who never let any man
suffer for killing another in this manner. (This was the late Sir John St.
Ledger.) He debauched all the women he could, and many whom he could not
corrupt, he ravished. I went with him once in the stage-coach to Kilkenny, and
seeing two pretty ladies pass by in their own chariot, he swore in his horrible
way, having drank very hard after dinner, that he would immediately stop them,
and ravish them: nor was it without great difficulty that I hindered him from
attempting the thing; by assuring him I would be their protector, and he must
pass through my heart before he could proceed to offer them the least rudeness.
In sum, I never saw his equal in impiety, especially when inflamed with liquor,
as he was every day of his life, though it was not in the power of wine to make
him drunk, weak, or senseless. He set no bounds or restrictions to mirth and
revels. He only slept every third night, and that often in his clothes in a
chair, where he would sweat so prodigiously as to be wet quite through; as wet
as if come from a pond, or a pail of water had been thrown on him. While all
the world was at rest, he was either drinking or dancing, scouring the
bawdy-houses, or riding as hard as he could drive his horse on some iniquitous
project. And yet, he never was sick, nor did he ever receive any hurt or
mischief. In health, joy, and plenty, he passed life away, and died about a
year ago at his house in the county of Galway, without a pang or any kind of
pain. This was Jack Gallaspy. There are however some things to be said in his
favor, and as he had more regard for me than any of his acquaintance, I should
be ungrateful if I did not do him all the justice in my power.

He was in the first place far from being quarrelsome, and if he fought a
gentleman at the small-sword, or boxed with a porter or coachman, it was
because he had in some degree been ill used, or fancied that the laws of honor
required him to call an equal to an account, for a transaction. His temper was
naturally sweet.

In the next place, he was the most generous of mankind. His purse of gold was
ever at his friend's service: he was kind and good to his tenants: to the poor
a very great benefactor. He would give more money away to the sick and
distressed in one year, than I believe many rich pious people do in seven. He
had the blessings of thousands, for his charities, and, perhaps, this procured
him the protection of heaven.

As to swearing, he thought it was only criminal, when it was false, or men
lied in their affirmations: and for whoring, he hoped there would be mercy,
since men will be men while there are women. Ravishing he did not pretend to
justify, as the laws of his country were against it; but he could not think the
woman was a sufferer by it, as she enjoyed without sinning the highest
felicity. He intended her happiness; and her saying No, kept her an innocent.

How far all this can excuse Mr. Gallaspy, I pretend not to determine: but as I
thought it proper to give the world the picture of so extraordinary a man, it
was incumbent on me, as his friend, to say all I could, with truth, in his
vindication.

Character of Mr. Dunkley.
Dunkley had an extensive capacity, an exquisite taste, and a fine genius.
Besides an erudition which denominates what we call a man of learning, he
happily possessed a social knowledge, which rendered him agreeable to every
body. He was one of the men that are capable of touching every note. To all the
variety of topics for conversation, the diversity of occurrences and incidents,
the several distinctions of persons, he could adapt himself. He would laugh
like Democritus: weep like Heraclitus. He had the short, pert trip of the
affected; the haughty, tragic stalk of the solemn; and the free, genteel gait
of the fine gentleman. He was qualified to please all tastes, and capable of
acting every part. He was grave, gay, a philosopher, and a trifler. He had a
time for all things, relative to society, and his own true happiness, but none
for any thing repugnant to honor and conscience. He was a surprising and
admirable man.

Character of Mr. Monaghan.
Monaghan had genius and knowledge, had read many books, but knew more of
mankind. He laughed at the men who lost among their books the elegancy of mind
so necessary in civil society. He had no relish but for nice studies and fine
literature, and despised too serious and abstruse sciences. This was reckoned a
fault in him by several judges: but with me it is a quere, if he was much to
blame. Politeness is certainly preferable to dry knowledge and thorny
enquiries. This gentleman's was such as rendered him for ever agreeable and
engaging. He was continually an improving friend, and a gay companion. In the
qualities of his soul, he was generous without prodigality, humane without
weakness, just without severity, and fond without folly. He was an honest and
charming fellow. This gentleman and Mr. Dunkley married ladies they fell in
love with at Harrogate Wells: Dunkley had the fair Alcmena, Miss Cox of
Northumberland; and Monaghan, Antiope with haughty charms, Miss Pearson of
Cumberland: They lived very happy many years, and their children I hear are
settled in Ireland.

Character of Mr. Gollogher.
Gollogher was a man of learning and extraordinary abilities. He had read very
hard for several years, and during that time, had collected and extracted from
the best books more than any man I ever was acquainted with. He had four vast
volumes of commonplace, royal paper, bound in rough calf, and had filled them
with what is most curious and beautiful in works of literature, most refined in
eloquent discourses, most poignant in books of criticism, most instructive in
history, most touching and affecting in news, catastrophes, and stories; and
with aphorisms, sayings, and epigrams. A prodigious memory made all this his
own, and a great judgment enabled him to reduce every thing to the most exact
point of truth and accuracy. A rare man! Till he was five and twenty, he
continued this studious life, and but seldom went into the mixed and
fashionable circles of the world. Then, all at once, he sold every book he had,
and determined to read no more. He spent his every day in the best company of
every kind; and as he had the happy talent of manner, and possessed that great
power which strikes and awakens fancy, by giving every subject the new dress
and decoration it requires; -- could make the most common thing no longer
trivial, when in his hand, and render a good thing most exquisitely pleasing;
-- as he told a story beyond most men, and had, in short, a universal means
toward a universal success, it was but natural that he should be every where
liked and wished for. He charmed wherever he came. The specific I have
mentioned made every one fond of him. With the ladies especially he was a great
favorite, and more fortunate in his amors than any man I knew. Had he wanted
the fine talents he was blessed with, yet his being an extremely handsome man,
and a master on the fiddle, could not but recommend him to the sex. He might,
if he had pleased, have married any one of the most illustrious and richest
women in the kingdom. But he had an aversion to matrimony, and could not bear
the thought of a wife. Love and a bottle were his taste. He was however the
most honorable of men in his amors, and never abandoned any woman to
distress, as too many men of fortune do, when they have gratified desire. All
the distressed were ever sharers in Mr. Gollogher's fine estate, and especially
the girls he had taken to his breast. He provided happily for them all, and
left nineteen daughters he had by several women a thousand pounds each. This
was acting with a temper worthy of a man; and to the memory of the benevolent
Tom Gollogher I devote this memorandum.

Having said above, that too many men of fortune abandon the girls they have
ruined, I will here relate a very remarkable story, in hopes it may make an
impression on some rake of fortune, if such a man should ever take this book in
his hand.

The history of the unfortunate Miss Hunt.
. 6. As I traveled once in the county of Kildare in Ireland, in the
summertime, I came into a land of flowers and blossoms, hills, woods, and
shades: I saw upon an eminence a house, surrounded with the most agreeable
images of rural beauties, and which appeared to be on purpose placed in that
decorated spot for retirement and contemplation. It is in such silent recesses
of life, that we can best enjoy the noble and felicitous ideas, which more
immediately concern the attention of man, and in the cool hours of reflection,
secreted from the fancies and follies, the business, the faction, and the
pleasures of an engaged world, thoroughly consider the wisdom and harmony of
the works of nature, the important purposes of providence, and the various
reasons we have to adore that ever glorious Being, who formed us for rational
happiness here, and after we have passed a few years on this sphere, in a life
of virtue and charity, to translate us to the realms of endless bliss. Happy
they who have a taste for these silent retreats, and when they please, can
withdraw for a time from the world.

The picture of Miss Hunt.
The owner of this sweet place was Mr. Charles Hunt, a gentleman of a small
estate and good sense, whom I knew many years before fortune led me to his
house. His wife was then dead, and he had but one child left, his daughter
Elizabeth. The beauties of this young lady were very extraordinary. She had the
finest eyes in the world, and she looked, she smiled, she talked with such
diffusive charms, as were sufficient to fire the heart of the morosest
woman-hater that ever lived, and give his soul a softness it never felt before.
Her father took all possible pains to educate her mind, and had the success to
render her understanding a wonder, when she was but twenty years old. She sung
likewise beyond most women, danced to perfection, and had every accomplishment
of soul and body that a man of the best taste could wish for in a wife or a
mistress. She was all beauty, life, and softness.

Mr. Hunt thought to have had great happiness in this daughter, though it was
not in his power to give her more than five hundred pounds for a fortune, and
she would have been married to a country-gentleman in his neighborhood of a
good estate, had not death carried off both her father and lover in a few days,
just as the match was agreed on. This was a sad misfortune, and opened a door
to a long train of sorrows. For two years however after the decease of her
father, she lived very happily with an old lady, her near relation, and was
universally admired and respected. I saw her many times during that term, at
the old lady's villa within a few miles of Dublin, and took great delight in
her company. If I had not been then engaged to another, I would most certainly
have married her.

In this way I left Eliza in Ireland, and for several years could not hear what
was become of her. No one could give me any information: but, about a
twelvemonth ago, as I was walking in Fleet Street, I saw a woman who cleaned
shoes, and seemed to be an object of great distress. She was in rags and dirt
beyond all I had ever seen of the profession, and was truly skin and bone. Her
face was almost a scull, and the only remaining expression to be seen was
despair and anguish. The object engaged my attention, not only on account of
the uncommon misery that was visible; but, as her eyes, though sunk, were still
extraordinary, and there were some remains of beauty to be traced. I thought I
had somewhere seen that face in better condition. This kept me looking at her,
unnoticed, for near a quarter of an hour; and as I found she turned her head
from me, when she saw me, with a kind of consciousness, as if she knew me, I
then asked her name, and if she had any where seen me before? -- The tears
immediately ran plentifully from her eyes, and when she could speak, she said,
I am Elizabeth Hunt. -- What, Mr. Hunt's daughter of Rafarlin! I replied with
amazement, and a concern that brought the tears into my eyes. I called a coach
immediately, and took her to the house of a good woman, who lodges and attends
sick people: ordered her clean clothes, and gave the woman a charge to take the
greatest care of her, and let her want for nothing proper, till I called next
day.

When I saw her again, she was clean and whole, and seemed to have recovered a
little, though very little, of what she once was: but a more miserable
spectacle my eyes have not often seen. She told me, that soon after I went to
England, Mr. R. a gentleman of my acquaintance of great fortune, got acquainted
with her, courted her, and swore in the most solemn manner, by the supreme
power, and the everlasting gospel, that he would be her husband, and marry her
as soon as a rich dying uncle had breathed his last, if she would consent, in
the mean while, to their living in secret as man and wife; for his uncle hated
matrimony, and would not leave him his vast fortune, if he heard he had a wife;
and he was sure, if he was married by any of the church, some whisperer would
find it out, and bring it to his ear. But notwithstanding this plausible story,
and that he acted the part of the fondest and tenderest man that ever lived,
yet, for several months, she would not comply with his proposal. She refused to
see him any more, and for several weeks he did not come in her sight.

The fatal night however at last arrived, and from the Lord Mayor's ball, he
prevailed on her, by repeated vows of sincerity and truth, to come with him to
his lodgings. She was undone, with child, and at the end of two months, she
never saw him more. When her relations saw her big belly, they turned her out
of doors; her friends and acquaintance would not look at her, and she was so
despised, and ashamed to be seen, that she went to England with her little one.
It fortunately died on the road to London, and as her five hundred pounds were
going fast by the time she had been a year in the capital, she accepted an
offer made her by a great man to go into keeping. Three years she lived with
him in splendour, and when he died, she was with several in high life, 'till she
got a cancer in her breast; and after it was cut off, an incurable abscess
appeared. This struck her out of society, and as she grew worse and worse every
day, what money she had, and clothes, were all gone in four years time, in the
relief she wanted and in support. She came the fifth year to a garret and rags,
and at last, to clean shoes, or perish for want. She then uncovered the upper
part of her body, which was half eaten away, so as to see into the trunk, and
rendered her, in the emaciated condition she was in, an object shocking to
behold. She lived in torment, and had no kind of ease or peace, but in
reflecting, that her misery and distress might procure her the mercy of heaven
hereafter, and in conjunction with her true repentance bring her to rest, when
she had passed through the grave and gate of death.

Such was the case of that Venus of her sex, Miss Hunt. -- When first I saw
her, it was rapture to be in her company: her person matchless, and her
conversation as charming as her person: both easy, unconstrained, and beautiful
to perfection. -- When last I saw her, she was grim as the skeleton, horrid,
loathsome, and sinking fast into the grave by the laws of corruption. What a
change was there! She lived but three months from the time I put her into a
lodging, and died as happy a penitent as she had lived an unhappy woman. I gave
her a decent private funeral; a hearse, and one mourning-coach, in which I
alone attended her remains to the earth; the great charnel-house, where all the
human race must be deposited. Here ends the story of Miss Hunt.

A word or two to Mr. R. who debauched Miss Hunt.
And now a word or two to the man who ruined her. Bob R. is still living, the
master of thousands, and has thought no more of the wretched Eliza, than if her
ruin and misery were a trifle. He fancies his riches and and power will screen
him from the hand of justice, and afford him lasting satisfaction: but, cruel
man, after this short day, the present life, the night of death comes, and
your unrelenting soul must then appear before a judge, infinitely knowing and
righteous; who is not to be imposed upon, and cannot be biassed. The sighs and
groans of Eliza will then be remembered, and confound and abash you for your
falsehood and inhumanity to this unhappy woman. In your last agony, her ghost
will haunt you, and at the sessions of righteousness appear against you,
execrable R. R.

The author falls in love with Miss Spence.
. 7. But to return to Harrogate. While I was there, it was my fortune to dance
with a lady, who had the head of Aristotle, the heart of a primitive christian,
and the form of Venus de medicis. This was Miss Spence, of Westmoreland. I was
not many hours in her company, before I became most passionately in love with
her. I did all I could to win her heart, and at last asked her the question.
But before I inform my readers what the consequence of this was, I must take
some notice of what I expect from the critical reviewers. These gentlemen will
attempt to raise the laugh. Our Moralist, (they will say) has buried three
wives running, and they are hardly cold in their graves, before he is dancing
like a buck at the Wells, and plighting vows to a fourth girl, the beauty, Miss
Spence. An honest fellow, this Suarez, as Pascal says of that Jesuit, in his
provincial letters.

An apology for the author's marrying so often.
To this I reply, that I think it unreasonable and impious to grieve
immoderately for the dead. A decent and proper tribute of tears and sorrow,
humanity requires; but when that duty has been paid, we must remember, that to
lament a dead woman is not to lament a wife. A wife must be a living woman. The
wife we lose by death is no more than a sad and empty object, formed by the
imagination, and to be still devoted to her, is to be in love with an idea. It
is a mere chimerical passion, as the deceased has no more to do with this
world, than if she had existed before the flood. As we cannot restore what
nature has destroyed, it is foolish to be faithful to affliction. -- Nor is
this all. If the woman we marry has the seven qualifications which every man
would wish to find in a wife, beauty, discretion, sweetness of temper, a
sprightly wit, fertility, wealth, and noble extraction, yet death's snatching
so amiable a wife from our arms can be no reason for accusing fate of cruelty,
that is, providence of injustice; nor can it authorize us to sink into
insensibility, and neglect the duty and business of life. This wife was born to
die, and we receive her under the condition of mortality. She is lent but for a
term, the limits of which we are not made acquainted with; and when this term
is expired, there can be no injustice in taking her back: nor are we to indulge
the transports of grief to distraction, but should look out for another with
the seven qualifications, as it is not good for man to be alone, and as he is
by the Abrahamic covenant bound to carry on the succession, in a regular way,
if it be in his power. -- Nor is this all; if the woman adorned with every
natural and acquired excellence is translated from this gloomy planet to some
better world, to be a sharer of the divine favor, in that peaceful and happy
state which God has prepared for the virtuous and faithful, must it not be
senseless for me to indulge melancholy and continue a mourner on her account,
while she is breathing the balmy air of paradise, enjoying pure and radiant
vision, and beyond description happy?

In the next place, as I had forfeited my father's favor and estate, for the
sake of christian-deism, and had nothing but my own honest industry to secure
me daily bread, it was necessary for me to lay hold of every opportunity to
improve my fortune, and of consequence do my best to gain the heart of the
first rich young woman who came in my way, after I had buried a wife. It was
not fit for me to sit snivelling for months, because my wife died before me,
which was, at least, as probable, as that she should be the survivor; but
instead of solemn affliction, and the inconsolable part, for an event I
foresaw, it was incumbent on me, after a little decent mourning, to consecrate
myself to virtue and good fortune united in the form of a woman. Whenever she
appeared, it was my business to get her if I could. This made me sometimes a
dancer at the Wells, in the days of my youth.

Miss Spence's reply to my addresses.
. 8. As to Miss Spence, she was not cruel, but told me at last, after I had
tired her with my addresses and petitions, that she would consider my case, and
give me an answer, when I called at her house in Westmoreland, to which she was
then going: at present however, to tell me the truth, she had very little
inclination to change her condition: she was as happy as she could wish to be,
and she had observed, that many ladies of her acquaintance had been made
unhappy by becoming wives. The husband generally proves a very different man
from the courtier, and it is luck indeed, if a young woman, by marrying, is not
undone -- During the mollia tempora fandi, as the poet calls it, the man may
charm, when, like the god of eloquence, he pleads, and every word is soft as
flakes of falling snow; but when the man is pleased to take off the mask, and
play the domestic hero; Gods! What miseries have I seen in families ensue! If
this were my case, I should run stark mad.

Miss Spence's mentioning the memorable line from Virgil, surprised me not a
little, as she never gave the least hint before, (though we had conversed then
a fortnight) of her having any notion of the Latin tongue, and I looked at her
with a raised admiration, before I replied in the following manner. -- What you
say, Miss Spence, is true. But this is far from being the case of all
gentlemen. If there be something stronger than virtue in too many of them,
something that masters and subdues it; a passion, or passions, rebellious and
lawless, which makes them neglect some, high relations, and take the throne
from God and reason; gaming, drinking, keeping; yet there are very many
exceptions, I am sure. I know several, who have an equal affection to goodness,
and were my acquaintance in the world larger than it is, I believe I could name
a large number, who would not prefer indulgence to virtue, or resign her for
any consideration. There are men, madam, and young men, who allow a partial
regard to rectitude is inconsistent and absurd, and are sensible, it is not
certain, that there is absolutely nothing at all in the evidences of religion:
that if there was but even a chance for obtaining blessings of inestimable
worth, yet a chance for eternal bliss is worth securing, by acting as the
spotless holiness of the Deity requires from us, and the reason and fitness of
things makes necessary, in respect of every kind of relation and neighbor.
This is the case of many men. They are not so generally bad as you seem to
think.

On the other hand, I would ask, if there are no unhappy marriages by the
faults of women? Are all the married ladies consistently and thoroughly good,
that is, effectually so? Do they all yield themselves entirely and universally
to the government of conscience, subdue every thing to it, and conquer every
adverse passion and inclination? Has reason always ways the sovereignty, and
nothing wrong to be seen? Are truth, piety, and goodness, the settled
prevailing regard in the hearts and lives of all the married ladies you know?
Have you heard of no unhappy marriages by the passions and vices of women, as
well as by the faults of men? I am afraid there are too many wives as subject
to ill habits as the men can be. It is possible to name not a few ladies who
find their virtuous exercises, the duties of piety, and the various offices of
love and goodness, as distasteful and irksome to them as they can be to a
libertine or a cruel man. I could tell some sad stories to this purpose: but
all I shall say more is, that there are faults on both sides, and that it is
not only the ladies run a hazard of being ruined by marrying. I am sure, there
are as many men of fortune miserable by the manners and conduct of their wives,
as you can name ladies who are sufferers by the temper and practice of their
husbands. This is the truth of the case, and the business is, in order to avoid
the miseries we both have seen among married people, to resolve to act well and
wisely. This is the thing to be sure, Miss Spence replied. This will prevent
faults on either side. Such a course as virtue and piety require must have a
continued tendency to render life a scene of the greatest happiness; and it may
gain infinitely hereafter. -- Call upon me then at Cleator as soon as you can,
(Miss Spence concluded, with her face in smiles) and we will talk over this
affair again. Thus we chatted as we dined together in private, and early the
next morning Miss Spence left the Wells.

May 12, a remove to Oldfield-Spaw, for a week, on account of an indisposition.
. 9. Miss Spence being gone from Harrogate, and finding myfelf very ill from
having drank too hard the preceding night, I mounted my horse, and rid to
Oldfield-Spaw, a few miles off, as I had heard an extraordinary account of its
usefulness after a debauch. There is not so much as a little alehouse there to
rest at, and for six days I lodged at the cottage of a poor laboring man, to
which my informer directed me. I lived on such plain fare as he had for
himself. Bread and roots, and milk and water, were my chief support; and for
the time, I was as happy as I could wish.

A reflection at solitary Oldfield-Spaw, after a night's hard drinking.
O nature! nature! would man be satisfied with thee, and follow thy wife
dictates, he would constantly enjoy that true pleasure, which advances his real
happiness, and very rarely be tormented with those evils, which obstruct and
destroy it: but, alas! instead of listening to the voice of reason, keeping the
mind free of passions, and living as temperance and discretion direct, the man
of pleasure will have all the gratifications of sense to as high a pitch, as an
imagination and fortune devoted to them can raise them, and diseases and
calamities are the consequence. Fears and anxieties and disappointments are
often the attendants; and too frequently the ruin of health and estate, of
reputation and honor, and the lasting wound of remorse in reflection, follow.
This is generally the case of the voluptuary. Dreadful Case! He runs the course
of pleasure first, and then the course of produced evils succeed. He passes
from pleasure to a state of pain, and the pleasure past gives a double sense of
that pain. We ought then surely, as reasonable beings, to confine our pleasure
within the bounds of just and right.

A description of Oldfield-Spaw.
. 10. As to the place called Oldfield-Spaw, it is seven miles from Harrogate,
and four from Rippon, lies on a rising ground, between two high hills, near an
old abbey, about five yards from a running stream, and in a most romantic
delightful situation, which resembles Matlock in Derbyshire, (ten miles beyond
Derby in the Peak) so very much, that one might almost take it for the same
place, if conveyed there in a long deep sleep. The same kind of charms and
various beauties are every where to be seen; rocks and mountains, groves and
valleys, tender shrubs and purling currents, at once surprise and please the
wandering eye.

An account of Oldfield-Spaw-water.
As to the mineral water at Oldfield-Spaw, it is an impetuous spring, that
throws out a vast quantity of water, and is always of the same height, neither
affected by rain or drought. It is bright and sparkling, and when poured into a
glass, rises up in rows like strings of little beads. It has an uncommon taste,
quite different from all other mineral waters that ever came in my way; but it
is not disagreeable. What impregnates it I know not. Dr. Rutty I suppose never
heard of this water, for it is not in his valuable quarto lately published; and
Dr. Short, in his excellent history of mineral waters, (2 volumes 4 to. London,
1734) says little more than that there is a medicinal spring there. What I
found upon trial is, that two quarts of it, swallowed as fast as I could drink
it in a morning, vomits to great advantage; and that four quarts of it, drank
by degrees, at intervals, works off by siege or stool, and urine, in a very
beneficial manner. I was apprehensive of a high fever from my night's hard
drinking at Harrogate, (which I could not avoid) and the Oldfield-water,
operating as related, carried off the bad symptoms, and restored me to sanity
in two day's time. This is all I can say of this fine water. It is very little
in respect of what it deserves to have said of it.

An observation on our people of fortune going to other countries to drink
mineral waters.
. 11. By the way, it is to me a matter of great admiration, that so many of our
rich and noble not only endure the fatigues and hazards of sailing and
traveling to remote countries, but waste their money, to drink spaw-waters
abroad, when they can have as good of every kind in England, by fiding a few
miles to the most delightful places in the world, in summer time. Our own
country has healing waters equal to the best in France, Italy, and Westphalia.
Harrogate-water, in particular, has all the virtues of the famous baths of
Aponus, within a mile of Padua in Italy, and is in every respect exactly alike.
See the analysis of Aponus-water by Fallopius and Baccius, and the analysis of
the English sulphur-spaw by Dr. Rutty. It is injustice then to our country to
visit foreign nations upon this account. -- Moffat-waters likewise are as good
as any in all the world.

Of Moffat-Wells.
N. B. Moffat is a village in Annandale, 35 miles S.W. of Edinburgh. The mineral
waters called Moffat-waters, lie at the distance of a long mile northward from
the village, and are 36 miles from Edinburgh. The springs are situated on the
declivity of a hill, and on the brow of a precipice, with high mountains at a
distance, and almost on every side of them. The hill is the second from
Hartfield, adjoining the highest hill in Scotland.

A vein of spar runs for several miles on this range of hills, and forms the
bottom and lower sides of the wells. It is a greyish spar, having polished and
shining surfaces of regular figures, interspersed with glittering particles of
a golden color, which are very copious and large.

There are two medicinal springs or wells, which are separated from one another
by a small rock: the higher well lies with its mouth south east. It Is of an
irregular square figure, and is about a foot and a half deep. The lower well is
surrounded with naked rocks: it forms a small arch of a circle. Its depth is
four foot and a half, and by a moderate computation, the two springs yield 40
loads of water in 24 hours, each load containing 64 or 68 Scotch pints; a
Scotch pint is two English quarts. -- The higher shallow well is used for
bathing, as it is not capable of being kept so clean as the lower well, on
account of the shallowness and the looseness of its parts.

These waters are strongly sulphurous, and resemble the scourings of a foul
gun, or rotten eggs, or a weak solution of sal polychrestum, or hepar
sulphuris. The color of the water somewhat milky or bluish.

N. B. The soil on every side of the wells is thin, and the hills rocky, only
just below the wells there is a small moss, caused by the falling of water from
the hill above it.

Virtues of these waters.
Great is the medicinal virtue of these waters, in relieving, inwardly, cholics,
pains in the stomach, griping of the guts, bilious and nephritic colics;
nervous and hysteric colics; the gravel, by carrying off the quantities of
sand, (but does not dissolve the slimy gravel) clearing the urinary passages in
a wonderful manner; in curing ischuries, and ulcerated kidneys; the gout, the
palsy, obstructions of the menses, old gleets, and barrenness: it is a
sovereign remedy in rheumatic and scorbutic pains, even when the limbs are
monstrously swelled, useless, and covered with scales. -- Outwardly, ulcers,
tumors, itch, St. Anthony's fire, and king's evil.

The waters are used by bathing and drinking: to drink in the morning three
chopins, six pints or a Scotch quart, four English quarts, at most: between the
hours of six and eleven. After dinner to drink gradually.

Medicines commonly used during the drinking of the waters are, an emetic or
two at first, and a few cathartic doses. The doses sal Glauberi and
polychrestum: syrup of buckthorn, and sulphur, is used along with the water.

But the cathartic prescription most in use, which was given by an eminent
physician, for a general recipe, to be taken by all who should at any time use
the water, is, pills that are a composition of gambozia, resin of jalop, aloes,
and scammony: these to all intents are a strong hydragogue.

The large vein of spar three feet thick, runs in one direction for six miles
to the wells, and crosses obliquely the rivulet at the bottom of the precipice,
and ascends the hill on the opposite side. Small veins of the same spar which
appears on the precipices, are on the side of the rivulet, and six small gushes
of water of the mineral kind proceed from them. The rocks and stones about the
tops of the wells, and in other parts of the hill and precipices, differ not
from common stones, no more than the water of the small springs in the
neighborhood with the common water.

The virtue of this water was discovered by Miss Whiteford, daughter of Bishop
Whiteford, in 1632. She was married in 1633. She had been abroad, and all over
England, drinking mineral waters for the recovery of her health, but found
little benefit, till by accident she tasted these waters in her neighborhood,
and finding they resembled those she had used elsewhere, made a trial of them,
and was cured of all her disorders.

Upon this she recommended the use of them to others, and employed workmen to
clear the ground about the springs, (their overflowing having made a small
morass) that the poor and the rich might come, and make use of a medicine,
which nature had so bounteously offered to them.

The author leaves Oldfield-Spaw, and sets out for Knaresborough, but arrives
at another place, May 19, 1731.
. 12. The 19th of May, at that hour, when a fine daybreak offers the most
magnificent sight to the eyes of men, (though few who have eyes will deign to
view it,) I mounted my horse again, and intended to breakfast at Knareshorough,
in order to my being at Harrogate by dinner time, with my friends again; but
the land I went over was so inchantingly romantic, and the morning so extremely
beautiful, that I had a mind to see more of the country, and let my horse trot
on where he pleased. For a couple of hours, he went slowly over the hills as
his inclination directed him, and I was delightfully entertained with the
various fine scenes, till I arrived at a sweet pretty country seat.

A morning thought on the rising sun.
The rising sun, which I had directly before me, struck me very strongly, in the
fine situation I was in for observing it, with the power and wisdom of the
author of nature, and gave me such a charming degree of evidence for the deity,
that I could not but offer up, in silence, on the altar of my heart, praise and
adoration to that sovereign and universal mind, who produced this glorious
creature, as the bright image of his benignity, and makes it travel unweariedly
round; not only to illustrate successively the opposite sides of this globe,
and thereby enliven the animal world, support the vegetable, and ripen and
prepare matter for all the purposes of life and vegetation; but, to enlighten
and cheer surrounding worlds, by a perpetual diffusion of bounties, to dispel
darkness and sorrow, and like the presence of the deity, infuse secret
ravishment into the heart. This cannot be the production of chance. It must be
the work of an infinitely wise and good Being. The nature, situation, and
motion of this sun, bring the Deity even within the reach of the methods of
sense assisted by reason, and shows such constant operations of his power and
goodness, that it is impossible to consider the present disposition of the
system, without being full of a sense of love and gratitude to the almighty
creator; -- the Parent of Being and of Beauty! By this returning minister of
his beneficence, all things are recalled into life, from corruption and decay;
and by its, and all the other heavenly motions, the whole frame of nature is
still kept in repair. His name then alone is excellent, and his glory above the
earth and heaven. It becomes the whole system of rationals to say, Hallelujah.

SECTION VI.
Come, CHEERFULNESS, triumphant Fair,
Shine through the painful cloud of care.
O sweet of language, mild of mien,
O virtue's friend, and pleasure's queen!
Fair guardian of domestic life,
Best banisher of homebred strife;
Nor sullen lip, nor taunting eye
Deform the scene where thou art by:
No sickening husband damns the hour,
That bound his joys to female power;
No pining mother weeps the cares,
That parents waste on hopeless heirs:
The officious daughters pleased attend;
The brother rises to the friend:
By thee our board with flowers is crowned,
By thee with songs our walks resound;
By thee the sprightly mornings shine,
And evening hours in peace decline.

May 19, 1731. A description of a beautiful spot of ground, and a sweet pretty
country seat in the west riding of Yorkshire.
. 1. WHILE I was thinking in this manner of the sun, and the author of it, I
came into a silent unfrequented glade, that was finely adorned with streams and
trees. Nature there seemed to be lulled into a kind of pleasing repose, and
conspired as it were to soften a speculative genius into solid and awful
contemplations. The woods, the meadows, and the water, formed the most
delightful scenes, and the charms of distant prospects multiplied as I
traveled on: but at last I came to a seat which had all the beauties that
proportion, regularity, and convenience, can give a thing. The pretty mansion
was situated in the midst of meadows, and surrounded with gardens, trees, and
various shades. A fountain played to a great height before the door, and fell
into a circular reservoir of water, that had foreign wildfowl swimming on its
surface. The whole was very fine.

Here I walked for some time, and after roaming about, went up to the house, to
admire the beauties of the thing. I found the windows open, and could see
several ladies in one of the apartments. How to gain admittance was the
question, and I began to contrive many ways; but while I was busied in this
kind of speculation, a genteel footman came up to me, and let me know, his lady
sent him to inform me I might walk in and look at the house, if I pleased. So
in I went, and passed through several grand rooms all finely furnished, and
filled with paintings of great price. In one of those chambers the servant left
me, and told me, he would wait upon me again in a little time. This surprised
me, and my astonishment was doubled, when I had remained alone for almost an
hour. An account of two wonderful figures, which played on the German flute.
No footman returned: nor culd I hear the sound of any feet. But I was
charmingly entertained all the while. In the apartment I was left in, were two
figures, dressed like a shepherd and shepherdess, which amazed me very much.
They sat on a rich couch, in a gay alcove, and both played on the German flute.
They moved their heads, their arms, their eyes, their fingers, and seemed to
look with a consciousness at each other, while they breathed, at my entering the
room, that fine piece of music, the masquerade minuet; and afterward, several
excellent pieces. I thought at first, they were living creatures; but on
examination, finding they were only wood, my admiration increased, and became
exceeding great, when I saw, by shutting their mouths, and stopping their
fingers, that the music did not proceed from an organ within the figures. It
was an extraordinary piece of clock-work, invented and made by one John Nixon,
a poor man.

The history of Miss Wolf.
. 2. At length however, a door was opened, and a lady entered, who was vastly
pretty, and richly dressed beyond what I had ever seen. She had diamonds enough
for a queen. I was amazed at the sight of her, and wondered still more, when,
after being honored with a low courtesy, on my bowing to her, she asked me in
Irish, how I did, and how long I had been in England. My surprise was so great
I could not speak, and upon this, she said, in the same language, I see, Sir,
you have no remembrance of me. You cannot recollect the least idea of me. You
have quite forgot young Imoinda, of the county of Gallway in Ireland; who was
your partner in country dances, when you passed the Christmas of the year 1715,
at her father's house. What (I said) Miss Wolf of Balineskay? O my Imoinda! And
snatching her to my arms, I almost stifled her with kisses. I was so glad to
see her again, and in the situation she appeared in, that I could not help
expressing my joys in that tumultuous manner, and hoped she would excuse her
Valentine, as I then remembered I had had that honor when we were both very
young.

This lady, who was good humor itself in flesh and blood, was so far from
being angry at this strange flight of mine, that she only laughed excessively
at the oddness of the thing; but some ladies who came into the apartment with
her seemed frightened, and at a loss what to think, 'till she cleared up the
affair to them, by letting them know who I was, and how near her father and
mine lived to each other in the country of Ireland. She was indeed extremely
glad to see me, and from her heart bid me welcome to Clankford. Our meeting was
a vast surprise to both of us. She thought I had been in the Elysian fields, as
she had heard nothing of me for several years: and I little imagined, I should
ever find her in England, in the rich condition she was in. She asked me by
what destiny I was brought to Yorkshire; and in return for my short story, gave
me an account of herself at large. Till the bell rung for dinner, we sat
talking together, and then went down to as elegant a one as I had ever seen.
There were twelve at table, six young ladies, all very handsome, and six
gentlemen. Good humor presided, and in a rational delightful cheerfulness, we
passed some hours away. After coffee, we went to cards, and from them to
country dances, as two of the footmen played well on the fiddle. The charming
Imoinda was my partner, and as they all did the dances extremely well, we were
as happy a little set as ever footed it to country measure. Two weeks I passed
in this fine felicity. Then we all separated, and went different ways. What
became of Miss Wolf after this -- the extraordinary events of her life -- and
the stories of the five ladies with her, -- I shall relate in the second volume
of my Memoirs of several Ladies of Great Britain. Four of them were Mrs.
Cheslin, Mrs. Fanshaw, Mrs. Chadley, and Mrs. Bissel; the fifth was Miss
Farmor; all mentioned in the Preface to the first volume of my Memoirs
aforesaid. May 25, 1731. An account of Oliver Wincup, Esquire


. 3. A fortnight, as said, I stayed with Miss Wolf, that was; but, at the time
I am speaking of, the relict of Sir Loghlin Fitzgibbons, an old Irish knight,
who was immensely rich, and married her when he was creeping upon all-fours,
with snow on his head, and frost in his bones, that he might lie by a naked
beauty, and gaze at that awful spot he had no power to enjoy. I did intend, on
leaving this lady, to be at Knaresborough at night; but the fates, for a while,
took me another way. At the inn where I dined, I became acquainted with a
gentleman much of my own age, who was an ingenious agreeable man. This was
Oliver Wincup, Esquire who had lately married Miss Horner of Northumberland, a fine
young creature, and a great fortune. This gentleman, by his good humor, and
several good songs, pleased me so much, that I drank more than I intended, and
was easily prevailed on to go with him, in the evening, to Woodcester, the name
of his seat; which was but ten miles from the house we had dined at. We came in
just as they were going to tea. There was a great deal of company, at least a
dozen ladies, besides half a score gentlemen, and all of them as gay and
engaging as the best-bred young mortals could be.

A description of Woodcester House.
. 4. The vill here was very odd, but a charming pretty thing. The house
consisted of several ground rooms, (ten I think) detached from one another, and
separated by trees and banks of flowers. They were entirely of wood, but finely
put together, and all disposed with the greatest symmetry and beauty. They were
very handsome without side, and the inside furnished and adorned with the
finest things the owner could get for money. Easy hills, little valleys, and
pretty groves, surrounded the sweet retreat, and the valleys were watered with
clear streams. The whole had a fine appearance. The varied scenes for ever
pleased.

The manner of living at Woodcester.
. 5. At this delightful place I stayed ten days, and was very happy indeed. We
drank, we laughed, we danced, we sung, and chatted; and when that was done,
'twas night. But country dances were the chief diversion; and I had a partner,
who was not only a wonder in face and person, (divinely pretty) but did wonders
in every motion. This was Miss Veyssiere of Cumberland: the dear creature!
Reader, when I was a young fellow, there were few could equal me in dancing.
The famous Paddy Murphy, an Irish member of the house of commons, commonly
called the Little Beau, well known at Lucas's coffee-house, Dublin: (He danced
one night, in 1734, that I was at the castle, before the late Duke of Dorset
and his Duchess, at their grace's request:) this gentleman, and Langham, the
miller, who danced every night at the renowned Stretch's puppet-shew, before
the curtain was drawn up, were both deservedly admired for their performance in
the hornpipe; yet were nothing to me in this particular: but Miss Veyssiere
out-did me far: her steps were infinite, and she did them with that amazing
agility, that she seemed like a dancing angel in the air. Eight nights we
footed it together, and all the company said, we were born for each other. She
did charm me, and I should have asked her the question, to try her temper, if
Wincup had not told me, her father intended to sacrifice her to a man old
enough to be her grandfather, for the sake of a great jointure; and in a week
or two she was to dance the reel of Bogee with an old monk. -- Poor Miss
Veyssiere! I said; What connection can there be between the hoary churl and you,

While side by side the blushing maid
Shrinks from his visage, half afraid?
I do not wish you may feather him, but may you bury him very quickly, and be
happy.

An account of a company of stroling players at Woodcester.
. 6. Another of our diversions at Woodcester, was a little company of singers
and dancers Mr. Wincup had hired, to perform in a sylvan theater he had in his
gardens. These people did the mime, the dance, the song, extremely well. There
was among them one Miss Hinxworth, a charming young creature, who excelled in
every thing; but in singing especially, had no equal I believe in the world.
She was a gentleman's daughter, and had been carried off by one O Regan, an
Irishman, and dancing master, the head of this company. He was the most active
fellow upon earth, and the best harlequin I have ever seen. Every evening we
had something or other extraordinary from these performers. He gave us two
pieces which so nearly resembled the two favorite entertainments called
Harlequin Sorcerer, and the Genii, (though in several particulars better) that I
cannot help thinking Mr. Rich owed his Harlequin Sorcerer to O Regan: and that
the Genii of Drury Lane was the invention of this Irishman.

You know, reader, that in the first scene of Harlequin Sorcerer, there is a
group of witches at their orgies in a wilderness by moonlight, and that
harlequin comes riding in the air between two witches, upon a long pole: Here O
Regan did what was never attempted at Covent Garden house, and what no other
man in the world I believe did ever do. As the witches danced round and round,
hand in hand, as swift as they could move, O Regan leaped upon the shoulder of
one of them, and for near a quarter of an hour, jumped the contrary way as fast
as they went, round all their shoulders. This was a fine piece of activity. I
think it much more wonderful, than to keep at the top of the outwheel of a
water-mill, by jumping there, as it goes with the greatest rapidity round. This
Mun. Hawley, An account of Mr. Hawley of Loch-Gur.
of Loch-Gur in the county of Tipperary, could do. He was a charming fellow in
body and mind, and fell unfortunately in the 22d year of his age. In a plain
field, by a trip of his horse, he came down, and fractured his skull. He did
not think he was hurt: but at night as soon as he began to eat, it came up. A
surgeon was sent for to look at his head. It was cracked in several places, and
he died the next day. He and I were near friends.

June 1, 1731. The author leaves Woodcester, and rides to a lone silent place
called Lasco.
. 7. The first of June, 1731, at five in the morning, I took my leave of honest
Wincup, as cheerful and worthy a fellow as ever lived, and set out for
Knaresborough; but lost my way, went quite wrong, and in three hours time, came
to a little blind alehouse, the sign of the Cat and Bagpipe, in a lone silent
place. The master of this small inn was one Tom Clancy, brother to the
well-known Martin Clancy in Dublin. He came to England to try his fortune, as
he told me, and married an old woman, who kept this public-house, the sign of
the Cat, to which Tom added the Bagpipe. As he had been a waiter at his
brother's house, he remembered to have seen me often there, and was rejoiced at
my arrival at the Cat and Bagpipe. He got me a good supper of trouts, fine ale,
and a squib of punch, and after he had done talking of all the gallant fellows
that used to resort to his brother Martin's, such as the heroes of
Trinity-college, Dublin, Captain Maccan of the county of Kerry, and many more,
he let me go to sleep.

The history of the two beauties in the wood.
. 8. The next morning, betimes, I was up, and walked into a wood adjoining to
Clancy's house. I sauntered on for about an hour easily enough, but at last
came to a part of the forest that was almost impenetrable. Curiosity incited me
to struggle onwards, if possible, that I might see what country was before me,
or if any house was to be found in this gloomy place: this cost me a couple of
hours, much toil, and many scratches; but at length, I arrived at the edge of a
barren moor, and beyond it, about a quarter of a mile off, saw another wood.
Proud to be daring, on I went, and soon came to the wood in view, which I found
cut into walks, and arrived at a circular space surrounded with a forest, that
was above a hundred yards every way. In the center of this was a house,
enclosed within a very broad deep mote, full of water, and the banks on the
inside, all round, were so thick planted with trees, that there was no seeing
any thing of the mansion but the roof and the chimnies. Over the water was one
narrow drawbridge, lifted up, and a strong door on the garden side of the mote.
Round I walked several times, but no soul could I see: not the least noise
could I hear; nor was there a cottage any where in view. I wondered much at the
whole; and if I had had my lad O Finn with me, and my pole, I would most
certainly have attempted to leap the fosse, broad as it was, and if it was
possible, have known who were the occupants of this strange place. But as
nothing could be done, nor any information be had, I returned again to the Cat
and Bagpipe.

Character of Mr. Jeremiah Cock, an old lawyer.
It was ten by the time I got back, and at breakfast I told Clancy, my landlord,
where I had been, and asked him if he knew who lived in that wonderful place.
His name (he replied) is Cock, an old lawyer and limb of the devil, and the
most hideous man to behold that is upon the face of the earth. Every thing that
is bad and shocking is in his compound: he is to outward appearance a monster:
and within, the miser, the oppressor, the villain. He is despised and abhorred,
but so immensely rich, that he can do any thing, and no one is able to contend
with him. I could relate, says Tom, a thousand instances of his injustice and
cruelty; but one alone is sufficient to render his memory for ever cursed. Two
gentlemen of fortune, who had employed him several years in their affairs, and
had a good opinion of him, on account of a canted uprightness and seeming
piety, left him sole guardian of a daughter each of them had, and the
management of fifty thousand pounds a-piece, the fortune of these girls, with
power to do as he pleased, without being subject to any control, 'till they
are of age. These ladies, as fine creatures as ever the eye of man beheld, he
has had now a year in confinement in that prison you saw in the wood; and while
he lives, will keep them there to be sure, on account of the hundred thousand
pounds, or till he dispose of them to his own advantage, some way or other. He
intends them, it is said, for two ugly nephews he has, who are now at school,
about fourteen years old, and for this purpose, or some other as bad, never
suffers them to stir out of the garden surrounded by the mote, nor lets any
human creature visit them. They are greatly to be pitied, but bear the severe
usage wonderfully well. One of them, Miss Martha Tilston, is in her twentieth
year; and the other, Miss Alithea Llansoy, in her nineteenth. They are girls of
great sense, and would, if any kind of opportunity offered, make a brave
attempt to escape: but that seems impossible. They are not only so strictly
confined, and he for ever at home with them, except he rides a few miles; but
are attended continually in the garden, when they walk, by a servant who is
well paid, and devoted to the old man her master. This makes them think their
state is fixed for life, and to get rid of melancholy, they read, and practice
music. They both play on the fiddle, and do it extremely fine.

Here Clancy had done, and I was much more surprised at his relation than at
the place of their residence which I had seen. I became very thoughtful, and
continued for some time with my eyes fixed on the table, while I revolved the
case of these unfortunate young ladies. But is all this true? (at last I said):
Or only report? How did you get such particular information? -- I will tell
you, Tom answered. Old Cock is my landlord, and business often brings me to his
house in the wood, to pay my rent, or ask for something I want. Besides, I
sometimes bring a fat pig there, and other things to fell. My daughter likewise
has sometimes a piece of work in hand for the ladies, and she and I take a walk
with it there by a better and shorter way than you went. You cannot think how
glad they are to see us, and they let me into all their perplexities and
distress.

On hearing this, a sudden thought of being serviceable to these ladies came
into my head, and I was going to ask a question in relation to it, when two
horsemen rode up to the door, and one of them called House! This, says my
landlord, is old Cock and his man; and immediately went out to him, to know his
will. He told him, he came for the ride-sake himself, to see if any letters
were left for him by that day's post at his house, and would dine with him if
he had any thing to eat. That I have, (the man replied), as fine a fowl, bacon
and greens, as ever was served up to any table, and only one gentleman, a
stranger and traveller, to sit down to it. Cock upon this came into the room I
was sitting in, and after looking very earnestly at me, said, Your servant,
Sir. I told him I was his most humble, and right glad to meet with a gentleman
for society in that lone place. I immediately began a story of a cock and a
bull, and made the old fellow grin now and then. I informed him among other
things, that I was traveling to Westmoreland, to look after some estates I had
there, but must hurry back to London very soon, for my wife was within a few
weeks of her time. You are a married man then, Sir, he replied. Yes, indeed,
and so supremely blessed with the charms and perfections, the fondness and
obedience of a wife, that I would not be unmarried for all the world: few men
living so happy as I am in the nuptial state. -- Here dinner was brought in,
and to save the old gentleman trouble, I would cut up the fowl. I helped him
plentifully to a slice of the breast, and the tips of the wings, and picked out
for him the tenderest greens. I was as complaisant as it was possible, and
drank his health many times. The bottle after dinner I put about pretty quick,
and told my old gentleman, if affairs ever brought him up to London, I should
be glad to see him at my house in Golden-Square, the very next door to Sir John
Heir's; or, if I could be of any service to him there, he would oblige me very
much by letting me know in what way. In short, I so buttered him with words,
and filled him with fowl and wine, that he seemed well pleased, especially when
he found there was nothing to pay, as I informed him it was my own dinner I had
bespoke, and dined with double pleasure in having the satisfaction of his most
agreeable company. He was a fine politician, I said, and talked extremely well
of the government and the times: that I had received more true knowledge from
his just notions, than from all I had read of men and things, or from
conversing with any one. The glass during this time was not long still, but in
such toasts as I found were grateful to his Jacobite heart, drank brimmers as
fast as opportunity served, and he pledged me and cottoned in a very diverting
way. He grew very fond of me at last, and hoped I would spare so much time, as
to come and dine with him the next day. This honor I assured him I would do
myself, and punctually be with him at his hour. He then rid off, brim full, and
I walked out to consider of this affair. But before I proceed any farther in my
story, I must give a description of this man.

A description of old Cock the lawyer.
Cock, the old lawyer and guardian, was a low man, about four feet eight
inches, very broad, and near seventy years old. He was humped behind to an
enormous degree, and his belly as a vast flasket of garbage projected
monstrously before. He had the most hanging look I have ever seen. His brows
were prodigious, and frowning in a shocking manner; his eyes very little, and
above an inch within his head; his nose hooked like a buzzard, wide nostrils
like a horse, and his mouth sparrow. In this case, was a mind quite cunning, in
the worst sense of the word, acute, artful, designing and base. There was not a
spark of honor or generosity in his soul.

How to circumvent this able one, and deliver the two beauties from his
oppressive power, was the question: it seemed almost impossible; but I resolved
to do my best. This I told Clancy, and requested, as I was to dine with Cock
the next day, that he would be there in the morning, on some pretense or other,
and let the ladies know, I offered them my service, without any other view than
to do them good; and if they accepted it, to inform me by a note, slipped into my
hand when they saw me, that if they could direct me what to do, I would execute
it at any hazard, or let them hint the least particular that might have any
tendency to their freedom in some time to come, though it were three months
off, and I would wait for the moment, and study to improve the scheme. This my
landlord very carefully acquainted them with, at the time I mentioned; and by
two o'clock I was at Cock's house, to see these beauties, and know what they
thought of the service offered them. The old man received me much civiler than
I thought he would do when he was sober, and had, what my landlord told me was
a very rare thing in his house, to wit, a good dinner that day. Just as it was
brought in, the ladies entered, (two charming creatures indeed), and made me
very low courtesies, while their eyes declared the sense they had of the good I
intended them. Cock said, these are my nieces, Sir, and as soon as I had
saluted them, we sat down to table. The eldest carved, and helped me to the
best the board afforded, and young as they were, they both showed by their
manner, and the little they said, that they were women of sense and breeding.
They retired, a few minutes after dinner, and the youngest contrived, in going
off, to give me a billet in an invisible manner. I then turned to Cock
entirely, heard him abuse the government in nonsense and falsehoods, as all
Jacobites do; and after we had drank and talked for better than an hour, took
my leave of him very willingly, to read the following note.

SIR,
As you can have nothing in view but our happiness, in your most generous offer
of assistance, we have not words to express our grateful sense of the intended
favor. What is to be done upon the occasion, as yet we cannot imagine, as we
are so confined and watched, and the doors of the house locked and barred in
such a manner every night, that a cat could not get out at any part of it. You
shall hear from us however soon, if possible, to some purpose; and in the mean
time we are,

SIR, Your ever obliged servants, M.T. A.L.



What to do then I could not tell; but as I rid back I consulted with my lad O
Fin, who was a very extraordinary young man, and asked him what observations he
had made on the servants and place. He said, he had tried the depth of the
water in the mote all round, and found it fordable at one angle, waist high,
and about two feet broad the rock he trod on. He had stripped, and walked it
over to be sure of the thing. As to the people, he fancied there was one young
man, a labourer by the year under the gardener, who would, for a reasonable
reward for losing his place, be aiding in the escape of the ladies; for he
talked with pity of them, and with great severity of his master: that if I
pleased, he would sound this man, and let me know more in relation to him: that
if he would be concerned, he could very easily carry the ladies on his back
across the water, as he was a tall man, and then we might take them behind us
to what place we pleased: or, if it was not safe trusting this man, for fear of
his telling his master, in hopes of more money on that side, then, he would
himself engage to bring the ladies and their clothes over, on his own back,
with wetting only their legs, if they could be at the waterside some hour in
the night. This was not bad to be sure; but I was afraid to trust the man; for,
if he should inform old Cock of the thing, they would be confined to their
chambers, and made close prisoners for the time to come. It was better
therefore to rely entirely upon O Fin, if they could get into the garden in the
night.

In answer then to another letter I had from the ladies by my landlord's
daughter the next morning, in which they lamented the appearing impossibility
of an escape, I let them know immediately the state of the water, and desired
to be informed what they thought of the gardener's man; or, if he would not do,
could they at any particular hour, get to that angle of the mote I named, to be
brought over on my man's back, and then immediately ride off behind us on
pillions, which should be prepared.mdash;Their answer was, that they dared not
trust any of Mr. Cock's men, but thought my own servant would do, and the
scheme reasonable and seemingly safe, if they could get out. They gave me a
million of thanks for my amazing care of them, and called the immortal powers
to witness the high sense they had of their unutterable obligation to me.

Waiting then for them, I staid at the little inn three days longer, and at
last received a billet to let me know, that at twelve o'clock that night, which
was the sixth of June, they could, by an accident that had happened, be at the
appointed place, and ready to go wherever I pleased. To a minute my man and I
were there, and in a few moments, O Fin brought them and their clothes over
safe. In an instant after they were behind us, and we rid away as fast as we
could. Six hours we traveled without stopping, and in that time, had gone
about thirty miles. We breakfasted very gaily at our inn, and when the horses
had rested a couple of hours, we set out again, and rid till three in the
afternoon, when we baited at a lone house in a valley, called Straveret Vale,
which had every rural charm that can be found in the finest part of Juan
Fernandes. A young couple, vastly civil, kept here a small clean public house,
the sign of the pilgrim, on the very margin of a pretty river, and the plain
things they had were as good as we could desire. Their bread, their drink,
their fowl, their eggs, their butter, cheese, vegetables, and bacon, were
excellent, and as they had good beds, I thought we could not do better than lie
by for two or three days in this sweet place, 'till it was determined, where
the ladies should fix. We were at least fixty miles from old Cock's house, and
in an obscurity that would conceal us from any pursuers; for we had kept the
cross roads and by-ways, and were on the confines of Westmoreland. Here then we
agreed to rest for a little time. In reality, it was just as I pleased. The
ladies were all acknowledgment for what I did to deliver them, and all
submission to my direction. They had each of them thirty guineas in their
purses, as they showed me, but what to do after that was gone, or where to go
while it lasted, to be in safety, they could not tell.

The affair perplexed me very much, and I turned it a thousand ways, without
being able to settle it as I would. I had two young heiresses on my hands, who
wanted more than a year of being at age, and I must support them, and place
them in some spot of decency, security, and peace, since I had gone thus far,
or I had injured them greatly, instead of serving them, in bringing them from
their guardian's house. This took up all my thoughts for three days. I
concealed however my uneasiness from them, and endeavored to make the house
and place quite pleasing to them. I kept up a cheerfulness and gaiety, and we
sat down with joy and pleasure to breakfast, dinner, and supper. Within doors,
we played at cards, we sung, and I entertained them with my German-flute.
Abroad, we walked, fished, and sometimes I rowed them up the river in a boat
the man of the house had. The whole scheme was really delightful, and as the
girls had great quickness and vivacity, and were far from being ignorant,
considering their few years, I could have wished it was possible to stay there
much longer: but it was no place for them, and I was obliged to call at
Claytor, in a little time. I could not forget my promise to the lovely Miss
Spence. My honor was engaged, and there was no time to lose. It is true, if I
had not been engaged, I might immediately have married either the beautiful
Miss Tilston, or the more beautiful Miss Llandsoy, then become my wards; but as
they were minors, if such a wife died under age, I could be no gainer, and
might have children to maintain without any fortune. All these things sat
powerfully on my spirits, and I was obliged at last to make the following
declaration to the ladies, which I did the third day after dinner.

Miss Tilston, Miss Llandsoy, I am sensible you have too high an opinion of
what I have done to serve you, and think there is more merit in it than there
really is; for a man of any generosity and ability would, I imagine, do all
that was possible to deliver two young ladies of your charms and perfections,
from the slavery and misery your guardian kept you in: I am likewise sure you
believe I would do every thing in my power, to secure your happiness, and give
you the possession of every blessing of time. I honor, I admire, I regard you
both, to a high degree; and if I were some powerful genie, I would crown your
lives with stable felicity and glory. But nature, ladies, has irrevocably fixed
limits, beyond which we cannot pass, and my sphere of action is far from being
large. My fortune is not very great, and thereby prevents my being so useful a
friend to you as I would willingly be. However, though it is not in my power to
do according to my inclination, in regard to your case, and with security place
you in some station fit for your rank and worth, yet I can bring you to a spot
of tranquillity, and in still life enable you to live without perplexity or
care of any kind. You shall have peace and little, and may perhaps hereafter
say, you have enjoyed more real happiness, for the time you had occasion to
reside there, than you could find in the tumult, pomp, and grandeur of the
world.

Here I gave the ladies an account of Orton-Lodge, in the northern extremity of
Westmoreland, where I had lived a considerable time told them the condition it
was in, the goods, the books, the liquors, and other necessaries and
conveniences that were there, and if, in that charming romantic spot, where no
mortal could come to hurt them, they could bear to live for a while, I would
settle them there, and get a man servant to work in the garden, and a couple of
maids. I would likewise procure for them two cows, a few lambs, some poultry,
and corn, and seeds for the ground: in short, that they should have every thing
requisite in such a place; I would return to them as soon as possible; I would
write to them often, directing my letters to the nearest town, to be called for
by their man. What do you say, ladies, to this proposal? In London it is not
possible for you to be: at a farm-house you might have no satisfaction: and any
where that was known and frequented, you may be liable to discovery, as Cock,
your guardian, will enquire every where; and if he hears of you, you will be
carried home most certainly to his dismal habitation, and be used ten times
worse than before. What do you think then of this scheme?

Sir, (they both replied) you are to us a subaltern power, by heaven sent to
deliver us from misery, and secure our happiness in this world. We have not
words to express the gratitude of our souls for this further instance of your
goodness in the offer you make us, nor can it ever be in our power to make you
the return it deserves. You will be pleased to accept our grateful thanks, and
all we have to add at present, our prayers for your preservation and health.
Conduct us, we beseech you, immediately to that sweet spot of peace you have
described.

This being agreed on, the next thing to be done was to get two horses for the
ladies, for mine were not able to carry double any further, if there had been a
turnpike road before us; then up the mountains we were to go, where no double
horse could travel; and when they were at the Lodge, they would want horses to
ride sometimes, or to remove, if the necessity of their case should happen to
require it: to my landlord therefore I applied upon the occasion, and he very
quickly got for me not only two pretty beasts, but a young laboring man, and
two country girls to wait upon the ladies. I then sent to the next town for a
couple of side-saddles, gave the servants directions to go to the Rev. Mr.
Fleming's house, to wait there till they heard from me, and then we set out for
Orton-Ladge. Two days we spent in traveling there, feeding on cold provisions
we had with us, and lying a night on the fern of the mountains. The second
evening we arrived at the Lodge. There I found every thing safe, and the place
as I had left it. I opened my various storehouses, to the surprise of the
young ladies, and brought them many good things; biscuits, potted char, potted
black-cocks, sweetmeats, and liquors of various kinds: O Fin likewise got us a
dish of trouts for supper, and the two beauties and I sat down with
cheerfulness to our table. -- Vastly amazed they were at all they saw. Every
thing was so good, and the wild charms of the place so pleasing, that they
could not but express the transports they were in at their present situation.
The whole they said, was charming as enchantment, and in language there was not
a force sufficient to express their grateful sentiments upon the occasion. This
gave me much pleasure, and till the end of June, I lived a very happy life with
these fine young creatures. They did all that was possible to show their esteem
and gratitude. Exclusive of their amazing fine faces, and persons, they were
ingenious, gay, and engaging, and made every minute of time delightful. If I
had not been engaged to Miss Spence, I should certainly have sat down in peace
with these two young ladies, and with them connected, have looked upon
Orton-Lodge as the Garden of Eden. They were both most charming women. Miss
Llandsoy was a mere divinity!

SECTION VII.
Come all, O come, ye family of joy;
Ye children of the cheerful hour, begot
By wisdom on the virtuous mind; O come!
Come innocence, in conscious strength secure;
Come courage, foremost in the manly train;
Come all, and in the honest heart abide,
Your native residence, your fortress still,
From real or from fancied evils free:
Let Us drive far off, for ever drive that bane,
That hideous pest, engendered deep in hell,
Horrid to sight, and by the frighted furies
In their dread panic Superstition named.
Let rescued fancy turn aloft her eye,
And view yon wide extended arch; behold
You crystal concave, studded with the gems,
The radiant gems of heaven, that nightly burn,
In golden lamps, and gild the aetherial space;
That smiling vault, that canopy of stars.
Or eastward turn, and see, serenely bright,
The full-orb'd moon begins her silent round:
The mountain tops, the rocks, the vales, the lawns,
By her set off, adorned, and made delightful.
On earth, benign, she sheds her borrowed ray,
And onward leads along her sparkling train.
Behold yon blazing sun, in glory rise:
Oceans of light he pours upon the world,
And night with all her train before him fly.
All nature smiles, rejoicing in his beams.
The feathered kinds their morning anthem sing:
The fish skim sportive over the gilded lakes:
Their towering tops the waving forests show;
And opening flowers their various dies display,
Perfume the air, and grateful incense yield.
It is a glorious and charming scene.
What should we fear then? this grand prospect brings.
No dreadful phantom to the frighted eye,
No terror to the soul; it is transport all!
Here fancy roves in sweet variety.
All these, in their eternal round, rejoice;
All these, with universal praise, proclaim
Their great Creator; bountiful, benign,
Immensely good, rejoicing in his creatures.
They wake new raptures in the heart of man;
And fill his soul with gratitude immense.

July 1, 1731. My departure from Orton-Lodge a second time: missed my road: the
country described.
. 1. THE first of July, just as the day was breaking, I mounted my horse, and
went again from Orton-Lodge. The morning being extremely fine, and every thing
appearing as in the above lines, I rid softly on for three or four hours, and
was so delighted with the beauties, and an infinite variety of lovely objects
my eyes were feasted with, that I did not mind the way; and instead of coming
to the turning that was my road, I got into a bending valley, which ended at a
range of rocky mountains. For half an hour I traveled by the bottom of these
frightful hills, and came at length to a pass through them, but so narrow, that
the beasts had not above an inch or two to spare on each side. It was dark as
the blackest night in this opening, and a stream came from it, by the waters
falling in several places from the top of the high enclosing precipices. It was
as shocking a foot-way as I had ever seen.

Finn, (I said to my young man) as the bottom is hard, and you can only be wet
a little, will you try where this pass ends, and let me know what kind of
country and inhabitants are beyond it? That I will, said O Finn, and
immediately entered the cleft or crevice between the mountains. A couple of
hours I allowed my adventurer to explore this dark way; but if in that time he
could make nothing of it, then his orders were to return: but there was no sign
of him at the end of six hours, and I began to fear he had got into some pound.
After him then I went, about one o'clock, and for near half a mile, the narrow
way was directly forward, a rough bottom, and ancle deep in water; but it ended
in a fine flowery green of about twenty acres, surrounded with steep rocky
hills it was impossible to ascend. Walking up to the precipice before me, I
found many caverns in it, which extended on either hand, and onwards, into a
vast variety of caves; some of them having high arched openings for entrance,
and others only holes to creep in at; but all of them spacious within, and high
enough for the tallest man to walk in.

In these dismal chambers I apprehended my fellow had lost himself, and
therefore went into them as far as I could venture, that is, without losing
sight of the day, and cried out Finn! Finn! but could hear no sound in return.
This was a great trouble to me, and I knew not what to do. Back however I must
go to my horses, and after I had spent two hours in searching, shouting, and
expecting my lad's return, by some means or other, I was just going to walk
toward the crevice, or dark narrow pass I had come through to this place, when
casting my eyes once more toward the caverns in the mountains, I saw my boy
come out, leaping and singing for joy. He told me, he never expected to see the
daylight more: for after he had foolishly gone too far into the caves, till he
was quite in the dark, in hopes of finding a passage through the mountain to
some open country, he was obliged to wander from chamber to chamber he knew not
where for many hours, without one ray of light, and with very little
expectation of deliverance; that he did nothing but cry and roar, and was
hardly able to stand on his legs any longer, when by a chance turn into a cave,
he saw some light again, and then soon found his way out. Poor fellow! he was
in a sad condition, and very wonderful was his escape.

After this, we made what haste we could to our horses, which we had left
feeding in the vale, and Finn brought me some cold provisions from his wallet
for my dinner. I dined with great pleasure, on account of the recovery of my
lad, and when we had both recruited and rested sufficiently, on we went again.
We found the valley winded about the mountains for three miles, and then ended
at the highest hill I had ever seen, but which it was possible to ascend. With
great difficulty we and our horses got to the top of it, and down on the other
side. Six mountains of the same height, whose tops were above the clouds, we
had to cross, and then arrived at a bottom, which formed a most delightful
scene.

Mrs. Thurloe's seat in Westmoreland.
. 2. The Vale of Keswick, and Lake of Derwentwater, in Cumberland, are thought
by those who have been there, to be the finest point of view in England, and
extremely beautiful they are, far more so than the Rev. Dr. Dalton has been
able to make them appear in his Descriptive Poem; (addressed to two ladies, at
their return from viewing the coal-mines, near Whitehaven, that is, the late
excellent Lord Lonsdale's charming daughters;) or than the Doctor's brother,
Mr. Dalton, has painted them in his fine drawings; and yet they are inferior in
charms to the vale, the lake, the brooks, the shaded sides of the surrounding
mountains, and the tuneful falls of water, to which we came in Westmoreland. In
all the world, I believe, there is not a more glorious rural scene to be seen,
in the fine time of the year.

In this fine vale, I found one pretty little house, which had gardens very
beautifully laid out, and usefully filled with the finest dwarf fruit trees and
ever-greens, vegetables, herbs, and shrubs. The mansion, and the improved spot
of ground, were at the end of the beautiful lake, so as to have the whole
charming piece of water before the door. The projecting shaded fells seemed to
nod or hang over the habitation, and on either hand, a few yards from the front
of the house, cascades much higher than that of dread Lodore, in Cumberland,
fell into the lake. There is not any thing so beautiful and striking as the
whole in any part of the globe that I have seen: and I have been in higher
latitudes, north and south, than most men living. I have conversed with nations
who live many degrees beyond the poor frozen Laplander. I have traveled among
the barbarians who scorch beneath the burning zone.

An acccount of the (...) Miss Thurlie's.
. 3. Who lived in this delightful valley, was, in the next place, my enquiry,
after I had admired for an hour the amazing beauties of the place. I walked up
to the house, and in one of the parlour windows, that had a view up the loch, I
saw a young beauty sitting with a music-book in her hand, and heard her sing in
a masterly manner. She could not see me, but I had a full view of her fine
face, and as I remembered to have seen her somewhere, I stood gazing at her with
wonder and delight, and was striving to recollect where I had been in her
company, when another young one came into the room, whom I had reason to
remember very well, on account of an accident, and then I knew they were the
two young ladies I had seen at Mr. Harcourt's. (see p. 374. of Memoirs of
several Ladies of Great Britain,) and admired very greatly for the charms of
their persons, and the beauties of their minds. Upon this I walked up to the
window, and after a little astonishment at seeing me, they behaved with the
greatest civility, and seemed to be highly pleased with the accidental meeting.
While we were talking, their mamma came into the apartment, and on their
letting her know who I was, and where they had been acquainted with me, the old
lady was pleased to ask me to stay at her house that night, and to assure me
she was glad to see me, as she had often heard her daughters speak of me. Three
days I passed with great pleasure in this sweet place, and then with regret
took my leave. These two fine young creatures were the Miss Thurloe's, and are
Mrs. Lowman and Mrs. Munkley, in the Memoirs of several Ladies of Great
Britain. In the 2d volume of that work, the reader will find their lives.

Account of a Carthusian monastery in Richmondshire.
. 4. The 5th of July I left Mrs. Thurloe's, and by the assistance of a guide,
had a fine ride to the house of Friar Fleming, in Richmondshire, where I
arrived by noon. I dined with this good Franciscan, and should have lain there
that night, but that I could not help being melancholy, on missing my dear
friend Tom, the Monk's brother, who died of a fever, as before related. From
him then I parted in the evening, and rid to a Carthusian monastry, which
consisted of seven monks, men of some estate, who had agreed to live together
in this remote place, and pass their lives in piety, study, and gardening. I
had a letter from Fleming to one of these gentlemen, the superior, letting him
know I was his near friend, and desiring he would receive me as himself; that,
although a protestant, I was of no party, but in charity with all mankind. This
letter procured me all the kindness and honors these gentlemen could show me.
They behaved with great civility and tenderness, and gave me the best they had,
good fish, good bread, good wine, excellent fruit, and fine vegetables; for as
to flesh, they never eat any, by their rule.

They were all learned and devout men, very grave and silent for the most part,
except when visited, but without any thing stiff or morose in their manner.
They had a large collection of books, and seemed to understand them well. What
time they had to spare from the hours of divine service, and working in their
gardens, according to the rule of St. Benet, which they follow, they give to
study, and had many volumes of their own writing; being mostly old MSS. they
had transcribed, Greek, Latin, and French. Making such copies was their
principal work in the closet.

Reasons for reading the works of the Rabbis, fictitious and extravagant as
they are.
. 5. I stayed two days with these gentlemen, and had a good deal of useful
conversation with them, on various subjects. On looking into the writings of
the Rabbis, which I saw in their library, I told one of these Chartreux, that
it was a wonder to me, that any one read such extravagant fabulous relations
and despicable fictions as these books contained, and should be glad to know,
what good could be extracted from them.

The Friar replied, that notwithstanding their being fictitious and extravagant
to a high degree, yet great use may be made of the works of the Rabbis, and
especially of the Talmud of Babylon An account of the Talmuds.
Reader, that you may the better understand the conversation I had with this
learned Carthusian, I must inform you what the Talmud, and other writings of
the Rabbis, are. --

The Talmud is a celebrated piece of Jewish literature, that is full of
Rabinical domination and enthusiasm. The Rabbis pretend, this book contains
the Oral laws, and other secrets, which God communicated to Moses. It consists
of two parts, each of which is divided into several books. In the first part,
which they call Mishna, is the text. In the other, is a sort of comment on the
text, and this is styled the Gemara.

This oral law, or tradition of the Jews, was collected after the destruction
of the Temple, A. D. 150, by Rabbi Judah, and is by them preferred before the
scripture. They suppose it was orally delivered by Moses to Israel, and
unlawful to be written; but when Jerusalem was destroyed, they were constrained
to write it, least it should be lost; but yet it was so written, as that none
but themselves might understand it. -- This Mishna and Gemara complete the two
Talmuds: -- that of Jerusalem, A. D. 230; -- and that of Babylon, 500 years
after Christ. Many parts of these Talmuds are translated by several learned
men, who have endeavored to render them intelligible: but in order to
understand them fully, you must read the Jad Chaska, or Mishna Torah of Moses
Maimonides, who was physician to the king of Egypt about 600 years ago. This
Rabbi has comprised the substance of the Mishna and Gemara of the Talmud, in
his books, and enabled us to understand all the Mishna with ease and pleasure.
See likewise the Clavis Talmudica, Cock's Excerpta, and the works of the
excellent Ludivicus de Campeigne du Veil, who had been a Jew, but became a
Roman Catholic; from Rome went over to the Church of England, where he was for
several years in the character of a great divine: but at last turned Baptist,
and died a member of that christian church; which lost him all his friends and
interest. He died the beginning of this century, with the reputation of an
upright Christian and a most learned man. There is no tolerable account given
of him in any of the Biographical Dictionaries. What they say is short and next
to nothing. And the Popish accounts are not only short, but false, and mere
calumny. -- I took a great deal of pains some years ago, to collect among the
Baptists, and from others who knew this great man, every thing I could get
relating to him and his works, and formed what I had got into a life of him,
which I did intend to insert in this place: but by some accident or other, it
is gone. I cannot find it any where.


We obtain from thence a knowledge of the customs and opinions of the Jews,
which afford some benefit. In the next place, they serve to the confirmation of
the history of Jesus Christ; for it appears by the Babylonish Talmud, that
there was one Jesus, who had disciples, lived in such and such a place, and did
and said diverse things; and in the Bible many texts relating to the Messiah are
confirmed and explained by these books of the Rabbis, though not by them
intended. This I have since found to be the truth of the case. I have read the
works of the Rabbis since, and find it to be as the Carthusian said. For
example;

It is said in Genesis iii. 15. I will put enmity between thy seed and her seed.
It shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. Now the Targum of
Onkelos gives the sense thus: The man shall be mindful of, or remember, what
thou (satan) have done to him in times past, and thou shall observe, watch or
haunt him till the end of days; that is, the serpent or devil should pursue and
have dominion over the world till the last days, and then the prince of this
world should be cast out, and the works of the devil destroyed. Beacharith
Heyamim, the end of days, or last days, is, by a general rule, given by the
most learned Rabbis, meant of the Messiah. So Kimchi on Isa. ii. 2. -- and
Abarbriel and R. Moses Nachm on Genesis xlix. 1. inform us.

It is likewise very remarkable, that the Targum of Jerusalem, and that of
Jonathan Ben Uziel, apply this place to the coming of the Messiah. They give
the words the following sense. -- I will put enmity between thy seed and her
seed: when the sons of the woman keeping my law, they shall bruise thy head,
and when they break my law, thou shall bruise their heel; but the wound given
to the seed of the woman, shall be healed, but thine shall be incurable; they
shall be healed in the last days, in the days of the Messiah. -- Such is the
opinion of the most learned Jews: -- and from thence it follows, that the
Christians have not put their sense upon the text I have cited to serve their
own turn; the Rabbis, we see, give the very same meaning to the place.

Again in Numb. xxiv. 17. we have the famous prophecy of Balaam: There shall
come a star out of Jacob, and a scepter shall rise out of Israel. -- In Isaiah
xi. 1. it is written; And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of
Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots, and the spirit of the Lord
shall rest upon him. And in Jeremiah xxiii. 5.6. Behold the days shall come,
says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous branch, -- and this is
his name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness. That the
Christians apply these texts to the Messiah, I need not inform the reader: but
it must be grateful to observe, that the paraphrases of Onkelos, Jonathan, and
Jerusalem, all of them expressly attribute the prophecy of Balaam to the
Messiah. And Rabbi Moses Hadarsan and Maimon, say, he is here called a Star,
(which signifies what Malachi expresses by the Sun of Righteousness. Mal. iv.
2. and Zechariah by the East. I will bring forth my servant the East. Zach.
iii. 8. as it is translated in the Vulgar, Septuagint, Arabic, and Syriac) is
here, say these Rabbis, called a Star, because he should come and destroy
idolatry, among the heathen nations, by becoming a light to the gentiles, and
the glory of Israel.

As to the other two texts, the Jews do likewise attribute them to the Messiah.
Rabbi Joseph Albo, speaking of the words, The Lord our Righteousness, in
particular, says expressly, that this is one name given to the Messiah. Albo,
Sep. ikker. lib. 2. c. 28. Thus do the Jews concur with us in the application
of texts to the Messiah. But what is become of this Messiah, they cannot tell.
They are amazed, perplexed, and confounded about him. They dispute on the
article, and have the wildest fancies in relation to it. Whereas the Christians
give a clear and consistent account of the Messiah, and by every argument that
can be desired by a rational, prove the truth of christianity.

Again: in Isa. ix. 6. we have these words: Unto us a child is born, unto us a
son is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulders: and his name
shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father,
the Prince of Peace. Or as the Alexandrian MS. has it, He shall call his name
the Angel, Wonderful, Counselor, Mighty, the Governor, the Prince of Peace,
the Father of the age to come. This is thought by all Christians to be a plain
declaration of the Messiah; for to apply it to any mere mortal, as to Hezekiah,
or Isaiah's son, cannot be done without the greatest absurdity: and therefore
Ben Maimon (epist. ad Afric.) fairly yields that these words belong to the
Messiah, and so does Jonathan Ben Uziel in his Chaldee paraphrase. The Talmud
itself allows it. Tract. Sanhedrim. that it relates to a person not come in the
time of the prophets, but to the man, whose name is the Branch, which was to
come forth out of the stem of Jesse, and to grow out of his roots. My servant
the Branch. Behold the man whose name is the Branch. Zech. iii. 8. and chapter xii.
and Isa. iv. 1. Even the person that shall be sent; Shilo, that remarkable
person God had promised to his people. So says the Talmud.

But further; as to the birth of the Messiah, in respect of the manner and the
place, it is thus set down by the prophet Micah, v. 2. And thou Bethlehem
Ephrata, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee
shall come forth unto me, that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth
have been of old, even from everlasting. -- And in Isa. vii. 14. are these
words, Behold a virgin shall conceive, and bring forth a son, and call his name
Immanuel. In these two texts, (the Christians say) the place of the birth of
the Messiah, and the manner of it, are as plainly described as words can do;
and if they cannot, without absurdity, be explained as relating to any other
person, then it must be perverting the meaning of the records, to oppose this
explication: but this the Jews are far from doing. The place is acknowledged in
the Talmud, in the Chaldee paraphrase of Jonathan, and all their most famous
masters declare with one voice, that Bethlehem indisputably belongs to the
Messiah. Exte Bethlehem coram me prodibit Messiah, ut sit dominium exercens in
Israel, cujus nomen dictum est ab aeternitate, a Diebus seculi. (Talmud. lib.
Sanhedrim, et Midrasch. The hillinic Rabbi Selemoh. paraph. Jonath. in Loc.
Rabbi David Kimchi.) -- And as to the manner, though it be true that some Jews
say, the Hebrew word Gnalma signifies a young woman as well as a virgin; yet
Kimell, Jarchi, and Selemoh, three of their greatest Rabbis, confess that here
is something wonderful presaged in the birth and generation of this person, and
that he was not to be born as other men and women are born. What can we desire
more, in the case, from an enemy? And in truth, the behold, or wonder, with
which the text begins, would be nothing, if it was only that a young woman
should have a child: -- and as to the Hebrew word Gnalmah, if it ever does
signify a young women, which I very much doubt, yet in the translation of the
Seventy, who well understood the original surely, they render the word by
parthenos, (...)in Graec; which always signifies a virgin in the strict
propriety of the phrase. And in the Punic language, which is much the same as
the Hebrew, the word Alma signifies a virgin, virgo intacta, and never means a
young woman.

Such are the advantages we may gain by reading the books of the Rabbis; and
to me it is pleasing to see these great Hebrew masters granting so much to us
for our Messiah, while they hate our holy religion beyond every thing. Even the
gay among the Jews, (if I have been truly informed by one who danced a night
with them) have, in contempt and abhorrence of our faith, a country-dance,
called The Little Jesus.

An account of Knareshorough and its waters.
. 6. The eighth of July, I left the little Chartreuse, and went from thence to
Knaresborough, where I arrived that night, and resided three days. It is a fine
old town, and borough by prescription, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, and
wapentake of Claro. The vast hills of Craven look beautifully wild in its
neighborhood, and the rapid river Nid, which issues from the bottom of those
mountains, almost encompasses the town. It is 175 measured miles from London,
and the best way to it is from Ferrybridge to Wetherby, the left hand road,
where there is an excellent inn, and from that to Knaresborough.

When this very ancient town passed from the posterity of Surlo de Burgh, the
founder of it, we know not, but we find that Henry III. Reg. 13. granted the
honor, castle, and manor, to the Earl of Kent, Margaret. his wife, and their
issue and heirs, and that on failure of issue and right heirs, it returned
again to the crown: for Edward the Second, among other lands, gave this
lordship of Knaresborough to his favorite Pierse de Gaveston, Earl of
Cornwall, and his heirs. Gaveston was taken not long after by the Barons, in
Scarborough castle, after a short siege, and on Gaversly-heath, near Warwick,
was beheaded by order of the Earl of Warwick, June 20, 1312.

By the fall of the insolent Gaveston, who had been banished by the great
Edward the First, but recalled and received into favor by Edward the Second,
before his father's funeral was performed; by the death of this favorite, who
had involved his master's interest with his own, and rendered any displeasure
against himself, the want of duty to the prince (just as Lord B * * *, and the
now Outs did the other day) which ruined the miserable King; Knaresborough came
again to the crown, and so continued till the 44th of Edward the Third, when
this king made a grant of the honor, castle, and manor of this town, and the
cell of St. Roberts; to John of Gaunt, the king's fourth son, who was Earl of
Richmond, and created Duke of Lancaster, on his having married one of the
coheiresses of Henry Duke of Lancaster. Other great estates were likewise given
at the same time to this fourth son of Edward, that he might maintain his
grandeur: and ever since, this town has belonged to the duchy of Lancaster. It
is an appendage to the crown.

Not far from this town, are two wells, as strong of sulphur as
Harrogate-water, and as valuable, though no one takes any notice of them. One
lies in the way to Harrogate, in a low ground by a brook-side. The other is
Bitton-spaw, in a park by Mr. Staughton's house.

Description of a dropping well.
As to the famous dropping-well or petrifying water, it lies on the west side of
the town and river, about 26 yards from the bank of the Nid. It rises 15 yards
below the top of a mountain of marle stone, and in four falls, of about two
yards each fall, comes to an easy ascent, where it spreads upon the top of an
isthmus of a petrified rock, generated out of the water, which falls down round
it. This isthmus or rock is ten yards high, and hangs over its base or bottom
about 5 yards. It is near 16 yards long and 13 broad, and as it started from
the bank about fifty years ago, leaves a chasm between them, that is about
three yards wide. In this chasm, you will find petrified twigs of trees,
shrubs, and grass-roots, hanging in most beautiful pillars, all interwoven, and
forming many charming figures; and on the common side are whole banks like
Stalactilites, hard and inseparable from the rock, where the water trickles
down. These petrefactions, the falling water, and the little isthmus or island
being beautifully clothed with ash, osier, elm, sambucus, servicana major,
geraniums, wood-mercury, hart's-tongue, sage, ladies mantle, cowslips, wild
angelica, etc. form all together a delightful scene. -- The first spring of
this water is out of a small hole on the little mountain, in the middle of a
thick-set of shrubs. It sends out 20 gallons in a minute of the sweetest water
in the world, and it is 24 grains in a pint heavier than common water.

Observations on petrifying waters.
Most people are of opinion, that petrifying water is dangerous drink, and may
produce abundance of mischief, in causing the stone and gravel in the body: the
original particles or principles of the stony substance called spar, which are
in abundance suspended in this kind of water, must get into the floodgates of
the kidneys and ureters, (as they opine) and create great misery in a little
time.

But this fear of petrefactions in living animal bodies is grounded upon
neither reason nor experience; for the spar in these waters forms no
petrefactions, whilst in a brisk motion, or in a temperate season, or on
vegetables while they preserve their vegetating life. While there is warmth and
circulation of juices, there can be no incrustation or petrefaction from the
suspended stony particles. Besides, if the minims of spar are not within the
spheres of sensible attraction, whilst in motion; much less are they so when
mingled with the fluids of the human body: you may therefore very safely drink
these limpid petrifying waters at all times, as a common fluid, if they come in
your way, as the best, and most grateful or pleasant water in the world, on
account of the infinitesimals, or original leasts, of spar that are in them, in
vast quantities, but infinitely small particles: and if you are sick, in many
cases sure I am, they are the best of medicines. Human invention has nothing
equal to them for fluxes of any part of the body, or colliquations from an acid
salt. So far are they from being in the least dangerous, that in all unnatural
discharges, by spitting, stool, or urine; by excessive menstrual or
haemorrhoidal fluxes, in the fluor albus, diabetes, profuse sweatings; in the
diarrhoea, dyfentry, or lienteria (where the springs are not quite worn out:)
in ulcers of the viscera, hectic fevers, atrophy, and colliquations or night
sweats, there is not any thing in physic more profitable or pleasant, to
recover a patient. Let your dose, in such cases, be three half-pints of
Knaresborough dropping-well in the forenoon; and before you begin to drink this
water, remember to take two doses of rhubarb, to cleanse off the excrements of
the first viscera. You must not drink ale, drams, or punch, during a course of
these waters: and take but very little red port. You must likewise have a
strict regard to diet. Let it be milk, eggs, jellies, barley-broth, chickens,
kid, lamb, and the like. You must avoid all salt, sharp, stimulating things,
day-sleep, and night-air: but agreeable conversation, and diversions that
require very little exercise, conduce to the success of this kind of water, in
the distempers I have mentioned. If such diseases are curable, you may expect a
restoration of health.

But, in the dropsy, jaundice, diminished or irregular menses; in hyppo,
melancholy, stuffings of the lungs, obstructions of the viscera, stoppages of
the lacteals and misentery, glandular swellings, king's evil, or any case,
where thinning, relaxing, opening, deterging, attenuation or stimulation are
wanting, such water is death.

Note; reader, there is another excellent petrifying-water at Newton-Dale in
Yorkshire, N. R. thirteen miles from Scarborough. -- Another near
Castle-Howard, the fine seat of the Earl of Carlisle, ten miles from York. --
Another, near Skipton, in that rough, romantic, wild and silent country, called
Craven, in the West Riding of Yorkshire. -- And one, called Bandwell, at
Stonefield in Lincolnshire, west of Horncastle, which is 122 miles from London.
These springs, and many that are not to be come at among the vast fells of
Westmoreland, and the high mountains of Stanemore, have all the virtues of
Knaresborough dropping-well; though Knaresborough-water is the only one
resorted to by company: and as to this spring, I can affirm from my own
knowledge, that it is as excellent, and truly medicinal, as the famous
petrifying-water at Clermont. There is no manner of need for Britons going to
the mountain Gregoire in Basse-Auvergne.

A POSTILLA, A Postilla, reader, is a barbarous word made up of the words post
illa, and was brought into use in the twelfth century, when the marginal
explicators of the bible left the margins, and under their text writ short and
literal notes, before which they put the word postilla, instead of the words
post illa, meaning the particular words in the text, from whence, by a letter,
they referred to the little note below: but in the 13th century, the barbarous
word took so much, that all the commentators following, appropriated the name
to their most copious commentaries, contrary to the first practice in the use
of the word, and for three centuries after, the biblial learning was all
postilla, till at length the word disappeared, according to the wonted
inconstancy and agitation of all human things, and gave place to a new and
fifth invention, called tractatus, or homily. This is the history of a postilla.


Containing an Account of Wardrew Sulphur-water, -- the Life of Claudius
Hobart, -- and A Dissertation on Reason and Revelation.
In my account of sulphur-waters, I forgot to mention one very extraordinary
spring of this kind, and therefore, make a postilla of it here, that the reader
may find in one section all I have to say on mineral waters. -- And as I found
by the side of this water, a man as extraordinary as the spring, I shall add
his life, to my account of the water, and a couple of little pieces written by
him.

Of Wardrew sulphur-water.
In Northumberland, on the borders of Cumberland, there is a place called
Wardrew, to the north-west of Thirlwall-castle, which stands on that part of
the picts-wall, where it crosses the Tippel, and is known by the name of Murus
Perforatus, (in Saxon, Thirlwall) on account of the gaps made in the wall at
this place for the Scots passage. Here, as I wandered about this wild,
untravelled country, in search of Roman antiquities, I arrived at a
sulphur-spring, which I found to be the strongest and most excellent of the
kind in all the world. It rises out of a vast cliff, called Arden-Rock, over
the bank of the river Arde or Irthing, six feet above the surface of the water,
and comes out of a chink in the cliff by a small spout. The discharge is fifty
gallons in a minute from a mixture of limestone and ironstone. And the water is
so very foetid, that it is difficult to swallow it. The way to it is not easy,
for there is no other passage than along a very narrow ledge, about nine inches
broad, which has been cut off the rock over the deep river, and if you slip,
(as you may easily do, having nothing to hold by) down you go into a water that
looks very black and shocking, by the shade of the hanging precipice, and some
aged trees which project from the vast cliff.

This dangerous situation, and its remoteness, will prevent its being ever much
visited, admirable as the spaw is; yet the country people thereabout make
nothing of the ledge, and drink plentifully of the water, to their sure relief,
in many dangerous distempers. -- It is to them a blessed spring.

A description of Wardrew in Northumberland.
The land all round here was one of the finest rural scenes I have seen, and
made a pensive traveller wish for some small public-house there, to pass a few
delightful days. Its lawns and groves, its waters, vales, and hills, are
charming, and form the sweetest softest region of silence and ease. Whichever
way I turned, the various beauties of nature appeared, and nightingales from
the thicket inchantingly warbled their loves. The fountains were bordered with
violets and moss, and near them were clumps of pine and beech, bound with
sweet-briar, and the tendrils of woodbine. It is a delightful spot: a paradise
of blooming joys, in the fine season of the year.

The history of Claudius Hobart.
. 8. One inhabitant only I found in this fine solitude, who lived on the margin
of the river, in a small neat cottage, that was almost hid with trees. This was
Claudius Hobart, a man of letters, and a gentleman, who had been unfortunate in
the world, and retired to these elysian fields, to devote the remainder of his
time to religion, and enjoy the calm felicities of contemplative life. He was
obliged by law to resign his estate to a claimant, and death had robbed him of
a matchless mistress, of great fortune, to whom he was to have been married.
The men who had called themselves his friends, and as Timon says in Lucian,
honored him, worshipped him, and seemed to depend on his nod, (...), no longer
knew him; jam ne agnoscor quidem ab illis, nec aspici ne dignantur me, perinde
ut eversum hominis jam olim defuncti cippum, ac temporis longitudine collapsum
pretereunt quasi ne norint quidem; (...): so true (continued Mr. Hobart) are
the beautiful lines of Petronius; Nomen amicitiae si quatenus expedit, haeret,
Calculus in tabula mobile ducit opus.
Quum fortuna manet, vultum servatis amici:
Cum cecidit, turpi vertitis ora fuga.
And so sweet Ovid says was his case, Eandem cum Timone nostro sortem
Expertus naso, qui sic de seipso:
En ego non paucis quondam munitus amicis:
Dum flavit velis aura secunda meis:
Ut fera terribili tumuerunt aequora vento,
In mediis lacera puppe relinquor aquis.


So Hobart found it, and as his health was declining from various causes, and
he had nothing in view before him while he appeared, but misery: therefore, he
retired to Wardrew, while he had some money, built the little house I saw on a
piece of ground he purchased, and provided such necessaries and comforts as he
imagined might be wanting: he had a few good books, the bible, some history,
and mathematics, to make him wiser and better, and abroad he diverted himself
mostly in his garden, and with fishing: for fifteen years past he had not been
in any town, nor in any one's house, but conversed often with several of the
country people, who came to drink the mineral-water: what he had fresh occasion
for, one or other of them brought him, according to his written directions, and
the money he gave them, and once or twice a week he was sure of seeing
somebody: as the people knew he was not rich, and lived a harmless life, they
were far from being his enemies, and would do any thing in their power to serve
the hermit, as they called him: but he seldom gave them any trouble. His food
was biscuit, honey, roots, fish, and oil; and his drink, water, with a little
rum sometimes: He was never sick, nor melancholy; but by a life of temperance
and action, and a religion of trust and resignation, enjoyed perpetual health
and peace, and run his latent course in the pleasing expectation of a remove,
when his days were past, to the bright mansions of the blessed.

Such was the account Mr. Hobart gave me of himself, (which made me admire him
much, as he was but fifty then) and to convince me his temper had nothing
Timonean or unsocial in it from his solitary life, he requested I would dine
with him. He entertained me with an excellent pickled trout and biscuit, fine
fruit, and a pot of extraordinary honey: with as much creme of tartar as lay on
a sixpence, fused in warm water, he made half a pint of rum into good punch,
and he talked over it like a man of sense, breeding, and good humor. We parted
when the bowl was out, and at my going away, he made me a present of the
following MS. and told me I might print it, if I could think it would be of any
use to mankind. It was called, The Rule of Reason, with a few Thoughts on
Revelation.

A tract.
. 9. The throne of God rests upon reason, and his prerogative is supported by
it. It is the sole rule of the Deity, the Mind which presides in the universe,
and therefore is venerable, sacred, and divine. Every ray of reason
participates of the majesty of that Being to whom it belongs, and whose
attribute it is; and being thereby awful, and invested with a supreme and
absolute authority, it is rebellion to refuse subjection to right reason, and a
violation of the great and fundamental law of heaven and earth.

To this best, and fittest, and noblest rule, the rule of truth, we ought to
submit, and in obedience to the sacred voice of reason, resist the
importunities of sense, and the usurpations of appetite. Since the will of that
Being, who is infinitely pure and perfect, rational and righteous, is obliged
and governed by his unerring understanding; our wills should be guided and
directed by our reason. In imitation of the wisest and best of Beings, we must
perpetually adhere to truth, and ever act righteously for righteousness sake.
By acting in conformity to moral truths, which are really and strictly divine,
we act in conformity to ourselves, and it is not possible to conceive any thing
so glorious, or godlike. We are thereby taught the duties of piety, our duties
toward our fellows, and that self-culture which is subservient to piety and
humanity.

Discourse on the rule of reason.
Reason informs us there is a superior Mind, endued with knowledge and great
power, presiding over human affairs; some original, independent Being, complete
in all possible perfection, of boundless power, wisdom and goodness, the
Contriver, Creator, and Governor of this world, and the inexhaustible source of
all good. A vast collection of evidence demonstrates this. Design, intention,
art, and power, as great as our imagination can conceive, every where occur. As
far as we can make observations, original intelligence and power appear to
reside in a Spirit, distinct from all divisible, changeable, or moveable
substance; and if we can reason at all, it must be clear, that an original
omnipotent Mind is a good Deity, and espouses the cause of virtue, and of the
universal happiness; will gloriously compensate the worthy in a future state,
and then make the vicious and oppressive have cause to repent of their
contradicting his will. It follows then most certainly, that with this great
source of our being, and of all perfection, every rational mind ought to
correspond, and with internal and external worship adore the divine power and
goodness. His divine perfections, creation and providence, must excite all
possible esteem, love, and admiration, if we think at all; must beget trust and
resignation; and raise the highest resentments of gratitude. All our happiness
and excellency is from his bounty, and therefore not unto us, not unto us, but
to his name be the praise. And can there be a joy on earth so stable and
transporting as that which rises from living with an habitual sense of the
Divine Presence, a just persuasion of being approved, beloved and protected by
him who is infinitely perfect and omnipotent?

By reason we likewise find, that the excesses of the passions produce misery,
and iniquity makes a man completely wretched and despicable: but integrity and
moral worth secure us peace and merit, and lead to true happiness and glory.
Unless reason and inquiry are banished, vice and oppression must have terrible
struggles against the principles of humanity and conscience. Reflection must
raise the most torturing suspicions, and all stable satisfaction must be lost:
but by cultivating the high powers of our reason, and acquiring moral
excellence, so far as human nature is able; by justice and the benevolent
affections, virtue and charity, we are connected with, and affixed to the
Deity, and with the inward applauses of a good heart, we have the outward
enjoyment of all the felicities suitable to our transitory condition. Happy
state surely! There are no horrors here to haunt us. There is no dreadful thing
to poison all parts of life and all enjoyments.

Let us hearken then to the original law of reason, and follow God and nature
as the sure guide to happiness. Let the offices of piety and beneficence be the
principal employment of our time; and the chief work of our every day, to
secure an happy immortality, by equity, benignity, and devotion. By continual
attention, and internal discipline, reason can do great things, and enable us
so to improve the supreme and most godlike powers of our constitution, and so
discharge the duties imposed upon us by our Creator, that when we return into
that silence we were in before we existed, and our places shall know us no
more, we may pass from the unstable condition of terrestrial affairs to that
eternal state in the heavens, where everlasting pleasures and enjoyments are
prepared for those who have lived in the delightful exercise of the powers of
reason, and performed all social and kind offices to others, out of a sense of
duty to God. Thus does truth oblige us. It is the basis of morality, as
morality is the basis of religion.

This, I think, is a just account of moral truth and rectitude, and shows that
it is essentially glorious in itself, and the sacred rule to which all things
must bend, and all agents submit. But then a question may be asked, What need
have we of revelation, since reason can so fully instruct us, and its bonds
alone are sufficient to hold us; -- and in particular, what becomes of the
principal part of revelation, called redemption?

Account of revelation.
The system of moral truth and revelation, (it may be answered) are united, and
at perfect amity with each other. Morality and the gospel stand on the same
foundation; and differ only in this, that revealed religion, in respect of the
corrupt and degenerate state of mankind, has brought fresh light, and
additional assistance, to direct, support, and fix men in their duty. We have
histories which relate an early deviation from moral truth, and inform us that
this disease of our rational nature spread like a contagion. The case became
worse, and more deplorable, in succeeding ages; and as evil examples and
prejudices added new force to the prevailing passions, and reason and liberty
of will, for want of due exercise, grew weaker, and less able to regain their
lost dominion, corruption was rendered universal. Then did the true God, the
Father of the Universe, and the most provident and beneficent of Beings,
interpose by a revelation of his will, and by advice and authority, do all that
was possible, to prevent the self-destructive effects of the culpable ignorance
and folly of his offspring. He gave the world a transcript of the law of nature
by an extraordinary messenger, the Man Christ Jesus, who had power given him to
work miracles, to rouse mankind from their fatal stupidity, to set their
thoughts on work, and to conciliate their attention to the heavenly
declaration. In this republication of the original law, he gave them doctrines
and commandments perfectly consonant to the purest reason, and to them annexed
sanctions that do really bind and oblige men, as they not only guard and
strengthen religion, but affect our natural sensibility and selfishness.
Religion appears to great disadvantage, when divines preach it into a bond of
indemnity, and a mere contract of interest; but exclusive of this, it must be
allowed, that the sanctions of the gospel have a weight, awfulness, and
solemnity, that prove to a great degree effectual. Safety and advantage are
reasons for well-doing.

In short, the evidence of the obligation of the duties of natural religion is
as plain and strong from reason, as any revelation can make it; but yet the
means of rendering these duties effectual in practice, are not so clear and
powerful from mere reason, as from revelation. The proof of obligation is
equally strong in reason and inspiration, but the obligation itself is rendered
stronger by the gospel, by superadded means or motives. The primary obligation
of natural religion arises from the nature and reason of things, as being
objects of our rational moral faculties, agreeably to which we cannot but be
obliged to act; and this obligation is strengthened by the tendency of natural
religion to the final happiness of every rational agent: but the clear
knowledge, and express promises which we have in the gospel, of the nature and
greatness of this final happiness, being added to the obligation from, and the
tendency of reason or natural religion to the final happiness of human nature,
the obligation of it is thereby still more strengthened. In this lies the
benefit of christianity. It is the old, incorrupt religion of nature and
reason, entirely free from superstition and immorality; delivered and taught in
the most rational and easy way, and enforced by the most gracious and powerful
motives.

Of the Mysteries, Trinity, and Sacrifice of the Cross.
But if this be the case, it may be asked, Where are our holy mysteries -- and
what do you think of our Redemption? If natural reason and conscience can do so
much, and to the gospel we are obliged only for a little more light and
influence, then Trinity in Unity, and the Sacrifice of the Cross are nothing.
What are your sentiments on these subjects?

As to the Trinity, it is a word invented by the doctors, and so far as I can
find, was never once thought of by Jesus Christ and his apostles; unless it was
to guard against the spread of tritheism, by taking the greatest care to
inculcate the supreme divinity of God the Father: but let it be a trinity,
since the church will have it so, and by it I understand one Uncreated, and one
Created, and a certain divine virtue of quality. These I find in the Bible,
God, Jesus the Word, and a Divine Assistance or Holy Wind, (not Holy Ghost, as
we have translated it): called a Wind, because God, from whom every good and
perfect gift comes, gave the most extraordinary instance of it under the
emblem of a Wind; and holy, because it was supernatural. This is the scripture
doctrine, in relation to the Deity, the Messiah, and the Energy of God; of
which the Wind was promised as a pledge, and was given as an emblem, when the
day of Pentecost was come; and if these three they will call a Trinity, I shall
not dispute about the word. But to say Jesus Christ is God, though the apostles
tell us, that God raised from the dead the Man Jesus Christ, whom they killed;
that he had exalted him at his right hand, and had made him both Lord and
Christ; and to affirm that this Ghost (as they render the word Wind) is a
person distinct and different from the person of God the Father, and equally
supreme; -- this I cannot agree to. If the scripture is true, all this appears
to me to be false. It is a mere invention of the Monks.

As to Redemption, it may be in perfect consistence and agreement with truth
and rectitude, if the accomplishment of it be considered as premial, and as
resulting from a personal reward: but to regard the accomplishment as penal,
and as resulting from a vicarious punishment, is a notion that cannot be
reconciled to the principle of rectitude. Vicarious punishment or suffering
appears an impossibility: but as Jesus, by adding the most extensive
benevolence to perfect innocence, and by becoming obedient to death, even the
death of the cross, was most meritorious, and was entitled to the highest
honor, and most distinguished reward, his reward might be our deliverance from
the bonds of sin and death, and the restoration of immortality. This reward was
worthy of the giver, and tended to the advancement and spread of virtue. It was
likewise most acceptable to the receiver. It no way interfered with right and
truth. It was in all respects most proper and suitable. These are my sentiments
of Redemption. This appears to me to be the truth on the most attentive and
impartial examination I have been capable of making.

To this, perhaps, some people may reply, that though these notions are, for
the most part just, and in the case of redemption, in particular, as innocence
and punishment are inconsistent and incompatible ideas, that it was not
possible Christ's oblation of himself could be more than a figurative
sacrifice, in respect of translation of guilt, commutation of persons, and
vicarious infliction; though a real sacrifice in the sense of intending by the
oblation to procure the favor of God, and the indemnity of sinners: yet, as
the author appears to be a Socinian, his account is liable to objections. For,
though the Socinians acknowledge the truth and necessity of the revelation of
the gospel, yet, in the opinion of some great divines, they interpret it in
such a manner, as no unprejudiced person, who has read the scriptures, with any
attention, nor any sensible heathen, who should read them, can possibly
believe. They make our Redeemer a man, and by this doctrine reflect the
greatest dishonor on christianity, and its Divine Author.

This is a hard charge. The Socinians are by these divines described as people
who read the scriptures with prejudice, and without attention; men more
senseless than the Heathens, and as wicked too; for, in the highest degree,
they dishonor Christ Jesus and his religion. Astonishing assertion! It puts me
in mind of an imputation of the celebrated Waterland in his second charge; --
"What atheism chiefly aims at, is, to sit loose from present restraints and
future reckonings; and these two purposes may be competently served by deism,
which is a more refined kind of atheism. -- Groundless and ridiculous calumny.
True and proper deism is a sincere belief of the existence of a God, and of an
impartial distribution of rewards and punishments in another world, and a
practice that naturally results from, and is consonant to such belief; and if
atheism aims to sit loose from restraints and reckonings, then of consequence,
deism is the grand barrier to the purposes of atheism. The true Deist is so far
from breaking through restraints, that he makes it the great business of his
life to discharge the obligations he is under, because he believes in God, and
perceives the equity and reasonableness of duties, restraints, and future
reckonings. The assertion therefore demonstrates the prejudice of Dr.
Waterland, in relation to the Deists.

And the case is the same in respect of the charge against the Socinians. It is
the divines that are prejudiced against them; and not the Socinians in studying
the New Testament. It is the grand purpose of our lives to worship God, and
form our religious notions according to the instructions of divine wisdom. We
examine the sacred writings, with the utmost desire, and most ardent prayer,
that we may be rightly informed in the truest sense of the holy authors of
those divine books; and it appears to our plain understandings, after the most
honest labor, and wishes to heaven for a clear conception of holy things, that
the Father is the supreme God, that is, the first and chief Being, and Agent;
the first and chief Governor; the Fountain of Being, Agency, and authority:
that the Christian Messiah, the Man Christ Jesus, was sent into the world to
bear witness to the truth, and preach the gospel of the kingdom of God, that
kingdom of God which is within you, says the Lord, Luke xvii. 21. not a
kingdom of Monks, a sacerdotal empire of power, propositions, and ceremonies.
He came to call sinners to repentance and amendment of life, to teach them the
law of love, and assure mankind of grace and mercy and everlasting glory, if
they kept the commandments, and were obedient to the laws of heaven; laws of
righteousness, peace, giving no offense, and unanimity in the worship of the
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: but that, if they did not repent, and
cease to be hurtful and injurious; if they did not open their eyes, and turn
from darkness to light, from the power of satan unto God, and put on such an
agreeable and useful temper and behavior, as would render them a blessing in
the creation, they would be numbered among the cursed, and perish
everlastingly, for want of real goodness and a general sincerity of heart. This
the Socinians think is what Christ proposed and recommended, as the only and
the sure way to God's favor, through the worthiness of the Lamb that was
slain. We say this is pure religion. It is true, original christianity, and if
the glorious design of our Lord is answered by his miracles and preaching, by
his death, his resurrection, his ascension, and by the grace of the holy,
blessed, and sanctifying Spirit, it could reflect no dishonor on christianity,
and its divine author, if our Redeemer was a mere man. If by the assistance of
God Almighty, a mere man performed the whole work of our redemption, all we had
to do was to be thankful for the mighty blessing. The love of God in this way
had been equally inestimable. The worth of Jesus would be still invaluable.

But it is not the opinion of the Socinians that Christ was a mere man. It is
plain from this assertion, that the Rev. Dr. Heathcote, (in his Remarks on free
and candid Disquisitions) knows nothing of them: the account they give of Jesus
Christ, is very different. They say, he was a most glorious agent united to a
human body, and so far from being a mere man, that he was superior to angels.
He was the next in character to the necessarily existing Being. He is the
brightness of the Father's glory, and the express image of his person: he has
an excellency transcendent, and to the life represents what is infinitely great
and perfect.

If they do not allow that he made the worlds, or had an eternal generation; if
they say, he had no existence till he was formed by the power of God in the
womb, and assert this eminency is proper to the Man Christ Jesus; yet they are
far from affirming he was therefore a mere man: no; they believe he was decreed
to be as great and glorious as possible, and that God made the world for him;
that he was made the image of the invisible person of the Father; an image the
most express and exact; as great as God himself could make it; and of
consequence, so transcendent in all perfections, that what he says and does is
the same thing as if God had spoken and acted. This is not making him a mere
man. No: they say he is the first of all, and the head of all creatures, whom
the infinite love of God produced, to promote greatness, glory, and happiness
among the creatures, by the superlative greatness and glory of Jesus; and that
angels, and the spirits of the just made perfect, might have the pleasure of
beholding and enjoying the presence of this most glorious Image, that is, of
seeing their invisible Creator in his Image Jesus Christ. He is not a mere man;
but the brightness of the glory of God, the express Image of his person, and
raised so much higher than the angels, as he has inherited from God a more
excellent name than they, to wit, the name of Son, and is the appointed heir of
all things.

So that this Socinianism reflects no dishonor on Christianity and its Divine
Author. It conduces as much to the glory of God, and the benefit of man, as any
christianity can do. There is something vastly beautiful and satisfactory in
the notion of Christ's being the most glorious Image of the invisible Father,
whenever his existence began. The many transcendent excellencies of the
Messiah, in whom all fullness dwells, are exercised upon men to their happiness,
and to his glory; and we learn from thence, that greatness and glory are the
result of the exercise of virtue to the relief and happiness of others. The
Redeemer of the world is, in this account, the next in dignity and power to the
Great God; and the perfections of the Father do most eminently shine forth in
him. We are hereby made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints
in light, and delivered from the power of darkness. We give thanks unto the
Father, who has translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his love.

It is certain then that the divines have misrepresented the people, who are
injuriously called Socinians, as the religion they profess is
Scripture-Christianity: I say injuriously, because, in the first place, the
word Socinian is intended as a term of great reproach to christians, who
deserve better usage for the goodness of their manners, and the purity of their
faith: and in the next place, that Socinus was so far from being the author of
our religion, that he was not even the first restorer of it. He did not go to
Poland to teach the people there his religious notions, but because there was a
unitarian congregation there, with whom he might join in the worship of the
Father, through Jesus the Mediator, as his conscience would not suffer him to
assemble with those who worship a Being compounded of three divine persons.

But it is time to have done, and I shall conclude in the words of a good
author in old French Or rather in bad French, as the writer was no Frenchman.
The extract must be a curious thing to the reader, as the valuable book I take
it from is not to be bought.

Nostre confession de foy ate depuis la premiere predication de l'evangile
puisque nous luy donnons la saint ecriture pour fondement, mais il arrive de
nous ce qu'il arrive des tous ceux qui se sont detaches de l'eglise Roman aux
quels le papists donnent malgre eux pour autheurs de leur religion Luther,
Calvin, and autres docteurs qui n'ont ete que les restorateurs, des dogmes and
de verites qui s'etoyent presque perdues sous le gouvernement tyrannique de
l'eglise Roman pendant lequel l'ecriture saint etoit devenue un livre
inconnu a la pluspart de chretiens la lecture en ayant ete defendue
communement. Mais par un decret de la providence de Dieu le periode de la
revolution etant venu chacun a commence a deterrer la verite la mieux qu'il a
pu, and comme dans chaque revolution il y a des chefs and des gens illustres,
ainsi dans le retablissement des dogmes etouffes si longtems par le papisme
Luther, Calvin, Arminius, and Socin, ont ete des hommes illustres and don't on a
done le nom aux religions, Vous scaurez donc s'il vous plaist que Socin bien
loin d'avoir ete autheur de nostre religion n'en a pas ete meme la premier
restaurateur: car il n'etoit venu en Pologne que parce qu'il avoit appris qu'il
s'y etoit deja formee une assemblee de gens qui avoyent des opinions semblables
aux siennes: Je vous diray de plus, que la seule chose que le fait un heroes
dans nostre religion c'est qu'il en a ecrit des livres, mais il ny a presque
person qui les life, car comme Socin etoit un bon jurisconsulte il est
extremement long and ennuyeux; and outre que nous ne voulous point avoir
d'autre livre de religion que le nouveau Testament and point d'autres docteurs
que les apostres. C'est pourquoy, c'est bien malgre nous qu'on nous appelle
Sociniens ou Arriens: ce sont des noms don't la malignite de nos ennemys nous
couvre pour nous render odieux. Nous appellons enter nous du simple nom de
Chretiens. Mais puisque dans cette desunion de la chretiente, on nous dit qu'il
ne suffit pas de porter ce nom universel, mais qu'il encore necessairement se
distinguer par quelque appellation particuliere, nous consentons donc de porter
le nom de chretiens unitaires pour nous distinguer de chretiens trinitaires. Ce
nom de chretiens unitaires nous convient fort bien comme a ceux qui ne voulant
en aucune facon encherye sur la doctrine de Jesus Christ, n'y y subtiliser plus
qu'il ne faut, attachent leur croyance and leur confession positivement a cette
instruction de Jesus Christ qui se trouve dans le 17 chap. de l'evangile de St.
Jean, quand il dit -- Mon pere l'heure est venue, glorifiez vostre fills afin
que vostre fills vous glorify, comme vous luy avez done puissance sur tous les
hommes a fin qu'il done la vie eternelle a tous ceux que vous luy avez done
or la vie eternelle consiste a vous connoistre, vous qui estes le seul Dieu
veritable, and Jesus Christ que vous avez envoye. La meme lecon nous done
l'apostre St. Paul dans le 8 chap. aux Cor. disant, -- qu'il n'y a pour nous
qu'un seul Dieu qui est la pere duquel sont toutes chooses and nous pour luy,
and il n'y a qu'un seul seigneur qul est Jesus Christ, par lequel sont toutes
chooses and nous par luy. C'est donc a cause de cette confession que nous nous
appellons chretiens unitaires par ce que nous croyons qu'il n'y a qu'un seul
Dieu, pere and Dieu de nostre seigneur Jesus Christ, celuy que Jesus Christ
nous a appris d'adorer, and lequel il a aussy adore luy meme, l'appellent non
seulment nostre Dieu mais son Dieu aussy selon qu'il a dit, je m'en vay a mon
pere and vostre pere, a mon Dieu and a vostre Dieu.

Ainsy vous voyez que nous nous tenons aux verites divines. Nous avons la
religieuse veneration pour la saint ecriture. Avec tout cela nous sommes
serviteurs tres humble des messieurs les trinitaires, -- penes quos mundanae
fabulae actio est, and il ne tient pas a nous que nous ne courrious de tout
nostre coeur a leurs autels, s'ils vouloyent nous fair la grace de souffrir
nostre simplicite en Jesus Christ, and de ne pas vouloir nous obliger a la
confession de supplements a la saint ecriture La verite and la religion en
visit. Alamagne 1695.


An account of Socinus.
. 8. The great and excellent Faustus Socinus was born at Sienna, in the year
1539, and died at Luclavie, the third of March, 1604, aged 65. His book in
defense of the authority of the sacred scriptures is a matchless performance;
and if he had never written any thing else, is alone sufficient to render his
memory glorious, and precious to all true christians. Get this book, if you
can. It is the finest defense of your Bible that was ever published.
(Steinfurti, A. 1611. edit. Vorst.) And yet, such is the malignity of
orthodoxy, that a late great prelate, Dr. Smalbroke, Bp. of Litchfield and
Coventry, (who died A. D. 1749) could not help blackening the author when he
mentioned the work: his words are these; -- "And if Grotius was more especially
assisted by the valuable performance of a writer, otherwise justly of ill fame,
I mean, Faustus Socinus's little book De Auctoritate S. Scripturae, this
assistance," etc. 2d charge to the clergy of St. David's, p. 34. -- Here the
admirable Faustus, a man of as much piety, and as good morals, as has lived
since the apostles time, who truly and godly served the almighty and
everlasting God, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, is painted by this
eminent hand a man of ill fame; and for no other reason but because his
heavenly religion made him oppose the orthodox heresy of three Gods, as taught
in the creed of Athanasius; and piously labor, by the purity of his doctrine
and example, to keep the world from corruption.

Let us then be careful to confess the holy unitarian faith. Let us take the
advice of Socinus, and be original christians. Let there not be in our religion
a God compounded of three supreme spirits, equal in power and all possible
perfections. Let us worship the Invisible Father, the first and chief Almighty
Being, who is one supreme universal Spirit, of peerless Majesty; and, as the
inspired apostles direct, let us worship him through his most glorious Image,
the Man Christ Jesus; our Redeemer and Mediator, our King and our Judge.

N. B. Though the reverend Dr. Heathcote has been very unfriendly in his
account of the Christians he calls Socinians, in his Observations before
mentioned, yet you are not from thence to conclude that he belongs to the
Orthodox Party. He is far from it. and therefore I recommend to your perusal
not only his Cursory Animadversions upon free and candid Disquisitions, and his
finer Boyle-Lecture Sermons on the Being of God, but also his Cursory
Animadversions upon the Controversy, concerning the miraculous Powers, and his
Remarks on Chapman's Credibility of the Fathers Miracles. They are three
excellent pamphlets. The first is against the scholastic Trinity. And the
others on the side of Doctor Middleton, against the miracles of the Fathers.

Note Reader, Dr. Heathcote's two pamphlets on the side of Dr. Middleton, and
the Rev. Mr. Toll's admirable pieces in vindication of the Doctor against the
miracles of the Fathers, will give you a just and full idea of the late
controversy. Mr. Toll's pieces are called -- A Defense of Dr. Middleton's Free
Enquiry -- Remarks upon Mr. Church's Vindication -- And his Sermon and Appendix
against Dr. Church's Appeal.

And if you would see all that can be said in relation to this matter, get
likewise Dr. Syke's Two previous Questions: and the Two previous Questions
impartially considered; by the same author.

Remarks on two Pamphlets against Dr. Middleton's Introductory Discourse: --
Two Letters to the Rev. Mr. Jackson, in Answer to his Remarks on Middleton's
Free Inquiry: -- And, A View of the Controversy, concerning the miraculous
Powers, supposed to have subsisted in the Christian Church through several
successive Centuries.

These pamphlets will bind into two large octavo volumes, and make a valuable
collection of critical religious learning.

Note, Reader, of that admirable work, called Bibliotheca Fratrum Polonorum, by
Socinus, Crellius, Sclichtingius, and Wolzgoenius, 6 tomes, fol. Irenopoli
1656. The first and second volumes are the writings of Socinus; the third and
fourth by Crellius; the fifth by Sclichtingius; and the sixth by Wolzogenius:
they are all well worth your reading, as they contain the most valuable and
excellent learning; and especially Socinus and Crellius. In another place,
(where you will find me alone in a solitude) I shall give some curious extracts
from the works of these great, injured men, and a summary of their lives.

SECTION VIII.
When Love's well timed, it is not a fault to love;
The strong, the brave, the virtuous, and the wise,
Sink in the soft captivity together.

The author returns to Harrogate, and from thence goes to Cleator in
Westmoreland, to wait upon Miss Spence.
FROM Knaresborough, I went to Harrogate again, and there found the following
letter, of an old date, left for me.

SIR,
As you told me, you intended to go to London soon, and business obliges me to
ride up to the capital a few weeks hence, I should take it as a great favor,
if you would make Westmoreland your way, and through Lancashire to the Chester
road, that I may have your protection and guidance in this long journey.

I am, Sir, Your humble servant, Maria Spence.
Cleator, six miles to the south-west of Wharton-Hall.

This letter surprised me. Yes, dear creature, I said, I will make Westmoreland
my way to London. At four in the morning I mounted my horse, and rid to
Cleator. I arrived there at six in the evening, and had traveled that day 75
miles; to wit, from Harrogate to Boroughbridge, 8; from thence to Catarric, 22;
to Gretabridge, 15; to Bows, 6; to Brugh in Westmoreland, 12; to Kirkby-Steven,
near Wharton-Hall, 6; to Cleator, 6: -- 75 miles. I dined at Catarric on a hot
pigeon-pye just drawn, and ale of one ear, that is, admirable, (as Rabelais
means by the phrase, "We had wine of one ear," alluding to the one shake of the
head to the right shoulder, when a thing is excellent); and I gave the horses
another feed of corn at Bows, the George, kept by Railton the Quaker (an
excellent inn, and the master of it an instructive and entertaining orator). I
mention these things for your benefit, reader, that you may know where to stop
to advantage, if you should ever ride over the same ground I went that day.
While I waited at the inn, till the horses had eaten their corn, the landlord
brought me a paper, dropped, by a lady he knew not, some days before at his
house. He added, it was a curiosity, and worth my serious consideration.

A MORNING and EVENING PRAYER.
Almighty and ever-living God, have mercy on me. Forgive me all my sin, and
make my heart one, to fear thy glorious fearful Name, Jehovah. Guide me with
thy counsel, I beseech thee, and be the strength of my life and my portion for
ever.

O Lord Jehovah, defend me from the power and malice, the assaults and
attempts, of all my adversaries, and keep me in health and safety, in peace and
innocence. These things I ask in the name of Jesus Christ, thy Son, our Lord;
and in his words I call upon thee as, Our Father, who art in heaven, etc.

Observations relative to Miss Dudgeon 's Prayer.
This prayer pleased me very much. In the most beautiful manner, as well as in
a few words, it expresses all we need ask from heaven; and if Miss Dudgeon of
Richmondshire was the composer of it, as I have been assured since, upon
enquiry, I here place it to her honor, as a monument of her piety and sense;
and in hopes the illustrious of her sex will use so short and excellent a form
of devotion in their closets morning and night.

There is an expression in this prayer, which for some time I could not well
comprehend the meaning of; that is, Make my heart one: but on considering it, I
found it supported by the greatest authorities.

Among the sayings of Pythagoras, one is, be simply thyself. Reduce thy conduct
to one single aim, by bringing every passion into subjection, and acquiring
that general habit of self-denial, which comprehends temperance, moderation,
patience, government, and is the main principle of wisdom. Be simply thyself,
and so curb desire, and restrain the inclinations, and control the affections,
that you may be always able to move the passions as reason shall direct. Let
not every foremost fancy, or every forward appearance, have the least mastery
over you; but view them on every side by the clear light of reason, and be no
further influenced by the imaginations of pleasure, and apprehensions of evil,
than as the obvious relations and nature of things allow. Let the result of a
perception which every rational mind may have of the essential difference
between good and evil, the be cause or ground of obligation. This will add
greatly to quiet, and be productive of much real felicity. It will render every
present condition supportable, brighten every prospect, and always incline us
more to hope than to fear. This is the doctrine of Pythagoras.

I likewise find that David expresses the same thought in the 86th Psalm, ver.
11. which is rendered in the Bible translation, Unite my heart to fear thy
name; -- in the Common Prayer Book, O knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear
thy name: but the Hebrew is, " Make my heart one, to fear thy name;" meaning,
Let the fear of thee be the one ruling disposition of my soul, in opposition to
the double-minded man, which the Hebrew elegantly expresses by a heart and a
heart; one that draws to the riches, pleasures, and honors of this world; and
another to the practice of all virtue.

As to the other part of the prayer, which has the words -- glorious -- fearful
-- Jehovah; -- whereas in the 86th Psalm it is only said -- "to fear thy name;"
the author certainly took them from the 28th chapter of Deuteronomy, ver. 58.
The design of the dreadful threatenings in this chapter set before the people,
is there thus expressed, -- that thou may fear this glorious and fearful
name, JEHOVAH THY GOD; (in our translation, the Lord thy God). And therefore I
think these words are very finely used in this prayer.

"It is amazing to me (says the Rector of St. Mabyn), that throughout the
Bible, the translators have every where changed the word Jehovah for the word
Lord, when God himself gave the word Jehovah as his name to be uttered; and as
in this word the whole mystery of the Jewish and Christian dispensations seem
to have been wrapped up.

Say to the people, Ami Jehovah. I am Jehovah. Ye shall know that I Jehovah am
your God, which brings you out from under the burdens of the Egygtians. Exodus
vi. 6, 7. And Deuteronomy. vi. 4. Hear, O Israel, Jehovah our God is one Jehovah.

Then as to this word's comprehending the two dispensations, a good writer
observes that, though God was known to his true worshippers by many other
names, as God Almighty, the High God, the Everlasting God, etc. yet Jehovah was
his one peculiar name; a name which he had appointed to himself, in preference
to all others, and by which he declared by Moses he would be distinguished for
the time to come.

And as of all the names of God, this seems to be the most expressive of his
essence, as it can only be derived from the root which signifies to be, and
denotes the one eternal self-existent Being, from whom all other things derive
their being, and on whom they must depend; -- As the word does likewise signify
makes to be what was promised or foretold, and by such meaning declares, as
often as the word is repeated, that Jehovah our God is not only self-existent,
and the Creator of the world, but Him in whom all divine prophecies and
predictions center; it follows, in my opinion, that we should utter this awful
name in our addresses to God, and not, like the Jews, through a superstition
omit it, and use another instead of it."

N. B. The Rector of St. Mabyn is the Rev. Mr. Peter's; and the passage is to be
found in an excellent Preface to the octavo edition of his admirable
Dissertation on the Book of Job, in reply to that part of the Divine Legation
of Moses demonstrated, in which the author, my Lord of Gloucesier, sets himself
to prove, that this book is a work of imagination, or dramatic composition, no
older than Ezra the priest, whom he suppofes to be the writer of it, in the
year before Christ 467, or the year 455, in the 20th year of the reign of
Artaxerxes, king of Persia, when Daniel's seventy weeks begins; that is, the
period of 490 years, that were to be fulfilled before the passion of our
Savior. And further, (according to the author of the Legation), that this
allegorical drama or poem was written to squiet the minds of the Jewish people
under the difficulties of their captivity, and to assure them, as represented
by the person of Job, of those great temporal blessings which three prophets
had predicted.

Now in the Preface to the book aforementioned, in answer to all this (and
fully and beautifully answered it is), you will find, I say, the passage
relating to the word Jehovah, and more than I have quoted from it.

As to Pythagoras the Samean, mentioned in this note, on account of his saying
-- Be simply thyself; -- he was famous in the 60th olympiad, as Jamblicus
informs us; that is, his Elikia, or Reign of-Fame, began in the first year of
this olympiad, which was the year before Christ 540; for 60 x 4 gives 250 - 777
leaves 537 + 3, the plus years of the olympiad; i. e. 2, 3, 4 = 540. -- And he
died in the 4th year of the 70th olympiad, that is, the year before Christ 497:
for 70 x 4 = 280 - 777 remains 497: there are no plus years to be added here,
as it happened in the 4th or last year of the olympiad. This philosopher was
contemporary with, and a near friend to, the renowned Phalaris, who was
murdered in the year before Christ 556, when the Belshazzar of Daniel ascended
the throne of Babylon. And as Pythagoras lived to the age of 90, according to
Diogenes, he must have been born in the beginning of the reign of
Nebuchadnezzar; the year this conqueror took Jerusalem, and its king Zedekiah,
which was olymp. 47.3. and of consequence before Christ 590: for 47 x 4 = 188 -
777, remains 580 + 1=590. This was 54 years before Thespis invented tragedy
Olymp. 61.1. Selden's Comment on the Arundel Marble.
and 11 years before the birth of Aeschylus, the reformer of tragedy. Cyrus was
then in the 10th year of his age.

It is likewise evident from hence, that Pythagoras must have lived through the
reigns of Cyrus, Cambyses, and the greatest part of the reign of Darius
Histaspes, who slew Smerdis the Magi, and is called in scripture Abasuerus; the
king of Persia, who married Esther, and ordered Haman the Amalekite to be
hanged on the gallaws he had erected for Mordecai the Jew, in the year before
Christ 510.

Note, David was before Pythagoras 519 years.

Reader, As to the word Elikia, which I have used to express the reign or time
of flourishing of Pythagoras; I have an observation or two to make in relation
to it, which I think worth your attending to.

Clemens Alexandrinus says ( Stromata, p. 40), (...): that is, The years from
Moses to Solomon's Elikia are 610; to wit, Moses's life -- 120 From his death
to David's accession -- 450 David's reign -- 40 610

From this passage it is plain, that the Elikia of Solomon is not meant of his
nativity, but of the beginning of his reign, when he was 33 years of age.

It is then very surprising that Dodwell should insist upon it, that Elikia
always signifies nativity. It is the more wonderful, as Dodwell quotes this
passage from Clement; and as it is impossible to make out 610, without coming
to the 33d of Solomon, as I have reckoned it.

Nay, in another place of the Stromata, Clement says, Isaiah, Hosea, and Micah
lived after the Elikia of Lycurgus; where he can only mean the time when that
lawgiver flourished; for, from the Destruction of Troy to the Akme of Lycurgus,
was 290 years: and from Solomon, in whose time Troy was taken, to the time of
the prophets, was 360 years.

Thus does learning accommodate things. Dodwell wanted to fit a passage in
Antilochus to his own calculation, and so 312 years from the Elikia of
Pythagoras, that is, says Dodwell, from the nativity of the philosopher (he
meant taking the word in that sense) to the death of Epicurus, brings us
exactly to the time. Who can forbear smiling? A favorite notion is to many
learned men a sacred thing. Dodwell settles his passage in Antilochus to his
mind, by perverting the word Elikia.

This, to be sure, in profane things, can do no great harm: but when the
practice is brought into things sacred, it is a detriment to mankind. Some
divines, for example, to support a notion as unreasonable as it is dear to
them, tell us that the word Isos signifies strict equality, not like: and that
when St. Paul says (...), we must construe it, Jesus Christ was strictly equal
to the most high God. This is sad construction, when Homer, Euripides,
Aeschylus, make the word Isos to import no more than like. Isanemos, swift as
the wind; Isatheos phos, like a God; Isanerios, like a dream.

And when a divine is positive that os and kathos, as, and even as, words
occurring in the New Testament, signify a strict equality, and not some sort of
likeness; this is miserable perversion, and hurts the christian religion very
greatly; as they endeavor, by such a given sense, to prove that the man Christ
Jesus is to be honored with the same divine honors we offer to God the Father
Almighty, by the command and example of Jesus, who was sent from God, and was a
worshipper of God; who lived obedient to the laws of God, preached those laws,
and died for them in the cause of God; who was raised from the dead by God, and
now fits on God's right hand; intercedes with God, and in his Gospel owns his
Father to be his and our only true God. This is sad accommodation. Though the
words never signify more than a degree of likeness in the Greek classics, yet
our headstrong orthodox monks will have them to mean strict equality; and
Alexander the Great and Alexander the Coppersmith are the same Being. Amazing!
Gentlemen; here is but One Ball, and out of itself you shall see this one ball
send forth two other balls, big as it, and yet not lose one atom of its weight
and grandeur. Hocus pocus, Reverendissimi spectatores, the One is Three.

And now, Gentlemen, be pleased to observe the miracle reversed. Pilluli
pilluli, congregate, Presto presio, unite: observate, Signori Dottissimi, the
Three are One. -- Such is the becus pocus the monks have made of their Trinity.






When I came to Miss Spence's door, I sent in my name by a servant, and
immediately Maria came out herself to welcome me to Cleator. She told me she
was glad to see me, and extremely obliged to me, for riding so many miles out
of my way, to travel up with her to London; but as she had never been further
from home than Harrogate, and was afraid of going such a journey by herself,
she writ to me, in hopes curiosity and my great complaisance to the ladies,
might induce me to take Cleator in my way to town, though so much about: but as
so many weeks had passed since she came away from the Wells, and she heard
nothing of me, she had laid aside all expectation of my coming. This made the
visit the more pleasing.

In answer to this, I replied, that if I had got her letter sooner, I would
have been with her long before: but that was not possible, as I had been at a
little lodge and farm of mine in the northern extremity of Westmoreland, to
settle things there, and returned to Harrogate but yesterday, when I had the
honor of receiving your letter, and upon reading it, set out at daybreak this
morning to kiss your hand, and execute any commands.

The manner of passing the evening at Cleator, the first night I was there.
. 2. Here an excellent hot supper was brought in, and after it, Miss Spence
said, she was surprised to hear I was an inhabitant of Westmoreland, as she had
never heard of me in the north, nor seen me at Harrogate before the other day.

I told her I was a stranger in the county, and by a wonderful accident, as I
traveled a few years ago out of curiosity, and in search of a friend, up
Stanemore-hills, I became possessed of a lodge I had on the northern edge of
Westmoreland, where I lived a considerable time, and once imagined I should
never leave it, as it is the most romantic and the most beautiful solitude in
the world.

While I was giving this short relation, Miss Spence seemed greatly amazed, and
her uncle, an old clergyman, who had looked with great attention at me, hoped
it would be no offense to ask me how old I was.

None at all, Sir, I replied. I want some months of twenty-six; and though I
dance and rattle at the wells, and am now going up to London, where all is
tumult and noise, yet my passion for still life is so great, that I prefer the
most silent retreat to the pleasures and splendors of the greatest town. If it
was in my power to live as I please, I would pass my days unheard of and
unknown, at Orton-Lodge, so my little silent farm is called, near the southern
confines of Cumberland, with some bright partner of my soul. I am sure I should
think it a complete paradise to live in that distant solitude with a woman of
Miss Spence's form and mind.

But tell me, I request, Maria said, how did you get to the confines of
Westmoreland over Stanemore hills, and what was that accident that put you in
possession of Orton-Lodge? It must be a curious account, I am sure.

This, I replied, you shall hear tomorrow morning after breakfast; there is
not time for it now. All I can say at present is, that it was love kept me
among the mountains for some years, and if the heaven-born maid (vastly like
you, Miss Spence, she was) had not, by the order of heaven, been removed to the
regions of immortality and day, I should not have left the solitude, nor would
you ever have left the solitude, nor would you ever have seen me at Harrogate:
but destiny is the dirigent: mutable is the condition of mortals, and we are
blind to futurity and the approaches of fate. This led me over the vast
mountains of Stanemore, enabled me to cross the amazing fells of Westmoreland,
and brought me to that spot, where I had the honor and happiness of becoming
acquainted with Miss Spence. Thus did we chat till eleven, and retired to our
chambers.

But the old gentleman, the doctor, when he came with me into my apartment,
told me we must have one bottle more, for it was his nightcap, without which he
could not sleep: he then bid the servant make haste with it, and when that was
out, we had another. He was a sensible agreeable man, and pleased me very much,
as he appeared a zealous friend to the illustrious house of Hanover; whereas
almost all the clergymen I had been in company with since I came to England,
were Jacobites, and very violent ones.

A conversation relating to the Revolution, and exclusion of James II.
. 3. I remember, among other things, I asked this Divine, over our wine, -- If
popery is ever so corrupt, could men be debarred of their rights for an
attachment to it? -- Are not crowns hereditary? -- And is not treason in our
country stamped with so peculiar an infamy, as involving the delinquent's
innocent children in the forfeitures, or penal consequences that await it, on
purpose to check the rebellion of Britons by such an accumulated punishment of
evil doers?

To this the doctor replied, that the exclusion of a popish prince must be
lawful, if we ought to secure our property and religion, and, as in duty bound,
oppose his trampling upon the laws, and his own solemn declarations. If the
people have privileges and interests, they may defend them, and as justifiably
oppose notorious domestic oppressions, as foreign invasions. The head of the
community, has no more a license to destroy the most momentous interests of it,
than any of the inferior members, or than any foreign invader. If a king has no
passion to indulge, incompatible with the welfare of his people, then, as
protection and obedience are reciprocal, and cannot subsist, the one without
the other, it must be a crime in the people not to honor, and obey, and assist
the royal authority. It is not only the interest but the duty of the subject to
obey the prince, who is true to the important trust reposed in him, and has the
welfare of the people at heart. But such a king cannot be a papist. The Romish
prince will not only stretch a limited prerogative into lawless power, and
grasp at absolute monarchy; but will break through the most sacred ties, and
subvert the rights he was sworn to guard, to re-establish popery in this
kingdom. Could James the Second have kept the seat of government, and baffled
all opposition, we may conclude from what he did, from his trampling upon the
laws, and his own solemn declarations; from his new court of inquisition (the
high commission court) to subvert the constitution of the church of England,
and to lay waste all its fences against popery; from that furious act of his
power, which fell on Magdalen-college, and his two cruel acts of parliament in
Ireland, ( repeal of the act of settlement, by which the protestant gentlemen
were deprived of their estates; and the act of attainder, by which they were to
be hanged, for going to beg their bread in another country, after they had been
robbed of all in their own by their king, who had sworn to protect them); from
hence, I say, it is plain, that if James could have sat firm upon the throne,
his misguided conscience would have induced him to the most inhuman acts of
violence. He would have proceeded to the barbarities; and rekindled the flames
of Mary. Had he continued to reign over these kingdoms, it is most certain,
that instruction and persuasion only would not have been the thing, but where
instruction and persuasion failed, imprisonments, tortures, death, would have
been used, to compel us to believe all the gross absurdities of Rome, their
impieties go God, and contradictions to common sense. We must throw away our
reason and our bibles, the noblest gifts of heaven, and neither think nor
speak, but as we are bid by men no wiser than ourselves; or, we must expire
under torments as great as the devil and the monks could devise. It was
therefore necessary, for the preservation of our church and state, to exclude
James and his popish heirs. The common welfare required this salutary
precaution. The collected interest of the community is the primary end of every
law.

All this, I said, seems quite right. To be sure, during that short twilight of
power, which dawned upon popery in England in the years 1689 and 90, its rage
was imprudent. It did discover its fury and resentment. In one of the Irish
acts you have mentioned, more than 2000 people were attainted, and some of them
the most noble and venerable characters in Ireland. Yet had success attended
the arms of James, this would have been but the beginning of sorrows. And
probably a son of christian Rome would have proscribed more in these two
islands, than in heathen Rome, out of the whole vast Roman empire, were given
up to destruction for their virtue, by the cruel triumvirate, Augustus, Antony,
and Lepidus: And of consequence, since dear experience convinced, it was
equally absurd and vain, to imagine that a popish head would govern a
protestant church by any councils, but those of popish priests, as it was to
imagine that a popish king would govern a protestant state by any councils, but
those of popish counselors; it must therefore be owned, that the Lords, and
others, assembled at Nottingham, were just in declaring, that King James's
administrations were usurpations on the constitution; and that they owned it
rebellion to resist a king that governed by law; but to resist a tyrant, who
made his will his law, was nothing but a necessary defense. This, to be sure,
is just. But still, if crowns are hereditary, and one severe punishment of
treason was intended to check all rebellion, were we not a little too hasty in
the affair of the Revolution? And might we not have expected something better
from the good sense and good nature of James, if we had waited a while, till he
could see the folly of his proceedings?

To this the Doctor replied, that as to James's good sense, it never appeared
he had any: and in respect of his many real good qualities, they were
extinguished by his bigotry, and could never be of service to a protestant
spirit, the spirit of freemen: it was therefore incumbent on them, who knew and
loved the invaluable blessings they enjoyed, to act as they did; that is, as
the wisdom of our constitution requires in such cases.

As to the crown's being hereditary, -- and the severe punishment of treasons;
-- in respect of the first particular, there is no natural or divine law
declares crowns hereditary. If a certain rule of succession has been
established in most kingdoms, the single point of view in it was public good,
or a prevention of those intestine commotions, which might attend an election:
But as every rule is dispensible, and must give way when it defeats the end for
which it was appointed; should the customary succession in a kingdom prove at
any time productive of much greater evils than those it was intended to
obviate, it may questionless be superseded occasionally. This point is evident
from reason. Though the crown in our own country is generally hereditary, yet
that right is to be set aside, if the security of our civil and religious
liberty requires it. If the pretense of James was a right to dominion, in
opposition not only to the sense of the legislature, but to that of the nation,
then the popish prince was justly excluded, for denying the public good to be
the supreme law. Had the right he claimed been established, then our religion,
our liberties, and the safety of our fortunes, had been no longer our own. In
case of such establishment, the glory of our constitution was no more. The sum
of the matter is, the royal family of the Steuarts being Roman Catholics, makes
their case similar to an extinction of it.

And as to the accumulated punishment of treason in Great Britain, that can
only be designed as a powerful check to rebellion, against a king whose darling
view is the welfare of the people. No infamy, forfeitures, or death, can be too
severe for the man, who rebels against a prince that governs for the good of
the people, and endeavors to transmit our state safe to posterity. To plot
against such a sovereign is a great crime indeed. To conspire against a prince,
whose life is of the utmost consequence to the community, is an enormity that
ought to be stamped with a peculiar infamy, and punished in the severest
manner. But it can be no treason to act against a papist, who violates every
maxim of our constitution, and by every maxim of popery labors to destroy our
religion and liberties. Every man may repel unlawful attempts upon his person
and property, and is armed by God with authority for self-defence.

To this it was replied, that I thought the Doctor quite right, and for my own
part was determined to oppose a popish prince, whenever he comes on with his
unalienable and indefeasible claim, to introduce his absurd and cruel religion,
to deprive us of our rational christianity, and make us slaves, instead of
freeborn subjects. No popish James, to write our themes, but (filling a
bumper) may this nation be ever happy in a king whose right is founded upon
law, and who has made it the rule of his government. May Britons ever remember
the merciless rage of popery, and the envious malice of France; each ready to
lay waste the whole fabric of our excellent constitution, and cry aloud, with
all the embittered sons of Edom, Down with it, down with it, even to the
ground. -- Here the clock struck one, and we parted.

A Description of Cleator.
. 4. Early the next morning I was up, according to my wont, and walked out, to
look at the place. Cleator is one of the finest spots that can be seen; in a
wild romantic country. The natural views are wonderful, and afford the eye vast
pleasure. The charming prospects of different kinds, from the edges of the
mountains, are very fine: -- The winding hills, pretty plains, vast precipices,
hanging woods, deep vales, the easy falls of water in some places, and in
others cataracts tumbling over rocks, -- form all together the most beautiful
and delightful scenes. All the decorations of art are but foils and shadows to
such natural charms.

In the midst of these scenes, and in a theatrical space of about two hundred
acres, which the hand of nature cut, or hollowed out, on the side of a
mountain, stands Cleator-Lodge, a neat and pretty mansion. Near it were groves
of various trees, and the water of a strong spring murmured from the front down
to a lake at the bottom of the hill.

Character of Maria Spence.
. 5. This was Miss Spence's country house. Here the wise and excellent Maria
passed the best part of her time, and never went to any public place but
Harrogate once a year. In reading, riding, fishing, and some visits to and from
three or four neighbors now and then, her hours were happily and usefully
employed. History and Mathematics she took great delight in, and had a very
surprising knowledge in the last. She was another of those ladies I met with in
my travels, who understood that method of calculation, beyond which nothing
further is to be hoped or expected; I mean the arithmetic of fluxions.

Very few men among the learned can consider magnitudes as generated by motion,
or determine their proportions one to another from the celerities of the motion
by which they are generated. I question if the Critical Reviewers can do it (I
am sure they cannot), though they have made so licentiously free with me. They
may however pretend to know something of the matter, and so did Berkley, late
Bishop of Cloyne in Ireland: yet that prelate, in reality, understood no more
of the method than a porter does, though he presumed to write against it, and
the divine Newton, the inventor of it: I say it. But Maria Spence, in the 24th
year of her age (at this time), was a master in the fluxionary way. She had not
only a clear and adequate notion of fluxions, but was able to penetrate into
the depths of this science, and had made sublime discoveries in this
incomparable method of reasoning. She astonished me. I thought Mrs. Burcott and
Mrs. Fletcher (mentioned in my first volume, p. 275.) were very extraordinary
women, on account of their knowledge in algebra, and the sine answers they gave
to the most difficult problems in universal arithmetic: but this sort of
reasoning is far inferior to the fluxionary method of calculation; as the
latter opens and discovers to us the secrets and recesses of nature, which have
always before been locked up in obscurity and darkness. By fluxions, such
difficulties are resolved, as raise the wonder and surprise of all mankind, and
which would in vain be attempted by any other method whatsoever. What then must
we think of a young woman well skilled in such work; -- not only able to find
the fluxions of flowing or determinate quantities, that is, the velocities with
which they arise or begin to be generated in the first moments of formation
(called the velocities of the incremental parts), and the velocities in the
last ratio's, as vanishing or ceasing to be; but from given fluxions to find
the fluents; -- and be ready in drawing tangents to curves; in the solution of
problems de maximis and minimis, that is, the greatest or least possible
quantity attainable in any case; in the invention of points of inflection and
retrogression; in finding the evoluta of a given curve; in finding the caustic
curves, by reflection and refraction, etc. etc. -- this was amazing beyond any
thing I had seen; or did ever see since, except Mrs. Benlow of Richmondshire,
with whom I became acquainted in 1739. (See Memoirs of several Ladies of Great
Britain, Vol. I.) With astonishment I beheld her. I was but a young beginner,
or learner, in respect of her, though I had applied so close to fluxions (after
I had learned algebra), that my head was often ready to split with pain; nor
had I the capacity, at that time, to comprehend thoroughly the process of
several operations she performed with beauty, simplicity, and charming
elegance. Admirable Maria! No one have I ever seen that was her superior in
this science: one equal only have I known, the lady a little before mentioned.
And does not this demonstrate, that the faculties and imagination of women's
minds, properly cultivated, may equal those of the greatest men? A reflection
on the education of the women.
And since women have the same improvable minds as the male part of the
species, why should they not be cultivated by the same method? Why should
reason be left to itself in one of the sexes, and be disciplined with so much
care in the other. Learning and knowledge are perfections in us not as we are
men, but as we are rational creatures, in which order of beings the female
world is upon the same level with the male. We ought to consider in this
particular, not what is the sex, but what is the species they belong to. And if
women of fortune were so considered, and educated accordingly, I am sure the
world would soon be the better for it. It would be so far from making them
those ridiculous mortals Moliere has described under the character of learned
ladies; that it would render them more agreeable and useful, and enable them by
the acquisition of true sense and knowledge, to be superior to gayety and
spectacle, dress and dissipation. They would see that the sovereign good can be
placed in nothing else but in rectitude of conduct; as that is agreeable to our
nature; conducive to well-being; accommodate to all places and times; durable,
self-derived, indeprivable; and of consequence, that on rational and masculine
religion only they can rest the soal of the foot, and the sooner they turn to
it, the happier here and hereafter they shall be. Long before the power of
sense, like the setting sun, is gradually forsaking them, (that power on which
the pleasures of the world depend) they would, by their acquired understanding
and knowledge, see the folly of pleasure, and that they were born not only to
virtue, friendship, honesty, and faith, but to religion, piety, adoration, and
a generous surrender of their minds to the supreme cause. They would be
glorious creatures then. Every family would be happy.

But as to Miss Spence, this knowledge, with a faultless person, and a modesty
mor graceful than her exquisite beauty, were not the things that principally
charmed me: nor was it her conversation, than which nothing could be more
lively and delightful: nor her fine fortune. It was her manners. She was a
Christian Deist, and considered Benevolence and Integrity as the essentials of
her religion. She imitated the piety and devotion of Jesus Christ, and
worshipped his God and our God, his Father and our Father, as St. John
expressly styles the God of Christians, xx. 17. She was extremely charitable to
others, and considered conscious virtue as the greatest ornament and most
valuable treasure of human nature. Excellent Maria!

The author's departure
. 6. With this young lady, and her two servants (her footman and her woman,) I
went up to London. from Cleator for London, July 31. 1731.
We set out from Cleator the 31st day of July, and without meeting with any
mischief in all that long way, came fafe to London. We were nine days on the
road; and as the weather was fine, and our horses excellent, we had a charming
journey. My companion was so agreeable, that had it been two thousand miles
from Cleator to London, instead of 272, I should still have thought it too
short. Her conversation was so various and fine, that no way could seem
tiresome and tedious to him that traveled with her. Her notions and remarks
were ever lively and instructive. It was vast pleasure to hear her, even on the
driest and most abstruse subjects, on account of the admiration her discourse
raised, and the fine knowledge it communicated, to one who understood her. I
will give an instance.

. 7. In riding over the mountains the first day, we missed the road in the
evening, and instead of getting to a very good inn, where we intended to rest,
we were forced to stop at a poor little public house, and right glad to get in
there, as the evening was tempestuous and wet, dark and cold. Here we got some
bacon and fresh eggs for supper, and the ale was good, which amused us well
enough till nine o'clock. We then proposed to play at cribbage for an hour, and
called for a pack of cards; but they had none in the house, and we were obliged
to divert ourselves with conversation, till it was time to retire. Miss Spence
began in the following manner.

A discourse on fluxions.
Was Newton, Sir, or Leibnitz, the author of that method of calculation, which
lends its aid and assistance to all the other mathematical sciences, and that
in their greatest wants and distresses? I have heard a foreigner affirm, that
the German was the inventor of fluxions.

That cannot be (I replied). In the year 1696, Dr. Barrow received from Mr.
Newton a demonstration of the rule of the quadrature of curves, which the
Doctor communicated to Mr. Collins; and as this is the foundation of fluxions,
and the differential calculus, it is evident Mr. Newton had invented the method
before that time.

In the beginning of the year 1673, Leibnitz was in England, again in October
1676; and the interval of this time he spent in France, during which he kept a
correspondence with Oldenburgh, and by his means with J. Collins; and sometimes
also with Newton, from the last of whom he received a letter, dated June 18,
1676, wherein is taught the method of reducing quantities into infinite series,
that is, of exhibiting the increments of flowing quantities. This method was
utterly unknown to Leibnitz, before he received the abovesaid letter of
Newton's, as he himself acknowledges in a letter to Oldenburgh, dated August
27, 1676; for before that time, he says in his letter, he was obliged to
transform an irrational quantity into a rational fraction, and then by
division, after the method of Mercator, to reduce the fraction into a series.

It is likewise certain, that Leibnitz did not then understand these series,
because, in the same letter, he desires Newton would explain to him the manner
how he got these series. And again in a second letter from Newton to Leibnitz,
dated October 24, 1676, he gives yet clearer hints of his method, and
illustrates it by examples, and lays down a rule, by which, from the ordinates
of certain curves, their areas may be obtained in finite terms, when it is
possible.

By these lights, and assisted by such examples, the acute Leibnitz might have
learned the Newtonian method.

It is plain he did so; for in 1684, he first published, in the Leipsic Acts,
his Elements of the Differential Calculus, without pretending to have had the
method before the year 1677, the year he received the two letters from Newton:
and yet, when Sir Isaac published his books of the number of curves of the
first kind, and of the quadrature of figures, the editors of the Acts said
Leibnitz was the first inventor of the differential calculus, and Newton had
substituted fluxions for differences, just as Honoratus Faber, in his Synopsis
Geometrica, had substituted a progression of motion for Cavallerius's method of
indivisibles; that is, Leibnitz was the first inventor of the method, Newton
had received it from him (from his Elements of the Differential Calculus), and
had substituted fluxions for differences; but the way of investigation in each
is the same, and both center in the same conclusions.

This excited Mr. Keil to reply; and he made it appear very plain from Sir
Isaac's letters, published by Dr. Wallis, that he (Newton) was the first
inventor of the algorith, or practical rules of fluxions; and Leibnitz did no
more than publish the same, with an alteration of the name, and manner of
notation. This however did not silence Leibnitz, nor satisfy the foreigners who
admired him. He abused Dr. Keil, and appealed to the Royal Society against him;
that they would be pleased to restrain the Doctor's vain babblings and unjust
calumniations, and report their judgment as he thought they ought to do, that
is, in his favor. But this was not in the power of the Society, if they did
justice; for it appeared quite clear to a committee of the members, appointed
to examine the original letters, and other papers, relating to the matter,
which were left by Mr. Oldenburgh and Mr. J. Collins, that Sir Isaac Newton was
the first inventor of fluxions; and accordingly they published their opinion.
This determines the affair. When this is the case, it is senseless for any
foreigner to say Leibnitz was the author of fluxions. To the divine Newton
belongs this greatest work of genius, and the noblest thought that ever entered
the human mind.

It must be so ( Maria replied): As the case is stated, Sir Isaac Newton was
most certainly the inventor of the method of fluxions: And supposing Leibnitz
had been able to discover and work the differential calculus, without the
lights he received from Newton, it would not from thence follow, that he
understood the true method of fluxions: for, though a differential has been,
and to this day is, by many, called a fluxion, and a fluxion a differential,
yet it is an abuse of terms. A fluxion has no relation to a differential, nor a
differential to a fluxion, The principles upon which the methods are founded
show them to be very different; notwithstanding the way of investigation in
each be the same, and that both center in the same conclusions: nor can the
differential method perform what the fluxionary method can. The excellency of
the fluxionary method is far above the differential.

This remark on the two methods surprised me very much, and especially as it
was made by a young lady. I had not then a notion of the difference, and had
been taught by my master to proceed on the principles of the Differential
Calculus. This made me request an explication of the matter, and Maria went on
in the following manner.

Magnitudes, as made up of an infinite number of very small constituent parts
put together, are the work of the Differential Calculus; but by the fluxionary
method, we are taught to consider magnitudes as generated by motion. A
described line in this way, is not generated by an apposition of points, or
differentials, but by the motion or flux of a point; and the velocity of the
generating point in the first moment of its formation, or generation, is called
its fluxion. In forming magnitudes after the differential way, we conceive them
as made up of an infinite number of small constituent parts, so disposed as to
produce a magnitude of a given form; that these parts are to each other as the
magnitudes of which they are differentials; and that one infinitely small part,
or differential, must be infinitely great, with respect to another other
differential, or infinitely small part: but by fluxion, or the law of flowing,
we determine the proportion of magnitudes one to another, from the celerities
of the motions by which they are generated. This most certainly is the purest
abstracted way of reasoning. Our considering the different degrees of
magnitude, as arising from an increasing series of mutations of velocity, is
much more simple, and less perplexed than the other way; and the operations
founded on fluxions, must be much more clear, accurate, and convincing, than
those that are founded on the Differential Calculus. There is a great
difference in operations, when quantities are rejected, because they really
vanish; -- and when they are rejected, because they are infinitely small: the
latter method, which is the differential, must leave the mind in ambiguity and
confusion, and cannot in many cases come up to the truth. It is a very great
error then to call differentials, fluxions, and quite wrong to begin with the
differential method, in order to learn the law or manner of flowing.

With amazement I heard his discourse, and requested to know by what master,
and what method, she obtained these notions; for they were far beyond every
thing on the subject that I had ever met with. What she said concerning the
nature and idea of fluxions, I though just and beautiful, and I believe it was
in her power, to show the bases on which they are erected.

An account of Martin Murdoch.
My master, Sir, ( Maria answered) was a poor traveller, a Scotchman, one Martin
Murdoch, who came by accident to my father's house, to ask relief, when I was
about fifteen years old. He told us, he was the son of one* of the ministers of
Scotland, and came from the remotest part of the Highlands: that his father
taught him mathematics, and left him, at his death, a little stock on a small
farm; but misfortunes and accidents obliged him in a short time to break up
house, and he was going to London, to try if he could get any thing there, by
teaching arithmetic of every kind. My father, who was a hospitable man, invited
him to stay with us a few days, and the parson of our parish soon found, that
he had not only a very extraordinary understanding, but was particularly
excellent at figures, and the other branches of the mathematics. My father upon
this agreed with him to be my preceptor for five years, and during four years
and nine months of that time, he took the greatest pains to make me as perfect
as he could in arithmetic, trigonometry, geometry, algebra, and fluxions. As I
delighted in the study above all things, I was a great proficient for so few
years, and had Murdoch been longer with me, I should have been well acquainted
with the whole glorious structure: but toward the end of the fifth year, this
poor Archimedes was unfortunately drowned, in crossing one of our rivers, in
the winter time, and went in that uncomfortable way, in the thirty-sixth year
of his age, to the enjoyment of that felicity and glory, which God has prepared
for a virtuous life and honest heart. Why such men, as the poor and admirable
Murdoch, have often such hard measure in this world, is not in my power to
account for; nor do I believe any one can: but what I tell you is one of those
surprising things, and I lamented not a little the loss of such a master. Still
however I continued to study by many written rules he had given me, and to this
day, mathematics are the greatest pleasure of my life.

As to our method, my master, in the first place, made me perfectly understand
arithmetic, and then geometry and algebra, in all their parts and improvements,
the methods of series, doctrine of proportions, nature of logarithms,
mechanics, and laws of motion: from thence we proceeded to the pure doctrine of
fluxions, and at last looked into the Differential Calculus. In this true way
my excellent master led me, and in the same difficult path every one must go,
who intends to learn Fluxions. I would be but lost labor for any person to
attempt them, who was unacquainted with these Precognita.

When we turned to fluxions, the first thing my master did, was to instruct me
in the arithmetic of exponents, the nature of powers, and the manner of their
generation. We went next to the doctrine of infinite series; and then, to the
manner of generating mathematical quantities. This generation of quantities was
my first step into fluxions, and my master so amply explained the nature of
them, in this operation, that I was able to form a just idea of a first
fluxion, though thought by many to be incomprehensible. We proceeded from
thence to the notation and algorithm of first fluxions; to the finding second,
third, etc. fluxions; the finding fluxions of exponential quantities; and the
fluents from given fluxions; to their uses in drawing tangents to curves; in
finding the areas of spaces; the valves of surfaces; and the contents of
solids; their percussion, oscillation, and centers of gravity. All these things
my master so happily explained to my understanding, that I was able to work
with ease, and found no more difficulty in conceiving an adequate notion of a
nascent or evanescent quantity, than in forming a true idea of a mathematical
point. In short, by the time I had studied fluxions two years, I not only
understood their fundamental principles and operations, and could investigate,
and give the solution of the most general and useful problems in the
mathematics; but likewise, solve several problems that occur in the phenomenon
of nature.

Here Maria stopped, and as soon as astonishment would permit me to speak, I
proposed to her several difficult questions, I had heard, but was not then able
to answer. I requested her, in the first place, to inform me, how the time of a
body's descending through any arch of a cycloid was found: and if ten hundred
weight avoirdupoise, hanging on a bar of steel perfectly elastic, and supported
at both ends, will just break the bar, what must be the weight of a globe,
falling perpendicular 185 feet on the middle of the bar, to have the same
effect? -- My next questions were, how long, and how far, ought a given globe
to descend by its comparative weight in a medium of a given density, but
without resistance, to acquire the greatest velocity it is capable of in
descending with the same weight, and in the same medium, with resistance? --
And how are we to find the value of a solid formed by the rotation of this
curvilinear space, A C D about the axis A D, the general equation, expressing
the nature of the curve, being ^ -- How is the center of gravity to be found of
the space enclosed by an hyperbola, and its asymptete? And how are we to find
the center of oscillation of a sphere revolving about the line P A M, a
tangent, to the generating circle F A H, in the point A, as an axis? -- These
questions Maria answered with a celerity and elegance that again amazed me, and
convinced me that, notwithstanding the Right Rev. metaphysical disputant, Dr.
Berkley, late Bishop of Cloyne in Ireland, could not understand the doctrine of
fluxions, and therefore did all he could to disgrace them, and the few
mathematicians who have studied magnitudes as generated by motion; yet, the
doctrine, as delivered by the divine Newton, may be clearly conceived, and
distinctly comprehended; that the principles upon which it is founded, are
true, and the demonstrations of its rules conclusive. No opposition can hurt it.

When I observed, that some learned men will not allow that a velocity which
continues for no time at all, can possibly describe any space at all: its
effect, they say, is absolutely nothing, and instead of satisfying reason with
truth and precision, the human faculties are quite confounded, lost, and
bewildered in fluxions. A velocity or fluxion is at best we do not know what;
-- whether something or nothing: and how can the mind lay hold on, or form any
accurate abstract idea of such a subtle, fleeting thing?

Disputants ( Maria answered) may perplex with deep speculations, and confound
with mysterious disquisitions, but the method of fluxions has no dependence on
such things. The operation is not what any single abstract velocity can
generate or describe of itself, but what a continual and successively variable
velocity can produce in the whole: And certainly, a variable cause may produce
a variable effect, as well as a permanent cause a permanent and constant
effect. The difference can only be, that the continual variation of the effect
must be proportional to the continual variation of the cause. The method of
fluxions therefore is true, whether we can or cannot conceive the nature and
manner of several things relating to them, though we had no ideas of
perpetually arising increments, and magnitudes in nascent or evanescent states.
The knowledge of such things is not essential to fluxions. All they propose is,
to determine the velocity or flowing wherewith a generated quantity increases,
and to sum up all that has been generated or described by the continually
variable fluxion. On these two bases fluxions stand.

This was clear and just, and showed that the nature and idea of fluxions is
agreeable to the nature and constitution of things. They can have no dependence
upon any metaphysical speculations, (such speculations as that
anti-mathematician, my Lord of Cloyne, brought in, to cavil and dispute against
principles he understood nothing of, and maliciously run the account of them
into the dark;) but are the genuine offspring of nature and truth. An instance
or two may illustrate the matter.

1. A heavy body descends perpendicularly 16 1/12 feet in a second, and at the
end of this time, has acquired a velocity of 32 feet in a second, which is
accurately known. At any given distance then from the place the body fell, take
the point A in the right line, and the velocity of the falling body in the
point may be truly computed: but the velocity in any point above A, at ever so
small a distance, will be less than in A; and the velocity at any point below
A, at the least possible distance, will be greater than in A. It is therefore
plain, that in the point A, the body has a certain determined velocity, which
belongs to no other point in the whole line. Now this velocity is the fluxion
of that right line in the point A; and with it the body would proceed, if
gravity acted no longer on the body's arrival at A. 2. Take a glass tube open
at both ends, whose concavity is of different diameters in different places,
and immerse it in a stream, till the water fills the tube, and flows through
it. Then, in different parts of the tube, the velocity of the water will be as
the squares of the diameters, and of consequence different. Suppose then, in
any marked place, a plane to pass through the tube perpendicular to the axis,
or to the motion of the water, and of consequence, the water will pass through
this section with a certain determinate velocity: But if another section be
drawn ever so near the former, the water, by reason of the different diameters,
will flow through this with a velocity different from what it did at the
former, and therefore to one section of the tube, or single point only, the
determinate velocity belongs. It is the fluxion of the space which the fluid
describes at that section; and with that uniform velocity the fluid would
continue to move, if the diameter was the same to the end of the tube. 3. If a
hollow cylinder be filled with water, to flow freely out through a hole at the
bottom, the velocity of the effluent will be as the height of the water, and
since the surface of the incubent fluid descends without stop, the velocity of
the stream will decrease, till the effluent be all out. There can then be no
two moments of time, succeeding each other ever so nearly, wherein the velocity
of the water is the same; and of consequence, the velocity, at any given point,
belongs only to that particular indivisible moment of time. Now this is
accurately the fluxion of the fluid then flowing; and if, at that instant, more
water was poured into the cylinder, to make the surface keep its place, the
effluent would retain its velocity, and still be the fluxion of the fluid. Such
are the operations of nature, and they visibly confirm the nature of Fluxion.
It is from hence quite clear, that the fluxion of a generated quantity, cannot
retain any one determined value for the least space of time whatever, but the
moment it arrives at that value, the same moment it loses it again. The fluxion
of such quantity can only pass gradually and successively through the indefinite
degrees contained between the two extreme values, which are the limits thereof,
during the generation of the fluent, in case the fluxion be variable: But then,
though a determinate degree of fluxion does not continue at all, yet, at every
determinate indivisible moment of time, every fluent has some determinate
degree of fluxion; that is, every generated quantity has every where a certain
rate of increasing, a fluxion whose abstract value is determinate in itself,
though the fluxion has no determined value for the least space of time
whatever. To find its value then, that is, the ratio one fluxion has to
another, is a problem strictly geometrical; notwithstanding the Right Rev.
anti-mathematician has declared the contrary, in his hatred to mathematicians,
and his ignorance of the true principles of mathematics.
If my Lord of Cloyne had been qualified to examine and consider the case of
fluxions, and could have laid aside that unaccountable obstinacy, and
invincible prejudice, which made him resolve to yield to no reason on the
subject; -- not to regard even the great Maclaurin's answer to his Analyst; --
he would have discovered, that it was very possible to find the abstract value
of a generated quantity, or the contemporary increment of any compound
quantity. By the binomial theorem, the ratio of the fluxion of a simple
quantity to the fluxion of that compound quantity, may be had in general, in
the lowest terms, and as near the truth as we please, whilst we suppose some
very small increment actually described: And whereas the ratio of these
fluxions is required for some one indivisible point of the fluid, in the very
beginning of the increment, and before it is generated, we make, in the
particular case, the values of the simple increments nothing, which before was
expressed in general: then all the terms wherein they are found vanish, and
what is left accurately shows the relation of the fluxions for the point where
the increment is supposed to commence. As the abstract value of the fluxion
belongs only to one point of the fluent, the moments are made to vanish, after
we have seen by their continual diminution, whither the ratio tends, and what
it continually verges to; and this becomes as visible as the very character it
is written in.

But Dr. Berkley was unacquainted with mathematical principles, and out of his
aversion to these sciences, and zeal for orthodoxy, cavilled and disputed with
all his might, and endeavored to bring the matter to a state unintelligible to
himself, and every body else. -- Here Maria had done, and for near a quarter of
an hour after, I sat silently looking at her, in the greatest astonishment.

But as to our travels, the 10th of August we got safe to London, and the
consequence of the journey was, that the last day of the same month, I had the
honor and happiness of being married to this young lady.

SECTION IX.
I am thinking with myself every day, (says one of the philosophers) how many
things are dear to me; and after I have considered them as temporary and
perishable, I prepare myself, from that very minute, to bear the loss of them
without weakness.

CLEANTHES. Cleanthes was a native of Assus in Lysia, in Asia Minor, and so
very poor, when he came to Athens to study, that, for his support, he wrought
at nights in drawing water for the gardens, and in grinding behind the mill. He
attended the lectures of Zeno, succeeded him in his school, and grew into very
high esteem with the Athenians. He lived to 99, but the year he died we know
not. His master Zeno died 342 years before Christ, and had conversed with
Socrates and Plato.

The ancient academics were Plato, (the disciple of Socrates), Speucippus,
Zenocrates, Polemo, Crates, and Crantor; and from Crates, the fifth academic,
sprung the old stoics, to wit, Crates, Zeno, Cleanthes, Chrysippus, and
Diogenes the Babylonian; not he that was surly and proud. Cicero in his works
often mentions this Babylonian, the stoic. We find in the Roman history, that
he was living in the year of Rome 599, that is, 155 years before Christ; but
when he died we know not. These gentlemen of the two old schools were to be
sure great philosophers, -- excellent men: but then, to be strictly impartial,
we must own, that all they knew in relation to the will of God, and a kingdom
to come, was but poor moral learning, in respect to what is written in the New
Testament for our instruction, if we will lay aside our fancies and systems,
and let reason explain revelation. The Christian religion is really more for
the glore of God, and the good of mankind, than reason, without inspiration,
has been able to teach. Christianity; without the additions and supplements of
monks, is not only above all just exception, but preferable to any other scheme.



The death of the author's 4th wife, and his behavior thereupon.
. 1. WISE is the man, who prepares both for his own death and the death of his
friends; who makes use of the foresight of troubles, so, as to abate the
uneasiness of them, and puts in practice this resolution of the philosopher. I
thought of this the morning I married the beautiful and ingenious Miss Spence,
(as related in the latter end of my eighth section), and determined if I lost
her, to make the great affliction produce the peaceable fruits of
righteousness. The man must feel, in such a case; the christian will submit.
Before the end of six months, she died, and I mourned the loss with a degree of
sorrow due to so much excellence, endearment and delight. My complaint was
bitter, in proportion to the desires of nature. But as nature says, let this
cup pass: grace says, let thy will be done. If the flower of all my comfort was
gone -- the glory departed! yet thy glory is, O man, to do the will of God, and
bear the burden he lays upon thee. Let nature, grace, and time, do their part,
to close the wound, and let not ignorance impeach the wisdom of the most high.
The cup which my father has given me: shall I not drink? I will. I will not
quarrel with providence. In short, I resigned, and not long after I had buried
this admirable woman, (who died at her seat in Westmoreland,) I went into the
world again, to relieve my mind, and try my fortune once more. What happened
there, I will report, when I have related the extraordinary case of my wife,
Miss Spence, and the four physicians I had to attend her. It is a very curious
thing.

The case of a lady in a fever, and an account of four physicians who attended
her.
. 2. This young lady was seized with that fatal distemper, called a malignant
fever: Something foreign to nature got into her blood, by a cold, and other
accidents, it may be, and the luctus or strife to get clear thereof became very
great. The effervescence or perturbation was very soon so violent as to show,
that it not only endangered, but would quickly subvert the animal fabric,
unless the blood was speedily dispersed, and nature got the victory by an
exclusion of the noxious shutin particles. The thirst, the dry tongue, the
coming causus, were terrible, and gave me too much reason to apprehend this
charming woman would sink under the conflict. To save her, if possible, I sent
immediately for a great physician, Dr. Sharp, a man who talked with great
fluency of medicine and diseases.

This gentleman told me, the Alkaline was the root of fevers, as well as of
other distempers, and therefore, to take off the effervescence of the blood in
the ebullitions of it, to incide the viscous humor, to drain the tartarous
salts from the kidneys, to allay the preternatural ferment, and to brace up the
relaxed tones, he ordered orange and vinegar in whey, and prescribed spirit of
sulphur, and vitriol, the cream, chrystals, and vitriolate tartar in other
vehicles. If any thing can relieve, it must be plenty of acid. In acidis posita
est omni curatio. But these things gave no relief to the sufferer.

I sent then in all haste for Dr. Hough, a man of great reputation, and he
differed so much in opinion from Sharp, that he called an acid the chief enemy.
It keeps up the luctus or struggle, and if not expelled very quickly, will
certainly prove fatal. Our sheet anchor then must be the testacea, in vehicles
of mineral water, and accordingly he ordered the absorbent powders to conflict
with this acidity, the principal cause of all diseases. Pearl and coral, crab's
eyes, and crab's claws, he prescribed in diverse forms; but they were of no use
to the sick woman. She became worse every hour.

Dr. Pym was next called in, a great practitioner, and learned man. His notion
of a fever was quite different from the opinions of Sharp and Hough. He
maintained that a fever was a poisonous ferment or venom, which seized on the
animal spirits: it breaks and smites them; and unless by alexipharmics the
spirits can be enabled to gain a victory in a day or two, this ferment will
bring on what the Greeks call a synochus, that is, a continual fever. In that
state, the venom holds fast the animal spirits, will not let them expand, or
disengage themselves, and then they grow enraged, and tumultuating, are hurried
into a state of explosion, and blow up the fabric. Hence the inflammatory
fever, according to the diverse indoles of the venom; and when the contagious
miasms arrive at their highest degree, the malignant fever arises. The spirits
are then knocked down, and the marks of the enemies weapons, the spots, etc.
appear. This (the Doctor continued) is the case of your lady, and therefore the
thing to be done is, to make the malignant tack about to the mild, and produce
an extinction of the ferment, and relief of the symptoms. This I endeavor to
do by alexipharmics and vesicatories, and by subduing the poison by the bark
and the warmer antidotes. Thus did my Doctor marshal shall his animal spirits,
fight them against the enemy venom, to great disadvantage. If his talk was not
romance, it was plain his spirits were routed, and venom was getting the day.
His alexipharmics and warm antidotes, were good for nothing. The malady
increased.

This being the case, I sent again in haste for a fourth doctor, a man of
greater learning than the other three, and therefore, in opinion, opposite, and
against their management of the fever. This great man was Dr. Frost. He was a
mechanician, and affirmed that, the solid parts of the human body are subjected
to the rules of geometry, and the fluids to the hydrostatics; and therefore, to
keep the machine in right order, that is, in a state of health, an aequilibrium
must be maintained, or restored, if destroyed. The balance must not turn to one
side or the other. To restore sanity in acute cases, and in chronic too, our
business is to prevent the vessels being elevated or deprest beyond the
standard of nature: when either happens, the division of the blood is
increased, the motion is augmented, and so beget a fever. There cannot be an
inordinate elevation of the oily or fiery parts of the blood, till the vessels
vibrate above the standard of nature.

In a slight fever, the blood increases but little above the balance; but if
more than one day; turns to a synochus, which is but the same fever augmented
beyond the balance of nature. This turns to a putrid synochus, and this to a
causus. This is the case of your lady. From an elevated contraction (the Doctor
contitinued, to my amazement,) her blood obtains a greater force and motion;
hence greater division, hence an increase of quantity and fluidity: and thus
from greater division, motion and quantity increased, arises that heat and
thirst, with the other concomitant symptoms of her fever; for the blood
dividing faster than it can be detached through the perspirastory emunctories
of the skin, is the immediate cause of the heart's preternatural beating: And
this preternatural division of the blood arises from the additional quantity of
obstructed perspirable matter, added to the natural quantity of the blood.

Things being so, (the Doctor went on) and the fever rising by the blood's
dividing faster than can be detached by the several emunctories; and this from
an elevation of the solids bove the balance, we must then strive to take off
the tension of the solids, and subtract the cause. This makes me begin in a
manner quite contrary to the other physicians, and I doubt not but I shall soon
get the better of the fury and orgasm, make an alteration in the black scabrous
tongue, and by according with the modus of nature, throw forth the matter of
the disease. I will enable nature to extricate herself. I hope to disentangle
her from the weight.

Thus did this very learned man enlarge; and while he talked of doing wonders,
the dry and parched skin, the black and brushy tongue, the crusty fur upon the
teeth, and all the signals of an incendium within, declared her dissolution
very near. As the serum diminished fast, and the intestine motion of the
crassamentum increased, nature was brought to her last struggles. All the
dismal harbingers of a general wreck appeared, to give the bystanders notice
of approaching death. She died the ninth day, by the ignorance of four learned
Physicians. -- Had these Gentlemen confidered the fever no otherwise than as a
disease arising from some unusual ferment, stirred up among the humors of the
blood, disturbing both those natural motions and functions of the body,
hindering perspiration, and thereby giving quick and large accession to such
parts of the aliment or liquors taken down, as are disposed to ferment; and
there is always a strong disposition that way; for the blood has a threefold
motion, -- fluidity, common to all liquors, -- protrusive, from the impulse of
the heart and arteries, -- and fermentative, that is, a motion throughout of
all its parts, which quality is owing to the dissimilar parts of the blood; --
for being a compound of various particles, there must be a colluctation when
they occur, and of consequence, a continual fermentation: As this is just and
moderate, it is for the good of the animal, and purifies the blood: if it is
too much, it tends to a fever; -- if it still increases, it produces the
burning causus: Hard is the struggle then, and if nature cannot dispume, even
helped by art, the patient has no hazard for life: Hence it is, that we are so
subject to fevers, -- and that it carries away more people than all the rest of
the diseases: Out of every forty-two that have it; twenty-five generally die.
It was so in the time of Hippocrates, 430 years before Christ: And so Dr.
Sydenham and Dr. Friend found it, in their practice:

But (I say) had my four Doctors considered the fever as I have plainly stated
it, without vainly pretending to be so wise as to know the essential causes of
it; and in the beginning of it, before the terrible appearances, the vigil,
delirium, subsultus, the dry black tongue, the furred teeth, and the pale,
unconcocted urine, had caused a depletion by large bleeding, had opened the
pores by a mild sudorific, had then given a vomit, Rad. Ipecacuanha in small
sack-whey or chicken-water, and let the sufferer indulge in that thin diluting
liquor, an emulsion of the seeds and almonds in barley water, and if the
patient required it, a draught of table-beer with a toast, between whiles; had
this been done very soon, there might be relief as quickly; or if the fever
still run high, to bleed again, and wash down some proper alexipharmic powder
with a proper cordial julap, it is possible nature would have been able to
accomplish the work, and health had been again restored. I use the word proper
alexipharmic, and proper cordial julap, because the Theriaca and Mithridatium
of the shops, which are commonly, almost always ordered as an alexipharmic
bole, are rather poisons than useful in a fever; and because the tincture and
syrup of saffron, the treacle-water, or any other distilled compound, are not
fit cordials in the case; but it should be the conserva lujulae in an emulsion
ex sem. fr. cum amygd. in aq. hordei. This is the true alexipharmic, -- and the
only cordial, to be given in a fever. -- But it was the destructive
alexipharmics and cordials of the shops they forced down Maria's throat, and
this, with the other bad prescriptions and management, killed one of the finest
and most excellent women that ever lived.

And now to give the world a better idea of this admirable woman than any
description of mine can exhibit, I shall here place a few religious little
Pieces, which she writ, while Miss Spence, and which I found among her papers.

MORAL THOUGHTS: Written by Miss SPENCE.
MORALITY.
ABSTRACT, mathematical, or physical truth, may be above the reach of the bulk
and community of mankind. They have neither the leisure, nor the necessary
helps and advantages to acquire the natural knowledge of arts and sciences. The
many calls and importunities of the animal kind, take up the greatest part of
their time, thoughts, and labor, so that the more abstract speculations, and
experimental disquisitions of philosophy, are placed by providence quite out of
their reach, and beyond their sphere of action.

On the contrary, moral truth, right and wrong, good and evil, the doing as we
would be done by, and acting toward all men as they really are, and stand
related in society; these things are as evident to the understanding, as light
and colors are to the eye, and may be called the intellectual, moral sense.
Here needs no deep learning, or trouble and expense of education, but the same
truths are as evident, and as much seen and felt by the learned and unlearned,
the gentleman and the ploughman, the savage or wild Indian, as by the best
instructed philosopher. The divine perfections shine through all nature, and
the goodness and bounty of the Creator to all his creatures, impress the
obligation of imitating this wisest and best of Beings upon every man's heart
and conscience.

But notwithstanding the maxims of morality are thus solidly established, and
adapted to all capacities; and though every man has a happiness to seek, and a
main end to secure, which must be infinitely preferable to any concerns of
life, yet here it is we find, that mankind in general have been most lost and
bewildered, as if providence had placed their own happiness, and the way to it,
more out of their power than any thing else. How this should happen, might seem
unaccountable at first sight, and yet it can be no'great mystery to any man
tolerably acquainted with the world and human nature. It is no difficult matter
to discover the reasons hereof, and it is withal highly useful to give them
their due considerarion.

1. The principal cause I take to be the prevailing strength and bias of
private, corrupt, animal affection, and desires. Reason is silenced and borne
down by brutal appetite and passion. They resolve to gratify their sensual
appetites and desires, and will therefore never taste or try the superior
pleasures and enjoyments of reason and virtue. But such men as these having
declared open war against their own reason and conscience, and being resolved
at all risks to maintain the combat, must be self-condemned, and cannot plead
ignorance, or error of judgment in the case.

2. Another fundamental cause of moral error, is the prejudice and
prepossession of a wrong education. False principles and absurd notions of God
and religion, wrought early into the tender, unexperienced mind, and there
radicated and confirmed from time to time, from youth to riper age, by parents,
teachers, our most intimate friends and acquaintance, and such as we have the
best opinion of, and confide most in; such causes make such strong impressions,
that the grossest errors, thus rivetted and fixed, are with the greatest
difficulty ever conquered or cleared off. In this case, men turn out
well-grounded believers, and are well-armed against conviction. Circumcision or
baptism fixes their religion in their infancy, and their church is as natural
to them as their country. Free enquiry is with them an apostasy from the
orthodox party, and as the great and sure trial of their faith and fortitude,
they will hear no reasonings about the holy religion they have taken upon trust.

3. Then the few, who have applied themselves to the study of morality, have
done it for the most part in a manner confused; and superficial enough: and
often so, as even to build upon principles either entirely false, or obscure
and uncertain; either foreign to its proper business, or mixed up with gross
errors, and absurdities. From whence it comes to pass, that in all languages,
the terms of morality, both in common discourse, and in the writings of the
learned, are such as have the most obscure, confused, indetermined, and unfixed
ideas, of any other terms whatever; men for the most part despising the things
which are plain and ordinary, to run after such as are extraordinary and
mysterious; and that they either will not know, or reject even truth itself,
unless she brings some charm with her, to raise their curiosity, and gratify
their passion for what is mavelous and uncommon.

In sum, the prejudices of the understanding, the illusions of the heart, and
the tyranny established in the world with relation to opinions, form a grand
obstacle to the serious study of morality; and to the attainment of a more
exact knowledge of our duty. Nor is it to be expected that any will very much
apply themselves to make discoveries in these matters, whilst the desire of
esteem, riches, or power, makes men espouse the well-endowed opinions in
fashion, and then seek arguments either to make good their beauty, or varnish
over and cover their deformity. -- Whilst the parties of men, cram their tenets
down all men's throats, whom they can get into their power, without permitting
them to examine their truth and falsehood; and will not let truth have fair
play in the world, nor men the liberty to search after it; what improvements
can be expected of this kind? What greater light can be hoped for in the moral
sciences? The subject part of mankind in most places might, instead thereof,
with Egyptian bondage, expect Egyptian darkness, were not the candle of the
Lord set up by himself in men's minds, which it is impossible for the breath of
man wholly to extinguish; how much soever the infallible guides of one church,
and the orthodox rulers of another, may scheme and labor to subject conscience
to human jurisdiction, and bring the inward principle and motive of action
within the cognizance of their political theocracy, or theocratic policy.

After all this, is it to be wondered at, that such, whose occupations and
distractions of life, or want of genius and outward helps, do not allow them to
engage in long and profound meditations, are found to have generally
understandings so short and narrow, and ideas so false or confused, in matters
of morality.

And since this is the case of the greatest part of mankind, it has no doubt
been always God's will, that they, who had the greatest light, and whom his
providence had furnished with the greatest helps, should communicate their
knowledge to such, as were not able of themselves to acquire it so easily, or
in so great a degree.

RELIGION.
What is Religion? The true, eternal, immutable religion of God and nature,
consists, as I opine, in the filial love and fear of God, and the brotherly
love of mankind; in the practice of all those moral duties of truth and
righteousness, which result from it, under a fiducial trust in, and dependence
on God, and the constant sense of his power and presence in all our actions, as
the rewarder of good and punisher of bad men. This is the religion founded in
nature and reason, and which must be at all times and every where the same. As
this religion was in a great measure lost, and neglected, amidst the general
ignorance, superstition, and idolatry of the world, it was the great business
and design of revelation to restore it, and set moral truth and reason in its
original light, by bringing mankind to the right use of their reason and
understanding in such matters.

After Epicurus and Zeno, Of Eclectics.
there were no new succeeding schemes of morality, but each man betook himself
to that sect, where he found what most suited his own sentiments.

In the reign of Augustus, Potamo of Alexandria, introduced a manner of
philosophising, which was called the Eclectic, because it consisted in
collecting from all the tenets of preceding philosophers, such as appeared most
reasonable; out of which they formed each man his own system of philosophy. --
It appears from Cicero's works, that he was an Eclectic.

And why should it not be good in religion, as well as in philosophy? I own I
am an Eclectic in divinis. And the sum of my religion is, without regard to
modes or parties, -- so to live to the glory of the Father, -- without
attachment to the creature, -- for the sanctification and happiness of mankind;
that when this fleeting scene of sin and sorrow shall vanish, and pass away
from sight, the angels of God may give my soul a safe transition to that
heavenly happiness, which no thought can lay hold on, and which no art can
describe.

Of reason and truth.
The practice of reason and truth is the rule of action to God himself, and the
foundation of all true religion. It is the first and highest obligation of all
rational beings, and our divine Lord came down from heaven to earth to teach it
to mankind. Christ preached a plain doctrine to men, fitted to reform their
hearts and lives -- intended to make them perfect in self-denial, humility,
love, goodness, and innocence; and to enoble them, with hearts raised above the
world, to worship the Father in spirit and in truth.

But this glorious religion the Romish priests have perverted into a system of
mysteries, and staring contradictions, the better to support the worst and most
deplorable purposes of temporal wealth, power, pride, malice, and cruelty. In
direct opposition to reason and common sense, we must commence generous
believers in an ecclesiastical christianity, and confess the symbol of their
holy Athanasius, though it be no more, or better, than the effects of a
luxuriant fancy, without likeness and correspondency, in the real nature and
reason of things; 17, 4, and 19 are 41, says convocation to his believers, and
your religion, my brethren, is all a tremendous mystery: You must adore as
such, what the Infidels renounce as a contradiction.

Thus shamefully do these priests sink the credibility of our gospel, and
impose upon the silly people, a ball of wax for the religion of Jesus; making
them believe contrary to knowledge, and prefer a system that is a lie against
the light of nature, and the gospel.

But the chief end, duty, happiness, and highest perfection that man can arrive
at, consists, and is found, in a perfect exercise of human reason.

We read in Chronicles, Of Integrity.
that Hezekiah began his good reign with the revival of religion, which had
long suffered by the neglect and profanation, or through the neglect and
omission of his predecessors. To this purpose he opened the doors of the house
of the Lord, and issued a decree, that all Israel should come to keep the
passover, which they had not done of a long time. But as the legal cleansing
and purifying, could not be performed by great numbers that did eat the
passover, by the appointed time, on account of many things, and particularly
the force of long interval and disuse; therefore this irregularity employed the
devotion of the good king, as the canon of the passover, under the strictest
prohibition, and the severest penalty, forbid any one to eat, that did not come
with outward and legal purity, No unclean person shall eat of it; and he prayed
for the people, saying, The good Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart
to seek God, the Lord God of their fathers, though he be not cleansed according
to the purification of the sanctuary; and the Lord hearkened unto Hezekiah,
says the next verse, and healed the people, that is, took off the penalties of
the canon, and gave them the benefit of the rite. From hence it follows, that,
however defective we may be in outward rites and ceremonies of a church, yet
inward truth and purity will be accepted in default of outward things. Inward
disposition is the substance of religion, and may compound for the want of
outward matters; but outward service can never be accepted instead of inward
purification.

And it farther follows, if the outward solemnities of religion cannot be
obtained upon lawful terms, (which is the case of many, in respect of Popery
and Athanasian worship,) then will the good Lord pardon and be propitious to
those who prepare their heart to seek him, though they be not cleansed
according to the solemn institution, and ritual purification.

This text is in the vulgar Latin, Dominus bonus propitiabitur cunctis qui in
toto cord requirunt Dominum, Deum patrum suorum, et non imputabit eis quod
minus sanctificati sunt. -- The good Lord will be propitious to all those, who
in their whole heart seek the Lord God of their fathers, and will not impute to
them their being less sanctified than they ought.

Of Priestcraft in the transmission of movables, from the deceased to the
living.
Note, This article relating to the encroachments of the clergy, was not found
among Miss Spence's papers; but is inserted here as in a proper place.
Histories in all ages the full of the encroachments of the clergy, yet they
all omit one of the most successful stratagems to ingross money. We are
indebted to our statute-book for informing us of one of the most notorious
pieces of priestcraft that ever was practiced. Would one believe, that there is
a country, and in Europe too, where the clergy gained such an ascendant over
the minds of the people, as tamely to suffer the moveable estate of every man
who died intestate, to be swallowed up by them; yet so prevalent was
superstition in our country, that it produced a law preferring the Bishop to
the next of kin; and in its extension excluding the children, the wife, and the
relations of the deceased, nay the creditor; and giving all to the Bishop per
aversionem. Such was the shameful rapacity of the clergy here for ages. Such a
monstrous practice was established upon this foundation, that the moveable
effects of every deceased person, his own appointment failing, ought to be laid
out for promoting the good of his soul; and so the ORDINARY took possession,
without deigning to account with any mortal. -- This began temp. Hen. I. when
the ORDINARY, for the good of the soul of the deceased, obtained a directing
power, and was in the nature of an overseer, and somewhat more. In the time of
King John, the ORDINARY drew blood, as Bacon well expresses it Discourse of
laws. p. 1, and 66. and New abridgement of the law. p. 398.
; for though the possession was as formerly, yet the dividend must be in the view
of the church, and by which means, the dividers were but mere instruments, and
the right was vanished into the clouds. But temp. Hen. III. it was settled, the
ORDINARY had not only gotten the game, but gorged it. Both right and possession
were now become the clergy's: the ORDINARY was to distribute it according to
pious uses: and no use so pious as to appoint to himself and his brethren.

The 1st statute that limited the power of the ORDINARY was 13th Ed. I. c. 19.
By this the ORDINARY was obliged to satisfy the intestate's death so far as the
goods extended. -- And 31st Ed. III. cap. 2. the actual possession was taken
from the ORDINARY, by obliging him to give a deputation to the next and most
lawful friends of the intestate, for administrating his goods. But this statute
proved but a weak check to the avarice of the clergy. Means were fallen upon to
elude it, by preferring such of the intestate's relations, who were willing to
offer the best terms: this corrupt practice was suffered in the days of Hen.
VIII. when the clergy losing ground, the statute 21 Hen. VIII. was enacted,
bearing, "That in case any person die intestate, or the executors refuse to
prove the testament, the Ordinary shall grant administration to the widow, or
to the next of kin, or to both, taking surety for true administration."

This statute, as it points out the particular persons who are entitled to
letters of administration, without leaving any choice to the Ordinary, was
certainly intended to cut him out of all hope of making gain of the effects of
persons dying intestate. But the church does not easily quit its hold. Means
were fallen upon to elude this law also. Though the possession given by this
statute was wrested out of the hands of the Ordinary, yet his pretensions
subsisted entire, of calling the administrator to account, and obliging him or
her to distribute the effects to pious uses. This was an admirable engine in
the hands of a churchman for squeezing money. An administrator who gave any
considerable share to the Bishop, to be laid out by him, without doubt, in
pious uses, would not find much difficulty in making his account. This rank
abuse moved the judges solemnly to resolve, that the Ordinary, after
administration granted by him, cannot compel the administrator to make
distribution New abridgement of the law. p.398.
. And at last, the right of the next of kin was fully established by statute 22
and 23 Car. II. cap. 10. This. cuts out the Ordinary entirely.

Of the Athanasian creed.
If I thought the Athanasian creed was a part of the religion of Jesus, I should
be induced to entertain a hard thought of Christianity. I should think it
enjoined a slavish submission to the dictates of designing men; and instead of
a reasonable service, required us to renounce our understandings, to apostatize
from humanity, and degenerate into brutes, by giving up our reason, which alone
distinguishes us from them. Most unjust charge upon our holy religion! A
religion, which enlarges our rational faculties, filling the mind with an
astonishing idea of an eternal duration, and thereby giving us a contempt of
the mean, transient pleasures of this life, and which we and the brutes enjoy
in common: A religion that requires only the highest degree of reverence
toward the MOST HIGH, the most refined purity of heart and mind, and the most
noble and diffusive charity toward all mankind: In short, that establishes
righteousness upon earth, and entire obedience to the will of God; that so
having put the oil into our lamp, according to the gospel parable, it may not
only measure the course of time, but light us beyond it, to the coming of the
bridegroom, and the morning of eternity.

But this will not do for the Doctors, they must have established CREDENDA for
judgments of all sizes -- they must have a formulary of dogmatic theology -- an
ATHANASIAN JUMBLE, to support the HOLY CHURCH; though their creed burlesques
mathematical certainty, and renders their ecclesiastical christianity inferior
to the ancient pagan religion. A trinity is the ecclesiastical God; but whether
three distinct conscious beings of coordinate power, equal independency, and
unorigination, and so THREE proper deities; -- or, only three symbols of
natural powers -- In this the Doctors are not agreed; but the majority are for
the THREE proper Deities: this heresy of three Gods we must subscribe to, or
the priests will number us with the infidels, and do us all the mischief they
can. -- Hence it comes to pass, that humanity, sweetness of temper, and
moderation, are banished from society; religion, like a cloak, is made use of
to authorize hatred, violence, and injustice; and the christian religion, as
the priests have forged it, and show it off, that is, upon its present footing,
as an establishment, is pernicious to mankind, and ought to go, that the people
may be restored again to Christ's religion, and be led to attend to the command
of God; which is to believe in the name of his son Jesus Christ, and to love
one another.

FAITH.
"Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen;"
(Heb. xi. 1.) that is, faith is such a firm persuasion as gives, as it were, a
substance or present existence to the good things which we hope for, and which
are not yet in being, and as engages us to depend upon the truth of unseen
things, as really, as upon ocular demonstration.

-- "He endured, as seeing him who is invisible;" (ver. 27.) that is, Moses as
really believed the being and attributes of the invisible God, as if he had
seen him with his eyes; and fully depended upon his conduct and assistance.

The better thing provided for Christians.
"And these all having obtained a good report through faith, received not the
promise, God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us
should not be made perfect;" (Heb. xi. 39, 40.) that is, -- Though the upright
under the law have a good character in Scripture, and of consequence were
accepted of God upon the account of their faith in the divine power and
goodness, yet they received not the promised reward of another life,
immediately on their leaving this world: God provided this better thing for us
Christians, that we should be made happy immediately, as soon as we leave this
world, that so they might not be made happy in heaven, till Christianity
commenced, and Christians should be there received to happiness with them.

Note 1. It is plain from what the Apostle says before, that the thing promised
is the better and more enduring substance in heaven.

2. The better thing provided for Christians, cannot be the resurrection from
the dead, and the being, after that, received into the heavenly Jerusalem;
since herein we shall have nothing better than the good people who lived under
the law: therefore, better things can only mean our enjoyment of God
immediately upon our leaving this world.

It is strange then that Bishop Fell, and Whitby say, the better thing means
the Messiah, or the heavenly country to be fully possessed at the end of the
world.

Of the same opinion is Pyle. -- He says, our pious ancestors under the law,
though in a state of rest and happiness, after death, yet received not the full
and complete enjoyment of celestial glory, that being deferred till the last
and great dispensation of the Messiah be past, that so they and sincere
Christians, may be all rewarded and crowned together, with the happiness both
of body and soul, at the final day of judgment: But if so, tell me Mr. Pyle,
where is the better thing provided for us Christians?

3. Besides, if the Apostle may be his own interpreter, the word perfect means
the intermediate state of good souls in paradise, and not the complete state
after the resurrection. In the next chapter, he speaks of the spirits of the
just made perfect, by which he means undoubtedly the separate souls now in
glory.

In a word, the design of the Apostle was to prove that, since God has provided
some better thing for us, we appear to be more in his favor; and therefore the
argument from their being justified to our being justified by faith, is
stronger, that is, such a faith as has an operative influence, by rendering our
lives a comment upon the blessed nature of God.

And that this was the meaning of the Apostle in the something better provided
for us Christians, appears yet plainer from the consequence drawn by the
inspired writer, to wit, that we ought with the greater patience and courage to
endure persecution, since God has provided something better for us than for
them. If the ancient believers held out, who expected but a state of sleep,
till the time of the general resurrection: much more should we patiently suffer
affliction, and even death itfelf, for the sake of truth, and of the gospel,
when we know, that God has promised us something better; to wit, that we shall
be conducted to paradise immediately after death, and be there spirits of just
men made perfect, and be with Christ, which is far better than either to sleep
after death, or to live longer in this world.

Let us lay aside (then) every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset
us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us. Let us put
away every thing from us, that would hinder us from improving in virtue and
goodness; looking to and imitating Jesus, the leader and captain of the
faithful, and an example of spotless virtue and perfect obedience. The love of
the world is enmity with God, and to place our affections here, is to vilify
that better provision which he has made for us. We are but strangers and
pilgrims here. The human state is but a passage, not a place of abode. It is a
station of exercise and discipline, and was not designed for the place of
enjoyment. That happy country is before us.

AVOIDINGS.
Avoid all indirect arts in the pursuit of a fortune. -- All unlawful methods
in self-preservation. -- And every gratification that militates with reason and
benevolence.

The Offices of a Christian.
These are heavenly-mindedness, and contempt of the world, and choosing rather
to die than commit a moral evil. Such things, however, are not much esteemed by
the generality of Christians: Most people laugh at them, and look upon them as
indiscretions; therefore there is but little true christianity in the world. It
has never been my luck to meet with many people that had these three necessary
qualifications. -- And as for the people, exclusive of their going to church to
make a character -- or to ogle one another -- or out of superstition to perform
so much opus operatum, a job of lip-service, which they idly fancy to be
religion, they, I mean the great and the small, might as well be Heathens as
Christians, for any real christian purpose they answer, in a strict adherence
to the three offices aforementioned. The name of Christian sounds over Europe,
and large parts of Asia, Africa, and America: But if a Christian is what St.
Paul defines it, to wit, a man that is heavenly-minded, that contemns the
world, and would die rather than commit a moral evil, then is the number of
Christians very small indeed.

The meaning of John vi. 44. No man can come to me, except the Father draw him.
That is, -- No one can be a Christian, unless his regard for the Deity and
natural religion inclines him to receive a more improved scheme of religion.

But Dr. Young, in one of his sermons, explains this text in the following
manner. -- No one can live up to the religion of Jesus, and reach Christian
perfection, unless the Father enlightens and enables him, by the operative
influence of his holy spirit. We can do nothing, in respect of what ought to be
done, to be more than nominal Christians, without the inward principle of
sanctification. -- This I think is mere methodism.

N. B. The excellent Dr. Lardner expounds the text in the following words: --
No man will come to me, and receive my pure, sublime, and spiritual doctrine,
unless he have first gained some just apprehensions concerning the general
principles of religion. And if a man have some good notions of God, and his
perfections, and his will, as already revealed, he will come unto me. If any
man is well disposed: if he has a love of truth, and a desire to advance in
virtue, and religious knowledge; he will readily hearken to me, and believe in
me. Sermons, Vol. I. p. 303.

Of Baptism, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
What is the meaning of baptizing them into the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost?

It signifies receiving men by baptism to the profession and privileges of that
religion, which was taught by the Father, Son, and Spirit, that is, which the
Father taught by the Son, in his lifetime, and by the Spirit, after his
ascension.

Or, to be baptized, is solemnly to profess our resolution to adhere to that
holy doctrine, which is the mind and will of God the Father, published to the
world by his Son, whom he sent from heaven for that purpose, and confirmed by
the power of the Holy Ghost.

Note, An able writer, St. Hillary, says ( De Trinitate, lib. 2. ad calcem, on
Matt. xxviii. 19.) that baptising in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit, signifies, -- In confession of the author of all
things, and of the only begotten, and of the gift.

Of Christian Idolatry.
What a surprising incident is idolatry in the church of Christ! that after the
religion of Jesus had accomplished its glorious design, and subverted idolatry
and superstition throughout the world, it should itself be wounded almost to
death, by the enemy it had subdued! This is the case all over the realms of
popery. And can they be said to have any true religion among them, where the
theology of Athanasius prevails?

Churchism and Creeds.
I have no very good opinion of creeds. Jesus Christ came with a legatarian
power from God, the Supreme Being, to declare his will to mankind; and the
great work to be done, (so far as I can find in the gospel,) is, the perfecting
our minds in all that is truly excellent; by laboring to excel in all the
virtues of the gospel, by loving the whole race of mankind with an universal
charity, and striving to add to the satisfaction and happiness of all about us,
and with whom we have any connection.

SECTION X.
Thou attribute divine! thou ray of God!
Immortal reason! come, and with thee bring,
In thy exulting train, invincible,
The honest purpose, and the cheerful heart;
The joyful fancy, filled with images
Of truth, of science, and of social love.
There is no ground for fear, while we are good:
Nature's the nurse, and providence the guide.
An account of Richmond the beau, and old Ribble the chemist.
. I. HAVING lost Maria, as related in the ninth section, I went up to London,
and on my way to the metropopolis, dined at a pleasant village, not far from
Nottingham, where I saw two gentlemen well worth mentioning. They were sitting
in a room the waiter showed me into, and had each of them a porringer of mutton
broth. One of them seemed a little consumptive creature, about four feet six
inches high, uncommonly thin, or rather exsiccated to a cuticle. His broth and
bread however he supped up with some relish. He seemed to be past threescore.
His name was Ribble.

The other was a young man, once very handsome, tall and strong, but so
consumed and weak, that he could hardly speak or stir. His name was Richmond.
He attempted to get down his broth, but not above a spoonful or two could he
swallow. He appeared to me to be a dying man.

While I beheld things with astonishment, the servant brought in dinner, a
pound of rump stakes, and a quart of green peace; two cuts of bread, a tankard
of strong beer, and a pint of port wine: with a fine appetite, I soon
dispatched my mess, and over my wine, to help digestion, began to sing the
following lines: --

I.
Tell me, I charge you, O ye fylvan swains,
Who range the mazy grove, or flowery plains,
Beside what fountain, in what breezy bower,
Reclines my charmer in the noontide hour?
II.
Soft, I adjure you, by the skipping fawns,
By the fleet roes, that bound along the lawns;
Soft tread, ye virgin daughters of the grove,
Nor with your dances wake my sleeping love.
III.
Come, Rosalind, O come, and infant flowers
Shall bloom and smile, and form their charms by yours;
By you the lilly shall her white compose;
Your blush shall add new blushes to the rose.
IV.
Hark! from yon bowers what airs soft warbled play!
My soul takes wing to meet the enchanting lay.
Silence, ye nightingales! attend the voice!
While thus it warbles, all your songs are noise.
V.
See! from the bower a form majestic moves,
And smoothly gliding, shines along the groves;
Say, comes a goddess from the golden spheres?
A goddess comes, or Rosalind appears.
While I was singing these lines, and all the while I was at dinner, the
gentlemen looked with wonder at me, and at last, as soon as I was silent, old
Ribble expressed himself in the following words. -- You are the most fortunate
of mortals to be sure, Sir. A happy man indeed. You seem to have health and
peace, contentment and tranquillity, in perfection. You are the more striking,
when such spectacles as my cousin Richmond (pointing to the dying gentleman in
the room) and I are in contrast before you. I will tell you our stories, Sir,
in return for your charming song, and hope what I am going to say may be of
service to you, as you are coming on, and we going off from this world.

The picture of beau Richmond.
My kinsman there, the dying Richmond, in that chair, was once a Sampson, and
the handsomest man of his time, though the remains of beauty or strength cannot
now be traced. By drinking and whoring he brought himself to what you see; to a
state that eludes all the arts of medicine. He has an aggravated cough, which
produces a filthy pus of an ash color, streaked with blood, and mixed with
filaments torn from his lungs and membranes, and with the utmost difficulty he
respires. He has a perpetual violent pain in his breast, a pricking soreness in
his paps when he coughs, and defects in in all his functions. He has that flux
of the belly, which is called a lientery, and the fluids of his body are wasted
in colliquative sweats. A stretching pain racks him if he lies on either side,
by reason of some adhesion of the lungs to the pleura. His hair is fallen off,
and his nails you see are dead-coloured, and hooked. His countenance, you
observe, is Hippocratical, the very image of death: his face a dead pale, his
eyes sunk, his nose sharp, his cheeks hollow, his temples fallen, and his whole
body thin like a skeleton. What a figure now is this once curled darling of the
ladies: It was done, good Sir, by the hand of Intemperance.

The picture of a temperate man, born with a consumption.
. 3. As to myself, ( Ribble continued,) I brought a confumption into the world
with me, and by art have supported under it. I was born with the sharp
shoulders you see, which are called pterogoides, or wing-like, and had a
contracted thorax, and long chest, a thin and long neck, a flaccid tone of all
the parts about the breast, and a very flabby contexture of the muscles all
over my body: but nevertheless, by a strict temperance all my life, and by
following the directions of Dr. Bennet in his Theatrum tabidorum, I have not
only made life tolerable, but so removed the burden of stagnant phlegm from the
thorax, by throwing it down by stool, and up by expectoration, -- exhaling it
sometimes through the skin, and at other times digesting it with fasting, that
I contrive more useful hours to myself than the strong and young can enjoy in
their continued scenes of dissipation and riot. In me is seen the wonderful
effect of rule and sobriety. I am now past fifty several years, notwithstanding
my very weak and miserable constitution, and by attending to nature, and never
indulging in gratification or excess, am not only able to live without pain,
but to divert life by experimental philosophy. ( Ribble went on) I came down to
this pleasant place, chiefly for the benefit of poor Richmond, my kinsman,
(whom you see with his eyes shut before you, the very picture of death,) and
also, with a view to do some good to myself, as it is the finest air in the
world. I took a house in the village to live the more easily, as the
lodging-houses are all crowded here, and resolved to amuse the days I have left
in cultivating the science of chemistry; not in order to finish what nature has
begun, do you see me, (as the alchymists talk,) and procure to the imperfect
metals the much desired coction; but, to examine substances, and by the
examination, obtain ideas of the bodies capable of the three degrees of
fermentation, spiritous, acetous, and putrid; and of the products of those
fermentations, to wit, ardent spirits, acids analogous to those of vegetables
and animals, and volatile alkalis.

To this purpose, I made for myself a laboratory, and about a year ago, began
to employ my vessels and furnaces in various processes. A vast variety of
entertaining things have since occurred, and my life is thereby made agreeable
and pleasing; though to look at my poor frame, one would think me incapable of
any satisfactions. I will give you an instance or two of my amusements, and do
you judge, if they may not afford a mind more delight, than the tumultuous joys
of love and wine, horse-racing, cock-fighting, hunting, and other violent
pleasures can yield.

A history of metals.
. 4. You know, good Sir, I suppose, that there are six metals, two perfect, and
four imperfect. Gold and silver, perfect: the others, copper, tin, lead, and
iron. Quicksilver is by some called a seventh metal: but that I think cannot
be, as it is not malleable. Yet it is not to be confounded with the
semi-metals, as it differs from the metals no otherwise than by being
constantly in fusion; which is occasioned by its aptness to flow with such a
small degree of heat, that be there ever so little warmth on earth, there is
still more than enough to keep mercury in fusion. It must be called then, in my
opinion, a metallic body of a particular kind: And the more so, let me add, as
art has not yet found out a way of depriving it wholly of its Phlogiston.

What phlogiston is.
I must observe to you, good Sir, in order to be intelligible in what I am
saying, that the Phlogiston in metals is the matter of fire as a constituent
principle in bodies. It is the element of fire combined with some other
substance, which serves it as a basis for constituting a kind of secondary
principle; and it differs from pure fixed fire in these particulars, that it
communicates neither heat nor light, -- it causes no change, but only renders
body apt to fuse by the force of a culinary fire, -- and it can be conveyed
from body to body, with this circumstance, that the body deprived of the
phlogiston is greatly altered, as is the body that receives it.

What semi-metals are.
And as to the semi-metals, (which I mentioned) you will be pleased to observe,
that they are regulus of antimony, bismuth, zinc, and regulus of arsenic. They
are not malleable, and easily part with their phlogiston. Zinc and bismuth are
free from the poisonous quality: but arsenic is the most violent poison;
especially the shining crystalline calx of it, or flowers raised by the fire,
and named white arsenic: and regulus of antimony is likewise a poison; not in
its nature, but because it always contains a portion of arsenic in its
composition.

The nature and composition of Antimony.
Antimony is of a pretty white bright color, and has the splendour, opacity,
and gravity of a metal, but under the hammer crumbles to dust. A moderate heat
makes it flow, and a violent fire dissipates it into smoke and white vapors.
They adhere to cold bodies, and when the farina is collected, we call these
vapors flowers of antimony.

What butter of antimony is.
Butter of antimony, good Sir, that wonderful corrosive, is a compound made by
distilling pulverized regulus of antimony, and corrosive sublimate. The
production, on operation, is a white matter, thick and scarce fluid, which is
the regulus of antimony united with the acid of sea salt. Here the corrosive
sublimate is decompounded, the mercury revivified, and the acid combined with
it, quits it to join the regulus of antimony, because its affinity with it is
greater.

(Little Ribble, the Chemist, went on, and with difficulty I could refrain from
laughing; not on account of the man's talking nonsense, for his discourse was
the very reverse of that; but by reason of the gripe he had of my arm, the
pulls he gave me, if I happened to look another way, and the surprising
eagerness with which he spoke; which showed, that he was chemically struck to
an amazing degree.)

Liver of antimony.
But liver of antimony, good Sir, is made of equal parts of nitre and antimony.
On the mixture's being exposed to the action of fire, a violent detonation
ensues, and the deflagrating nitre consumes the sulphur of the antimony, and
even a part of its phlogiston. A greyish matter remains after the detonation,
and this is what we call liver of antimony. It contains a fixed nitre, a
vitriolated tartar, and the reguline part of antimony vitrified.

How antimony separates gold from other metals.
The principal use the Chemists make of antimony is to separate gold from the
other metals. All metals, gold excepted, have a greater affinity with sulphur
than the reguline part of antimony. As to gold, it is incapable of contracting
any union with sulphur. If therefore I have a mass compounded of various
metals, and want to get the gold out, I melt it with antimony, and as soon as
it flows, every thing in the mass which is not gold, unites with the sulphur,
in or of the antimony, and causes two separations, that of the sulphur of
antimony from its reguline part, and that of the gold from the metals with
which it was mixed: This produces two new combinations. The metals and the
sulphur, in fusion, being lighter, rise to the surface; and the gold and the
reguline part of antimony being heaviest, the combination of them sinks to the
bottom. Now the business is to part these two, and to this purpose, I expose
the combination to a degree of fire, capable of dissipating into vapors all the
semi-metal the mass contains. The reguline being volatile, goes off by the
great heat, and my gold remains pure and fixed in my crucible.

The excellence of antimonial wine.
As to the antimonial wine, made by the essence of antimony, that is, by
impregnating the most generous white wine, with the minims or lests of
antimony, which the physicians have found out, it is not the part of a chemist
to speak of that; and therefore, I shall only observe to you, that it is the
best vomit, the best purge, and the best thing for a sweat, in the world. I
will tell you, good Sir, what I heard an eminent Doctor say of it. -- Affirmo
sanctissime, nihil inde melius, nihil tutius, nihil efficacius, deprehendi
unquam, quam tritum illum, ac simplicem vini automonialis infusum ex vino albo
generoso, aromate aliquo stomachico adjecto. Epotus largiter maximas movit
vomitiones, in minuta tantum quantitate, ad guttas puta viginta, aut triginta,
adhibitus sudores elicit benignos; paulo tamen majorae aleum solvit leniter.
Medicamentum, paratu quidem facillimum, at viribus maximum. -- And therefore,
good Sir, when any thing ails you, let me recommend the antimonial wine to you.
Thirty drops will sweat you effectually. About forty or fifty purges in a happy
manner.

The nature of Bismuth.
But as to the second semi-metal, bismuth, it has almost the same appearance as
regulus of antimony, but of a more dusky cast, inclining somewhat to red. It
requires less heat than antimony to flow, and like it, and the other
semi-metals, is volatile, by the action of a violent fire, and under the hammer
is dust. In fusion, it mixes well with all metals, and whitens them by union,
but destroys their malleability. In flowing, it loses its phlogiston with its
metallic form. And it has a singular property, which the other semi-metals have
not, of attenuating lead so as to make it amalgamatic with mercury, so
perfectly as to make it pass with it through shamoy leather. As soon as the
amalgama is made, the bismuth goes off or separates; but the lead for ever
remains united with the mercury.

An extraordinary sympathetic Ink.
It is of a solution of the ore of bismuth, we make that very curious and useful
thing, called sympathetic ink, which is a liquor of a beautiful color, like
that of the lilach or pipe-tree blossom. The process in preparing this liquor
is tedious and difficult by aqua fortis, aqua regis, and fire, and therefore
the ink is rarely to be met with. It is not to be had, unless some gentleman
who makes chemistry his employment, gives one a present of a bottle of it; as I
do now to you, in hopes it may some time or other be of singular service to
you; for I have conceived a great regard for you, though I never saw you before,
as you seem not only more teachable than any I have met with, but to delight in
the information I give you relating to chemical things.

Here I returned my Chemist many thanks, and professed my eternal obligation to
him; that I could listen for years to him; and wished it was possible to become
his disciple, that I might see him by experiment facilitate the study of a
science, more entertaining, instructive, and extensively useful than any other.
But how, dear Sir, am I to use this ink, you are so vastly good as to give me,
to make it more useful than any other ink could be?

I will tell you ( Ribble replied): you must write with this lilach-coloured
liquor, on good well gummed paper, that does not sink; and the singularity of
the ink, consists in its property of disappearing entirely, and becoming
invisible, though it be not touched with any thing whatever: And this
distinguishes it from all others. The writing must dry in a warm air, and while
it is cold no color can be perceived: but gently warming it before the fire,
the writing gradually acquires a greenish blue color, which is visible as long
as the paper continues a little warm, and disappears entirely when it cools.
When other sympathetic inks are made to appear by proper application, they do
not disappear again; but this liquor from the ore of bismuth must have the fire
or heat kept to it, to render it legible. If a man writes to his mistress,
suppose, or to a minister of state, with lemon juice, once the writing has been
warmed by the fire, and the letters by that means appear, the epistle may be
afterward read at any time and place; but if the lady's father should by
accident get your letter, written in lilach-coloured liquor, it must still
remain a secret to him: For if on getting it, and opening the seal, he could
see no writing, and therefore imagining it was writ with lemon juice, or some
other sympathetic ink, he should hold it himself to the fire, or bid his
servant hold it to the heat, that the letters might be produced, and made
visible, yet the moment bismuth-ink is taken away from the fire, and begins to
cool, it is as invisible again, as a sheet of white paper. How serviceable this
may be on various occasions, may be easily conceived.

Of Zinc.
But as to our third semi-metal, called Zinc, this is so like bismuth to
appearance, that some have confounded it with Zinc; though it differs from it
essentially in its properties, and will unite with all metalline substances,
except bismuth. It is volatile by fire above all things, and makes a sublimate
of the metallic substances with which it is fused. Zinc mixed with copper in
the quantity of a fourth part, produces brass. If the Zinc is not very pure,
the composition proves tombac, or Prince's metal.

The nature of regulus of arsenic.
Regulus of arsenic, the fourth semi-metal, has a color resembling lead,
unites readily with metallic substances, and renders them brittle, unmalleable,
and volatile. The calx of it produced by fire, may be made volatile by more
fire, and in this differs from the calx of all metalline substances; for all
other calx's are fixed, and cannot be moved. It has likewise a saline
character, in which its corrosive quality or poison consists: a quality from
which the other metallic substances are free, when they are not combined with a
saline matter. These things being noticed, in relation to metals, and
semi-metals in general, I will now proceed to relate a few curious cases, in
respect of the metals.

The characters of gold.
Gold, our first metal, has ten sensible criterions. It is the heaviest and
densest of all bodies: the most simple of all bodies: the most fixed of all
bodies: the only body that cannot be turned into scoriae, by antimony and lead;
the most ductile of all bodies: so soft as to be scarcely elastic or sonorous:
must be red hot to melt: is dissolvable by sea salt and its preparations, but
remains untouched by any other species of salts; and of consequence not liable
to rust; as aqua regia and spirit of sea salt do not float in the air, unless
in laboratories; or chemists shops, where we find them sometimes: It unites
spontaneously with pure quicksilver: It never wastes by emitting effluvia, or
exhalations. These are the ten sensible properties or characteristics of this
metal. It is certainly pure gold, if it has these criterions, and they are of
great use in life; especially to persons who have to do with that subtle tribe,
the alchemists.

As to the weight of gold, it is more than nineteen times heavier than water,
bulk for bulk, and this property is inseparable from it; it being impossible to
render gold more or less heavy; and for this reason, the specific gravity of
gold, if it had no other criterion, might demonstrate real gold. To make gold,
other metals must be rendered equiponderant to it: And therefore, if an
alchemist should offer to obtrude a metal on you for gold, hang an equal weight
of pure, and of suspected gold by two threads to a nice balance, and on
immerging them in water, if the alchemist's gold be pure, the water will retain
both pieces in oequilibrio; otherwise, the adulterate metal will rise, and the
pure descend.

The reason is, all bodies lose some of their weight in a fluid, and the weight
which a body loses in a fluid, is to its whole weight, as the specific gravity
of the fluid is to that of the body. The specific gravity of a body is the
weight of it, when the bulk is given; 38 grains of gold weighed in the air, is
not the true weight of it: for there it loses the weight of an equal bulk of
air: It weighs only 36 grains in the water, and there it loses the weight of as
much water, as is equal in bulk to itself, that is, 2 grains, and as the gold
weighs 38 grains, it follows, that the weight of water is to that of gold, bulk
for bulk, as 2 to 38, that is, as the weight lost in the fluid is to the whole
weight.

And so, if a piece of gold, and a piece of copper, are equiponderant in air,
yet in water the gold will outweigh the copper; because their bulks, though of
equal weight, are inversely as their specific gravities, that is, the gold must
be as much less than the copper, as the specific gravity of gold is greater
than that of copper: And as they must both lose weight in proportion to bulk in
water, therefore the gold, the lesser of the two, loses less of its weight than
the copper does, and consequently, out-weighs the copper in water. I hope this
is clear. The case is the same, in proportion, in pure gold, and gold mixed
with other metals. The bulk of the pure gold must be less than that of allayed
gold, and its weight greater in water; though both equiponderate (a pound
suppose) in air.

It is very plain, Sir, and I request you will proceed. You give me valuable
information, and oblige me very much. This pleased the Chemist, and the
ingenious little Ribble went on.

As to the simplicity of gold, we mean, by a simple body, that whose minutest
part has all the physical properties of the whole mass. Now dissolve a grain of
gold in aqua regia, and from a single drop of the solution, a particle of gold
may be separated, and have all the characters of gold, (except those of
magnitude,) though the separated particle of gold shall only be the millionth
part of the grain. -- Or, fuse a single grain of gold with a mass of silver,
and mix the whole together, so that the gold shall be equally distributed: then
take a particle thereof, and you will have a particle of perfect gold; for
dissolve the least part of the mixture in aqua fortis, and a quantity of gold
will precipitate to the bottom. It will bear the same proportion to the grain,
that the part dissolved did to the whole mass.

Having mentioned aqua regia and aqua fortis, I must, to be intelligible, say
two or three words in relation to them. Aqua regia is an extract by fire from
sea salt and spirit of nitre. The acid liquor that comes over from them into
the receiver, is aqua regis. -- Aqua fortis, or spirit of nitre, is a nitrous
acid separated from its basis, nitre, by the vitriolic acid. Aqua regis only
will dissolve gold. Silver is not soluble by aqua regis; its proper solvent is
the acid of nitre or aqua fortis. -- But if you want to separate a mass of gold
and silver, either will do. You may dissolve the gold by aqua regia, and let
the silver remain pure: or, dissolve the silver by aqua fortis, and let the
gold remain pure. Only note in this case of a mixed lump of gold and silver,
the operation by aqua fortis is preferable, for this reason; that aqua regis in
dissolving the gold, takes up likewise a little silver; but aqua fortis has
not the least effect on gold: -- And note further, that if there be equal parts
of gold and silver in the mixture, they cannot be parted by aqua fortis. It has
not then the least effect on the silver, which is very strange. To make aqua
fortis act duly on silver mixed with gold, the silver must be at least in a
triple proportion to that of the gold. The reason of the singular effect is,
that when the gold exceeds, or the parts of both are equal in quantity, then,
as both are intimate, united in the mass, the parts or minims of the gold coat
over the parts of the silver, and defend them from the action of the aqua
fortis. In this case, aqua regia must be used to dissolve the gold, and leave
the silver pure: or, as aqua regia takes up a little of the silver, when it
dissolves the gold, melt the metalline mass, and add as much silver, as will
make it a triple proportion to the gold. Then you may by aqua fortis take up
all your silver in the dissolution, and leave all the gold pure.

But as to the third criterion of gold, its being the most fixed of all bodies,
this is evident from the violence of fire having no effect on it. An ounce of
it exposed for the space of two months, in the eye of a glass furnace, does not
lose half a grain. It may from thence be said to be incorruptible.

As to gold's resisting antimony, and not turning into scoriae by its force, it
is most certain from hence, that if you take a mass consisting of gold, silver,
copper, the other metals, with stones, etc. and fuse it with antimony, the
bodies will flow on the surface, and be easily blown off by the bellows: the
antimony all evaporates, and leaves the gold alone. This is called the last
test of gold, to try the purity of it. If the remaining gold have lost nothing
of its weight, it is allowed perfectly pure, and called gold of twenty-four
carats; or if it be found 1/24 lighter, it is said to be twenty-three carats
fine.

The wonderful ductility of gold.
But as to the ductility of gold, this is the most extraordinary property of it.
The arts of gold-beating and wire-drawing, show us things quite amazing. In
leaf-gold, a grain and a quarter of the metal, may be made to cover an area of
fifty square inches; and if the leaf be divided by parallel lines 1/100 part of
an inch, a grain of gold will be divided into five hundred thousand minute
squares, all discernible by the eye: yet this is not the most can be done by
the hammer. A single grain of gold may be stretched into a leaf that will cover
a house, and yet the leaf remain so compact, as not to transmit the rays of
light, nor ever admit spirit of wine to transude. This however is nothing to
the effects of wire-drawing.

A gold wire is only a silver one gilt, and if you coat a silver cylinder of
forty-eight ounces weight, with one ounce of gold, which is sufficient, this
cylinder may be drawn out into a wire so very fine, that two yards thereof
shall weigh only one grain, and 98 yards only 49 grains, so that one grain of
gold gilds 98 yards; and of course the ten thousandth part of a grain, is above
one third part of an inch long. And since the third part of an inch is yet
capable of being divided into ten lesser parts visible to the eye, it is
evident that the hundred thousandth part of a grain of gold, may be seen
without the help of a microscope: And yet so intimately do its parts cohere,
that though the gold wherewith the wire is coated, be stretched to such a
degree, there is not any appearance of the color of silver underneath. Nor is
this all.

In supergildings, that is, to make the richest lace, they employ but 6 ounces
of gold, to cover or gild 45 marks of silver, that is, twenty-two pounds and a
half avordupoise weight, rounded into the form of a cylinder or roller, which
has fifteen lines in diameter, and twenty-two inches in length; and here the
stratum of gold which invelopes the ingot that is to be drawn into wire, has
no more thickness than the fifteenth part of a line, which is extremely thin;
as a line is the twelfth part of an inch.

But to make the common gold-thread, they do not use more than two ounces of
gold, and sometimes not more than one, to gild or cover ingot I have mentioned,
and then the inveloping stratum is not more in thickness, if two ounces be
employed, than the 45th part of a line; and if one ounce be used, but the 90th
part of a line. Two ounces of gold is generally used, in gilding or covering
the ingot I have mentioned, and vastly thinner must the stratum be, when the
ingot is drawn till it surpasses the fineness of a hair, and the diameter is
nine thousand times smaller than what it had in the mass: By weighing out half
a dram of this thread or wire, it is found by measuring the length of the half
dram, that the ingot of 22 pounds, and 22 inches long, is changed into a length
of 1163520 feet, that is, ninety-six leagues and 196 fathom; for the half dram
of wire or thread measures 202 feet; by consequence, an ounce of it, 3232 feet;
a mark of it, or eight ounces, 25856 feet. And yet, astonishing as this length
is, for two ounces of bold to be drawn to, the gold which covers the silver
never ceases to gild it. The gold still keeps pace with the wire, stretch it to
what length the drawers can, through the wire-drawing irons, and holes much
smaller one than another. The silver never appears.

It does not however rest there. Before the thread or wire is wound on silk,
and before they spin it, it must be flatted by passing it between steel wheels
extremely well polished, and this flatting increases its length to more than a
seventh part. One ingot, therefore, of 8 marks or 22 pounds, and 22 inches
long, by this increase of a 7th part, is brought to the length of 111 leagues,
that is, about 300 English miles.

But amazing as this extent is, it is not the utmost bounds to which the
ductility of gold may be carried. One ounce only of gold is sometimes used to
cover one ingot, and drawn to the length I have mentioned, and by the time it
has passed the flatting wheels, the gold that covers the silver laminae, must
have its thickness reduced to less than the millionth part of a line; that is,
a twelve millionth of an inch. This is beyond the reach of our conception.
Imagination cannot plumb her line so low.

But, Sir, (I said) May not the gold be divided into small grains separate one
from another, but yet near enough to give their color to the silver? Though we
may not be able to see the thing, yet I think it may be imagined; the gold on
the laminae does not form a continued leaf.

Experience, good Sir, demonstrates the contrary, -- that every point of silver
has its cover of gold. Put a piece of this gilt wire in aqua fortis, the
silver will be dissolved, and the gold left a perfect, continuous tube. It is
an amazing thing! And shows the astonishing power of the first cause! As to the
reason of this ductility, and why gold in such a manner adheres to silver, so
as never to part from it, if the 22 pounds of silver gilded with one ounce of
gold could be extended by art for ever, this is past our finding out. It is a
secret of nature we cannot form any idea of.

Calignosa nocte premit Deus.

Ribble went on. These are the things most remarkable in relation to gold; and
I have only to add, that as to the manner of getting it, it is found sometimes
in glebes or clods, consisting of gold alone; sometimes in a powdry form, and
then called gold- dust, or sand-gold, in the sands and mud of rivers and
brooks; but most commonly in whitish clods, dug out of mines of vast depth, and
intermixed with silver and various fossils. This they reduce by fire to a mass
of metal, and by aqua regia or aqua fortis, the gold is easily taken out of the
ore.

And as to gold's being so yielding and ductile by human art, it is to be
observed, that in return it exerts a greater power on the human mind. Passive
it is in its ductility, but more active in its influence on man. It is a
greater tyrant than a slave. It drives repeated millions of the human race to
death and hell. King of metals as it is, bright and glorious to behold, and
what procures innumerable blessings to mankind; yet, without the grace of God,
to moderate the passion for it, and to direct the mind in a true use of it, it
is more dangerous to beings on a trial in a first state, than even poverty can
be in this lower hemisphere. What villainies are daily committed to get it!
What iniquities daily perpetrated by those who have plenty of it! Lead us not
into temptation, should relate as well to too much of it, as to a total want of
it; and it is well prayed, -- In all time of our wealth, good Lord deliver us.

Mr. Ribble's conclusion, containing his religious thoughts and advice.
In my opinion, neither poverty nor riches, but a middle state, is the thing we
should desire. It is in this condition, we can best live soberly, or with a
sound mind, and conduct ourselves as those who have an intelligent spirit to
preside in body. Too much gold most commonly inverts this order, and produces
an apostasy that sets the inferior powers in the throne, and enslaves the mind
to the body: It gives the passions the commanding influence, and makes reason
receive law from appetite.

If we look into the world, we find too often, in this case, that wealth is big
with innumerable sins. The rich are filled with wine, wherein is excess, and
show an unbridled dissoluteness of manners. Their eyes behold strange women,
and their hearts utter perverse things. Instead of regarding the common good,
they commit the most extravagant injuries. Of such a hardening nature is too
much gold, that it tends to make conscience insensible and stupid, and renders
it for ever unapt for impression. Then whoredom and wine, and new wine, take
away the heart, and men are made to forget the law of God.

But having neither poverty nor riches, in the calm middle state, having all
reasonable conveniences, we can fairly come by; a vast variety of creatures
for our food, and wine in its season, to make glad the heart; we may then
partake of the bounties of providence, with a sober freedom, and at the same
time, can best lay up for ourselves a good foundation, or secuity for the time
to come, that we may lay hold of eternal life.

Though it is with a prospect of difficulties, that all must enter upon religion,
and with labor and difficulty, maintain our ground, and acquit ourselves like
christians, that is, resist the devil in all his assaults, overcome the world
in its ensnaring influence, and mortify the irregular inclinations of nature;
yet in the happy middle state, where there is no poverty nor riches, that is,
great wealth, we can make everlasting glory and felicity our governing aim, and
bound our ambition and desires by nothing short of the resurrection of the
dead. We may live in a full and ready submission of the soul to the authority
of God's word. Things eternal may have the ascendant in our practical judgment,
and then with pleasure we become followers of them, who through faith and
patience inherit the promises.

Good Sir, this is all our sowing time, and whatsoever a man sows, that shall
he also reap. He that sows to his flesh, shall of his flesh reap corruption;
but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap everlasting life.
And therefore, whether your lot be cast in the happy middling state, or you
were born to thousands a year, let wisdom be your rule, and prefer that
happiness which has everlasting duration, in the realms of light above, to any
present good that can come in competition with it. Do not spend money for that
which is not bread -- and your labor for that which satisfies not. Do not
employ your pains for that which has vanity written upon it, by the word of
God, by the testimony of the wisest men, and by frequent experience: but let
your principal regard be for your immortal soul, when nothing can be given in
exchange for the soul. Implore the light and grace of the good spirit, and by
the quickening influences of the Father of the universe, and the exertion of
your whole strength, let it be the principal labor of your every day, to make
advances in the divine life, and be a blessing to society wherever you come. In
virtue and charity may you excel.

You will pardon old Ribble, I hope, good Sir, and excuse his addressing
himself to you in this manner. It is an odd conclusion, I own, to a discourse
on metals and semi-metals; but it is from an extreme regard I have conceived
for you, that I talk as I do, and presume to call upon you, (as you are a young
man of fortune, I suppose) to consider seriously of that decree, which is the
result of unerring wisdom, and the will of the Rector of the universe, to wit,
that we are all under the law of death, and through that gate must pass,
perhaps at a day's, an hour's warning, to the resurrection of the dead, to be
adjudged to happiness or misery, as time has been employed, and life spent
here. This is the decree of the Most High God, and of consequence, it is
incumbent on us, to prepare for the awful hereafter, and endeavor by good
actions, and a virtuous mind, by purity of conscience, and an exalted piety, to
come off well in judgment. Happy -- thrice happy they that do so.

Here little Ribble the Chemist had done, and I had reason to return him my
very hearty thanks for the favor of his whole discourse. I was vastly obliged
to him for the knowledge he had given me, in relation to the philosophy of
metals, and taking him by the hand, promised him, that I would ever gratefully
remember his moral conclusion. This pleased the old gentleman, and at four in
the afternoon we parted.

A charming vale, and country house, in Nottinghamshire, the feat of Mr.
Moncktes.
3. Reflecting on the wonders of the metals, which I had heard old Ribble so
well discourse of, and being more intent on what had been told me of these
things, that I might never forget such useful learning, I trotted on for
several hours without minding the road, and arrived as the sun was setting in a
deep and melancholy vale, through which a pleasant river run, that by the
murmur of its streams, seemed to be marked out for the rendezvous of the
thoughtful, who love the deep recesses, and embowring woods, with the soft
thrillings of gliding streams, as much as the sprightly court the gayest
scenes. In this sweet spot, I found a pretty country house, and not knowing
where I was, rid up to the door, to enquire my way. A gentleman, who seemed to
be about forty, immediately appeared, let me know I was at a considerable
distance from any town, and as it was near ten, told me I had best rest with
him that night, and I was most heartily welcome. This was humane and civil. I
accepted the kind invitation, and immediately went in with him. He brought me
into a decent room, and gave me a handsome meal. We had a couple of bottles
after supper, talked of a thousand things, and then withdrew to wind up the
machines. He would not let me stir the next morning, and after dinner we became
well acquainted. Six days this gentleman prevailed with me to stay at his
house, and then I left him with regret. He was so generous, so civil, and in
every thing so agreeable, that I could not avoid admiring him, and regarding
him to an extreme degree. His name was Monckton.

Character of Mr. Monckton.
4. Avery Monckton had seen the world, when he was a young man, and by reading
much, and thinking a great deal, had acquired an extensive knowledge, and a
deep penetration. In him the gentleman and the scholar were visible. He seemed
superior to folly, and his philosophy appeared to be an assiduous examination
of his ideas, fancies, and opinions, in order to render them true and just. His
religion consisted in a cheerful submission to the divine pleasure, with
respect to all things independent of us, or absolutely external to us; and in a
continued exertion of benevolence, in doing all the good he could. What the
theology of sects was, and the notions of divines, he never minded. It was his
opinion, that an active charity is the only thing that can liken and approve us
to the original benevolent mind: and that it is reasonable to submit to all his
dispensations, since the providence of an infinitely perfect Being, must do all
for the best in the whole. This was Avery Monckton, Esquire In his person he was
tall, and very thin.

This gentleman told me the following remarkable story relating to himself, on
my asking him, if he had ever been married? -- Yes, Sir, he replied: When I was
about five and twenty, a young lady came in my way, who had all the external
charms that ever adorned a woman, and I thought her mind as perfect in goodness
of every kind, as minds can be on this earth. I made my addresses to her, and
with some difficulty persuaded her to accept of a good jointure, and be a wife;
for she had got it into her head, that christian perfection consisted in a
virgin-life. I loved her to an extreme degree, and fancied myself beyond
mortals happy, as her fondness seemed equal to my passion, and she expressed it
in a most transporting way. Three months passed on in this delightful manner,
and I should have thought an age but minutes, if the scene was to have no
change. But every thing must have an end in this poor state. Business called me
one morning early into the city, and till it was late at night, I thought not
to return: Back however I was compelled to go for some papers, I had forgot,
and designing to surprise agreeably my wife, came in by a key I had, at the
wash-house door, and unseen went softly up to my chamber, where I expected to
find my beloved in a sweet sleep. Gently I touched the lock, and intended, as
my charmer slumbered, to give this idol of my heart a kiss: But, as I opened
the door without being heard, I saw a man by my bedside, and my fond faithful
wife, buttoning up his breeches. Amazement seized me, but I was not in a rage.
I only said, is that Louisa I see, and shut the door. Down stairs I went
immediately, and out again the same way I came in. I was done with love for
ever, and from that time never saw my wife more. A ship being to sail the next
day for Constantinople, I went a passenger in it, and resolved to live abroad
some years.

Six years I resided in Greece, and visited every curious place: Four I spent
in Asia minor, and two in Italy and France. I diverted myself with noting down
the extraordinary things I saw, and I purchased several fine antiquities by the
way. When done, I came back to my country again, and this little seat I now
live at, being to be sold, I bought it immediately, and have resided here ever
since. My study, my garden, and my horse, divert me fully and finely every day.
I have all I desire in this world, and reign more happily over my few subjects,
in this airy, silent, secret spot, than the greatest monarch can do on a
throne. My people are only one young man, who is my gardener, my footman, and
my groom, and two old women, my maids. These are ever attentive to my will, and
by their good behavior and management, make my lodge as agreeable, and life as
pleasing, as can be expected in this system of things.

Monckton's story pleased me much, and I wondered greatly at his happy temper,
when he saw his beloved wife buttoning up the breeches of the man. But did you
ever hear what became of her after? -- And faulty as she was, may there not be
found an honest charming woman, to render your hours more delightful than study
and contrivance can make them, without a soft partner through life? Come into the
world with me, Sir, and I will engage to find out for you a mere primitive
christian of a woman, with all the beauties of body that Lucian gives his
images.

You are very good, Sir, ( Monckton replied) in offering to look out for
another wife for me, and I thank you very heartily, for your well-meant
kindness; but as I never enquired what became of my first wife, from the
morning I left her, and know only that she is dead, as her jointure has not
been demanded for several years past; so shall I never be concerned with a
second. Perhaps there are some honest women in the world. I hope so: but I have
had enough of marriage. Beside, I think it time now to turn my thoughts a
better way. In the forty-fifth year of my age, it cannot be weak, to begin to
consider the great change before me, and fix my hopes on a good remove into
some better and happier region. If I was unfortunate with a wife when a young
man, I have little reason to expect better days with one, as age comes on. I
might find myself again most sadly mistaken. But there can be no disappointment
in making it the principal work of life, to prepare, in such a retirement as
this, for that approaching hour, when we must submit to the power and tyranny
of death and corruption. By this means, the greatest happiness may be secured.
In every thing else, there is uncertainty and vanity. I speak principally in
respect of my time of life, who am hastening fast to fifty: but at every time,
it is my opinion, that men, as rationals, and beings who take on themselves the
honorable profession of the christian religion, should not comply with the
criminal liberties allowed in the world, and give into the illicit usages and
customs of place and company, for fear of ridicule, or to avoid giving offense;
but keep strictly to the will and laws of their higher country, and in all
things have a special regard to holiness, and truth, and purity.

I do not say this by way of preaching, but that you may thereby have a truer
idea of the man you chanced to find in a lone house on this vast common. Seven
years have I now lived here, and in all that time, have not been once in
London: but sometimes I ride to a neighboring village, and if on the road, or
at an inn, I can pick up a sensible agreeable man, I love to dine with him, and
drink a pint of wine. Such a man I frequently ride in quest of, and if he be
entirely to my mind, (which is very rarely the case,) I invite him home with
me, to pass at my lodge two or three days. Far then am I from being unsocial,
though I live in solitude; but I left the world, because I was ill-used in it,
and happen to think very differently from the generality of men. Here Monckton
ended his story, and a little after we parted.

A bait at a lone inn, and the arrival of Miss Turner of Skelsmore vale.
. 5. I rid for six hours without meeting with any thing remarkable; but as I
baited about three o'clock at a lone inn, the situation of which was so fine in
forest and water, that I determined to go no further that day, there arrived a
little after, a young lady, her maid, and two men servants. They were all
well-mounted, and the lady's beast in particular, as great a beauty of its
kind, as its mistress was among women. I thought I had seen the face before,
and had been some where or other in her company; but as it must be several
years ago, and her face and person were a little altered, I could not
immediately recollect her: but Finn, my lad, coming up to me, asked me, if I
did not remember Miss Turner of Skelsmore-vale See the Life of John Buncle,
Vol. I. p. 404.
? Miss Turner, I said; -- to be sure, now I think, it is she; but this lady
just arrived here is much fatter, and, if it be possible, something handsomer.
It is her, believe me, quoth Finn, and you ought to wait upon her instantly. I
went. It was Miss Turner, one of the beauties that adorns a gallery of pictures
in the North, and who is with great truth in the following lines described, in
a Poem written on this collection of paintings.

The picture of Miss Turner.
But see! Emilia rises to the sight
In every virtue, in every beauty bright!
See those victorious eyes, that heavenly mien!
Behold her shine like Love's resistless Queen!
Thou fairest wonder of thy fairest kind!
By heaven some image of itself designed!
As if in thee it took peculiar care,
And formed thee like some favorite seraph there,
But though thy beauty strikes the ravished sight*
Thy virtue shines distinguishingly bright!
And all the graces of thy form combined,
Yield to the charms of thy unblemished mind;
Where all is spotless, gentle, and serene,
One calm of life untouched by guilt or pain!
Could I in equal lays thy worth design,
Or paint exalted merit such as thine!
To latest ages should thy name survive,
And in my verse Emilia ever live;
The admiring world should listen to thy praise,
And the fair portrait charm succeeding days.
This lady knew me at once, on my entering the room where she was, and we dined
together. She told me, her brother, my friend, died in Italy, on his return
home; and Miss Jaquelot, her cousin and companion, was happily married; and
that being thus left alone, by these two accidents, she was going up to London,
to reside in the world.

My address to Miss Turner.
. 6. Miss Turner, (I said then) as you are now your own mistress, I may with
justice make my addresses, and tell you, that from the first hour I saw you, I
was in love with you, and am so still: that if you will do me the honor to be
my wife, I will make the best of husbands. I have now some fortune, and if you
will allow, that an honest man is the best companion for an honest woman, let
us marry in the country, and instead of going up to that noisy tumultuous place
called London, retire to some still delightful retreat, and there live, content
with each other, as happy as it is possible for two young mortals to be in this
lower hemisphere. What do you say, Miss Turner?

Miss Turner's answer: and our marriage.
. 7. You shall have my answer, Sir, in a few days: But as to going up to
London, I think I had best see it, since I am come so far. It may give me a new
relish for still life, and make the country seem more charming than I thought
it before. On the other hand, it may perhaps make me in love with the town, and
put me out of conceit with the country. In short, on second thoughts; I will
not go up to the Capital. I will return to Skelsmore-vale. I think so now: But
how I may think in the morning, at present I do not know. In the mean time, (
Caesia continued,) ring, if you please, for a pack of cards, and let us pass
the evening in play. The cards were brought in, the game began, and before we
had played, many hours, I saw this dear charming creature was all my own. She
sat before me, like blushing beauty in the picture, (in the gallery of Venus,)
enriched with thought, warm with desire, and with delicate sensations covered
over: I could not help wishing for father Fleming, my friend, to qualify us for
the implanted impulse, and sanctify the call. Early the next morning I sent
Finn for him, and he was with me in a few days. The evening he arrived we were
married. Man and wife we sat down to supper.

The Author's apology for marrying again so soon.
. 8. Here the morose, the visionary, and the dunce, will again fall upon me,
for marrying a fifth wife, so quickly after the decease of the fourth; who had
not been three months in her grave: But my answer is, that a dead woman is no
wife, and marriage is ever glorious. It is the institution of heaven, a
blessing to society, and therefore hated by the devil and mass-priests. Satan
by opposing it, promotes fornication and perdition. The priests by preaching
against it, drive the human race into cloisters; destroy every thing gentle,
generous, and social; and rob the people of their property. Celibacy is popery
and hell in perfection. It is the doctrine of devils, and a war with the
Almighty. It is against the institutions of nature and providence; and
therefore, for ever execrable be the memory of the mass-priests, who dare to
call it perfection.

My dear Reader, if you are unmarried, and healthy, get a wife as soon as
possible, some charming girl, or pretty widow, adorned with modesty, robed with
meekness, and who has the grace to attract the soul, and heighten every joy
continually; -- take her to thy breast, and bravely, in holy wedlock,
propagate. Despise and hiss the mass-priests, and every visionary, who preaches
the contrary doctrine. They are foes to heaven and mankind, and ought to be
drummed out of society.

SECTION XI.
Quid quaeri, Labiene, jubes? --
An noceat vis ulla bono? Summaque perdat
Opposita virtute minas? Laudandaque velle
Sit satis, et nunquam successu crescat honestum?
Scimus, et hoc nobis non altius inferet Ammon.
Cato 's answer to Labienus, when he requested him to consult the oracle of
Jupiter Ammon. Lucan, B. 9. Where would thy fond, thy vain enquiry go?
What mystic fate, what secret would thou know?
If this sad world, with all its forces joined,
The universal malice of mankind,
Can shake or hurt the brave and honest mind?
If stable virtue can her ground maintain,
While fortune feebly threats and frowns in vain?
If truth and justice with uprightness dwell,
And honesty consist in meaning well?
If right be independent of success,
And conquest cannot make it more nor less?
Are these, my friend, the secrets thou would know,
Those doubts for which to oracles we go?
It Is known, it is plain, it is all already told,
And horned Ammon can no more unfold.
ROW. Or thus.

What should I ASK, my friend, -- if best it be
To live enslaved, or thus in arms die free!
If it our real happiness import,
Whether life's foolish scene be long or short?
If any force true honor can abate,
Or fortune's threats make virtue bow to fate?
If when at noble ends we justly aim,
The bare attempt entitles us to fame?
If a bad cause, that justice would oppress,
Can ever grow more honest by success?
All this we know, wove in our minds it sticks,
Which Ammon nor his priests can deeper fix.
They need not teach with venal cant and pains,
That God's inevitable will holds our's in chains,
Who act but only what he pre-ordains.
He needs no voice to thunder out his law,
Or keep his creatures wild desires in awe:
Both what we ought to do, or what forbear,
He once for all did at our births declare:
What for our knowledge needful was or fit,
With lasting characters in human soul he writ.
But never did he seek out desert lands
To skulk, or bury truth in desert sands,
Or to a corner of the world withdrew,
Head of a sect, and partial to a few.
Nature's vast fabric he controuls alone;
This globe's his footstool, high heaven his throne.
Estque Dei seeds, ubi terra, et pontus, et aer,
Et caelum, et virtus. Superos quid quaerimus ultra?
In earth, sea, air, and what ever else excels,
In knowing heads, and honest hearts he dwells.
Why vainly seek we then in barren sands,
In narrow shrines, and temples built with hands,
HIM, whose dread presence does all places fill,
Or look, but in our reason for his will!
Whatever we see is GOD, in all we find
Apparent prints of his eternal mind.
Sortileges egeant dubii semperque, futuris
Casibus Ancipetes: me non oracula certum,
Sed mors certa facit: pavido fortique cadendum est.
Hoc satis est dixisse Jovem. Sic illa profatur.
Let floating fools their course by prophets steer,
And live of future chances still in fear;
No oracle or dream the crowd is told,
Shall make me more or less resolved and bold;
Death is my sure retreat, which must on all,
As well on cowards, as on the gallant fall.
This said he turned him with disdain about,
And left scorned Ammon to amuse the rout. The temple of Jupiter Ammon was
situated on the south part of the deserts of Lybia, about 200 miles from the
borders of Egypt. These deserts consisting of fluctuating sands are of a vast
unknown extent, and by the rising of the wind, roll like waves of the sea, fall
like snow, and have buried whole armies: But the spot in the middle of which
the temple stood, is fine fixed land, seven miles in circumference, richly
planted and watered with fountains and streams; a delightful and healthful
place, though the vast deserts all round are scorching sands, without so much
as one well or rivulet to be seen any where. Alexander the Great was there in
the year 332, or 1 before Christ. And Cato in the year before Christ 46. Lucan
gives a fine description of this march of Cato in his IXth book. -- And of the
spot where Ammon reigned, says --

Here, and here only, through wide Lybia's space,
Tall trees, the land, and verdant herbage grace.
Here the loose sands by plenteous springs are bound,
Knit to a mass, and molded into ground:
Here smiling nature wears a fertile dress,
And all things here the present God confess.
The Latin is vastly fine.

Esse locis superos testatur sylva per omnem
Sola virens Libyen, nam quicquid pulvere sicco
Separat ardentem tepida berenicida lepti,
Ignorant frondes. Solus nemus abstulit Ammon.
Sylvarum fons causa loco, qui putria terrae
Alligat, et domitas unda connectit arenas.
This spot in Lybia is to this day the same beautiful and wonderful place; the
most charming piece of ground in the world, in the midst of the most horrible
deserts; but instead of Corniger, (as Lucan calls Ammon) an African prince
named Abu Derar, now reigns there, and his palace stands where the temple stood
in Alexander's and Cato's time. I saw not long ago a gentleman who had been on
the spot and told me this. He further said, that this king and his people had
been converted to the christian religion by an Abyssinian priest, and had
better notions of christianity than many of our great divines; for they have
not a thought of trinity in unity; nor would they say, to gain the whole world,
what the great Dr. Potter does in one of his sermons, to wit, that whatsoever
pain or misery God himself did suffer in his human nature: Or as Trapp
expresses himself in his discourse on the marriage at Cana, -- A sweet smile
sat on the face of the great God: -- meaning Jesus: -- Horrible sayings! O
wretched orthodoxy! But they think, without daring to invent and add to the
gospel, that Jesus Christ was (and was no more than) the Messiah, sent by God
for the salvation of mankind.

At what time this Oracle of Jupiter Ammon ceased is not certain. We are sure
it was of no reputation in the time of Trajan. All the Oracles ceased, when men
opened their eyes, and laid aside their impertinent credulity. This was the
true cause of the cessation; though the fathers ascribe it to the coming of the
Savior of the world. It was mere priestcraft to make money.



Non exploratum populis Ammona relinquens.

The unfortunate death of Miss Turner, the author's fifth wife.
. 1. FOR six weeks after our marriage, we resided at the inn, on account of the
charms of the ground, and seemed to be in possession of a lasting happiness it
is impossible for words to describe. Every thing was so smooth and so round,
that we thought prosperity must be our own for many years to come, and were
quite secure from the flames of destruction; but calamity laid hold of us, when
we had not the least reason to expert it, and from a fullness of peace and
felicity, we sunk at once into an abyss of afflictions. Instead of going back
to Skelsmorevale, as we had resolved, my wife would go up to London, and pass a
few weeks there, and thereabout, before she retired to the mountains. I was
against it, but her will was my law. We set out for the Capital, and the first
day's journey was delightful: But her fine beast having met with an accident in
the night, by a rope in the stable, which got about it is foot, cut it deep, and
rendered it unable to travel; we took a chariot and four to finish our way; but
on driving by the side of a steep hill, the horses took fright, ran it down,
over came the carriage, and my charmer was killed. This was a dismal scene. She
lived about an hour, and repeated the following fine lines from Boissard, when
she saw me weeping as I kneeled on the ground by her; --

Nil prosunt lacrumae, nec possunt fata moveri:
Nec pro me queror; hoc morte mihi est tristius ipsa,
Moeror Atimeti conjugis ille mihi. Homonoea and Atimetus: and the epitaph of
Homonoea at large.
These lines from the antiquities of Boissard, are a real inscription on a tomb
in Italy, which this antiquary found in his travels, and copied it as a
curiosity to the world. It is to be seen on the monument to this day. Homonoea
was a great beauty at the court of the Emperor Honorius, and married to
Atimetus, a courtier and favorite, who preferred her to the most illustrious
of ladies of that time, on account of her extraordinary charms, and uncommon
perfections; but the did not long enjoy the honor and happiness she was
married into. Before the was twenty, death snatched her away, in the year of
the reign of Honorius, A. D. 401. and the following beautiful epitaph was cut
on her monument, and remains to this day: I place it here for the entertainment
of my readers, and likewise La Fontaine's elegant translation of it.

Homoea's Epitaph.
Si pensare animas sinerent crudelia fata,
Et posset redimi morte aliena salus:
Quantulacunque meae debentur tempora vitae
Pensarem pro te, cara Homonoea, libens.
At nunc quod possum, fugiam lucemque deosque,
Ut to matura per stuga morte sequar.
[Atimetus the husband, is the speaker of these six lines.]

Parce tuam conjux fletu quassare juventam,
Fataque merendo sollicitare mea.
Nil prosunt lacrumae, nec possunt fata moveri.
Viximus: hic omnes exitus unus habet.
Parce, ita non unquam similem experiare dolorem.
Et faveant votis numina cuncta tuis!
Quodque mihi cripuit mors immatura juventae,
Hoc tibi victuro proroget ulterius.
[Homonoea is supposed to speak these eight lines, to her hushand; and then
relates her case to the traveller, who is passing by.]

Tu qui secura procedis mente parumper
Siste gradum quaeso, verbaque pauca lege.
Illa ego quae claris fueram praelata puellis,
Hoc Homonoea brevi condita sum tumulo,
Cui formam paphia, et charites, tribuere decorem,
Quam Pallus cunctis artibus eruduit.
Nondum bis denos aetas compleverat annos,
Injecere manus invida fata mihi.
Nec pro me queror; hoc morte mihi est tristius ipsa,
Moeror Atimeti conjugis ille mihi.
Sit tibi terra levis, mulier dignissima vita
Quaeque tuis olim perfruerere bonis.
[ These two lines may be the words of the Public, or of whoever crected the
monument to the memory of Homonoea.

Now see how finely La Fontaine has done this inscription into verse.

Si l'on pouvoit donner ses jours pour ceux d'un autre
Et que par cet echange on contentat le sort,
Quels que soint les momens qui me restent encore
Mon ame, avec plaisir, racheteroit la votre.
Mais le destin l'ayant autrement arrete,
Je ne scaurois que fuir les dieux and la clarte,
Pour vous suivre aux enfers d'une mort avancee.
Quittez, o chere epoux, cette triste pensee,
Vous alterez en vain les plus beaux de vos ans:
Cessez de fatiguer par de cris impuissans,
La parque et le destin, deitez inflexibles.
Mettez fin a des pleurs qui ne le touchent point;
Je ne suis plus: tout tent a ce supreme poinct.
Ainsi null accident, par des coups si sensibles
Ne vienne a l'avenir traverser vos plaisirs!
Ainsi l'Olimpe entier s'accorde a vos desirs!
Veuille enfin atropos, au course de votre vie
Ajouter l'etendue a la mienne ravire!
Et toy, passant tranquille, apprens quels sont nos maux,
Daigne icy t'arreter on moment a les lire,
Celle qui preseree aux partis les plus hauts,
Sur le ceur d'Atimete acquir un doux empire;
Qui tenoit de venus la beauty de ses traits,
De Pallas son scavoir, des graces ses attraits,
Gist sous ce peu d'espace en la tomb enserree,
Vingt soleils n'avoient pas ma carriere eclaires,
Le sort jetta fur mois ses envieuses mains;
C'est Atimete seul quit fait que je men's plains,
Ma mort m'afflige moins que sa douleur amere.
O femme, que la terre a tes os soit legere?
Femme digne de vivre; et bientot pusses tu
Recommencer de voir les traits de la lumieres,
Et recouvrer le bien que ton ceur a perdu.
Or thus in prose.

S'il suffisoit aux destins qu'on donat sa vie pour celle d'un autre, et qu'il
fut possible de racheter ainsi ce que l'on aim, quelque soit le nombre
d'annees que les parques m'ont accord, je le donnerois avec plaisir pour vous
tirer de tombeau, ma chere Homonee; mais cela ne se pouvant, ce que je puis
fair est de fuir le jour et la presence de dieux, pour alter bientot vous
suivre le long du Styx.

O mon chere epoux, cessez de vous affliger; ne corrompez plus le fleurs de vos
ans; ne fatiguez plus ma destinee par de plaintes continuelles: toutes les
larmes sont icy veins; on ne sauroit emouvoir la parque: me voila morte,
chacun arrive a ce term la. Cessez done encore un fois: Ainsi puissiez-vous ne
sentir jamais une semblable douleur! Ainsi tous les dieux soient favorable a
vos souhaits! Et veuille la parque ajouter a votre vie ce qu'elle a ravi a la
mienne.

Et toy qui passes tranquillement, arrete icy je te pry un moment ou deux,
afin de lire ce peu de mots.

Moy, cette Homonee que preferra Atimete a de filles considerables; moy a qui
Venus donna la beauty, les graces et les agremens; que Pallas enfin avoit
instruite dans tous les arts, me voila icy renfermee dans un monument de peu
d'espace. Je n'avois pas encore vingt ans quand le sort jetta ses mains
envieuses sur ma person. Ce n'est pas pour moy que je m'en plains, c'est pour
mon mari, de qui la douleur m'est plus difficile a supporter que ma propre mort.

Que la terre te soit legere, o epouse digne de retourner a la vie, et de
recouvrer un jour que tu a perdu!

N. B. The reader who does not understand French, will find this in English at
the end of this XIth Section.



Just as she expired, she took me by the hand, and with the spirit of an old
Roman, bid me adieu.

Can you form an idea, Reader, of the distress I was then in? If is not
possible I think, unless you have been exactly in the same situation; unless
you loved like me, and have been as miserably separated from as charming a
woman. But it was in vain for me to continue lamenting. She was gone for ever,
and lay as the clod of the valley before me. Her body I deposited in the next
churchyard, and immediately after, rid as fast as I could to London, to lose
thought in dissipation, and resign the better to the decree. For some days I
lived at the inn I set up at, but as soon as I could, went into a lodging, and
it happened to be at the house of the famous Curl the bookseller; a man well
known in the Dunciad, and Pope's letters to his friends, on account of Curl's
frauds in purchasing and printing stolen copies of Mr. Pope's works. It is in
relation to these tricks, that Pope mentions Curl in his Dunciad and Letters. A
succinct history of him I shall here give: but had I complied with his
requests, it would have been a long relation, to the advantage and glory of
this extraordinary man: For he came one morning into my closet, with an apron
full of papers; being letters, memorandums, parodies, and notes, written by or
concerning himself; and requested I would, on a good consideration, write his
life, to his profit and honor, and make it a five shilling book. That I said
was not then in my power to do: but I would, one time or other, give the public
a true account of him, and make it conclude I hoped to the glory of his
character. Here it is.

The picture and character of Curl the Bookseller.
. 2. CURL was in person very tall and thin, an ungainly, awkward, white-faced
man. His eyes were a light-grey, large, projecting, gogle and pur-blind. He was
splay-footed, and baker-kneed.

He had a good natural understanding, and was well acquainted with more than
the title pages of books. He talked well on some subjects. He was not an
infidel as Mrs. Row misrepresents him in one of her letters to lady Hartford,
(afterward Duchess of Somerset). He told me, it was quite evident to him,
that the scriptures of the Old and New Testament contained a real revelation.
There is for it a rational, a natural, a traditionary, and a supernatural
testimony; which rendered it quite certain to him. He said, he no more doubted
the truth of the christian religion, than he did the existence of an
independent supreme Creator; but he did not believe the expositions given by
the divines. So far Curl was right enough. His fault was, that with such a
belief, he took no pains with his heart. Trusting entirely to the merits the
Savior, like too many other mistaken christians, he had no notion of religion
as an invisible thing within us, called the kingdom of God: He did not even
consider it as a good outside thing, that recommends a man to his
fellow creatures. He was a debauchee to the last degree, and so injurious to
society, that by filling his translations with wretched notes, forged letters,
and bad pictures, he raised the price of a four shilling book to ten. Thus, in
particular, he managed Burnet's Archiology: And when I told him he was very
culpable in this, and other articles he sold, his answer was, What would I have
him do? He was a bookseller. His translators in pay, lay three in a bed, at the
Pewter-Platter Inn in Holborn, and he and they were for ever at work, to
deceive the Public. He likewise printed the lewdest things. He lost his ears
for the Nun in her Smock, and another thing. As to drink, he was too fond of
money, to spend any in making himself happy that way; but at another's expense,
he would drink every day till he was quite blind, and as incapable of
self-motion as a block. This was Edmund Curl: But he died at last as great a
penitent, (I think in the year 1748) as ever expired. I mention this to his
glory.

As Curl knew the world well, and was acquainted with several extraordinary
characters, he was of great use to me at my first coming to town, as I knew
nobody, nor any place. He gave me the true characters of many I saw, told me
whom I should avoid, and with whom I might be free. He brought me to the
play houses, and gave me a judicious account of every actor. He understood
those things well. No man could talk better on theatrical subjects. He brought
me likewise to Sadler's Wells, to the night-cellars, and to Tom King's, the
famous night-house at Covent Garden. As he was very knowing, and well-known at
such places, he soon made me as wise as himself in these branches of learning;
and, in short, in the space of a month, I was as well acquainted in London, as
if I had been there for years. My kind preceptor spared no pains in lecturing.

But what of all things I thought most wonderful was the company I saw at the
Sieur Curl's. As he was intimate with all the high whores in town, many of them
frequented his shop, to buy his dialogues, and other lively books. Some of
these girls he often asked to dine with him, and then I was sure to be a guest.
Many very fine women I thereby saw, but none worth mentioning, till Carola
Bennet arrived. She did surprise me. Her mind and body were very wonderful, and
I imagine a description of her, and her story afterward will not be ungrateful
to my readers.

The picture of Carola Bennet.
. 3. Carola Bennet was at this time in the two and twentieth year of her age, a
dazzling beauty in the height of life and vigor. Her eyes were black and
amazingly fine: Her mouth charming: Her neck and breast very beautiful: Her
stature was just what it ought to be. She had a glow of health, a luscious air,
and a bewitching vivacity: Her manners were wonderfully winning, and the tone
of her voice so sweet and insinuating, that her words and looks went directly
to the heart. She had read many books of gaiety, wit, and humor; especially
the French; and talked delightfully on such subjects. She sang to perfection:
but her conversation was too free, and she seemed to have no sense of any
religion. It was a fine entertainment to be in her company, as I often was, yet
I could not help sighing, to see so many any perfections on the brink of
everlasting destruction. -- This young lady all of a sudden disappeared. Curl
knew not what was become of her: but as I rid ten years after through
Devonshire, in the finest part of that romantic county, I saw her one morning,
(as I stopped to water my horse in a brook that ran from a park,) sitting on a
seat, under a vast beautiful cedar tree, with a book in her hand. I thought I
was no stranger to the fine face, and as I was pretty near to her, I called
out, and asked, if she was not Miss Bennet? She knew me at once, and pointing
to a gate that was only latched, desired I would come to her. I went and found
she was the mistress of the fine seat at a small distance off. She brought me
into the house, would not suffer me to stir that day, and told me the story of
her life. I think it worth placing here.

History of Miss Bennet.
. 4. Carola Bennet was the daughter of John Bennet, Esquire a Yorkshire gentleman,
who died when she was in her 19th year, and left her in the care of her aunt,
an old lady who was outwardly all saint, and within a devil. This Carola knew
well, and requested her father to get another guardian for her, or leave her to
manage herself; for Mrs. Hunfleet, her aunt, was far from being that primitive
christian he took her for, and so great a miser, that exclusive of all her
other vices, her avarice alone was enough to ruin her niece. She would
sacrifice the whole human race for half a thousand pounds. But all his daughter
said was in vain. He believed his sister was godliness itself, in its utmost
latitude and extent; that she lived a continued opposition to our mortal
enemies, the world, sin, and the devil; and that her heart was a mere magazine
of universal honesty, probity of manners, and goodness of life and
conversation. Integrity and rectitude, and benevolence, as he thought, were the
bright criterions of her soul. She will teach you, Carola, to fast and pray,
and make you like herself, a mere saint.

It was to no purpose then for the daughter to remonstrate: She could only
weep, as her father was positive, and after his death was obliged to go home
with Mrs. Hunfleet. There, as she expected, she had too much of the outward
bodily exercise of religion, every thing that can be named within the circle of
external worship; such as public and private services, fastings, macerations,
bowings, expanded hands and lifted eyes, which Lord Halifax (in his advice to a
daughter,) calls the holy goggle: but that all this accompanied the internal
acts of the old woman's mind, and went along with her heart and soul, Carola
had reason to doubt. She saw it was but outward profession, -- all hypocrisy,
-- that her life belied her creed, and her practice was a renunciation of the
christian religion. This appeared to be the case very quickly. The aunt sold
her to one Cantalupe for five hundred pounds. Under pretense of taking her to
visit a friend, she brought her to a private bagnio, or one of those houses
called convents.

A description of a London convent: and an adventure there.
. 5. Such houses stand in back courts, narrow lanes, or the most private
places, and seem to be uninhabited, as the front windows are seldom opened, or
like some little friary, where a company of visionaries reside; but within are
elegantly furnished, and remarkable for the best wines. The woman who keeps the
house is the only person to be seen in them, unless it be sometimes, that a
high-priced whore, who passes for the gentlewoman's daughter, by accident
appears.

In these brothels the Sieur Curl was well known, and as the wine in them is
always excellent, (but a shilling a bottle dearer than at the tavern,) and one
sits without hearing the least noise, or being seen by any one, I have often
gone with this ingenious man to such places, on account of the purity of the
wine, and the stillness of the house; as there are no waiters there, nor any
well-drest hussies to come in the way. You are as silent as in a cave; nor does
a woman appear, except as before excepted, unless it be by appointment at this
kind of meeting house, as such places may well be called: for there not seldom
does many a married woman meet her gallant. One evening that I was there with
Curl, there came in the wife of a very eminent merchant, a lady of as excellent
a character as any in the world; who was never so much as suspected by any of
her acquaintance, but allowed by every body to be a woman of pure morals and
unspotted chastity. She came in first with a black mask on her face, from her
chair, and was by the woman of the house shown into a chamber up stairs: Half
an hour after, there was another soft tap at the door, and a gentleman was let
in, who was showed up to the chamber the lady was in: As the door of the room
Curl and I were sitting in, happened to be open as this adventurer passed by, I
knew the man. He was an Irish gentleman of large fortune, with whom I was well
acquainted. He was ever engaged in amors, and was some years after this hanged
at Cork, for ravishing Sally Squib, the quaker. His name then can be no secret:
But as to the the lady's name, I shall never tell it, as she left several
children, who are now living in reputation; but only observe, that there are,
to my knowledge, many women of such strict virtue in the world. If you ask me
reader, how I came to know who she was? I will tell you. As she came down
stairs in a mask at ten at night, in the manner she went up, I concluded she
was a married woman of distinction, and followed her chair, when it went off.
She changed at Temple Bar, and then took a hackney coach, which drove beyond
the Royal Exchange; I followed till it stopped at a grand house, into which she
went without a mask, and had a full view of her fine face. I enquired next day
who lived in the house I saw her go into, and was told it was Mr. *****, a
merchant of the greatest repute. Often did I see this lady after this, was
several times in her company, and if I had not known what I did, should have
thought her a woman of as great virtue as ever lived. There was not the least
appearance of levity or indecency in her. To all outward appearance, she was
chastity and discretion in flesh and blood. -- But as to Carola Bennet.

The history of Miss Bennet continued.
. 6. Soon after her aunt and she arrived at Mrs. Bedewell's, in came Cantalupe
as a visiter, and after tea, they went to cards. Then followed a supper, and
when that was over, they gave the innocent Miss Bennet a dose, which deprived
her of her senses, put her to bed, and in the morning she found herself ruined
in the arms of that villain Cantalupe. Distraction almost seized her, but he
would not let her stir. She called, but no one came near to her relief. He
swore a million of oaths, that it was pure love made him buy her of her aunt,
as he heard she was going to marry another man, and if she would but share with
him in his great fortune, since the thing was done, he would, (by every sacred
power he vowed) marry her that evening or the next, the first time they went
out, and be the truest and most tender husband that ever yet appeared in the
world. This, and the situation she was in, naked and clasped in his strong
arms, without a friend to aid her, within doors or without, made her sensible
her resentments were in vain, and that she had better acquiesce, and make the
man her husband, if she could, since it was her hard fate, and that in all
probability she might conceive from the transactions of the night. This made
her have done. She lay as he requested till noon, and hoped he would prove as
faithful as he had solemnly swore to be.

But when the night came, an indisposition he feigned, made him unable to stir
out that evening, and he requested the idol of his heart, whom he loved more
than life, to give him leave to defer it till the next. For six days he put it
off in the same manner, during which time, they never stirred out of the
bagnio, and the seventh day he left her fast asleep in bed. A billet-doux on
the dressing-table informed her, that he was obliged to set out that morning
for France, and as he intended to be back in a few months, he hoped she would
not think him faithless at once. He left her a hundred pound bank note, which
was all he had then to spare, as he had paid to her aunt 500 l. a few days
before.

Thus fell the beautiful Miss Bennet by the treachery of her ever-cursed aunt,
and was made a whore very much against her will. The aunt, in the mean time,
had shut up her house, and was gone no one knew where. She took several jewels
with her, and a large sum of money, both the property of her niece. She left
her but little of her fortune, and reported every where, that Carola was gone
into keeping with a great man, and had before been debauched by her footman. In
short, all that could be done this woman did, to impoverish and defame her
niece, and as she had passed upon the world for a praying virtuous old piece,
her reports were thought so true, that all the female acquaintance Miss Bennet
had, laughed at the story she told, and shunned her as a foul fiend. She was
banished from all modest company. They considered her as the most detestable
prostitute, for excusing herself (they said) by blackning the character of so
pious and upright a woman as Mrs. Hunfleet, her aunt, was.

A reflection on hypocrites.
. 7. Thus did iniquity ruin and triumph over innocence in the mask of religion,
and a thousand times, to my own knowledge, it has done the same thing. I have
often known wretches pretend to seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness,
in the first place, and by believing all the monks have invented, by constantly
attending public worship, and an unnatural kind of sobriety, pass for people
that were ready and willing to suffer every thing the cause of God and truth
can require from rationals: yet these holy mortals could make the service of
God not only stand with unwilling infirmities, (the common case of the best
humanity,) but consist with wilful and presumptuous sinning, and a malevolence
as great as the devil had against our first parents. A minister of the gospel,
who passed for an admirable man, did his best to ruin my character for ever
with my father. One of the holiest men in the world, cheated me of a thousand
pounds, left in his hands for my use, for fear I should spend it myself. And a
rich man, commonly called piety and goodness, from the seeming simplicity of
his manners, the softness of his temper, and the holy goggle of his eyes in his
public devotion, arrested me on a note of hand, one third of which was interest
thrown into the principal, and made me pay interest upon interest, without
mercy, or waiting as I in-treated, till it was more convenient. Many more such
praying, sanctified villains I could mention, in respect of whom Edmund Curl
was a cherubim, fond as he was of a girl and a flask. Curl owned he was a
sinner, and that he was led by thirst and repletion to indulge: but the
hypocrites with professions of esteem for the pearl of great price, and that
they have parted with their Herodias, for the sake of eternal life; yet
wilfully disobey from a passion for substance; and the shrine of bright Mammon
in this world, has a greater influence on their souls than all the joys of an
everlasting heaven to come. What they do is a farce. Upon what they have, they
rest their all.

But as to Miss Bennet: In this sad condition, she secreted herself for some
months from the world, and notwithstanding her constitution and taste, intended
to retire among the mountains of Wales, and live upon the little she had left:
but unfortunately for so good a design, the matchless Sir Frederic Dancer came
in her way, and by money, and the force of love, persuaded her to be his
companion while he lived, which was but for a short time. A young nobleman
prevailed on her next, by high rewards, to be the delight of his life for a
time; and at his death, she went to the arms of an Irish peer. She had what
money she pleased from these great men, and being now very rich, she
determined, on the marriage of her last Lord, to go into keeping no more, but
to live a gay life among the agreeable and grand. She had lost all her notions
of a weeping and gnashing of teeth to come, in the conversation of these
atheistical men, and on account of her living as happily as she could in this
world. What religion she had remaining, was placed in giving money to the sick
and poor, which she did with a liberal hand: And her charity, in all its
charms, she often showed to the most deserving men. Those who had much of this
world's goods paid dear: but she had compassion on the worthy, though they
could not drive in a chariot to her door. This was the case of Miss Bennet,
when I saw her at Curl's.

But all of a sudden she disappeared, and no one could tell what was become of
her: that I learned from herself, when I chanced to see her under the cedar
tree, (as before related) in the park.

A young clergyman, Mr. Tench, an Irishman of the county of Galway, who was
very rich, and had a fine seat in Devonshire, saw her at the opera, and fell in
love with her. He soon found out who she was, waited upon her, and offered to
marry her, if she would reform. At first, she showed very little inclination to
a virtuous course, and, as her manner was, ridiculed the interest of another
life. The blessedness of heaven she laughed at, and made a jest of riches,
honors, and pleasures to be found on the other side the grave. This did not
however dishearten Tench. He was a scholar and a man of sense, and as he loved
most passionately, and saw she had a fine capacity, he was resolved, if
possible, to reclaim her, by applying to her bright understanding.

Mr. Tench's conversation with Miss Bennet, in relation to religion.
. 8. He observed to her, in the first place, (as she informed me) that,
exclusive of future happiness, godliness was profitable in all things, that is,
even in this life, in prosperity and adversity, in plenty and in want, in peace
and in war, in confusion and security, in health, in honor and disgrace, in
life and in death, and in what condition soever we may be. This he proved to
her satisfaction, and made it plain to her conception, that by it only we can
acquire a right judgment of persons and things, and have a just and due
estimate of ourselves: that unless held in by reason and religion, pleasure,
though innocent of itself, becomes a thing of deadly consequence to mortals;
and if we do not use it in due time, place, circumstance, measure and limits,
it necessarily involves us in difficulties and troubles, pain and infamy: if we
stifle the grand leading principles, reason and religion, by sin and vice, and
let desire and inclination range beyond bounds, we must not only plunge into
various woes in this world, but as creatures degenerated below the beast,
become the contempt and abhorrence of the wise and honest. To this sad
condition must be annexed a reflective misery, as we have conscience or reason,
that will examine, now and then, the whole procedure of life, do all we can to
prevent it, and the remorse that must ensue, on account of our wretched and
ridiculous conduct, is too bitter a thing for a reasonable creature to acquire,
for the sake of illicit gratification only; and this becomes the more grievous
in reflection, as pleasures are not forbidden by religion, but allowed to the
most upright, and ordained for the holy service of God; to recruit nature, and
enliven the spirits; to propagate the human species, and preserve the flame of
love in the married state. If there was then no other life but this, it is most
certainly our interest in regard to fame and advantage, to be governed by
reason and religion.

And if we are not to be annihilated with the beast, but are to answer
hereafter for what we have done, whether it be good or bad, surely the main
business of life should be to govern ourselves by godliness, that is, to be
christians in our principles, holy in our conversation, and upright in our
behavior. If the gospel be true, (as has been proved a thousand and a thousand
times, by the wisest men in the world, to the confusion and silence of
infidelity,) and the Son of God came into the world, not to make Judea the seat
of absolute and universal empire, and establish a temporal dominion in all
possible pomp and magnificence, (as the Jews most erroneously and ridiculously
fancied, and to this day believe,) but to prepare greater things for us; to
relieve us from the power of sin, and the endless and unspeakable miseries of
the life which is to come; to propose a prize far more worthy of our
expectations than the glories of civil power, and to secure to us the happiness
both of soul and body to all eternity, in the kingdom of God; then certainly,
in regard to ourselves, we ought to attend to his heavenly lessons, and turn
from the unlawful enjoyments of this life, to the endless and solid happiness
of a future state. As this is the case, we should cherish and improve a faith
of invisible things, by serious and impartial consideration. We should attend
to the evidence which God has given us for the truth of christianity, evidence
very cogent and sufficient; and then show our faith by works suited to the
doctrine of Christ; that is, by recommending the practice of virtue, and the
worship of one God, the Creator of the universe.

Consider then, Miss Bennet, that you stand on the brink of death,
resurrection, and judgment; and it is time to begin by serious and humble
enquiry to arrive at a faith of strength and activity; that by your eminence in
all virtue and holiness, you may make the glorious attempt to be greatest in
the kingdom of heaven. This will be a work worthy of an immortal Soul: Nor will
it hinder you from enjoying as much happiness in this lower hemisphere, as
reason can desire. For godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise
of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.

Thus (Miss Bennet that was, continued) did this excellent young clergyman talk
to me, and by argument and reasoning in the gentlest manner, by good sense and
good manners; made me a convert to christianity and goodness, He snatched me
from the gulf of eternal perdition, and, from the realms of darkness, and the
society of devils, brought me into the kingdom of the Messiah. To make me as
happy as it was possible even in this world, he married me, and landed me in
this charming spot you found me in. For seven years, we lived in great
happiness, without ever stirring from this fine solitude, and since his death,
I have had no inclination to return to the world: I have one lady for my
companion, an agreeable sensible woman, a near relation of Mr. Tench's, and
with her, and some good books, and three or four agreeable neighbors, have all
the felicity I care for in this world. When you saw me at Curl's, I had no
taste for any thing but the comedy, the opera, and a tale of La Fontaine; but
you found me with a volume of Tillotson in my hand, under that aged and
beautiful cedar, near the road; and in those sermons I now find more delight,
in the solemn shade of one of those fine trees, than ever I enjoyed in the
gayest scenes of the world. In these sweet silent walks I am really happy.
Riches and honor are with me, yea durable riches and righteousness. To the
blessings of time, I can here add the riches of expectation and comfort, the
riches of future glory and happiness. This makes me fond of this fine retreat.
In contentment, peace, and comfort of mind, I now live. By harkening to the
commandments, my peace is a river.

Here Mrs. Tench had done, and I was amazed beyond expression. This charming
libertine was quite changed. It was formerly her wont (when I have sat an
evening with her at Curl's,) to make a jest of the christian scheme, -- to
laugh at the devil and his flames; her life was all pleasure, and her soul all
whim: but when I saw her last, she was serious, and seemed to enjoy as happy a
serenity and composure of mind, as ever mortal was blessed with. Even her eyes
had acquired a more sober light, and in the place of a wild and luscious air, a
beautiful modesty appeared.

A reflection on the conversion of Miss Bennet.
. 9. And now to what shall I ascribe this astonishing alteration? Shall I say
with our methodists and other visionaries, that it must be owing to immediate
impulse, and proceeded from inward impression of the Spirit? No: this will not
do. It was owing to be sure, to the word (not in-spoken) but taught by Christ
in his gospel. When her friend Tench opened the New Testament to her, her good
understanding inclined her to hearken. She began to consider: She pondered, and
had a regard to the gospel, now laid before her, by that sensible and excellent
young clergyman. She became a believer. And as the Apostle says, We can do all
things through Christ who strengthens us; that is, says Dr. Hunt, in one of his
fine sermons, through the directions of Christ, and through the arguments and
motives of the christian doctrine. Well said, Hunt. It must be our own choice,
to be sure, to be good and virtuous. So far as men are passive, and are acted
upon, they are not agents. Without power to do good or evil, men cannot be
moral or accountable beings, and be brought into judgment, or receive according
to their works.

Dr. Lardner, in his excellent sermon on the power and efficacy of Christ's
doctrine, has a fine observation; -- Would any say, that the necessity of
immediate and particular influences from Christ himself, is implied in this
context, where he says, that he is a vine, and his disciples branches, and that
their bearing fruit depends as much upon influences from him, as the life and
vigor of branches do upon the sap derived from the root of the tree? It would
be easy to answer, that the argument in the text is a similitude, not literal
truth. Neither is Christ literally a vine, nor are his disciples, strictly
speaking, branches. Men have a reasonable, intellectual nature, above animals
and vegetables. They are not governed by irresistible, and necessary, or
mechanical powers. But it is sound doctrine, and right principles, particularly
the words of Christ, which are the words of God, that are their life, and may,
and will, if attended to, powerfully enable them to promote good works, and to
excel, and persevere therein.

Two Irish gentlemen call upon me, and bring me to a gaming table, kept by a
company of sharpers, where I lose all my fortune.
. 10. But it is time to my own story. -- While I lodged at Curl's, two Irish
gentlemen came to see me, Jemmy King an attorney, and that famous master in
chancery, who debauched Nelly Hayden, the beauty, and kept her several years. I
knew these men were as great rakes as ever lived, and had no notion of
religion; that they were devoted to pleasure, and chased away every sober
thought and apprehension by company, by empty, vicious, and unmanly pleasures:
The voice of the monitor was lost, in the confused noise and tumult of the
passions: but I thought they had honor at the bottom, according to the common
notion of it. I never imagined they were sharpers, nor knew, that being ruined
in Ireland, they came over to live by a gaming table. The Doctor especially, I
thought was above ever becoming that kind of man, as he had a large estate, and
the best education; always kept good company; and to appearance, was as fine a
gentleman as ever was seen in the world. With these two I dined, and after
dinner, they brought me, as it were, out of curiosity, to a gaming table, they
had by accident discovered, where there was a bank kept by men of the greatest
honor, who played quite fair, and by hazarding a few guineas, I might perhaps,
as they did, come off with some hundreds.

At entering the room, I saw about twenty well-drest men sitting round a table,
on which lay a vast heap of gold. We all began to play, and for two or three
hours, I did win some hundreds of pounds: the Doctor and the other cheat, his
friend, seemed to lose a large sum; but before morning they won it all back
from me, with a great deal more; and I not only lost what I had got then, but,
excepting a few pounds, what I was worth in the world; the thousands I had
gained by my several wives. I had sold their estates, and lodged the money in
my banker's hands. The villains round this table got it all, and my two
Irishmen were not to be seen. They disappeared, and left me madly playing away
my all. I heard no more of them, till I was told several years after, that they
were in the Isle of Man, among other outlawed, abandoned, wicked men; where
they drank night and day, according to the custom of the place, and lived in
defiance of God and man. There these two advocates of impiety dwelt for some
time, and died as they had lived; enemies to all good principles, and friends
to a general corruption.

As to the well-drest company round the table, they went off one by one, and
left me all alone to the bitter thought, which led me to what I was some hours
before, by what I then found myself to be. I was almost distracted. What had I
to do with play, (I said)? I wanted nothing. And now by villains, with a set
of dice that would deceive the devil, I am undone. By sharpers and false dice I
have sat to be ruined. The reflection numbed my senses for some time: and then I
started, was wild, and raved.

Curl's scheme to carry off an heiress, which I did in a successful manner.
. 11. This transaction made me very thoughtful, and I sat within for several
days, thinking which way to turn. Curl saw I was perplexed, and on his asking
me if I had met with any misfortune, I told him the whole case; that I had but
one hundred pounds left, and requested he would advise me what I had best do.
To do justice to every one, Curl seemed deeply concerned, and after some
silence, as we sat over a bottle at a Coffee-house, he bid me take notice of an
old gentleman, who was not far from us. That is Dunk the miser, who lives in a
wood about 20 miles off. He has one daughter, the finest creature in the
universe, and who is to succeed to his great estate, whether he will or not; it
being so settled at his marriage; but he confines her so much in the country,
and uses her so cruelly every way, that I believe she would run away with any
honest young fellow, who could find means to address her. Know then (continued
Curl) that I serve Mr. Dunk with paper, pens, ink, wax, pamphlets, and every
thing he wants in my way. Once a quarter of a year, I generally go to his
country house with such things, as he is glad to see me sometimes; or if I
cannot go myself, I send them by some other hand. Next week I am to forward
some things to him, and if you will take them, I will write a line by you to
Miss his daughter, recommend you to her for a husband, as one she may depend on
for honor and truth. She knows I am her friend, and who can tell, but she may
go off with you. She will have a thousand a year, when the wretch her father
dies, if he should leave his personal estate another way.

This thought pleased me much, and at the appointed time, away I went to Mr.
Dunk's country house with a wallet full of things, and delivered Curl's letter
to Miss. As soon as she had read it, I began my address, and in the best manner
I could, made her an offer of my service, to deliver her from the tyrant her
father. I gave her an account of a little farm I had on the borders of
Cumberland, a purchase I had made, on account of the charms of the ground, and
a small pretty lodge which stood in the middle of it, by a clump of old trees,
near a murmuring stream; that if she pleased, I would take her to that sweet,
silent spot, and enable her to live in peace; with contentment and tranquillity
of mind; though far away from the splendors and honors of the world: and
considering, that a christian is not to conform to the world, or to the pomps
and vanities of it; its grand customs and usages; its dress and entries; its
stage representations and masquerades, as they minister to vice, and tend to
debauch the manners; but are to look upon ourselves as beings of another world,
and to form our minds with these spiritual principles; it follows then, I
think, that a pleasing country situation for a happy pair must be grateful
enough. There peace and love and modesty may be best preserved; the truth and
gravity of our religion be strictly maintained; and every lawful and innocent
enjoyment be for ever the delights of life. Away from the idle modes of the
world; perpetual love and unmixed joys may be our portion, through the whole of
our existence here; and the inward principles of the heart be ever laudable and
pure. So will our happiness as mortals be stable, -- subject to no mixture or
change; and when called away from this lower hemisphere, have nothing to fear,
as we used this world, as though we used it not; as we knew no gratifications and
liberties but what our religion allows us: as our enjoyments will be but the
necessary convenience and accommodation, for passing from this world to the
realms of eternal happiness: Follow me then, Miss Dunk; I will convey you to a
scene of still life and felicity, great and lasting as the heart of woman can
wish for.

The charming Agnes seemed not a little surprised at what I had said, and after
looking at me very earnestly for a minute or two, told me, she would give me an
answer to Mr. Curl's letter in less than half an hour, which was all she could
say at present, and with it I returned to give him an account of the reception
I had. It will do, he said, after he had read the letter I brought him from
Miss Dunk, but you must be my young man for a week or two more, and take some
more things to the same place. He then showed me the letter, and I read the
following lines.

SIR,
I am extremely obliged to you for your concern about my happiness and liberty,
and will own to you, that in my dismal situation, I would take the friend you
recommend, for a guide through the wilderness, If I could think his heart was
as sound as his head. If his intentions were as upright as his words are fluent
and good, I need not be long in pondering on the scheme he proposed. -- But can
we believe him true, as Lucinda says in the play?

The sunny hill, the flowery vale,
The garden and the grove,
Have echoed to his ardent tale,
And vows of endless love.
The conquest gained, he left his prize,
He left her to complain,
To talk of joy with weeping eyes,
And measure time by pain.

To this Curl replied in a circumstantial manner, and vouched very largely for
me. I delivered his letter the next morning, when I went with some acts of
parliament to old Dunk, and I found the beauty, his daughter, in a rosy bower;
-- Simplex munditiis, neat and clean as possible in the most genteel undress;
and her person so vastly fine, her face so vastly charming; that I could not
but repeat the lines of Otway, --

Man when created first wandered up and down,
Forlorn and silent as his vassal brutes;
But when a heaven-born maid, like you appeared,
Strange pleasures filled his soul, unloos'd his tongue,
And his first talk was love. --
A deal I said upon the occasion: we became well acquainted that day, as her
father had got a disorder that obliged him to keep his bed, and by the time I
had visited her a month longer, under various pretenses of business invented by
the ingenious Curl, Agnes agreed to go off with me, and commit herself entirely
to my care and protection: But before I relate this transaction, I think it
proper to give my readers the picture of this lady; and then an apology for her
flying away with me, with whom she was but a month acquainted.

The picture of Miss Dunk.
Agnes in her person was neither tall nor thin, but almost both, young and
lovely, graceful and commanding: She inspired a respect, and compelled the
beholder to admire and love and reverence her. Her voice was melodious; her
words quite charming; and every look and motion to her advantage. Taste was the
characteristic of her understanding: Her sentiments were refined: And a
sensibility appeared in every feature of her face. She could talk on various
subjects, and comprehended them, which is what few speakers do: but with the
finest discernment, she was timid, and so diffident of her opinion, that she
often concealed the finest thoughts under a seeming simplicity of soul. This
was visible to a hearer, and the decency of ignorance added a new beauty to her
character. In short, possessed of excellence, she appeared unconscious of it,
and never discovered the least pride or precipitancy in her conversation. --
Her manner was perfectly polite, and mixed with a gaiety that charmed, because
it was as free from restraint as from boldness.

In sum, exclusive of her fine understanding, in her dress, and in her
behavior, she was so extremely pleasing, so vastly agreeable and delightful,
that she ever brought to my remembrance, when I beheld her, the Corinna
described in the beautiful lines of Tibullus:

Illam quicquid agit, quoquo vestigia flectit,
Componit furtim subsequiturque decor;
Seu solvit crines, fusis decet esse capillis;
Seu compsit comptis est veneranda comis.
Urit seu tyria voluit procedere pulla;
Urit seu nivea candida vest venit.
Talis in aeterno felix Vertumnus Olympo
Mill habet ornatus, mill decenter habet.
When love would set the gods on fire, he flies
To light his torches at her sparkling eyes.
Whatever Corinna does, wherever she goes,
The graces all her motions still compose.
How her hair charms us, when it loosely falls,
Combed back and tied, our veneration calls!
If she comes out in scarlet, then she turns
Us all to ashes, -- though in white she burns.
Vertumnus so a thousand dresses wears,
So in a thousand, ever grace appears.
Such was the beautiful Agnes, who went off with me, and in so doing acted well
and wisely, I affirm, on her taking me only for an honest man; for there is no
more obedience due from a daughter to her father, when he becomes an
unrelenting oppressor, than there is from a subject to an English king, when
the monarch acts contrary to the constitution. Passive obedience is as much
nonsense in a private family, as in the government of the prince. The parent,
like the king, must be a nursing father, a rational humane sovereign, and so
long all service and obedience are due. But if, like the prince, he becomes a
tyrant, deprives his daughter of her natural rights and liberties; will not
allow her the blessings of life, but keep her in chains and misery;
self-preservation, and her just claim to the comforts of existence and a
rational freedom, give her a right to change her situation, and better her
condition. If she can have bread, serenity, and freedom, peace and little, with
an honest man, she is just to herself in going off with such a deliverer.
Reason and revelation will acquit her.

Thus justly thought Miss Dunk, and therefore with me she fled at midnight. We
met within half a mile of her father's house, by the side of an ancient wood,
and a running stream, which had a pleasing effect, as it happened to be a
bright moonshine. With her foot in my hand, I lifted her into her saddle, and
as our horses were excellent, we rid many miles in a few hours. By eight in the
morning, we were out of the reach of old Dunk, and at the sign of the Pilgrim,
a lone house in Esur-vale, in Hertfordshire, we breakfasted very joyfully. The
charming Agnes seemed well pleased with the expedition, and said a thousand
things that rendered the journey delightful. Twelve days we traveled in a
fullness of delights, happy beyond description, and the thirteenth arrived at a
village not far from my little habitation. Here we designed to be married two
days after, when we had rested, as there was a church and a parson in the town,
and then ride on to Foley farm in Cumberland, as my small spot was called, and
there sit down in peace and happiness.

But the second day, instead of rising to the nuptial ceremony, to crown my
life with unutterable bliss, and make me beyond all mankind happy, the lovely
Agnes fell ill of a fever. A sense of weight and oppression discovered the
inflammation within, and was attended with sharp and pungent pains. The blood
could not pass off as it ought in the course of circulation, and the whole mass
was in a violent fluctuation and motion. In a word, she died in a few days, and
as she had requested, if it came to that, I laid her out, and put her into the
coffin myself. I kept her seven days, according to the custom of the old
Romans, and then in the dress of sorrow, followed her to the grave. -- Thus was
my plan of happiness broken to pieces. I had given a roundness to a system of
felicity, and in the place of it, saw death and horror, and disappointment
before me.

What to do next I could not tell. One question was, should I return to
Orton-lodge, to my two young heiresses? No: they wanted two years of being at
age. -- Then, shall I stay at Foley-farm where I was, and turn hermit? No: I
had no inclination yet to become a father of the deserts. -- Will you return to
London then, and see if fortune has any thing more in reserve for you? This I
liked best; and after six months deliberation on the thing, I left my farm in
the care of an old woman, and set out in the beginning of January.

A winter night-scene on the mountains of Westmoreland.
. 13. It was as fine a winter's morning as I had seen, which encouraged me to
venture among the Fells of Westmoreland; but at noon the weather changed, and
an evening very terrible came on. A little after three, it began to blow, rain,
and snow very hard, and it was not long before it was very dark. We lost the
way quite, and for three hours wandered about in as dismal a night as ever poor
travelers had. The storm rattled: The tempest howled: We could not see the
horse's heads, and were almost dead with cold. We had nothing to expect but
death, as we knew not which way to turn to any house, and it was impossible to
remain alive till the day appeared. It was a dismal scene. But my time was not
yet come, and when we had no ground to expect deliverance, the beasts of a
sudden stopped, and Soto found we were at the gate of a walled yard. There he
immediately made all the noise he could, and it was not long before a servant
with a lantern came. He related our case within, and had orders to admit us. He
brought me into a common parlour, where there was a good fire, and I got dry
things. The man brought me half a pint of hot alicant, and in about half an
hour, I was alive and well again. On enquiring where I was, the footman told
me, it was Doctor Stanvil's house; that his master and lady were above in the
dining room, with some company, and he had directions to light me up, when I
had changed my clothes, and was recovered. Upon this I told him I was ready,
and followed him.

My arrival at Dr. Stanvil's house, and introduced to the Doctor, and company.
On the servant's opening a door, I entered a handsome apartment, well lighted
with wax, and which had a glorious fire blazing in it. The doctor received me
with great politeness, and said many civil things upon fortune's conducting me
to his house. The conversation naturally fell upon the horrors of the night, as
it still continued to rain, hail, and blow, beyond what any of the company had
ever heard; and one of the ladies said, she believed the winter was always far
more, boisterous and cold among the Fells of Westmoreland, than in any other
part of England, for which she gave several good reasons: The solemn mountains,
the beautiful valleys, the falling streams, form one of the most charming
countries in the world in summertime; but in winter, it is the most dreadful
spot of earth, to be sure.

The surprising story of Mrs. Stanvil.
The voice of the lady who talked in this manner, I thought I was well
acquainted with, but by the position of the candles, and the angle of a screen
in which she sat, I could not very well see her face: Amazement however began
to seize me, and as an elegant supper was soon after brought in, I had an
opportunity of seeing that Miss Dunk whom I had buried, was now before my eyes,
in the character of Dr. Stanvil's wife; or, at least, it was one so like her,
it was not possible for me to distinguish the figures: -- there was the same
bright victorious eyes, and chestnut hair; the complexion like a blush, and a
mouth where all the little loves for ever dwelt; there was the fugitive dimple,
the enchanting laugh, the rosy fingers, the fine height, and the mein more
striking than Calypso's. O heavens! I said to myself, on sitting down to
supper, What is this I see! But as she did not seem to to be at all affected,
or showed the least sign of her having ever seen me before that time, I
remained silent, and only continued to look with admiration at her, unmindful
of the many excellent things before me. -- In a minute or two, however, I
recovered myself. I ate my supper, and joined in the festivity of the night. We
had music, and several songs. We were easy, free, and happy as well-bred people
could be.

Finn's obserration, and discourse in my bedchamber, on the company's retiring
to their apartments.
At midnight we parted, and finding an easy-chair by the side of my bed, I threw
myself into it, and began to reflect on what I had seen; Finn standing before
me with his arms folded, and looking very seriously at me. This lasted for
about a quarter of an hour, and then the honest fellow spoke in the following
manner. -- I beg leave, Sir, to imagine you are perplexing yourself about the
lady of this house, whom I suppose you take for Miss Dunk, we brought from the
other side of England, half a year ago, and buried in the next churchyard to
Blenkern. This, if I may be so free, is likewise my opinion. I would take my
oath of it in a court of justice, if there was occasion for that. However she
got out of the grave, and by whatever casualty she came to be Mrs. Stanvil, and
mistress of this fine house; yet I could swear to her being the lady who
traveled with us from the west to Cumberland. But then, it seems very
wonderful and strange, that she should forget you so soon, or be able to act a
part so amazing, as to seem not to have ever seen you before this night. This
has astonished me, as I stood behind your chair at supper, looking full at her;
and I observed she looked at me once or twice. What to say to all this, I know
not; but I will make all the enquiry I can among the servants, as to the time
and manner of her coming here, and let you know tomorrow, what I have been
able to collect in relation to her. In the mean time, be advised by me, Sir,
though I am but a poor fellow, and think no more of the matter to the loss of
your night's rest. We have had a wonderful deliverance from death by getting
into this house, I am sure, and we ought to lie down with thankfulness and joy,
without fretting ourselves awake for a woman, or any trifling incident that
could befall. Beside, she is now another man's property, however it came to
pass, and it would be inconsistent with your character to think any more of
her. This may be too free; but I hope, Sir, you will excuse it in a servant who
has your interest and welfare at heart. -- Here the sage Finn had done. He
withdrew, and I went to sleep.

Finn's account of Mrs. Stanvil, which he had from the servants.
Betimes the next morning, Finn was with me, and on my asking what news, he
said, he had heard something from all the servants, and more particularly had
got the following account from the doctor's own man: -- that Dr. Stanvil had a
small lodge within three miles of the house we were in, and retired there
sometimes to be more alone, than he could be in the residence we were at; that
this lodge was a mere repository of curiosities, in the middle of a garden full
of all the herbs and plants that grew in every country of the world, and in one
chamber of this house was a great number of skeletons, which the doctor had
made himself; for it was his wont to procure bodies from the surrounding
churchyards, by men he kept in pay for the purpose, and cut them up himself at
this lodge: that some of these dead were brought to him in hampers, and some in
their coffins on light railed cars, as the case required: that near six months
ago, the last time the doctor was at this lodge, there was brought to him by
his men the body of a young woman in her coffin, in order to a dissection as
usual, and the bones being wired; but as it lay on the back, on the great table
he cuts up on, and the point of his knife at the pit of the stomach, to open
the breast, he perceived a kind of motion in the subject, heard a sigh soon
after, and looking up to the head saw the eyes open and shut again: that upon
this, he laid down his knife, which had but just scratched the body, at the
beginning of the linea alba, (as my informer called it) and helped himself to
put it into a warm bed: that he took all possible pains, by administering every
thing he could think useful, to restore life, and was so fortunate as to set
one of the finest women in the world on her feet again. As she had no raiment
but the shroud which had been on her in the coffin, he got every thing
belonging to dress that a woman of distinction could have occasion for, and in
a few days time, she sparkled before her preserver in the brightness of an
Eastern princess: He was quite charmed with the beauties of her person, and
could not enough admire her uncommon understanding: He offered to marry her, to
settle largely on her, and as she was a single woman, she could not in
gratitude refuse the request of so generous a benefactor: My informer further
related, that they have both lived in the greatest happiness ever since; and
the doctor, who is one of the best of men, is continually studying how to add
to the felicities of her every day: that he offered to take her up to London to
pass the winters there, but this she refused, and desired she might remain
where she was in the country, as it was really most agreeable to her, and as he
preferred it to the town.

A reflection on Miss Dunk's marrying Dr. Stanvil.
This account made the thing quite plain to me. And to judge impartially,
considering the whole case, I could neither blame the lovely Agnes for marrying
the doctor, nor condemn her for pretending to be a stranger to me. She was
fairly dead and buried, and all connection between us was at an end of course,
as there had been no marriage, nor contract of marriage. And as to reviving the
affair, and renewing the tenderness which had existed, it could answer no other
end than producing unhappiness, as she was then Mrs. Stanvil, in a decent and
happy situation. And further, in respect of her marrying the doctor so soon
after her separation from me, it was certainly the wisest thing she could do,
as she had been so entirely at his disposal, was without a stitch to cover her,
and I in all probability, after burying her, being gone up to London, or in
some place, where she could never hear of me more; I might likewise have been
married, if any thing advantageous had offered after laying her in the
churchyard. And beside, she neither knew the place she fell sick in, nor the
country the doctor removed her to, as soon as ever he could get any clothes to
put on her. So that, naked and friendless as she was, without any money, and
ignorant of what became of me; without a possibility of informing herself; I
could not but acquit her. I even admired her conduct, and resolved so far to
imitate her, in regard to the general happiness, that nothing should appear in
my behavior, which could incline any one to think, I had ever seen her before
the night the tempest drove me to her house. I was vexed, I own, to lose her.
But that could be no reason for making a senseless uproar, that could do
nothing but mischief.

As composed then as I could be, I went down to breakfast, on a servant's
letting me know they waited for me, and found the same company, who had so
lately parted to slumber, all quite alive and cheerful, easy and happy as
mortals could be. At the request of Dr. Stanvil, who was extremely civil, I
staid with them two months, and passed the time in a delightful conversation,
intermixed with music, cards, and feasting. My departure from Dr. Stanvil's
house.
With sadness I left them all, but especially on account of parting for ever
with the late Miss Dunk. It was indeed for the pleasure of looking at her, that
I staid so long as I did at Dr. Stanvil's; and when it came to an eternal
separation, I felt that morning of my departure, an inward distress it is
impossible to give an idea of to another. It had some resemblance (I imagine)
of what the visionaries call a dereliction; when they sink from ecstasy to the
black void of horror, by the strength of fancy, and the unnacountable operation
of the animal spirits.

Some observations on Mrs. Stanvil's coming to life again, after being taken
out of the grave.
Here, before I proceed, I think I ought to remove some objections that may be
made against my relation of Mrs. Stanvil's coming to life again, and her being
brought from the couch of lasting night to a bridal bed. It is not easy to
believe, that after I seemed certain she was dead, and kept her the proper
number of days before interment; saw her lie the cold wan subject for a
considerable time, and then let down into the grave; yet from thence she should
come forth, and now be the desire of a husband's eyes. This is a hard account
sure. But nevertheless, it is a fact. As to my being mistaken, no less a man
than Dr. Cheyne thought Colonel Townsend dead: (See his Nervous Cases:) And
that several have lived for many years, after they had been laid in the tomb,
is a thing too certain, and well-known, to be denied. In Bayle's dictionary,
there is the history of a lady of quality, belonging to the court of Catharine
de Medicis, who was brought from the church vault, where she had been
forty-eight hours, and afterward became the mother of several children, on her
marriage with the Marquis D'Auvergne. -- The learned Dr. Connor, in his history
of Poland, gives us a very wonderful relation of a gentleman's reviving in that
country, after he had been seemingly dead for near a fortnight; and adds a very
curious dissertation on the nature of such recoveries. The case of Dun Scotus,
who was found out of his coffin, on the steps going down to the vault he was
deposited in, and leaning on his elbow, is full to my purpose. And I can affirm
from my own knowledge, that a gentleman of my acquaintance, a worthy excellent
man, was buried alive, and found not only much bruised and torn, on opening his
coffin, but turned on one side. This many still living can attest as well as I.
The reason of opening the grave again, was his dying of a high fever in the
absence of his lady, who was in a distant county from him; and on her return,
three days after he was buried, would have a sight of him, as she had been
extremely fond of him. His face was sadly broke, and his hands hurt in striving
to force up the lid of the coffin. The lady was so affected with the dismal
sight, that she never held up her head after, and died in a few weeks. I could
likewise add another extraordinary case of a man who was hanged, and to all
appearance was quite dead, yet three days after his execution recovered as they
were going to cut him up. -- How these things happen, is not easy to account
for; but happen they do sometimes. And this case of Mrs. Stanvil, may be
depended on as a fact.

N. B. The following is the thing promised the English reader at page 381.

The legend on the monument of Homonoea, translated into English.
Atimetus. If it was allowed to lay down one's life for another, and possible
by such means, to save what we loved from the grave, whateever length of days
was allotted me, I would with pleasure offer up my life, to get my Homonoea
from the tomb; but as this cannot be done, what is in my power I will do, --
fly from the light of heaven, and follow you to the realms of lasting night.


Homonoea. My dearest Atimetus, cease to torment your unhappy mind, nor let
grief thus feed on your youth, and make life bitterness itself. I am gone in
the way appointed for all the mortal race: All must be numbered with the dead.
And since fate is inexorable, and tears are in vain, weep not for me, once more
I conjure you. But may you be ever happy, may providence preserve you, and add
to your life those years which have been taken from mine.


The person who erected the monument to the memory of Homonoea. Stop,
traveller, for a few minutes, and ponder on these lines.

Here lies Homonoea, whom Atimetus preferred to the greatest and most
illustrious women of his time. She had the form of Venus, the charms of the
graces; and an understanding and sensibility, which demonstrated that wisdom
had given to an angel's form, a mind more lovely. Before she was twenty, she
was dissolved. And as she had practiced righteousness, by carrying it well to
those about her, and to all that were specially related, she parted with them,
as she had lived with them, in justice and charity, in modesty and submission,
in thankfulness and peace. Filled with divine thoughts, inured to contemplate
the perfections of God, and to acknowledge his providence in all events, she
died with the humblest resignation to the divine will, and was only troubled
that she left her husband a mourner. Excellent Homonoea.

May the earth lie light upon thee, and in the morning of the resurrection, may
you awake again to life, and rise to that immortality and glory, which God, the
righteous Judge, will give to true worth and dignity; -- as rewards to a life
adorned with all virtues and excellencies, -- the dikaiomata, -- that is, the
righteous acts of the Saints.




SECTION XII.
Opinion's foot is never, never found
Where knowledge dwells, it is interdicted ground;
At wisdom's gate the opinion's must resign
Their charge, those limits their employ confine.
Thus trading barks, skilled in the watery road,
To distant climes convey their precious load.
Then turn their prow, light bounding over the main,
And with new traffic store their keels again.
Thus far is clear. But yet untold remains,
What the good genius to the crowd ordains,
Just on the verge of life.
He bids them hold
A spirit with erected courage hold.
Never (he calls) on fortune's faith rely,
Nor grasp her dubious gift as property.
Let not her smile transport, her frown dismay,
Nor praise, nor blame, nor wonder at her sway,
Which reason never guides: it is fortune still,
Capricious chance, and arbitrary will.
Bad bankers, vain of treasure not their own,
With foolish rapture hug the trusted loan.
Impatient, when the powerful bond demands
Its unremember'd covenant from their hands.
Unlike to such, without a sigh restore
What fortune lends: anon she will lavish more.
Repenting of her bounty, snatch away,
Yea, seize your patrimonial fund for prey,
Embrace her proffered boon, but instant rise,
Spring upward, and secure a lasting prize,
The gift which wisdom to her sons divides;
Knowledge, whose beam the doubting judgment guides,
Scatters the sensual fog, and clear to view
Distinguishes false interest from the true.
Flee, flee to this, with unabating pace,
Nor parley for a moment at the place,
Where pleasure and her harlots tempt, nor rest,
But at false wisdom's inn, a transient guest:
For short refection, at her table fit,
And take what science may your palate hit:
Then wing your journey forward, till you reach
True wisdom, and imbibe the truth she will teach.
Such is the advice the friendly genius gives,
He perishes who scorns, who follows lives.
SCOTT'S CEBES. As the table of Cebes does best in prose, and the Rev. Mr.
Collier the Nonjuror's translation of this fine mythological picture is not
good, I shall place another version of this table at the end of this Section. I
made it at the request of a young lady, who did not like Mr. Collier's version.
The fine picture does to be sure, in his English, look more like a work in the
cant language of L'Estrange, or Tom Brown, than the ancient and charming
painting of Cebes the Theban philosopher. It is fitter to make the learned men
of a beer-house laugh, than to delight and improve people of breeding and
understanding.



A reflection as I rid from Dr. Stanvil's house.
. 1. WITH this advice of the genius in my head, (which by chance I had read the
morning I took my leave of Dr. Stanvil,) I set out, as I had resolved, for
York, and designed to go from thence to London; hoping to meet with something
good, and purposing, if it was possible, to be no longer the Rover, but turn to
something useful, and fix. I had lost almost all at the gaming-table, (as
related) and had not thirty pounds of my last hundred remaining: This, with a
few sheep, cows and horses at Orton-lodge, and a very small stock at my little
farm, on the borders of Cumberland, was all I had left. It made me very
serious, and brought some dismal apprehensions in view: But I did not despair.
As my heart was honest, I still trusted in the providence of God, and his
administration of things is this world. As the infinite power and wisdom of the
Creator was evident, from a survey of this magnificent and glorious scene; --
as his care and providence over each particular, in the administration of the
great scheme was conspicuous; can man, the favorite of heaven, have reason to
lift up his voice to complain, if he calls off his affections from folly, and
by natural and supernatural force, by reason and revelation, overbears the
prejudices of flesh and blood; -- if he ponders the hopes and fears of
religion, -- and gives a just allowance to a future interest? Hearken to the
commandments, (says the Lord,) and your peace shall be as a river.

A tempest.
. 2. On then I trotted, brave as the man of wood, we read of in an excellent
French writer, In Claude's reply to Arnaud, the French papist, we are told it
was the humor of the Prince of Conde, to have a man of wood on horseback,
dressed like a field-officer, with a lifted broad sword in its hand; which figure
was fastened in the great saddle, and the horse it was on always kept by the
great Conde's side, when he traveled or engaged in the bloody field. Fearless
the man of wood appeared in many a well-fought day; but as they pursued the
enemy one afternoon through a forest, in riding hard, a bough knocked off the
wooden warrior's head; yet still he galloped on after flying foes, to the
amazement of the enemy, who saw a hero pursuing without a head. Claude applies
this image to popery.


and hoped at the end of every mile to meet with something fortunate; but
nothing extraordinary occurred till the second evening, when I arrived at a
little lone public-house, on the side of a great heath, by the entrance of a
wood. For an hour before I came to this resting place, I had rid in a tempest
of wind, rain, lightning and thunder, so very violent, that it brought to my
remembrance old Hesiod's description of a storm.

Then Jove omnipotent displayed the god,
And all Olympus trembled as he trod:
He grasps ten thousand thunders in his hand,
Bares his red arm, and wields the forky brand;
Then aims the bolts, and bids his lightnings play,
They flash, and rend through heaven their flaming way:
Redoubling blow on blow, in wrath he moves,
The singed earth groans, and burns with all her groves:
A night of clouds blots out the golden day,
Full in their eyes the writhen lightnings play:
Nor slept the wind; the wind new horror forms,
Clouds dash on clouds before the outrageous storms;
While tearing up the sands, in drifts they rise,
And half the deserts mount the encumbered skies:
At once the tempest bellows, lightnings fly,
The thunders roar, and clouds involve the sky.
It was a dreadful evening upon a heath, and so much as a bush was not to be
met with for shelter: but at last we came to the thatched habitation of a
publican, and I thought it a very comfortable place: We had bread and bacon,
and good ale for supper, and in our circumstances, it seemed a delicious meal.

The Author is informed of an old acquaintance of his, who lived not far from
the inn he arrived at.
. 3. This man informed me, that about a mile from his habitation, in the middle
of the wood, there dwelt an old physician, one Dr. Fitzgibbons, an Irish
gentleman, who had one very pretty daughter, a sensible woman, to whom he was
able to give a good fortune, if a man to both their liking appeared; but as no
such one had as yet come in their way, my landlord advised me to try the
adventure, and he would furnish me with an excuse for going to the doctor's
house. This set me a thinking: Dr. Fitzgibbons, an Irish gentleman, I said: I
know the man. I saved his son's life, in Ireland, when he was upon the brink of
destruction, and the old gentleman was not only then as thankful as it was
possible for a man to be, in return for the good I had done him, at the hazard
of my own life; but assured me, a thousand times over, that if ever it was in
his power to return my kindness, he would be my friend to the utmost of his
ability. He must ever remember, with the greatest gratitude, the benefit I had
so generously conferred on him and his. All this came full into my mind, and I
determined to visit the old gentleman in the morning.

. 4. Next day, as I had resolved, I went to pay my respects to Dr. Fitzgibbons,
who remembered me perfectly well, was most heartily glad to see me, and
received me in the most affectionate manner. He immediately began to repeat his
obligations to me, for the deliverance I had given his son, and that if it was
in his power to be of service to me in England, he would leave nothing undone
that was possible for him to do, to befriend me. The case was this. As I was
returning one summer's evening from Tallow-Hills, where I had been to see a
young lady, (mentioned in the beginning of my first volume,) I saw in a deep
glen before me two men engaged; a black of an enormous size, who fought with
one of those large broad swords which they call in Ireland, Andrew Ferraro; and
a little thin man with a drawn rapier. The white man I perceived was no match
for the black, and must have perished very soon, as he had received several
wounds, if I had not hastened up to his relief. I knew him to be my
acquaintance, young Fitzgibbons, my neighbor in the same square of the college
that I lived in; and immediately drawing an excellent Spanish tuck I always
wore, took the Moor to myself, Fitzgibbons not being able to stand any longer;
and a glorious battle ensued. As I was a master at the small sword in those
days, I had the advantage of the black by my weapon, (as the broad sword is but
a poor defense against a rapier,) and gave him three wounds for every slight
one I received: But at last he cut me quite through the left collar-bone, and
in return, I was in his vast body a moment after. This dropped the robber, who
had been a trumpeter to a regiment of horse; and Fitzgibbons and I were
brought, by some people passing that way, to his father's house at
Dolfins-barn, a village about a mile from the spot where this affair happened.
A surgeon was sent for, and we recovered in a few weeks time; but my
collar-bone was much more troublesome to me, than the wounds Fitzgibbons had
were to him, though he lost much more blood. This was the ground of the
obligation the doctor mentioned in his conversation with me.


He told me, that darling son of his, whose life I had saved, was an eminent
physician at the court of Russia, where he lived in the greatest opulence and
reputation: and as he owed his existence as such to me, his father could never
be grateful enough in return. Can I any way serve you, Sir? Have you been
fortunate or unfortunate, since your living in England? Are you married or
unmarried? I have a daughter by a second wife, and if you are not yet engaged,
will give her to you, with a good fortune, and in two years time; if you will
study physic here, under my direction, will enable you to begin to practice,
and get money as I have done in this country. I have so true a sense of that
generous act you did to save my son, that I will with pleasure do any thing in
my power that can contribute to your happiness.

To this I replied, by thanking the doctor for his friendly offers, and letting
him know, that since my coming to England several years ago, which was
occasioned by a difference between my father and me; I had met with several
turns of fortune, good and bad, and was at present but in a very middling way;
having only a little spot among the mountains of Richmondshire, with a cottage
and garden on it, and three or four beasts, which I found by accident without
an owner, as I traveled through that uninhabited land; and a small farm of
fifty acres with some stock, on the borders of Cumberland, which I got by a
deceased wife. This, with about fifty guineas in my purse, was my all at
present; and I was going up to London, to try if I could meet with any thing
fortunate in that place; but that, since he was pleased to make me such
generous offers, I would stop, study physic as he proposed, and accept the
great honor he did me in offering me his daughter for a wife. I told him
likewise very fairly and honestly, that I had been rich by three or four
marriages since my being in this country; but that I was unfortunately taken in
at a gaming-table, by the means of two Irish gentlemen he knew very well, and
there lost all; which vexed me the more, as I really do not love play: -- that
as to my father, I had little to expect from him, though he had a great estate,
as our difference was about religion; (which kind of disputes always have the
cruellest tendency;) and the wife you know he married, a low cunning woman,
does all she can to maintain the variance, and keep up his anger to me, that
her nephew may do the better on my ruin. I have not writ to him since my being
in England: Nor have I met with any one who could give me any account of the
family. This is my case, Sir.

And what (Dr. Fitzgibbons said) is this fine religious dispute, which has made
your father fall out with a son he was once so fond of? -- It was about trinity
in unity, Sir: a thing I have often heard your son argue against by lessons he
had from you, as he informed me. My father is as orthodox as Gregory Nazienzen,
among the ancient fathers, or Trapp and Potter, Webster and Waterland, among
the modern doctors; and when he found out, that I was become an unitarian, and
renounced his religion of three Gods, the horrible creed of Athanasius, and all
the despicable explications of his admired divines, on that subject; -- that I
insisted, that notwithstanding all the subtle inventions of learned men,
through the whole christian world, yet God Almighty has not appointed himself
to be worshipped by precept or example in any one instance in his holy word,
under the character of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; -- that the worship of
three persons and one God is expressly contrary to the solemn determination of
Christ and his Apostles; -- and in numbers of instances in the New Testament it
is declared, that the one God and Father of all is the only supreme object, to
whom all religious worship should be directed: -- that for these reasons, I
renounced the received doctrine of a coequal trinity, and believed our great
and learned divines, who labored to prevent people from seeing the truth as it
is in Jesus, would be in some tribulation at Christ's tribunal; where they are
to appear stripped of all worldly honors, dignities, and preferments, poor,
naked, wretched mortals, and to answer for their supplement to the gospel, in
an invented heresy of three Gods. -- When my father heard these things, and saw
the religious case of his son, his passion was very great. He forbid me his
table, and ordered me to shift for myself. He renounced me, as I had done the
triune God.

The doctor wondered not a little at the account I had given him, (as my father
was reckoned a man of great abilities,) and taking me by the hand, said, I had
acted most gloriously: that what lost me my father's affection, was the very
thing that ought to have induced him to erect a statue to my honor in his
garden: -- that since I was pleased to accept of his offer, his friendship I
might depend on: -- that if I would, I should begin the next day the study of
physic under his direction, and at the end of two years, he would give me his
daughter, who was not yet quite twenty.

The picture of Julia Fitzgibbons.
. 5. Just as he had said this, Miss Fitzgibbons entered the room, and her father
introduced me to her. The sight of her astonished me; though I had before seen so
many fine women, I could not help looking with wonder at her. She appeared one
of those finished creatures, whom we cannot enough admire, and upon
acquaintance with her, became much more glorious.

What a vast variety of beauty do we see in the infinity of nature. Among the
sex, we may find a thousand and a thousand perfect images and characters; all
equally striking, and yet as different as the pictures of the greatest masters
in Italy. What amazing charms and perfections have I beheld in women as I
journeyed through life. When I have parted from one; well I said, I shall never
meet another like this inimitable maid; and yet after all, Julia appeared
divinely fair, and happy in every excellence that can adorn the female mind.
Without that exact regularity of beauty, and elegant softness of propriety,
which rendered Miss Dunk, whom I have described in these Memoirs, a very
divinity, Julia charmed with a graceful negligence, and enchanted with a face
that glowed with youthful wonders, beauties that art could not adorn but always
diminished. The choice of dress was no part of Julia's care, but by the neglect
of it she became irresistible. In her countenance there ever appeared a
bewitching mixture of sensibility and gaiety, and in her soul, by converse we
discovered that generosity and tenderness were the first principles of her
mind. To truth and virtue she was inwardly devoted, and at the bottom of her
heart, though hard to discover it, her main business to serve God, and fit
herself for eternity. In sum, she was one of the finest originals that ever
appeared among womankind, peculiar in perfections which cannot be described;
and so inexpressibly charming in an attractive sweetness, a natural gaiety, and
a striking negligence, a fine understanding, and the most humane heart; that I
found it impossible to know her without being in love with her: Her power to
please was extensive indeed. In her, one had the loveliest idea of woman.

The Author marries Miss Fitzgibbons his seventh wife.
. 6. To this fine creature I was married at the end of two years from my first
acquaintance with her; that is, after I had studied physic so long, under the
care and instruction of her excellent father; who died a few weeks after the
wedding, which was in the beginning of the year 1734, and the 29th of my age.
Dying, he left me a handsome fortune, his library, and house; and I imagined I
should have lived many happy years with his admirable daughter, who obliged me
by every endearing means, to be excessively fond of her. I began to practice
upon the old gentleman's death, and had learned so much in the two years I had
studied under him, from his lecturing and my own hard reading, that I was able
to get some money among the opulent round me; not by art and collusion, the
case of too many doctors in town and country, but by practicing upon consistent
principles. The method of my reading, by Dr. Fitzgibbon's directions, was as
follows; and I set it down here for the benefit of such gentlemen, as choose to
study in the private manner I did.

A METHOD of studying PHYSIC in a private Manner: By which means a Gentleman,
with the Purchase of a Diploma, may turn out DOCTOR, as well as if he went to
PADUA, to hear MORGANNI.
THE first books I got upon my table, were the lexicons of Castellus and
Quincy; one for the explication of ancient terms; and the other of modern.
These, as Dictionaries, lay at hand for use, when wanted.

I then opened the last edition of Schelhammer's Herman Conringius's
Introductio in universam artem medicam, singulasque ejus parts; I say the last
edition, 1726, because that has an excellent preface by Hoffman. This book,
which comes down to the beginning of the 17th century, I read with great care;
especially Gonthier Christopher Schelhammer's notes, and additions, which have
enriched the work very much. (By the way, they were both very great men, and
bright ornaments to their profession. They writ an amazing number of books on
medicine. Conringius died December 1681, aged 75. Schelhammer, in January 1716,
in the 67th year of his age.)

The next introductory book to the art, was Lindenius renovatus de scriptis
medicis, quibus praemittitur manuductio ad medicinam. This book was first
called Libro duo de scripturis, etc. and written by Vander Linden, a famous
Leyden professor, who published it in the year 1637, in a small octavo. In the
same form it was printed in 1651 and 1662: these three editions at Amsterdam:
But the valuable edition is that of Nuremburg, 1686, by George Abraham
Merklinus, who made very many and excellent additions to this fourth edition,
and called it Lindenius renovatus, as he had augmented it to a vast 4 to. John
Antonides Vander Linden died in March 1664, aged 55. And Merklinus in April
1702, in the 58th year of his age. They both writ many books in physic: but
there have been such improvements made by the diligence and success of modern
physicians, that it would be only loss of time to read over all their works, or
all the authors of the 17th century.

The next books I opened, were the learned Daniel Le Clerc's history of physic,
which commences with the world, and ends at the time of Galen; and the great
Dr. Friend's history, which is a continuation of Le Clerc, down to Linacre, the
founder of the College of Physicians, in the reign of Henry VIII. -- These
books showed me the origin and revolutions of physic, and the ancient writers
and their works on this subject. By the way, Daniel Le Clerc died in June 1728,
aged 76, and some months.

When I had read these things, If Mangetus had published his Bibliotheca
scriptorum medicorum, 2 vols. folio, at the time I am speaking of, the Doctor,
my friend, would have recommended it to a beginner.
I turned next to botany, and read Raii Methodus plantarum emendata, Londini
1703. Raii Synopsis methodica stirpium, Ed. 3. And Tournefort's Institutiones
rei herbariae. These books with a few observations of my own, as I walked in
the gardens, the fields, and on the plains, furnished me with sufficient
knowledge of this kind for the present. The vast folio's on this subject are
not for beginners.

Chemistry was the next thing my director bid me look into, and to this purpose
I perused Boerhaave's Elementa chemiae: and Hoffman's Observationes
physico-chemiae: These afford as much chemistry as a young physician need set
out with: but as books alone give but an imperfect conception, I performed most
of the common operations in the portable furnace of Becher.

The materia medica in the next place had my attention, that is, those animal,
vegetable, and fossil substances, which are used to prevent, cure, or palliate
diseases. And in order to know the names of all the drugs, their history, the
adulterations they are subject to, their virtues, their dose, their manner of
using them, and the cautions which they require, -- to get a sufficient
knowledge of this kind, I looked into Geoffrey's materia medica, and made a
collection of the materia at the same time, that I might conceive and remember
what I read.

Pharmacy, or the art of preparing and compounding medicines, was the next
thing I endeavored to be a master of. And that I might know how to exalt their
virtues, to obviate their ill qualities, and to make them less nauseous, I read
to this purpose, Quincy's pharmaceutical lectures and dispensatory: and took
care to be well versed in all the pharmacopoeia's, those of London, Edinburgh,
Paris, Boerhaave, Bate, and Fuller. And I read very carefully Gaubin's methodus
praescribendi. This gave me the materials, and taught me the form of
prescribing.

Anatomy I studied next, that is, the art of dividing the several parts of a
body, so as to know their size, figure, situation, connexions, and make. I
began with Drake and Keil, and then read over Winslow. I had likewise open
before me at the same time, at my entrance upon this study, a good set of
plates, the tables of Eustachius and Cooper, and turned them carefully over as
I read. The doctor then showed me how to dissect, but chiefly by the direction
of a book called the Culter Anatomicus of Michel Lyserus, ou method court,
facile, and claire de dissequer les corpse humaines. I was soon able to perform
myself. It was the third edition of Lyserus, 1679; which has many curious
anatomical observations added to it by Gaspard Bartholin, the son of the
celebrated Thomas Bartholin, Copenhagen professor. ( Michel Lysere was the
disciple of the great Thomas Bartholin. Thomas died, December 1680, in his 64th
year. Michel in 16^9.) a young man; regrette a cause de son merit. I had also
Nichol's Compendium, and Hunter's Compendium. By these means, and by reading
the authors who have written upon some one part only; such as Peyerus de
glandulis intestinus. Experimenta circa pancras. De Graaf de organis
generationis. Gasp. Bartholin de diaphragm. Malpigius de pulmonibus -- de
venibus -- de liene, et de cornuum vegetatione. Lower de cord -- de
ventriculo, et de cerebri anat. Willis de respiratione. Glisson de hepatoe.
Cass^rius de vocis auditusque organis. Walsalou de aure. Havers on the bones.
Munro on the bones. Douglas on the muscles. Morgagni adversaria. Ruyshii opera.
Nuck's Adenographia. Wharton's Adenographia. Ridley's anatomy of the brain.
Santorini observationes. Boneti sepulchrum anatomicum. Blasii anatomia
animalium. Tyson's anatomy of the oran-outang. By these means, I cut up the
body of a young woman, I had from a neighboring churchyard, and acquired
knowledge enough of anatomy.

N. B. If all the pieces written upon some one part of the body, are not to be
had single, the reader inclined to the delightful study of physic, will find
them in the Bibliotheca Anatomica, 2 vols. folio.

Here before I proceed, I will mention a very curious case, which occurred in
my dissecting the body I have spoken of. It was as remarkable an example of a
preternatural structure as ever appeared. Case of a young woman with a double
vagina.
In cutting her up, there was found two vaginas, and a right and left uterus.
Each uterus had its corresponding vagina, and the uteri and the vaginae lay
parallel to each other; there was only one ovarium; but two perfect hymen's. The
labia stretched so as to take in the anus, terminating beyond it; and as they
were in large ridges, and well armed, the whole had a formidable appearance. If
it should be asked, Could a perfect superfoetation take place in such a person?
Most certainly there might be one conception upon the back of another at
different times; therefore, I should not choose to marry a woman with two
vaginas, if it was possible to know it before wedlock.

But to proceed, -- The next things I read, were the Institutes of Medicine,
that is, such books as treat of the economy and contrivance of nature in
adapting the parts to their several uses. The books purely physiological, are,
Keil's Tentamina. Sanctorii aphorismi. Bellini de pulsibus et urina. Borellus
de motu animalium. Harvey de motu cordis: -- And de generation animalium. (two
admirable pieces.) Friend's Emmenologia. Simpson's System of the Womb. And
Pitcairne's Tracts. These are the best things relating to physiology, which may
be called the first part of the Institutions of Physic.

The 2d part of the Institutes is the Art of preserving such a system as the
body, in an order fit for the exercise of its functions as long as possible.
The 3d part is pathology, which teaches the different manners in which diseases
happen; and the various causes of these disorders, with their attendants and
consequences: The 4th part is the doctrine of signs, by which a judgment is
formed of the sound or bad state of the animal: And the 5th is Therapentica,
that is, the means and method of restoring sanity to a distempered body.
Treatises on all these matters, are what we call institutions of physic, and in
relation, to the four last mentioned, the best books are, Hoffman's Systema
medicinoe rationalis, and Boerhaave's Institutions, with his lectures upon
them. These books I read with great attention, and found them sufficient.

Being instituted in this manner, I turned next to the practical writers, and
read the history of diseases and their cure from observations of nature. This
is called pathologia particularis, and is the great business of a physician.
All that has been said is only preparatory to this study. Here then I first
very carefully read the authors who have written a system of all diseases; and
then, such writers as have considered particular cases. The best system writers
are Boerhaave's aphorisms and comment. Hoffman's pathologia particularis; being
the last part of his Systema medicinae. Jumher's cospectus medicinae. Allen's
Synopsis. Shaw's Practice of physic; and Lomnii opusculum aureum.

The writers on a few and particular distempers are, Sydenham opera. Moreton's
Puretologia. Bellini de morbis capitis et pectoris. Ramazzini de morbis
artificium. Wepsemus de apoplexia. Floyer on the asthma. Astruc de lue venerea.
Turner's synopsis: And of the skin. Musgrave de arthritide. Highmore de
passione hysterica et hypocondria. Glisson de rachitide. Clericus de lumbrico
lato. Daventer ars obstetricandi. Mauriceau des femmes grosses. Harris de
morbis infantium. Turner's letter to a young physician. All these books very
carefully I read, and to your reading add the best observations you can any
where get, or make yourself. I writ down in the shortest manner, abstracts of
the most curious and useful things, especially the representations of nature;
and refreshed my memory by often looking into my notebook. Every thing taken
from nature is valuable. Hypothesis is entertaining rather than useful.

And when I was reading the history of diseases in the authors I have just
mentioned, I looked into the ancient Greek and Latin medical writers; for all
their merit lies in this kind of history. Their pharmacy and anatomy is good
for nothing. They scarce knew any thing of the human bodies, but from the
dissections of other animals, took their descriptions. The great Vesalius in
the beginning of the 16th century, was the first that taught physicians to
study nature in dissecting human bodies; which was then considered by the
church as a kind of sacrilege. When Vesalius began to dissect human bodies, he
was considered by the people as an impious cruel man; and before he could
practice publicly, he was obliged to get a decision in his favor from the
Salamanca divines. C'est ce qui engagea Charles V. de fair fair une
consultation aux theologiens de Salamanque, pour savoir si en conscience on
pouvoit dissequer un corpse humain, pour en connoitre la structure. ( Niceron
Memoirs:) They would not let him settle in France; but the republic of Venice
gave him a professor's chair at Padua, where he dissected publicly, and taught
anatomy seven years. He was but 18, when he published his famous book, La
fabrique du corpse humain, which was the admiration of all men of science: And a
little after, he made a present of the first skeleton the world ever saw, to
the university of Bale; where it is still to be seen. This great man, Andrew
Vesal, was born the last of April, 1512; and in the 58th year of his age,
October 15, 1564, he was shipwrecked on the isle of Zante, and in the deserts
there was famished to death. His body was found by a goldsmith of his
acquaintance, who happened to land there not long after, and by this man
buried. Vesal's works are two volumes in folio, published by Herman Boerhaave,
Lugduni Batavorum, 1725. Every physician ought to have them.


As to chemistry, they had no notion of it. It was not heard of till some
hundred years after the latest of them. In botany they had made little
progress. In short, as they knew little of botany; -- nothing of chemistry; as
their systems of natural philosophy and anatomy were false and unnatural, (and
it is upon anatomy and natural philosophy, that physiology or the use of the
parts is founded,) we can expect nothing from the ancients upon these heads,
but mere imaginations, or notions unsupported by observation or matter of fact.
It is their history of diseases supports their character. Hippocrates, in
particular, excels all others on this head: but this great man was not perfect
even in this. Knowledge in nature is the daughter of time and experience. Many
notions of the animal economy were then absurd; and if Hippocrates was too
wise to act always up to his theory, yet he could not be entirely free from its
influence.

The names of the ancient original greek medical writers are, Hippocrates,
Dioscorides, Aritaeus, Galen, and Alexander. The latin writers of physic are,
Celsus, Scribonius Largus, Caelius Aurelianus, Marcellus Empericus, Theodorus
Priscianus, and Sextus Placitus. We have besides several collectors, as
Oribasius, Aetius, Paulus Aeginita, etc. Nicander, the medical poet; and the
fragments of Soranus, Rufus Ephesius, Zonorates, Vindicianus, Diocles
Carystius, Cassius, and a few others: but all these may be looked into
afterward. The original authors are sufficient in the noviciate.

As to the latin medical writers, Celsus, and Caelius Aurelianus only, are
worth reading. Celsus lived in the latter end of the reign of Augustus, and is
admirable for the purity of his latin, and the elegance of his sense. You must
have him night and morning in your hands, till you are a master of the terms
and expressions peculiar to physic, which occur in him. The style of Caelius is
very bad, and his cavils tedious: but his description of diseases is full and
accurate. In this respect he is a very valuable writer. He lived in the second
century, as did Galen likewise.

As to Hippocrates, who was contemporary with Socrates, he was born the first
year of the Soth Olympiad, 460 before Christ. Rene Chartier's Edit. Paris,
1639, is the most pompous: but Vander Linden's, Leyden, 1668, 2 vols. in 8vo,
is the best. When I read Hippocrates, I did also look into Prosper Alpini's
good book, De presagienda vita, et morte aegrotantium: In which he has with
great care collected and methodized all the scattered observations of
Hippocrates, relating to the dangerous or salutary appearances in difeases. At
the same time, I likewise read this great man's Medicina Methodica. (He died
professor of botany at Padua, Feb. 1617, Aet 64. and was born November, 1553.)
I did likewise look into the best commentators on Hippocrates; whose names you
will find in Conringius's Introduction, which I have mentioned.

N. B. The best edition of Dioscorides's Materia medica, is that of Frankfort,
1598, folio. The best edition of Aritaeus, who lived before Julius Cesar's time
(as Dioscorides did, A.D. 46) is Boerhaave's, 1731, folio. The best edition of
Galen's works, are that of Bale, 1538, in 5 vols. and that of Venice, 1625, in
7 volumes. Alexander of Tralles flourished in the 6th century, under Justinian
the Great, and left the following works, Therapentica, Lib 12. De singularum
corporis partium vitiis, aegritudinibus, and injuriis, Lib. 5. Epist. de
lumbricis: Tractatus de puerorum morbis: Liber de febribus. The best greek copy
is that of Stephens, Paris, 1548, folio. In greek and latin, Basil, 1658. But
in neither of these editions is to be found the Epistle de lumbricis. You must
look for that in the 12th volume of Fabricius's Bibliotheca Graeca.

In the last place, besides all the authors I have mentioned, I likewise looked
into the original observation writers, and miscellaneous books relating to
physic. They afford excellent knowledge, where the authors are faithful and
judicious. Such are the observationes medicae of Nicolaus Tulpius (a curious
book; and the dedication of it to his son Peter, a student in physic, good
advice; 2d edition, 1652, is the best: it is a fourth part larger than the 1st
edition, that came out in 1641.) The observationes et curationes medicinales of
Petrus Forestus, Lib. 22. -- The observationes medicae of Joannes Theodorus
Schenkius. -- And the various Journals, and Transactions of learned Societies;
which are repositories in which the physician finds much rare and valuable
knowledge. And as a physician ought to have a little acquaintance with the
modern practice of surgery, I concluded with Heister's, Turner's, and. Sharp's
Surgery.

By this method of studying physic in the middle of a wood, and employing my
time and pains in reading the ancients, and considering their plain and natural
account of diseases, I became a Doctor, as well as if I had been a regular
collegiate in the world. -- But it is time to think of my various story, and I
shall detain my Reader no longer from it, than while he reads the following
translation of the charming mythological picture of Cebes; which is placed
here, as the golden 10th Satire of Juvenal is put after the XIIIth Section of
this work, by way of entertainment between the acts.

A Translation of the Table of Cebes.
The thing is a Dialogue between an Old Man and a Traveller.
WHILE we were walking in the temple of Saturn, (in the city of Thebes,) and
viewing the votive honors of the God, the various offerings which had been
presented to that deity, we observed at the entrance of the Fane, a picture
tablet that engaged our attention, as it was a thing entirely new, both with
regard to the painting and the design. For some time, we stood considering the
device and fable, but still found ourselves unable to guess the meaning. The
piece did not seem to be either a city or a camp; but was a kind of a walled
court, that had within it two other enclosures, and one of them was larger than
the other. The first court opened at a gate, before which a vast crowd of
people appeared, impatient to enter; and within a group of female figures was
represented. Stationed at the porch without, was seen a venerable form, who
looked like some great teacher, and seemed to warn the rushing multitude. Long
we gazed at this work, but were not able to understand the design, till an old
man came up to us, and spoke in the following manner.

1. O. It is no wonder strangers, that you cannot comprehend this picture: for
even our inhabitants are not able to give a solution of the allegoric scene.
The piece is not an offering of any of our citizens, but the work of a
foreigner, a man of great learning and virtue, and a zealous disciple of the
Samian or Elean sages, who arrived here many years ago, and by his conversation
instructied us in the best learning, which is morality. It was he built and
consecrated this temple to Saturn, and placed here this picture you see before
you.

A Translation of the Mythological Picture of Cebes: By the Rev. and famous
Jeremy Collier.
AS we were taking a turn in Saturn's temple, we saw a great many consecrated
presents, remarkable enough for their curiosity: Amongst the rest, we took
particular notice of a picture hung over the door; the piece we perceived was
all emblem and mythology; but then the representation was so singular and out
of custom, that we were perfectly at a loss whence it should come, and what was
the meaning of it. Upon a strict view, we found it was neither a city, nor a
camp, but a sort of court, with two partitions of the same figure within it,
though one of them was larger than the other. The first court had a crowd of
people at the gate, and within we saw a great company of women. Just at the
entrance of the first gate, there stood an old man, who by his gesture and
countenance, seemed to be busy in giving advice to the crowd as they came in.
And being long at a stand about the design of the fable, a grave man somewhat
in years, making up, begins to discourse us in this manner. Gentlemen, says he,
I understand you are strangers, and therefore it is no wonder the history of
this picture should puzzle you: For there are not many of our own countrymen
than can explain it. For you are to observe, this is none of our town
manufacture The Greek words which Mr. Collier renders town-manufacture, are
(...).
But along while ago, a certain outlandish man And what he calls outlandish, is
(...).
of great sense and learning, and who by his discourse and behavior, seemed to
be a disciple of Pythagoras and Parmenides; this gentleman, I say, happening to
travel hither, built this structure, and dedicated both the temple and this
piece of painting to Saturn. Sir, said I, had you any acquaintance with this
gentleman. Yes, says he, I had the benefit of his conversation, and was one of
his admirers a long time. For, to my thinking, though he was but young, he talked
at a strange significant rate The Greek is, (...).
.

N. B. The remainder of Collier's facetious version, is omitted for want of
room.

T. And did you know, (I said) and converse with this wise man?


O. Yes, (he replied) I was long acquainted with him, and as he was but young,
and talked with great judgment upon the most important subjects, with
astonishment I have listened to him, and with pleasure heard him explain the
moral of this fable.


T. Expound to us then, (I conjure you) the meaning of the picture, if business
does not call you away; for we long to be instructed in the design of the piece.


O. I am at leisure, (the old man answered) and willingly consent to your
request; but I must inform you first, there is some danger in what you ask. If
you hearken with attention, and by consideration understand the precepts, you
will become wise, virtuous, and blessed (...).
: if otherwise, you will be abandoned, blind, and miserable (...).
The explanation of the picture resembles the enigma of the Sphinx, which she
proposed to every passenger that came that way. If they could expound the
riddle they were safe; but if they failed in the attempt, they were destroyed
by the monster This monster, who lived near Thebes, was said to be the daughter
of Typhon and Echidna, and had a head and face like a girl, wings like a bird,
and in the rest, like a dog.
Folly is as it were a Sphinx to mankind. She asks you, How is good and ill
defined? If you cannot explain the problem, and happen to misjudge, you perish
by degrees, and become the victim of her cruelty. You do not die immediately,
as the unhappy did by the Theban monster; but by the force and operation of
folly, you will find yourself dying from day to day, your rational part wounded
and decayed, every noble power of the foul confounded, and like those given up
to punishment for life, feel the last of those pangs, which guilt prepares for
the stupid: but if by thinking, you can understand and discern the boundaries
of good and ill, then folly like the Sphinx must perish, and your life will be
blessed with happiness and serenity. -- Hear me then with all your attention.

These things being previously observed by the old man, and we entreating him
to begin, he lifted up a wand he held, and pointing to the picture, said, the
first enclosure represents human life, and the multitude at the gate, those who
are daily entering into the world. That aged person you see on an eminence,
directing with one hand, and holding in the other a roll, which is the code of
reason, is the genius of mankind; benevolent, he seems to bend, and teach the
people what they ought to do; shows them as they enter into life the path they
ought to take; the way which leads to danger, and that which bears to safety
and happiness.


T. And which is the way, (I said) and how are they to find it?


O. That you shall know hereafter: but at present you must take notice of that
painted woman seated on a throne very near the gate. She is called Delusion,
and by every art, with fawn and soft infection, presents a bowl of ignorance
and error to all that enter into life. They take the cup, and in proportion to
what they have drank of the intoxicating mixture, are led away by the women
you, see, at a little distance from Imposture, to destruction some, and some to
safety; less erring and less blind those being who have but tasted of
delusion's cup.

These women so variously dressed, and so profusely gay, are called the Opinions,
Desires, and Pleasures: You observe how they embrace each mortal as he arrives
within the gate, promise the greatest blessings, and compel their votaries to
wander with them where they please.


T. But who (I asked) is that woman placed on a globe, who appears not only
blind, but seems to be wild and distracted? Incessantly she walks about, and
flings her favors capriciously: From some she snatches their effects and
possessions, and bestows them upon others.


O. They call her Fortune, (replied the old man). Her attitude marks her
character. Her gifts are as unstable as her tottering ball; and all who depend
upon her specious promises, are deceived when most they trust her, and find
themselves exposed to the greatest misfortunes.


T. There is a great crowd I perceive surrounding her, and if too commonly she
meditates mischief, whenever the smiles, what is the meaning of their
attendance?


O. These are the inconsiderate, and stand there to catch the toys she blindly
scatters among them; (wealth, fame, titles, an offspring, strength or beauty,
the victor's laurel, and arbitrary power:) Those who rejoice, and are lavish in
their praises of this divinity, have received some favors from her, and call
her the goddess of good fortune: But those whom you see weeping and wringing
their hands, are such whom she has deprived of every good; they curse her as
the goddess of ill fortune.


T. But (replied I) as to riches, glory, nobility, a numerous posterity, power,
and honor, which you called toys, why are they not real advantages?


O. Of these things (our Instructor answered) we shall speak hereafter more
fully: At present it is better to continue the explication of the picture.

2. Cast your eyes next then on that higher enclosure, (proceeded the old man)
and take notice of the women on the outside thereof. You observe how wantonly
they are dressed: The first of them is Incontinence, loosely zoned, her bosom
bare; and the other three are, Riot, Covetousness, and Flattery. They watch for
the favorites of fortune. You see they caress them, and try to bring them to
the pleasures of their soft retreat; where the bowl sparkles, the song
resounds, and joys to joys succeed in every jocund hour: But at length Distress
appears, and the favorite of a day discovers, that his happiness was merely
imaginary, under a delusion; but the evils that attend his pleasures real. When
he has wasted all he had received from fortune, he is forced to enter himself
into the service of those mistresses, and by them compelled to dare the foulest
and most desperate deeds; villain and knave he becomes; stabs for a purse; his
country sells for gold; and by deceit and sacrilege, by perjury, treachery, and
theft, endeavors for some time to live. But shiftless at length, and unable to
acquire support by crimes, they are consigned to the dire gripe of Punishment.


T. What is she, I beg you will inform us?


O. Look beyond those women, called the Opinions, (continued the old man) and
you will see a low gate, opening into a dark and narrow cave: you may observe
at the entrance of it, three female figures very swarthy and foul, covered with
rags and filthiness; and near them, standing naked by their side, a frightful
lean man This man Mr. Collier calls, an ill-looking skeleton of a fellow, with
scarce a tatter to his limbs. Cant! The Greek is, (...).
. Close to him is another woman, so meagre and ghastly you perceive, that it is
not possible for any thing to resemble him more.


T. We see them, and request to be informed who they are?


O. The first with a whip in her hand, is Punishment, and next to her sits
Sadness, with her head reclining on her knees; that woman tearing her hair is
Trouble; the naked lean man is Sorrow, and the image by his side wild Despair.
You see they are all going to seize the unhappy man of pleasure, and make him
feel the greatest pain and anguish: For they carry him to the house of Misery,
and in the pit of Woe he is to pass the remainder of life, unless Repentance
comes to his relief.


T. And what then follows, (I said) if Repentance interposes?


O. She rescues him from his tormentors, and gives him a new view of things. He
has from her some account of true learning, but the hint so short, that it may
lead him likewise to false learning. If he be so happy as to understand, and
choose right, he is delivered from prejudice and error, and passes the rest of
his days in tranquillity and peace: but if he be mistaken, instead of wisdom,
he only gains that amusing counterfeit, which turns him from vice to studious
folly.


T. Great (I replied) are the risks we mortals run: But who is this false
learning?


. 3.

O. At the entrance of the second enclosure The three enclosures in Cebes,
allude to the division of human life into the sensual, the studious, and the
virtuous.
, you may observe a woman neatly dressed, and of a good appearance; decent the
port, -- spotless the form: This is the counterfeit, but the vulgar call her
true learning: Even the happy few, who succeed in the pursuit of wisdom, are
commonly detained too long by this deceiving fair one: Nor is it strange; for,
skilled as she is in all the learning, and in every art can grace the head, you
see what crowds of admirers she has; poets, orators, logicians, musicians,
arithmeticians, geometricians, astrologers, and critics.


T. But who, (I asked my instructor,) are those women, so busy on every side,
and so earnest in their addresses to this company? They look like Incontinence
and her companions, and the opinions whom you showed us in the first court. Do
they also frequent the second enclosure?


O. Yes, (replied the old man,) Incontinence is sometimes seen here. The
opinions do likewise enter; for the early potion these men received from
Imposture still operates. Ignorance finds a place here; and even Extravagance
and Folly. They remain under the power of these, till having left false
learning, they enter upon the path that leads to Wisdom. When they arrive at
the enlightened ground of Truth, they get her sovereign remedy Mr. Collier
translates it, -- they enter into a course of physic. The Greek is, (...). And
what Mr Collier a little before translates, -- She opens a vein, and gives then
a glass of her constitution: -- when the have taken the stirrup cup: --
brimmers: -- the lasses frisk about: Salute with a deal of welcome, and the lug
them off, -- some to ruin, and some to the gallows: -- All this, and much more
night-cellar stuff, the Theban philosopher had not an idea of, as any one may
see who can turn to the Greek. How Collier learned such guard-phrases, and why
he use them, seemed for some time very strange to me, till I was informed by
one who knew this Divine well, that in the days of his youth, he kept very low
company, and was known at several night-houses. In that period of his life, he
translated Cebes.
, and are freed from the ill effects of Ignorance and Error. This enables them
to throw off the wild hypothesis, -- the learned romance, -- and to employ the
precious hours of life in thinking to the wisest purposes. Had they staid with
false learning, they never could have delivered themselves from these evils.


T. Proceed then, I pray you, (said I) and show us the way that leads to
Happiness and Wisdom.


. 4.

O. Do you see (proceeded the venerable man,) that rising ground, which appears
so desert and uninhabited. You may observe upon it a little gate, that opens in
a narrow and unfrequented path; the avenue a rugged rocky way. You perceive a
little onward, a steep and craggy mountain with precipices on either side,
which sink to a frightful depth. This is the way to Wisdom.


T. It seems a dreadful way, as painted in this table.


O. Yet higher still observe that rock, toward the mountain's brow, and take
notice of the two figures which sit upon it is edge, and appear to be as
beautiful and comely as the goddess of health. They are sisters; Temperance the
one, Patience the other. With friendship in their looks, and arms protended
over the verge of the cliff, you see them lean, to encourage those who pass
this way, and rouse the spirits of the fainting sons of Wisdom, who has
stationed these two sisters there. They urge the brave men on; tell them the
hardships will lessen by degrees, -- the passage will become more easy and
agreeable as they advance, and offer them their assistance to ascend the
summit, and reach the top of the rock. That being gained, they show them the
easiness and pleasantness of the rest of the way to wisdom: The charming road
invites one's eyes: How smooth and flowery, green and delightful, does it
appear!


T. It does indeed.


. 5.

O. Look next (the excellent old man continued,) at that distant blooming wood,
and near it you will see a beautiful meadow, on which there seems to fall a
light as from a purer heaven, a kind of double day. In this lightsome field
(...).
, you may perceive a gate which opens into another enclosure, which is the
abode of the blessed. Here the Virtues dwell with Happiness. In this region of
eternal beauty, the righteous rest.


T. It does appear a charming place.


O. Observe then near the portal, a beauteous form of a composed aspect: She
seems mature in life, and her robe is quite plain, without affectation or
ornaments. Her eyes are piercing; her mien sedate: She stands not on a globe,
(like Fortune) but upon a cube of marble, fixed as the rock she is on before
the gate. You see on either side of her two lovely nymphs, the very copies of
her looks and air. This matron in the middle is true learning, Wisdom herself;
and the two young beauties are Truth and Persuasion. Her standing on a square,
is an expressive type of certainty in the way to her; and denotes the
unalterable and permanent nature of the blessings she bestows on those who come
to (...). constanti vultu, or constans vultum.
her. From her they receive courage and serenity; that confidence and contempt
of fear, which exempts the happy possessors from any disturbance, by the
accidents and calamities of life.


T. These are valuable gifts. But why without the walls does Wisdom stand?


O. To present the purifying bowl to those who approach, and restore them to
themselves. As a physician by degrees first finds out the cause of a violent
disorder, and then removes it, in order to restore the man to health; so
Wisdom, as she knows their malady, administers her sovereign medicine, and
frees them from all their evils. She expels the mischiefs they had received
from delusion, their ignorance and error, and delivers them from pride, lust,
anger, avarice, and all the other vices they had contracted in the first
enclosure. In a word, she restores them to sanity, and then sends them in to
Happiness. and the Virtues.


T. Who are, they? (I said).


. 6.

O. Do you not see within the gate, (my instructor replied) a society of
matrons, beautiful and modest, dressed unaffected, and without any thing of the
gay excess? These are Science and her sisters, Fortitude, Justice, and
Integrity, Temperance, Modesty, Liberality, Continence, Clemency, and Patience.
They hail their guests, and the company seem to be in raptures.


T. But when the friends to virtue are admitted into this charming society,
where do they lead then to?


O. See you not (resumed the good old man,) the hill beyond the grove; that
eminence which is the highest point of all the enclosures, and commands a
boundless prospect. There, on a glorious throne, you may observe a majestic
person in her bloom, well dressed, but without art or lavish cost, and her
temples adorned with a beautiful Tiar: This is Happiness, the regent of that
blessed abode, and as the moral heroes approach her, you may perceive her, with
the Virtues who stand assistant round her, going to reward the friends of
wisdom with such crowns as are bestowed on conquerors.


T. Conquerors! (I said) In what conflicts have these persons been victorious?


O. They have, in their way to the realm of Happiness, destroyed the most
formidable and dangerous monsters, who would have destroyed them, if they had
not been subdued: These savage beasts at war with man are, ignorance and error;
grief, vexation, avarice, intemperance, and every thing that is evil. These are
vanquished, and have lost all their power. The moral hero triumphs now, though
their slave before.


T. Great achievements indeed! A glorious conquest. But exclusive of the
honor of being crowned by Happiness and the Virtues, is there any salutary
power in the crown that adorns the hero's head?


O. There is, young man. The virtue of it is great. Possessing this, he is
happy and blessed. He derives his felicity from no external object, but from
himself alone.


T. O happy victory! And being thus crowned, what does the hero do -- where
next his steps?


O. Conducted by the Virtues, he goes back to survey his first abode, and see
the crowd he left; -- how miserably they pass their time; waste all their hours
in crimes, and in the whirl of passions live. Slaves to ambition, pride,
incontinence, vanity, and avarice, they appear tormented with endless anxiety.
They have forgot the instructions the good genius gave them, at their entrance
into life, and suffer thus because they cannot find the way to Wisdom.


T. True: (I said) But I cannot comprehend, why the Virtues should bring the
heroes back to the place they came from: Why should they return to view a
well-known scene?


O. The reason (answered my instructor) is, because they had not a true idea of
what they had seen. Surrounded by a confusion of things as they passed on, they
could not distinctly perceive what was done. The mists of ignorance and error
obscured the prospect as they journied on, and by that means, they were subject
to mistakes. They could not always distinguish between good and evil. But now
that they have attained to true learning, with concern they behold the mad
world the virtues show them again, and being enlightened by wisdom, are
perfectly happy in themselves. The misery of the numberless fools they behold
now, strikes them very strongly, and gives them a delightful relish for their
present happiness.


T. It must be so. And when they have seen these things, where do they then go?


O. Wherever they please. Safely they may travel where they will: In all times,
and in all places they are secure, as their integrity is their defense. Every
where they live esteemed and beloved by all. The female monsters I have
mentioned, Grief, Trouble, Lust, Avarice, or Poverty, have now no power to hurt
them; but as if possessed of some virtuous drug, they can grasp the viper, and
defy destruction.


T. What you say is just. But who are all these persons descending the hill?


O. Those that are crowned (the old man said) are the happy few I have
described. You see what joy is in their faces: And those who seem forlorn and
desperate, under the command of certain women, are such who by their folly have
not found the way to true learning; or stopping at the rough and narrow ascent
you observed, went to look for an easier path, and so quite lost the road. The
tormentors who drive them on are, Trouble, Despair, Ignominy, and Ignorance.
Wretched you see them return into the first enclosure, to Luxury and
Incontinence* and yet they do not accuse themselves as the authors of their own
ruin, which is very strange; but rail at Wisdom, and revile her ways;
asserting, that the true pleasures of life are only to be found in luxury and
riot. Like the brutes, they place the whole satisfaction of man in the
gratification of sensual appetite.


T. But who are those other lovely women, who return down the hill so full of
gaiety and mirth?


O. They are the opinions, who having conducted the virtuous to the region of
light, are coming back to invite and carry others thither, by showing them the
felicity and success of those they brought to the mansion of Wisdom.


T. And do the opinions never enter with those they bring into that happy
place, where the virtues and true learning reside?


O. No: Opinion can never reach to science; they only deliver their charge into
the hands of wisdom, and then, like ships that give up their lading, in order
to sail for a new cargo, they return to bring other Eleves to reason and
felicity.


T. This explanation of the table, (I said) is quite satisfactory: But you have
not yet informed us, what the good genius bids the multitude do, as they appear
on the verge of life?


O. He charges them to act with courage, and be magnanimous and brave in all
events; a thing I recommend to you, young man; and that you may have a true
idea of this, I will tell you what I mean by a bold spirit, in passing through
this world.


7.

O. Then lifting up his arm again, and pointing with his wand to a figure in
the picture; that blind woman standing on a globe, as I told you before, is
Fortune. The genius forbids us to trust her, or imagine her smiles will be
lasting happiness. Reason is never concerned in what the does. It is Fortune
still; without principle she acts, is arbitrary and capricious, and
inconsiderately and rashly for ever proceeds. Regard not then her favors, nor
mind her frowns: But as she gives and takes away, and often deprives of what we
had before, we are neither to esteem or despise her; but if we should receive
from her a gift, take care to employ it immediately to some good purpose, and
especially in the acquisition of true science, the most lasting and precious
possession. If we act otherwise, in respect of Fortune, we imitate those
wretched usurers, who rejoice at the money paid in to them, as if they received
it for their own use; but pay it back with regret, forgetting the condition,
that it was to be returned to the proprietor on demand. Regardless of Fortune
then, and all her changes in this mortal life, the genius advises to pass
bravely on, without harkening to the solicitations of Incontinence and Luxury
in the first enclosure, to reject their temptations, and go on to false
learning: With her he would have us make a short stay, to learn what may be of
service to use in our journey to Wisdom. This is the advice of the genius to
those who enter into life.


T. Here the good old man had done, and I thanked him for his explanation of
the picture. Only one thing (I said) there was more, which I must request he
would tell me the meaning of. What is it we can get by our stay with false
learning?


O. Things (he answered) that may be of use to us. The languages, and other
parts of education, which Plato recommends, may hinder us from being worse
employed, and keep us from illicit gratification. They are not absolutely
necessary to true happiness; but they contribute to make us better. Something
thing good and useful they do afford; though virtue, which ought to be the
principal business in view, may be acquired without them. We may become wise
without the assistance of the arts, though (as observed before,) they are far
from being useless: as by a good translation made into our own tongue, we may
know what an author means, and yet by taking the pains to become masters of the
original language, might gain more advantages, -- such as entering better into
the writer's sense, and discovering some beauties which cannot otherwise be
found: So the useful things in the sciences may be very quickly and easily
learned, and though by great labor in becoming accurately acquainted with them,
we might fill our heads with speculations, yet this cannot make us the wiser
and better men. Without being learned, we may be wise and good.


T. And are the learned then in no better a condition than the people in
respect of moral excellence? (I said). Are the speculations of the scholar, and
the arts and fine inventions of the schools, of no use in perfecting the moral
character? This to me seems a little strange.


O. Blind as the crowd is the man of letters, in this particular (my instructor
replied): All his studies and curious knowledge have no relation to his living
right. With all the tongues, and all the arts, he may be a libertine, a sot, a
miser, or a knave, a traitor to his country, and have no moral character at
all. This we see every day.


T. But what is the cause of so strange a thing, I requested to know? I observe
that these men of letters seem to sit down contented in the second enclosure,
and do not attempt to go on to the third where Wisdom resides; though they see
continually before their eyes so many passing on from the first court, where
they had lived for some time in lewdness and excess, to the habitation of true
learning.


O. It is their remaining in this second enclosure, that occasions their being
inferior in moral things to those who have not had a learned education. Proud
and self-sufficient on account of their languages, arts, and sciences, they
despise what Wisdom could teach them, and will not give themselves the trouble
of ascending with difficulty to the mansion of true learning. They have no
taste for the lessons of Wisdom; while the humble mount to her exalted
dwelling, those scholars, as you see, are satisfied with their speculations and
vain conceits. Dull and untractable in the improvement of their hearts, and
regardless of that exact rectitude of mind and life, which is only worth a
rational's, toiling for (as he is an Eleve for eternity), they never think of
true wisdom, nor mind her offered light. Their curious ingenious notions, are
what they only have a relish for; the imaginations of those men of letters
cannot reach that ineffable peace and contentment, that satisfaction and
pleasure, which flow from a virtuous life and an honest heart. This is the case
of our learned heads, uless repentance interferes to make them humble, and
scatters the vain visions they had from false opinion.

This (concluded the venerable teacher) is the explication of this parable or
allegory. May you often revolve upon these lessons, and lend your whole attention
to the attainment of true wisdom, that you may not embrace her shadow, the
speculations and inventions of the learned, but, by this instruction, acquire
the true principles of morality and goodness. This is not all the table of
Cebes. There follows a disputation in the Socratic method, concerning the claim
of wealth, and other externals, to the title of good things: but it is dry, and
no part of the picture or mythology. For this reason I stop here.

As to the picture of Cebes, it is to be sure a fine thing, and greatly to the
honor of the Theban philosopher, who was one of the disciples of Socrates; and
about twenty at the time of the death of his master: Socrates died by the
executioner, in the 70th year of his age, before our Lord, 402. -- Cebes was
about eighty, at the birth of Epicurus.

A remark on the table of Cebes.
But after all that can be said in praise of this excellent remain of antiquity,
still the little systen of ethics is but a poor performance, in respect of any
section of the gospel of Christ. Cebes says nothing of the Deity: Nor does he
mention the mischiefs of vice, and the benefits of virtue, as a divine
constitution.

An Apostle, on the contrary, (to mention only one particular out of a thousand
from the christian books,) calls to the human race in the following manner: "I
beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of Almighty God, the Father of the
Universe, who has graciously admitted you to, the faith, and revealed the
terms of acceptance; that ye present your bodies now a living sacrifice, holy
and acceptable to the Deity, which is the reasonable and spiritual service
required of you in the time of the gospel; and not offer the bodies of beasts
any more as the Heathen world were wont to do.

And, as persons now wholly devoted to the Lord of heaven and earth, be not
conformed to the fashions and ways of this world; but be ye transformed by the
renewing of your mind; that ye may prove what is the good, the acceptable, and
perfect will of God. Abhor that which is evil, in all your dealings: Cleave to
that which is good: Let love be without dissimulation, and be kindly
affectioned one to another; not advancing yourselves, but in honor preferring
one another. Be not slothful in business, but fervent in spirit; as serving the
Lord Jehovah in your several stations. Rejoice in hope of a refreshment to
come, in the realms of bliss: Be patient in tribulation, which God will reward,
and continue instant in prayer.

In sum, let us follow the steps of Christ, and in imitation of his divine
humility, his devotion, his love, be for ever meek and forbearing, gentle and
charitable, and live in the spirit of prayer."

What is there in the table of Cebes like this spiritual and religious virtue,
this love to God, this zeal for his honor and service, and an entire
dependence upon him in all conditions of life? The virtues of the heroes of
antiquity are noble and excellent qualities; -- their courage, and justice, and
temperance, and gratitude, and love to their country are fine things: but they
seem to have been calculated for the civil life. Those heroes were virtuous
without being pious, and appear rather as self-sufficient independent beings,
than as servants and votaries of God Almighty. It is these Christian virtues I
hove mentioned, that adorn and perfect human nature. It is these things that
mostly contribute to the happiness of the world, and of every man in it.

N. B. Mr. Scott, at the end of his Notes on Cebes, has the following remark.
-- If this philosopher had represented the effects of virtue and vice as a
divine constitution, he would have ennobled his instruction, and done greater
service to the interest of morality. But those important interests are
effectually provided for by revelation. There the precepts of virtue are the
laws of God. There we find a clear and complete system of his will. There our
obedience is encouraged by hope in his pardoning mercy and powerful assistance,
by the life, death, and resurrection of his own son; and by promises and
threatenings which extend the reward of righteousness, and the punishment of
wickedness unto a future state of existence.





SECTION XIII.
Look round the habitable world, how few
Know their own good; or knowing it, pursue.
How void of reason are our hopes and fears!
What in the conduct of our life appears
So well designed, so luckily begun,
But, when we have our wish, we wish undone?
The tenth Satire of Juvenal. DRYDEN. Omnibus in terris quae sunt a Gadibus
usque
Auroram et Gangem, pauci dignoscere possunt
Vera bona, atque illis multum diversa remota
Erroris nebula: quid enim ratione timemus
Aut cupimus? Quid tam dextro pede concipis, ut te
Conatus non paeniteat, votique peracti?
JUVENALIS, Sat. X.
Sir Robert Stapylton has done this Satire in the following manner.

In all the earth, from Cales westward to the streams
Of Ganges gilded with the morning beams.
To few men good and ill unmasked appear,
For what with reason do we hope or fear?
What have thou by thy happiest project gained,
But thou repent'st thy pains and wish obtained?
Mr. Dryden's translation is by far the finest, to be sure. It is a charming
thing: but whether it comes so near the intended humor and brisk turns of
Juvenal, as a third translation the Reader will find at the end of this
section, may admit of some consideration. -- I add here the sixteen last lines
of Dryden's Version, the most beautiful part of the Satire; that it may be near
for comparing with the translation I have mentioned. -- And for the same
reason, I likewise place here the same number of lines done by Stapylton.

Yet not to rob the priests of pious gain,
That altars be not wholly built in vain:
Forgive the gods the rest, and stand confined
To health of body, and content of mind;
A soul that can securely death defy,
And count it nature's privilege to die;
Serene and manly, hardened to sustain
The load of life, and exercised in pain;
Guiltless of hate, and proof against desire;
That all things weighs, and nothing can admire;
That dares prefer the toils of Hercules
To dalliance, banquets, and ignoble ease.
The path to peace is virtue: What I show,
Thyself may freely on thyself bestow:
Fortune was never worshipped by the wise;
But, set aloft by fools, usurps the skies.
DRYDEN. Yet that for sacrifice thou may prepare
Thy white hog, and for something make thy prayer.
Pray that the Gods be graciously inclined,
To grant thee health of body, and of mind.
Ask a strong soul that may death's terrors scorn,
And think to die, as good as to be born:
As great a gift of nature, that no cross
Can daunt, that knows no passion, fears no loss:
That Hercules his labors can digest,
Far better than Sardanapalus's feast,
His wenches, or his feather-beds; I show
What thou thyself may on thyself bestow.
The path to peace is virtue; All the powers
Will be our own, if wisdom be but ours:
And yet to thee, vain fortune, we have given
The name of goddess, and placed thee in heaven.
STAPYLTON. Ut tamen et poscas aliquid, voveasque sacellis
Exta, et candiduli divina tomacula porci:
Orandum est, ut sit men's sana in corpore sano.
Fortem posce animum, et mortis terrore carentem,
Qui spatium vitae extremum inter munera ponat
Naturae, qui far queat quoscunque labores,
Et venere, et coenis, et pluma Sardanapali;
Monstro, quod ipse tibi possis dare: semita certe,
Tranquillae per virtutem patet unica vitae.
Nullum numen habes, si sit prudentia: sed te
Nos facimus, fortuna, deam, coeloque locamus.
JUVENAL.
The unfortunate death of Julia.
. 1. HAVING married the illustrious Julia, as related in my last Section, and
by the death of her father soon after the wedding, acquired a handsome
settlement, a considerable sum of money, and a valuable collection of books; I
thought myself so happily situated in the midst of flourishing mercies, and so
well secured from adversity, that it was hardly possible for the flame of
destruction to reach me. But when I had not the least reason to imagine
calamity was near me, and fondly imagined prosperity was my own, infelicity
came stalking on unseen; and from a fullness of peace, plunged us at once into
an abyss of woe. It was our wont, when the evenings were fine, to take boat at
the bottom of a meadow, at the end of our garden, and in the middle of a deep
river, pass an hour or two in fishing; but at last, by some accident or other,
a slip of the foot, or the boat's being got a little too far from the
bank-side, Julia fell in and was drowned. This happened in the tenth month of
our marriage. The loss of this charming angel in such a manner, sat powerfully
on my spirits for some time; and the remembrance of her perfections, and the
delights I enjoyed while she lived, made me wish I had never seen her. To be so
vastly happy as I was, and be deprived of her in a moment, in so shocking a
way, was an affliction I was hardly able to bear. It struck me to the heart. I
sat with my eyes shut ten days.

A reflection on the death of Julia.
. 2. But losses and pains I considered were the portion of mortals in this
trying state, and from thence we ought to learn to give up our own wills; and
to get rid of all eager wishes, and violent affection, that we may take up our
rest wholly in that which pleases God: Carrying our submission to him so far,
as to bless his correcting hand, and kiss that rod that cures our passionate
eagerness, perverseness, and folly.

We ought likewise to learn from such things, to look upon the sad accidents of
life, as not worthy to be compared with what Christ underwent for our sakes,
who, though he was a Son, yet he learnt obedience by the things that he
suffered; and with christian resignation live in a quiet expectance of a future
happy state, after our patience has had its perfect work: Considering that
these light and momentary afflictions, are not worthy to be compared with the
glory that Christ has purchased for us; and if we are faithful to death, has
promised to bestow upon us.

In all these things resigning to the wisdom of God, and not merely to his will
and authority, believing his disposal to be wisest and best; and that his
declarations and promises are true, though we cannot in some cases discern the
reason of such an end, and such means being connected: Nor can imagine how some
promises can be made good. Patience, (I said) my soul! Patience, and what thou
know not now, thou shall know in a little time. Thus I reasoned, as I sat
with my eyes shut.

Thoughts on wives and whores.
. 3. And when I had done, I called to Soto o Finn, my man, to bring the horses
out immediately, and I would go some where or other to see new scenes, and if I
could, get another wife: As I was born with the disease of repletion, and had
made a resolution not to fornicate; it was incumbent on me to have a sister and
companion, with whom I might lawfully carry on the succession. As a friend to
society, and passively-obedient to the laws of my higher country, a wife for
ever, I declared; for, if on losing one, we can be still so fortunate as to get
another, who is pretty without pride; witty without affectation; to virtue only
and her friends a friend:

Whose sense is great, and great her skill,
For reason always guides her will;
Civil to all, to all she is just,
And faithful to her friend and trust:
Whose character, in short, is such,
That none can love or praise too much.
If such a charmer should again appear, and ten thousand such there ever are
among the sex, silly and base though the majority may be; what man could say he
had had enough of wedlock, because he had buried seven such wives? I am sure I
could not. And if, like the men who were but striplings at fourscore, in the
beginning of this world, I was to live for ages, and by accidents lost such
partners as I have described; I would with rapture take hundreds of them to my
breast, one after another, and piously propagate the kind. The most despicable
of all creatures is a whore. An abomination to heaven: And if God was a mere
fanciful fear; yet such a wretch the prostitute is, that neither honor nor
honesty can ever be expected from her. But, in defiance to divine and human
laws, she lives a fee to mankind; to ruin the fortune, pox the body, and for
ever damn the soul of the miserable man, who is dunce enough to become a
Limberham to the execrable wretch. The misfortunes I have known happen to
gentlemen of my acquaintance, by street-whores, chamber-whores, and
kept-whores, would make a volume as large as this I am writing: and leave
another world quite out of the history. I have seen gentlemen of the best
fortunes and education, become worn-out beggars in the streets of London,
without any thing hardly to cover them, by the means of those execrable
harlots; some have become bullies to bawdy-houses; and many I have beheld going
to the gallows, by maintaining the falsest and least-engaging of women: But
take a modest sensible woman to your heart, who has the fear of the great God
before her eyes, and a regard to the laws of her country: Share your fortune
generously with her, that she may have her innocent amusements and dress, be
for ever good-humoured, be true to her bed, and every felicity you may taste
that it is possible to enjoy in this lower hemisphere. Let a wife be our
choice, as we are rationals.

The state of Orton-lodge, on my arrival there.
. 4. With these notions in my head, I mounted my horse; and determined, in the
first place, to pay a visit to my two beauties at Orton-lodge, who were by this
time at age, and see what opinions they had acquired, and if they had any
command for me: But when I arrived at my romantic spot, I found the ladies were
gone, all places shut up, and no soul there; the key of the house-door was left
for me, and a note fastened to it, to inform me how the affair was.

SIR,
Not having had the favor of hearing from you for almost three years, and
despairing of that honor and happiness any more, we have left your fine
solitude, to look after our fortunes, as we are of age; and on enquiry have
found, that old Cock, our cruel guardian, is dead and gone. We are under
infinite obligations to you, have an extreme sense of your goodness, and hope,
if you are yet in the land of the living, that we shall soon be so happy as to
get some account of you, to the end we may return the weighty balance due from,

SIR, Your most obliged, and ever humble servants,


From the date of this letter it appeared, that they were not a month gone
before my arrival; but to what place they said not, and it was in vain for me
to enquire. I found every thing in good order, and all the goods safe; the
garden full of fruits and vegetables, and plenty of various eatables in the
house, pickled, potted, and preserved. As it was in the month of June, the
solitude looked vastly charming in it is vales and forest, its rocks and waters;
and for a month I strove to amuse myself there, in fishing, shooting, and
improving the ground; but it was so dull, so sad a scene, when I missed the
bright companions I had with me in former days; who used to wander with me in
the valleys, up the hills, by the streams, and make the whole a paradise all
the long day, that I could not bear it longer than four weeks; and rid from
thence to Dr. Stanvil's seat, to ask him how he did, and look once more at that
fine curiosity, Miss Dunk that was, but at the time I am speaking of, his wife.
However, before I left my lodge, I made a discovery one day, as I was exploring
the wild country, round my little house, that was entertaining enough, and to
this day, in remembrance, seems to me so agreeable, that I imagine a relation
of this matter may be grateful to my Readers. It contains the story of a lady,
who cannot be enough admired, can never be sufficiently praised.

The History of the beautiful LEONORA.
. 5. As I rambled one summer's morning, with my gun and my dog; over the vast
mountains, which surrounded me at Orton-lodge, I came as the sun was rising to
a valley about four miles from my house, which I had not seen before, as the
way to it, over the Fells, was a dangerous road. It was green and flowery, had
clumps of oaks in several spots, and from the hovering top of a precipice at
the end of the glin, a river falls ingulphed in rifted rocks. It is a fine
rural scene.

Here I sat down to rest myself, and was admiring the natural beauties of the
place, when I saw three females turn into the vale, and walk toward the
water-fall. One of them, who appeared to be the mistress, had an extravagance
of beauty in her face, and a form such as I had not often seen. The others were
pretty women, dressed like quakers, and very clean. They came very near the water
where I was, but did not see me, as I was behind two rocks which almost joined:
And after they had looked a while at the headlong river, they went back, and
entering a narrow-way between two hills disappeared. I was greatly surprised at
what I had seen, not imagining I had such a neighbor in Richmondshire, and
resolved to know who this beauty was. The wonders of her face, her figure, and
her mien, were striking to the last degree.

Arising then as soon as they were out of sight, I walked on to the turning I
saw them enter; and in half an hour's time came to a plain, through which several
brooks wandered, and on the margin of one of them, was a grove and a mansion.
It was a sweet habitation, at the entrance of the little wood; and before the
door, on banks of flowers, sat the illustrious owner of this retreat, and her
two maids. In such a place, in such a manner, so unexpectedly to find so
charming a woman, seemed to me as pleasing an incident as could be met with in
traveling over the world.

At my coming near this lady she appeared to be astonished, and to wonder much
at seeing such an inhabitant in that part of the world: but on pulling off my
hat, and telling her I came to visit her as her neighbor; to pay my humble
respects to her, and beg the honor of her acquaintance; she asked me, from
what vale or mountain I came, and how long I had been a resident in that wild
part of the world? This produced a compend of some part of my story, and when I
had done, she desired, me to walk in. Coffee and hot rolls was soon brought,
and we breakfasted cheerfully together. I took my leave soon after, having made
her a present of some black cocks and a hare I had shot that morning; and
hoped, if it was possible to find an easy way to my lodge, which I did not yet
know, that I should some time or other be honored with her presence at my
little house; which was worth her seeing, as it was situated in the most
delightful part of this romantic silent place, and had many curiosities near
it; that in the mean time, if it was agreeable, I would wait upon her again,
before I left Richmondshire, which would be soon: For I only came to see how
things were, and was obliged to hasten another way. This beauty replied, that
it would give her pleasure to see me, when I had a few hours to spare. Three
times more then I went very soon; we became well acquainted, and after dinner
one day, she gave me the following relation.

My name was Leonora Sarsfield before I married an Irishman, one Burk, whom I
met at Avignon in France. He is one of the handsomest men of the age, though his
hopes were all his fortune; but proved a villain as great as ever disgraced
mankind. His breeding and his eloquence, added to his fine figure, induced me
to fancy him an angel of a man, and imagine I had well bestowed a hundred
thousand pounds, to make him great, and as happy as the day is long: For three
months he played the god, and I fondly thought there was not such another happy
woman as myself in all the world. I was mistaken. Burk found out by some means
or other, that I had concealed five thousand pounds of my fortune from his
knowledge; and that I was in my heart so good a protestant, that it was
impossible to bring me over to popery, or ever get me to be an idolater at the
mass, before the tiny god of dough: -- that I could never be brought to look
upon the invented superstitions, and horrible corruptions of the church of
Rome, as the true religion; nor be ever persuaded to assist at the Latin
service in that communion, as it must be an abomination to Christ and to God,
if the gospel may be depended upon as the rule of faith: -- When Burk perceived
these things, he threw off the disguise, and appeared a monster instead of a
man, as he was a bigot of the first order, a furious papist, (which I did not
know, when we married;) and as he was by nature as cruel, as he was avaricious
by principle, he began to use me in the vilest manner, and by words and deeds,
did all he could to make my life a burden to me. He was for ever abusing me in
the vilest language; cursing me for a heretic for ever damned; and by blows
compelling me to inform him where my money was. He has left me all over blood
very often, and when he found I still held out, and would not discover to him
what remained of my fortune; nor, which I valued much more than my money,
violate my religion, by renouncing the customs and practice of the reformed
church, and joining in the sinful worship of the mass; he came to me one night
with a small oak sapling, and beat me in such a manner as left me almost dead.
He then went out of the house, told me he would return by twelve, and make me
comply, or he would break every bone in my body. This happened at a
country-seat of mine in this shire; all the servants being obliged to lie every
night in an out-house, that he might have the more power over me. His excessive
avarice was but one cause of this inhuman behavior: It was the zeal of this
raging bigot for his ever-cursed popery, that made him act the unrelenting
inquisitor.

A reflection on popery.
I asked you, Sir, before I began my story, if you were a catholic, and as you
assured me you were the very reverse, I may indulge myself a little in
expressing my resentments against that religion of Satan, which the Popish
doctors drew out of the bottomless pit. It is a religion formed in hell by
devils, and from them brought by those arch-politicians, the mass-priests, to
make the world their slaves, or rack the human race to death, by torments that
would perhaps melt even devils. O bloody and infernal scheme of worship! Surely
there is some chosen curse, some hidden thunder in the stores of heaven, red
with uncommon wrath, to blast the men, who owe their greatness to their
apostasy from the religion of Christ Jesus; and to the woes and pains they lay
on mankind. By the religion of modern Rome, you see in me a wife almost
tortured to extinction by a holy Roman catholic husband: Nor am I the only
married protestant woman, who has felt the stripes and bruises of a merciless
popish companion. Thousands to be sure have suffered as well as I upon the same
account, though none in so miserable a manner. Even fathers have lost all bowels
for their children, and become the most violent persecutors, when the blessed
religion of popery has been in dispute. Children, for it is sake, have destroyed
their parents; and the world has been turned into a field of blood, to feed and
support those dreadful slaughterers, the mass-priests; and gratify the blind
and impious religious fancies of their well-taught religionists, commonly
called catholics. What I have suffered gives me a true sense of popery. It has
made me consider its errors and iniquities with double attention. I tremble at
the thoughts of its prevailing in this land. An Address to the Protestant
Ladies of Great Britain.
What a thing, Ladies, is Popery! Whether we consider it in a religious view,
or regard it as a political contrivance, to gratify the avarice, and ambition
of the clergy, it appears the just object of our contempt, as well as of our
abhorrence. It does not only make its priests the slaughterers of mankind;
witness the inquisition, the Morisco's, Thorn The Morisco's were expelled
Spain, A. D. 1492. -- The inquisition was erected four years after; -- and the
doings at Thorn, (by which the quantity of blood formerly spilt on the ground
by ever-cursed Popery was increased) in the year 1724.
, England, Ireland, France, the Low Countries, Hungary, and other theaters of
barbarity, the most shocking and inhuman; but it causes even husbands to become
mere devils to wives, who are angels of women in mind and body, and can only be
charged with their being protestants. So Burk the papist behaved to one of the
finest and most excellent women I have seen. Nor was this lady the only unhappy
one I have known made so by popish husbands. I have seen a thousand protestant
wives, the most amiable and worthy women, as wretched as cruelty could make
them, by their husband's zeal for the mass-priests religion; a religion fit
only for hell, and that ought to make every protestant female tremble at the
idea of a catholic husband: He may be as kind and good to a Romish wife, as it
is possible for man to be to a woman; but if he marries a protestant, he must
be a Satan to her by virtue of his religion. Never hearken then, O ye
protestant ladies, to a popish suitor; however rich or outwardly agreeable he
may be. Think of the principles and spirit of that church, whose unsuccessful
attempts on our religion and liberties, have given occasion for the solemnity
of the 5th of November, and that of the 23d of October. Blood and cruelty are
her constitution: And by those principles and practices with regard to civil
society, as well as by her doctrines, she promotes infidelity, and strives to
render the word of God of none effect. She destroys the credibility of the
gospel. -- Could that religion come down from heaven, which claims a right not
only to persecute single persons, but to devote whole nations to destruction by
the blackest treachery, and most inhuman massacres; -- and which teaches such
absurdities as transubstantiation, masses, purgatory, penances, indulgences,
and attrition: -- Absurdities that dissipate the poor Romans of those guilty
fears, which natural conscience might otherwise keep alive in men. Such things
(without mentioning the adoration of the cross and other images, and the
increasing multitude of imaginary mediators), entirely destroy the credibility
of any system with which they are connected. God cannot be the author of a
scheme which weakens and corrupts the law of nature. -- No popery then for you.






But as to my tragical relation, (continued Leonora:) -- Being thus left by
Burk in this sad situation, bleeding, and miserable with pains, but still in
dread of worse usage on his return; I crawled down stairs, to a small door in a
back place, which opened to a private way out of the house. This was known only
to myself, as it was a passage my father had made, (in case of thieves, or any
villains,) from a little unfrequented cellar, by a narrow ascending arch, to a
thicket in the corner of a shrubby field, at a small distance from the house.
To a labyrinth made in this small grove I made what haste I could, and had not
been long there, before I perceived through the trees my inhuman husband; and
as he came near me, heard him say, she shall tell me where my money is, (for
all she has is mine;) and worship our lady and the host, or I will burn her
flesh off her bones, and make her feel as many torments here, as the heretics
are tortured with in everlasting pain. The sight of the monster made me tremble
to so violent a degree, that I was scarcely able to proceed to the cottage of a
poor woman, my sure friend, about two miles from the place I was hid in; but I
did my best to creep through cross ways, and after many difficulties, and
suffering much by going over ditches, I got to my resting place. The old woman,
my nurse, screeched at the sight of me, as I was sadly torn, and all over gore.
Such a spectacle to be sure has seldom been seen. But by peace and proper
things, I got well again in two months, and removed to this lone house, which
my father had built in this spot for his occasional retirement. Here I have
been for two years past, and am as happy as I desire to be: Nay vastly so, as I
am now free and delivered from a monster, whose avarice and cruelty made me a
spectacle to angels and men: Because, Sir, I would not reduce myself to the
state of a beggar, to satisfy his insatiable love of money: nor worship his
dead-woman, and bit of bread; his rabble of, saints, images, relics, and that
sovereign cheat, the Pope; because I would not give up all I had, and become an
idolater, as far more despicable and sinful than the ancient Pagans; as the
Romish ritual and devotions, are more stupid and abominable than the Heathen
religion; for disobedience in these respects, pains and penalties without
ceasing were my appointment, and I was for some months as miserable as the
damned.

Such, Sir, was my fatal marriage, which I thought would be a stock of such
felicities, that time only by many years could reduce to an evanescent state,
and deprive me of: As Venus was at the bridal with her whole retinue; the
ardent amorous boy, the sister-graces in their loose attire; Aglavia, Thalia,
and Euphrosine, bright, blooming, and gay; and was attended by Youth, that
wayward thing without her; was conducted by Mercury, the god of eloquence, and
by Pitho, the goddess of persuasion; as all seemed pleasurable and enchanting,
my young imagination formed golden scenes, and painted a happiness quite
glorious and secure. But how precarious and perishing is what we mortals call
felicity! Love and his mother disappeared very soon, as I have related; and to
them succeeded impetuous passion, intense, raging, terrible, with all the
furies in the train. The masked hero I had married was a Phalaris, a miser, a
papist; a wretch who had no taste for love, no conception of virtue, no sense
of charms; but to gold and popery would sacrifice every thing that is fair and
laudable. Le Diable a quatre he shined in as a player, and was the Devil
himself in flesh and blood. Where is the rest of your with uplifted arm, was
the thundering cry in my ears. You shall be a catholic, damn you, or I Will pinch
off the flesh from your bones.

A remark on this lady.
Here the beautiful Leonora had done, and I wondered very greatly at her
relation: Nor was her action in speaking it, and the spirit with which she
talked, less surprising. With admiration I beheld her, and was not a little
pleased, that I had found in my neighborhood so extraordinary a person, and so
very fine an original. This lady had some reason to abhor the word catholic,
and might well be angry with popery, though she carried her resentment a little
too far; but had the Reader seen her attitude, her energies, and the faces she
made, when she mentioned the corruptions of popery, or the word husband; sure I
am, it would be thought much more striking than Garrick in Richard, or Shuter
in his exhibition of Old Philpot. I was greatly delighted with her, and as she
was very agreeble in every thing, I generally went every second day to visit
her, while I continued in Richmondshire; but this was not long. I journeyed
from thence to pay my respects to Dr. Stanvil and his lady, whom I have
mentioned before. And what happened there, I shall relate in the next Section:
Only stop a few minutes my good Reader, to peruse the translation of the tenth
Satire of Juvena1; which is placed here by way of entertainment, as I said in
another place, and to make good my assertion, that we know not what we would be
at in our fancies and our fears.

The Tenth Satire of Juvenal.
SURVEY mankind, muster the herd
From smoothest chin to deepest beard;
Search every climate, view each nation,
From lowest to the highest station;
From Eastern to the Western Indies,
From frozen Poles to the line that singes;
Scarce will you find one mortal wight,
Knows good from ill, or wrong from right: The design of this fine Satire is to
show, that endowments and blessings of the mind, as wisdom, virtue, justice,
and integrity of life, are the only things worth praying for.

'Cause clouds of lust and passion blind,
And bribe with interests the mind;
And while they combat in our heart,
Our fondness crowns the conquering part.
What is the thing under the sun,
That we with reason seek or shun?
Or justly by our judgment weighed,
Should make us fond of, or afraid?
Whatever is luckily begun,
Brings sure repentance at long-run.
The distant object looming great,
Possessed proves often an empty cheat;
And he who wins the wished for prize,
A trouble often dearly buys.
Some for their family importune,
And beg their ruin for a fortune.
The courteous gods granting their prayers,
Have entailed curses on their heirs.
Of wizards some inquire their doom,
Greedy to know events to come,
And by their over caution run*
On the same fare they strove to shun:
Some have petitioned to be great,
And eminent in church and state.
This in the war's a famous leader,
The Other at bar a cunning pleader;
The cause on either-side insure you,
By dint of noise stun judge and jury:
And if the business will not bear water,
Banter and perplex the matter.
But their obstrep'rous eloquence
Has failed even in their own defense:
And saving others by haranguing,
Have brought themselves at last to hanging.
Milo presuming on his strength,
Caused his own destiny at length.
The greedy care of heaping wealth,
Damns many a soul and ruins health,
And in an apoplectic fit,
Sinks them downright into the pit.
How many upstarts crept from low
Condition, vast possessions show?
Whose estate's audit so immense
Exceeds all prodigal expense.
With which compare that spot of earth,
To which these mushrooms owe their birth:
Their manners to dad's cottage show,
As Greenland whales to dolphins do.
In Nero's plotting dismal times,
Riches were judged sufficient crimes.
First swear them traitors to the state,
Then for their pains share their estate.
Fat forfeitures their toils reward:
Poor rogues may pass without regard.
Some are hooked in for sense and wit,
And some condemned for want of it.
The over-rich Longinus dies,
His bright heaps dazzled envious eyes.
Neither could philosophy,
Wisdom, desert, or piety,
Rich Seneca from his pupil save,
It Is fit he send him to a grave,
And then resume the wealth he gave.
The guards the palaces beset,
For noble game they pitch their net:
While from alarms and pangs of fear,
Securely sleeps the cottager.
If you by night shall happen late,
To travel with a charge of plate;
With watchful eyes and panting heart,
Surpised, each object makes you start:
While racked with doubts, oppressed with fear,
Each bush does an armed thief appear:
A shaken reed will terror strike,
Mistaken for a brandished pike.
Before the thief, the empty clown The Latin of these two lines is -- Cantabit
vacuus coram latrone viator. Which Dryden translates thus --

The beggar sings, even when he sees the place
Beset with thieves, and never mends his pace.
Shadwell, Poet Laureat in King William's time, does it thus --

While the poor man, void of all precious things,
In company of thieves, jogs on and sings.
Holiday thus --

Before the thief, who travels empty, sings. Stapylton thus --

The poor wayfaring man, that does not bring
A charge along, before the thief will sing.


Sings unconcerned and travels on The Latin of these two lines is -- Cantabit
vacuus coram latrone viator. Which Dryden translates thus --

The beggar sings, even when he sees the place
Beset with thieves, and never mends his pace.
Shadwell, Poet Laureat in King William's time, does it thus --

While the poor man, void of all precious things,
In company of thieves, jogs on and sings.
Holiday thus --

Before the thief, who travels empty, sings. Stapylton thus --

The poor wayfaring man, that does not bring
A charge along, before the thief will sing.

.
With warm petitions most men ply
The gods, their bags may multiply;
That riches may grow high and rank,
Outswelling others in the bank.
But from plain wood and earthen cups,
No poisoned draught the peasant sups.
Of the gold goblet take thou care,
When sparkling wine's spic'd by thy heir:
Then who can blame that brace of wise men,
That in differing moods despise men:
The old merry lad saunters the streets
And laughs, and drolls at all he meets:
For pastime rallies, flouts, and fools 'em,
Shams, banters, mimics, ridicules 'em.
The other sage in maudling wise,
Their errors mourns with weeping eyes.
Dull fools with ease can grin and sneer,
And buffoons flout with saucy jeer.
What source could constant tears supply,
To feed the sluices of each eye;
Or to others merry humor make,
His spleen continually to shake?
Could he in sober honest times
With sharp conceit tax petty crimes:
And every where amongst the rout,
Find follies for his wit to flout; Juvenal here means Democritus.

Which proves that Gotham and gross climes,
Produce prodigious wits sometimes.
The joys and fears of the vain crowd,
And whimp'ring tears he would jear aloud;
Wisely secure, fortune deride,
By foppish mortals deified;
Bid her be hanged, and laugh at fate,
When threatened at the highest rate;
Whilst fools for vain and hurtful things,
Pour out their prayers and offerings,
Fast'ning petitions on the knees The Latin of these two lines is -- Propter
quae fas est genua incerare deorum. Which Mr. Dryden does not translate at all:
-- His lines are --

He laughs at all the vulgar cares and fears:
At their vain triumphs, and their vainer tears:
An equal temper in his mind he found,
When Fortune flattered him, and when she frowned:
It Is plain from hence that what our vows request,
Are hurtful things, or useless at the best.

,
Of their regardless deities The Latin of these two lines is -- Propter quae
fas est genua incerare deorum. Which Mr. Dryden does not translate at all: --
His lines are --

He laughs at all the vulgar cares and fears:
At their vain triumphs, and their vainer tears:
An equal temper in his mind he found,
When Fortune flattered him, and when she frowned:
It Is plain from hence that what our vows request,
Are hurtful things, or useless at the best.

.
For place and power, how many men vie,
Procuring mortal hate and envy;
Heralds long-winded titles sound,
Which the vain owners often confound.
Down go their statues in disgrace;
The party hangs up in the place.
In rage they break chariot triumphant,
Because a knave before set his rump on it:
Poor horses suffer for no fault,
Unless by bungling workmen wrought.
The founder's furnace grows red hot,
Sejanus statue goes to pot:
That head lately adored, and reckoned
In all the universe the second,
Melted, new forms and shapes assumes,
Of piss-pots, frying-pans, and spoons Mr. Dryden's English is, -- Sejanus,
almost first of Roman names,
The great Sejanus, crackles in the flames:
Formed in the forge, the pliant brass is laid
On anvils: And of head and limbs are made,
Pans, cans, and piss-pots, a whole kitchen trade.
The Latin is, --

Jam strident ignes, jam follibus atque caminis
Ardet adoratum populo caput, et crepat ingens
Sejanus: Deinde ex facie toto orb secunda
Fiunt urceoli, pelves, sartago, patellae.

.
The crowd o'erjoyed that Caesar's living,
Petition for a new thanksgiving;
How the base rout insult to see
Sejanus dragged to destiny Sejanus, the vile minister of Tiberius, was
executed by order of the Emperor, A. D. 31. and to prevent his suspecting any
such thing, and providing against the calamity, which the favorite might
easily have done, as he commanded the Praetorians, and had all power given him,
his master named him his colleague in the consulship; which of all things
Sejanus most desired, and thought the highest mark of his sovereign's
affection. So true it is that we know not what we wish for.
,
Would you on these conditions, Sir,
Be favorite and prime minister,
As was Sejanus? Stand possessed
Of honors, power, and interest;
Dispose supreme commands at will,
Promote, disgrace, preserve, or kill;
Have foot and horse-guards, the command
Of armies both by sea and land.
Had you not better ask in prayer,
To be some petty country mayor;
There domineer, and when your pleasure's
Condemn light weights, break false measures;
Though meanly clad in safe estate,
Than choose Sejanus robes and fate?
Sejanus then, we must conclude,
Courting his bane, mistook the good.
Crassus and Pompey's fate of old,
The truth of this sure maxim told:
And his who first bowed Rome's stiff neck,
And made the world obey his beck Julius Caesar, who acquired the sovereign
sway by art and slaughter, and when a tyrant, fell by his own desires.
.
The novice in his accidence,
Dares pray his wit and eloquence
May rival Roman Cicero's fame,
And Greek Demosthenes' high name:
Yet to both these their swelling vein
Of wit and fancy proved their bane.
No pleading dunce's jobbernowl
Revenge ever doomed to grace a pole.
The trophies which the vanquished field
Do to the glorious victors yield,
Triumphant conquerors can bless,
With more than human happiness:
This, Roman, Grecian, and barbarian,
Spurred to acts hazardous and daring;
In sweat and blood spending their days,
For empty fame, and fading bays.
It Is the immoderate thirst of fame
Much more than virtue does inflame:
Which none for worse or better take,
But for her dower and trapping's sake.
The fond ambition of a few,
Many vast empires overthrew;
While their achievements with their dust,
They vainly to their tombstones trust.
For sepulchers like bodies lie,
Swallowed in death's, obscurity The beautiful Latin is, -- -- Et laudis
titulique Cupido
Haesuri saxis cinerum custodibus: ad quae
Discutienda valent sterilis mala robora ficus:
Quandoquidem data sunt ipsis quoque fata sepulchris.
Which Mr. Dryden renders in the following manner.
This avarice of praise in times to come,
Those long inscriptions crowded on the tomb,
Should some wild fig tree take her native bent,
And heave below the gaudy monument,
Would crack the marble titles, and disperse
The characters of all the lying verse.
For sepulchers themselves must crumbling fall
In time's abyss, the common grave of all.

.
Behold how small an urn contains
The mighty Hannibal's remains:
That hero whose vast swelling mind
To Afric could not be confined:
Nature's impediments he past,
And came to Italy at last:
There, after towns and battles won,
He cries, comrades, there is nothing done,
Unless our conquering powers
Break down Rome's gates, level her towers,
Root up her posts, and break her chains,
And knock out all opposers brains:
Whilst our troops scour the city thorough,
And fix our standard in Saburra The greatest street in Rome.
.
But what catastrophe of fate,
Does on this famous leader wait:
His conduct's baffled, army's broke,
Carthage puts on the Roman yoke:
Whilst flight and banishment's his fate,
His ruined country's scorn and hate.
Go, madman, act thy frantic part,
Climb horrid Alps, with pains and art,
Go, madman, to be with mighty reputation,
The subject of a declamation The Latin is, -- -- I demens currepur Alps.
Ut pueris placeas, et declamatio fias.
Go, climb the rugged Alps, ambitious fool,
To please the boys, and be a theme at school.
DRYDEN.

One world's too mean, a trifling thing,
For the young Macedonian king;
He raves like one in banishment,
In narrow craggy island pent:
In one poor globe does sweat and squeeze,
Wedged in and crampt in little-ease.
But he who human race once scorned,
And said high Jove King Philip horned,
While managed oracles declare
The spark great Ammon's son and heir;
At Babylon, for all his huffing,
Finds ample room in narrow coffin.
Man swells with bombast of inventions,
When stripped, death shows his true dimensions.
So do we read wild Xerxes rent
Mount Athos from the continent,
And in a frolic made a shift,
To set it in the sea adrift:
With ships paved over the Hellespont,
And built a floating bridge upon it:
Drove chariots over by this device,
As coaches ran upon the ice.
He led so numberless a rout,
As at one meal drank rivers out.
This tyrant we in story find,
Was used to whip and flog the wind;
Their jailor Eolus in prison,
Never forced them with so little reason:
Nor could blue Neptune's godhead save him,
But he with fetters must enslave him.
Yet after all these roaring freaks,
Routed and broke he homeward sneaks;
And ferries over in fishing-boat
Through shoals of carcases afloat;
His hopes all vanished, bilked of all
His gaudy dreams: See pride's just fall.
The frequent subject of our prayers,
Is length of life and many years:
But what incessant plagues and ills,
The gulf of age with mischief fills!
We can pronounce none happy, none,
Till the last sand of life be run.
Marius's long life was the only reason,
Of exile and Minturnian prison.
Kind fate designing to befriend
Great Pompey, did a fever send,
That should with favorable doom,
Prevent his miseries to come:
But nations for his danger grieved,
Make public prayers, and he is reprieved:
Fate then that honored, head did save,
And to insulting Caesar gave.
It Is the fond mother's constant prayer,
Her children may be passing fair:
The boon they beg with sighs and groans,
Incessantly on marrow-bones.
Yet bright Lucretia's sullen fate,
Shows fair ones are not fortunate.
Virginia's chance may well confute you,
Good luck don't always wait on beauty.
Let not your wills then once repine,
Whatever the gods for you design.
They better know than human wit,
That does our exigence befit.
Their wise all-seeing eyes discern,
And give what best suits our concern.
We blindly harmful things implore,
Which they refusing, love us more.
Shall men ask nothing then? Be wise,
And listen well to sound advice.
Pray only that in body sound,
A firm and constant mind be found:
A mind no fear of death can daunt,
Nor exile, prison, pains nor want:
That justly reckons death to be
Kind author of our liberty:
Banishing passion from our breast,
Resting content with what is possessed:
That every honest action loves,
And great Alcides toil approves,
Above the lusts, feasts, and beds of down,
Which did Sardanapalus drown.
This mortals to themselves may give;
Virtue's the happy rule to live.
Chance bears no sway where wisdom rules,
An empty name adored by fools.
Folly blind Fortune did create,
A goddess, and to heaven translate. As I had not room for all the Xth Satire,
what is seen here, is rather an abridgement than an entire version: But the
whole sense of the author is preserved, though several of his examples and
illustrations are left out.

And so excellent a thing, Dr. Burnet bishop of Salisbury thought this Satire,
that in his famous Pastoral Letter he recommmends it, (and the Satires of
Persius), to the perusal and practice of the divines in his diocese, as the
best common places for their sermons; and what may be taught with more profit
to the audience, than all the new speculations of divinity, and controversies
concerning faith; which are more for the profit of the shepherd, than for the
edification of the flock. In the Satires, nothing is proposed but the quiet and
tranquillity of the mind. Virtue is lodged at home, (as Mr. Dryden expresses
it, in his fine dedication to the Earl of Dorset), and diffused to the
improvement and good of human kind. Passion, interest, ambition, mystery, fury,
and every cruel consequence, are banished from the doctrine of these stoics,
and only the moral virtues inculcated, for the perfection of mankind.

But so unreasonable and infatuated are our shepherds, too many of them I mean,
that a rational christian cannot go to church without being shocked at the
absurd and impious work of their pulpits. In town and country, almost every
Sunday, those bright theologers are for ever on the glories of trinity in
unity, and teaching their poor people that God Almighty came down from heaven
to take flesh upon him, and make infinite satisfaction to himself. This is the
cream of christianity, in the account of those teachers. The moral virtues are
nothing, compared to a man or a woman's swallowing the divine mystery of an
incarnate God Almighty. Over and over have I heard a thousand of them on this
holy topic, sweating and drivelling at each corner of their mouths with
eagerness to convert the world to their mysteries. -- The adorable mystery!
says one little priest, in my neighborhood in Westminster. -- The more
incomprehensible and absurd it appears to human reason, the greater honor you
do to heaven in believing it, says another wise man in the country. But tell
me, ye excellent divines, tell me in print if you please, if it would not be
doing more honor to the law of heaven, to inform the people, that the true
christian profession is, to pray to God our Father for grace, mercy, and peace,
through the Lord Jesus Christ; without ever mentioning the Athanasian scheme,
or trinity in unity: (which you know no more of than so many pigs do, because
it is a mere invention, and not to be found in the Bible): And in the next
place, to tell your flocks in serious and practical address, that their main
business is, as the disciples of the holy Jesus, a good life; -- to strive
against sin continually, and be virtuous and useful to the utmost of our power;
-- to imitate the purity and goodness of their great master, (the Author of
eternal salvation to all them that obey him), and by repentance and holiness of
heart, in a patient continuance in well-doing, make it the labor of their
every day, to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world: You
must become partakers of a divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is
in the world through lust, and by acquiring the true principles of christian
perfection, render yourselves fit for the heavenly bliss. This, my dearly
beloved brethren, is the great design of Christ and his gospel. You must
receive Jesus Christ as your Savior and Mediator, -- you must be exercised
unto godliness, and have the ways of God in your hearts. By a course of
obedience and patience, you must follow the captain of our salvation to his
glory.

To this purpose, I say, our clergy ought to preach; and if in so saying, they
think me wrong, I call upon them to tell me so in print, by argument; that I
may either publicly acknowledge a mistaken judgment; -- or prove, that too many
ministers mislead christian people in the article of faith and practice. By the
strict rules of christian simplicity and integrity, I shall ever act.



SECTION XIV.
Bear me, ye friendly powers, to gentler scenes,
To shady bowers, and never-fading greens;
To flowery meads, the vales, and mazy woods,
Some sweet soft seat, adorned with springs and floods
Where with the muses, I may spend my days,
And steal myself from life by slow decays.
With age unknown to pain or sorrow blessed,
To the dark grave retiring as to rest;
While gently with one sigh this mortal frame,
Dissolving turns to ashes whence it came;
And my freed soul departs without a groan;
In transport wings her flight to worlds unknown.

The Author goes to visit Dr. Stanvil and his lady. Aet. 29. July 2, 1734.
. 1. FROM Orton-lodge I went to Bassora, to pay my respects to Dr. Stanvil and
his charming consort. I was received by them both with the greatest goodness
and civility; but as before, this lady did not seem to have had any former
acquaintance, one might well think from the part she acted, that she had never
seen me, till the accident I have related brought me to her husband's house. I
did not however even hint any thing to the contrary, but turning to the Doctor
a little after my arrival, began to ask him some questions.

A question proposed to Dr. Stanvil, how the Spanish fly acts in
blister-stupors.
. 2. As he had an Essay on fevers in his hand, when I entered the room, I
requested to know, how he accounted for the effects of Cantharides, in raising
and strengthening a low trembling pulse, and driving the natural heat and
efflatus of the blood outward, -- in giving relief in delirious ravings,
stupors, and loss of reason, -- in reducing continual fevers to distinct
remissions, -- and in cleansing and opening the obstructed glands and
lymphatics, so as to bring on the critical sweats, let loose the saliva and
glandular secretions, and bring down the thick soluble urine? How does
blistering, so happily brought in by the physical bully of this age, Dr.
Radcliff, so wonderfully cool and dilute the blood? It seems to me somewhat
strange.

The Doctor's opinion, how the cantharides act on the body in blisters.
. 3. Dr. Stanvil replied: It is easily accounted for. The Spanish fly, that
extremely hot and perfectly caustic insect, is stocked with a subtle, active,
and extremely pungent salt, which enters the blood upon the application of the
blister, and passes with it through the several glandular strainers and
secretory ducts. This stimulating force of the fly's salt, occasions the pain
felt in making the water with a blister, (which may be taken off by a thin
emulsion made with the pulp of roasted apples in milk and water), and causes
the liberal, foul and stinking sweats, while the Epispastic is on.

This being evident, it is plain from thence, that the penetrating salts of the
fly, that is, the volatile pungent parts of the cantharides, act in the blood
by dissolving, attenuating, and ratifying the viscid cohesions of the lymph and
serum; by stimulating the nervous coats of the vessels, throw off their
stagnating viscidities, and by cleansing the glands, and forcing out the
coagulated serum, restore the circulation and freedom of lymph from the
arteries to the veins; opening, scouring and cleansing at the same time, the
expurgatory glands.

The wisdom and goodness of God in the production of the Spanish fly, for the
benefit of man.
In short, as common cathartics purge the guts and cleanse and throw off their
clammy, stagnating, and obstructing contents, by rarifying and dissolving the
viscid cohesions of the fluids, and by stimulating the solids; so do the active
salts of the fly penetrate the whole animal machine, become a glandular
lymphatic purge, and perform the same thing in all the small straining
conveying pipes, that common purgatives effect in the intestines: and as by
this means, all the sluices and outlets of the glandular secretions are opened,
the cantharides must be cooling, diluting, and refrigerating in their effects
to the greatest degree, though so very hot, caustic, and pungent in themselves.
So wonderfully has the great Creator provided for his creature, man; in giving
him not only a variety of the most pleating food; but so fine a medicine,
(among a thousand others) as the Spanish fly, to save him from the destroying
fever, and restore him to health again. It is not by a discharge of serum, as
too many doctors imagine, that a blister relieves, for five times the quantity
may be brought off by bleeding, vomiting, or purging; but the benefit is
entirely owing to that heating, attenuating, and pungent salt of this fly, (and
this fly only), which the divine power and goodness has made a lymphatic
purgative, or glandular cathartic for the relief of man, in this fatal and
tormenting malady. Vast is our obligation to God for all his providential
blessings. Great are the wonders that he does for the children of men.

Dr. Stanvil's sudden death, and the cause of it.
. 4. Here the Doctor dropped off his chair, just as he had pronounced the word
men, and in a moment became a lifeless sordid body. His death was occasioned by
the blowing up of his stomach, as I found upon opening his body, at the request
of his lady. -- When the blood which is confined within the vessels of the
human body, is agitated with a due motion, it maintains life; but if there be a
stagnation of it in an artery, it makes an aneurism; in a vein, a varix; under
the skin, a bruise; in the nose, it may excite an haemorrhage; in the vessels
of the brain, an apoplexy; in the lungs, an haemoptoe; in the cavity of the
thorax, an empyema; and when it perfectly stagnates there, immediate death.

An animal (observe me Reader) must live so long as this fluid circulates
through the conical pipes in his body, from the lesser base in the center, the
heart, to the greater in the extreme parts; and from the capillary evanescent
arteries, by the nascent returning veins to the heart again; but when this
fluid ceases to flow through the incurved canals, and the velocities are no
longer in the inverse duplicate ratio of the inflated pipes, then it dies. The
animal has done for ever with food and sex; the two great principles which move
this world, and produce not only so much honest industry, but so many wars and
fightings, such cruel oppressions, and that variety of woes we read of in the
tragical history of the world. Even one of them does wonders. Cunnus teterrim^
belli causa. And when united, the force is irresistible.

But as I was saying, when this fluid ceases to flow, the man has done with
lust and hunger. The pope, the warrior, and the maid, are still. The machine
is at absolute rest, that is, in perfect insensibility: And the soul of it is
removed to the vestibulum or porch of the highest holy place; in and Burnet of
the Charter House), as needful to our contact with the material system; -- as
it must exist with a spiritual body to be sure, (says the Rev. Mr. Caleb
Fleming, in his Survey of the search after souls), because of its being present
with its Savior, beholding his glory, who is in human form and figure, which
requires some similitude in the vehicle, in order to the more easy and familiar
society and enjoyment. Or, as the learned Master of Peter-house, Dr. Edmund
Law, and Dr. Sherlock, Bishop of London, informs us, it remains insensible for
ages, till the consummation of all things; -- from the dissolution of the body,
is stupid, senseless, and dead asleep till the resurrection.

Such was the case of my friend, Dr. Stanvil; he dropped down dead at once. A
rarefaction in his stomach, by the heat and fermentation of what he had taken
the night before at supper, destroyed him. That concave viscus, or bowel, which
is seated in the abdomen below the diaphragm, I mean the stomach, was inflamed,
and as the descending trunk of the aorta passes down between it and the spine,
that is, between the stomach and back part of the ribs, the inflation and
distention of the bowel compressed and constringed the transverse section of
the artery aorta, in its descending branch, and by lessening it, impeded the
descent of the blood from the heart, and obliged it to ascend in a greater
quantity than usual to the head. By this means, the parts of the head were
distended and stretched with blood, which brought on an apoplexy, and the
operation upward being violent, the equilibrium was entirely broken, and the
vital tide could flow no more. This I found on opening the body. I likewise
observed that, exclusive of the compressure of the descending trunk of the
artery aorta, the muscular coats of the stomach were stretched, inflated, and
distended; and of consequence, the blood vessels which enter into the
constitution of those muscles, were stretched, dilated, and turgid with blood,
and therefore the blood could not be driven forward in the course of its
circulation with its natural and due velocity, but must prove an obstacle to
the descent of the blood from the heart, and oblige almost the whole tide to
move upwards. This, and the constringing the aorta, at its orifice or
transverse section, between the costae and the bowel called the stomach, is
enough, I assure you, Reader, to knock up the head of a giant, and put a stop
to all the operations of nature. Thus fell this gentleman in the 32d year of
his age.

The character of Dr. Stanvil.
. 5. Whether the learned Dr. Edmund Law N. B. Dr. Law is still master of
Peter-House, Cambridge, and not only one of the most learned men of the age,
but as fine a gentleman and as good a man as lives. His merits, I am sure, as a
scholar and a christian, entitled him to the mastership of St. John's, on the
death of Dr. Newcomb; though he lost it, as often the best men do in respect of
things temporal. But notwithstanding all the fine learning of Dr. Law, I think
he is mistaken in many of his notions, and especially in his Notes on
Archbishop King's book of Evil; as I intend to show in my Notes aforementioned:
His Tritheism likewise requires a few animadversions; which I shall humbly
offer with plainness, fairness, and freedom.


, and the great Dr. Sherlock bishop of London N. B. Dr. Sherlock bishop of
London died at Fulham, after a long and lingering illness, Saturday, July 18,
1761, three months after the great and excellent bishop Hoadley; who departed
this life at Chelsea, April 20, 1761. Sherlock and Hoadley never agreed; and
which of them was right I attempt to show in my Notes on Men and Things and
Books. Which will be published as soon as possible. Why I think Hoadley's
Sermons far preferable to Sherlock's; (vastly beautiful though some things are in
the discourses of the latter); and that my Lord of Winchester's plain account
of the Supper is a most rational and fine performance; as gold to earth in
respect of all that has been written against this book: -- Why, I say, all
Hoadley's Tracts are matchless and invulnerable, and that he was victor in the
Bangorian controversy, the Reader will find in many considerations on these
subjects in the book called Notes, etc. aforementioned.


, be right, in asserting, the human soul sleeps like a bat or a swallow, in
some cavern for a period, till the last trumpet awakens the hero of Voltaire
and Henault, I mean Lewis XIV. to answer for his treachery, falsehood, and
cruelty; or, whether that excellent divine Mr. Fleming has declared the truth,
in maintaining in his late survey, that the conscious scheme was the doctrine
of Christ and his apostles; this however is certain, that my friend Stanvil is
either now present with his Savior, beholding his glory, in a vehicle
resembling the body of our Lord; as the dissenter just mentioned teaches; -- or
if, according to the author of the Considerations on the state of the world,
(Archdeacon Law) and my Lord of London, in his Sermons, the scriptures take no
account of an intermediate state in death, and we shall not awake or be made
alive until the day of judgment; then will my friend have eternal life at the
resurrection; he was as worthy a man as ever lived; an upright christian deist,
whose life was one unmixed scene of virtue and charity. He did not believe a
tittle of our priestly mysteries, or regard that religion which skulks behind
the enormous columns of consecrated opinions; but, as christianity was revealed
from heaven, to bring mankind to the worship of the one supreme God and
governor of the world, and lead them into the paths of humanity, he rejected
the superstition of Monks and their disciples, and in regard to the voice of
reason, and the words of the gospel, adored only the supreme Being, manifested
his love of God by keeping the commandments, and his love of his neighbor, by
doing all the good in his power. Such a man was Dr. John Stanvil. If men of
fortune would form their manners on such a model, virtue by degrees would
spread through the inferior world, and we should soon be free from superstition.

. 6. Having mentioned the sleeping and the conscious schemes, I would here
examine these opinions, and show why I cannot think, a dead inconscious silence
is to be our case till the consummation of the ages; as a happiness so remote
would weaken I believe the energy and influence of our conceptions and
apprehensions, in respect of faith, hope, and expectations. To curb desire, or
suffer severely here, for the sake of truth and virtue, and then cease to be,
perhaps for ten thousand years to come, or much longer; (for there is not any
thing in revelation, or an appearance out of it, that can incline a rational
man to think he is near the day of judgment or general resurrection); this
seems to be an obstacle in the progress of the pilgrim: And therefore, why I
rather think, we step immediately from the dark experiences of this first
state, to a blissful consciousness in the regions of day, and by death are
fixed in an eternal connection with the wise, the virtuous, and the holy: --
This, I say, I would in the next place proceed to treat of, by considering what
the scriptures reveal in relation to death, and what is most probable in
reason; but that it is necessary to proceed in my story.

Mrs. Stanvil's behavior on the death of her husband.
. 7. When the beautiful Mrs. Stanvil saw her husband was really dead, and had
paid that decent tribute of tears to his memory, which was due to a man, who
left her in his will all his estates, real and personal, to be by her disposed
of as she pleased; she sent for me to her chamber the next morning, and after a
long conversation with her, told me, she could now own who she was, and instead
of acting any longer by the directions of her head, let me know from her heart,
that she had still the same regard for me, as when we traveled away together
from her father's house in the West, to the North of England: And if I would
stay at Bassora where I was, but for three months she must be away, she would
then return, and her fortune and hand I might command. This I readily consented
to, and when the funeral was over she departed. For the time agreed on, I
continued in the house, and to a day she was punctual in her return. We were
married the week after, and I was even happier than I had ever been before;
which must amount to a felicity inconceivably great indeed. Six months we
resided at her seat, and then thought it best to pay a visit to my father in
Ireland. We arrived at Bagatrogh Castle in the western extremity of that
island, in the spring of the year 1735, and were most kindly received.

My father longed to see me, and was very greatly rejoiced at my coming; but I
found him in a dying way, paralytic all over, and scarcely able to speak. To my
amazement, he was become as strict a unitarian as myself, and talked with
abhorrence of Athanasian religion. This was owing, he said, to my MS. Remarks I
left with him on Lord Nottingham's Answer to Mr. Whiston's Letter to his
Lordship; which MS. of mine he had often read over when I was gone, and thereby
was thoroughly convinced, on considering my reasoning, that christians are
expressly commanded, upon pain of God's displeasure, to worship one supreme God,
and him only, in the name and through the mediation of Jesus Christ. Upon this
religious practice as a fundamental rule he had at last fixed. He saw it was
the safe way, and would never depart from it. He told me, the parson of his
parish, a right orthodox divine, who had been his chum in the university, and
very intimate with him, was greatly troubled at this change in his sentiments,
and said many severe things; but he no more minded the Athanasians now, than he
did the idolatrous papists. This gave me great pleasure, and recompensed me for
what I had suffered on a religious account. I gave thanks to God that truth
through my means had prevailed. The Reader will find these Remarks of mine, on
Lord Nottingham's Letter to Mr. Whiston, in my Notes relating to men, things,
and books. Which will be published as soon as possible.


THE CONCLUSION.
AND now, my candid Reader, to take my leave of you at this time, I have only
to observe, that as this volume is full large, I cannot add my intended XVth
section, but only say in a short summary, that soon after my arrival at
Bagatrogh Castle, my father's seat on Mall-Bay, on the coast of Galway in
Ireland, the old gentleman died, and as in a passion, he had irrevocably
settled the greatest part of his large estate on a near relation of mine, and
had it not in his power to leave me more than a hundred a year, a little ready
money, and a small ship, which lay before his door in the Bay, he descended to
the grave in great trouble, with many tears. Like old Isaac over Esau, he wept
bitterly, and wished in vain, that it was in his power to undo what he had done.

As soon as my father was buried, I returned to England with my wife, in the
little vessel, now my own, which lay in the Bay, and immediately after landing,
and laying up my ship in a safe place, we went to Bassora again, there lived
for one year as happy as two mortals could be; but in the beginning of the year
1736; she died of the small pox, and to divert my mind, it came into my head to
go to sea, and make some voyages in my own little ship, which was an excellent
one for strength and sailing, though but a sloop of twenty-five tons. I went
captain myself, and had an ingenious young gentleman, one Jackman, for my mate,
who had been in the East Indies several times, six good hands, and two
cabbin-boys. Every thing necessary, convenient, and fit, books, mathematical
instruments, etc. we took on board, and weighed anchor the 5th of July, 1736.

We went on shore at the Canary Islands, the Cape de Verd Islands, and other
places. We passed the Sun in 15 degrees North latitude, and from that time
standing South; crossed the Line; the heats intolerable, and the musquitoes and
bugs insufferable. We soon lost sight of the Northern star, and had the
Crosiers and Magellan clouds in view. In three months time we anchored at St.
Catharine's on the coast of Brazil. The 2d of December we saw the Streights la
Maine, that run betwixt Terra del fuego and Staten, and is the boundary between
the Atlantic and Pacific oceans; but instead of venturing into them, and
hazarding our lives among the impetuous blasts and waves which sweep round Cape
Horn, (as Admiral Anson did the 7th of March 1741, two months too late, by the
fault of the ministry, in his way to the South Seas), we kept out at sea to the
East of Staten-land, and ran to the latitude 64, before we stood to the
Westward. The weather was fine, as it was then the height of summer, to wit, in
December and January. All the occurrences in this course, the discovery we made
in the latitude abovementioned of an inhabited island, governed by a young
Queen, and what appeared and happened there, and in our run from thence to
Borneo and Asia, round the globe; and from China to Europe, on our return home;
with the events we afterward met with, and the observations I made in other
places, the Reader will find in a book called, The Voyages and Travels of Dr.
Lorimer.

Nine years of my life was spent in traveling and sailing about, and at last I
returned to rest and reflect, and in rational amusements pass the remainder of
my time away. I retired to a little flowery retreat I had purchased within a
few miles of London, that I might easily know what was doing in this
hemisphere, while I belong to it; and in the midst of groves and streams,
fields and lawns, have lived as happily ever since, as a mortal can do on this
Planet.

Dr. Cheyne (by the way I observe,) calls it a ruined Planet, in his wild
posthumous book; It is a question with some, if this book was not written by
the Doctor's visionary daughter, or by her and the Rev. Athanasian bigot, her
brother. But as I knew the Doctor after he was a little cracked with imaginary
religion, and have heard him talk as in this book, I am positive it is his.


(a notion he had from his master, enthusiastic Law), N. B. The Rev. Nonjuror,
Mr. William Law, the father of our Methodists, and the disciple of Jacob Behmen
the theosopher, died at King's Cliff near Nottingham, April 13, 1761, seven
days before bishop Hoadley; against whom he was a bitter writer in the
Bangorian controversy. -- I knew this famous visionary very well, and shall
remark largely on his writings in my Notes relating to Men and Things and Books.

Law was the most amazing compound I have ever seen. He was a man of sense, a
fine writer, and a fine gentleman; and yet the wildest enthusiast that ever
appeared among men. His temper was charming, sweet, and delightful; and his
manners quite primitive and uncommonly pious: He was all charity and goodness,
and so soft and gentle in conversation, that I have thought myself in company
with one of the men of the first church at Jerusalem while with him. He had
likewise the justest notions of christian temper and practice, and recommended
them in so insinuating a manner, that even a rake would hear him with pleasure.
I have not seen any like him among the sons of men in these particulars. It was
wrong to put him in the Dunciad, and call him one Law, as Pope does. He was
really a very extraordinary man; and to his honor be it remembered, that he had
the great concern of human life at heart, took a deal of pains in the pulpit,
and from the press, (witness his two fine books on a devout life,) to make men
fear God and keep his commandments. He was a good man indeed.

But what strange books did he write! His Appeal to the Deists -- His Spirit of
Prayer and Love -- His earnest and serious Answer to Trapp -- His Notes and
Illustrations on Behmen -- His Replies to Hoadley; and, what is stranger still,
his abuse of bishop Hoadley, in his Appeal I have mentioned.

Here, had I room, I would relate a very curious conversation that passed
between Dr. Theophilus Bolton, archbishop of Cashell in Ireland, (a most
excellent, most sensible, and most learned man,) and me, (at the third night's
sale of archbishop King's library in Dublin,) in relation to Mr. Law. It
happened on his Lordship's buying Jacob Behmen's Works for a pound, and then
asking me, who stood by him, if I had read them, and could enable him to
understand them? But this I must place in my Notes aforementioned.


but from what I have seen on three continents, and in traversing the ocean
round the globe, from West to East, and from the Southern latitude 64, to 66
North; a Planet in reality so divinely made and perfect, that one can never
sufficiently adore and praise an infinitely wise God for such a piece of his
handy work: -- A world so wisely contrived, so accurately made, as to
demonstrate the Creator's being and attributes, and cause every rational mortal
to acknowledge that Jehovah is our God, and fear and obey so great and
tremendous a Being -- the power and glory of our God.

But as I was saying, after my return, I bought a little spot and
country house, where I might rest from my labors, and easily know what is
doing in this hemisphere: -- how gloriously our most gracious and excellent
king endeavors to advance the felicity of his people, and promote the honor
and dignity of Great Britain: -- how indefatigable the present ministry is in
pursuing such measures, as demonstrate they have the interest of their country
at heart; as evince how well they supply the deficiencies of their predecessors
in office: -- and how zealously the combined wisdom of the whole legislature
acts for the preservation of the Britannic constitution, and the liberties and
properties of the people; that the ends of the late war may be answered, and
the peace at last give universal satisfaction.

To hear such news; and know what France and Spain are doing; -- and what the
renowned Anti-Sejanus is writing; ( Anti-Sejanus who deserves the curse and
hatred of the whole community As an abetter of arbitrary power, and for
attempting to raise the prerogative.
) I purchased a retirement near the capital; a spot surrounded with woods and
streams, plants and flowers; and over which a silence hovers, that gives a
relish to still life, and renders it a contrast to the busy, bustling, envious
crowds of men.

Here I sat down at last, and have done with hopes and fears for ever.

"Here grant me, heaven, to end my peaceful days,
And pass what is left of life in studious ease;
Here court the muses, whilst the sun on high,
Flames in the vault of heaven, and fires the sky;
Soon as Aurora from her golden bowers,
Exhales the fragrance of the balmy flowers,
Reclined in silence on a mossy bed,
Consult the learned volumes of the dead;
Fallen realms and empires in description view,
Live over past times, and build whole worlds anew;
Often from the bursting tombs, in fancy raise
The sons of Fame, who lived in ancient days;
Often listen till the raptured soul takes wings,
While Plato reasons, or while Homer sings.
Or when the night's dark wings this globe surround,
And the pale moon begins her solemn round;
When night has drawn her curtains over the plain,
And silence reassumes her awful reign;
Bid my free soul to starry orbs repair,
Those radiant orbs that float in ambient air,
And with a regular confusion stray,
Oblique, direct, along the aerial way:
Fountains of day! stupendous orbs of light!
Which by their distance lessen to the sight:
And if the glass you use, t'improve your eyes,
Millions beyond the former millions rise.
For no end were they made? Or, but to blaze
Through empty space, and useless spend their rays?
Or ought we not with reason to reply,
Each lucid point which glows in yonder sky,
Informs a system in the boundless space,
And fills with glory its appointed place:
With beams, unborrow'd, brightens other skies,
And worlds, to thee unknown, with heat and life supplies.
But chiefly, O my soul, apply to loftier themes,
The opening heavens, and angels robbed with flames:
Read in the sacred leaves how time began,
And the dust moved, and quickened into man;
Here through the flowery walks of Eden rove,
Court the soft breeze, or range the spicy grove;
There tread on hallowed ground where angels trod,
And reverend patriarchs talked as friends with God;
Or hear the voice to slumbering prophets given,
Or gaze on visions from the throne of heaven.
Thus lonely, thoughtful may I run the race
Of transient life, in no unuseful ease:
Enjoy each hour, nor as it fleets away,
Think life too short, and yet too long the day;
Of right observant, while my soul attends
Each duty, and makes heaven and angels friends:
Can welcome death with Faith's expecting eye,
And mind no pangs, since Hope stands smiling by;
Nor studious how to make a longer stay,
Views heavenly plains and realms of brighter day;
Shakes off her load, and winged with ardent love,
Spurns at the earth, and springs her flight above,
Soaring through air to realms where angels dwell,
Pities the shrieking friends, and leaves the lessning bell."
THE END.

