THE ANATOMY OF THE Human Nerves, WITH An Account of the reciprocal Motions of
the HEART, AND A Description of the HUMAN LACTEAL SAC and DUCT.

By ALEXANDER MONRO, P. A.

EDINBURGH, Printed for Mr. W. MONRO and W. DRUMMOND.

Sold by them and other Booksellers there.

PREFACE.
THE first Sketch of the following Essays was wrote for the Service of a
Friend, without any Intention of mine to have been an Author. When they were
published, I was glad of the Opportunity which the second Edition of the
Anatomy of the Bones gave me to correct them, and I thought Mr. Winslow's
Anatomy made any further Labor of mine on these Subjects unnecessary. But
whenever it was foreseen that this third Edition of the Osteology was to be
printed, I was teazed with the Importunities of Friends and Scholars, to make
the Anatomy of the Nerves more complete, and to tack the other two Essays to
it. It was in vain for me to plead the Difficulty, if not Impossibility of
bringing the Physiology of the Nerves to any Certainty, though it might engage me
in an endless Dispute; and that any other Description of the Distribution of
the Nerves, than what Mr. Winslow had given, was altogether superstuous: They
insisted, would not be refused, and forced me to undertake it.

In the Account of the Nerves in general, I have avoided what I could to give
Offense; and therefore have not only treated all the Opinions I mention with
that Modesty which the Uncertainty of the Subject required, but have not named
one Author, flattering myself, that those, whom I was under the Necessity to
redargue, might be better concealed by my not declaring whom I approved.

I attempted an accurate Description of the particular Nerves; but upon
comparing the Notes I wrote of what I saw in dissecting the Nerves with Mr.
Winslow's Exposition des Nerss, I found I had done little more than used other
Words for describing the same Things; and upon giving my Papers to be perused
by some of those for whose. Use any Thing I write is chiefly intended, I mean
the Students in Physic, I discovered another Misfortune sufficient to make me
alter my Design. The young Anatomists were so confounded with the Variety of
Branches and their Sub-divisions, that they could not see even the gross
Outlines of the Picture I had attempted to draw. That I might be understood,
and my Scholars might thereby be assisted to remember the more minute
Dissections I should show them, I changed my Notes into a superficial
Description of the larger Branches of the Nerves.

The Account of the Systole and Diastole of the Heart is the immortal
Boerhaave's Doctrine illustrated, and the Description of the Receptaculum
Chyli, and of the Ductus Thoracicus is nearly the same as it was in the former
Edition.

THE ANATOMY OF THE Human Nerves.
Of the Nerves in general.
1.BY the Assistance of Injections and Microscopes wonderful Plexuses of
Blood Vessels are discovered to go from the Pia Matter into the Cortex,
cincritious, or ashy-coloured Part of the Cerebrum, Cerebellum and spinal
Marrow, whereas we can only see longitudinal Vessels, without numerous
Ramifications or reticular Plexuses, in the white medullary Substance of these
Parts.

2. The Continuity of the Cortex with the Medulla of the Encephalon and spinal
Marrow is observable with the naked Eye, and is more distinctly seen with the
Assistance of a Microscope.

3. In dissecting the Brain and Cerebellum, we see the small Beginnings of the
Medulla proceeding from the Cortex, and can trace its gradual Increase by the
Addition of more Medulla coming from the Cortex.

4. Both Cortex and Medulla are very succulent; for being exposed to the Air to
dry, they lose more of their Weight than most other Parts of the Body do.

5. In several Places we can observe the Medulla to be composed of Fibers laid
at each other's Sides.

6. The medullary Substance is all employed in forming the white fibrous Cords,
which have now the Name of Nerves appropriated to them. Within the Skull we see
the Nerves to be the medullary substance continued, and the medulla spinalis is
all employed in forming Nerves.

7. The common Opinion concerning the Rise of the Nerves, founded on a
superficial Inspection of those Parts, is, that the Nerves are propagated from
the same Side of the Encephalon at which they go out. But it having been
remarked, after a more strict Enquiry, and preparing the Parts by Maceration in
Water, that the medullary Fibers decussate or cross each other in some Parts of
the Medulla; as for Example, at the Corpus annulare, and Beginning of the
Medulla spinalis: And practical Observators having related several Examples of
People, whose Brain was hurt on one Side, while the morbid Symptom, Palsy,
appeared on the other Side of the Body, of which I have seen two Instances; and
Experiments made on Brutes having confirmed these Observations, it has been
thought, that the Nerves had their Rise from the Side of the Encephalon,
opposite to their Egress from the Skull. It may however still be said, that
this last Opinion is not fully demonstrated, because a Decussation in some few
Parts is not a Proof that it obtains universally; and if there are Examples of
Palsy of the Side opposite to where the Lesion of the Brain was, there are also
others, where the Injury done to the Brain and the Palsy were both on the same
Side.

8. The Nerves are composed of a great many Threads lying parallel, where they
come out from the Medulla.

This fibrous Texture is evident at the Origin of most of the Nerves within the
Skull, and in the Cauda equine of the Medulla spinalis, we can divide them into
such small Threads, that a very quick-sighted Eye can scarce perceive them; but
these Threads, when looked at with a Microscope, appear each to be composed of
a great Number of smaller Threads.

9. How small one of these Fibrils of the Nerves is we know not, but when we
consider that every, even the most minute Part of the Body is sensible, and
that this must depend on the Nerves (which all conjoined would not make a Cord
of an Inch Diameter) being divided into Branches or Filaments to be dispersed
through all these minute Parts, we must be convinced that the nervous Fibrils
are very small. From the Examination of the minimum visibile it is
demonstrated, that each Fiber in the Retina of the Eye, or expanded optic
Nerve, cannot exceed the Size of the 32400 Part of a Hair.

10. The medullary Substance, of which the nervous Fibrils are composed, is
very tender, and would not be able to resist the common Force of the
circulating Fluids, and other such Forces to which the Nerves are exposed
within the Bones, were not the Pia Matter and Tunica Arachnoides continued upon
them. The former giving them Firmness and Strength, and the latter furnishing a
cellular Coat to connect the Threads of the Nerves, to let them ly soft and
mo^st, and to support the Vessels which go with them.

It is this cellular Substance that is distended with Air when it is blown
through a Blowpipe thrust into a Nerve, and that makes a Nerve appear all
spungy, after being distended with Air till it dries, the proper nervous
Fibrils shriveling so in drying as they scarce can be observed.

11. These Coats, 10. would not make the Nerves strong enough to bear the
stretching and Pressure they are exposed to in their Course to the different
Parts of the Body; and therefore as the Nerves are going out at the Holes in
the Cranium and Spine, the Dura Matter is closely wrapped round them, to collect
their disgregated Fibers into tense firm Cords, and that the stretching they
may be exposed to may have no Effect to hurt them where they are not
strengthened thus by the Dura Matter; this strong Membrane is firmly fixed to the
Sides of the Holes in the Bones through which they pass.

12. The nervous Cords thus composed of nervous Fibrils, cellular Coat, Pia and
Dura Matter, have such numerous Blood Vessels bestowed on them, that after their
Arteries only are injected, the whole Cord can be tinged of the Color of the
injected Liquor; and if the Injection is pushed too violently, the cellular
Substance of the Nerves comes to be distended with it.

13. A nervous Cord, such as has been just now described, 12. has very little
Elasticity, compared with other Parts of the Body. When cut out of the Body, it
does not become observably shorter, while the Blood Vessels contract three
Eighths of their Length.

14. In the Course which the Nerves have to the several Parts of the Body, they
are generally lodged in a cellular or fatty substance, and run in the
Interstices of the Muscles and other active Organs, that so they might be
little exposed to the Pressure which these Parts would make upon them, and
might be defended from any bad Effects which such Pressure might otherwise
produce.

15. The larger Cords of the Nerves divide into Branches in their Distribut on
to the different Parts; the Branches being smaller than the Trunk from which
they come, and making generally an acute angle where they separate.

16. In several Places different Nerves unite into one Cord, which is commonly
larger than any of the Nerves which form ^t.

17. Several Nerves, particularly those which are distributed to the ^ow^ls,
suddenly form a hard Knot. considerably larger than all the Nerves of which it
is made. These Knots were called Corpora olivaria, and are now generally named
Ganglions.

18. The Ganglions have much thicker Coats and larger, more numerous
Blood Vessels than the Nerves, so that they appear redder and more muscular. On
dissecting the Ganglions, Fibers are seen running longitudinally in their Axes,
and other Fibers are derived from their Sides in an oblique direction to the
longitudinal ones.

19. The Nerves which go out from the Ganglions are no way remarkably different
from other Nerves.

20. The Nerves that are sent to our Organs of the Senses lose there their firm
Coats, and terminate in a pulpy Substance. The optic Nerves are expanded into
the soft tender Webs the Retinae; the auditory Nerve has scarce the Consistence
of Mucus in the Vestibulum, Cochlea and semicircular Canals of each Ear; the
Papillae of the Nose, Tongue and Skin are very soft.

21. The Nerves of Muscles can likewise be traced till they lose their Coats
and become very soft, from which, and what we observed of the sensatory Nerves,
20. there is Reason to conclude, that the muscular Nerves are also pulpy at
their Terminations, which we cannot indeed prosecute by Dissection.

22. It would seem necessary that the Extremities of the Nerves should continue
in this soft flexible State, ( 20, 21.) in order to perform their Functions
right: For in proportion as Parts become rigid and firm by Age, or any other
Cause, they lose of their Sensibility, and the Motions are more difficultly
performed.

23. Though the Fibers in a nervous Cord are firmly connected, and frequently
different Nerves join into one Trunk, or into the same Ganglion, yet the
Sensation of each Part of the Body is so very distinct; and we have so much the
Power of moving the Muscles separately, that, if the Nerves are principal
Agents in these two Functions, which I shall endeavor to prove they are, we
have Reason to believe that there is no Union, Confusion or immediate
Communication of the proper nervous Fibrils, but that each Fiber remains
distinct from its Origin to its Termination.

24. Changes produced any way upon the Coats of the Nerves cannot however miss
to affect the nervous Fibrils. The cellular Substance may be too full of Liquor
or may not supply enough; the Liquor may not be of a due Consistence, or it may
be preternaturally obstructed and collected. The Pia Matter may be too tense or
too lax, as may also the Dura Matter; their Vessels may be obstructed; their
proper Nerves may be violently irritated or lose their Power of acting; and a
great many other such Changes may happen which will not only occasion Disorders
in particular Nerves, but may cause the Sympathy so frequently Observed among
the Nerves, which is so necessary to be attentively regarded in a great many
Diseases in order to discover their true State and Nature, without the
Knowledge of which we must commit very dangerous Mistakes in the Practice of
Physic and Surgery.

25. Many Experiments and Observations concur in proving, that when Nerves are
compressed, cut, or any other way destroyed, the Parts served by such Nerves
farther from the Head or Spine than where the injuring Cause has been applied
have their Sensations, Motious and Nourishment weakened or lost, while no such
Effects are seen in the Parts nearer to the Origins of those Nerves; and in
such Experiments where the Cause impeding the Nerves to exert themselves could
be removed, and the Structure of the Nerves not injured; as for Example, when a
Ligature made upon a Nerve and stopping its Influence has been taken away, the
Motion and Sensation of the Parts soon were restored. From which it would
appear that the Nerves are principal Instruments in our Sensations, Motions and
Nourishment; and that this Influence of the Nerves is not inherent in them
without the Communication between these Cords, and their Origin is preserved.

It will be no Objection to this Conclusion, that sometimes, upon cutting a
Nerve, the Effects abovementioned have been felt for a short Time, but
afterward the Person was sensible of no Numness or Immobility; for wherever
this is said to have happened, the cut Nerve was only one of several which were
sent to the Member, the want of whose Influence would be felt no longer than
till the Habit was acquired of performing the Functions casily by the other
Nerves.

It is of no greater Weight as an Objection, that when a Ligature is drawn very
hard upon a Nerve, the Nerve never again recovers its Influence upon the Parts
it is distributed to beyond the Ligature, but is of as little Effect as if it
had, been cut through; which is to say, that its Texture has been altered beyond
Recovery. The same Thing is to be seen by tying a Thread tight round a tender
Twig of any vegetable, it decays.

26. Experiments and Observations show too, that when Parts of the Encephalon
or Medulla spinalis have been irritated, compressed or destroyed, the Parts of
the Body, whose Nerves had their Origin from such affected Parts of the
Encephalon or Medulla spinalis, became convulsed, paralytick, insensible or
wasted; and in such Cases where the injuring Cause could be removed from the
Origin of the Nerves, the morbid Symptoms observed in the Parts to which these
Nerves were distributed, went off upon the Removal of that Cause. From which it
is thought reasonable to conclude, that the Nerves must not only have a
Communication with their Origin, but that the Influence they have upon the
Parts they are distributed to, depends on the Influence which they derive from
the Medulla Encephali and spinalis.

27. Though the Medulla spinalis has its own Vessels and cineritious Substance
which assists to form its Medulla, yet a very large Share of the Medullary
Substance within the Spine is derived from the Encephalon, whose Medulla
oblongata descends from the Head, and the Influence of the Medulla spinallis on
its Nerves depends in a great Measure on this Medulla oblongata of the Head.
Hence an Injury done to any Part of the Medulla spinalis immediately affects
all the Parts whose Nerves have their Origin below where the injuring Cause is
applied to the Spinal Marrow. A Luxation of a Vertebra in the Loins makes the
lower Extremities soon paralytick; a transverse Section of the Medulla at the
first Vertebra of the Neck soon puts an End to Life.

28. If such Causes produce constantly such Effects ( 25, 26, 27,) in us and
other Creatures living in nearly the same Circumstances as we do, the
Conclusions already made will be good, notwithstanding Examples of Children and
other Creatures being born without Brains or Medulla spinalis; or
notwithstanding the Brains of adult Creatures being much changed in their
Texture by Diseases, and notwithstanding the Experiments of cutting off the
Heads of Tortoises, and some other Animals which continued to move about a
considerable Time after their Heads were off. We may be ignorant of the
particular Circumstances requisite or necessary to the Being or Wellbeing of
this or that particular Creature, and we may be unable to account for a great
many Phenomenon; but we must believe our Eyes in the Examination of Facts, and
if we see constantly such Consequences from such Actions, we cannot but
conclude the one to be the Cause, and the other the Effect. It would be as
unjust to deny the Conclusions made in the three preceding Articles, because
of the seemingly preternatural Phenomenon mentioned in the Beginning of this,
as it would be to deny the Necessity of the Circulation of the Blood in us and
Quadrupeds, because a Frog can jump about or a Tortoise can walk long after all
the Bowels of its Thorax and Abdomen are taken out, or because the different
Parts of a Worm crawl after it has heen cut into a great many Pieces. It is
therefore almost universally agreed that the Nerves are principal Instruments
in our Sensations, Motion and Nourishment, and that the Influence which they
have is communicated from their Origin, the Encephalon and Medulla spinallis;
but Authors are far from agreeing about the Manner in which this Influence is
communicated, or in what Way Nerves act to produce these Effects.

29. Some allege that the nervous Fibers are all solid Cords acting by
Elasticity or Vibration. Others affirm that those Fibers are small Pipes
conveying Liquors, by means of which all their Effects are produced.

30. The Gentlemen, who think the nervous Fibers solid, raise several
Objections to the other Doctrine, which I shall consider afterward, and
endeavor to show the Fitness of their own Doctrine to account for the Effects
commonly observed to be produced by the Nerves.

The Objects of the Senses plainly, say they, make Impulses on the Nerves of
the proper Organs, which must shake the nervous Fibrils, and this Vibration
must be propagated along the whole Cord to its other Extremity or Origin, as
happens in other tense Strings; and these Vibrations being differently modified
according to the Difference of the Object, and its different Application,
produce the different Ideas we have of Objects.

31. To this Account of the Sensations it is objected, 1st, That Nerves are
unfit for Vibrations, because their Extremities, where Objects are applied to
them, are quite soft and pappy, ( 20.) and not susceptible of the Vibrations
supposed; and if there could be any little Tremor made here by the Impulse of
Objects, it could not be continued along the nervous Cord, because the cellular
Substance by which each particular Fiber is connected to the neighboring ones,
( 10.) and the fatty Substance in which the nervous Cord is immersed ( 14)
would soon stifle any such vibratory Motion.

The 2 d Objection to this Doctrine is, that, supposing the Nerves capable of
Vibrations by the Impressions of Objects, these Vibrations would not answer the
Design. For if what we know of other vibrating Strings, to wit, that their Tone
remains the same, unless their Texture, Length or Tension is altered, and that
different Substances striking them do no more than make the Sound higher or
lower: If these Properties are to be applied to Nerves, then it will follow
that the same Nerve would constantly convey the same Idea, with no other
Variety than of its being weaker or stronger, whatever different Objects were
applied to it, unless we suppose the Nerve changed in its Texture, Length or
Tension each Time a different Object is applied, which, it is presumed, no Body
will undertake to prove does happen. But further, if ever such a Variety of
Vibrations could be made, our Sensations would notwithstanding be confused and
indistinct, because the tremulous nervous Fiber being firmly connected, and
contiguous to several other Fibers of the same Cord, would necessarily shake
them too, by which we should have the Notion of the Object as applied at all
the different Parts where the Extremities of these Fibers terminate.

32. In whatever way the Favorers of the Doctrine of solid Nerves please to
apply the Elasticity of Nerves to the Contraction of Muscles; their Adversaries
insist that Nerves are too weak to resist such Weights as the Muscles sustain,
they would surely break, especially that they are greatly, if not wholly,
deprived of their strong Coats before they come to the Part of the Muscle, they
are immediately to act upon ( 21.) and the Nerves being found to have little or
no Elasticity to shorten themselves ( 12.) shows them altogether unfit for such
an Office as this of contracting Muscles in the way proposed of their acting by
Elasticity.

33. As a further Objection against either Motion or Sensation being owing to
the Elasticity of the Nerves, it is said, that if this Doctrine was true, the
Sensations would be more acute, and the Contractions of Muscles would be
greater and stronger, when the Parts become firmer and more rigid by Age; for
then their Elasticity is increased: Whereas on the contrary it appears, ( 22.)
that then the Sensations are blunted, and muscular Contraction becomes less and
weaker.

34. If the Nerves were granted to be elastic, and to communicate a springy
Force to all the Parts they are distributed to, they might appear necessary in
this View to assist the Application of the nutritious Particles of the Fluids
to the Sides of the Vessels these Particles were to repair; and so far might
well enough account for the Share Nerves are thought to have in Nutrition; yet
if we cannot make use of Elasticity in the other two Functions of Sensation and
Motion, we must also endeavor to find out some other Way the Nerves act in
Nutrition, which will be done afterward.

35. Having thus stated the Reasons for and against the Nerves acting as solid
Strings, let us likewise relate the Arguments for Nerves being Pipes, and the
Objections to this Doctrine.

A great Argument of those who think the Nerves to be Tubes conveying Liquors,
is the strong Analogy of the Brain and Nerves to other Glands of the Body and
their Excretories, where a manifest Secretion of Liquor is made in the Glands
to be conveyed by the Excretories, to the proper Places in which it ought to be
deposited: They think that the vascular Texture of the Cortex of the Encephalon
and Medulla spinalis ( 1.); the Continuation of the Cortex in forming the
medullary Substance ( 2.3.), the fibrous Texture ( 5.) and succulent State of
this Medulla ( 4.), and its being wholly employed to form the Nerves (6.),
where the fibrous Texture is evident (8.); all these Things, say they, conspire
to show such a strong Analogy between these Parts and the other Glands of the
Body, as carries a Conviction that there is a Liquor secreted in the Encephalon
and Medulla spinalis, to be sent out by the Nerves to the different Parts of
the Body.

36. The following Objections are raised to this Argument in favor of a Liquor
conveyed in the Nerves, from the Analogy of the Glands. 1st, Other Glands, it
is said, have their Excretories collected into a few large Pipes, and not
continued in such a great Number of separate Pipes, as far as the Places where
the Liquors are deposited, which last must be the Case, if the Nerves are the
Excretories of the glandular Brain. 2 dly, We see the Cavities and can examine
the Liquors in the Excretories of other Glands much smaller than the Brain,
which cannot be done in the Nerves. 3 dly, If the Nerves were Pipes, they would
be so small that the Attraction of their Sides to their Liquors would be so
great, that the Liquors could not be moved with the Celerity required to
influence our Sensations and Motions, in the quick Manner we see them
performed. 4 thly, If the Nerves were Pipes they would be cylindrical ones, and
consequently not subject to Diseases, or at least we could have no
Comprehension of the Diseases in them.

37. The Answer to the 1st of these Objections is, That there are other Glands
where there is a manifest Secretion, and in which the Disposition of the
Excretories is in much the same way as in the Encephalon; the Kidneys, for
Example, have a reticulated Cortex of Vessels, from which the Eustachian or
Bellinian Medulla, consisting of longitudinal Fibers and a few longitudinal
Blood Vessels, proceeds; and this Medulla is collected into ten or twelve
Papillae, each of which is formed of numerous small separate Pipes, which
singly discharge the Urine into the large membranous Tubes, which united
compose the Pelvis. Upon comparing this Texture of the Kidney with what was
said of the Encephalon, ( 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8.) the Analogy will be found very
strong.

38. In Answer to the 2 d Objection in 36. it is granted, that Microscopes,
Injections, and all the other Arts hitherto employed have not shown the
Cavities of the nervous Fibrils, or the Liquors contained in them; and from
what was said ( 9.) of the smallness of the nervous Fibrils, it is not to be
expected that ever they should be seen. But so long as such a Number of little
Animals can every Hour be brought to the Framers of this Objection, in which
they can as little demonstrate the Vessels or contained Fluids, it will not be
allowed to be conclusive Reasoning, that because ocular Demonstration cannot be
given of Pipes, therefore they do not exist. For if we have any Notion of an
Animal, it is its being a Hydraulick Machine, which has Liquors moving in it as
long as it has Life; if therefore such little Animals have Vessels and Liquors
which we cannot see, why may not some of the Vessels and Liquors of the human
Body be also invisible to us.

To avoid this Answer to the Objection, it is further urged that though we might
not see the Canals and Liquors of Nerves as they are flowing naturally, yet
they ought to discover themselves by the Canals being stretched, or a Nerve's
swelling upon being firmly tied; and it might likewise be expected, that
however subtle the Liquor of the Nerves is, it might be collected in some
Drops at least, when the cut End of a Nerve of a living Animal is kept some
Time in the exhausted Receiver of an Air-Pump. It is affirmed, that neither did
the tied Nerve swell between the Brain and Ligature, nor was there any Liquor
collected in the Receiver of the Air-Pump, from which it is concluded that
there is no Liquor in the Nerves.

There is some Difference among those who say they have tried these
Experiments, some affirming that in young Animals the Nerve does swell above
the Ligature, and that a Liquor does drill out upon cutting a Nerve. But
allowing the Experiments to succeed any way, the Reply to the Inference from
them is, that in neither way are they any thing to the Purpose; for the
swelling of the Nerve after it is tied, or the Efflux of Liquors from its
Extremity, will never prove either to be the Effect of the Fluid in the proper
nervous Fibrils, so long as they might be occasioned by the Liquors in the
larger Vessels of the cellular Substance of the Nerves; and if these same
Vessels of the Coats of the Nerves do not discover their Liquors by these
Experiments, it is far less to be expected that the much more subtle Nerves
should.

39. The 3 d Objection to the Doctrine of the Brain being a Gland, and the
Nerves its Excretories, supposes a more rapid Motion necessary in the Fluid of
the Nerves, than what most of the Defenders of the nervous Fluid will now
allow, and is afterward to be considered particularly in a more proper Place.

40. The 4 th Objection being, that if Nerves are Excretories of a Gland, they
must be cylindrical Pipes, in which no Obstructions or Diseases would happen;
but since we daily see Diseases in the Nerves, they must therefore not be such
Excretories. The Answer is, That Diseases happen often in the Excretories of
other Glands as of the Liver, Kidneys, etc. notwithstanding their cylindrical
Form, and their much shorter and less exposed Course. When we consider the very
tender Substance of the Brain; the vast Complication of Vessels there; the
prodigious Smalness of the Pipes going out from it; the many moving Powers
which the Nerves are to undergo the shock of; and the many Chances which the
Vessels, Membranes and cellular Substance accompanying the Nerves have of being
disordered, and then affecting the nervous Fibrils, we have very great Reason
to be surprised, that these cylindrical Pipes are not much more frequently put
out of Order by too great or too small a Quantity of Liquors; by too viscid or
too thin Fluids; by Liquors consisting of too mild and sluggish Particles, or
of too acrid pungent ones; by too great or too little Motion given to the
Liquors; by the Diameters of the Pipes being too much straightened, or too much
enlarged; and by a great many other Varieties of Circumstances which might be
supposed capable of disturbing the Functions of the Nerves, supposing them to
be cylindrical Excretories of the Gland the Brain.

41. The numerous Vessels of the Encephalon have brought some of the Gentlemen
who defend the Opinion of the Nerves being solid, to acknowledge, that there is
a Liquor secreted in the Brain; but then they will not allow that this Liquor
is sent out by the proper nervous Fibrils, but that it is poured into the
cellular Substance in which the Nerves ly, to keep them moist and supple, and
therefore fit for exerting their Elasticity, Vibration, etc. by which, in their
Opinion, the Effects commonly ascribed to Nerves are produced.

42. Besides the Objections already mentioned ( 31, 32,) against the Nerves
acting as elastick Strings, this Opinion has some other Difficulties attending
it, that may be urged as Objections to it; such as, there is not one Example in
the Body of Liquors secreted in a large Gland being poured into a cellular
Su^stance, as here supposed; the Liquors in the Cells of the tunica cellularis
of other Parts are separated from the little Arteries which are distributed to
these Cells.

Further, it cannot be well determined, how a Liquor secreted in the Cortex of
the Brain should make its Way through the Medulla to come out into the cellular
Membranes on the Surface of that Medulla.

Lastly, A very simple Experiment of injecting Water by the Artery of any
Member, and thereby filling the cellular substance of the Nerves of that
Member, shows evidently that the Liquor of the tunica cellularis of the Nerves
has the same Fountain as the Liquor in the tunica cellularis has any where
else, that is, from the little Arteries dispersed upon it.

43. The Doctrine of a Fluid in the Nerves is not only thus supported by the
Analogy of the Brain and Nerves to the other Glands and their Excretories, but
those who maintain this Doctrine mention an Experiment which they think
directly probative of a Fluid in the Nerves; it is this. After opening the
Thorax of a living Dog, catch hold of and press one or both the phrenic Nerves
with the Fingers, the Diaphragm immediately ceases to contract; then let go the
hold of the Nerves, and the Muscle acts again: Pinch a second time the Nerve or
Nerves some way above the Diaphragm, this Muscle again ceases to act: Keep firm
the Hold of the Nerve, and with the Fingers of the other Hand strip it down
from the gripping Fingers toward the Diaphragm, and the Muscle is made to
contract; and for three or four such Stripings its Action follows or obeys the
Motion of the Fingers which strip it down; then it becomes disobedient, and
will contract no more, strip as you will, unless the Fingers gripping or
pinching the Nerve let go their Hold, or are removed higher up upon the Nerve,
when the Muscle may again be made to contract by stripping the Nerve down
toward it. This Experiment I have done with the Success here mentioned. Let
any one try if he can imagine any other reasonable Account of these
Appearances, than that the gripping Fingers stopped the Course of a Fluid in the
Nerve; that what of this Fluid was thus made to stagnate in the Part of the
Nerve between the gripping Fingers and Diaphragm, was forced down into that
Muscle by the Pressure of the Fingers which stripped the Nerve down; and when
ever this stagnating Fluid was pressed all away by several Repetitions of
stripping the Nerve, the Muscle being supplied with no more Fluid contracted no
more, till upon removing the Fingers which had hold of the Nerve, a new Supply
of Liquor was brought from the Brain, or from the Part of the Nerve that had
not yet been gripped or stripped; and when ever this Liquor could make its Way
down to the Muscle, or was forced down to it, the Muscle immediately began to
renew its contractile Motions.

44. Some Gentlemen convinced of the Reasonableness of the Secretion of a
Liquor in the Brain to be sent out by the Nerves, but not comprehending how a
Fluid could have such a rapid retrograde Motion as they imagined was necessary
for conveying the Impressions of Objects made on the Extremities of Nerves to
the Sensorium, supposed two Sorts of Nerves, one that conveyed a Liquor for
muscular Motion and Nutrition; the other composed of solid Nerves, that were to
serve for the Organs of the Senses, to convey the Vibrations communicated from
Objects to the Sensorium.

45. The Objections mentioned ( 31.) against the sensatory Nerves acting by
Vibrations take place here: And further, there is nothing in the Texture either
of the Brain or Nerves, which gives any Reason to think, that the Nerves are
differently formed; on the contrary, the Structure is every where similar, and
often Branches of the same Nerve serve both for Sensation and Motion. What
occasioned justly a Prejudice against the Scheme of our Sensations depending on
a Fluid in the Nerves, to wit, the rapid Refluxes supposed in the sensitive
Nerves, is an Opinion now deserted generally by the Defenders of the nervous
Fluid, for Reasons to be given in a little, though their Opponents are still
willing to palm it on them, whereby they may have a better Handle against the
general Doctrine of the nervous Fluid.

46. This same rapid Refluxat was too, which gave Rise to another Division of
the Nerves into arterious or effluent, and venous or refluent. It was said,
that muscular Motion and Nutrition depended on the arterious Nerves, and that
the Sensations depended on an accelerated Motion of the nervous Fluid toward
the Brain, by the Impressions which the Objects of the Senses make upon the
venous Nerves. By this Supposition the Absurdity of rapid Fluxes and Refluxes
in the same Canal was prevented, and an Advantage was thought to be gained by
it, of saving too great a W^ste of the Fluid of the Nerves, which otherwise the
Encephalon and Medulla spinalis could not supply in sufficient Quantity to
answer all the Exigencies of Life.

47. To this Opinion ( 46.) it has been objected, 1. That there is no Example
in the Body of a secreted Liquor being returned immediately and unmixed to the
Gland by which it was originally separated from the Mass of Blood, which would
be the Case were there venous Nerves. 2 dly, There is no Occasion for saving
the Fluid of the Nerves in the Way proposed, the Organs for secreting that
Fluid being large enough to supply all that is necessary o^ it in the common
Functions of Life. 3 dly, If the Fluid of the Nerves was to be thus kept in a
perp^tual Circulation, it would soon become too acrid for continuing with
safety in such sensible tender Vessels as the Brain and Nerves are composed of.
4 thly, This Hypothesis will not answer the Design for which it was proposed.
For though the momentary Application of an Object might cause an Acceleration in
the Fluid of venous Nerves, yet if the Object was kept applied to the Nerves,
it would stop their Fluid, so that it could not go forward to the Brain; and
therefore, according to this Doctrine, we should be sensible of no Objects,
except those whose Application to the Organs of the Senses was momentary.

48. Let us now suppose it probable, that the Encephalon and Medulla spinalis
secern a Liquor from the Blood which is sent into all the Nerves, and that by
the Means of this Liquor the Nerves perform the Offices commonly assigned to
them, it is necessary to enquire what Kind of Liquor this is, and how it moves,
in order to determine how well its Nature and Motion are fitted for performing
what is expected from it.

49. It has been supposed, that the Liquor of the Nerves was of a very strong
acid or alcaline Nature; but since we can see none of our Juices of such
Natures, and since such Liquors irritate and destroy the Parts of the Body they
are applied to, we can never imagine that the Brain could separate, or the
Nerves could bear any Thing of such an acrid Nature; and this same Tenderness
and Sensibility of these Organs must hinder us to suppose the Liquor of the
Nerves can be acrid or pungent of any Kind, as of the Nature of inflammable
Spirits, Spirit of Harthorn, etc.

50. Some have imagined the Liquor of the Nerves to be capable of vast
Explosion, like Gunpowder, or of violent sudden Raretaction like Air, or of
strong Ebullition like boiling Water, or the Mixture of Acids with alkaline
Liquors. But as none of the Particles of our Mass of Blood, from which this
Liquor of the Nerves must be derived, enjoy any such Pro^erties, we cannot
suppose the Blood to furnish what it has not. Besides, all these Operations are
too violent for the Brain or Nerves to bear; and when once they are begun, are
not so quickly controuled or put an End to, as Experience teaches us the Nerves
can be made to cease from acting.

51. We know not sufficiently the Properties of an Ether pervading every
Thing, to pretend to apply it to the animal Functions, especially where we must
suppose it sent a great Way in a long Cord, in which we cannot conceive how it
should be confined; which are Difficulties not to be surmounted in accounting
for the Functions of Nerves by Means of such an Ether.

52. The surest Way of judging what Kind of Liquor this of the Nerves must be,
is to exmine the Liquors of similar Parts of the Body. All the Glands separate
Liquors from the Blood much thinner than the compound Mass itself; such is the
Liquor poured into the Cavity of the Abdomen, Thorax, Ventricles of the Brain,
the Saliva, pancreatic Juice, Lymph, etc. Wherever there is Occasion for
secreted Liquors being thick and viscid, in order to answer better the Uses
they are intended for, Nature has provided Reservoirs for them to stagnate in,
where their thinner Parts may be carried off by the numerous absorbent Veins
dispersed on the Sides of those Cavities, or by flying off where there is a
Communication with the external Air. The Snot of the Nose is very thick
commonly by stagnating; but when the Secretion of the Membrane of the Nose is
in creased by blowing the Nose, or by Sternutatories, we see it very thin and
watery; there not then Time for the Air or Absorbents to carry off the more
watery Particles. The Cerumen of the Ears is of a watery Consistence, when
squeezed out before it has stagnated. The Mucus of the alimentary Canal is
concocted in Lacunae. The Bile in the hepatick Duct is lymphatick; that in the
Gallbladder is viscid and strong. The Urine is much more watery as it comes
from the Kidneys, than when it is excreted from the Bladder. The Seed is thin
as it comes from the Testicles, and is concocted in the Vesiculae seminales,
etc.

53. From 52. we may safely conclude, that the Secretion of a thing Liquor is
made in the Cortex of the Encephalon and Medulla spinalis; and seeing the
Thinness of secreted Liquors is generally as the Divisions of the Vessels into
small subtle Branches, and the Ramifications within the Skull are carried on
to a very great Subtilty, the Liquor secreted in the Encephalon may be
determined to be among the finest or thinnest Fluids.

54. Seeing we can observe no large Reservoire, where the Liquor secerned in
the cortical Substance is deposited, to have its finer Parts taken off, we have
Reason to think, that it goes forward into the Nerves in the same Condition in
which it is secerned.

55. By fine or subtle animal Liquors is meant no more than those which are
very fluid, consisting of a large Proportion of watery Particles, and a lesser
one of the oily, saline and terrestrious Particles. Some of the Liquors which
we can have in sufficient Quantity to make Experiments with, are so fluid, and
have so little Viscidity or Cohesion of Parts, that when laid on a Piece of
clean Mirror, they will evaporate without leaving a Stain on the Mirror, such
is the Liquor drilling out on the Surface of the Pleura, the Lymph, and several
others.

If then these Liquors, which are subject to our Examination, the secerning
Vessels of which are so large that we can see them, have such a small Cohesion
of Farts, it might not be unreasonable to say, that the Liquor of the Nerves is
as much more fine and fluid than Lymph, as the Vessels separating it are
smaller; and therefore that the Fluid of the Nerves is a defecated Water with a
very small Proportion of animal Sapo dissolved in it.

56. Two Experiments are said to contradict this Opinion of the Liquor of the
Nerves being so fluid and subtle. One is, that upon cutting the Cauda equina
of a living Anim^l, a Liquor as viscid as the White of an Egg drops out: The
other is, that a wounded Nerve yields a glairy Sanies. But these are no Proof
that the Liquor of the Nerves is of the same Nature, since it is evident that
the Liquor discharged in both those Cases, comes out of the cellular Substance
involving the nervous Fibrils.

57. Considering how many Experiments make it evident, that there is a constant
uninterrupted Stream of Liquors flowing through all the Canals of Animals,
which convey Liquors, whose Particles are not larger than the Diameter of their
Canal, which never is the Case in a natural State of excretory Vessels, it i^
surprising how the Opinion ever should have been taken up of the Liquid of the
Nerves being obliged to make such a prodigious rapid Course, as to flow from
the Brain to each Muscle instantaneously when we will to contract it; or that
this Liquor should flow back with the like Celerity from the Extremity of each
Nerve, to which an Object of Sensation was applied. The Nerves, as well as the
other Excretories of the Glands are always full of Liquors, the Degree of
Distension of the Canals by the Liquors being, even in a sound natural State,
sometimes more and sometimes less, the Sides of the Tubes being stretched to
make way for a larger Quantity, and contracting to accommodate themselves to a
lesser Quantity; as much Liquor as does Violence to the Sides of the Canals in
stretching, or so little as the Sides cannot contract to, both occasion
Diseases.

58. The Motion of the Fluid in the Nerves will not only then be constant, but
it will also be equal, or nearly so: For though the Blood in the larger Arteries
is moved unequally by the unequal Forces, the Contraction of the Ventricle of
the Heart, and the weaker Power, the Systole of the Arteries, yet the
Difference between these two moving Powers comes to be less and less
perceptible, as the Arteries divide into smaller Branches, because of the
numerous Resistances the Liquors meet with, and because the Canals they move in
become larger, till in the very small arterious Branches there is no Difference
in the Velocity of the Liquors from the Effect of the Heart or Artery. The
Motion of the Fluids must still be more equal in the Excretories of Glands, and
particularly in those where the Vessels have divided into very minute Branches.
So that the nervous Fluid will move constantly, equally and slowly for
ordinary; but this natural Course may be altered by the Influence of the Mind,
or by the Pressure of some neighboring active Organ.

59. We have perhaps no Idea of the Manner how Mind and Body act upon each
other; but if we allow that the one is affected by the other, and that the
Fluid of the Nerves (whatever Name People please to give ^t) is a principal
Instrument which the Mind makes use of to influence the Actions of the Body, or
to inform itself of the Impressions made on the Body, we must allow that the
Mind can direct this Instrument differently, particularly as to Quantity and
Celerity.

60. Let us now suppose the nervous Fluid such as has been argued for, to wit,
an extreme Fluid saponaceous Water, moving in a constant, equal, slow Stream
from the Encephalon and Medulla spinalis in each of the proper nervous Fibers,
except when the Motion is changed by some accessory Cause, such as the Mind,
Pressure of other Parts, etc. and let us examine how well such a Supposition
will agree with the Phenomenon of the three great Functions, Nutrition,
Sensation and muscular Motion, which the Nerves are principal Instruments of.

In general we may well enough say, that Nerves can carry Fluids to the most
minute Part of the Body, to supply what is wasted in any of the solids; that
the Impression made by the Objects of the Senses on the very soft pulpy
Extremities of the Nerves of the Organs of the Senses, must make such a Stop in
the equal-flowing nervous Fluid, as must instantaneously be perceptible at the
Fountainhead from which the pressed Pipes come; That the constant Flow of the
Liquor of the Nerves into the Cavities of the muscular Fibrillae, occasions the
natural Contraction of Muscles, by the constant nisus it makes to increase the
transverse Diameter, and to shorten the longitudinal Diameter of each Fiber,
and that it is only to allow the Mind a Power of pouring a greater Quantity of
this same Fluid with a greater Velocity, into what muscular Fibers it pleases,
to account for the voluntary strong Action of Muscles.

61. But since such a superficial Account would not be satisfactory, it will be
expected, that the principal Phenomenon of these three Functions are to be
explained by the Means of such a Fluid as has been supposed, and that the
several Objections against this Doctrine should be answered: Let us attempt
this, and where we cannot extricate ourselves from Difficulties which may be
thrown in, let us boldly acknowledge Ignorance.

62. a. If Water, with a very small Proportion of Oils and Salts from the
Earth, proves a fit Nourishment for Vegetables, such a Liquor as the Fluid of
the Nerves has been described ( 55.) may not be unfit for repairing the Waste
in Animals.

b. The slow constant Motion of this nervous Fluid ( 57, 58.) to the most
minute Parts of the Body ( 9.) is well enough calculated to supply the
Particles that are constantly carried away from the Solids by the Vis Vitae,
Circulation of the Liquors and necessary Actions of Life.

g. The greater proportional Size of the Encephalon, the great Fountain of this
nutritious Liquor of the Nerves, in Creatures the younger they are, seems very
well calculated for their greater proportional Growth at that time of Life.

d. A Palsy and Atrophy of the Members generally accompanying each other, show,
that Nourishment, Sensation and Motion do depend on the same Cause.

e. It was said ( 25.) that the Nerves were principal Instrum^nts in Nutrition,
it was not affirmed, that they were the sole Instruments; and therefore an
Atrophy may proceed from the Compression or other Lesion of an Artery, without
being an Objection to the Doctrine here laid down.

63. a. All Objects of our Senses act by Impulse, when they are applied to
their proper Organs. Tangible Objects evidently press on the Surface of our
Bodies: Odorous Particles need the Assistance of Air moved rapidly to affect
our Nose: Sapid Substances often are not sufficient to give us any Idea of
their Taste by their own Weight, but need the Assistance of the Pressure of the
Tongue upon the Palate: The Rays of Light collected into a Focus drive light
Bodies before them: Sound communicates a Vibration to all Bodies in harmonic
Proportion with it. The Impulse made thus by any of these Objects on the soft
pulpy Nerves ( 20.) which are full of Liquor, will press their Sides or
Extremities, and their Liquor will be hindered to flow so freely as it did. The
Canals being all full, ( 57.) this Resistance must instantaneously affect the
whole Canals that are pressed and their Origins, and have the same Effect, as
if the Impulse had been made upon the Origin itself. To illustrate this by a
gross Comparison, let any one push Water out of a Syringe through a long
flexible Pipe, fixed to the Syringe, he will be sensible of Resistance, or a
Push backwards instantaneously, as any other puts his Finger on the Orifice of
the Pipe, or grips the Sides of it. This Impulse made on the Nerves, and thus
communicated to their Origin, will vary according to the Strength or Weakness,
the Quickness or Slowness, the Continuance or speedy Removal, the Uniformity or
Irregularity, the Constancy or Alteration, etc. of the Application or the
Objects to the Nerves.

b. Whenever the Impulse proper to the Object is regularly applied with due
Force to a Nerve rightly disposed to be impressed by it, and is communicated,
as just now explained, to the Sensorium, it gives a true and just Idea of the
Object to the Mind.

c. The va^ious Kinds of Impulses, which the differ^n^ Classes of Objects make,
occasion a Nec^s^^^y of having the different Organs of the Senses variously
modified, so that the several Impulses may be regularly applied to the Nerves
in each Organ, or in other Words, we must have different Organs of the Senses
fitted to the different Classes of Objects.

d. As the Objects have one common Property of Impulse, so all the Organs have
most of the Properties of the Organ of Touching in common with the Papillae the
Skin. In the Nose and Tongue this is evident; in some Operations on the Eyes we
can also perceive this, as we may likewise do in some Cases, where Matter is
collected in the internal Ear.

e. These Properties common as well in the Objects as the Organs, occasion
frequently uncommon Effects in the Application of an Object to an Organ proper
to another Object of Sensation; for sometimes we have the same Idea, as if the
Object had been applied to its own proper Organ; at other times the Object is
as it were changed, and we have the Idea as if the Organ had had its own proper
Object applied to it. Thus, for Example, Light is the proper Object to be
applied to the Eye, to give us any Idea of Colors; yet when all Light is
excluded from the Eyes, an Idea of Light and Colors may be excited in us by
Coughing, Sneezing, Rubbing, or striking the Eye-ball. -- A Cane vibrating by a
Stroke, but not so as to give any Sound perceptible to the Ear, if it is
applied to the Teeth, it raises a strong Idea of Sound, as will also a little
Insect crawling in the Meatus auditorius. -- The Fingers applied to two rough
Surfaces, rubbing on each other, are sensible of the Sound they make; Surgeons
of any Practice in the Cure of fractured Bones can bear Witness to the Truth of
this. -- The Fingers dipped in acid and several other acrid Liquors, have a
Sensation very like to Tasting. -- Sm^lling and Tasting every Body knows are
subservien^ and assisting to each other. From such Examples we have further
Proof of one genera^ Cause of our Sensations, to wit, Impulse from the Objects;
and that any one of the Organs would be capable of producing the Effect of
another, if the Impulses of the different Objects could be ^regularly appl^ed
to each.

f. If the Impulse of an Object is applied with due Force, but irregularly, a
confused Idea of the Object is raised. Distant Objects are confused to Myopes,
as very near ones are to Presbytae.

g. If the Application of the Impulse is regular, but the Force with which it
is applied is too weak, our Perception of the Object is too faint. One may
whisper so low as not to be heard.

h. If the Application of Objects is too violent, and there is any Danger of
the tender Organs of our Senses being lesed or destroyed, the uneasy Sensation
we call Pain is raised, whatever the Organ thus lesed is. The Objects of Touch
affect every Organ: Thus Pr^ssure, cutting, pricking, Salts, pungent Oils,
great Heat, violent Cold, etc. occasion Pain, wherever they are applied.
Besides this, every particular Organ can be affected with Pain, by the too
violent Application of its own proper Object. Too much Light pains the Eyes;
very loud Sound stuns the Ears; very odorous Bodies and too sapid Objects hurt
the Nose and Tongue. A pretty sure Proof this of the Objects of our Senses all
acting, and of the Organs all being impressed in nearly the same Way.

i. Whenever this uneasy Sensation, Pain, is thus raised, a Sort of Necessity
is as it were imposed upon the Mind, to endeavor to get free of the injuring
Cause, by either withdrawing the lesed Part of the Body from it, as one retires
his Hand when his Finger is pricked or burnt; or the injuring Cause is
endeavored to be forced from the Body, as a Tenesmus pushes acrid Faeces out
of the rectum. In both these Operations a convulsive Contractio^ is immediately
made in the lesed Part, or in the Neighborhood of it; and if the Irritation is
very strong or permanent, the greater Part of the nervous System comes to be
affected in that spasmodic or convulsive Way.

This Nisus of the Mind to free the Body of what is in Danger of being very
hurtful, may serve to explain the Phenomenon of a great many Diseases, when we
are acquainted with the Distribution of the part^cular Nerves; and from this we
can understand the Operation of Medicines that stimulate, and may learn how by
exciting a sharp but momentary Pain, we may free the Body of another Pain that
would be more durable; and that by having it thus in our Power to determine a
flow of the Liquor of the Nerves to any particular Part, for the Benefit of
that Part or the Relief of any other diseased Part, we can do considerable
Service by a right Application of the proper Medicines.

k. If a Pain-giving Cause is very violent or long continued, it destroys the
Organs either irrecoverably, or puts them so much out of Order, that they only
gradually recover. People have been made blind or deaf for al^ their Lives
after, by the violent Effect of Ligh^ on their Eyes or Sound on their Ears, and
w^ are frequently exposed to as much Light an^ Sound as make us unfit to see or
hear for a considerable Time after. I would explain this by a Ligature put
round the tender Branch of an Herb; this Ligature drawn to a certain Degr^e may
weaken the Canals so as to be unfit for the Circulation of the Juices a good
While, till they are gradually explicated and made firm by these Juices. A
stricter Ligature would disorder the Structure of the Fibers so much, that the
Liquors could not recover them. The Analogy is so plain it needs no Commentary.

64. 1. In applying the Fluid of the Nerves to the Action of Muscles, it was
said that natural or involuntary Contraction of Muscles was the Nisus which the
nervous Fluid flowing constantly into the muscular Fibers makes to distend
these Fibrils, by enlarging their transverse Diameters and shortning their
Axes, and that voluntary Contraction was owing to a greater Quantity of that
nervous Liquor determined toward the Muscle to be put in Action, and poured
with a greater momentum into the muscular Fibrils by the Power of the Mind
willing to make such a Muscle to act.

2. It has been objected to this account of muscular Motion, that if it was
true, the Volume of a Muscle in Contraction necessarily would be considerably
increased by so much Liquor poured into its Fibrils, whereas it does not appear
by any Experiment, that the Volume of a Muscle is increased by its being put
into Action.

3. To th^s it has been answered, That the ^paces between the muscular Fibers
are sufici^nt to ^llow the Fibrils swelling during the Contraction of a Muscle
to lodge in, without any Addition to the Bulk of the Muscle; and that it
plainly appears that these Spaces between the Fibrils are thus occupied, by the
Compression which the larger Vessels of M^scles, which run in those Spaces,
suffer during the Action of a Muscle; it is so great that the Muscle becomes
p^le by contract^ng.

4. Another Objection to the Action of Muscl^s being owing to the Influx of a
Fluid into their Fibrils is, that muscular Fibers are distractile, or capable
or being stretched; and therefore when a Fluid is poured into their hollow
Fibrils, they would be stretched longitudinally, as well as have their
transverse Diameters increas^d, that is, a Muscle would become longer as well
as thicker when it is put in Action, whereas it is known to every Body that a
Muscle is shortened when acting.

5. In Answer to this it has been remarked, that though muscular Fibrils are
distractile, yet, they will not yield to, or be stretched by every Force
however little that might be applied to them, a Cord that can be stretched in
Length by the Weight of a Pound or two, might not yield in the least to an
Ounce or two; and it must likewise be observed, that gradually as any Body is
stretched, its Resistance to the stretching force increases. A Rope may be
stretched to a certain Length by a Pound Weight appended to it, which would
require two Pounds to stretch it very little further; and therefore the general
Observation of Animal Fibers being distractile, cannot be a reasonable
Objection to the account of muscular Motion above-ment^oned, unless a Proof is
brought that the Force which the Liquid of the Nerves must exert upon each
Fiber of a Muscle in order to make a Muscle act, is capable of distracting or
stretching the Fibers, which has not yet been attempted to be proved.

6. If muscular Motion depends on the Influx of the nervous Liquid, the
instantaneous Contraction of a Muscle, when the Mind wills to make it act, will
easily be understood from the Nerves being always full of their Liquor, ( 57.)

7. If either the Nerves of any Muscle do not furnish a sufficient Quantity of
their Liquor, or if the Fibers of a Muscle become too easily distractile, such
a Muscle will be unactive or paralytick.

8. If too great a Quantity of the Liquor of the Nerves is determined to a
Muscle or Muscles, by any Cause which the Mind cannot command, such Muscle or
Muscles will be convulsed.

9. If the Motion of the Liquid of the Nerves is not uniform, but by Disease
becomes irregular, an alternate Relaxation and Contraction of Muscles may be
the Consequence, hence trembling Palsies, chorea sancti Viti, etc.

10. Though the Nerves may not furnish as much Liquor as may be sufficient to
make Muscles contract with Strength enough to overcome the Resistances to their
Action, yet there may be enough of Liquor in the Nerves to allow the
Impressions of Objects to be conveyed to the sensorium; this may be one Cause
of a Member's being sometimes sensible after it cannot be moved.

11. Unless the Liquor of the Nerves acquires some Energy in the Brain, which
we have no Reason to think the Circulation of the Fluids in the Vessels can
give it, or unless it has Properties other than what we can discover in it, or
unless there is an active Agent determining its momentum toward some
particular Parts, which we are not conscious of; if some of these don't obtain
the Action of the Heart continuing of equal Force to propel our Liquors,
notwithstanding all the Resistances that are to it, is not to be explained.

12. All Muscles, but especially the Heart, will continue to contract in an
irregular Way, after they are cut away from the Animal to whom they belonged,
which may be owing to the Liquors continuing to flow in the small Vessels, and
being poured irregularly into the muscular Fibrillae.

13. After the Heart or any other Muscle cut away from an Animal has ceased to
contract, its Contraction may again be restored by blowing one's warm Breath
upon it, or pricking it with any sharp Instrument; that Heat or Prick^ng should
by their stimulus (63. 1.) occasion Contraction in a living Creature may be
understood; but how they should have the same Effect in a Muscle separated from
an Animal, I know not.

N. B. Number. 11, 12, 13 are as inexpl^cable upon any other Supposition yet made
concerning muscular Motion.

65. I know no Experiment or Observations by which any Thing can be proved, or
from which any Thing can be reasonably inferr^^ con^erning the Uses of the
Ganglions of th Nerves, and therefore pretend to g^ve no Account of them.

Of the particular Nerves.
THERE are generally said to be forty Pair of Nerves in all, of which ten come
out from the Encephalon, and the other thirty have their Origin from the
Medulla spinalis.

Of the ten Pair of Nerves that are generally said to come from the Encephalon,
the first is the OLFACTORY, which long had the Name of the Mammillary Processes
of the Brain, because in the Brutes which were most commonly dissected, their
Form has some Resemblance to a Nipple; for they are large where they begin to
go out from the Brain, and taper a little as they go forwards to the cribriform
Part of the Ethmoid Bone; and because in these Animals they are evidently
Continuations or Productions of the two anterior Ventricles of the Brain, being
hollow and containing Lymph, the Ancients believed that these Nerves served to
convey the superfluous Mucus from the cold moist Brain, to be evacuated by the
Holes of the cribriform Bone into the Nose. But in Man these Nerves are small,
long, and without any Cavity, having their Origin from the corpora striata,
near the Part where the internal carotid Arteries are about to send off their
Branches to the different Parts of the Brain, and in their Course under the
an^erior Lobes of the Brain, which have a Depression made for lodging them, the
human olfactory Nerves become larger till they ^ome to the cribriform Bone
where they split unto a great Number of small Filaments to pass through the
little Holes in that Bone, and then each being joined by a Franch of the fifth
Pair of Nerves is spread on the Membrane of the Nose.

The tender Structure and sudden Expansion of these Nerves on such a large
Surface render it impossible to trace them far; which has made some Authors
deny them to be Nerves: But when we break the Circumference of the cribriform
Lamella, and then gently raise it, we may see the Distribution of the Nerves
some way on the Membrane of the Nose.

The Contrivance of defending these long soft Nerves from being too much
pressed by the anterior Lobes of the Brain under which they lie, is singular,
because they have not only the prominent orbitar Processes of the frontal Bone,
and the Crista Galli of the Ethmoid Bone to support the Brain on each Side,
with the Falx by means of the Veins going into the longitudinal Sinus, and
other Attachments bearing it up in the Middle, but have a Groove formed in each
Lobe of the Brain itself for them to lodge in. Their splitting into so many
small Branches before they enter the Bones of the Skull is likewise peculiar to
them; for generally the Nerves come from the Brain in disgregated Filaments,
and unite into Cords, as they are going out at the Holes of the Bones: But we
shall find that this Contrivance is the best for answering the Purpose they are
designed for, of being the Organ of smelling; for had they been expanded upon
the Membrane of the Nose into a medullary Web, such as the optic Nerve forms,
it would have been too sensible to bear the Impressions of such Objects as are
applied to it, and a Distribution in the more common way of a Cord sending off
Branches, would not have been equal enough for such an Organ of Sensation.

The 2 d Pair of Nerves are the OPTIC, which rise each from the thalami
nervorum opticorum, and then after making a large Curve outward, run obliquely
inwards and forwards till they unite at the Forepart of the Sella Turcica, and
then dividing again, each runs obliquely forwards and outward to go out at its
proper Hole in the sphenoid Bone, accompanied with the proper ocular Artery, to
run afterward to the Globe of the Eye, within which each is extended into a
very fine Cup-like Web that lines all the Inside of the Eye as far forwards as
the ciliary Circle, and is universally known by the Name of Retina.

Though the Substance of these two Nerves seems to be blended at the Place where
they are joined, yet Observations of People whose optic Nerves were not joined
at all, and of others who have been blind of one Eye from a Fault in the optic
Nerve, or in those who have had one of their Eyes taken out, make it appear
that there is no such intimate Union of Substance, the optic Nerve of the
affected Side only being w^sted, while the other was large and plump; and the
same Observations are contradictory to the Doctrine of a Decussation of all the
Nerves ( 7.); for the Disease could be traced from the affected Eye to the
Origin of the Nerve on the same Side. In many Fishes indeed the Doctrine of
Decussation is favored, for their optic Nerves plainly cross each other
without any Union at the Part where they are joined in Men and most Quadrupeds.

Those People, whose optic Nerves were not joined, having neither seen Objects
double, nor turned their Eyes different Ways, is also a plain Proof that the
Conjunction of the optic Nerves will not serve to account for either the
uniform Motions of our Eyes, or our seeing Objects single with two Eyes.

The Retina of a recent Eye, without any Preparation, appears a very fine Web,
with some Blood Vessels coming from its Center to be distributed on it; but
after a good Injection of the Arteries that run in the Substance of this Nerve
as is common to other Nerves, it is with Difficulty that we can observe its
nervous medullary Substance. As these Vessels are placed in the centrical Part
of the optic Nerve, and there are not medullary Fibers here, where it enters
the Ball of the Eye: This may be one Reason why we do not see such Bodies or
Parts of Bodies, whose Picture, formed on the Bottom of our Eye, falls on this
centrical Part of the Retina. An Inflammation in those Arteries of the Retina,
which an Opthalmia is generally attended with, may very well account for that
Tenderness in the Eyes, and Inability to bear the Light which People have in
that Disease. The Over-distension of these Vessels may likewise serve to
account for the black Spots observed on bright colored Bodies especially, and
that smoaky Fog, through which all Objects are seen by People in some Fevers. If
those Vessels lose their Tone and remain preternaturaly distended, no Objects
may affect our Retina, though the Eye externally appears sound, or this may be
one Cause of an Amaurosis or Gutta serena.

The THIRD PAIR rise from the anterior Part of the Processus annularis, and
piercing the Dura Matter a little before and to a Side of the lateral
Extrem^ties of the posterior clinoid Process of the sphenoid Bone, run along
the Receptacula, or cavernous Sinuses, at the Side of the Ephippium, to get out
at the Foramina lacera, to be distributed to the Globe of the Eye, to the
Musculus rectus of the Palpebra, and to the Attollens, Adductor, Deprimens and
obliquus minor Muscles of the Eye-ball. These Muscles being principal
Instruments in the Motions of the Eyelid and Eye-ball, the Nerve has therefore
got the Name of the Motor Oculi. I have frequently observed in Convulsions the
Eyelids widely opened, the Cornea turned up and outward, and the Eye Balls
sunk in the Orbit; which well described the conjunct Action of the Muscles
which this Pair of Nerves serves. Possibly the Distension of a consi^erable
Branch of the Carotid, which passes over this Nerve near its Origin on each
Side, may be the Reason of that Heaviness in the Eyelids and Eyes, after
drinking hard or eating much.

The FOURTH PAIR, which are the smallest Nerves of any, derive their Origin
from the posterior Base of the Testes, and then making a long Course on the
Side of the annular Protuberance, enter the Dura Matter a little farther back
and outward than the third Pair, to run also along the Receptacula, to pass
out at the Foramina lacera, and to be entirely spent on the Musculi
trochleares, or superior oblique Muscles of the Eyes. The rotatory Motions and
the Advancement of the Eye Balls forward, by which Motions several of our
Passions are expressed, principally depending on these Muscles, the Nerves that
serve them have got the Name of PATHETICI.

The FIFTH PAIR are large Nerves, rising from the annular Process, where the
medullary Processes of the Cerebellum join in the Formation of that Tuber, to
enter the Dura Matter near the Point of the petrous Process of the Temporal
Bones, and then plunging into the Receptacula at the Side of the Sella Turcica,
each becomes in appearance thicker, and goes out of the Skull in three great
Branches.

The first Branch of the 5th is the OPHTHALMICK, which runs through the Foramen
lacerum to the Orbit, having in its Passage thither a Connection with the 6th
Pair: it is afterward distributed to the Ball of the Eye with the 3d, to the
Nose, along with the Olfactory, which the Branch of the 5th that passes through
the Orbiter internus Hole, joins in the Manner already mentioned in the
Description of the first Pair. This ophthalmic Branch likewise supplies the
Glandula lacrymalis, Fat, Membranes, Muscles and the Teguments of the Eyelids,
its longest farthest extended Branch passing through the Foramen superciliare
of the Os Frontis to be distributed to the Forehead.

The small Fibers which this first Branch of the 5th and the third Pair of
Nerves send to the Eye-ball, being situated on the ^optic Nerve, and after
piercing the sclerotick Coat running on the choroid Coat on the Outside of the
Retina in their Course to the Uvea or Iris, may possibly be a Reason, why there
is such a Sympathy between the optic Nerve and the Uvea, that the Uvea
contracts to lessen the Pupil, and exclude too numerous Rays of Light; and
this, with the Sympathy which must arise from some of the Nerves of the
Membrane of the Nostrils being derived from this first Branch of the 5th Pair
of Nerves, may also be the Cause, why a strong Irritation of too strong Light
upon the Retina may produce the same Effect, Sneezing, as when any tickling
Substance is applied to the Membrane of the Nose. In the Megrim all the
Branches of this Nerve discover themselves to be affected; for the Forehead is
racked with Pain, the Eye-ball is pained, and feels as if it was squeezed, the
Eyelids shut convulsively, the Tears trickle down, and an uneasy Heat is felt
in the Nose Hence we can understand, where external Medicines will have the
best Effect, when applied to remove this Disease, to wit, to the Membrane of
the Nose and to the Forehead. Hence we can understand, why alternate Pressure
near the superciliary Hole of the frontal Bone sometimes gives immediate Relief
in the Megrim.

The second Branch of the 5th Pair of Nerves may be called MAXILLARIS SUPERIOR,
from its serving principally the Parts of the upper Jaw. It goes out at the
round Hole of the sphenoid Bone, and sends immediately one Branch in the
Channel on the Pop of the Antrum maxillare, the Membrane of which and the
superior Teeth are supplied by it in its Passage. As it is about to go out ^t
the Orbiter externus Hole, it sends a Nerve through the Substance of the Os
maxillare, to come out at Steno's Duct, to be distributed to the anterior Part
of the Palate; and what remains of it escaping at the Orbiter externus Hole,
divides into a great many Branches, that supply the Cheek, upper Lip and
Nostril. The next considerable Branch of the superior maxillary Nerve is sent
into the Nose by the Hole common to the Palate and sphenoidal Bone, and the
remaining Part of this Nerve runs in the Palato-maxillaris Canal, giving off
Branches to the Temples and Pterygoid Muscles, and comes at last into the
Palate to be lost. Hence the Ach in the Teeth of the upper Jaw occasions a
gnawing Pain deep seated in the Bones of the Face, with a Swelling in the
Eyelids, Cheek, Nose and upper Lip; and on the other hand, an Inflammation in
these Parts is often attended with sharp Pain in the Teeth. Hence an
Obstruction in the Duct of the maxillary Sinus, which obliges the Liquor
secreted there to find out a preternatural Rout for itself, as I have seen more
than once, may be occasioned by the Pain of the Teeth.

The third or MAXILLARIS INFERIOR. Branch of the fifth Pair going out at the
oval Hole of the sphenoid Bone, serves the Muscles of the lower Jaw, and the
Muscles situated between the Os hyoides and Jaw; all the salivary Glands, the
Amygdalae and the external Ear have Branches from it; it has a large Branch
lost in the Tongue, and sends another through the Canal in the Substance of the
lower Jaw, to serve all the Teeth there, and to come out at the Hole in the
anterior Part of the Jaw, to be lost in the Chin and Under-lip-Hence a
convulsive Contraction of the Muscles of the lower Jaw, or the Mouth's being
involuntarly shut, a great Flow of Spittle or Salivation, a Pain in the Ear
especially in Deglutition, and a Swelling all about the Throat, are natural
Consequences of a violent Irritation of the Nerves of the lower Teeth in the
Toothache; and Pain in the Teeth and Ear is as natural a Consequence of an
Angina. Hence alternate Pressure on the Chin may sometimes relieve the Violence
of a Toothache. Hence destroying the Nerves of a Tooth by actual or potential
Cauteries, or pulling a carious Tooth, so often removes immedi^tely all these
Symptoms. Hence no Cure is to be found for some Ulcers in the upper or lower
Jaw, but by drawing a Tooth.

The SIXTH PAIR, which is the smallest except the fourth, rises from the
Forepart of the Corpora pyramidalia, and entering the Dura Matter some way behind
the Extremities of the posterior clinoid Processes of the sphenoid Bone, have a
long Course below that Membrane, and within the Receptacula at the Side of the
Sella Turcica, to go out at the Foramina lacera into the Orbit, tolbe lost in
the Abductor-muscle of the Eye. In this Passage each of them lies very
contiguous to the internal carotid Artery, and to the ophthalmick Branch of the
fifth Pair of Nerves. At the same Place where they are contiguous to the
Carotid, a Nerve, e^^^er, ac^ording to the general Description of Anato^ists,
go from each of them ^n an uncom^on w^y (that is the Angle is obt^se beyond
^^ere (...) rises) to descend with the Artery, and to form the Beginning of the
intercostal Nerve; or, according to other Authors, this Nerve comes up from the
great Ganglion of the Intercostal to be joined to the sixth here.

The Arguments for this latter Opinion are, That according to the common
Opinion, this Beginning of the intercostal Nerve, as it is called, would rise in
a Manner not so ordinary in Nerves. In the next Place it is observed, that the
sixth Pair is larger nearer to the Orbit, than it is before it comes to the
Place where this Nerve is said to go off; and therefore it is more probable,
that it receives an Addition there rather than gives off a Branch. Lastly, It
is found, that upon cutting the intercostal Nerves of living Animals, the Eyes
plainly were affected, they lost their bright Water, the Gum, or Gore, as we
call it, was separated in greater Quantity, the Pupil was more contracted, the
cartilaginous Membrane at the internal Canthus came more over the Eye, and the
Eye-ball itself was diminished.

To this it is answered in Defense of the more common Doctrine, that other
Branches of Nerves go off in a reflected Way as well as this does, supposing it
to be the Beginning of the Intercostal, and that the Reflection would rather be
greater, if it is thought to come up from the Intercostal to the sixth. 2 dly,
Tha^ Nerves enlarge sometimes where there is no Addition made to them, as in
the Instance already mentioned of the Trunk of the fifth Pa^^ while below the
Dura Matter. 3 dly, That the Experiments on living Animals show indeed that the
Eyes are affected upon cutting the intercostal Nerve, but not in the Way mig^^
have been expected, if the Intercostal furnishes such a Shareof the Nerve that
goes to the Abductor Muscle of the Eye; for it might have been thought, that
this Muscle would have been so much weakened immediately upon cutting the
Intercostal, as its Antagonist the Adductor would have greatly prevailed over
it, and have turned the Eye strongly in toward the Nose, which is not said to
be a Consequence of this Experiment. So that the Arguments are still equivocal,
and more Observations and Experiments must be made before it can be determined
with Certainty, whether the sixth Pair gives or receives a Branch here. In the
mean time I shall continue to speak about the Origin of the Intercostal with
the common Herd of Anatomists.

At this same Place where the Intercostal begins, the fifth Pair is contiguous
and adherent to the sixth; and it is generally said, that the ophthalmic Branch
of the fifth gives a Branch or two to the Beginning of the Intercostal, or
receives such from it. Others deny any such Communication between them, and
those who affirm the Communication confess, that in some Subjects they could
not see it. After examining the Nerves here in a great many Subjects, I cannot
determine whether or not there are nervous Filaments going from the one to the
other. Sometimes I thought I traced them evidently; at other times I observed
what I dissected for nervous Filaments, to be no other than collapsed cellular
Substance; and in all the Subjects where I had pushed an Injection successfully
into the very small Arteries, I could only observe a Plexus of Vessels
connecting the one to the other. In any of these Ways however there is as much
Connection, as we are assured from many Experiments and Observations on other
Nerves, is sufficient to make a very great Sympathy among the Nerves here.
Possibly the Appearances in the Eyes of Dogs, whose intercostal Nerves were
cut, might be owing to this Sympathy.

The SEVENTH PAIR comes out from the lateral Part of the annular Process,
behind where the medullary Processes of the Cerebellum are joined to that
Tuber, and, being accompanied with a larger Artery than most other Nerves,
enters the internal Meatus auditorius, where soon the two great Pacquets of
Fibr^s, of which it appeared to consist within the Skull, separate from each
other; one of them enters by several small Holes into the Vestible, Cochlea and
semicircular Canals, is stretched on this inner Camera of the Ear in a very
soft pulpy Substance; and being never seen in the Form of a firm Cord, such as
the other Packet of this Nerve and most other Nerves become, is called PORTIO
MOLLIS of the auditory Nerve.

The other Part of this seventh Pair passes through Galen's Foramen caecum or
Fallopius's Aqueduct in its crooked Passage by the Side of the Tympanum, in
which Passage a Nerve sent from the lingual Branch of the inferior maxillary
Nerve, along the outside of the Tuba Eustachiana, and cross the Cavity of the
Tympanum, where it has the Name of Chorda Tympa^^, ^s commonly said to be
joined to it. The very acute Angle which this Nerve makes with the fifth, or
the sudden violent Reflection it would suffer, on the Supposition of its coming
from the fifth to the seventh, whereas supposing its Course from the seventh to
the fifth, its Course would be more in the ordinary Way, has made some say,
that this Chorda tympani should be esteemed a Branch of the seventh Pair going
to join the fifth. This same smaller Packet of the seventh gives Branches to
the Muscles of the Malleus and to the Dura Matter, while it passes through the
bony crooked Canal, and at last comes out in a firm Cord named PORTIO DURA, at
the Extremity of this Canal, between the styloid and mastoid Processes of the
temporal Bone, giving immediately Filaments to the little oblique Muscles of
the Head, and to those that rise from the styloid Process. It then pierces
through the parotid Gland, and divides into a great many Branches, which are
dispersed in the Muscles and Teguments that cover all the Side of the superior
Part of the Neck, the whole Face and Cranium, as far back as the Temples,
including a considerable Part of the external Ear. Its Branches having thus a
considerable Connection with all the three Branches of the fifth Pair, and with
the second cervical, occasions a considerable Sympathy of these Nerves with it.
Hence in the Toothache, the Pain is sometimes very little in the affected
Tooth, compared to what it is all along the Side of the Head and in the Ear.
Hence probably the Relief of the Toothache by Blisters applied behind the Ear,
or by a hot Iron touching the Antihelix of the Ear. By this Communication or
Connection possibly too it is, that a vibrating String held between one's Teeth,
gives him a strong Idea of its Sound which no other can hear. Perhaps too the
Distribution of this Nerve occasions the Head to be so quickly turned upon the
Impression of Sound on our Ears.

The EIGHTH PAIR of Nerves rise from the lateral Base of the Corpora olivaria
in disgregated Fibers, and as they are entering the anterior internal Part of
the Hole, common to the Os Occipitis and Temporum, each is joined by a Nerve
which ascends within the Dura Matter from the 10th of the Head, the first and
second cervical, and sometimes from inferior Nerves: This every Body knows has
the Name of the NERVUS ACCESSORIUS. When the two get out of the Skull, the
Accessorius separates from the eighth, and descending obliquely outward,
passes through the Sternomastoideus Muscle, to which it gives Branches to be
lost in the Trapezius and Rhomboid Muscles of the Scapula. In this Course it is
generally more or less joined by the second cervical Nerve.

The large eighth Pair soon after its Exit gives Nerves to the Tongue, Larynx,
Pharynx and Ganglion of the Intercostal Nerve, and being disjoined from the 9th
and Intercostal, to which it adheres closely some way, runs straight down the
Neck behind the internal jugular Vein, and at the interior Side of the internal
carotid Artery. As it is about to enter the Thorax, a large Nerve goes off from
the eighth of each Side: This branch of the right Side turns round from the
anterior to the posterior Part of the subclavian Artery, while the Branch of
the left Side turns round the great Curve of the Aorta, both of them mounting
up again at the Side of the O Esophagus, to which they give Branches, are lost
at last in the Larynx. These are called the RECURRENT Nerves, which we are
desired to shun in the Operation of Bronchotomy, though their deep Situation
protects them sufficiently. The Muscles of the Larynx being in a good measure
supplied with Nerves from the Recurrents, it is to be expected, that the
cutting of them will greatly weaken the Voice, though it will not be entirely
lost, so long as the superior Branches of the eighth Pair are entire.

At or near the Place where the recurrent Nerves go off from the eighth Pair,
or frequently from the Recurrents themselves, Nerves go off to the Pericardium,
and to join with the Branches of the Intercostal that are distributed to the
Heart.

After these Branches are sent off, the Parvagum on each Side descends behind
the great Branch of the Trachea and gives numerous Filaments to the Lungs in
going to the O E^ophagus. The one of the left Side running on the Forepart of
the O Esophagus, communicates by several Branches with the right one in its
Descent to be distributed to the Stomach: The right one gets behind the O
Esophagus, where it splits and rejoins several Times before it arrives at the
Stomach, to which ^t sends Nerves; and then being joined by a Branch from the
left Trunk, they run toward the caeliac Artery, there to join into the great
semilunar Ganglion formed by the two Intercostals.

From the Distribution of this Par vagum, we may learn how tickling the Fauces
with a Feather or any such Substance, excites a Nausea and Inclination to
vomit. Why coughing occasions vomiting, or vomiting raises a Cough. Hence we
see how the nervous Asthma and the Tussis convulsiva, Kinkcough, are attended
with a straitning of the Glottis. How Food ill to digest brings on the Asthma
on weakly People, and why Emetics have frequently cured the Asthma very
speedily. How the superior Orifice of the Stomach is so sensible as to be
looked on as the Seat of the Soul by some. How People subject to Distensions of
the Stomach have so often the Sensations of Balls in their Breast or Throats.
Why the Globus hystericus is so often attended with a violent Strangulation at
the Glottis. The Sympathy among the Branches of these Nerves will lead us to
understand these and several other Phenomenon.

The NINTH PAIR of Nerves comes from the inferior Part of the Corpora
pyramidalia, to go out of the Skull at their proper Holes of the occipital
Bones. After their Egress they adhere for some way firmly to the 8th and
Intercostal, and then sending a Branch that in many Subjects is joined with
Branches of the first and second cervical Nerves, to be distributed to the
Thyroid Gland and Muscles on the Forepart of the Trachea Arteria, the 9th is
lost in the Muscles and Substance of the Tongue. Some have thought this Nerve,
and others have esteemed the third Branch of the fifth Pair of Nerves to be the
proper gustatory Nerve. I know no Observations or Experiments to prove either
Opinion, or to determine that both the Nerves may not serve for Tasting, and
for the Motion of the Tongue.

The TENTH PAIR rises from the Sides of the Medulla spinalis, to go out between
the Os Occipitis and first Vertebra of the Neck. After each of them gives a
Branch to the great Ganglion of the Intercostal Nerve, they are distributed to
the oblique Muscles, and to some of the Extensors of the Head. Whether the Name
of the tenth of the Head, or of the first Vertebral, ought to be given to this
Nerve, is of no such Consequence as to deserve a Debate.

In the Description of the sixth Pair, I said that I would use the way of
speaking which most Anatomists have, to wit, I would say that the Beginning of
the Intercostal Nerve comes out of the Skull, and therefore shall here subjoin
a cursory Description of this Nerve to those of the Head, notwithstand^ng its
much larger Part is composed of Nerves coming out from the Medulla spinalis.
There is no greater Incongruity in Point of Method to say, that a Nerve one is
describing receives Additions from Nerves that have not been described, than it
is to repeat in the Description of a great many Nerves, that each of them gives
Branches to form a Nerve which we are ignorant of, which is all the Difference
between describing the Intercostal before or after the spinal Nerves.

The Branch reflected from the sixth Pair, joined possibly by some Filaments of
the Ophthalmic Branch of the fifth, runs along with the internal Carotid through
the crooked Canal formed for this Artery in the temporal Bone, where the little
Nerve is very soft and pappy, and in several Subjects divides and unites again
before it comes out of the Skull. As soon as the Nerve escapes out of this bony
Canal it is connected a little way with the eighth and ninth, then separating
from them, after seeming to receive additional Nerves from them, it forms a
large Ganglion, into which Branches from the tenth of the Head, and from the
first and second cervical enter. From this Ganglion the Nerves come out again
small to run down the Neck along with the carotid Artery, communicating by
Branches with the cervical Nerves, and giving Nerves to the Muscles that bend
the Head and Neck. As the Intercostal is about to enter the Thorax, it forms
another Ganglion from which Nerves are sent to the Trachea and to the Heart;
these designed for the Heart joining with the Branches of the eighth, and
passing between the two great Arteries and the Auricles to the Substance of
that Muscle. The Intercostal after this being composed of two Branches, one
going behind, and the other running over the anterior Part of the Subclavian
Artery, forms a new Ganglion where the two Branches unite below that Artery,
and then descending along the Sides of the Vertebrae of the Thorax, receives
Branches from each of the dorsal Nerves, which Branches appearing to come out
between the Ribs, have given the Name of Intercostal to the whole Nerve. Where
the Addition is made to it from the fifth dorsal Nerve, a Branch goes off
obliquely forwards, which being joined by other such Branches from the sixth,
seventh, eighth and ninth darsal, an anterior Trunk is formed that passes
between the Fibers of the Appendix musculosa of the Diaphragm to form along
with the other Intercostal and the Branches of the eighth Pair, a large
semilunar Ganglion situated betw^^n the caeliac and superior mesenteric
Arteries; the Roots of which are, as it were, involved in a sort of nervous
Network of this Ganglion, from which a great Number of very small nervous
Threads run out to be extended on the Surface of all the Branches of these two
Arteries, so as to be easily seen when any of the Arteries are stretched, but
not to be dissected off from them; and thus the Liver, Gallbladder, Duodenum,
Pancreas, Spleen, Jejunum, Ilium, and a large Share of the Colon have their
Nerves sent from this great solar Ganglion or Plexus.

Several Fibers of this Ganglion running down upon the Aorta, meet with other
Nerves sent from the posterior Trunk of the Intercostal, which continues its
Course along the Sides of the Vertebrae, they supply the Glandulae renales,
Kidneys and Testes in Men or Ovaria in Women; and then they form a Network
upon the inferior mesenteric Artery where the Nerves of the two Sides meet, and
accompany the Branches of this Artery to the Part of the Colon that lies in the
left Side or the Belly, and to the Rectum as far down as the lower Part of the
Pelvis.

The Intercostal continuing down by the Side of the Vertebrae of the Loins, is
joined by Nerves coming from between these Ver^ebrae, and sends Nerves to the
Organs of Generation and others in the Pelvis, being even joined with those
that are sent to the inferior Extremities.

The almost universal Connection and Communication this Nerve has with the
other Nerves of the Body, may lead us to understand a great many Phenomenon,
where one otherwise would be greatly surprised at the Sympathy to be observed
among the Parts of the Body. One who knows the Course of this Nerve will
readily understand why a Stone in the Kidneys, or Ureters, or any other Cause
irritating those Organs, should so much more frequently bring on Vomiting and
other Disorders of the Stomach, than the Stone or any other stimulating Cause
in the Bladder does. The Obstructions of the Menses will hence appear capable
of occasioning Strangulations, Belching, Colicks, Stomach-aches, and even
Convulsions in the Extremities may be owing to such Obstructions, or to any
violent Irritations of the Stomach or Guts. With a View to these
Communications, I have frequently applied Vesicatories from the Ears to the
Clavicles of Children laboring under the Tussis convulsiva with observable
good Success.

The spinal Nerves rise generally by a Number of disgregated Fibers from both
the anterior and posterior Part of the Medulla spinalis, and soon after form a
little Knot or Ganglion where they get on their firm Coats, and are extended
into firm Cords. They are distinguished by Numbers, according to the Vertebrae
from between which they come out, the superior of the two Bones forming the
Hole through which they pass, being the one from which the Number is applied to
each Nerve. There are generally said to be thirty Pair of them, seven of which
come out between the Vertebrae of the Neck, twelve between those of the Back,
five from the Loins, and six from the Os sacrum.

The FIRST CERVICAL Pair of Nerves comes out between the first and second
Vertebrae of the Neck, and having given Branches to join with the tenth Pair of
the Head, the second Cervical and Intercostal, and to serve the Muscles that
bend the Neck, it sends its largest Branches backwards to the extensor Muscles
of the Head and Neck; some of which piercing through these Muscles run up on the
Occiput to be lost in the Teguments there; and many Fibers of it advance so far
forward, as to be connected with the Fibrillae of the first Branch of the fifth
Pair of the Head, and of the Portio Dura of the Auditory Nerve. Hence possibly
it is that a Clavus hystericus shall suddenly change from the Forehead to a
violent Pain and Spasm in the Back-part of the Head and Neck.

The SECOND CERVICAL is soon joined by some Branches to the ninth of the Head
and Intercostal, and to the first and third of the Neck, then has a large
Branch that comes out at the exterior Edge of the Sternomastoideus Muscle,
where it joins with the Accessorius of the eighth Pair, and then is distributed
to the Platysma Myoides, Teguments of the Side of the Neck and Head, parotid
Gland and external Ear, being connected to the Portio Dura of the Auditory
Nerve and to the first cervi^al. The Remainder of this second Cervi^al (...)
spent on the Levator scapulae, and the Extensors of the Neck and Head.
Generally a large Branch is here sent off to join the Accessorius of the eighth
Pair, near the superior Angle of the Scapula.

To the Irritation of the Branches of this Nerve, it probably is, that in an
Inflammation of the parotid Gland, the Neck is pained as far down as the
Clavicle, the Head is drawn toward the Shoulder of the affected Side, and the
Chin is turned to the other Side. In opening the external Jugular-Vein, no
Operator can promise not to touch some of the cutaneous Branches of this Nerve
with the Edge of the Lancet, which occasions a sharp pricking Pain in the mean
Time, and a Numness of the Skin near the Orifice for some Time after.

The THIRD PAIR of the Neck passes out between the third and fourth cervical
Vertebrae, having immediately a Communication with the second, and sending down
a Branch, which being joined by a Branch from the fourth cervical forms the
PHRENIC Nerve. This desceding enters the Thorax between the subclavian Vein and
Artery, and then being received into a Groove formed for it in the Pericardium,
it has its Course along this Capsula of the Heart, till it is lost in the
middle Part of the Diaphragm. The right Phrenic has a pretty straight Course,
but the left one is obliged to make a considerable Turn outward, to go over
the prominent Part of the Pericardium where the Point of the Heart i^ lodged.
Hence in violent Palpitations of the Heart, a pungent acute Pain is felt near
the left Orifice of the Stomach.

The other Branches of the third cervic^^ Nerve are distributed to the Muscles
and Teguments at the inferior Part of the Neck and Top of the Shoulder. No
Wonder then that an Inflammation of the Liver or Spleen, an Abscess in the
Lungs adhering to the Diaphragm, or any other Cause capable of irritating the
Diaphragm, should be attended with a sharp Pain in the Top of the Shoulder, as
well as Wounds, Ulcers, etc. of this Muscle itself. If the Irritation of this
Muscle is very violent, it may occasion that convulsive Contraction of the
Diaphragm which is called a Hiccough, and therefore a Hiccough in an
Inflammation of the Liver has been justly declared to be an ill Symptom.

The Irritation of the thoracic Nerves so as to produce sneezing, may sometimes
free the phrenic Nerves from any Spasm they occasion; so that sneezing
sometimes takes away the Hiccough, and a Derivation of the Fluid of the Nerves
any other way may do the same Thing: Or the Hiccough may also be sometimes
cured by a Surprise, or any other strong Application of the Mind in thinking or
in distinguishing Objects.

The FOURTH CERVICAL Nerve, after sending off that Branch which joins with the
third to form the Phrenic, and bestowing Twigs on the Muscles and Glands of the
Neck runs to the Arm-Pit, where it meets with the FIFTH, SIXTH and SEVENTH
Cervicals' and FIRST DORSAL, that escape in the Interstices of the Musculi
scaleni, to come at the Arm-Pit where they join, separate, and re-join in a way
scarce to be rightly expressed in Words; and after giving several considerable
Nerves to the Muscles and Teguments which cover the Thorax, they divide into
several Branches to be distributed to all the Parts of the superior Extremity.
Seven of these Branches I shall describe under particular Names.

1. CUTANEUS runs down the Forepart of the Arm near the Skin to which it gives
off Branches, and then divides on the Fore-arm into several Nerves, which
supply the Teguments there and on the Palm of the Hand. In opening the Cephalic
Vein of the Arm at the ordinary Place, the same Symptoms are produced, as I
mentioned to be done in opening the external Jugular-Vein, and by the like
Cause, to wit, the hurting a Branch of this cutaneous Nerve with the Lancet.

2. MUSCULO-CUTANEUS or perforans Casserii passes through the c^raco-brachialis
Muscle, and, after supplying the biceps flexor cubiti and brachiaeus internus,
is spent on the Teguments on the outside of the Fore-arm and Back of the Hand.

3. MUSCULARIS has a spiral Course from the Axilla under the Os humeri, and
backward to the external Part of that Bone, supplying by the Way the extensor
Muscles of the Fore-arm, to which it runs between the two brachiaei Muscles, to
be chiefly bestowed on the Muscles that extend the Wrist and Fingers; some of
its Branches going likewise to the Flexors, and others serving the Skin on the
outside of the Fore-arm, the Extremity of it descends along the Radius to the
Back of the Hand, in which, and in the back unequal Part of the Thumb and three
large Fingers it terminates.

4. ULNARIS is extended along the Inside of the Arm, to give Nerves to the
Muscles that extend the Fore-arm and to the Teguments of the Elbow; toward the
lower Part of the Arm it slants a little backward to come at the Groove behind
the internal Condyle of the Os humeri, through which it runs to the Ulna; in its
Course along this Bone it serves the neighboring Muscles and Teguments; and as
it comes near the Wrist, it detaches a Branch obliquely over the Ulna to the
Back of the Hand, to be lost in the unequal Part of several Fingers. The larger
Part of the Nerve goes straight forward to the internal Side of the Os
pisiforme of the Wrist; where it sends off a Branch which sinks under the large
Tendons in the Palm, to go cross to the other Side of the Wrist, serving the
musculi lumbricales and interossei, and at last terminating in the short
Muscles of the Thumb and Forefinger. What remains of the ulnar Nerve, after
supplying the short Muscles of the Little-finger, divides into three Branches;
whereof two are extended along the Sides of the Sheath of the Tendons of the
Flexors of the Little-finger, to furnish the concave Side of that Finger; and
the third Branch is disposed in the same Way upon the Side of the Ring-finger
next to the Little finger.

When we lean or press on the internal Condyle of the Os humeri, the Numness
and Prickling we frequently feel point out the Course of this Nerve; I have
seen a Weakness and Atrophy in the Parts which I mentioned this Nerve to be
sent to, after a Wound in the internal inferior Part of the Arm.

5. RADIALIS accompanies the humeral Artery to the bending of the Elbow,
serving the Flexors of the Cubit in its Way; then, after giving large Nerves to
the Muscles on the Forepart of the Fore-arm, it continues its Course near to
the Radius, bestowing Branches on the circumjacent Muscles. Near the Wrist it
gives off a Nerve which is distributed to the Back of the Hand, and the unequal
Part of the Thumb, and several of the Fingers. The larger Part of this Nerve
passing behind the annular Ligament of the Wrist gives Nerves to the short
Muscles of the Thumb, and afterward sends a Branch along each Side of the
Sheath of the Tendons of the Flexors of the Thumb, Forefinger, Middle-finger,
and one Branch to the Side of the Ring-finger next to the Middle, to be lost on
the concave Side of those Fingers.

The Manner of these Nerves of the Fingers, both from the Ulnar and Radial
going off, is that a single Branch is sent from the Trunk to the Side of the
Thumb and Little-finger farthest from the other Fingers; and all the rest are
supplied by a Trunk of a Nerve, which splits into two some way before it comes
as far as the End of the Metacarpus, to run along the Sides of different
Fingers that are nearest to each other.

It might have been observed, that in describing the posterior Branches of the
ulnar and radial Nerve, I did not mention the particular Fingers, to the unequal
Part of which, they were distributed. My Reason for this Omission is the
Uncertainty of their Distribution; for though sometimes these posterior Branches
go to the same Fingers, to the concave Part of which their anterior Branches
are sent, yet frequently they are distributed otherwise, and I ought to observe
that the muscular Nerve has not always that Termination in the Back of the Hand
which I mentioned.

6. ARTICULARIS sinks downwards at the Axilla, to get below the Neck of the
superior Head of the Os humeri, and to mount again at the Back-part of it; so
that it almost surrounds the Articulation, and is distributed to the Muscles
that draw the Arm back and raise it up.

7. SCAPULARIS runs straight to the Cavitas semilunata of the upper Costa of
the Scapula, which is made a Hole in the recent Subject, a Ligament being
extended from one Angle of the Bone to the other, giving Nerves in its Way to
the Muscles of the Scapula. When it has passed this Hole it supplies the
Supraspinatus Muscle, and then descending at the anterior Root of the Spine of
the Scapula, it is lost in the other Muscles that lie on the Dorsum of the
Scapula.

The Situation of these brachial Nerves in the Axilla, may let us see how a
Weakness and Atrophy may be brought on the Arms by long continued Pressure of
Crutches, or such other hard Substances on this Part; and the Course of them
from the Neck to the Arm may teach us how much better Effects, Vesicatories or
stimulating nervous Medicines would have, when applied to the Skin, covering
the transverse Processes of the Vertebrae, or at the Axilla, than when they are
put between the Shoulders, or upon the spinal Processes in Convulsions or
Palsies of the superior Extremities, where a Stimulus is required.

The TWELVE DORSAL Nerves of each Side as soon as they escape from between the
Vertebrae, send a Branch forward to join the Intercostal, by which a
Communication is made among them all, and they soon likewise give Branches
backwards to the Muscles that raise the Trunk of the Body, their principal
Trunk being extended outward to come at the Furrow in the lower Edge of each
Rib, in which they run toward the anterior Part of the Thorax, between the
internal and external intercostal Muscles, giving off Branches in their Course
to the Muscles and Teguments of the Thorax.

The FIRST Dorsal has already been said to have this Particular in it, that it
contributes to form the brachial Nerves, and that the two Branches of the
Intercostal, which come down to the Thorax, form a considerable Ganglion with
it.

The SIX inferior dorsal Nerves give Branches to the Diaphragm and abdominal
Muscles.

The TWELFTH joins with the first Lumbar, and bestows Nerves on the Musculus
quadratus Lumborum and Iliacus internus.

May not the Communications of all these Nerves be one Reason of the Parts they
serve acting so uniformly and conjunctly in Respiration, and conspiring
together in the convulsive Motions of Coughing, Sneezing, etc? The twitching
Spasms that happen sometimes in different Parts of the Muscles of the Abdomen,
by any Irritation on the Branches of the lower dorsal Nerves are in Danger of
occasioning a Mistake in Practice, by their Resemblance to the Colic,
Nephritis, etc. The Communications of these lower ones with the Intercostals
may serve to explain the violent Effort of the abdominal Muscles in a Tenesmus
and in Childbearing.

As the Intercostal is so much larger in the Thorax than any where else, and
seems to diminish gradually as it ascends and descends, there is some Suspicion
that the Trunk of it is here, from which the superior and inferior Parts are
sent as Branches.

The FIVE LUMBAR Nerves on each Side communicate with the Intercostal and with
each other, and give posterior Branches to the Loins.

The FIRST commuicates with the last dorsal, sends Branches to the abdominal
Muscles, to the Psoas and Iliacus, and to the Teguments and Muscles on the
anterior Part of the Thigh; while its principal Branch joins with other Nerves
to form the crural Nerve.

The SECOND LUMBAR Nerve passes through the Psoas Muscle, and is distributed
nearly in the same Way as the former, as is also the THIRD.

Branches of the first, second and third make up one Trunk, which runs along
the anterior Part of the Pelvis, and passing in the Notch at the anterior Part
of the great Hole common to the Os Pubis and Ischium, is spent on the Adductor
Muscles and the Teguments on the Inside of the Thigh. This Nerve is called the
OBTURATOR or POSTERIOR CRURAL NERVE.

By united Branches from the first, second, third and fourth lumbar Nerves, a
Nerve is formed that runs along the Psoas Muscle, to escape with the external
Iliac Vessels out of the Abdomen, below the tendinous Arcade of the external
oblique Muscle. This Nerve, which is named the ANTERIOR CRURAL, is distributed
principally to the Muscles and Teguments on the anterior Part of the Thigh. A
Branch however of this Nerve runs down the Inside of the Leg to the superior
Part of the Foot keeping near to the Vena, saphaena; in opening of which with a
Lancet at the Ancle, the Nerve is sometimes hurt, and occasions sharp Pain at
the Time of the Operation, and Numness afterward.

The Remainder of the fourth Lumbar and the fifth joins in composing the
largest Nerve of the Body, which is soon to be described.

Whoever attends to the Course of these lumbar Nerves, and of the spermatic
Vessels and Nerves upon the Psoas Muscle with the oblique Passage of the Ureter
over that Muscle, will not be surprised, that when a Stone is passing in this
Canal, or even when it is inflamed, the Trunk of the Body cannot be raised
erect without great Pain; or that the Skin of the Thigh becomes more
insensible, and the Thigh is drawn forward, and that the Testicle often is
drawn convulsively toward the Ring of the abdominal Muscles.

The SIX PAIR of the OS SACRUM consist each of small posterior Branches sent to
the Hips, and of large anterior Branches.

The first, second and third, after coming through the three superior Holes of
the Os sacrum, join together and with the fourth and fifth of the Loins, to
form the largest Nerve by much of the Body, which is well known by the Name of
SCIATIC or ISCHIATIC Nerve: This, after sending large Nerves to the different
Parts of the Pelvis, and to the external Parts of Generation and the Podex, as
also to the Muscles of the Hips, passes behind the great Tuber of the Os
Ischium, and then over the Quadrigemini Muscles to run down near to the Bone of
the Thigh at its posterior Part, giving off Nerves to the neighboring Muscles
and Teguments. Some Way above the Ham, where it has the Name of the Poplitaeus
Nerve, it sends off a large Branch that passes over the Fibula, and sinking in
among the Muscles on the anterior external Part of the Leg, runs down to the
Foot, to be lost in the superior Part of the larger Toes, supplying the
neighboring Muscles and Teguments every where in its Passage. The larger
Branch of the Sciatic, after giving Branches to the Muscles and Teguments about
the Ham and Knee, and sending a large cutaneous Nerve down the Calf of the Leg,
to be lost at last in the exterior Side of the Foot and superior Part of the
lesser Toes, sinks below the Gemellus Muscle, and distributes Nerves to the
Muscles on the Back of the Leg; among which it continues its Course, till
passing behind the internal Malleolus and in the internal Hollow of the Os
Calcis, it divides into the two plantar Nerves. The internal of which is
distributed to the Toes, in the same Manner as the radial Nerve of the Hand
serves the concave Side of the Thumb and Fingers, and the external Plantar is
divided and distributed to the Sole of the Foot and Toes, nearly as the ulnar
Nerve is in the Palm of the Hand and in the concave Part of the Fingers.

By applying what was said of the Nerves in general to the particular
Distribution of the Nerves of the inferior Extremities, we may see how People
with fractured Legs, especially where there are Splinters, should be so subject
to convulsive Startings of the fractured Member, and why upon tying the
Blood Vessels in an Amputation of the Leg, the Patients should sometimes
complain of violent Pain in their Toes; why such Patients should also be
troubled with Startings, or why, for a considerable Time after the Amputation
of the diseased Limb, when the Suppuration is well advanced, they should
complain of Pain in the Sore which occasioned the Amputation.

The FOURTH Nerve of the Os sacrum, which with the two following is much
smaller than the three superior, soon is lost in the Vesica urinaria and
Intestinum rectum.

The FIFTH comes forward between the Extremity of the Os sacrum and Coccygis,
to be distributed principally to the Levatores Any.

The SIXTH advances forward below the broad Shoulders of the first Bone of the
Os Coccygis, and is lost in the Sphincter Any and Teguments covering it.

The Branches of the four last cervical Nerves, and of the first dorsal, which
are bestowed on the superior Extremity, and the two Crurals, with the Sciatic,
which are distributed to the inferior Extremities, are much larger
proportionally to the Parts they serve, than the Nerves of the Trunk of the
Body, and especially of the Viscera are; and for a very good Reason, that in
the most common necessary Actions of Life a sufficient Quantity of Fluid, on
which the Influence of Nerves seems to depend, may be supplied to the Muscles
there, which are obliged to perform so frequent and violent Contractions. The
Size of the Nerves of the inferior Extremities seems larger proportionally than
in the superior Extremities; the inferior Extremities having the Weight of the
whole Body to sustain, and that frequently at a great Disadvantage. What the
Effect is of the Nerves here being lesed, we see daily, when People happen by
sitting wrong to compress the sciatic Nerve, they are incapable for some time
after to support themselves on the affected Extremity; and this is still more
remakeable in the Sciatic or Hip-Gout, in which the Member is not only weakened,
but gradually shrivels and wastes.

THE Systole and Diastole OF THE HEART, And the Reciprocal Actions of its
AURICLES and VENTRICLES ACCOUNTED FOR.
THAT the Account I am to give of the alternate Motions of the Heart may be
rightly understood, it will be necessary to mention the few following
Propositions on which it depends.

1. All Muscles are furnished with Bloodvessels and Nerves, and their Action
depends on the Influx of Blood, and of the nervous Fluid into their muscular
Fibers; therefore whenever Muscles are deprived of a sufficient Quantity of
either one or other of these Liquors or of both, their Action is weakened or
ceases. The Truth of this has been fully proved by the Experiments of
compressing, tying and cutting the Nerves or Arteries of Muscles.

2. All Muscles are in a constant State of Action as long as Blood and nervous
Fluid are freely supplied to them. This seems evident from the continued
Contraction of the Sphincters of the Bladder and Anus and of Muscles, whose
Antagonists are cut asunder or become paralytic.

Though in these two Propositions, I have assumed a Fluid of the Nerves, for the
Probability of which, see the Arguments in the foregoing Treatise, yet to avoid
a Dispute, it may be here remarked, that the following Account of the Heart's
Motions, will equally hold good, by supposing the Nerves to be solid Cords
acting by Elasticity, Vibration, etc. if it is only granted, that their Action
is necessary to the Contraction of Muscles, and that Compression is capable to
hinder that Action, which Experiments plainly show it is.

3. The Nerves of the Heart pass to it between the two Auricles or two
Arteries, and between the Auricles and Arteries.

4. The Coronary Arteries, which are the only ones that supply the Heart, rise
from the Aorta immediately above the middle loose Part of the semilunar Valves,
in the same Height of the Aorta as where the Angles of these Valves are fixed.

5. The Edges of the semilunar Valves are duplicated with a muscular Corpuscle
in the Middle, and muscular Cords running obliquely from that Corpuscle to the
Insertion of the Valves into the Aorta.

These three last Propositions are evidently made appear to be true by
Dissections.

6. Before the Vessels in which the Circulation is performed can act, it is
necessary to suppose them full of their Liquors, otherwise the whole Vascular
System could not be all at once put into Action, and the Motion of the Fluids
sent out from the Heart, could not be propagated to that in the returning
Vessels; consequently the Circulation would be stopped almost as soon as begun.

If then both Auricles and Ventricles attempt, upon the first Communication of
Motion, to contract; the Ventricles being stronger will force their own
Contraction, and hinder the Contraction of the Auricles, which must be in the
mean time much dilated by the Influx of Blood from the Veins (Prop. 6.) and at
this Time, the Arteries are also distended by the Blood thrown out of the
Ventricles; therefore the Cardiac Nerves lying between them, (Prop. 3.) will be
compressed and prevented from exerting their Office. While this happens to the
Nerves, the Blood rushing out of the left Ventricle into the Aorta, and
thrusting the semilunar Valves outward and upwards, distends the great Artery
considerably, whereby the Valves are stretched, and their lunated Edges are
brought to be straight and as high as their Angles; consequently these Edges,
thus raised and pressed to the Sides of the Aorta, are made to cover the
Orifices of the Arteriae coronariae, which the Corpuscles will assist to do
more adequately; and therefore, while they are in this Situation, no Blood can
be sent to the Substance of the Heart. If then the Nerves do not exert their
Office, and Access is denied to the Blood, This Muscle, the Heart must (by
Prop. 1.) become paralytic or unactive.

The Auricles, which were attempting all this Time to contract themselves, will
now, when the Resistance to them is removed, throw the Blood they contain into
the Ventricles; and the Arteries that were violently distended while the
Ventricles pushed the Blood into them, will at this same Time when the
Ventricles cease to act, constrict themselves; and the Valvulae semilunares
will, by their Elasticity assisted by the muscular Corpuscles and Cords, be
depressed inwards. Since then, by the Constriction of the Auricles and
Arteries, the Nerves of the Ventricles are freed from the Compression they
suffered while the Auricles and Arteries were distended; and since the Blood in
the Aorta pressed strongly by the contracting Sides of this Artery, and
resisted, by the Liquors which are to be thrown through all its Branches, is
also pushed with great Force on the Orifice of the left Ventricle, thrusts back
the semilunar Valves which stop its Entry into that Cavity, and impetuously
rushes into the coronary Arteries: Since then, I say, the Nerves of the Heart
are again free from Compression, and the Blood is again sent to the Heart by
its Arteries, its muscular Fibers must again contract (by Prop. 2.) And thus,
as long as these Causes continue to act and cease alternately, their Effects
must be exerted in the same Manner; that is, as long as an Animal lives, the
Heart must have an alternate State of Contraction called its Systole, and of
Relaxation or Diastole; and the Auricles and Arteries must be dilated, while
the Ventricles are contracting, and the Ventricles must be dilated while the
Auricles and Arteries are constricted, or their Actions must always be
reciprocal.

THE DESCRIPTION Of the Human Lacteal Sac and Duct.
THE Receptaculum Chyli of Pecquet, or Saccus lacteus of Van Horn, is a
membranous somewhat pyriform Bag, two Thirds of an Inch long, one Third of an
Inch over in its largest Part when collasped; situated on the first Vertebra of
the Loins to the Right of the Aorta, a little higher than the right emulgent
Artery, behind the right inferior Muscle of the Diaphragm; it is formed by the
Union of three Tubes, one from under the Aorta, the second from the Interstice
of the Aorta and Cava, the third from under the Emulgents of the right Side.
The Lacteal Sac, becoming gradually smaller toward its superior Part, is
contracted into a slender membranous Pipe, of about a Line Diameter, which is
generally named, The THORACIC DUCT. This passes betwixt the muscular Appendices
or inferior Muscles of the Diaphragm, on the Right of, and somewhat behind the
Aorta; then, being lodged in the cellular Substance behind the Pleura, it
mounts between this Artery and the Vena azygos as far as the fifth Vertebra of
the Thorax, where it is hid by the azygos as this Vein rises forwards to join
the descending or superior Cava, after which the Duct passes obliquely over to
the left Side behind the O Esophagus, Aorta descendens, and great Curvature of
the Aorta until it reaches the left carotid Artery; behind which, and on the
left Side of the O Esophagus it runs to the Interstice of the first and second
Vertebra of the Thorax, where it begins to separate from the carotid,
stretching farther toward the left internal Jugular Vein by a circular Turn,
whose unequal Part is uppermost. At the Top of this Arch it splits into two for
a Line and a half, the superior Branch receiving into it a large lymphatic
Vessel from the cervical Glands. This Lymphatic appears, by blowing Air and
injecting Liquors into it, to have no Valves; when the two Branches are again
united, the Duct continues its Course toward the internal Jugular Vein, behind
which it descends, and immediately at the left Side of the Insertion of this
Vein enters the superior posterior Part of the left subclavian Vein, whose
internal Membrane duplicated forms a semilunar Valve that is unequal externally,
and covers two Thirds of the Orifice of the Duct; immediately below this
Orifice a cervical Vein from the Musculi scaleni enters the subclavian

The Coats of the Sac and Duct are thin transparent Memora^es; from the Inside
of which, in the Duct, small semilunar Valves are produced, most commonly in
Pairs; which are so situated, as to allow the Passage of Liquors upwards, but
oppose their Return in an opposite Course. The Number of these is generally ten
or twelve.

This is the most simple and common Course, Situation and Structure of the
Receptaculum chyli and thoracic Duct; but having had Occasion to observe a
Variety in these Parts of different Subjects, I shall set down the most
remarkable of them.

The Sac is sometimes situated lower down than in the former Description, is
not always of the same Dimensions, is not composed of the same Number of Ducts,
and frequently appears divided into several small Cells, instead of being one
simple Cavity.

The Diameter of the Duct is various in most Bodies, and is seldom uniform in
the same Subject; but frequently sudden Enlargements or Sacculi of it are
observable. The Divisions which Authors mention of this Duct are very
uncertain. I have seen it divided, and one Branch climb over the anterior Part
of the Aorta at the eighth Vertebra of the Thorax, and at the fifth slip behind
that Artery, to join the other Branch which continued in the ordinary Course.
The precise Vertebra, where it begins to turn to the left Side, is also
uncertain. Frequently it does not split at its superior Arch; in which Case a
large Sac is found near its Aperture into the subclavian Vein. Generally it has
but one Orifice; though I have seen two in one Body, and three in another: Nay
sometimes it divides into two, under the Curvature of the great Artery; one
goes to the right, another to the left subclavian Vein; and I have found this
Duct discharging itself entirely into the right subclavian. The lymphatic
Vessel which enters its superior Arch is often sent from the thyroid Gland.

Whether is not the Situation of the Receptaculum chyli so much nearer the
muscular Appendices of the Diaphragm in Men than Brutes, designed to supply the
disadvantageous Course the Chyle must otherwise have in our erect Posture?

Does not the Descent of the Extremity of the Duct to the subclavian Vein, and
the opening of the lymphatic into the Top of the Arch, contribute to the ready
Admission of the Chyle into that V^^^?

FINIS.

