CALCULATIONS TO DETERMINE AT WHAT POINT IN THE SIDE OF A HILL ITS ATTRACTION
WILL BE THE GREATEST, etc.

BY CHARLES HUTTON, LL. D. AND F. R. S.

Read at the ROYAL SOCIETY, Nov. 11, 1779.

LONDON: Printed by J. NICHOLS (Successor to Mr. BOWYER).

M DCC LXXX.

CALCULATIONS, etc.
TO NEVIL MASKELYNE, D. D. F. R. S. AND ASTRONOMER ROYAL.
Royal Military Acad. Sept. 21, 1779. DEAR SIR,
AS the experiment of determining the universal attraction of matter, which you
lately conducted with so much accuracy and success, is of so great importance
and curiosity, that it may probably be hereafter repeated by the learned in
other countries, and in other situations; and as the utmost precision is
desirable in so nice an experiment; I have composed the enclosed paper to
determine the best part of a hill for making the observations, so as to obtain
the greatest quantity of attraction.

I have no doubt, Sir, that the determination of this point will appear of some
consequence in the opinion of one who has the improvement of useful knowledge
so much at heart; and if the manner in which it is here made, meet your
approbation, I shall desire the favor of your presenting it to the Royal
Society.

I have the honor to be, etc.

1. The great success of the experiment, lately made by the Royal Society, on
the hill Schehallien, to determine the universal attraction of matter, and the
important consequences that have resulted from it, may probably give occasion
to other experiments of the same kind to be made elsewhere: and as all possible
means of accuracy and facility are to be desired in so delicate and laborious
an undertaking; it has occurred to me that it might not be unuseful to add, by
way of supplement to my paper of calculations relative to the abovementioned
experiment, an investigation of the height above the bottom of a hill, at which
its horizontal attraction shall be the greatest; since that is the height at
which commonly the observations ought to be made, and since this best point of
observation has never been any where determined that I know of, but has been
variously spoken of or guessed at, it being sometimes accounted at, and
sometimes at of the height of the hill; whereas from these investigations it is
found to be generally at about only of the altitude from the bottom.

2. Let ABCEDA be part of a cuneus of matter, its sides or faces being the two
similar right-angled triangles ABC, ADE meeting in the point A, and forming the
indefinitely small angle BAD. Then of any section bced, perpendicular to the
planes ABD and ADE, the attraction on a body at A in the direction AB, is equal
to the constant quantity s s; where s = sin. BAC and s = sin. BAD, to the
radius 1.

diagram

For, first, since the magnitude of the flowing section is every where as A b2,
and the attraction of the particles of matter inversely as the same, or as 1/A
b2; therefore their product or A b2/A b2 or 1 (a constant quantity) is as the
force of attraction of bced.

Then to find what that quantity is. Put AB = a, and BC = x; then BD or CE (the
distance between the two planes at the distance AB) is = as. Now the force of a
particle in the line CE is as 1/AC2 in the direction AC, and therefore it is as
AB / AC3 in the direction AB; consequently the force of the whole lineola CE in
the direction AB is AB.CE / AC3; and therefore the fluxion of the force of the
section BCED or f is ^; and the fluent gives ^ for the attraction itself.

3. To find now the attraction of the whole right-angled cuneus on a body at A
in the direction AB. -- Since the force of each section is s s by the last
article, therefore the force of all the sections, the number of them being AB
or a, is ass = s. AB. BC / AC the force of the whole cuneus ABCEDA.

diagram

4. To find the attraction of the rectangular part ABCD on A in the direction
AB; ABCD being one side of the cuneus, and AD its edge. -- Put AD = BC = b, and
AB = x. Then, the force of any section as BC being always as s s by Art. 2, the
fluxion of the force or f will be ^; and the fluent is ^ the attraction of ABCD.

diagram

5. To find the attraction of the right-angled part BCD of a cuneus whose edge
passes through A the place of the body attracted. -- Put AB = a, BC = b, BD =
c, DA = d = a - c, DC = e, AC = g, and DP = x. Then, the force of any section
PQ being still as s s, the fluxion of the force of the part DPQ is ^; and the
correct fluent when x = c is ^ the force of a body at A in the direction AB.

diagram

6. To find the attraction of the right-angled part BCD on the point A. --
Using here again the same notation as in the last article, we have ^. The
correct fluent of which, when x = c, is ^.

7. To apply now these premises to the finding of the place where the
attraction of a hill is greatest, it will be necessary to suppose the hill to
have some certain figure. That position is most convenient for observing the
attraction, in which the hill is most extended in the east and west direction.
Supposing then such a position of a hill, and that it is also of a uniform
height and meridional section throughout; the point of observation must
evidently be equally distant from the two ends. But instead of being only
considerably extended, I shall suppose the hill to be indefinitely extended to
the east and to the west of the point of observation, in order that the
investigation may be mathematically true, and yet at the same time sufficiently
exact for the before-said limited extent also. It will also come nearest to the
practical experiment, to suppose the hill to be a long triangular prism, so
that all its meridional sections may be similar triangles. Let therefore the
triangle ABC represent its section by a vertical plane passing through the
meridian, or one side of an indefinitely thin cuneus whose edge is in PG; or
rather PBCGP the side of one cuneus, and PAGE the side of another, their common
edge being the line PG perpendicular to the base AC; P being the required point
in the side AB where the attraction of the section ABC, (...) indefinitely thin
cuneus, shall be greatest in a direction parallel to the horizon AC. And then
from the foregoing suppositions, it is evident that in whatever point of AB the
attraction of ABC is greatest, there also will the attraction of the whole hill
be the greatest.

diagram

8. Now draw HPDEF parallel to AC; and AH, PG, BY, CF, perpendicular to the
same. Then it is evident that at the point P, in the direction PF, the
attraction of PBCGP is affirmative, and that of PAGE negative. But PBCGP is =
PBD + BDE + PFCG - EFC; and PAGE = PHAG - PHA. Therefore the attractions of PBD,
BDE, PFCG, PHA, are affirmative; and those of EFC, PHAG, negative.

Put now BY = a, AI = b, IC = c, AB = d, BC = e, AC = g = b + c, and PG = x,
the altitude of the point P above the bottom. Also let s = the sine of the
indefinitely small angle of the cuneus to rad. 1; and ^.

Then by Art. 3, the attraction of PBD is s. PD. BD / BP = sb x a- x/ d, of PHA
is s. PH. PG / PA = sb x x/ d.


By Art. 4, the attraction PFCG is s. PG x h. l. PF+PC / PG = sx x h. l. ag-
bx+ qq/ ax, PGAH is s. PG x h. l. PH+PA / PG = sx x h. l. b+ d/ a.


By Art. 5, the attraction of EFC is ^.

Lastly by Art. 6, the attraction of BDE is ^.

These quantities being collected together with their proper signs, and
contracted, we have ^ for the whole attraction in the direction PE.

9. Having now obtained a general formula for the measure of the attraction in
any sort of triangle, if the particular values of the letters be substituted
which any practical case may require, and the fluxion of this attraction be put
= 0, the root of the resulting equation will be the required height from the
bottom of the hill.

10. But for a more particular solution in simpler terms, let us suppose the
triangle ABC to be isosceles, in which case we shall have d = e, and g = 2 b =
2 c, and then the above general formula will become ^ for the value of the
attraction in the case of the isosceles triangle, where q2 is ^. And the
fluxion of this expression being equated to 0, the equation will give the
relation between a and x for any values of b and d, by a process not very
troublesome.

11. Now it is probable that the relation between a and x, when the attraction
is greatest, will vary with the various relations between b and d, or between b
and a. Let us therefore find the limits of that relation, between which it may
always be taken, by using two particular extreme cases, the one in which the
hill is very steep, and the other in which it is very flat, or a very small in
respect of b or d.

12. And first let us suppose the triangular section to be equilateral; in
which case the angle of elevation is 60, which being a degree of steepness that
can scarcely ever happen, this may be accounted the first extreme case. Here
then we shall have d = 2 b = a3, and the formula in Art. 10, will become s x: 2
a- r- x/2 + x x h. l. 2 a+2 r- x/3 x + a- x/4 x h. l. a+2 r+ x/ a- x for the
value of the attraction in the case of the equilateral triangle, in which r is
^.

13. Or if we take x = na, where n expresses what part of a is denoted by x,
the last formula will become ^ for the case of the equilateral triangle.

14. To find the maximum of the expression in the last article, put its fluxion
= 0, and there will result this equation ^; the root of which is n =.251999.
Which shows that, in the equilateral triangle, the height from the bottom to
the point of greatest attraction, is only 1/500th part more than of the whole
altitude of the triangle. And this is the limit for the steepest kind of hills.

15. Let us find now the particular values of the measure of attraction arising
by taking certain values of n varying by some small difference, in order to
discover what part of the greatest attraction is wanting by observing at
different altitudes.

16. And first using the value of n (.251999) as found in the 14th article, the
general formula in Art. 13, gives sa x 1.0763700 for the measure of the
greatest attraction.

17. If n = 3/10, or x = 3/10 a; the same formula gives sa/20 x: 17 - 79 + 6h.
l. 17+279/9 + 7/2 h. l. 13+279/7 = sa x 1.0702512 for the attraction at 3/10 of
the altitude, which is something less than the other.

18. If n = 4/10 = the formula gives sa/20 x: 16 - 76 + 8h. l. 8+76/6 + 3h. l.
7+76/3 = sa x 1.0224232 for the attraction at 4/10 or of the altitude; less
again than the last was.

19. If n = 5/10 =; the formula gives ^ for the attraction at half way up the
hill; still less again than the last.

20. If n = 6/10 =; the formula gives sa/20 x: 14 - 76 + 12h. l. 7+76/9 + 2h.
l. 8+76/2 = sa x.8109843 for the attraction at 6/10 or of the altitude from the
bottom; being still less than the last was. And thus the quantity of attraction
is continually less and less the higher we ascend up the hill above the.251999
part, or in round numbers.252 part of the altitude. Let us now descend, by
trying the numbers below.252; and first,

21. If n =.25 =; the same formula in Art. 13, gives sa x: 7 - 13 + 2 h. l.
7+213/3 + 3/2 h. l. 5+213/3 = sa x 1.0763589 for the attraction at of the
altitude; and is very little less than the maximum.

22. If n = 2/10 =; the formula gives 1/10 sa x:9 - 21 + 2 h. l. 9+221/3 + 2
h.l. 3+21/2 = 1/10 sa x 9 - 21 + 2 h. l. 23+521/2 = sa x 1.0684622 for the
attraction at 2/10 or of the altitude; and is something less than at of the
altitude.

23. If n = 1/10; the formula gives sa/20 x: 19 - 91 + 2 h.l. 19+291/3 + 9/2 h.
l. 11+291/9 = sa x.9986188 for the attraction at 1/10 of the altitude; still
less than the last was. And, lastly,

24. If n = 0, or the point be at the bottom of the hill; the formula gives ^
for the attraction at the bottom of the hill; which is between and of the
greatest attraction, being something greater than but less than of it.

25. The annexed table exhibits a summary of the 6/10 8109843 5/10 9340963 2/13
4/10 10224232 1/20 3/10 10702512 1/180 252/1000 10763700 0 10763589 1/97852
2/10 10684622 1/134 1/10 9986188 1/14 0 7746531 2/7 calculations made in the
preceding articles; where the first column shows at what part of the altitude
of the hill the observation is made; the second column contains the
corresponding numbers which are proportional to the attraction; and the third
column shows what part of the greatest attraction is lost at each respective
place of observation, or how much each is less than the greatest.

26. Having now so fully illustrated the case of the first extreme, or limit,
let us search what is the limit for the other extreme, that is, when the hill
is very low or flat. In this case b is nearly equal to d, and they are both
very great in respect of a; consequently the formula for the attraction in Art.
10, will become barely ^; the fluxion of which being put = 0, we obtain ^;
hence therefore ^, and ^. Which shows that the other limit is 29/100; that is,
when the hill is extremely low, the point of greatest attraction is at 29/100
of the altitude, like as it is at 25/100 when the hill is very steep. And
between these limits it is always found, it being nearer to the one or the
other of them, as the hill is flatter or steeper.

27. Thus then we find that at of the altitude, or very little more, is the
best place for observation, to have the greatest attraction from a hill in the
form of a triangular prism of an indefinite length. But when its length is
limited, the point of greatest attraction will descend a little lower; and the
shorter the hill is, the lower will that point descend. For the same reason,
all pyramidal hills have their place of greatest attraction a little below that
above determined. But if the hill have a considerable space flat at the top,
after the manner of a frustum, then the said point will be a little higher than
as above found. Commonly, however, of the altitude may be used for the best
place of observation, as the point of greatest attraction will seldom differ
sensibly from that place. And when uncommon circumstances may produce a
difference too great to be entirely neglected, the observer must exercise his
judgment in guessing at the necessary change he ought to make in the place of
observation, so as to obtain the best effect which the concomitant
circumstances will admit of.


