VILLAGE MEMOIRS.

VILLAGE MEMOIRS: In a SERIES of LETTERS BETWEEN A CLERGYMAN and his Family in
the Country, and his SON in Town.

Utinam veteres Mores --
Potius majori honori hic essent, quam Mores Mali.
PLAUTUS. LONDON, Printed for T. DAVIES, in Russel Street, Covent Garden.
MDCCLXV.

TO THE Reverend Mr. --
Dear Sir,
I Have procured the Letters and Papers you so much wished to peruse, and now
present them with all due respect to you and to the public.

I am, Rev. Sir, with great esteem, Your friend and servant, THE EDITOR.

ERRATA.
P. 97. l. 9. for acts ends, read act ends. P. 113. l. 7, 8. for Bourdalone,
read Bourdaloue. P. 125. l. 2. for (...), read (...). P. 125. l. 12. for
ornaments was, read ornament was.
PREFACE.
READER, if thou art a man of the world, this book will not please thee -- it
was written by those who were abstracted from mankind, and had little relish
for either the ribaldry or amusements of the present times. -- Mr. Paulet was a
clergyman unknowing in the world, and unknown to all but men like himself --
the latter part of his life he read mankind chiefly in his study; for it was
his unhappy fate, whenever he wished to take a wider range, to experience
little more than their falsehood or infidelity. -- His son, by becoming a
private tutor in town for a while, afforded him frequent opportunities of
hearing what follies were most predominant; and from his own letters, perhaps,
it may not be incurious to trace the decent sobriety of the character of the
old English gentleman, when compared with the inflated maxims of the modern
Indian innovator. -- The daughter's correspondence likewise will not be totally
uninstructive, as it may afford some remarkable instances of the great changes
that, in a short time, may be brought about from the prevalence of Manners over
Laws, Principles, and Morality. -- It may be justly urged, perhaps, that Mr.
Paulet saw every thing through a contracted medium; but, however, the mind is
tempered by virtue, or harmonized by religion, I fear there are few good men
who can survey the scenes that are continually shifting before them, without
acrimony or disgust. -- The mind of man in solitude is torpid and inactive, but
when cast on the ocean of life, it is dissipated and infirm -- restless in the
pursuit of some hidden good, it wears out its sensibility by perpetual motion;
and confined within the limits of an unextended empire, it contracts itself,
and becomes gloomy and despondent.

VILLAGE MEMOIRS.
To Mr. Paulet, at Sir Wm. Russell's, Cavendish-Square.
Dear Charles,
WE are all under the greatest anxiety about our friend and neighbor Mr.
Alrington -- his disorder rages more vehemently than ever, and the physicians
cannot perceive one favorable symptom of his amendment -- have no time to add
further particulars, but fear this is only a preface to worse intelligence --
will write by tomorrow's post -- in the mean time your sister joins in all
love with your affectionate father,

Robert Paulet.
Marleston, Feb. 1, 1773.

To the Same.
Dear Charles,
AT four o'clock this afternoon I was again sent for, not to pray by him, but
(at my own request) to pay the last tribute to expiring friendship -- He had no
orders to give about either his plumes or his monument -- "If I have lived
well, said he, my deeds will be graven on the minds of men, and I shall have
the blessings of the deserving -- let the poor be decently supplied on the
occasion with all necessaries, and if they loved me, they will not wish for
superfluities -- I have ever been their protector, and they would not, I am
sure, convert my funeral into an hour of festivity -- I feel an awe, but no
grief, at my dissolution -- some philosophers, it is said, have been above
terrors, but I fear they were below humanity -- to shudder is the part of the
guilty, to stand undismayed is the language of the Stoic, to be humble is the
duty of a man -- before the mortification took place, I had need of all my
resolution, but I hope in those moments I confessed virtue on the rack, and
suffered torture only to refine my ore from its dross -- There is, I am
convinced of it, now a counterpoise to all human misery -- some hidden resource
which the mind can best supply at its utmost exigency -- I feel it now, and
should think it ill exchanged for all that titles, wealth, fortune, or power
could bestow upon me, and though I am journeying apace to that undiscovered
country, from which I never shall return, I would not wish for one hour of
added life for aught but for my friends, amongst whom, my dearest Paulet, I
have ever principally esteemed you -- thus saying, he pressed eagerly my hand,
looked fervently to heaven -- sighed -- and expired. -- A scene like this
awakened all my feelings, and for some moments I experienced an awful something
without a name -- tears and grief had nearly overwhelmed me, but I have again
recovered my tranquillity, for it would ill become me to fall a victim to
distress, when my life and my profession demand me to make use of its
instruction -- I have gained by his death a trial of that fortitude, which I
hope I have not altogether disgraced -- what I have lost you can easily recount
with me -- He was a man, (for I must ever dwell on his character) who, though
he had experienced all the falsehood of a bad world, had never steeled his
heart against the feelings of humanity -- he was benevolent without vanity, and
generous without ostentation -- he had a heart, perhaps, too susceptible of
soft impressions, which ever laid him open to the designs of the artful and
disingenuous, so that from the superiority of his understanding he derived a
weakness in his worldly conduct -- he was warm in his resentments, but, lest he
should be behind hand in reparation, paid always over price -- he was skilled
in all the necessary truths of the religion he professed, and it was no
inferior branch of his knowledge, that he was ever willing to remain ignorant
of those deeper mysteries which its divine Author thought fit to conceal from
him -- he was to me a patron, a benefactor, and a friend, a friend that -- but
I will here close the subject, entreating you, my dearest Charles, to withdraw
frequently from the busy scenes of life to contemplate the character of a man,
which may add fervor to virtue, zeal to religion, and confidence to truth.

I am your affectionate father, Robert Paulet.
Marleston, Feb. 2, 1773.

To Mr. Paulet, etc.
Dear Brother,
FOR all what Mr. Pope says -- that people never want to receive letters but
from London, I have the vanity to think you will be glad to hear from me, though
confined in this gloom of solitude -- We have had a sad dull winter of it; my
father being still quite moped for the death of poor Mr. Arlington: indeed he
is a great loss to us all, but we hope soon to have ample amends made us by the
great man that has just purchased his estate -- he came down yesterday for the
first time to view it, for he bought it only from the fine description that was
given of it by the great auctioneer in London -- his name is Massem -- he has a
sister who is come to that time of life, when you say we women begin to cast
long Our shadows lengthen as the sun goes down.
shadows -- there are a Mr. and Mrs. Clip, who came with them two dependents,
and a Mr. Layout, a designer in taste in gardening, and no end of servants -- I
have only seen them as they passed by, for they stay but a day or two, as Miss
Massem says she is indispensibly engaged to go with some duchess or other to
the masquerade on Thursday evening next -- The parish are quite delighted with
their appearance; but my father seems afraid that these great folks should
contaminate his flock, but I cannot see why they should, for they say that they
will be vastly good and charitable to the poor, and when they are down will
almost entirely maintain them without work out of their own kitchen -- I
thought brother you would like to hear a little how we went on, and as you will
pay no tax for this intelligence, I could not help scribbling a few lines, though
it was only to assure you that I remain ever your affectionate sister,

Susan Paulet.
Marleston, April 10, 1773. If you are not too much taken up with your new
office, I shall be glad to hear how you like London.




To Miss Paulet, at Marleston.
Dear Sister,
I Hope you would not suppose that either the diversions of town, or the
dignity of my new character as preceptor, would so entirely engross my
attention, as to make me forget my friends -- It is true, this mode of life has
not a little engaged both my attention and my wonder -- I wonder at every thing
I see, and then I wonder that I should wonder at any thing -- all here is one
perpetual scene of tumult, noise, and dissipation -- mankind ever in pursuit of
something, which when found, creates more wants than it supplies -- a general
siege is laid against an old offender called Time, which, though every one
complains of the loss of, yet every one is in league to kill it as fast as
possible -- the old maid at Ranelagh may have hopes of making a conquest, and
the old matron at a rout may be enraptured with spadille -- but, believe me,
these are only secondary considerations -- to kill so much time is the
principal point in view -- for how can the old maid experience any real
pleasure from haunting those circles where she is conscious that she is
considered but as the forlorn shadow of her departed beauty -- or how can the
old matron receive any high gratification from returning to those tables, where
she must reflect (if she has not stifled reflection) that she can only afford
new specimens of the acidity of her temper, and the fraudulency of her
intentions -- indeed she has one consolation, that the troops she is engaged
with are generally full as corrupt and contaminated as herself. -- You will say
that the old can have but few prospects and amusements -- it is true, but they
can have real ones, prospects ever brightening, as attraction must ever
increase, the nearer we approach the object -- but you will now exclaim that I
appear already to write from my dictatorial chair, and give laws in the true
style of a schoolmaster; but I can never help expatiating on this subject, for
it is not so much the comet itself, as the tail of that comet that I am so much
in care for -- there is always some expecting niece or entrusted cousin, who,
to be kept out of harm's way, must be the watchful sentinel to all this scene
of disorder -- good Heavens! as if the mind could be more in harm's way, or
more dissipated than by sitting seven hours attendant on a card-table, now and
then admiring work, perhaps indulged by introducing her knotting, and storing
her mind (for to read would be ill manners) with those remarks only that
avarice, ignorance, and ill humor are continually suggesting -- and what are
the fruits of this miserable farrago every day's experience too fatally
evinces. -- You think I wish to deter you from coming here -- indeed I do, --
for though the country, I fear, affords frequently no better examples, yet it is
impossible to drive quite so fast on cross-roads, as it is on a turn-pike; and
there are numbers who can keep themselves afloat on a gentle stream, whose
strength is yet utterly insufficient to stem a torrent. -- I do not doubt
either the goodness of your heart, or the firmness of your intentions, but
remember the wisest and the best have found the inefficacy of reason against
worldly seduction -- nor do I mean to stifle a generous endeavor, or preclude
that trial which is appointed to virtue -- I know both their value and reward
-- but consider -- true courage consists in combating an enemy nobly, that
attacks you -- it is the part of a bravado only to be affiduous for a contest.

I see I have run out my letter to an unconscionable length, so conclude myself
abruptly, with duty to my father,

Your affectionate brother, Charles Paulet.
Cavendish-Square, April 20, 1773.

To Mr. Paulet, etc.
Honnurd Sir,
HOPING as how your honnur will excuse my bouldnes, I truble your honnur to
tell you that I have lit of a mishap, and am afeard my old measter should know
ont -- I have Sr for a long time been after one Jane Felly the weelrites
dawter, and now sir she wants to be married to me, seeing as how shes in a full
condition for it -- to be sure sir I have savd a little monney in sarvice, and
if your honnur would but be so good as to get her a place in London, if it was
near such a bad one, I think the thing might be soon hushd up -- I don't at all
mind what a place it is, seeing as how it is for nothing but a kiver, indeed
the worser the better as they say, as it is only for a time -- I have no friend
on earth to ply to but your honnur, and indeed I need not have one more
cleverer for this or any thing else, if your honnur would but be so kind as to
sarve me int, and say nothing ont to my old measter -- so hoping for your
goodness I am your dutiful sarvant

to command, John Cuttle.
Marlston Apr. 24, 1773.

To the Revd. Mr. Paulet, at Marleston.
Dear Father,
I Now sit down to give you some account of the pupil who is entrusted to my
care -- He is a young man of rank and fortune, and not totally devoid of
literary seize -- for a short time he has been at Westminster school, but
(as too frequently is the case) has been so much taken off by the diversions of
the town, that it was well if in the course of the week the Masters were able
to remove that love of dissipation, which the young man had imbibed the
preceding days of it -- however, before I came to him he could tolerably
construe some of the easier classics, and he is by no means deficient in point
of natural abilities -- by the death of his mother he is now committed to the
care of an uncle, who, for a year and a half, has placed him under my direction
-- what my mediocrity shall be able to impart I know not; but attention will
not be wanting, and I have a father ever able and willing to supply all my
deficiencies -- my present endeavor is to improve his taste by furnishing his
mind with the best criticisms on ancient literature, such as Warburton's on the
6th Book of Virgil, and Hurd's on the Art of Poetry. -- By the aid of these
books I perceive his mind to be wonderfully enlarged, and he has already
remarked that the fame of the commentators ought nearly to equal the glory of
their respective authors -- from hence you will gather that he has Feeling,
which in preference to every other consideration ought principally to be
improved. -- He has just asked my opinion of the Ramblers, which, says he, I
find are generally considered as pompous and pedantic -- I tell him that the
Ramblers are my manuals, and I can more properly apply the words of bishop
Burnet to them, than to any other modern productions, "That they are the
storehouse of all moral virtues." -- I fear he thinks I have strong
prejudices, for he often observes that the world speaks quite otherwise -- as
to the world, I tell him, there are but few who are capable of judging -- those
that are, either through envy or other malignant passions, will rarely do
justice to living authors -- Johnson would be more read, was his matter as
thinly spread as in other periodical publications -- then he has written on
party subjects, and this can never be forgiven by his vanquished opponents --
Warburton is not less obnoxious on the same account -- indeed so far I will
accede -- that the one by long dealing in words has too much increased the
vocabulary, and the other by dealing too much with mankind has at length
exceeded the decent limits of all sober satire -- but truth and virtue were
their guides, and whilst these remain in the world, such authors will ever be
considered as their brightest ornaments -- an old gentleman was by chance
present at this dialogue between my pupil and me, who hastily exclaimed, "Good
God! sir, why I never heard a syllable of all this, in regard to either of
them, and I have resided the greatest part of my life The bishop of Gloucester
lived at Prior Park, near Bath, and the author of the Ramblers in Johnson's
Court, Fleet Street. Editor.
at Bath, except two months that I lived with my brother in Fleet Street.

I am, etc. C. Paulet.
Cavendish-Square, April 29, 1773.

To Mr. Paulet, etc.
Honnurd Sir,
NOT hearing from your honnur so soon as was expected we hope now that you will
know nothing of the matter, for we have gotten a lisense, and are married, and
all is well again -- she thinks she shant be lighted of near three months, and
that's longer by two than her mother was, and by all three than almost any other
woman in the parish -- I am afeared of nobody saying ought about the matter but
my old measter, but you know Sr he is very partickler this way -- but if he
should sir I must tell him that neighbor Snarles wife was church'd and married
and the child cristned and all the same day, and thof to be sure my old measter
made a bogle ont, yet you know he was blig'd to do it after all, and the child
for ought I can see was born in as good wedlock as mine will be -- howsomever I
must do as well as I can by her now, and hope God will prosper my honest
endeavors, thof to be sure I should be sorry if my old measter was disobliged
by it.

I am your dutiful sarvant to command John Cuttle.
Marleston, May 1, 1773.

To John Cuttle, at Marleston.
John,
TO little purpose has my father explained to you the duties of religion, both
in and out of church, if at your time of life you have made no better use of
them -- though you ought not to desert the creature you have debauched, yet there
can be little prospect of happiness where the foundation is laid in iniquity --
it is not a number of bad people in a parish that can sanctify a bad action;
and, whatever may be the opinion of your neighbors, that will not, or ought
not at least, to lighten the burden of your own conscience -- what you have
done is in open violation of your duty, and in express disobedience to the laws
of your God -- you and your guilty partner must repent of your errors, and
where you may have little hopes from the justice of the Almighty, through his
mercy you may have full assurance of pardon.

I wish you well, and subscribe myself your friend, C. Paulet.
Cavendish-Square, May 5, 1773.

To Mr. Paulet, etc.
TO day I have paid a visit for the first time to our great neighbors -- Oh!
Charles -- such a visit! -- I was accosted with -- "So, Dr. I reckon you would be
glad to wet your throat after talking so long to your parish -- pray be free,
and call for any thing you like here -- you need not stand mearly-mouthed, as
if you was with some of your half-starved country 'squires -- call about you,
man, says he -- we don't cupboard the bottoms of the bottles here -- why, egad,
my servants in the kitchen live grander than all the gentry hereabouts put
together." -- "Gentry -- says miss Massem -- rabble you mean, brother." -- I
only replied, that I rarely drank wine in an afternoon -- the conversation then
chiefly ran on their own grandeur, and the ignorance and poverty of their
neighbors -- after tea -- Mr. Layout favored us with Remarks on Taste in
Gardening: alas! how different from poor Mr. Arlington's (which by the bye I
shall select for you from his papers) and Miss Massem insisted on my looking at
her Trou Madame table; for though she knew, she said, that I would not be so
wicked as to play of a Sunday, yet she declared that I should look at it -- I
told her that I supposed it might be as innocent as any other game, but that I
thought the Sabbath might be full as well enployed -- "ay, but how Dr. says the
'squire -- for there is no visiting hereabouts, and we never go to church;
though, in compliment to you, we shall always send the servants." -- I hoped
they would come from a better motive -- "ay, ay, says he, those sort of people
like to show their best clothes." -- Mr. Layout observed that Sunday was only
fit to travel on; and Miss Massem added, that at best it could only be
considered as a horrid Bore." -- I would have it now, says the nabob, as in
foreign parts, all life and jollity and dancing, and not keep it as they do
here, just as tho'f it was a Fast." -- Perhaps, sir, said I, if limitations
could be set to amusements, it might be an improvement -- proper recreations
are as necessary for the mind as the body, and, when seasoned with temperance,
keep both in equal harmony; but the misfortune is, that where no line could be
drawn, people would soon go from the fields to a playhouse, from the
playhouse to a rout, and from a rout to a masquerate. -- "Well, says Miss
Massem, and suppose they did, it would be much better I think than to stay at
home, and be all out of humor with one another" -- I certainly agreed with her
that it would, if that must be the necessary consequence. -- This short
dialogue throws a strong light on their respective characters, and when I
consider what a total change such a family may bring about in a village, I
reason upwards and look with horror on an infected kingdom -- if time and
reflection can work any improvement, I shall gradually inculcate better
notions; at present, it is in vain to attempt to sow good principles in a soil
not formed for their reception. -- Your sister joins in all love with

Your affectionate father, Robert Paulet.
Marleston, May 9, 1773. Pray write oftener, for old folks, though they are
thrown out of the world, love to hear what is doing in it.




To Mr. Paulet, etc.
Dear Brother,
THOUGH my father seems to dislike this new family, and to be sure they have some
odd ways with them, yet upon the whole they are vastly agreeable -- Miss Massem
has taken great notice of me, and was so kind as to send for me the other
evening to make up a dance -- yesterday she took me with them to return Sir
John Oldbury's visit -- Oh Lord, they are so queer and so formal -- to be sure
we laughed immoderately all dinnertime -- Miss Massem declared that if every
thing had not been as awkward as it was, she should never have refrained at the
sight of poor sir John's periwig, to say nothing of his antiquated wife, and
his two full blown daughters -- to be sure miss Massem said they meant to be
very civil, but they were almost too bad to visit, however as they were her
nearest neighbors, she would always endeavor to make an annual sacrifice. --
As to Mr. Massem, he said it was much the same what places he visited at, for
most of our country gentry kept such bad cooks, that he should always be
obliged to get away as soon as possible, that he might make an early supper --
and for the future, if he must visit sir John, he should always go out of
principle on an Ash Wednesday -- However, they know nothing of all this, and if
they did not see us laugh, I believe took the visit very kind and friendly.

I am your affectionate sister, Susan Paulet.
Marleston, May 20, 1773. At the ball, I had the honor to dance with captain
Glanville, who is reckoned one of the finest gentlemen in England; he was most
excessively complaisant to me, though all the other ladies in the room were much
my superiors.




To Miss Paulet.
Dear Sister,
I Thank you for every remembrance of me -- but if you will not take it quite ill,
I must rally you a little about day visiting -- to be sure it is considered as
a mark of friendship and esteem, but I believe in general that it proceeds from
little more than a love of dissipation, or to gratify an idle curiosity. -- I
remember paying a visit of the sort you speak of, and could not help reflecting
how little amusement there could be either to the entertainers or the
entertainees. -- Those who are to entertain are anxious for the dignity or
propriety of the treat, and where there is much anxiety there can be little or
no comfort -- then if any awkward circumstances should occur (as the world now
goes), they know they will be the talk of the whole neighborhood; and where
servants are not always in trammels, some will spill the beer, and others
trample on your favorite lap-dog. -- On the other hand those who are to be
entertained, as soon as they have swallowed their dinners, talked of the wine,
the weather, and the roads -- heard perhaps that sir John Strictly's hares are
all snared, or that Dr. Meanwell has got into a fresh dispute about tithes --
are absolutely told that the coach is at the door -- this is all the
regalement, unless perchance the ladies at tea have just had time enough to
inform them that the Dr.'s daughters are grown as fat as porpoises -- nothing
more is to be done but to pack up -- recall the coachman who has just stepped
back for one more draught of ale -- to express great satisfaction for the
entertainment they have received -- hope that the family will return the visit
as soon as possible, which will make them most inexpressibly happy, and lo! the
last lagging footman is just come out to take his horse. -- Well -- all
ceremonies are now passed -- and as they are safely out of hearing, it is high
time to turn every thing into ridicule, or to recount the miseries of the day
-- "To think, says one lady, of all the trouble I had with my hair, and to see
no more company -- but that is always the case whenever I am well dressed --
the next time I declare I Will visit in my nightcap." -- "Lord, says another, I
knew very well what the visit would turn out, and put on a last year's negligee
on purpose -- however, we have certainly been of use to them -- we have aired
their plate, reviewed their footmen, and thinned their poultry-yard." -- Thus
the badness of the roads is beguiled with low sneers and petty detraction, till
the party congratulate one another on their safe return to their own home --
for awhile they sit moped -- discontented -- call for the card-table, (one
hates whist, and another abominates quadrille) are all killed with the fatigues
of the day; but as home is of all places the worst, a servant is immediately
dispatched to poor old lady Humdrum's, to acquaint her that they will do
themselves the honor of waiting upon her ladyship on the morrow. -- Thus is
life wasted without either profit or amusement, and people presume to thank
their stars that they can lead useful and rational lives, whilst Mr. Pedant is
poring over his books, and Mrs. Conserve is employed in writing out new
receipts to preserve apricots.

I am, etc. etc. Charles Paulet.
Cavendish-square, May 29, 1773.

To Mr. Paulet.
Dear Charles,
MY time of late has been much taken up in assisting the executors to settle
Mr. Arlington's affairs -- we now find that from the very advantageous sale of
the estate, after paying off all the debts, there will be something left very
considerable for his relations -- a circumstance which, could he have known,
poor man! would have greatly contributed to have brightened up the evening of
his days -- but to wave this melancholy subject.

So ignorant, Charles, was I of the world, that I did not know it was one great
instance of politeness to go up to town only just to come down again, and that
with such rapidity, that a by-stander might fancy that the national welfare
depended on their speed -- We have now brought down with us, I assure you, as
part of our retinue, a domestic chaplain, Mr. Pliant -- so silken, so supple,
and so complying, that I could almost fancy him to say to his patron -- "Is it
your pleasure, sir, to believe in God?" -- He is, I find on enquiry, a distant
relation, and seems thoroughly broke in to the office he is to fill --
yesterday, as I was returning from my usual ride, I met him, like Justice
Overdo in the comedy, in quest of enormities, and we really enjoyed a very
pretty kind of a chit-chat, till at length some how or other I dropped out
something about servilities -- "Servilities!" says he, "now I reckon you think
that I am forced to submit to some servilities as you call them -- no, sir, let
me tell you, my mode of life is perfectly agreeable to me -- Mr. Massem keeps a
good table, has the choicest liquors -- and, though your country hereabouts to
be sure is dull enough, yet we have always company in the house to pass away
the time with -- and as for business, I have nothing to do but to dust the
books -- clean the bird-cages, and now and then make rebusses for the ladies --
indeed if we had not some amusements amongst ourselves, it would be dull enough
here, for I have been sauntering about," says he, "for these two hours, and
cannot meet with any one thing worthy the least observation" -- "Surely," says
I, "sir, nature, to a mind capable of reflection like yours, every where
presents a fund of entertainment -- to a man, who knows how to take a ride,
this blade of grass, or this declining hill affords an infinite scope for
contemplation -- in this sequestered scene methinks I could say with
Shakespeare, that I " Find tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
Sermons in stones, and good in every thing."
but if this retired prospect delights you not, I will return with you to the
top of the hill, and present you with an object that may call forth all your
attention -- that is at once a cure for pride, and a lecture to ambition; that
reminds philosophy of its true end, and makes none but the ignorant tremble to
behold it -- it leads the languid to hope, allays the the thirst of avarice,
and places wealth on its true foundation -- to you and me, sir, it may be the
vehicle to happiness; a car more triumphant than ever graced the conquests of a
Caesar, or an Alexander" -- "Good God! sir", says my companion, "what can you
mean? -- I can see nothing but a HEARSE."

In short, Charles, as I found the present delighted him not, I thought it by
no means unfair to raise his prospect to Futurity.

I am, dear Charles, etc. etc. Robert Paulet.
Marleston, June 6, 1773.

To Mr. Paulet, etc.
Dear Father,
I Intended by to-day's post to have sent you a string of political reports,
with some large extracts from speeches said to have been lately made in the
house of commons; but, as I find the former are nothing but reports, and the
latter, like dying confessions, were printed beforehand, I now sit down with an
absolute determination to give you nothing but the truth.

The grand vehicle of business in this metropolis appears to me to be a Lie --
it rises in the morning with the watchman, bawling out -- Half an hour past
eleven o'clock, and accompanies the 'prentice home, who pulls out his watch
with great eagerness to convince his master that it has not yet struck twelve
-- through the regions of darkness, its operations perhaps are better supposed
than described, for it stands not unveiled in open daylight till it is
circulated through the Strand by paragraphs, postcripts, letters, and
advertisements -- fame, in the shape of a news-carrier, sounding the trumpet
before it. -- By its aid the tradesman and his wife are enabled to drink their
coffee, and by its aid the tradesman and his wife are enabled to drink that
coffee comfortably, for scandal, like irreligion, gives a relish to many
enjoyments. -- But now the whole city is in a ferment, for there its mornings
are monopolized, and it is exchanged and brokered about to greater or less
advantage from its different degrees of sanctity in great wigs, and its more or
less solemnity in city faces -- indeed it is never a moment unemployed there
but at dinnertime, when it steals away to meet the statesman on his return
from the gaming-table or the stews -- with him it holds a levee, where it is
decked in smiles and graces -- (what it has lost in weight it has gained in
politeness) -- and lends to expectation, even the confidence of success -- the
veil indeed is never taken off, for the promiser gives a hundred to strengthen
one, till time alone convinces you of the uncertainty of a future day -- you
now plead loudly for admittance, but tomorrow is called in to the juggler's
aid, for this afternoon he is engaged to vote against the Articles, and at
night he must negociate with a Jew ere he dares to show his face again before
the waiter at Almack's -- but his servants perhaps are town-bred, and are
taught to descry want and necessity by intuition -- Lying is their professed
science, for what mischiefs might not ensue if through ignorance a stranger
should be let in to see a patriot barter his integrity, or a fair one her
reputation and her virtue -- if mistakes like these should arise, Honor must
be called in as a safeguard here, as Goodness is the security of the city --
but the evening advances, and it is now sold wholesale at theaters,
lectureshops, and all other places of public diversion -- like Scrub, it may be
said to be of all professions -- "one day it drives the coach, another it
drives the plough, another it draws warrants, and another it draws beer" -- it
seems to be the desideratum of the philosopher, for it operates universally
from the speech that is administered at noonday, to the dark slander that is
only launching into whisper-hood -- the poet relies upon it for his dinner, and
the politician for his pay -- the divine -- but hold -- here it can be of no
use except now and then to explain a text, -- till it openly stands confessed,
and by a nolo episcopari becomes a passport to a bishopric -- in short, where
is it not of use, except in the uncontrouled intercourse between a tender and
indulgent father and an ever dutiful and affectionate son,

I am, etc. C. Paulet.


To Mr. Paulet, etc.
Dear Brother,
I Am so angry at your last letter, that I could almost resolve not to write to
you any more. -- I told Miss Massem some of your Remarks on Day-visiting, and
she says that if you give into a way of being so severe, you will never be a
favorite amongst the ladies -- besides, brother, I receive so many civilities
from this family, that I should tax myself with the height of ingratitude, if I
endeavored to give you an opportunity of turning their foibles into ridicule
-- however, as I dare not trust you with my own remarks, I have at my father's
request transcribed some of Mr. Arlington's, which I doubt not but you will
find both valuable and entertaining -- the next opportunity he has of conveying
a packet too large for the post, he will send you, according to promise,
Strictures on Landscape Gardening.

I am, etc. Susan Paulet.
July 2d, Marleston, Remarks from the late Mr. Arlington's Papers.
I. Men are frequently most desirous of talking on those subjects they least
understand -- for the same reason perhaps as ladies at ninety-nine affect to
have the toothache. II. Addison, a man of great judgment in other branches of
literature, is scarce ever right when he criticizes the old English language.
III. No man can properly criticize Milton who has not carefully studied
Euripides Mr. Arlington here probably alludes to Sampson Agoniftes, many
passages of which appear evidently to be borrowed from thence.
. IV. There ought to be an act of parliament against burying authors of
eminence under their own ruins -- Swift will soon be an example of this. V. It
has been objected against studying Thucydides, that he wrote a large folio
comprising only a very short period -- the time indeed is short, but the writer
made ample amends by the force of his descriptions, and the sublimity of his
style -- and it is a sufficient encomium perhaps to say that he was studied by
Demosthenes, and imitated by Sallust. VI. Mr. Pope's Essay on Man is certainly
a very masterly performance in point of poetry; but the philosophy contained in
it is flimsy and unconnected. VII. Stern will be immortal when Rabelais and
Cervantes are forgot -- they drew their characters from the particular genius
of the times -- Stern confined himself to nature only. VIII. Till my uncle
Toby appeared I had used to assert, that no character was ever better drawn
than that of sir Roger de Coverly. IX. A man may as well give himself the
trouble to copy nature as Stern. X. How much soever the ancients might abound
in elegance of expression -- their works are very thinly spread with sentiment.
XI. Education should be the mirror of former prejudices. XII. I have frequently
thought that the duty of visiting the sick should not be vested in the priest,
for who knows but the constant sights of dying persons may in time render their
hearts, like those of butchers and surgeons, callous and void of humanity.
XIII. A man by swearing may draw down a curse upon himself, but never one upon
his neighbor. XIV. It is said by Tacitus, that men lose their respect for you
in proportion to the favors you bestow -- but as few perhaps know how to give
with delicacy as others to receive with proper gratitude. XV. The parliament of
England is formed in a manner not totally dissimilar from that of the ancient
council of The general attention of this assembly, and the invariable object of
all its modellers and directors, was to form a complete representative of all
Greece; as the good of each individual was subservient to that of his
community, so the good of each community was considered as subordinate to that
of the whole nation. Their (...) was the man who considered himself as a member
of the state, who submitted his conduct to the laws, who acted entirely under
their direction, who gained popularity, not by flattering the people, but by
procuring their good; on the other hand the inhabitants did not confine their
regards to their own private affairs, they did not consider public difficulties
merely as they affected their own tranquillity, or that of their families; they
were taught to regard their country as a common mother to whom they belonged no
less than to their natural parents. While these principles preserved their due
vigor and influence, Greece continued a really united body, happy in itself,
and formidable to its enemies; but as soon as the nation began to degenerate,
its representative, of course shared in the corruption -- and this degeneracy
increased so fast, that at length, we read, the most of those who were deputed
to fit in this once famous council of Amphictyons, were so corrupt, that they
even came prepared to earn the wages of iniquity -- to devote themselves
entirely to the service of the crafty and the enterprising, who could pay them
most liberally, without regard to their own honor, the interest of the
community, or the general good of Greece.

Vid. B. of Meaux, and Dr. Leland, etc.


Amphictyons, or, as it is called by Demosthenes, the whole Hellenic body. XVI.
The character of the king of Prussia, in many of the most remarkable strokes of
it, strongly resembles that of Philip of Macedon. XVII. True politeness is the
unaffected result of good nature and good sense. XVIII. Turnpike-roads and
circulating libraries are the great inlets of vice and debauchery -- the ladies
will say this remark is quite Gothic, but their husbands feel the truth of it
too forcibly. XIX. County races are meetings where the men assemble to quarrel
about horses, and the women about precedence. XX. Plausibility is a more
marketable quality than good sense. XXI. The man who bids fairest for success,
as candidate for any office where the public is principally concerned, is not
he who has most friends, but he who has fewest enemies -- not he whose talents
raise an idea of superiority, but he whose mediocrity begets respect. XXII.
Ambitious men who meet with disappointments either become quite desperate, or
sink into a state of indolence and insensibility. XXIII. What you please means,
I expect much more than I can in reason ask for. XXIV. How frequently a man
draws his his own character best, when he means to give you that of another
person. XXV. In universities we see the triumph of learning over wealth -- in
manufacturing towns the triumph of wealth over literature. XXVI. No age ever
gave stronger proofs of the certainty of a future state than the present, by
the triumph of vice over virtue and religion. XXVII. There is no instance, but
in religion, where it is a compliment to approve the profession, and abuse the
practice. XXVIII. A malevolent man is always very lavish in his encomiums on
the dead, because he thinks it is an insult to the living. XXIX. Mirth compared
with cheerfulness is as the huzza of a mob to the sober applause of a thinking
people. XXX. As religion rises in speculation, it will lose in practice. XXXI.
Metaphysics, however useful to detect the subtilty of others arguments, are
often very detrimental to the proficients in them -- Reason herself may be lost
by refinement. XXXII. The world generally asserts that spendthrifts have but
half the fortune they really have, and that misers have at least twice as much.
XXXIII. Young men are encouraged to take up general history much sooner than
they ought -- I would have them strongly impressed with moral virtues, before
they venture to read so dreadful a detail of crimes and misfortunes. XXXIV.
Foreign travel is knowledge to a wise man, and foppery to a fool. XXXV. Man
cannot be engaged in a deeper science than that of himself. XXXVI. Fashion is
not only the greatest tyrant, but the greatest impostor. XXXVII. A man of bad
morals can never be a patriot, for being destitute of virtue himself, he must
ever wish to make his country like his own heart, a scene of anarchy and
confusion. XXXVIII. Some authors boast that they always write in haste -- but
what is this but in other words to say, that they are possessed of such
wonderful talents, that the world may easily compound for error and neglect.
XXXIX. We frequently condemn old people for their love of pleasure and company
-- but surely the morning of life is best suited to business -- the evening to
society. XL. Abuse is that tax which merit must always pay for its superiority.
XLI. When maiden ladies come to a certain age, they do not reject the men so
much from a love of virtue, as from resentment for the neglect that has long
been shown them -- they then begin to hate the male sex in general, from the
inattention of particulars. XLII. In party disputes the prize is given to the
most violent -- but violence, we know, is the child of error. XLIII. Was it not
well said, that Goodnature, like the God of Nature, was not always extreme, to
mark what was done amiss? XLIV. Men often complain of the fickleness of fortune
-- the error lies in their mistaking her benefits for perpetual gifts, instead
of being grateful for a temporary loan. XLV. Because Plato "reasoned well,"
Cato is said to have fallen on his sword. -- I fear it is because our modern
infidels reason ill, that they so frequently become Suicides.



To Miss Paulet.
Dear Sister,
IT would be one of the most melancholy hours of my life if I could suppose
myself capable of giving you any just grounds of offense -- that you might not
be caught with the glare of falsehood, instead of reality, I have ever
endeavored to give you all the caution in my power; -- far would I be from
debarring you of the least pleasures that are reasonable, but wish you only to
be moderate in the pursuit of them -- if caution of every kind comes not best
from a brother, from whom can it come? He can have no interest but yours, nor
any struggle or competition, but who shall make most happy the tenderest and
most affectionate of parents -- but I will not suffer myself to suppose that
you have ever felt the least resentment -- on all subjects let me speak the
free sentiments of my heart, as you must ever be convinced of my utmost
sincerity and affection.

I am, etc. C. Paulet.
P.S. Pray tell my father, that in his next I hope to receive his permission
for my going into Orders, that as soon as possible, I may alleviate the burden
of those expenses, which have already, I fear, fallen too heavy upon him.




To Mr. Paulet, etc.
Dear Brother,
I Received your last kind letter, and now sit down to give you some little
account of the jaunt I have just taken with my good friends into Derbyshire. --
My father, for a long time, was against my going, but Miss Massem did every
thing in her power to teaze him into it. -- At Derby we saw the Silk mills, and
what I liked much better the New assembly room, and the China manufactory, but
we staid there only a short time, for there was a low family who found out Mr.
Massem, and was exceedingly troublesome and impertinent to him, so in the
evening we went to Kedleston, where we had a very tolerable dance -- next day
we saw lord Scarsdale's, which is very fine to be sure; but Miss Massem found
great fault with the furniture of the house, and Mr. Layout, who was with us,
allowed no part of the garden ground to be disposed in taste -- Mr. Massem
admired nothing but the large pillars; and captain Glanville thought there was
a great deal of idle money thrown away upon the library -- as for myself, I
liked every thing, but particularly the sideboard -- from Kedleston we went to
Matlock, which, if it was not for the company, would, if possible, be ten times
more dismal than Marleston -- however, we danced and went upon the water with
music, and drank tea at the boat house, and, upon the whole, passed our time
very agreably -- from thence we went to Chatsworth -- it proved a most charming
day, and we were all enraptured with the waterworks -- in some places,
cataracts of water fall down stairs twenty yards deep, and in others the water
is forced up into the air to the most incredible height, to say nothing of the
artificial tree which would have sprinkled us all over from its leaves, if it
had not been out of order -- from Chatsworth we went to Buxton, where we joined
parties with lord Canvass and Dr. and Mrs. Grudgens -- at first they took no
notice of us, but as soon as they found out who Mr. Massem was, they were
particularly complaisant and civil. -- My lord is most exceedingly engaging --
but Dr Grudgens talks of nothing but eating and preferment -- and then so
suspicious, that in a morning, when he played at all-fours with captain
Glanville, if the hand was not out before the bell rung, he was sure to keep
the cards in his pocket all the while he knelt down to say his prayers --
indeed prayers here are merely made a farce of -- for people laugh and whisper
the whole time -- though it would not signify much if they did not, for what with
the howling of dogs, the bawling of footmen, and the giggling of ladies maids
in the passages, it would be utterly impossible to hear one syllable that the
parson said -- poor man! -- I was really quite sorry for him, and my father
would have been absolutely shocked, for the company had used to pay him more or
less, just as they won or lost at cards -- indeed I thought he seemed to have
no advantage but that of saying grace at the head of the table, whilst the
ladies were fighting for the wings of the chickens. -- But I must tell you one
circumstance that happened about Mrs. Grudgens -- one day she was very busy in
carving an immense goose that stood before her, when captain Glanville desired
her next neighbor to help him to some apple pie -- Mrs. Grudgens, with all the
good nature in the world, came immediately out of the goose, and plunged
directly into the pie -- to be sure she was elbow-deep in sage and onion -- and
the captain was so unlucky, for he is a man of vast wit, as to set all the
company into a loud laugh by calling out -- "For heaven's sake madam stop -- I
asked for apple pie -- I did not mean a medley one."

Whether you are at all entertained with my letter or not, you will see at
least that my resentments are of no long continuance -- and that I am as much
as ever,

Your affectionate sister, Susan Paulet.


To Mr. Paulet, etc.
Dear Charles,
I Must still think you too young to go into orders -- I may be particular in
my notions perhaps -- but I will cheerfully streighten my own circumstances to
approve my sincerity. -- It has been well observed, that "young men are apt to
mistake the completion of their academic courses for the completion of their
theologic studies" -- a mistake which inclines them to aspire to teach others,
seeing the rather, (as St. Paul expresses it) that they ought to be taught
themselves." -- Those who are appointed to explain the oracles of God, should
have attended to them most particularly -- otherwise they may soon be caught in
the delusive snares of modern infidelity, or wax old in the pernicious system
of not changing "the posture of defense, and of keeping to strong holds." --
And I am sorry to observe, that true religion has nearly suffered as much from
the one as from the other -- Our Savior, perhaps, has confined the practice of
our duty within the limits of his own sermon on the mount; nevertheless, as a
divine, it will be required that you should be able to give a rational account
of the faith that is in you -- a rational and a cautious one let it always be,
for the Scriptures, in the hands of controvertists, have generally been wrested
to the most infamous purposes -- each man insisting on that being irreligion,
which was only not consonant to his own prejudices. -- St. Augustine, I know,
asserts, that Dictum est tamen --, non ut aliquid diceretur, sed ne taceretur.
Aug. de Trin. lib. v.c.9.
"when any enquiry is made, it is not necessary that you should say any thing
to the purpose, but well or ill that you should always keep talking" -- but
none but such a saint would have said it, and this very assertion with me would
invalidate his whole authority. -- In regard to studying the Fathers in
general, I can only say, that I hope they were sincere, but by their strange
interpretations, (to say no worse of them) they have opened a door to ridicule;
and from their absurdities, modern infidels have sought occasion to undermine
the main fabric of religion itself. What can be said in excuse for writers,
where some endeavor to prove that it was necessary there should be only
Quatuor, quoniam quatuor sunt parts orbis terrae, etc. Aug. de Cons. Evang.
lib. i.3. it. Vid. Iren. lib. iii.c.11. Theophyl. Prooem in Matthew.
four evangelists, because there were only four elements, four climates, four
cardinal winds, and four cardinal virtues; and others Si Filius sederet ad
dextram, Pater sederet ad sinistram.
, that Christ could not ascend to sit at the right hand of God, for if he sat
at the right, God himself must sit at the left." -- These are not merely the
testimonies that Voltaire, Rousseau, or even Dr. Middleton, may bear against
them, but the more certain testimony that they bear against themselves; -- from
what I have said, therefore, think no scorn to trace the causes of their
mistakes, but by no means presume to determine essentials on their fallacious
authority. And let me require you never to raise scruples in the minds of well
disposed people, under the pretense of preaching against infidelity, for if
your arguments are ever so cogent, you cannot strike at any great number, for
very few infidels will ever be your hearers -- and there is no such thing as a
Sect of Free-thinkers -- it is just as ridiculous, as Dr. Bentley observes
Phil. Lips.
, as to talk of a rope of sand.

And let me particularly enjoin you never to take up ill opinions of, or
denounce against any man, merely on account of his sect or party -- for, as our
Savior says "In his Father's house there are many mansions," so I have no
doubt but there are many ways that may lead to them.

Enthusiasm is the growth of a narrow mind and a heated imagination, infidelity
is the result of false reasoning, and a wicked biass -- from the former we are
empowered to believe "a solid system of old wives stories," and from the
latter, that, though the history be ever so authentic, we ought never to
believe at all -- whatever may be their difference in another world, in this,
they equally tend to gloom, madness, and desperation -- by not calling in our
reason, we debase the religion we profess, and by calling in too much, we are
apt to invalidate faith, reject revelation, and then our minds will extravagate
through all the wilds of error and absurdity.

I am ever your affectionate father, Robert Paulet.
P.S. In regard to the present dispute about the Articles, my own opinion is,
that no other test should be required than the Apostles Creed; but this opinion
is not orthodox.




To Mr. Paulet, etc.
Dear Father,
I Am just returned from Sadlers Wells, which does not only lower my idea of
the times, but even of human nature -- I do not so much reflect on the
entertainment itself as it is called, as on the cruel means that must have been
made use of before the managers could have procured so dreadful an exhibition
-- whence can arise the pleasure of seeing children suspended in the air, or
tossed about at the utmost hazard of their lives to gratify the avarice of
unnatural parents? But indeed the country affords almost as strong instances of
cruelty, as town, for wrestling, single-stick, or even football, are never
considered as diversions by the common people, but as attended with danger,
mischief, or bloodshed; -- but in town, what shocks me most, is that continual
flocking to executions -- in the country, from the less frequency of them, even
butchers weep, but here they are accounted the next diversions to Sadlers
Wells; and by use men can see a monkey dangling from a wire, or a
fellow creature expiring at the gallows with equal unconcern -- how much care
therefore should be taken to inculcate the principles of humanity in youth, a
term which in general, I believe, is mistaken for cowardice; how little care
indeed is taken, even amongst the higher ranks of people, who suffer their
children unmercifully to treat the whole brute-creation, and then wonder that
in time they become cruel enemies and undutiful children -- they think not how
early these inhuman principles are imbibed; they begin indeed in infancy only
with torturing flies, but they end in delighting to view the most horrid
murders of the inquisition.

At other places of great resort, a dog shows you what it is o'clock; bears
dance minuets, and sparrows country-dances; but such exhibitions ought not to
be allowed in a civilized country; for no valuable discoveries are likely to be
made from them, that can any ways atone for the tortures which the birds or
animals must experience in the training.

You find I am desirous of seeing every thing once, and giving you my free
thoughts as they flow, without staying to marshal them in any order. I return
you my best thanks for the kind advice contained in your last -- and wish to
receive more hints on the same subject.

-- remain, etc. Charles Paulet.


To Mr. Paulet, etc.
Dear Charles,
THE alterations already made at Marleston are so great, that I hardly know my
own village -- Mr. Massem every day makes purchases of ground, no matter at
what expense, that Mr. Layout may at least acknowledge he has scope enough for
his invention. I hear of nothing but Obelisks, Statues, Gazebos, Terminations,
and a Laurel-belt -- they talk of taste just as if it was to be brought down in
a broad-wheeled wagon, and they had nothing to do but to scatter it at random
-- Mr. Layout thinks there should be a clump, and there is one; the 'squire
thinks it would look pretty to cut a vista through it, and it is cut; and his
sister thinks she should like a dairy-house near the spot, and she builds it --
so that at last it will be an Olio, a Christmas Pie, a Solomon Gundy, or
perhaps a Fool's Coat -- I must own, it rather grieves me to find that the
grove on the right hand, where the rustic seat was, with the motto of Hae
latebrae dulces and si jam credis, amoenae, should be condemned to be cut down,
as well as the large one, which Mr. Arlington had used to call Shenstone's
Grove, for the urn to his memory was prettily executed, and the placing of the
statue of the Sibyl in front of it, which seemed to exclaim Procul O procul
este profani! was in my opinion a very happy thought -- however, they are all
to be swept away, to make room, as the 'squire informs me, for a fine Mercury
with his quiver, and a Hercules with his trident -- I fear, some how or other,
these Latin mottoes have called down vengeance on the groves themselves, for I
am sure, that neither he nor his chaplain can construe them -- instead of these
venerable shades, a paltry shrubbery is to be planted, which is to be decorated
(as the 'squire would say), "with all the monsters of the internal world." --
By what I see of the intended alterations of the water, it is destined to take
any course but its own, for the merit of every thing seems to consist only in
the sum it is to cost; -- where the genius of the place is attended to, I am as
much delighted as any man with modern improvements -- but where expense is only
considered, or mistaken as another name for real taste, I feel so much disgust,
that I turn away my eyes from false ornament, to contemplate nature herself in
a simple farm, unbroke-in upon by a Mr. Layout.

Mr. Massem has not only qualified himself to act as a Justice of the peace,
but has likewise bought a seat in parliament -- from this latter acquisition to
his dignity, he will be enabled to do very little good or harm; but from the
former, where some preparation is necessary, much mischief may accrue to the
neighborhood, if he should prove, as I fear will be the case, "a law unto
himself." -- indeed I am far from wishing to circumscribe the power of a
justice, for very few are willing to act as it is without pecuniary advantages,
-- and this I partly attribute to the great increase of attorneys -- these
sinful men in the flesh (as the Quakers call them) have stopped the free course
of justice, and turned that food, which ought to have proved our nourishment
and support, into a disease. -- What could be his motive for going into
parliament ( except the honor on it) I did not foresee, but Miss Massem informs
me, that this will account for his civility in bowing to many of the
shabby-looking people that he meets with in the streets of London -- he may now
call them his constituents, but I believe in reality they are no other than his
own poor relations.

Oh! Charles, this Miss Massem is, I fear, a woman of bad principles; and
though she is particularly kind and attentive to my daughter, yet I heartily
wish the girl had never been introduced to her -- she is artful in her conduct,
violent in her prejudices, and "made up of passions." -- Her friends pretend to
excuse her by saying that she cannot curb herself, and that she is always the
same before every body, but I should be apt to add, except her brother, from
whom she has large expectations, so that you see the God of Wealth has
infinitely more influence over her than the God of Heaven.

There is a captain continually with her, whom I utterly detest; but of him
more hereafter.

P.S. Mr. Massem has just been with me, and told me the price of his seat; and
I agree with him that he has bought in very dear, for the stocks on that
exchange are soon likely to fall.

All your letters give me pleasure, so, pray, write as often as you can.

Your sister joins in all love with your affectionate father,

Robert Paulet.
Marleston.

To Mr. Paulet, etc.
Dear Brother,
MR. Massem's family intend to go to town immediately after Christmas, to stay
only a very short time, and they have been so kind as to offer to take me with
them, and bear all my expenses -- this is a favor that I had no right in the
world to expect from them; but, great as it is, I fear I shall not be able to
accept it, unless you, brother, will be so good as to throw in your interest
with my father -- Miss Massem has lain at him continually, but let her say what
she will, he seems to have no inclination but to mew me up at Marleston --
whenever I urge any thing of the necessity of my seeing more of the world, he
always says he does not wish it -- that he had much rather see me married to a
good man, than a great one, and I believe he is as likely to meet with the one
as the other in this neighborhood, unless he can persuade poor old Dr. Snore
to make an offer, or the ever amiable and charming master Patty Pipkin; but
perhaps he aspires so high as to think I may marry 'squire Homebrew'd, or
Parson Poacher -- if I should be honored with the first, my employment would
be I suppose to make tea all day long to settle his stomach, and if I take the
other, I should be constantly engaged in packing up hampers of hares and
partridges to send to town, to be exchanged by his correspondents for oysters
and brandy. -- My father seriously, I believe, means all for my good, but I am
every day more and more convinced that his not knowing the world, will be my
greatest misfortune, for I am sure Marlestone is not the place, if a woman (as
Miss Massem says) is intended to make the most of herself. In short, brother,
all my comfort this winter depends, upon you, for there is nobody else can
persuade my father if you cannot; and you must have a poor opinion indeed of me,
if you think both my safety and my prudence are at stake, because I shall
chance to breathe for a week or two the air of London.

Let me hope soon to feel the effects of such a letter as you can write if you
please, which will ever confer a most lasting obligation on your affectionate
sister,

Susan Paulet.
Marleston.

To Miss Paulet, etc.
Dear Sister,
BY all the affection I bear you, let me entreat you not to urge this London
journey too far -- my father is convinced that it is absolutely improper, or he
never would deny you; and I think you could not enjoy pleasures abroad that
must be purchased with uneasiness at home -- perhaps he wishes not to receive
such obligations, or perhaps he thinks that it will throw you into a mode of
life not calculated to promote your real happiness -- whatever are his
objections, I should think his sentiments should be the rule of your conduct.
In regard to "women making the most of themselves," Miss Massem has borrowed
that idea from her brother, who has been used in India to make such purchases
at a public market; and indeed if the plan was as openly avowed here, in my
mind it would make but very little difference -- for what is running from plays
to concerts, from concerts to routs, and from routs to the Pantheon, but being
equally exposed to sale at a public market -- and what is the preparation to it
but the vilest prostitution of time, reason, and tranquillity -- the mornings
are passed in selecting ornaments, and the conquests of the evening depend on
the skill of the hairdresser in adjusting them -- how important He is
considered can only be known by seeing the disappointment, vexation, and
uneasiness that are occasioned when, after two hours waiting, the fatal message
is brought, that he cannot possibly wait on the lady till next day -- and what
are the conquests after, all, that are to be made here -- of men perhaps
chagrined at having lost their last guinea, or of fops who have found out a new
way to trim their frocks, or tie their neckloths -- alas! these men are too
much taken up with themselves to be sufficiently attentive to the ladies, and
the Wise have long since known that, where a woman's darling passion is Vanity,
the first fruits of marriage can only be a Divorce.

I have been obliged to speak out; but I make no apology, for I am certain that
your future welfare depends entirely on your present caution.

I am with more sincerity than complaisance,

Your most affectionate brother, Charles Paulet.
Cavendish square.

To Mr. Paulet, etc.
Dear Father,
ALL the diversions I see here contribute to lower my respect for the public --
whether the national capacity is weakened, or whether the increasing numbers of
the idle and the vain make it no longer necessary to consult propriety in
entertainments, I know not, but certain I am that the taste of the town is as
depraved as its principles,

It was a complaint made, some years ago, that our Operas were disgraced with
the lowest insipidity of composition and sing-song, and that there was nothing
to be admired but the mere tricks of the performers -- this must always be the
case in a nation where a fiddler is more estimated than a composer; but now the
times are so far altered, that neither the fiddler nor the music are attended to
at all -- if the eye is pleased, the ear and understanding are supposed to be
gratified of course. -- Those who chiefly frequent operas, gape out this part
of the performance, and wake not till they are caught up with raptures at the
unmeaning strut of a celebrated Dancer.

Translations of that miserable dialogue, which were heretofore thought only
fit to be set to music, are now received at the theaters with the greatest
applause, under the appellation Mr. Paulet surely forgets the West Indian,
which is undoubtedly one of the best Comedies in the language. Editor.
of Comedy -- bewilder only the attention with a quick succession of incidents,
and Scotticisms, French jargon, and Irish blunders, in short, a Babel of
languages are sure to supply all deficiencies of wit and humor.

In regard to Tragedies -- those that I have seen are merely indebted to the
quackery of a manager for their success, indeed most of them appear to be made
by the same receipt -- the ingredients are a tyrant, a marriage, incest,
murder, and a triumph: the poetry (once thought essential) now seems to make
the least part of the production -- a scheme is laid between a manager, a
painter, an author, and a scene-shifter to fabricate a new piece -- the action
must be laid in a part of the world that will best suit the scenery of the
house; for, by a little dexterity in the painter, the figure of a Colossus may
be easily changed into an Egyptian idol; -- the next step is to consult the
strength of the house, in regard to the performers -- as there are no tolerable
men, the lady must recite at least half the play -- they have an old man that
can make a shift to whine out a small part, a roaring tyrant, and a d -- m your
blood lover, and then the scene-shifters may supply the rest -- Whilst the work
is perfecting, the public is informed by the Newspapers that a gentleman of
distinguished abilities (now abroad) will soon favor the town with a new
tragedy -- the first night of the performance the house is crowded in every
corner of it (for mankind are not in quest of what is good, but of any Hash
that they mistake to be a new one) -- the curtain rises to soft music, the lady
makes vows at the altar, the tyrant and his trumpets alarm her -- she faints,
and is ordered to be married. -- A hermit secrets her from the tyrant --
discovers himself to be her father, the lover finds out the hermitage, and the
second acts ends with their embraces. -- They must then embrace no more -- he
is her brother -- she flies from him to an altar, or a tomb, (this makes
variety in the puppet-show) -- the tyrant sees her, and would absolutely bear
her off, but she is rescued by her brother. -- In the fourth act her brother is
seized by the tyrant's guards -- is imprisoned -- she visits him -- the guards
drag her from her brother to the tyrant -- he then resolves instantly to marry
her -- she screams, and the hermit bursts in, and promises to make an important
discovery, if he will only delay the nuptials -- the tyrant still persists --
his guards seize the hermit -- she rages, prays, and goes mad -- the noise
increases, and the theater is drowned with tears. -- Expectation is now big for
the fifth act -- what a scene of distress! -- she is absolutely forced to the
altar, but there, rather than marry the tyrant, the murderer of her race, she
recovers her senses, and murders him herself -- the guards take no notice of
the matter, and the house applauds her for near a quarter of an hour; -- the
hermit then declares that her lover is not her brother, but a young prince whom
he has educated, and therefore with great piety gives his blessing on their
nuptials -- all then is joy and exultation -- and thus, agreeable to all the
rules of Tragedy, ends this miserable happy catastrophe. -- Some half dozen in
the theater perhaps may be rather discontented, but to keep them in humor, a
favorite actress takes off their attention from the play, by giving them the
news of the town by way of epilogue.

This may not be the exact drama; but Sethona, which I have just now seen, is,
if possible, much more ridiculous and inconsistent.

I am ever, etc. Charles Paulet.
P.S. The author of Sethona has sacrificed his own better judgment in
compliance with the taste of the town -- his tragedy of Zingis has infinite
merit, and his History of Hindostan intitles him to a high rank amongst the
learned and ingenious.




To Mr. Paulet, etc.
Dear Brother,
MR. Massem's family have been some time in town, and I begin to think it full
as well that I am left behind; however, I shall always submit my solicitudes to
the prudence of my friends. -- My father has been very kind in paying off all
my expenses on my Derbyshire tour, though Mr. Massem was very much against it;
and he says, that as soon as ever he thinks it expedient, he will give me leave
to take another journey -- do not think ill of me for the over anxiety I have
shown about this, but rather view me with an eye of pity, for though I share
the caution of a father, and the affection of a brother, yet deprived of a
mother's peculiar watchfulness and care, what am I but a poor unsheltered bark
exposed to every gale.

I am in all sincerity your affectionate sister, Susan Paulet.
Marleston.

To Mr. Paulet, etc.
Dear Charles,
ACCORDING to your desire I shall now endeavor to point out to you some
Minutiae, as they are called, which may serve as proper hints, before you go
into Holy Orders -- Minutiae, which not being sufficiently attended to, always
confirm me in the opinion that a minister is either ignorant of, or indifferent
to the service he is to perform. -- By the Rubric, before the Common Prayer of
the 2d of Edw. VI. it was ordered that the priest being in the quire (that is,
in his own seat there) should begin with the Lord's Prayer; but early in the
reign of queen Elizabeth, reading desks were set up in the body of the church,
and then the Sentences, Exhortation, Confession, and Absolution were generally
introduced Vide Burn's Eccles. Law.
-- in regard to the Sentences, I shall only observe that any of them are
proper, but if you begin with "If we say that we have no sin, we deceive
ourselves, and the truth is not in us, but if we confess our sins, He, etc." --
you must here supply the word God, for He has no reference. The exhortation,
which must be read with dignity and earnestness, should close I think at
"heavenly Grace," and the words "saying after me," should be pronounced as you
are kneeling down. -- The absolution should not be given, as I have frequently
heard it, as if the minister had power to forgive sins, but the voice must be
carefully kept up till you come to "He pardons and forgiveth," etc. -- The
Venite, which must now be considered as another exhortation, was formerly used
to hasten people into church, and Durandus, I think, mentions that some lazy
Christians had always used to lie in bed till they heard the Venite sung. --
The Psalms In point of composition, the 114th Psalm is a finer ode than any in
Horace.

When Israel came out of Egypt, and the house of Jacob from among strange
people,

Judah was his sanctuary: and Israel his dominion.

The sea saw that and fled; Jordan was driven back.

The mountains skipped like rams: and the little hills like young sheep.

What aileth thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest: and thou Jordan, that thou
wast driven back?

Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams: and ye little hills like young sheep?

Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord: at the presence of the God of
Jacob.

The following verse "Who turned the hard rock into a standing water: and the
flint-stone into a springing well," in the Translation is an instance of the
Bathos, and I could there wish to have it omitted. What a subject is this Psalm
for setting to music, if Boyce, Howard, or some other great composer was to
undertake it!


have been objected to by many, as being composed for particular occasions, and
not general enough in their use, but they contain such energy, such simplicity
and elegance, that the finest fervor of devotion must be borrowed from them --
the stops you know are calculated for the chaunt, and much absurdity will arise
if you do not minutely consider the sense, and keep up your voice at the end of
those verses where the sentence is not complete -- nor is this all -- the
manner must be particularly attended to -- a penitential Psalm should be read
very differently from that of an exultation; -- in regard to the lessons, there
is a still greater scope -- the manner of reading them, should be as various as
the matter; for what can be more opposite than the commands of Pharaoh, and the
supplication of Judah -- this is scarce ever attended to; for most divines, I
am sorry to say, read even the threatenings of Goliath with the meek voice of
David -- the New Testament demands that in the gospel you should plainly recite
a narrative -- in the fifteenth of Corinthians, that you should triumph in your
redemption. -- In the Belief, I confess, that I am much hurt that most
congregations should bow at the name of Jesus, and not at that of God the
Father -- this -- if it has any meaning, exalts the Son above the Father, which
is unnecessary in a Protestant country -- but the custom has crept in from
taking a text in St. Paul in the literal sense "at the name of Jesus every knee
shall bow," etc. -- Then follow the Collects -- and here I must particularly
take notice of that on Advent Sunday, which I hope you can repeat with the
propriety it deserves -- when you come to that passage "that at the last day,
when He shall come again in his glorious Majesty," etc. your own feelings will
prompt you to throw in a suitable degree of solemnity -- weigh the whole of it,
I entreat you, for it is one of the finest models of petitionary composition.
-- When the Order for Morning and Evening Service began with the Lord's Prayer,
it ended with the third Collect for Grace -- the Litany was then a separate
service, and I could almost wish that it had either remained so, or that more
prayers were omitted on those days that it is appointed to be read -- the
recital of it however requires particular attention -- oh! how frequently has
it offended both my ear and understanding when a minister has made a full stop
at "all uncharitableness," as if he had no need to be delivered from it." -- In
regard to the Communion Service, I shall at present only observe, that you
should not give the Commandments from the altar -- this is making the old law
of more weight than the new -- the code to be amended more sacred than the law
explained -- in short, if it must be read at all, it should be read at the
beginning, not at the end; but I need not inform you that this likewise was
originally a separate service. These are the chief remarks which immediately
occur, and which being weighed, may add propriety to the fervency of your
devotion -- the subject will improve upon you by attention, for though I am not
so zealous as some divines who assert that our service is perfect in the beauty
of holiness, yet I am fully convinced, that upon the whole it is a reasonable
and a holy service Controversy about the Trinity, in my opinion, is a disease
that wants quiet rather than cure -- as to the Articles, the divines must give
up a few to save the rest -- they urge that such tests are necessary to keep
out Arians, Socinians, Evansonians, etc. -- why should they be kept out? In the
name of God, I say, let them all come in, and be made here, as I hope they will
be hereafter, one fold under one shepherd!
. -- In regard to sermons, let me ask you the following questions -- have you
studied Dr. Jeremy Tailor for matter and not for style? have you read Dr.
Clarke for fine arguments and nice distinctions -- Sherlock for strength and
persuasion "Ask the sinner then, whether the fears of futurity are all idle
dreams? And as you like his answer follow his example." Sherlock's 8th
Discourse, 4th vol.


, and Jortin for plain reason, and sober sense -- have you felt the sublimity
of Warburton "Those specific attributes, from which we deduce all our knowledge
of the nature and will of God, are formed on analogy and bear relation to
ourselves. But then, we say, such attributes are not on that account the less
real or essential. The light of the sun is not in the orb itself what we see it
in the rainbow. There it is one candid, uniform, perfect blaze of glory: here,
we separate its perfection, in the various attributes of red, yellow, blue,
purple, and what else the subtle optician so nicely distinguishes. But still
the solar light is not less real in the rainbow, where its rays become thus
untwisted, and each differing thread distinctly seen, than while they remain
united and incorporated with one another in the sun. Just so it is with the
divine nature: it is one simple, individual perfection in the Godhead himself:
but when refracted and divaricated, in passing through the human mind, it
becomes power, justice, mercy; which are all separately and adequately
represented to the understanding." Warburton's 2d Sermon. 1st vol.


, and admired the concise elegance of Hurd? -- You can answer, I hope, all
these questions in the affirmative -- let me then advise you to buy all the
sermons that Manwaring has ever published -- would his pamphlets were folios!
but for more common use attend to -- study Bourdalone -- the length of your
discourses should not exceed twenty minutes (few hearers can keep up their
attention so long), but should you be dull, heavy, uninstructive, nay I will
say unentertaining, half that time will be estimated an hour -- a good sermon,
delivered with propriety and earnestness, always attracts -- even the infidel
keeps his snuff box in his pocket, and the ladies are silent about their fans;
but once lose their attention, the whole air distills the dews of Morpheus, the
'prentice recollects his Saturday's fatigue, and his mistress is forced to
pinch her husband to prevent a snore -- in short, though I hate both, I think
volatile essence is a better ingredient in a sermon than a downright opiate. --
But what subjects must; you choose for discourses? -- here I should hesitate --
by no means introduce party -- never preach at any body; this is the fruit of
private resentment, not of Christian zeal -- don't pretend to expound very
difficult texts -- expositions of this kind become the press better than the
pulpit -- such disquisitions should be read, not heard -- address the senses
and the heart -- quote not chapter and verse, but give the substance, and, if
you could, the manner of St. Paul; for I am convinced that he preached not like
-- or -- but like Hinchliffe, Porteus, or Hurd; -- now and then take subjects
from the Bible, but most frequently from the New Testament; a good comment on
any sentence in our Savior's sermon on the mount is of itself a full
discourse, but you may make excursions -- I have read excellent discourses
against gaming, and very lately a most useful sermon against inhumanity to
brutes. But where are you to preach? -- by no means for a constancy in a
village, where your principal auditors will be only a few overgrown farmers It
is well Mr. Paulet has confined himself to the overgrown ones, for I humbly
conceive that the middling farmers, like the middle ranks of people, were the
most attentive as well as the most intelligent of his audience. Editor.
-- it is scarce possible to do much good amongst them -- they will not regard
you for your reasoning, but for your revenue; and I declare I would almost as
willingly see you transported to live amongst the New Zealanders, as (after the
education I have given you) that you should fall at last a dupe to gross
ignorance and low conceit -- the soldier is brave, and the sailor is generous
-- the mechanic in the course of his traffic has had opportunities of enlarging
his ideas; but the farmer having never burst the web, thinks himself as wise as
the parish clerk, who is convinced of his own omniscience, because he has never
met with any one but the parson to tell him the contrary -- I allow that I
speak here with some degree of acrimony, but I am clearly convinced that these
men have greatly augmented the distresses of the inferior clergy, and it is
chiefly owing to them, in conjunction with attorneys, that there is so much
"leading into captivity, and such complaining in our streets." -- These are the
only men about us, my dear Charles, who have shown neither gratitude nor
affection to the memory of poor Mr. Arlington, yet are ready on every occasion
to bow the knee most servilely to the Nabob. -- This brings on melancholy
reflections: adieu for the present, and believe me ever

your affectionate father, Robert Paulet.
Marleston. P.S. Let me give you one more caution in regard to sermons -- never
introduce any thing ludicrous in them -- it may be called preaching in the
manner of South or Stern, but it is a bad manner, and I pray you avoid it --
Atterbury has frequently disgusted me beyond measure with vulgar allusions; and
even the bishop of Gloucester, when he talks of Hocus Pocus tricks, in a sermon
on the resurrection.




To the Rev. Mr. Paulet.
Dear Father,
I Cannot forbear sending you my earliest acknowledgements for your kind
remarks -- I will give them, at least, all the attention they deserve.

I have not only seen your neighbor, Mr. Massem, but have heard him speak in
the house of commons on the booksellers petition -- he enlarged on the nearness
and dearness of property in general -- "that it was for that only that men had
been enabled to risque every thing that was valuable to them in this life --
that he thought authors were a very pernicious race of men; that they caused
all that abuse on men of property that appeared so frequently in the
newspapers, and that the booksellers were a pack of bloodhounds that set them
on; that he therefore hoped neither of them would have any relief under this
here bill -- that he thoroughly understood this particular kind of property; he
had weighed it, and viewed it in every light, and was fully convinced that the
whole was merely a dispute between the statute law and the common law of the
land; for his own part, therefore, he should always be for the former." -- He
spoke long and with great confidence, and was much better heard on the subject
of property, than either a Burke or a Bar would have been, had the weight and
circulation of it been materially engaged against them.

I write with a rapid pen, which you must excuse, etc.

I am your dutiful and affectionate son, Charles Paulet.


To Mr. Paulet.
Dear Charles,
I Was in hopes to have found more Remarks of Mr. Arlington's on Gardening,
etc. than I am at present able to send you -- he evidently intended to have
said more on Architecture, which is absolutely necessary likewise to be
thoroughly understood by the complete Master of modern Design.

From these papers you will see what notions the ancients held of gardening in
general; but should you ever wish to dive into further particulars, I will show
you a most curious book on that subject, which I have by me; the title of it is
Stengel de Horto -- mine is the second edition, printed in 1650. -- There are a
thousand different receipts to make paradises; and his account of the gardens
in Italy will much divert you: indeed I suspect that the Italian gardens are
not much improved since the days of Phflaumeren. -- In regard to the French
gardens, you may look over a book entitled Voyage Pittoresque des Environs des
Paris, par M. D... He begins, as you would suppose a Frenchman to begin, with
saying, "Ce n'est point un paradoxe, d'avancer que les plus beaux jardins de
l'Europe sont ceux de France." -- I was surprised to find in Maundrell's
Travels, that there was so much genuine taste amongst the Turks.

Since lord Kamis and Mr. Shenstone published their Remarks, there has appeared
a little Essay on Design in Gardening, by a gentleman of the Temple, and an
octavo volume of Observations, written by Mr. Wh -- ley; both of them books of
merit, but the latter, I think, is too full of technical terms for a novice to
engage in.

Mr. Arlington differs in opinion from Mr. Mason, in regard to avenues -- this
is combating great authority, but if I was to decide, I should be so
old-fashioned as to give my verdict against the poet. But you will say, what is
all this to me, who perhaps may never have ten acres of ground in my
possession, or ever cultivate any thing better than potatoes or cabbages --
this may be very true, but I would be equally able to feel, and to make proper
remarks, and to exclaim in the words of Goldsmith, that lawns, lakes, towns,
fields, and woods " For me their tributary stores combine;
" Creation's heir, the world, the world is mine."


I am your ever affectionate father, Robert Paulet.
Marleston, March 1, 1774. STRICTURES ON LANDSCAPE GARDENING. From Mr.
ARLINGTON's Papers.
(...) Longinus.
GARDENING, says an ingenious author Lord Kamis.
, was at first an useful art" -- but Eden Sir Wm. Temple.
was calculated for pleasure, and a life of labor succeeded not till after the
fall.

"In modern language, the garden of Alcinous might be but a kitchen-garden,"
yet, as Eustathius observes, "ornaments was sought for even there, however
unsuccessfully," unless we suppose the description given by Homer to be "wholly
poetical, and made at the pleasure of the painter, like the little island of
Phaeacia."

It would not be of much importance to enquire whether the gardens of Babylon
were brought into use by Semiramis, Syrus, or Belus -- we find in general, that
they were terraces one above the other, carried up to the height of the wall of
the city, and planted with stately trees, in imitation of the hanging woods,
which Amyite had been accustomed to in the mountainous parts of Media.

As the gardens of Solomon were chiefly calculated for magnificence, and those
of the Hesperides celebrated for the excellence of their fruit only, I shall
venture to suppose the dawn of taste to rise with the old Bard in his
description of Calypso's bower, Without the grot, a various sylvan scene
Appeared around, and groves of living green;
Poplars and alders ever quivering played,
And nodding cypress formed a fragrant shade;
Four limpid fountains from the clifts distill,
And every fountain pours a several rill,
In mazy windings wandering down the hill:
Where bloomy meads with vivid greens were crowned,
And glowing violets threw odours round;
A scene, where if a god should cast his sight,
A god might gaze, and wonder with delight.
Pope's Odyssey.

It is not improbable, says Sir William Temple, but that the most refined
pleasures of invention descended earlier into Lower Asia from Damascus and
Assyria -- but as these nations abounded not with heroes, the poets make little
or no mention of them.

It has been supposed, that Epicurus was the first who introduced gardens into
Greece -- but Pliny assures us, he was only the first who had a garden within
the city of Athens, whereas before his time they were without the walls, like
the Horti Suburbani of the Romans.

In such retreats this great philosopher gave the most shining precepts of
morality, however misrepresented by the Stoics, or mistaken by those gross
pretenders to his sect, who conceived pleasure to consist only in sensuality --
they served the two purposes of assembling the philosopher's pupils for
instruction, and of furnishing them, as Cowley well expresses it, "with cheap
and virtuous luxury."

Nor was this luxury confined merely to the philosophers -- the greatest
warriors sought for hours of reflection in such retirements, and the same
hands were employed in the service of agriculture, which had raised and
supported the glory of their country.

Though utility was chiefly sought for in the gardens of the philosophers, yet
Virgil's Description of the Elysian Fields affords a most beautiful specimen of
bold imagery and rich design. -- "The full green of the woods -- the gayly
illuminated lawn, the grove with the rapid river issuing from it; the dusky
thickets, the fresh meads watered with rills, the sequestered vale rendered
more solemn by the thick wood, and placid stream." -- His account likewise of
the old Corycians gardens makes us greatly lament, that haste should have
deprived the world of his masterly instructions on a subject he so much admired
-- Father Harduin, indeed, in his Notes on Pliny, thinks the loss is amply made
up to us by his brother Jesuit's Poem on Gardening, which he puts in
competition with the Georgics -- an opinion which will be adopted by such
critics as feel no difference between the feeble descriptions of -- and the
glowing pictures of a Mason.

In England we have ever, till of late, most servilely copied our methods of
gardening from the Italians, French, Flemish, or Dutch, all of whom indeed seem
to have offered nothing better in the construction of them, than "clipped hedges,
parterres, squirting fountains, true-love knots, and flourishes." -- Sir
William Temple seems much delighted with the taste brought in by king William,
of which the evergreen quarter at Kensington remains a specimen; and offers
Moore Park, in Hertfordshire, as the perfectest figure of a garden he ever saw
-- indeed he allows there may be other forms admitted wholly irregular, but
they must owe their beauty to some extraordinary dispositions of nature.

Lord Bacon does not like images cut out in juniper, or other gardenstuff --
"they be for children," says he -- "but can approve of little low hedges cut
round like welts, with some pretty pyramids -- and in some places fair columns
upon frames of carpenter's work."

Mr. Pope severely ridicules the invasion of nature, but proposes a place to be
copied from, which in his time partook largely of the old absurdities A full
detail of them may be found in Monsr. de Phflaumeren, etc
; and whose beauties were but trifling and puerile -- Stowe, when compared with
Versailles, might demand some share of admiration, but immense would be the
distance from that genuine taste which Shenstone Vide Letters on Chivalry and
Romance.
"and nature have brought us acquainted with."

Stowe, indeed, under its modern improvements, may be considered as a very fine
specimen of taste and design, particularly by those who are unacquainted with
the exquisite elegance -- I had almost said the absolute perfection of lord
Scarsdale's.

"It seems to me, says lord Kamis, far from an exaggeration, that good
professors are not more essential to a college than a spacious garden, which
ought to be tempered with simplicity, rejecting sumptuous and glaring ornaments
-- in this respect the university of Oxford may be deemed a perfect model." --
That the gardens of Oxford may be as useful and efficacious as those of ancient
Rome, for the purposes of study and application, I will by no means presume to
deny -- but they are certainly as artful as their buildings -- they are formal
without unity of design, and complex without variety.

"Regularity," says the same author, "is required in that part of a garden
which joins the dwelling house." -- The beauties of a dwelling house arise from
regularity and proportion, but the works of art and nature have a different
destination -- utility would suffer if the ground was not polished near the
dwelling; but this polish, to speak philosophically, should be, I think
inversely as the distance.

Mr. Burke doubts "whether beauty be at all an idea belonging to proportion" --
surely the effect produced by it in architecture strikes even a common eye with
pleasure -- the instance produced from vegetables is not much to the purpose,
for it will appear from an accurate survey, that there is more regularity in
the parts of flowers than is commonly imagined -- their forms indeed are
infinitely varied, but in the same plant nature seldom deviates from the laws
of proportion, and some of our best botanists have actually founded much of
their systems upon the proportion of the parts -- so far therefore from
supposing no beauty to result from proportion, we may infer that some part at
least of the beauty even of vegetables arises from it.

It is supposed by modern rules that all avenues of course must be cut down,
but I am far from thinking, that they may not frequently remain to great
advantage -- they must be long and wide, and should properly lead to a Gothic
castle, tower, or any other large and ancient building. -- I know it has been
said, Vide Essay on Sublime and Beautiful.
"that avenues of a moderate length are far grander, and that a true artist
should always put a generous deceit on the spectator" -- but though perspective
will lessen greatness in height as it gains in length Burke.
," yet I think it is equally certain that the duke of Montagu's avenues will be
considered as far more grand than those in St. James's Park.

To remedy the ill effects of a straight line, an uniform curve is now adopted
-- but alteration is not always improvement -- and it reminds me of the conduct
of the matron, who, to prevent her daughter from dropping her chin into her
bosom, threw it up into the air by the aid of a steel collar -- Hogarth's
Analysis has as yet been read to very little purpose.

"Grandeur may possibly be enforced by surprise Shenstone.
," but propriety will suffer for it -- a magnificent building will certainly
appear more magnificent after viewing a cottage -- but where is the connection
between a dairy and a Chinese temple, a rustic seat and a Grecian altar?

We rarely see the whole of a building, with its furniture, confined to one
expression -- some minute article is for ever giving us disgust -- we view an
hermitage for instance; -- from the gloomy entrance into it -- the crucifix and
other emblems placed in order -- the straw-bed and old seat -- we are so struck
with the solemnity of the scene, that we are even in expectation of seeing the
saint himself approach to meet us -- till all of a sudden a modern dining table
presents itself to view, and at once destroys all our enthusiasm. -- How
different this from the taste of him, who thought of only putting a few rude
planks together, and carving the signs of the zodiac upon them.

* * * * * * * *

* * * * * * * *

* * * * * * * *

* * * * * * * *

Elevations of the different parts of Blenheim-house, when viewed separately on
paper, are not unworthy of the greatest architect -- but, when taken together,
the whole appears as a most heavy pile of building -- there is no contrast, no
relief, though Mr. Pope, perhaps, made too severe a remark when he called it "a
quarry of stones above ground."

Many of our modern houses have been built from Italian models, without the
least reference or conformity to the change of country -- on account of heat in
Italy, it is necessary to have but few windows -- this must ever make a
building not only appear heavy, but of course produce a contrary effect to that
which ought to be sought for in a northern clime.

It was not always a specimen of bad taste in our ancestors that they built
their houses in a valley, and moated them round about -- safety in those times
was principally to be considered -- and improvements in mechanics had not then
enabled them to live with equal convenience above hill as below.

The common opinion at present is, that a house cannot have too much prospect;
but I would carefully distinguish between looking at, and overlooking objects
-- the summit may be very proper for an observatory, but not always for a
dwelling house; from which all objects, I think, should be seen distinctly,
without the aid of a telescope.

* * * * * * * *

"A garden on a flat Lord Kaims.
, it is said, ought to be highly and The ornaments must be very carefully
suited; for to dress up trifling subjects in grand and exalted expressions,
will, in the end, only make them appear the more contemptible.
variously ornamented, in order to occupy the mind, and prevent its regretting
the insipidity of a uniform plain. -- artificial mounts in this view are common
-- but no person has thought of an artificial walk elevated high above the
plain." -- The effect of such a walk is most admirably exemplified in Mr.
Garrick's But I cannot approve of the statue of Shakespeare -- surely it would
have been time enough to have represented him in marble or stone, when the very
Genius of Shakespeare no longer presided there.
polished ground at Hampton.

There will always be a material difference where the master himself is
possessed of a fine taste, when compared with that of any hireling -- he will
more cooperate with nature -- he has a better opportunity of becoming
intimately acquainted with the Genius of his own place -- a difference not to
be explained on paper perhaps, but strongly to be felt at the Mr. Shenstone's.
Leasowes -- at Mr. Hamilton's.
Cobham -- at Sir R. Newdigate's.
Arbory -- and Lord Scardale's.
Kedleston.

No wonder that our taste in England is still to be condemned, since most of ur
largest gardens are laid out by some general undertaker, who, regardless of the
peculiar beauties of each situation, introduces the same objects at the same
distances in all.

"Art should ever be timid of overstepping the modesty of nature, for any thing
over-done is from the purpose; and though it may make the unskilful admire,
cannot but make the judicious grieve -- the censure of which, one (as
Shakespeare observes to the actors) must in your allowance yout-weigh a whole
theater of others."

Gardening then, in its highest stage of improvement, is of the nature of an
epic poem -- the plan must be great, entire, and one. Dryden.
"Even the least portions must have a reference to the whole. -- Nothing of a
foreign nature, like the trifling conceits" which bad poets, or bad gardeners
"are always ready to introduce. By which the observer is misled into another
sort of pleasure opposite to that which is designed in the general plan. One
conduces to the designer's aim, the completing of his work, -- the other
slackens his pace, diverts him from his way, and locks him up like a
knight errant in an enchanted castle, when he should be pursuing his main
adventure." -- In short, as Pope says, To build, to plant, whatever you intend,
To rear the column, or the arch to bend,
To swell the terras, or to sink the grot;
In all, let nature never be forgot.
Still follow sense, of every art the soul,
Parts answ'ring parts, shall slide into a whole.





To the Rev. Mr. Paulet.
Dear Father,
I Have of late forborne to give you any account of my pupil, as I could not
give you a very favorable one -- he is permitted by his uncle to sit up so
late overnight, that he is generally unfit for business all the next day. -- A
circumstance has lately happened that has given me much uneasiness, though I
believe I had more reason to be concerned for his principles than his safety;
-- a dispute arose the other evening (at cards I suspect), and words ran so
high, that it was at length agreed to decide the important matter by single
combat -- the heroes met in form at the appointed time -- their pistols missed
fire, and the seconds interposed, -- and there it ended; -- this, however, with
the initials of their names -- in couched terms -- with distant observations --
and short inuendoes, makes out a very pompous paragraph for the newspapers. --
I have often, in my own mind, attributed the great increase of duelling to the
accounts that are there inserted -- of this I am certain, it is one cause at
least, if not a principal one; but duelling will always be practiced in every
country "where the dread of shame is greater than the love of glory" -- for
instance, now we read that "a great dispute happened the other day at a certain
great assembly" (the Robinhood perhaps, or the Sixpenny Pantheon) "which was
determined to be decided by single combat -- on the day appointed Mr. A -- met
captain B --, Mr. D -- was second to Mr. A --, and captain G -- was second to
captain B --; Mr. A -- received the first fire, and asked captain B -- if he
would then ask pardon, who roughly answered -- no; his honor forbad him; --
then said Mr. A -- I must fire, though it will give me the most inexpressible
concern to rob the public of so gallant and so respectable a character -- on
which he presented his pistol, pulled the trigger, and the ball grazed captain
B -- 's shoulder-knot, who instantly fell to the ground -- the seconds
interposed, and Mr. A -- called to a surgeon who stood at a small distance to
assist captain B --, who was immediately carried home in a chair." -- Then
comes "We hear that the amiable Miss C -- was so alarmed at captain B -- 's
danger" (she did not know, we presume, at what distance they were to fire)
"that she lay in fits the whole day, and her life is even now despaired of, --
captain B -- 's misery on this occasion is easier to be conceived than
expressed, but he was conscious that a man destitute of honor must be totally
unworthy of Miss C -- 's love." -- Let your barber only read all this, and he
sleeps not till he makes himself conspicuous.

Accept my best thanks for the gardening papers, which I have just received --
will write again soon -- in the mean time, believe me, etc.

Charles Paulet.
Cavendish-Square,

To the Rev. Mr. Paulet.
Dear Father,
MY situation is every day more and more disagreeable to me, -- my pupil has
formed connections that will ruin his peace, and destroy my satisfaction, --
his fortune is come too soon, and there are vulturs that already make a prey of
him; -- his uncle says he disapproves of Gaming, but is for ever speaking
respectfully of the most abandoned characters of the times; and the young man
is taught in the world, that to discharge any debts, but those of honor, is
mechanical, -- to regard money is below a man of rank, when so many men without
any can cut so great a figure; -- it is not, I find, till men have played deep
that they know the resources -- then they can borrow money, and get great names
to be bound with them; if one does not pay, another must, -- but if none can?
-- they must bilk their creditors by going abroad, unless some lady of great
fortune will in the mean time make herself happy by marrying a man of fashion
and of the world. -- This year then the whole set are again established, they
contract new debts, and find out new fools to become security for the payment
of them. -- Whilst our nobility and gentry are thus squandering away their
estates, what wonder is it that negociators and attorneys are purchasing all
the principal seats about London -- their incomes are made great by annuities,
and their principal is established by premiums -- these usurers (if they have
not the impudence to take seats in parliament themselves, can nevertheless
carry on the sale of boroughs for their dependents; and young men thus seduced,
are generally compelled to barter their dearest interests to gain petty places
in the excise, perhaps at the foot of the treasury-board, that they may satisfy
the rapacious demands of an usurer's clerk. -- Interest in the House arises
from connections at Arthur's; and popularity is gained in the world from the
clerk's brother being a writer in the news -- every day new fools admire, and
new fools are every day admitted to be plundered.

My pupil, alas! is already a melancholy instance of a slavish subjection to
the tyranny of fashion, and will soon be irrevocably plunged into the deep and
desperate gulf of gaming -- last night, however, he gave me at least a serious
hearing, but informed me that it was utterly impossible that I should know any
thing of life or of the world -- "Gaming," says he, "is as necessary a
qualification for a young man of fashion as dress, dancing, fencing, or a
knowledge of modern languages -- it is practiced universally abroad; and play
here at a high stake is not only an introduction, but become the only key of
admittance into most of the best companies; -- how would Sir John Rouleau have
ever got a seat in parliament, if he had not made a good acquaintance at
Arthur's or Newmarket? -- these are the only schools of advancement; and those
fortunes," says he, "which you call lost, are only transferred for a night or
two into other hands -- besides, if they never return, the Great can easily
make other compensations; and where is the difference between receiving a large
income from a place, or from dirty farms, except that the former is here
considered as the more honorable -- those who value the latter only, can never
be received into company at all, except at county-meetings or race-balls; and
then they are only admitted like parsons, to laugh at bad jokes, or dance with
ugly partners." -- All this may be very true, but I am yet to be convinced that
it is necessary to become a man of fashion, if the title must be purchased at
the expense of peace, virtue, honor and religion; however, no reply can be
made to arguments which have no "weak side" of reason to be attacked upon; but
of this I am certain, that such principles every day increase in the kingdom,
and in a short time, I fear, will overwhelm it.

From this cursed fount what mighty evils flow,
Gaming -- thou source of every human woe,
Thou bane to peace, thou cause of every care,
Wives, children, parents -- all the ruin share;
It Is thine to rob the mind of all relief,
And sink the hero to the midnight thief!
You will, most probably, receive my next from Bath, -- on my return from
thence, I intend to leave my pupil and go into orders.

I am ever, etc. Charles Paulet.
Cavendish-square,

To Mr. Charles Paulet, etc.
Dear Charles,
I Shoot this letter at random -- if you have left town for Bath, it will only
for a while delay some uneasiness. -- Glanville, I had been informed, had taken
such liberties with your sister, that I was determined to intercept a letter
which I supposed to have come from him -- it proved to be the enclosed, which I
send for your perusal; in the mean time, I have made no other comment but to
forbid my daughter from ever having any more connections with that family. --
You will see the use that is made of Lord Chesterfield's Letters, which I have
read, -- his mind, poor man! was a fine flower-garden, overrun with weeds --
but he is dead -- Mr. Stanhope is likewise dead -- they are both dead -- to
meditate on Death is to pass the severest censure on those epistles -- had he
reflected on Death as frequently as on the "Graces," he would not, I think,
have taught his son that "to dissemble" was to prepare for it. -- But read the
enclosed.

I am, dear Charles, ever, etc. etc. Robert Paulet.
Marleston.

(From Miss Massem to Miss Paulet.)
Marleston-Hall, Sunday Morn. My dear Susy,
AFTER you left us last night, you cannot think how captain Glanville laughed
at your notions of everlasting constancy; and that if once you had given your
affections, you was sure they could never be alienated; -- do you know that he
swears no woman's affections ever yet served a regular apprenticeship, and that
you have arts and graces enough to make any man wind about and serpentine just
as you please. -- Apropos -- you must read Lord Chesterfield's Letters, which I
will send you, -- his advice to his son in regard to the world, will hold
exactly right as to any woman's management of a husband; -- he says very justly
"that because man is a rational animal, you must not suppose, therefore, that
he always acts rationally; you must watch his weak, unguarded moments, get into
his secrets, engage his heart, and you will easily dupe his understanding." --
Dissimulation is the virtue of the Great, and as you will see from these
excellent books, the men not only practice it, but profess it as a science; how
then shall we be able to cope with them, if we do not fight with as good
weapons, and play off their own arts against themselves? -- Now, for instance,
suppose you was to marry an old bachelor -- I think you might overthrow all his
little systems in a fortnight -- to be sure, at times, he would be restive and
cross, but then you must suppose he never speaks his real sentiments; and at
others he will quietly enough return to his shackles -- this is what Mr. Pope
means by " If she rules him, never shows she rules."


Why should she show it? for her time to take advantage is only when alone;
before company she must always acquiesce, or the world will not be of her side;
and, as Lord Chesterfield says, the world is always the dupe of deceit; and it
is, therefore, much better to seem than to be." -- I knew a lady that adopted
this mode of conduct exactly, and was very successful, -- to be sure, the man
was very miserable, and at last, I believe, died of a broken heart; but the
world, to this day, are almost unanimously agreed, that she undoubtedly made
him one of the very Best of Wives.

For the future, leave all your letters at Mary Cuttle's, and I shall be sure
to receive them safe.

I am ever my dear Susy's sincerest friend and servant, Catharine Massem.
But, my dearest Susy, I must of all things caution you against marrying a Wit
-- it is a noxious seeing animal, against whom you may play off a whole battery
of Tears, Oaths, Sighs, and Protestations, to no effect. -- As to money, you
must be an oeconomist in his pleasures, if you mean to be extravagant in your
own.




To the Rev. Mr. Paulet.
Dear Father,
I Have now been near a week at Bath with my pupil -- we lodge at the new
hotel, called York house, which is very commodious -- indeed more so, I think,
than the noble one just fitted (...) in Covent Garden, as there are more
conveniences under the same roof. -- You have heard so much of the neatness
and regularity of the buildings here, that it is unnecessary for me to
expatiate upon them -- the Circus and south front of the Square are beautiful
beyond description; but I cannot approve the Crescent, though I must confess I
never saw any building (where so many rules of architecture were violated) that
altogether looked so well. -- To describe the manners and fashions here, would
be far beyond my art, though they have many peculiar to themselves -- as in
town, people quarrel for places and preferments, and where some great prize is
held up to the aspirants; so here, for want of better employment, they have
been absolutely compelled to quarrel for nothing at all -- not whether one man
should have more popularity or higher distinction than another, but whether he
should go up the hill or down to dance his minuet; and whether the important
place of master of the ceremonies should be filled by a native of Ireland or
England -- nay, to so great a degree has this fashion of quarrelling for
nothing prevailed amongst the fair sex, that, not content merely with the war
of the tongue, they have even descended to blows -- this can be attributed to
nothing but the extraordinary Fermentation of the waters.

The numberless evils to which mankind are always by necessity exposed, should
make them, one would think, at all times endeavor to unite in bands of mutual
harmony, and here especially, where so many are in a perpetual state of
suffering -- yet here, from mere fashion, the strangest infatuation prevails,
even amongst invalids, who fly as far as possible from the baths and the
shelter of the lower town, to brave the turbulency of the mountains; -- the
buildings are now extended so far, that, as the Irishman would say, "Bath is
run away from itself, it is absolutely gone out of its own town;" and it may do
very well for the healthful to follow it, but sure it is the greatest absurdity
in the world that invalids should fly as far as possible from shelter, and from
all those advantages for which Bath is so peculiarly and so justly celebrated.

The waters (if you believe the Apothecaries) are specifics for all disorders;
there is only one that you can possibly die of, which is Obstinacy -- this
becomes incurable from not taking advice enough about the use of them, when
present, or by removing from the benefit of them too soon -- it is true, lady
Skinandbone has been coughing up her lungs here these two years, but would
certainly have recovered, had she not obstinately refused to stay one fortnight
longer; and my lord Lastlegs would absolutely have relinquished his crutches in
a few days more, and hung them up in the pump-room as the most memorable
trophies in it -- had he not obstinately resolved to change these ever
efficacious waters for those of Bristol.

In regard to the diversions, there is a playhouse here, where the actors
(exclusive of Garrick) are in general full as good as those in town -- in
tragedy they do not always speak with "a good accent and good discretion," but
I have seen some characters in comedy really supported with great humor and
propriety. -- The new rooms are elegantly fitted up, and may be better
calculated, perhaps, than any others for the purposes of dancing and gaming;
but as I never partake of the latter, and not very frequently of the former,
they afford me but little or no entertainment -- for an evening or two I might
have been delighted with the splendour of the appearance, but soon, (as some one
expresses it) " The gay idea palls upon the sense,
" And coldly strikes the mind with feeble bliss."
In short, if I was obliged to give you my opinion of Bath, I should define it
to be a place, in which though life, perhaps, may not be passed most usefully,
it may, nevertheless, be wasted agreeably -- amongst wanton widows, and
debauched wives, forsaken Irishmen, and forsaking men of quality.

This place is so fertile of anecdote, that I could send you volumes from it
instead of epistles.

I am ever, etc. etc. Charles Paulet.
P.S. There is a literary society established near Bath by a set of gentlemen
and ladies where many improvements are made on the prizes that were distributed
by the ancients -- instead of the bay they give jessamine, and instead of
laurels artificial nosegays -- I have not seen any of the literary productions,
but hear there will soon be published a most excellent didactic poem on the
beautiful arch of lady Horatia Pedant's auburn eye brow.




The following letters from the rev. Mr. Paulet to his son at Bath, conclude
the volume.

To Mr. Paulet.
Woburn, Sat. Night. Dear Charles,
THIS morning put a period to all my happiness -- your sister -- your lost
unhappy sister is fled with Glanville! -- The care, the affection that I have
ever shown for her -- all the principles of virtue and religion that I have
ever endeavored to inculcate, have availed her nothing, and she is fled at
last with Glanville. -- From her infancy I have labored to prove myself a kind
and indulgent father; and now when I meant to reap the harvest of my toil --
behold, this is my reward! -- but I myself have been the cause -- I have given
up too far, -- but as she had lost her mother, and my notions of life were
supposed to be too contracted, the opinions of others have weighed against me,
and I have relaxed my own principles to her ruin. -- I have got so far on my
road to town, but can hear no tidings which way they took -- nor is it needful
for me to inquire -- I am rather flying from myself than in pursuit of her --
she is for ever lost -- she is ruined -- she fled, alas! with Glanville. -- Had
his intentions been honorable, whence this secrecy? -- but nothing can
exculpate her -- she knew the depth of misery into which I should be plunged,
and, had she thought of marriage, would have saved my desperation. -- Glanville
would not marry her -- he owns no ties of either honesty or honor -- he could
violate all engagements (if he made any) and the infatuated world would call it
Gallantry. -- All her principles were polluted -- she was deaf to shame, as
well as virtue, who could dare to triumph thus over the weakness of a father's
heart. -- Delay not, my son, to seek -- to inquire -- to upbraid -- it is too
late, alas! to recall, -- and should chance or fortune cast her in your way --
reproach her with her infamy -- tell her that she has violated her duty to
herself -- to me -- and if there needs an aggravation of her crime -- to her
God -- that no penance can obliterate the stain -- that she has pulled down
ruin on herself and on her father, and that his tears will be drops of
vengeance on her head for ever: -- tell her -- no, no, this may be too harsh,
-- tell her only that if she would return -- I could forgive her.


London. Dear Charles,
I Have now no hopes of seeing you before I leave town, for I have at last got
some faint intelligence of your sister, and shall set off immediately for Dover
-- should she have set sail (for I hear he is carrying her to France) I shall
then relinquish all pursuit, and leave her to the protection of that power that
can amend her heart, and assuage my sorrows -- when you perceive me thus torn
and distracted with my grief, harbor not a thought that your sister was ever
dearer to me than yourself -- she is lost -- and now awakens all my anxiety,
"but thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine."


Dear Charles,
LET those only talk of bearing up against afflictions, who have never felt
them -- there may be such situations that no principles can fortify the mind
against, and under which the greatest and the best must ever fall -- into such
a one is your unhappy father plunged. -- I pursued my journey so much faster
than I expected, (for man neither knows his weakness nor his strength) that I
thought by night I should even reach Dover, but gaining no tidings, I began to
sink under my fatigue, and to hope only from time for that aid which philosophy
could not afford me. -- As I was passing through a small village, I saw all the
people running out with unfeeling curiosity after a poor wretch, who they told
me was falling into labor -- the officers, I found, were persecuting her, to
save expenses, to the next parish, and had refused her not only harbor, but
relief -- no situation can dispense with our humanity -- I determined,
therefore, to allot some few shillings to succor, at least, if not to save
this victim of distress; -- as I came nearer the rabble stopped, and, for a
while, I even forgot my own miseries to contemplate hers -- I inveighed against
their cruelty in the bitterest terms -- broke through the crowd, and insisted
on their affording her some relief -- they told me "there was no occasion, for
the woman entreated only for to die" -- I demanded that they should convey her
to the next alehouse, -- that I would leave my watch -- my money; -- my aid to
carry her into it, alas! I was unable to give, for she was now from agonies,
become an object too shocking for humanity to behold; -- I was, at length,
responsible for her charges, and the crowd were indifferent to her distress. --
As soon as they had borne her in, I entreated her to take comfort -- bewailed
her miseries -- assured her, that if either by leaving my watch or some money,
I could procure her cordial medicine or assistance, I would relieve her -- she
looked up wistfully in my face, and told me she wished me only to forgive. --
Think, my dearest Charles, what must be my feelings, when I found this object
of misery to be no other than my poor unhappy daughter, whom that villain
Glanville had thus basely deserted -- for a while, I fear, I was unable to
yield that assistance as a father, that she would have found from me as a
friend; -- but recovering my tranquillity -- I assured her that all resentments
were lost in her distress; that I had even forgot she had offended me, and that
if she could recover -- "Alas! says she, it is now too late, for I have
languished whole days from want -- without friend -- without money -- and
without that comfort that innocence could have afforded me;" but that to see me
once again was more than her fondest wishes ever formed; nor had she another
hope than by the blessing of a father to look up for the forgiveness of her
God." -- But here I pause, for the scene became too affecting, and I believe I
was carried away from her before death put a period to her distress. -- Fondly
bewailing her untimely fate, I sit by her faded corse, and shed the tender
tribute of unavailing tears -- thinking that I still see her only as asleep --
that I shall again enjoy the sweets of her converse, and that we shall again be
happy -- happy, indeed, we may be in another world, but never more in this --
but I blush to refer myself only to futurity, when on earth I can feel no more
comfort -- Oh! Charles, think not that I mean to vindicate wrong, or that my
fondness gets the better of my principles -- I know her errors, but will not,
with a malicious world, think this the only fault that a woman can never
expiate -- it is not, believe me, an horror at the crime, but the pride of life
that begets these distinctions. Let the cold, the selfish, and the unfriendly
speak rigidly of her offenses, a father could feel only for her distress. --
When this first burst of my grief begins to subside, I shall endeavor to take
some measures for her removal; for at all adventures I resolve to bury her at
Marleston, not with those honors, perhaps, as if adorned with virtue; yet,
nevertheless, with a decency that is due to the unfortunate; and lest "ill
tongues should hereafter be too busy with her fame" I will inscribe something
like the following epitaph upon her tomb -- Stop -- gentle maid -- whoever thou
art;


THE END

