Voyages and Descriptions VOL. II. In Three PARTS, viz. 1. A Supplement of the
Voyage round the World, describing the Countries of Tonquin, Achin, Malacca,
etc. their Product, Inhabitants, Manners, Trade, Policy, etc. 2. Two Voyages to
Campeachy; with a Description of the Coasts, Product, Inhabitants,
Logwood-Cutting, Trade, etc. of Jucatan, Campeachy, New-Spain, 3. A Discourse
of Trade-Winds, Breezes, Storms, Seasons of the ear, Tides and Currents of the
Torrid Zone throughout the World: With an Account of Natal in Africa, its
Product, Negro's, etc.


By Capt. William Dampier.

Illustrated with Particular Maps and Draughts.

To which is Added, A General INDEX to both Volumes

The Third Edition.

LONDON, Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCCV.

To the Right Honorable EDWARD Earl of ORFORD, Viscount Barfleur, Baron of
Shingey, Principal Lord of the Admiralty, Treasurer of His Majesty's Navy, etc.
and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
IT IS in Acknowledgment of the Favors your Lordship has conferred upon me,
that I presume to place your Name before these Papers. The Honorable Person to
whom I dedicated my former Volume could not have taken a more agreeable way to
befriend me, than by recommending me to your Patronage; and I shall always
retain a grateful sense of it: And your Lordship has been pleased to prefer me
in a way suitable to my Genius and Experience; and wherein therefore, if in any
way, I may be able to do something toward the preserving the good Opinion you
have been pleased to entertain of me. It Is a further Satisfaction to me, that
my Employment is of such a Nature as does not alienate me fron your Lordship's
more peculiar Jurisdiction, but places me more immediately under it, and
chiefly accountable to your self. Whatever parts of the World I shall range
into, I shall carry this Comfort along with me, that next under the Providence
of God, and his Majesty's Protection, I shall be so long as I am upon the Seas,
in the Province, and under the Direction of your Lordship and the Honorable
Board: For whose Favors to me in general I have no better way of Expressing my
Gratitude, than by doing it thus to your Lordship, who Presides there. And with
these Sentiments, I am bold to subscribe my self,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Faithful, and Devoted Humble Servant, William
Dampier.

The PREFACE.
IN the Preface to my former Volume, I have accounted for the Design, and
Method, and Style of those Relations of my Travels: What I have more to say of
that kind, is chiefly with reference to what I now offer the Reader. Thus far I
have thought fit to change my Method in this Volume, as to divide it into
distinct Parts, because the Matters it treats of are so different from one
another, in point of Time, or other Circumstances: But still in each Part I
have taken the same course of making several Chapters, that this Volume might
retain some Uniformity with the other.

The First of these is that Account I promised of my Voyages from Achin in
Sumatra, to several Places in the E. Indies; of which I forbore to
particularize in the former Volume, for Reasons there mentioned. I have now
more than discharged my self of that Promise: For I have improved my own
Observations, especially as to Tonquin, by those of some English Gentlemen, who
made a considerable stay in that Kingdom. I am abundantly satisfied my Self of
their Ability and Integrity; the proper Qualifications in things of this
Nature: And could I have obtained their leave, the Reader also should have had
the Satisfaction of knowing to whom he was to ascribe several of those
particulars: However, I have taken frequent Occasions to distinguish in general
what I saw, from what I was informed of. This part is the Supplement of what is
contained in the former Volume; and compleats the Voyage round the World.

The Second Part contains what relates to the Time I spent in the Bay of
Campeachy, either as a Logwood-Cutter, or a Trader to them. This was before I
made my Voyage round the World, as the Reader will perceive: And upon this
Occasion, therefore, I have gone so far back, as to speak of my first entrance
upon this Rambling kind of Life. For the Account it gives of Campeachy, and the
Neighboring parts of Jucatan and New Spain, etc. I refer the Reader to the
Work it self.

The Third Part is an Account of the Winds, and Weather, Storms, Tides, and
Currents of the Torrid Zone, round the World; which may be of Use toward the
Improvement of Navigation, and that part of Natural History. It Is the substance
of what I have remark't or learnt, about Things of that kind, in so long a
course of Roving upon the Seas: And though I have not omitted to speak of these
Matters in the series of my Voyages, as occasion offered, yet I thought it
might not be unacceptable, to put them together in one View also by themselves,
in a Methodical Discourse, ranging the several Particulars under their proper
Heads.

To render these things the more intelligible, I have prefixed peculiar Maps:
One to each of the foregoing Parts; but two to this of the Winds, etc. that the
Variety of Trade-Winds might some way be Pictured, as it were, to the Eye; and
the Reader might be the less liable to be confounded with the Multiplicity of
words, denoting the several Points of the Compass, or other Terms necessary to
the Descriptional part of the Discourse. These Maps contain the Torrid Zone,
and so much toward each Pole as was of Use to my Design: And the Projection
differs in this only from the Common Maps, that in order to show the Atlantic
and South Oceans each in one entire view, the Division of the Hemispheres is
made, not at the first Meridian, (reckoning from Teneriffe,) nor at the 350th,
as is usual also, and as it is in the Globe-Map, prefixed to my first Volume,
but at the 300th; yet still retaining the common Graduation in the Equator,
from that customary Meridian of the Canaries, or C. Verd.

And upon this mention of the Atlantic Sea, there is one thing I would observe
to the Reader, that I use that name not only for the North Sea, as it is called,
but for this whole Ocean, on both sides of the Equator between Europe and
Africa on one hand, and America on the other. If I be questioned for taking
this Liberty, I should think it enough to say, that I wanted a general name for
this whole Ocean, and I could not find one more proper. And yet even as to the
Reason of the thing, if the Discovery of a Sea to the South of the Isthmus of
Darien, or the Mexican Coast, were ground sufficient for the extending the Name
of the South Sea to all that largest Ocean of the World, though it lies West
rather of the whole Continent of America; much more may I be allowed a less
considerable Enlargement of the Name of Atlantic Sea, which others have long
since extended to so great a part of this Ocean, from its Original narrow
Confines, the Neighborhood of Mount Atlas, and the Coasts of Mauritania. I
know that so much of this Ocean as lies South of the R. Niger, went usually by
the Name of the Aethiopick Sea: Yet I cannot learn a sufficient Reason for it:
For though it is true, that the Ancients called all the South parts of Africa to
each Sea, Aethiopia, yet even upon this bottom, the Name of Aethiopick Sea
should have been left common to the Oceans on each side of the Cape of Good
Hope. But if the Name must be appropriated, why to this on the West of Africa?
why not rather to that on its E. Coast? which lies nearer the Inward or more
proper Aethiopia, now the Abissine Empire; and consequently might better be
called Aethiopick Sea. Accordingly I have ventured to call it so, Vol. 1. page
289. making it there the same as the Indian; which I also make to be all the
Ocean from the East Coast of Africa to the remotest of the E. India Islands,
New Holland, and New Guinea: Though this Name also of Indian Sea has been
understood, usually, of narrower bounds. But be that as it will, I was for
using comprehensive Names; and therefore these three Names of Atlantic,
Indian, and South Seas or Oceans, serve me for the whole Ambit of the Torrid
Zone, and what else I have occasion to speak of.

To these three Parts is added a general Index of both Volumes. The first
Volume should not have been published without one, but that was reserved to be
annexed to this; that the Reader might not have the Trouble of turning over 2
Alphabets.

Thus what I designed as an Appendix to the former Volume, is grown to its self
a Volume answerable to the other. And I am sensible there is one part of the
intended Appendix yet behind; viz. The Descriprion of the South Sea Coasts of
America, from the Spanish Pilot Books, etc. I confess I had thoughts of
crowding it into this Volume: But besides the dryness and fatigue of such a
Work, and the small leisure I had for it, I was quite discouraged from
attempting it, when upon a nearer View of the matter I found in those
Descriptions and Charts a repugnance with each other in many particulars; and
some things which from my own Experience I knew to be erroneous. Indeed as they
are they may be very useful to Sailors in those Parts, being generally right
enough in the main: But I was loath to undertake a Work, much of which must have
consisted in correcting Mistakes, and yet have left unaviodable many more to be
rectified. Others may have Time and Helps for this Affair; and future
Discoveries may give greater Light to direct them. To me it shall suffice, that
bating this one particular, I have here endeavored to perform what I had made
the Public expect from me.

The CONTENTS.
PART I. The Supplement of the Voyage round the World.
CHAP. 1. The Author's Voyage from Achin to Malacca and Tonquin. 2. The Natural
State of Tonquin. 3. Of the Natives, their Customs, Religion, Trade, etc. 4. Of
the Government, Kings, Soldiery, and Mandarins. 5. Voyage to Tenan. The A.'s
Journey by Land to Cachao, and Occurrences. 6. His (...) Tonquin, with some
particulars of Cambodia, and Bencouli, and Arrival at Malacca and Achin. 7.
Achin described, its Natural and Political State, Customs, Trade, Civil War,
etc. 8. His Voyage to Malacca again: Malacca described. 9. His Return to Achin;
Voyage to Fort St. George, and thence to Bencouli: Bencouli described.
PART II. The Campeachy Voyages.
Chap. 1. The A,'s First Voyage to Campeachy, and Return. Jucatan, Alcranes,
and T. of Pines described. 2. His Second Voyage. The ^. Coast of Campeachy
described; its Vegetables, Weather, Animals, etc. 3. Logwood-Cutting, Beef
hunting; (...) Occurrences. 4. The W. Coast of Campeachy described; its
Mountain-Cow, Indians, etc. 5. The Coast further W. and products of Campeachy
and New-Spain described. The A.'s return to England.
PART III. A Discourse of Winds, Storms, Seasons, Tides, and Currents in the
Torrid Zone.
Chap. 1. Of the True or General Trade Wind at Sea, Crossing the Line, etc. 2.
Of the Coasting and constant Trade Winds. 3. Of the shifting Trade Winds, and
Monsoons: 4. Of the ordinary Sea and Land Breezes. 5. Of peculiar Breezes, and
Winds of particular effects, Summasenta Winds, Cartagena Breezes, Popogaios,
Tereno's, and Harmatans. 6. Of Storms, Norths, Souths, Hurricanes, Tuffoons,
stormy Monsoons and Elephanta's. 7. Of the Seasons of the Year, Weather, Rains,
and Tornadoes. 8. Of Tides and Currents, Natal described; its Product, Negroes
etc.
map of the Strights of Malacca

Mr. DAMPIER's Voyages.
VOL. II. PART I. His Voyage from Achin in Sumatra, to Tonquin, and other
places in the East Indies.
CHAP. I.
The Connection of this Discourse with the Voyage round the World. The Author's
departure from Achin in the Isle of Sumatra with Captain Weldon. Their Course
along the Streights of Malacca. Pulo Nuttee, and other Islands. The R. and
Kingdom of Jihore. Pulo Oro, and Pulo Timaon: Green Turtle there. Pulo Condore.
Shoals of Pracel, River of Cambodi, Coast of Champa, Pulo Canton.
Cochinchinese, Pulo Champello, R. and City of Quinam. Oil of Porpusses and
Turtle. Shipwrackt Men detained usually at Cochinchina Pegu. Aguala Wood from
the Bay of Siam. Bay of Tonquin. I. of Aynam, and other Islands. Rokbo one
mouth of the chief R. of Tonquin. Fishers I. River of Domea, the other Mouth.
Its Bar and Entrance. Mountain Elephant. Pearl-Islands. Pilots of Batsha. They
go up the River of Domea. Domea and its Gardens, and Dutch there. They leave
their Ships at Anchor above it, where the Natives build a Town. They go up to
the chief City in the Country Boats. The River and the Country about it.
Leprous Beggars. Hean, a Town of note; Chinese there. The Governor, Shipping
and Tide. They arrive at Cachao, the Metropolis of Tonquin.

THE Reader will find upon perusing my Voyage round the World, that I then
omitted to speak particularly of the excursions I made to Tonquin, to Malacca,
Fort St. George, and Bencouli, from Achin in the Isle of Sumatra; together with
the Description I intended to give of those parts. I do but just mention them
there; but shall now proceed to a more distinct account of them.

And to keep to the order of time, the Reader may recollect, that my first
departure from Achin was to Tonquin, along with Captain Weldon, about July
1688. as I have said p. 505th. of my former Volume. I have there related in a
page or two before, to how weak a condition my self and my Companions were
brought, through the fatigues of our passage from Nicobar to Achin: yet did not
my weakness take me off from contriving some employment or expedition, whereby
I might have a comfortable subsistence. Captain Weldon Fort St. George; it
being in his way to the Streights of Malacca, and so to Tonquin, whither he was
bound. This afforded me the opportunity of trying that Voyage, to which he
kindly invited me, and to which I was the more encouraged because he had a good
Surgeon in his Ship, whose Advice I needed: and my friend Mr. Hall was
particularly animated thereby; who had also resolved upon this Voyage, and was
in a weaker condition than my self. Besides, Capt. Weldon promised to buy a
Sloop at Tonquin, of which he would make me Commander, to go a trading Voyage
from thence to Cochinchina, Champa, Cambodia, or some others of the adjacent
Countries: which Trade has been scarce, yet has been attempted by our
Countrymen, and there were hopes it might turn to a good account; but this
project came to nothing.

However, Captain Weldon having finished his business at Achin, I set out
thence with him through the Streights of Malacca, and we soon arrived at the Town
of Malacca: of which Town and Country, I shall have a better occasion to speak
hereafter. Here we found the Caesar of London, commanded by Captain Wright, who
came from Bombay, and was bound to China. He stopped here to water and refresh,
as is usual for Ships to do that pass these Streights. By him we were informed
that three other English Ships had touched here, and were past on to the
Fastward ten days before. These 3 Ships came from Fort St. George, in company
with Captain Weldon: but his business ^alling him to Achin, they in the mean
time pro^ecuting their Voyage, got the start of us thus much. The Caesar was
soon ready to sail again, and went away the next Morning after our arrival at
Malacca.

Tonquin, as were all his Ships company, he hired a Dutch Pilot at Malacca; and
having finished his business there, we set sail, two days after the Caesar. We
were desirous to overtake these four Ships, and therefore crowded all the Sail
we could make; having a strong westerly Wind, accompanied with many hard Gusts
and Tornadoes: and the very next day we got sight of them; for they had not yet
passed through a narrow Passage, called the Streights of Sincapore. We soon got
up with them, and past through together; and sailing about three leagues
farther we anchored near an Island called Pulo Nuttee, belonging to the Kingdom
of Jihore.

Here Captain Weldon took in Wood and Water, and some of the Indian Inhabitans
came aboard us in their Canoas, of whom we bought a few Coconuts, Plantains,
and fresh Fish. We staid here not above 24 hours; for the other Ships had
filled most of their Water at other Islands near this, before we came up with
them: for though Ships do usually take in Water at Malacca Town, yet they do as
frequently discharge it again at some of these Islands, and take in better.

We sailed the next day, and kept near the Malacca shore; and there passing by
the Mouth of the River Jihore, we left many other Islands on our Starboard side.

The River of Jihore runs by the City of that name, which is the seat of the
little Kingdom of Jihore. This Kingdom lies on the Continent of Malacca, and
consists of the extremity or doubling of that Promontory. It abounds with
Pepper, and other goood Commodities.

They are a Mohammedan People, very warlike, and desirous of Trade. They delight
much in Shipping and going to Sea, all the neighboring Sumatra, Java, etc.
their Vessels are but small, yet very serviceable; and the Dutch buy up a great
many of them at a small price, and make good trading Sloops of them. But they
first fit them up after their own fashion, and put a Rudder to them, which the
Jihorians don't use, though they are very good Seamen in their way; but they make
their Vessels sharp at each end, though but one end is used as the Head: and
instead of a Rudder, they have on each side the Stern a thing like a very broad
Oar, one of which they let down into the Water at pleasure, as there is
occasion to steer the Ship either to the one side or the other, always letting
down that which is to the Leeward. They have Proes of a particular neatness and
curiosity. We call them Half Moon Proes, for they turn up so much at each end
from the Water, that they much resemble a Half Moon, with the Horns upwards.
They are kept very clean, sail well, and are much used by them in their Wars.
The People of Jishore have formerly endeavored to get a Commerce with our
Nation. For what reason that trade is neglected by us, I know not. The Dutch
trade very much there; and have lately endeavored to bring the King, who is
very young, to their bow.

At the farther end of the Streights of Malacca, among many other Islands, we
sailed by those of Pulo Oro, and Pulo Timaon: which last is a place often
touched at for wood, water, and other refreshments, though we past by it. Among
other things, there are great plenty of excellent Green Turtle among these
Islands.

Being at length got clear of the Islands into the wide Ocean, we steered away
still together Pulo Condore. when having all brought to, and spoke with each
other, we parted for our several Voyages. The Caesar and two others, that were
bound to China, steered away to the Eastward, keeping to the South of Pulo
Condore; it being their best course, thereby to avoid the large sholes of
Pracel. We and the Sapphire of Fort St Geonge, commanded by Captain Lacy,
steered more Northerly; and leaving Pulo Condore on our Starboard, we hal^d in
for the Continent, and fell in with it near the River of Cambodia. But leaving
this also on our Starboard side, we coasted along to the Eastward, keeping near
the Champa shore, and coming to the point of Land that bounds the S. W. part of
the Bay of Tonquin, we doubled it, and coasting to the North; leaving Champa
still on our Larboard side, and the dangerous shoals of Pracel about 12 or 14
leagues off on our Starboard side, we kept along fair by the shore, just
without Pulo Canton.

This Island lies in about 13 d. North. It is much frequented by the
Cochinchinese, whose Country begins hereabouts, bordering on the Kingdom of
Champa. They are most Fishermen that come hither, and their chief business is
to make Oil of Porpusses; for these Fish are found in great plenty here at some
seasons of the year, and then the Cochinchinese resort hither to take them. The
people that we found on Pulo Condore, mentioned in the 14th Chapter of my
Voyage round the World, page 395, were of these Cochinchinese. The Turtle also
which they catch, is chiefly in order to make Oil of their fat: and there is a
great store of Turtle on all this Coast.

We coasted yet f^rther on this shore, till we came to the Islands of
Champello. These may seem to have some affinity to Champa, by the sound of the
word, which one would take to be a Portugues diminutive of Champa; yet they lie
on the Cochinchina Coast, and belong to it, though uninhabited They are 4 or 5 in
number, and lie 4 or 5 leagues. from the shore. They are called Champella de la
Mar, to distinguish them from others lying farther down in the Bay of Tonquin,
called Champello de Terra. These last lie in about 16 d. 45 m. North, but the
Islands of Champello de la Mar lie in about 13d. 45m. N.

Over against these last Islands, on the Main, there is a large navigable River
empties it self into the Sea. The City of Quinam stands on the banks of this
River, and is said to be the principal City of the Kingdom of Cochinchina. As
to its distance from the Sea, its bigness, strength, riches, etc. I am yet in
the dark: only I have been informed, that if a Ship is cast away on this
Kingdom, the Seamen that escape drowning and get ashore become Slaves to the
King. Captain John Tiler was thus served, and despaired of ever getting his
freedom; but after a considerable stay there he was taken notice of by the
King, and upon promise of returning thither again to trade there, he was sent
away. I sailed in a Vessel of his after this: but I never found him inclined to
Trade thither any more. However, notwithstanding this their severity to
Shipwrackt People, I have beeen informed by Captain Tiler and others, that they
have a desire to Trade, though they are yet destitute of the means to attain it.
This desire of Trade, they seem to have taken up from some Chinese Fugitives,
who fled from the Tartars, when they conquered their Country: and being kindly
received by these Cochinchinese, and having among them many Artificers, they
instructed their kind protectors in many useful Arts, of which they were wholly
ignorant before. It Is probable this their custom of seizing Shipwrackt Seamen
may soon vanish by the coming in of Trade, which is already China do now drive
some small traffic among these people, and fetch thence some small quantities
of Pepper, Lignum Aloes, and Aguala Wood, which is much esteemed for its rare
scent, and is very valuable in other places of India. They also fetch Betle
from hence, it growing here in great plenty. I have had no account of any
Shipping the Cochinchinese have of their own, but I have met with them in their
open Boats of 4, 5, or 6 Tun; employing themselves chiefly in getting Pitch and
Tar from Pulo Condore, in fishing about the Coast and Island to get Oil, and in
fetching Aguala Wood from the Bay of Siam; which, whether it grows there or no,
I cannot tell, but I have heard that it is only Drift-wood cast ashore by the Sea.

The seizing Shipwrackt men has been also a custom at Pegu, but whether still
continued I know not. They looked on such as men preserved by God, purposely for
them to feed and maintain; and therefore the King ordered them to be maintained
by his Subjects; neither was any work required of them, but they had liberty to
beg. By this means they got food and raiment from the Inhabitants, who were
zealously charitable to them.

But to proceed; we kept a little without all the Islands, and coasting 5 or 6
leagues further, we stood right over toward the N. E. Cod of the Bay of
Tonquin. The Bay of Tonquin has its entrance between the S. E. point of Champa
on the West side, which lies in the lat. of about 12 d. North, and the Island
of Aynam near the S. W. part of China, on the East side. The Island of Aynam is
in about 19 d. North. It is a pretty considerable Island, well peopled with
Chinese Inhabitants. They have Ships of their own, and drive Voyage round the
World, page 174.

Near the Cod of the Bay of Tonquin there are abundance of small Islands, of
which I shall speak more hereafter. The mouth of the Bay seems to be barred up
with the great shole of Pracel, which lies stretched at length before it, yet
leaving two wide Channels, one at each end; so that Ships may pass in or out
either way. And therefore even the Ships that are bound from the Streigths of
Malacca or Siam to China, may as well pass to and from within the shole as
without.

The Bay of Tonquin is about 30 leagues wide in the broadest place. There is
good sounding and anchoring all over it: and in the middle, where it is
deepest, there is about 46 fathom water. There you have black Oaze, and dark
Peppery Sand: but on the West side there is reddish Oazy Sand. Beside the other
Islands beforementioned, there are others of less note on the Cochinchina
Coast; but none of them all above 4 or 5 miles from the shore.

In the bottom of the Bay also, there are some small Islands, close by the
Tonquin shore: 2 of these are of especial note, not for their bigness, but for
Sea-marks for the 2 principal Rivers, or Mouth rather of the chief River of
Tonquin. One of these Rivers or Mouths, is called Rokbo. It discharges it self
into the Sea near the the N. W. corner of the Bay: and the mouth of it is in
about 20d. 6m. N. This River or branch I was not at; but have been informed,
that it has not above 12 foot water at the entrance; but that its bottom
Chinese and Siamars do use. About a League to the Westward of this Rivers
mouth, there is a small pretty high Island called Fishers Island. It lies
about 2 mile from the shore, and it has good anchoring about it in 17 or 18
foot water: and therefore it is not only a Sea-mark for the River, but a secure
place to ride in, and very convenient for Ships to anchor at, to shelter
themselves when they come hither, especially if they have not a present
opportunity to enter the River; either because of coming too late in the year,
or being hindered by bad weather.

The other River or Mouth, was that by which we entered; and it is larger and
deeper than the former. I know not its particular name; but for distinction I
shall call it the River of Domea; because the first Town of note, that I saw on
its bank was so called. The mouth of the River is in lat. 20 d. 45 m. It
disembogues 20 leagues to the N. E. of Rokbo. There are many dangerous Sands
and Shoals between these 2 Rivers, which stretch into the Sea 2 leagues or
more: and all the Coast, even from the Cochinchina shore on the West, to China
on the East, admits of Shoals and Sands, which yet in some places lie stretched
farther off from the shore than in others.

This River of Domea is that by which most European Ships enter, for the sake
of its depth: yet here is a Bar of near 2 mile broad, and the Channel is about
half a mile broad, having Sands on each side. The depth of the River is various
at different times and seasons, by the relation of the Pilots who are best
acquainted here: for at some times of the year here is not above 15 or 16 foot
water on a spring tide; and at other times here are 26 or 27 foot. The highest
tides are said to he in the month of November, December, and January, when the
Northerly Monsoons blow; and the lowest in May, June, and July, when the
Southerly Monsoons blow; but to be particular in them is beyond my experience.

The Channel of the Bar is hard Sand, which makes it the more dangerous: and
the Tides whirling among the Sands, set diverse ways in a Tides time; which
makes it the more dangerous still. Therefore Ships that come hither, commonly
wait for a Pilot to direct them, and if they arrive when it is Nepe-tide, they
must stay for a Spring before a Pilot will come off to take charge of them. The
mark of this River is a great high ridgy Mountain in the Country, called the
Elephant. This must be brought to bear N. W. by N: then steering toward the
shore, the water runs shallower, till you come into 6 fathom, and then you will
be 2 or 3 miles from the foot or entrance of the Bar, and about the same
distance from a small Island called Pearl Island; which will then bear nearest
N. N. E. Having these marks and depth, you may anchor, and wait for a Pilot.

The Pilots for this River are Fishermen, who live at a Village called Batsha,
at the mouth of the River; so seated, that they can see all Ships that wait for
a Pilot, and hear the Guns too, that are often fired as signals by Europeans,
to give notice of their arrival.

It was in the road before the Bar, in sight of the Elephant Land, that we
found the Rainbow of London, Captain Pool Commander, riding and waiting for a
Pilot, when we and Captain Lacy arrived. Captain Pool came directly from
England, and passing through the Streights of Sundy, touched at Batavia.

He had lain here 2 or 3 days before we arrived: but the Spring-tides coming
on, the Pilots came

Having run about 5 or 6 leagues up the River, we past by a Village called
Domea. This is a handsome Village: and 'twas the first of note that we saw
standing on the banks. It Is seated on the Starboard side going up, and so nigh
the River, that the tide sometimes washes the walls of the Houses, for the tide
rises and falls here 9 or 10 foot. This Village consists of about 100 Houses.
The Dutch Ships that trade here do always lie in the River before this Town,
and the Dutch Seamen, by their annual returns hither from Batavia, are very
intimate with the Natives, and as free here as at their own homes: for the
Tonquinese in general are a very sociable people, especially the traders and
poorer sort: but of this more in its proper place. The Dutch have instructed
the Natives in the art of Gardening: by which means they have abundance of
Herbage for Sallading; which among other things is a great refreshment to the
Dutch Seamen, when they arrive here.

Though the Dutch who come to trade in this Kingdom, go no higher with their
Ships than this Domea, yet the English usually go about 3 mile farther up, and
there lie at anchor during their stay in this Country. We did so at this time,
and passing by Domea came to an anchor at that distance. The tide is not so
strong here as at Domea; but we found not one house near it: yet our Ships had
not lain their many days before the Natives came from India, especially where
Ships lie long at a place, the poorer sort of Natives taking this opportunity
to truck and barter; and by some little offices, or begging, but especially by
bringing Women to let to hire, they get what they can of the Seamen.

This place where our Ships rode at anchor was not above 20 miles from the Sea:
but the Trade of the Kingdom is driven at Cachao, the principal City; where for
that reason the English and Dutch East India Companies have each of them their
Factors constantly residing. The City was farther up the River, about 80 miles
from our Anchoring place; and our Captains got themselves in a readiness to go
up thither; it being usual to send up the goods in the Country Boats, which are
large and commodious enough; and the hire is pretty reasonable both for the
Vessels, and the Men who manage them. They are Tonquinese, and use both Oars
and Sails. Our Factory at Cachao had news of our arrival before we came to an
anchor, and immediately the chief of the Factory, with some of the King of
Tonquin's Officers, came down to us, by that time we had lain there about 4 or
5 days. The Tonquinese Officers came to take an account of the Ships and
Lading, and our Captains received them with great civility, firing of Guns,
feasting for two or three days, and presents also at their return back to
Cachao.

Soon after their departure, the chief of the Factory returned thither again,
and with him went our three Captains, and some others, among whom I got leave
to go also. Captain Weldon had recommended me to the chief of the Factory,
while he was aboard us: and my going up now to the Cochinchina, Champa, or
Cambodia, which Captain Weldon had contrived for me: nor was it his fault that
it came no nothing.

We went from our Ships in the Country Boats we had hired, with the Tide of
flood, and anchored in the ebb: for the Tide runs strong for 30 or 40 miles
beyond the place where we left our Ships. Our Men contented themselves with
looking after their goods (The Tonquinese being very light-finger'd) and left
the managment of the Boats entirely to the Boats Crew. Their Boats have but one
Mast; and when the Wind is against them they take it down, and ply their Oars.
As we advanced thus up the River, sometimes rowing, sometimes sailing, we had a
delightful prospect over a large level fruitful Country. It was generally
either Pasture or Rice-fields; and void of Trees, except only about the
Villages, which stood thick, and appeared mighty pleasant at a distance. There
are many of these Villages stand close to the Banks of the Rivers, encompassed
with Trees on the backside only, but open to the River.

When we came near any of these Villages, we were commonly encountered with
Beggars, who came off to us in little Boats made of twigs, and plaistered over
both inside and outside with Clay, but very leaky. These were a poor Leprous
People, who for that reason are compelled by the rest to live by themselves,
and are permitted to beg publicly. As soon as they spied us they set up a loud
doleful cry, and as we past by them we threw them out some Rice, which they
received with great appearance of joy.

In about four days time we got to Hean, a Town on the East side of the River;
which is here entire: for a little before we came to Hean we met Domea, which
we came up, and the other of Rokbo: making a large and triangular Island
between them and the Sea; the Mouths of those Channels being, as I have said,
20 leagues asunder.

Hean is about 60 miles from the place where we left our Ships, and about 80
from the Sea that way: But along the River or Channel Rokbo, where the Land
trends more to the Southward, it seems to be farther distant from the Sea. It Is
a considerable Town, of about 2000 Houses: but the Inhabitants are most poor
People and Soldiers, who keep a Garrison there; though it has neither Walls,
Fort, nor great Guns.

Here is one street belonging to the Chinese Merchants. For some years ago a
great many lived at Cachao; till they grew so numerous, that the Natives
themselves were even swallowed up by them. The King taking notice of it,
ordered them to remove from thence, allowing them to live any where but in the
City. But the major part of them presently forsook the Country, as not finding
it convenient for them to live any where but at Cachao; because that is the
only place of Trade in the Country, and Trade is the Life of a Chinese. However
some of them were content to settle at Hean, where they have remained ever
since. And these Merchants, notwithstanding the prohibition, go often to
Cachao, to buy and sell goods; but are not suffered to make it their constant
residence. There were two of these China Merchants who traded yearly to Japan,
with raw and wrought Silks, bringing back Money chiefly. These all of them wore
long Hair braided behind, as their own Country fashion was before the Tartarian
Conquest. The French too have their Factory here, not being allowed to fix at
Cachao, and their Bishops Hean: but of this I shall have occasion to speak more
hereafter.

The Governor of the adjacent Province lives here. He is one of the principal
Mandarins of the Nation, and he has always a great many Soldiers in the Town,
and inferior Officers, whom he employs at his pleasure on any occasion.
Besides, here are also some of the King's River Frigates, which I shall
hereafter describe, ready to be sent on any expedition: and though no Europeans
come up so far as this with their Ships, (that I could learn) yet the Siamites
and Chinese bring their Ships up the River Rokbo, quite to Hean, and lie at
anchor before it: and we found there several Chinese Jonks. They ride a-float
in the middle of the River; for the Water does not rise and fall much at this
place: Neither is the flood discerned by the turning of the stream; for that
always runs down, though not so swift near full Sea as at other times: for the
tide pressing against the stream, though faintly so far up the River, has not
power to turn it, but only slackens its course, and makes the Water rise a
little.

The Governor or his Deputy gives his Chop or Pass to all Vessels that go up or
down; not so much as a Boat being suffered to proceed without it. For which
reason we also made a stop: yet we stayed here but a little while; and
therefore I did not now go ashore; but had a while after this a better
opportunity of seeing Hean.

From Hean we went up to Cachao in our Boats, being about 2 days more on our
Voyage, for we had no tide to help us. We landed at the English Factory, and I
stayed there 7 or 8 days, before I went down to our Ships again in one of the
Country Boats. We had good weather coming up but it rained all the time of this
my first stay a^ Cachao; and we had much wet weather after this

CHAP. II.
Tonquin, its Situation, Soil, Waters, and Provinces. Its natural Produce,
Roots, Herbs, Fruits, and Trees. The Cam-chain and Cam-quit Oranges. Their
Limes, etc. Their Betle and Lichea Fruit. The Pone-tree, Lack-trees,
Mulberry-trees, and Rice. Their Land Animals, Fowl tame and wild; Nets for wild
Ducks, Locusts, Fish, Balachuan, Nukemum-Pickle, Soy, and manner of Fishing.
The Market, Provisions, Food and Cookery. Their Chau or Tea. The Temperature of
their Air and Weather throughout the Year. Of the great Heats near the
Tropicks. Of the yearly Land Floods here, and elsewhere in the Torrid Zone, and
of the overflowing of the Nile in Egypt. Of Storms called Tuffoons: and of the
influence the Rains have on the Harvest at Tonquin, and elsewhere in the Torrid
Zone.

THE Kingdom of Tonquin is bounded to the North and North East with China, to
the West with the Kingdom of Laos, to the S. and E. with Cochinchina and the
Sea, which washes a part of this Kingdom. As to the particular bounds or extent
of it, I cannot be a competent judge, coming to it by Sea, and going up
directly to Cachao: but it is reasonable to believe it to be a pretty large
Kingdom, by the many great Provinces which are said to be contained in it. That
part of the Kingdom, that borders on the Sea, is all Elephant Mountain, and a
Ridge of a much less height continued from thence to the mouth of the River of
Domea. The Land for about 60 miles up in the Country is still very low, even
and plain: nor is it much higher, for about 40 miles farther quite to Cachao,
and beyond it; being without any sensible Hill, though generally of a tolerable
good height, and with some gentle risings here and there, that make it a fine
pleasant Champian; and the further side of this also is more level than the
Champian Country it self about Hean or Cachao. Farther still to the North,
beyond all this, I have been informed that there is a chain of high Mountains,
running cross the Country from East to West; but I could get no intimation of
what is beyond them.

The Soil of this Country is generally very rich; That very low Land I speak of
toward the Sea, is most black Earth, and the mould pretty deep. In some places
there is very strong Clay. The Champian Land is generally yellowish or greyish
earth, of a looser and more friable substance than the former: yet in some
places it has a touch of the Clay too. In the plain Country, near the Mountains
last mentioned, there are said to be some high steep rocks of Marble scattered
up and down at unequal distances, which standing in that large plain Savannah,
are like so many great Towers or Castles: and they appear more visible, because
the Land about them is not burdened with Wood, as in some places in its
neighborhood.

I have said somewhat already of the great River and its 2 branches Rokbo and
Domea, wherewith this Country is chiefly watered: though it is not destitute of
many other pleasant streams, that are lost ^n these, in their course toward
the Sea: and probably there are many others, that run immediately Cachao, which
is about 40 or 50 miles to the South of the Mountains, it is about as broad as
the Thames at Lambeth: yet so shallow in the dry Season, as that it may be
forded on Horseback. At Hean, 20 miles lower, it is rather broader than the
Thames at Gravesend; and so below Hean to the place where it divides it self.

The Kingdom of Tonquin is said to be divided into 8 large Provinces, viz. the
East and West Provinces, the North and South Provinces, and the Province of
Cachao in the middle between those 4: which 5 I take to be the principal
Provinces, making the heart of the Country. The other 3, which are Tenan,
Tenehoa, and Ngeam, lie more upon the Borders.

The Province of Tenan is the most Easterly, having China on the S. E. the
Island Aynam and the Sea on the S. and S. W. and the East Province on the N. W.
This is but a small Province: its chiefest product is Rice.

The East Province stretches away from Tenan to the North Province, having also
China on its East side, part of the South Province, and the Province on Cachao
on the West; and the Sea on the South. This is a very large Province; it is
chiefly low Land and much of it Islands, especially the S. E. part o^ it,
bordering on the Sea toward Tenan; and here the Sea makes the Cod of a Bay. It
has abundanc^ of Fishermen inhabiting near the Sea: but its chie Hean is the
chief place of this Province, and the Seat of the Mandarin its Governor.

The S. Province is the triangular Island, made by Sea: The River of Domea is
on its E. side, dividing it from the East Province, and Rockbo on the West,
dividing it from Tenan; having the Sea to its South. This Province is very low
plain even Land, producing Rice in great abundance: here are large Pastures,
and abundance of Fishermen near the Sea.

Tenehoa to the West of Rokbo, has the West Province on its North, Aynam on its
West, and the Sea on its South: this Province is also low Land, chiefly abounds
in Rice and Cattle, and has a great Trade in Fishing, as all the Sea Coast has
in general.

The Province of Ngeam, has Tenehoa on the East, and on the South and West it
borders on Cochinchina, and has the West Province on its North. This is a
pretty large Province, abounding with Rice and Cattle: and here are always
Soldiers kept to guard the Frontiers from the Cochinchineses.

The West Provinces has Ngeam on the South, the Kingdom of Laos on the West,
the Province of Cachao on the East, and on the North the North Province. This
is a large Province, and good Champion Land; rich in Soil, partly woody, partly
pasture. The product of this Province is chiefly in Lack; and here are bred a
great abundance of Silkworms for making Silk.

The North Province is a large tract of Land, making the North side of this
whole Kingdom. It has the Kingdom of Laos on the West, and China on the East
and North, the Kingdom of Bao or Baotan on the North West, and on the South
borders Tonquin, viz. the West Province that of Cachao, and the East Province.
The North Province, as it is large, so it has variety of Land and Soil; a great
deal of plain Champian Land, and many high Mountains which yield Gold, etc. the
wild Elephants of this Country are found most on these Mountains. The other
parts of the Province produce Lack and Silk, etc.

The Province of Cachao, in the Heart of the Kingdom, lies between the East,
West, North, and South Provinces: it is a Champian pleasant Country: the Soil is
yellow or gray Earth: and it is pretty woody, with some Savannahs. It abounds
with the two principal Commodities of their Trade, viz. Lack and Silk, and has
some Rice: Nor are any of the Provinces destitute of these Commodities, though in
different proportions, each according to the respective Soil.

This Country has of its own growth all necessaries for the Life of Man. They
have little occasion for eatable Roots, having such plenty of Rice; yet they
have Yams and Potatoes for variety; which would thrive here as well as any
where, were the Natives industrious to propagate them.

The Land is every where clothed with Herbage of one kind or other; but the
dry Land has the same Fate that most dry Lands have between the Tropicks, to be
overrun with Purslain; which growing wild, and being pernicious to other
tender Herbs and Plants, they are at the pains to weed it out of their Fields
and Gardens, though it is very sweet, and makes a good Sallad for a hot Country.

There is a sort of Herb very common in this Country, which grows wild in
stagnant Ponds, and floats on the surface of the Water. It has a narrow, long,
green thick Leaf. It is much esteemed

Plantains and Bonanoes grow and thrive here as well as any where, but they are
used here only as Fruit, and not for Bread, as in many places of America.
Besides these here are diverse sorts of excellent Fruits, both Ground-fruit and
Tree fruit. The Ground-fruits are Pumpkins, Melons, Pine-apples, etc. the
Tree-fruits are Mangoes, a few Oranges, Limes, Coco-nuts, Guava's, Mulberries,
their much esteemed Betle, a Fruit called Lichea, etc. The Oranges are of
diverse sorts, and two of them more excellent than the rest. One sort is called
Cam-chain, the other is called Cam-quit. Came, in the Tonquinese Language,
signifies an Orange, but what the distinguishing Words Came and Quit signify I
know not.

The Cam-chain is a large Orange, of a yellowish color: the rind is pretty
thick and rough; and the inside is yellow like Amber. It has a most fragrant
smell, and the taste is very delicious. This sort of Orange is the best that I
did ever taste; I believe there are not better in the World: A Man may eat
freely of them; for they are so innocent that they are not denied to such as
have Fevers, and other sick People.

The Cam-quit is a very small round Fruit, not above half so big as the former.
It is of a deep red color, and the rind is very smooth and thin. The inside
also is very red, the taste is not inferior to the Cam-chain, but it is
accounted very unwholesome Fruit, especially to such as are subject to Fluxes;
for it both creates and heightens that October till February, but then the
Cham-chain becomes redder, and the rind is also thinner. The other sorts of
Oranges are not much esteemed.

The Limes of Tonquin are the largest I ever saw. They are commonly as big as
an ordinary Limon, but rounder. The rind is of a pale yellow color when ripe;
very thin and smooth. They are extraordinary juicy, but not near so sharp or
tart in taste as the West-Indian Limes.

Coco-nnts and Guava's do thrive here very well: but there are not many of the
latter.

The Betle of Tonquin is said to be the best in India; there is great plenty of
it; and it is most esteemed when it is young, green and tender; for it is then
very juicy. At Mindanao also they like it best green: but in other places of
the East Indies it is commonly chewed when it is hard and dry.

The Lichea is another delicate Fruit. It Is as big as a small Pear, somewhat
long shaped, of a reddish color, the rind pretty thick and rough, the inside
white, enclosing a large black kernel, in shape like a Bean.

The Country is in some part woody; but the low Land in general is either
grassy Pasture, or Rice Fields, only thick set with small Groves, which stand
scattering very pleasantly over all the Low Country. The Trees in the Groves
are of diverse sorts, and most unknown to us. There is good Timber for building
either Ships or Houses, and indifferent good Masts may here be had.

There is a Tree called by the Natives Pone, chiefly used for making Cabinets,
or other Wares to be la^kred. This is a soft sort of wood, not much unlike Fir,
but not so serviceable. Another Tree grows in this Country that yields the
Lack, with which Cabinets and other sine things are overlaid. English Merchants
at Hean; and these bare but small hungry Fruit.

Here is good plenty of Rice, especially in the low Land, that is fatned by the
overflowing Rivers. They have two crops every year, with great increase, if
they have seasonable Rains and Floods. One crop is in May, and the other in
November: and though the low Land is sometimes overflown with Water in the time
of Harvest, yet they matter it not, but gather the crop and fetch it home wet
in their Canoas; and making the Rice fast in small bundles, hang it up on their
Houses to dry. This serves them for Bread-corn; and as the Country is very
kindly for it, so their Inhabitants live chiefly of it.

Of Land-Animals in this Country there are Elephants, Horses, Buffaloes,
Bullocks, Goats, Deer, a few Sheep for the King, Hogs, Dogs, Cats, Lizards,
Snakes, Scorpions, Centapees, Toads, Frogs, etc. The Country is so very
populous, that they have but few Deer or wild Game for hunting, unless it be in
the remoter parts of the Kingdom. But they have abundance of Fowls both tame
and wild. The tame Fowls are Cocks and Hens, and Ducks also in great plenty, of
the same sort with ours. The Inhabitants have little Campeachy) and other
smaller Water-fowls. The Duck, Widgeon, and Teal are innumerable: They breed
here in the Months of May, June, and July; then they fly only in couples: but
from October to March you will see over all the low watery Lands great Companies
together: and I have no where seen such large flights, nor such plenty of Game.
They are very shy since the English and Dutch settled here; for now the Natives
as well as they shoot them: but before their arrival the Tonquinese took them
only with Nets, neither is this custom left off yet. The Net that is used for
this Game is made square, and either bigger or less according as they have
occasion. They fix two Poles about 10 or 11 foot high, upright in the Ground,
near the Pond, where the Ducks haunt; and the Net has a head-cord, which is
stretched out straight, made from the top of one Pole to the other; from whence
the lower part of the Net hangs down loose toward the Ground; and when in the
evening they fly toward the Pond, many of them strike against the Net, and are
there entangled.

There is a kind of Locust in Tonquin, in great abundance. This Creature is
about the bigness of the top of a Man's Finger, and as long as the first joint.
It breeds in the Earth, especially in the Banks of Rivers and Ditches in the
low Country. In the months of January and February, which is the season of
taking them, being then only seen, this Creature first comes out of the Earth
in huge

The Rivers and Ponds are stored with diverse sorts of excellent Fish, besides
abundance of Frogs, which they angle for, being highly esteemed by the
Tonquinese. The Sea too contributes much toward the support of poor People, by
yielding plentiful stores of Fish, that swarm on this Coast in their seasons,
and which are commonly preferred before the River Fish. Of these here are
diverse sorts, besides Sea Turtle, which frequently come ashore on the sandy
Bays in their seasons to lay their Eggs. Here are also both Land-crabs and
Sea-crabs good store, and other Shellfish, viz. Craw-fish, Shrimps, and
Prawns. Here is one sort of small Fish much like an Anchovy, both in shape and
size, which is very good pickled. There are other sorts of small Fish, which I
know not the names of. One sort of them comes in great ^hoals near the shore,
and these the Fishermen with their Nets take so plentifully as to load their
Boats with them. Among these they generally take a great many Shrimps in their
Nets, which they ^arry ashore mixed together as they take them, and make
Balachaun with them.

Balachaun is a composition of a strong favor; yet a very delightsom Dish to
the Natives of this Country. To make it, they throw the mixture of Shrimps and
small Fish into a sort of weak pickle made with Salt and Water, and put it into
a tight earthen Vessel or Jar. The pickle being thus weak, it keeps not the
Fish firm and hard, neither is it probably so designed, for the Fish are never
gutted. Therefore in a short time they turn all to a mash in the Vessel; and
when they have lain thus a good while, so that the Fish is reduced to a Pap,
they then draw off the Liquor into fresh Jars, and preserve it for use. The
masht Fish that remains behind is called Balachaun, and the liquor poured off
is called Nuke-mum. The poor People eat the Balachaun with their Rice. It Is
rank scented, yet the taste is not altogether unpleasant; but rather savory,
after one is a little used to it. The Nuke-mum is of a pale brown color,
inclining to gray; and pretty clear. It is also very savory and used as a good
sauce for Fowls, not only by the Natives, but also by many Europeans, who
esteem it equal with Soy. I have been told that Soy is made partly with a fishy
composition, and it seems most likely by the taste: tho a Gentleman of my
acquaintance, who was very intimate with one that sailed often from Tonquin to
Japan, from whence the true Soy comes, told me, that it was made only with
Wheat, and a sort of Beans mixed with Water and Salt.

Their way of Fishing differs little from ours: in the Rivers they take some of
their Fish with Hook and Line, others with Nets of several sorts. At the Mouths
of the Rivers they set Nets against the Stream or Tide. These have two long
Wings opening on each side the Mouth of the Net, to guide the Fish into it;
where passing through a narrow neck, they are caught in a bag at the farther
end.

Batsha particularly it will not, there they supply that defect, with long
slender Canes, which they stick upright near one another in a row: for on both
sides of the River, when the tide runs strong (which is the time that the Fish
are moving) the limber Canes make such a rattling by striking against each
other, that thereby the Fish are scared from thence toward the Mouth of the
Net, in the middle of the stream. Farther up the River, they have Nets made
square like a great sheet. This sort has two long Poles laid across each
other. At this crossing of the Poles a long Rope is fastened; and the Net hangs
down in a bag by its corners from them. To manage it there is a substantial
post, set upright and firm in the River; and the top of it may be 8 or 10 foot
above the water. On the top of this post there is a Mortice made to receive a
long pole, that lies athwart like the Beam of a Balance: to the heavier end of
which they tie the Rope, which holds the Net; and to the other end another Rope
to pull up the Net on occasion. The Fishermen sink it with Stones to the Rivers
bottom, and when they see any Fish come over it, one suddenly pulls the Rope at
the opposite end of the Beam, and heaves Net and Fish out of the Water. They
take a great deal of Fish this way: and sometimes they use Drag-Nets, which go
quite across, and sweep the River.

In the stagnant Ponds, such as the Mandarins have commonly about their Houses,
they go in and trouble the water with their feet, till it is all muddy and
thick: and as the Fish rise to the furface they take what they please with
small Nets, fastened to a hoop, at the end of a pole.

Tonquin one in the week, in a neighborhood of 4 or 5 Villages; and held at
each of them successively in its order: so that the same Village has not the
Market returned to it till 4 or 5 weeks after. These Markets are abundantly
more stored with Rice (as being their chief subsistence, especially of the
poorer sort) than either with Flesh or Fish, yet wants there not for Pork, and
young Pigs good store, Ducks and Hens, plenty of Eggs, Fish great and small,
fresh and salted Balachaun and Nuke-Mum; with all sorts of Roots, Herbs, and
Fruits, even in these Country Markets. But at Cachao, where there are Markets
kept every day, they have besides these, Beef of Bullocks, Buffaloes Flesh,
Goats Flesh, Horse Flesh, Cats and Dogs, (as I have been told) and Locusts.

They dress their food very cleanly, and make savory: for which they have
several ways unknown in Europe; but they have many sorts of dishes, that would
turn the Stomach of a Stranger, which yet they themselves like very well, as
particularly, a dish of raw Pork, which is very cheap and common. This is only
Pork cut and minced very small, fat and lean together; which being afterward
made up in balls, or rolls like Sausages, and pressed very hard together, is then
neatly wrapped up in clean Leaves, and without more ado, served up to the Table.
Raw Beef is another dish, much esteemed at Cachao. When they kill a Bullock
they singe the hair off with Fire, as we singe Bacon-Hogs in England. Then they
open it; and while the Flesh is yet hot, they cut good Collops from off the
lean parts, and put them into a very tart Vinegar, where it remains 3 or 4
hours longer, till it is sufficiently soaked, and then, without more trouble,
they take it out, and eat it with great delight. As for Horseflesh, I know not
whether Galicia in Old Spain; where the Cattle falling down with labor, and
being so poor and tired that they cannot rise, they are slaughtered, and sent
to Market; and I think I never eat worse Beef than at the Groin. The
Horseflesh comes to Market at Cachao very frequently, and is as much esteemed
as Beef. Elephants they eat also; and the Trunk of this Beast is an acceptable
present for a Nobleman, and that too though the Beast dies with Age or Sickness.
For here are but few wild Elephants, and those so shy, that they are not easily
taken. But the King having a great number of tame Elephants, when one of these
dies, it is given to the poor, who presently fetch away the Flesh, but the Trunk
is cut in pieces, and presented to the Mandarins. Dogs and Cats are killed
purposely for the Shambles, and their Flesh is much esteemed by people of the
best fashion, as I have been credibly informed. Great yellow Frogs also are
much admired, especially when they come fresh out of the Pond. They have many
other such choice dishes: and in all the Villages, at any time of the day, be
it Market day or not, there are several to be sold by poor people, who make it
their Trade. The most common sorts of Cookeries, next to boiled Rice, is to
dress little bits of Pork, spitted 5 or 6 of them at once on a small skiver,
and roasted. In the Markets also, and daily in every Village, there are Women
sitting in the Streets, with a Pipkin over a small Fire, full of Chau, as they
call it, a sort of very ordinary Tea, of a reddish brown color, and it is their
ordinary drink.

The Kingdom of Tonquin is in general healthy enough, especially in the dry
season, when also it is very delightsom. For the seasons of the year Tonquin
and all the Countries between the Tropicks, are distinguished into Wet and Dry,
as properly as others are into Winter and Summer: But as the alteration from
Winter to Summer, and vice versa is not made of a sudden, but with the
interchangeable Weather of Spring and Autumn; so also toward the end of the
dry season, there are some gentle showers now and then, that precede the
violent wet months; and again toward the end of these, several fair days that
introduce the dry time. These seasons are generally much alike at the same time
of the year in all places of the Torrid Zone, on the same side of the Equator:
but for 2 or 3 degrees on each side of it, the weather is more mixed and
uncertain, (though inclining to the wet extreme) and is often contrary to that
which is then settled on the same side of the Equator more toward the Tropic.
So that even when the wet season is set in, in the Northern parts of the Torrid
Zone, it may yet be dry weather for 2 or 3 degrees North of the Line: and the
same may be said of the contrary Latitudes and Seasons. This I speak with
respect to the dryness or moisture of Countries in the Torrid Zone: but it may
also hold good of their Heat or Cold, generally: for as to all these qualities
there is a further difference arises from the make or situation of the Land, or
other accidental causes, besides what depends on the respective latitude or
regard to the Sun. Thus the Bay of Campeachy in the West Indies, and that of
Bengal in the East, in much the same latitude, are exceeding hot and moist; and
whether their situation, being very low Countries, and the scarcity and
faintness of the Sea-breezes, as in most Bays, may not contribute hereunto, I
leave others to judge. Yet even as to the Latitudes of these places, lying near
the Tropicks, they are generally upon that account alone more inclined to great
Heats, East and West Indies, that the hottest parts of the World are these near
the Tropicks, especially 3 or 4 Degrees within them; sensibly hotter than under
the Line it self. Many reasons may be assigned for this, beside the accidental
ones from the make of the particular Countries, Tropical Winds, or the like.
For the longest day at the Equator never exceeds 12 Hours, and the Night is
always of the same length: But near the Tropicks the longest day is about 13
hours and an half; and an hour and an half being also taken from the Night,
what with the length of the day, and the shortness of the night, there is a
difference of three hours: which is very considerable. Besides which, at such
places as are about 3 Degrees within the Tropicks, or in the Lat. of 20 Degrees. N.
the Sun comes within 2 or 3 degrees of the Zenith in the beginning of May; and
having past the Zenith, goes not above 2 or 3 degrees beyond it, before it
returns and passes the Zenith once more; and by this means is at least 3
Months within 4 degrees of the Zenith: so that they have the Sun in a manner
over their Heads from the beginning of May, till the latter end of July.
Whereas when the Sun comes under the Line, in March or September, it
immediately posts away to the North or the South, and is not 20 days in passing
from 3 degrees on one side, to 3 degrees on the other side the Line. So that by
his small stay there, the heat cannot be answerable to what it is near the
Tropic, where he so long continues in a manner Vertical at Noon, and is so
much longer above the Horrizon each particular day, with the intervening of a
shorter Night.

But to return to Tonquin. During the wet Months there it is excessive hot,
especially whenever India. And as to the Rains, it has not the least share of
them, though neither altogether the greatest of what I have met with in the
Torrid Zone; and even in the same Latitude, and on the same side of the
Equator. The wet Season begins here the latter end of April, or the beginning
of May; and holds till the latter end of August, in which time are very violent
Rains, some of many hours, others of two or three Days continuance. Yet are not
these Rains without some considerable intervals of fair Weather, especially
toward the beginning or end of the Season.

By these Rains are caused those Land-floods, which never fail in these
Countries between the Tropicks at their annual Periods; all the Rivers then
overflowing their Banks. This is a thing so well known to all who are any way
acquainted with the Torrid Zone, that the cause of the overflowing of the Nile,
to find out which the Ancients set their Wits so much upon the Rack, and
fancied melting of Snows, and blowing of Etesi^, and I know not what, is now no
longer a secret. For these Floods must needs discharge themselves upon such low
Lands as lie in their way; as the Land of Egypt does with respect to the Nile,
coming a great way from within the Torrid Zone, and falling down from the
higher Ethiopia. And any one who will be at the pains to compare the time of
the Land-flood in Egypt with that of the Torrid Zone in any of the parts of it
along which the Nile runs will find that of Egypt so much later than the other,
as 'twill be thought reasonable to allow for the daily progress of the Waters
along so vast a trac Nile being the only great River known to come thither a
great way from a Country near the Line, they made that only the subject of
their enquiry: but the same effect must also follow from any great River that
should run from out of the Torrid Zone into the South Temperate Zone. And as to
the Torrid Zone, the yearly Floods, and their cause, are every where as well
known by People there, as the Rivers themselves. In America particularly, in
Campeachy Rivers, in Rio Grande, and others, it is a vast havoc is made by
these Floods; bringing down sometimes Trees of an incredible bigness; and these
floods always come at the stated season of the Year. In the dry part of Peru,
along the Coasts of Pacifick Sea, where it never rains, as it seldom does in
Egypt, they have not only Floods, but Rivers themselves, made by the annual
falling of Rain on the Mountains within Land; the Channels of which are dry all
the rest of the year. This I have observed concerning the River Ylo, on the
Coast of Peru, in my former Volume, p. 95. But it has this difference from the
Floods of Egypt, that besides its being a River in the Torrid Zone, it is also
in South Latitude, and so overflows at a contrary season of the Year; to wit,
at such time as the Sun being in Southern Signs, causes the Rains and Floods on
that side the Line.

But to eeturn from this digression, in August the weather at Tonquin is more
moderate, as to heat or wet, yet not without some showers, and September and
October are more temperate still: yet the worst weather in all the year for
Seamen, is in one of the 3 Months last mentioned: for then the violent Storms,
called Tuffoons, (Typhones) are expected. Chinese that trade thither, will not
stir out of Harbor till the end of October: after which Month there is no more
danger of any violent Storms, till the next year.

Tuffoons are a particular kind of violent Storms, blowing on the Coast of
Tonquin, and the neighboring Coasts in the Months of July, August, and
September. They commonly happen near the full or change of the Moon, and are
usually preceded by very fair weather, small Winds and a clear Sky. Those small
Winds ^er^ from the common Trade of that time of the year, which is here at S.
W. and shuff^es about to the N. and N. E. Before the Storm comes there appears
a boding Cloud in the N. E. which is very black near the Horizon, but toward
the upper edge it looks of a dark Copper color, and higher still it is
brighter, and afterward it fades to a whitish glaring color, at the very edge
of the Cloud. This Cloud appears very amazing and ghastly, and is sometimes
seen 12 Hours before the Storm comes. When that Cloud begins to move apace, you
may expect the Wind presently. It comes on fierce, and blows very violent at N.
E. 12 Hours more or less. It is also commonly accompanied with terrible claps
of Thunder, large and frequent flashes of Lightning, and excessive hard Rain.
When the Wind begins to aba^e it dies away suddenly, and falling slat calm it
continues so an hour, more or less: then the wind comes about to the S. W. and
it blows and rains as fierce from thence, as it did before at N. E. and as long.

November and December are 2 very dry, wholesome, warm and pleasant months.
January, February, and March are pretty dry: but then you have thick fogs in
the morning, and sometimes drisling cold rains: the air also in these 3 months,
particularly in January and February is very sharp, especially April is counted
a moderate month, either as to heat or cold, dryness or moisture.

This is ordinarily the state of their year: yet are not these various Seasons
so exact in the returns, but that there may sometimes be the difference of a
month, or more. Neither yet are the several Seasons, when they do come,
altogether alike in all years. For sometimes the Rains are more violent and
lasting, at other times more moderate; and some years they are not sufficient
to produce reasonable Crops, or else they come so unseasonably as to injure and
destroy the Rice, or at least to advance it but little. For the Husbandry of
this Country, and other Countries in the Torrid Zone depends on the Annual
Floods, to moisten and fatten the Land, and if the wet seasons prove more dry
than ordinary, so as that the Rice-Land is not well dranched with the
overflowing of the Rivers, the Crops will be but mean: and Rice being their
Bread, the staff of Life with them, if that fails, such a populous Country as
this cannot subsist without being beholding to its Neighbors. But when it
comes to that pass, that they must be supplied by Sea, many of the poorer sort
sell their Children to relieve their wants, and so preserve their Lives, whilst
others that have not Children to sell, may be famished and dye miserable in the
Streets. This manner of Parents dealing with their Children is not peculiar to
this Kingdom alone, but is customary in other places of the East Indies,
especially on the Coasts of Malabar and Coromandel. There a famine happens more
frequently, and rages sometimes to a degree beyond belief: for those Countries
Tonquin. Neither are they such large Rivers to fatten the Land: but all their
Crop depends on Seasons of Rains only, to moisten the earth: and when those
seasons fail, as they do very often, then they can have no Crop at all.
Sometimes they have little or no rain in three or fore years, and then they
perish at a lamentable rate. Such a Famine as this happened 2 or 3 years before
my going to Fort St. George, which raged so sore, that thousands of people
perished for want, and happy were they that could hold out till they got to the
Seaport Towns, where the Europeans lived, to sell themselves to them, though
they were sure to be transported from their own Country presently. But the
famine does never rage so much at Tonquin, neither may their greatest scarcity
be so truly called a famine: for in the worst of times there is Rice, and it is
through the poverty of the meaner people, that so many perish or sell their
Children, for they might else have Rice enough, had they money to buy it with:
and when their Rice is thus dear, all other provisions are so proportionably.

There is a further difference between the Countries of Malabar and Coromandel,
and this of Tonquin, that the more Rain they have there, the greater is their
blessing: but here they may have too much rain for the lower part of the
Kingdom; but that is rare. When this happens they have Banks to keep in the
Rivers, and Ditches to drain the Land; though sometimes to little purpose, when
the floods are violent, and especially if out of season. For if the floods come
in their seasons, though they are great, and drown all the Land, yet are they not
hurtful; but on the contrary, very beneficial, because the mud that they leave
behind fattens the Land. And after all, if the low Land

CHAP. III.
Of the Natives of Tonquin: Their Form, Disposition, Capacity, Clothes,
Buildings, Villages, Groves, Banks, Ditches, and Gardens. Of Cachao, the
Capital City. Ovens to secure goods from Fire; and other precautions against
it. The Streets of the City, the Kings Palaces, and English and Dutch
Factories. An Artificial Mole above the City, to break the force of the
Land-floods. Of their Wives and Common Women. Feasts at the Graves of the Dead,
and Annual Feasts: their entertaining with Betle and Arek, etc. Their Religion,
Idols, Pagods, Priests, Offerings, and Prayers. Their Language and Learning.
Their Mechanic Arts, Trades, Manufactures, Commodities and Traffic.

TOnquin is very populous, being thick set with Villages; and the Natives in
general are of a middle stature, and clean limbed. They are of a Tawny Indian
color: but I think the fairest and clearest that I ever saw of that
Complexion: for you may perceive a blush or change of color in some of their
faces, on any sudden surprise of passion; which I could never discern in any
other Indians. Their faces are generally flattish, and of an oval form. Their
noses and lips are proportionable enough, and altogether graceful. Their hair
is black, long and lank, and very thick; and they wear it hanging down to their
shoulders.



They are generally dextrous, nimble, and active; and ingenious in any
Mechannick Science they profess. This may be seen by the multitude of fine
Silks that are made here; and the curious Lackerwork, that is yearly
transported from thence. They are also laborious and diligent in their
Callings; but the Country being so very populous, many of them are extreme poor
for want of employment: and though the Country is full of Silk, and other
materials to work on, yet little is done, but when strange Ships arrive. For
it is the Money and goods that are brought hither, especially by the English and
Dutch, that puts life into them: for the Handicrafts men have not Money to set
themselves to work; and the Foreign Merchants are therefore forced to trust
them with advancemoney, to the value of at least a third, or half their goods;
and this for 2 or 3 months or more, before they have made their Goods, and
brought them in. So that they having no Goods ready by them, till they have
Money from the Merchant strangers, the Ships that trade hither must of
necessity

The Tonquinese make very good Servants; I think the best in India. For as they
are generally apprehensive and do^il, so are they faithful when hired, diligent
and obedient. Yet they are low spirited: probably by reason of their living
under an Arbitrary Government. They are patient in labor, but in sickness they
are mightily dejected. They have one great fault extreme common among them,
which is gaming. To this they are so universally addicted, Servants and all,
that neither the awe of their Masters, nor any thing else, is sufficient to
restrain them, till they have lost all they have, even their very Clothes. This
is a reigning Vice among the Eastern Nations, especially the Chinese, as I said
in the 15th Chaper of my former Volume. And I may add, that the Chinese I found
settled at Tonquin, were no less given to it than those I met with elsewhere.
For after they have lost their Money, Goods and Clothes, they will stake down
their Wives and Children: and lastly, as the dearest thing they have, will play
upon tick, and mortgage their Hair upon honor: And whatever it cost 'em they
will be sure to redeem it. For a free Chinese, as these are, who have fled from
the Tartars, would be as much ashamed of short Hair, as a Tonquinese of white
Teeth.

The Clothes of the Tonquinese are made either of Silk or Cotton. The poor
people and Soldiers do chiefly were Cotton Cloth died to a dark tawny color.
The rich men and Mandarins commonly were English Broad-cloath: the chief
colors are red or green. When they appear before the King, they wear long
Gowns which reach down to their heels: neither may any man appear in his
presence but in such a garb. The great men have also long Caps made of the same
that their Gowns

The Tonquinese buildings are but mean. Their Houses are small and low: the
Walls are either Mud, or Watle bedawbed over: and the Roofs are thatched, and
that very ill, especially in the Country. The Houses are too low to admit of
Chambers: yet they have here 2 or 3 partitions on the ground floor, made with a
watling of Canes or Sticks, for their several uses; in each of which there is a
Window to let in the light. The Windows are only small square holes in the
Walls, which they shut up at night with a Board, fitted for that purpose. The
Rooms are but meanly furnished; with a poor Bed or two (or more, according to
the bigness of the family) in the inner Room. The outer Rooms are furnished
with Stools, Benches, or Chairs to sit on. There is also a Table, and on one
side a little Altar, with two Incense-pots on it; nor is any House without its
Altar. One of these Incense-pots has a small bundle of Rushes in it; the ends
of which I always took notice had been burnt, and the fire put out. This outer
Room is the place where they commonly dress their food: yet in fair weather
they do it

They dwell not in lone houses, but together in Villages: it is rare to see a
single house by it self. The Country Villages commonly consist of 20, 30, or 40
houses, and are thick seated over all the Country; yet hardly to be be seen
till you come to their very doors, by reason of the Trees and Groves they are
surrounded with. And it is as rare to see a Grove without a Village, in the low
Country near the Sea, as to see a Village without a Grove: but the high Lands
are full of Woods, and the Villages there stand all as in one great Forest. The
Villages and Land about them do most belong to great men, and the Inhabitants
are Tenants that manure and cultivate the ground.

The Villages in the low Land are also surrounded with great banks and deep
ditches. These incompass the whole Grove, in which each Village stands.

The banks are to keep the water from overflowing their gardens, and from
coming into their houses in the wet time, when all the Land about them is under
water, 2 or 3 foot deep. The ditches or trenches are to preserve the water in
the dry time, with which they water their gardens when need requires. Every man
lets water at pleasure, by little drains that run inward from the Townditch,
into his own garden; and usually each man's yard or garden is parted from his
neighbors by one of these little drains on each side. The houses lie
scattering up and down in the Grove; no where joining to one another, but each
apart, and fenced in with a small hedge. Every house has a small gate or style
to enter into the garden first, for the house stands in the middle of it: and
the gardens runs also from the backside of the house

The Capital City Cachao, which stands in the high Country about 80 Miles from
the Sea, on the West side of the River, and on a pretty level, yet rising
Ground, lies open in the same manner, without wall, bank, or ditch. There may
be in Cachao about 20000 Houses. The Houses are generally low, the walls of the
Houses are of mud, and the covering Thatch, yet some are built with Brick, and
the covering with Pan-tile. Most of these Houses have a Yard, or Backside
belonging to them. In each Yard, you shall see a small arched building made
somewhat like an Oven, about six foot high, with the Mouth on the Ground. It is
built from top to bottom with brick, all over daubed thick with mud and dirt.
If any House wants a yard, they have nevertheless such a kind of Oven as this,
but

As every private Person has this contrivance, to secure his own Goods, when a
Fire happens, so the Government has carefully ordered necessary means to be
used for the preventing of Fire, or extinguishing it before it gets too great a
Head. For in the beginning of the dry Season every Man must keep a great Jar of
Water, on the top of his House, to be ready to pour down, as occasion shall
serve. Besides this, he is to keep a long Pole, with a Basket or Bowl at the
end of it, to throw Water out of the Kennels upon the Houses. But if the Fire
gets to such a head, that both these expedients fail, then they cut the Straps
that hold the Thatch of the Houses, and let it drop from the Rafters to the
Ground. This is done with little trouble; for the Thatch is not laid on as
ours, neither is it tied on by single Leaves, as in the West Indies, and many
parts of the East Indies, where they Thatch with Palmeto or Palm Tree Leaves:
but this is made up in Panes of 7 or 8 foot square, before it is laid on; so
that 4 or 6 Panes, more or less, according to the bigness of the House, will
cover one side of it: and these Panes being only fastened in a few places to the
Rafters with Rattans, they are easily cut, and down drops half the covering at
once. These Panes are also better than loose Thatch, as being more managable,
in case any of them should fall on or near the Oven where the Goods are, for
they are easily dragged off to another

The principal Streets in this City are very wide, though some are but narrow.
They are most of them paved, or pitched rather, with small Stones; but after a
very ill manner. In the wet Season they are very dirty; and in the dry time
there are many stagnant Ponds, and some Ditches full of black stinking Mud, in
and about the City. This makes it unpleasant, and a Man would think unwholesome
too: yet it is healthy enough, as far as I perceived, or could ever learn.

The Kings of Tonquin, who make this City their constant Residence, have two or
three Palaces in it, such as they be. Two of them are very mean; they are built
with Timber, yet have they many great Guns planted in Houses near them, Stables
for the Kings Elephants and Horses, and pretty large square spots of Ground for
the Soldiers to draw themselves up regularly before him. The Third Palace is
called the Palace Royal. It is more magnificently built than the other two: yet
built also with Timber, but all open as the Divans in Turkey are said to be. The
Wall that incompasseth it is most remarkable. It is said to be 3 leagues in
circumference. The height of this Wall is about 15 or 16 foot, and almost as
many Boua or Emperor goes in or comes out. There are two smaller Gates
adjoining to it, one on each side, which are opened on all occasions, for any
concerned there to pass in and out; but Strangers are not permitted this
liberty. Yet they may ascend to the top of the Wall, and walk round it, there
being Stairs at the Gate to go up by: and in some places the Walls are fallen
down.

Within this Wall there are large Fish Ponds, where also there are
Pleasure-Boats for the Emperor's diversion. I shall defer speaking of him,
whose Prison this is, rather than Court, till the next Chapter, where I shall
discourse of the Government.

The House of the English Factory, who are very few, is pleasantly seated on
the North end of the City, fronting to the River. It Is a pretty handsome
low-built House; the best that I saw in the City. There is a handsome
Dining Room in the middle, and at each end convenient Apartments for the
Merchants, Factors, and Servants belonging to the Company to live in, with
other conveniences. This House stands parallel with the River; and at each end
of it there are smaller Houses for other uses, as Kitchen, Storehouses, etc.
running in a Line from the great House toward the River, making two Wings, and
a square Court open to the River. In this square space, near the Banks of the
River, there stands a Flag Staff, purposely for the hoysing up the English
Colors on all occasions: for it is the custom of our Countrymen aboard, to let
fly their Colors on Sundays, and all other remarkable Days.

Dutch Factory joins to the English Factory on the South side: I was never in
it, and therefore can say nothing of it, but what I have heard, that their
ground is not so large as ours, though they are the longest standers here by many
years: for the English are but newly removed hither from Hean, where they
resided altogether before.

There is nothing more in or about the City worth noting, but only a piece of
Work on the same side, up the River. This is a massy Frame of Timber,
ingeniously put together, and very artificially placed on great Piles, that are
set upright in the River, just by its Banks. The Piles are driven firmly into
the Ground, close one by another: and all the space between them and the Bank
is filled up with Stones, and on them great Trees laid across, and pinned fast
at each end to the Piles: so that the whole Fabric must be moved before any
part of it will yield. This piece of work is raised about 16 or 17 foot above
the Water in the dry time: but in the wet Season the Floods come within 2 or 3
foot of the top. It was made to resist the violence of the Water in the rainy
season: for the Stream then presses so hard against this place, that before
this Pile was built, it broke down the Bank, and threatened to carry all before
it, even to the ruining of the City, if this course had not timely been taken
to prevent it. And so much the rather, because there is a large Pond just
within Land, and low Ground between it and the City: So that had it made but a
small breach into the Pond, it would have come even to the Skirts of the City.
And though the City stands so high as that the Land-floods never reach it, yet
the Land on which it stands being a sort of yielding Sand, could not be thought
capable of always resisting such violence. For the natural Floods do very often
make great changes in the River, breaking down

But to return to the People. They are courteous and civil to Strangers,
especially the trading People: But the great Men are Proud, Haughty and
Ambitious; and the Soldiers very insolent. The poorer sort are very Thievish;
insomuch that the Factors and Strangers that traffic hither are forced to keep
good Watch in the Night to secure their Goods, notwithstanding the severe
Punishments they have against Thieves. They have indeed great Opportunities of
Thieving, the Houses being so slightly built: But they will work a way under
Ground, rather than fail; and use many subtle Stratagems. I am a Stranger to
any Ceremonies used by them in Marriage, or at the Birth of a Child, or the
like, if they use any: Polygamy is allowed of in this Country, and they buy
their Wives of the Parents. The King and great Men keep several, as their
Inclinations lead them, and their Ability serves. The Poor are stinted for want
of means more than desire: For though many are not able to buy, much less to
maintain one Wife; yet most of them make a shift to get one, for here are some
very low prized ones, that are glad to take up with poor Husbands. But then in
hard times, the Man must sell both Wife and Children, to buy Rice to maintain
himself. Yet this is not so common here as in some Places; as I before observed
of the Malabar and Coromandel Coasts. This custom among them of buying Wives,
easily degenerates into that other of hiring Misses, and gives great liberty to
the young Women, who offer themselves of then Lascars, who are Moors of India,
coming hither in Vessels from Fort St. George, and other places; who yet have
nothing to give them, but such Fragments of Food, as their Commons will afford.
Even the great Men of Tonquin will offer their Daughters to the Merchants and
Officers, though their stay is not likely to be above 5 or 6 Months in the
Country: neither are they afraid to be with Child by White Men, for their
Children will be much fairer than their Mothers, and consequently of greater
repute, when they grow up, if they be Girls. Nor is it any great charge to
breed them here: and at the worst, if their Mothers are not able to maintain
them, it is but selling them when they are young. But to return, the Women who
thus let themselves to hire, if they have been so frugal as to save what they
have got by these loose Amors, they soon procure Husbands, that will love and
esteem them well enough: and themselves also will prove afterward obedient and
faithful Wives. For it is said, that even while they are with Strangers, they
are very faithful to them; especially to such as remain long in the Country, or
make annual returns hither, as the Dutch generally do. Many of these have
gotten good Estates by their Tonquin Ladies; and that chiefly by trusting them
with Money and Goods. For in this poor Country it is a great advantage to watch
the Market; and these female Merchants having stocks will mightily improve
them, taking their opportunities of buying raw Silk in the dead time of the
Year. With this they will employ the poor People, when work is scarce; and get
it cheaper and better done, than when Ships are here: for then every man being
employed Pagally.

When a Man dies he is interred in his own Land, for here are no common
Burying-places: And within a Month afterward the Friends of the deceased,
especially if he was the Master of the Family, must make a great Feast of Flesh
and Fruit at the Grave. It Is a thing belonging to the Priests Office to assist
at this solemnity; they are always there, and take care to see that the Friends
of the deceased have it duly performed. To make this Feast they are obliged to
sell a piece of Land, though they have Money enough otherways: Which Money they
bestow in such things as are necessary for the Solemnity, which is more or
less, according to the quality of the deceased. If he was a great Man, there is
a Tower of Wood erected over the Grave; it may be 7 or 8 Foot square, and built
20 or 25 foot high. About 20 yards from the Tower, are little Sheds built with
Stalls, to lay the Provisions on, both of Meat and Fruits of all sorts, and
that in great plenty. Thither the Country People resort to fill their Bellies,
for the Feast seems to be free for all Comers, at least of the Neighborhood.
How it is dressed or distributed about, I know not; but there the People wait
till it is ready. Then the Priest gets within the Tower, and climbs up to the
top, and looking out from thence, makes an Oration to the People below. After
this the Priest descends, and then they set Fire to the Foundation of the
Tower, burn it down to the Ground: and when this is done they fall to their
Meat. I saw one of these Grave-Feasts, which I shall have elsewhere occasion to
mention.

Tonquinese have two Annual Feasts. The chief is at the first New Mood of the
New-Year; and their New-Year begins with the first New Mood that falls out
after the middle of January, for else that Moon is reckoned to the Old Year. At
this time they make merry and rejoice 10 or 12 days, and then there is no
business done, but every Man makes himself as fine as may be, especially the
common sort. These spend their time in gaming or sporting, and you shall see
the Streets full of People, both Citizens and Country Folks, gazing at several
diverting Exercises. Some set up Swings in the Streets, and get Money of those
that will swing in them. The Frames are contrived like ours in the Fields about
London in Holiday times: but they who swing stand upright in the lower part of
the Swing, which is only a stick standing on each end, being fastened to a
pendulous Rope, which they hold fast with their hands on each side; and they
raise themselves to such a prodigious height, that if the Swing should break
they must needs break their Limbs at best, if not kill themselves outright.
Others spend their time in drinking. Their ordinary Drink is Tea: but they make
themselves merry with hot Rack, which sometimes also they mix with their Tea.
Either way it has an odd nasty taste, but is very strong: and is therefore
much esteemed by them: especially at this time, when they so much devote
themselves to Mirth, or Madness, or even bestial Drunkenness. The richer sort
are more reserved: yet they will also be very merry at this time. The Nobles
treat their friends with good Cheer and the best Rack; but indeed there is none
good in this Country. Yet such as they have they esteem as a great Cordial;
especially when Snakes and Scorpions have been infused therein, as I have been
informed. This is not only accounted a great Cordial, but an Antitode against
the Leprosy, and

The Betle Leaf is the great entertainment in the East for all Visitants; and
it is always given with the Arek solded up in it. They make up the Arek in
pellets sit for use, by first peeling off the outer green hard rind of the
Nuts, and then splitting it length-ways in 3 or 4 parts, more or less,
according to its bigness. Then they dawb the Leaf all over with Chinam or Lime
made into a Mortar or Paste, and kept in a Box for this purpose, spreading it
thin.

And here by the way I shall take notice of a slip in the former Volume, p.
318. which I desire may be corrected: the Nut being there by mistake called the
Betle, and the Arek-tree called the Betle-tree, whereas Betle is the name of
the Leaf they chew. In this Leaf thus spread with Chinam, they roll up a slice
of Arek Nut, very neatly, and make a pellet of about an Inch long, and as big
as the top of ones finger. Every man here has a Box that will hold a great many
of these pellets, in which they keep a store ready made up: for all persons, of
what quality soever, from the Prince to the Beggar, chew abundance of it. The
poorer sort carry a small pouchful about with them: But the Mandarius, or great
men, have curious oval Boxes, made purposely for this use, that will hold 50 or
60 Betle Pellets. These Boxes are neatly lackered and gilded, both inside or
outside, with a cover to take off; and if any stranger visits them, especially
Europeans, they are sure, among other good entertainment, to be treated with a
Box of Betle. The Attendant that brings it holds it to the left India to the
viler uses.

It is accounted good breeding to commend the taste or neatness of this
present; and they all love to be flattered. You thereby extremely please the
Master of the House, and engage him to be your friend: and afterward you may
be sure he will not fail to send his Servant with a present of Betle once in
two or three mornings, with a complement to know how you do. This will cost you
a small gratuity to the Servant, who joyfully acquaints his Master how
gratefully you received the Present: and this still engages him more; and he
will complement you with great respect whenever he meets you. I was invited to
one of these New Years Feasts by one of the Country, and accordingly went
ashore, as many other Seamen did upon like invitations. I know not what
entertainment they had; but mine was like to be but mean, and therefore I
presently left it. The staple Dish was Rice, which I have said before is the
common food: Besides which, my friend, that he might the better entertain me
and his others Guests, had been in the morning a fishing in a Pond not far from
his house, and had caught a huge mess of Frogs, and with great joy brought them
home as soon as I came to his house. I wondered to see him turn out so many of
these creatures into a Basket; and asking him what they were for? he told me,
to eat: but how he dressed them I know not; I did not like his Dainties so well
as to stay and dine with him.

The other great Feast they have, is after their May-crop is housed, about the
beginning of June. At this Feast also they have public Rejoicing; but much
inferior to those of their New Years Feast.



There are other Images also, that are in the shape of Beasts, either Elephants
or Horses, for I have not seen them in any other shape. The Pagodas or Idol
Temples, are not sumptuous and magnificent, as in some of the Neighboring
Kingdoms. Pagodas: but in the Country some of them are thatched. I saw the
Horse and Elephant Idols only in the Country: and indeed I saw none of the
Idols in the City Cachao, but was told they were generally in humane shapes.

The Horse and Elephant Images I saw, were both sorts about the bigness and
height of a good Horse, each standing in the midst of a little Temple, just big
enough to contain them, with their heads toward the door: and sometimes one,
sometimes two together in a Temple, which was always open. There were up and
down in the Country other buildings, such as Pagodas, or Temples, Tombs, or the
like, less than these; and not above the height of a man: but these were
always shut so close, that I could not see what was within them.

There were many Pagan Priests belonging to these Pagodas, and it is reported
that they are by the Laws tied to strict rules of Living, as abstinence from
Women, and strong drink especially, and enjoined a poor sort of Life. Yet they
don't seem to confine themselves much to these Rules: but their subsistence
being chiefly from Offerings, and there being many of them, they are usually
very poor. The Offerings to the Priest is commonly 2 or ^ handfuls of Rice, a
box of Betle, or some such like present. One thing the people resort to them
for is Fortune-telling, at which they pretend to be very expert, and will be
much offended if any dispute their skill in that, or the truth of their
Religion. Their Habitations are very little and mean, close by the Pagodas,
where they constantly attend to offer the petitions of the poor people, that
frequently resort thither on some such errand. For they have no set times of
Devotion, neither do they seem to esteem one day above another, except

I think the Mandarins and rich people seldom come to the Pagodas, but have a
Clerk of their own, who reads the Petition in their own Courts or Yards: and it
should seem by this, that the Mandarins have a better sense of the Deity, than
the common People; for in these Yards, there is no Idol, before whom to perform
the Ceremony, but it is done with Eyes lift up to Heaven. When they make this
Petition they order a great deal of good meat to be dressed, and calling all
their Servants into the Court, where the Ceremony is to be persormed, they
place the food on a Table, where also 2 Incense-pots are placed, and then the
Mandarin presents a paper to the Clerk, who reads it with an audible voice. In
the first place there is drawn up an ample account of all that God has blessed
him withal, as Health, Riches, Honor, Favor of his Prince, etc. and long
Life, if he be old; and toward the conclusion, there is a Petition to God for
a continuance of all these blessings, and a farther augmentation of them;
especially with long life and favor of his Prince, which last they esteem as
the greatest of all Blessings. While this paper is reading the Master kneels
down, and bows his face down to the Earth: and when the Clerk has done reading
it, he puts it to the burning rushes, that are in the Incense-pot, where it is
consumed. Then he flings in ^ or 4 little bundles of sacred paper, which is
very fine and gilded; and when that also is burnt, he bids his Servans eat the
Meat. This Relation I had from an English Gentlemen, who understood the
Language very well, and was present at such a Ceremony. This burning of paper
seems a great Custom Chinese, in a Sacrifice they had at Bencouli.

The Tonquinese Language is spoken very much through the throat, but many words
of it are pronounced through the teeth. It has a great affinity to the Chinese
Language, especially the Fokein dialect, as I have been informed: and though
their words are differently pronounced, yet they can understand each others
writings, the characters and words being so near the same. The Court Language
especially is very near the Chinese; for the Courtiers being all Scholars, they
speak more elegantly; and it differs very much from the vulgar corrupted
Language. But for the Malayan Tongue, which Monsieur Tavernier's Brother in his
History of Tonquin says is the Court Language, I never could hear by any person
that it is spoken there, tho I have made particular inquiry about it; neither
can I be of his opinion in that matter. For the Tonquinese have no manner of
Trade with any Malayans that I could observe or learn, neither have any of
their neighbors: and for what other grounds the Tonquinese should receive that
language I know not. It is not probable that either Conquest, Trade or Religion
could bring it in; nor do they travel toward Malacca, but toward China; and
commonly it is from one of these causes that Men learn the language of another
Nation. The remarkable smoothness of that Language, I confess, might excite
some people to learn it out of curiosity: but the Tonquinese are not so curious.

They have Schools of Learning and Nurseries to tutor youth. The Characters
they write in are the same with the Chinese, by what I could judge; and they
write with a hair Pencil, not sitting at a Table, as we do, but stand upright.
They hold their Paper in one hand, and write with the other: Tonquin, or
brought to them from China.

Since the Jesuits came into these parts, some of them have improved themselves
in Astronomy pretty much. They know from them the Revolution of the Planets:
they also learn of them natural Philosophy, and especially Ethic^s: and when
young Students are admitted to make Graduates, they pass through a very strict
examination. They compose something by way of trial, which they must be careful
to have wholly their own, for if it is found out that they have been assisted,
they are punished, degraded, and never admitted to a second examination.

The Tonquinese have learnt several Mechanic Arts and Trades, so that here are
many Tradesmen, viz. Smiths, Carpenters, Sawyers, Joyners, Turners, Weavers,
Tailors, Potters, Painters, Moneychangers, Paper-makers, Workers on Lacker were
Bell-founders, etc. Their Saws are most in frames. and drawn forwards and
backwards by two men. Money-changing is a great Profession here. It is managed
by Women, who are very dextrous and ripe in this employment. They hold their
Cabals in the night, and know how to raise their Cash as well as the cunningest
Stock-jobber in London.

Tonquinese make indifferent good Paper, of two sorts. One sort is made of
Silk, the other of the rinds of Trees. This being pounded well with wooden
Pestles in large Troughs, make the best writing Paper.

The vendible Commodities of this Kingdom, are Gold, Musk, Silks, both wrought
and raw, some Callicoes, Drugs of many sorts, Wood for Dying, Lacker Wares,
Earhen-Wares, Salt, Anniseed, Wormseed, etc. There is much Gold in this
Country: It is like the China Gold, as pure as that of Japan, and much finer.
Eleven or twelve Tale of Silver brings one of Gold. A Tale is the Name of a
Sum about a Noble English. Besides, the raw Silk fetched from hence, here are
several sorts of wrought Silks made for Exportation, viz. Pelongs, Sues,
Hawkins, Piniasco's, and Gaws. The Pelongs and Gaws, are of each sort either
plain or flowered very neatly. They make several other sorts of Silk, but these
are the principal that are bought by the English or Dutch.

The Lakerd Ware that is made here, is not inferior to any but that of Japan
only, which is esteemed the best in the World; probably because the Japan Wood
is much better than this at Tonquin, for there seems not any considerable
difference in the Paint or Varnish. The Lack of Tonquin is a sort of gummy
Juice, which drains out of the Bodies or Limbs of Trees. It is gotten in such
quantities by the Country People, that they daily bring it in great Tubs to the
Markets at Cachao to sell, especially all the working Season. The natural
color is white, and in substance thick like Cream: but the Air will change its
color, and make it look blackish: And therefore the Country People that bring
it to Town, cover it over with 2 or 3 sheets of Paper, or Leaves, to preserve
it in its fresh native color The Cabinets, Desks, or any sort of Europeans
make: and in laying on the Lack upon good or fine joined work they frequently
spoil the joints, edges, or corners of Drawers of Cabinets: Besides, our
fashions of Utensils differ mightily from theirs, and for that reason Captain
Pool, in his second Voyage to the Country, brought an ingenious Joyner with him
to make fashionable Commodities to be lackered here, as also Deal-boards, which
are much better than the Pone-wood of this Country.

The Workhouses where the Lacker is laid on, are accounted very unwholesome,
by reason of a poisonous quality, said to be in the Lack, which fumes into the
Brains through the Nostrils of those that work at it, making them break out in
Botches and Biles; yet the scent is not strong, nor the smell unsavory. The
Laborers at this Trade can work only in the dry Season, or when the drying
North Winds blow: for as they lay several Coats of Lack, one on another, so
these must all have time to be thoroughly dry, before an outer Coat can be laid
on the former. It grows blackish of it self, when exposed to the Air; but the
Color is heightened by Oil and other ingredients mixed with it. When the outside
Coat is dry, they polish it to bring it to a gloss. This is done chiefly by
often rubbing it with the ball or palm of their Hands. They can make the Lack
of any color, and temper it so as to make therewith good Glue, said to be the
best in the World: It is also very cheap, and prohibited Exportation. They make
Varnish also with the Lack.

Here is also Turpentine in good plenty, and very cheap. Our Captain bought a
considerable quantity for the Ships use: and of this the Carpenter

The Earthen Ware of this Country is course and of a gray Color, yet they make
great quantities of small Earthen Dishes, that will hold half a Pint or more.
They are broader toward the brim than at the bottom, so that they may be
stowed within one another. They have been sold by Europeans, in many of the
Malayan Countries, and for that reason Capt. Pool in his first Voyage bought
the best part of 100000, in hopes to sell them in his return homeward at
Batavia, but not finding a Market for them there, he carried them to Bencouli
on the Island Sumatra, where he sold them at a great profit to Governor Bloom:
And he also sold most of them at good Advantage to the Native Malayans there:
yet some thousands were still at the Fort when I came thither, the Country
being glutted with them. Capt. Weldon also bought 30 or 40000, and carried them
to Fort St. George, but how he disposed of them I know not. The China Wares
which are much finer, have of late spoiled the sale of this Commodity in most
places: Yet at Rackan in the Bay of Bengall, they are still esteemed, and sell
at a good rate.

The several sorts of Drugs bought and sold here, are beyond my Knowledge: but
here is China root, Galingame, Rhubarb, Ginger, etc. Neither do I know whether
any of these grow in this Country, for they are mostly imported from their
Neighbors; though as to the Ginger, I think it grows here. Here is also a sort
of Fruit or Berry said to grow on small Bushes, called by the Dutch, Annise,
because its s^^nt and taste is strong like that of the Anniseed. This Commodity
is only exported hence by the Dutch, who carry it to Batavia, and there ^^stil
it among their Arack, togive it an Anniseed b^vour. This sort of Arack is not
sit to make Dutch chiefly, who instead of Brandy, will swallow large doses of
it, though it be strong: but it is also much used and esteemed all over the
East Indies.

There is one sort of Dying-wood in this Country much like the Campeachy
Log-wood, though whether the same, or Wood of greater value, I know not. I have
heard that it is called Sappan Wood; and that it comes from Siam. It was smaller
than what we usually cut in the Bay of Campeachy; for the biggest stick that I
saw here was no bigger than my Leg, and most of it much smaller, and crooked.
They have other sort of Dies; but I can give no account of them. They dye
several Colors here, but I have been told they are not lasting. They have many
sorts of good tall Timber Trees in this Country, fit for any sorts of building:
but by relation none very durable. For Masting the Fir and Pone-trees are the
best. Here is much Wormseed, but it grows not in this Kingdom. It is brought
from within the Land, from the Kingdom of Boutan, or from the Province of
Yunam, bordering on this Kingdom, yet belonging to China. From thence comes the
Musk and Rhubard; and these three Commodities are said to be peculiar to Boutan
and Yunam. The Musk grows in the Cods of Goats. The same Countries yield Gold
also, and supply this Country with it: for whatever Gold Mines the Tonquinese
are said to have in their own Mountains, yet they do not work upon them.

With all these rich Commodities, one would expect the People to be rich; but
the generality an very poor, considering what a Trade is driven here For they
have little or no Trade by Sea them selves, except for Eatables, as Rice, and
Fill Chinese, English, Dutch, and other Merchant Strangers, who either reside
here constantly, or make their annual Returns hither. These export their
Commodities, and import such as are vendible here. The Goods imported hither
besides Silver, are Saltpeter, Sulphur, English Broad-cloath, Cloathrashes,
some Callicoes, Pepper and other Spices, Lead, great Guns, etc. but of Guns the
long Saker is most esteemed. For these Commodities you receive Money or Goods,
according to contract: but the Country is so very poor, that, as I formerly
observed, the Merchant commonly stays 3 or 4 Months for his Goods, after he has
paid for them; because the Poor are not employed till Ships arrive in the
Country, and then they are set to work by the Money that is brought thither in
them. The King buys great Guns, and some pieces of Broad-cloath: but his pay is
so bad, that Merchants care not to deal with him, could they avoid it. But the
Trading People by all accounts are honest and just: That I heard a Man say, who
had traded there ten Years, in which time he dealt for many thousands of
pounds, that he did not in all that time lose 10 l. by them all.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Government of Tonquin. The 2 Kings Boua and Choua; the Revolt of the
Cochinchinese, and Original of the present Constitution at Tonquin. Of the
Boua's confinement, and the Choua's or ruling Kings Person and Government; and
the Treasure, Elephants and Artillery. Their manner of making Gunpowder. Of
the Soldiers, their Arms, Employment, etc. Of the Naval Force, their fine
Galleys and Management of them. The Watch kept in their Towns, their Justice
and punishing of Debtors, and Criminals of all sorts. Of the Eunuch Mandarins:
Their Promotion and Dispositions. Of their swearing upon a draught of Hens
Blood: and the Trial by bitter Waters in Guinea. Of the Mandarins
Entertainments: The Chop-sticks used at Meals; and their kindness to Strangers.

THis Kingdom is an absolute Monarchy, but of such a kind as is not in the
World again; for if has two Kings, and each supreme in his particular way: The
one is called Boua, the other Choua; which last Name I have been told signifies
Masier. The Boua and his Ancestors were the sole Monarchs of Tonquin; though I
know not whether as independent Sovereigns, or as Tributaries to China, of
which they have been thought to have been a ^ro^tier Pro^ince, if not a Colony:
for there is a great (...) between them in their Language.

The Boua's, or ancient Kings of Tonquin, were formerly Masters of Cochinchina,
and kept that Nation in subjection by an Army of Tonquinese constantly kept
there, under a General or Deputy, who ruled them. When Cochinchina threw off
the Tonquinese Yoke, the King had two great Generals, one in Cochinchina, and
another in Tonquin it self. These two Generals differing, he who was in
Cochinchina revolted from his Sovereign of Tonquin, and by his Power over the
Army there, made himself King of Cochinchina: since which these two Nations
have always been at Wars; yet each Nation of late is rather on the defensive
part than on the offensive. But when the General who commanded in Cochinchina
had been thus successful in his Revolt from under the Boua, the Tonquinese
General took the Courage to do so too; and having gained the Affections of his
Army, deprived the King, his Master, of all the Regal Power, and kept it with
all the Revenues of the Crown in his own Hands: yet leaving the other the Title
of King; probably, because of the great zeal the People had for that Family.
And thus the Kingdom came wholly into the Power of this Tonquinese General, and
his Heirs, who carry the Title of Choua; the Boua's of the Ancient Family
having only the shadow of that Authority they were formerly Masters of. The
Boua lives the Life of a kind of a Prisoner of State, within the old Palace,
with his Women and Children; and diverts himself in Boats among his Fish Ponds
Tonquinese, and seemingly by the Choua also; who never offers any violence to
him, but treats him with all imaginable respect. The People say they have no
King but Boua; and seem to have sad apprehensions of the loss they should have,
if he should dye without an Heir: and whenever the Choua comes into his
prefence, which is 2 or 3 times in the year, he uses abundance of Compliments
to him, and tells him, that his very Life is at his service, and that he
governs and rules wholly to do him a kindness: and always gives him the upper
hand. So also when any Ambassadors are sent from the Emperor of China, they
will deliver their Message to none but the Boua, and have their Audience of
him. Yet after all this Pageantry, the Boua has only a few Servants to attend
him, none of the Mandarins make their Court to him, nor is he allowed any
Guards: All the Magistracy and Soldiery, Treasure, and the ordering of all
Matters of Peace or War, are entirely at the Choua's disposal; all preferment
is from him, and the very Servants who attend the Boua, are such only as the
Choua places about him. Besides these Servants, none are ever suffered to see
the Boua, much less Strangers: So that I could learn nothing as to his Person.
But as to the Choua, I have been informed that he is an angry, ill-natured,
leprous Person. He lives in the second Palace, where he has ten or twelve
Wives; but what Children I know not. He governs with absolute Authority over
the Subjects, and with great tyranny: for their Lives, Goods, and Estates are
at his Command. The Province of Tenehoa is said to have belonged properly to
his Ancestors, who were great Mandarins before the usurpation So that he now
^^e^s to have a particular value

The Choua has always a strong guard of Soldiers about his Palace, and many
large Stables for his Horses and Elephants. The Horses are about 13 or 14 hands
high, and are kept very fat: there are 2 or 300 of them. The Elephants are kept
in long Stables by themselves, each having a peculiar room or partition, with a
Keeper to dress and feed him. The number of the King's Elephants are about 150
or 200. They are watered and washed every day in the River.

Some of the Elephants are very gentle and governable, others are more indocil
and unruly. When these rude ones are to pass through the Streets, though only to
be watered, the Rider or Dresser orders a Gong or Drum to be beaten before him,
to warn People that an unruly Elephant is coming; and they presently clear the
Streets and give a passage for the Beast; who will do mischief to any that are
in the way, and their Riders or Keepers cannot restrain him.

Before the Choua's Palace, there is a large parade, or square place for the
Soldiers to be drawn up. On one side there is a place for the Mandarins to sit,
and see the Soldiers exercise, on the other side there is a shed, wherein all
the Cannon and heavy Guns are lodged. There may be 50 or 60 Iron Guns from
Falcon to Demy-Culverin, 2 or 3 whole Culverin or Demi-Cannon, and some old
Iron Mortars lying on logs. The Guns are mounted on their Carriages, but the
Carriages of these Guns are old and very ill made. There is one English, to put
it into the Carriage; where it now stands more for a show them service. But tho
this is but an ordinary piece of workmanship, yet the Tonquinese understand how
to run Metals, and are very expert in tempering the Earth, wherewith they make
their mould.

These are all the great Guns, that I saw or heard of in this Kingdom, neither
are here any Forts, yet the King keeps always a great many Solders. It Is said
that he has always 70 or 80000 constantly in pay. These are most Foot, they are
armed with Curtans or Sword, and Hand-Guns of 3 foot and an half or 4 foot in
the Barrel. The bore is about the bigness of our Horse Pistols, they are all
Matchlocks, and they are very thick and heavy. The Soldiers do all make their
own Powder. They have little Engines for mixing the ingredients, and make as
small a quantity as they please. They know not how to corn it, and therefore it
is in unequal lumps, some as big as the top of a man's Thumb, and some no bigger
than a white Pea: neither have I seen any Powder well corn'd, that has been
made in any of these Eastern Nations.

The Soldiers have each a Cartage Box covered with leather, after the manner of
the West-Indian Privateers: but instead of Paper Cartages, these are filled
with small hollow Canes, each containing a load or charge of Powder; which they
empty out of the Cane into the Gun; so that each Box has in it, as it were, so
many Bandeleers. Their Arms are kept

The Soldiers when they march are led by an Officer, who is leader of the File:
and every File consists of 10 men: but as I have been informed by one who has
seen them march, they don't keep their ranks in marching. The Soldiers are most
of them lusty strong well made men: for it is that chiefly recommends them to
the Kings service. They must also have good Stomachs, for that is a greater
recommendation than the former; neither can any man be entertained as a
Soldier, that has not a greater stroke than ordinary at eating: for by this
they judge of his strength and constitution. For which reason, when a Soldier
comes to be listed, his Stomach is first proved with Rice, the common
subsistence of the ordinary People in this Kingdom: and according as he acquits
himself in this first trial of his manhood, so he is either discharged or
entertained in the service. It Is reported, that at these Trials they commonly
eat 8 or 9 cups of Rice, each containing a pint, and they are ever afterward
esteemed and advanced, according to the first days service: and the greatest
eaters are chiefly employed as guards to the King, and commonly attend on his
person. The Province of Ngean breeds the lustiest men, and the best eaters: for
that reason those of that Province are generally employed as Soldiers. After 30
years service a Soldier may petition to be disbanded; and then the Village
where he was born must send another Man to serve in his room.

Moors and Turks. Both these and the Foot Soldiers are very dexterous in using
their weapons, and shoot very well either with Gun or Bow; for they are often
exercised by shooting at Marks. The King orders a shooting match once a year,
and rewards the best marks-man with a fine Coat, or about 1000 Cash, as it is
called, which is a sum above the value of a Dollar. The mark is a white
earthen Cup, placed against a Bank. The distance they stand to fire at it is
about 80 yards. He who breaks the first Cup has the finest Coat; for there are
others also of less worth and finery for the rest, that have the good fortune
to break the other Cups, or Cash in lieu of them. This is all at the Kings
charge, who incourages this exercise very much, as a means to make them good
Marks-men; and they generally prove such. They will load and fire the quickest
of any People. They draw the Rammer at one motion, and pouring down the Powder
and Bullet, they ram all down at one motion more. Then they withdraw the
Rammer, and put it into its place, at 2 motions more. All the 4 motions are
performed very dexterously and quick: and when they shoot at a mark, they
level, and fire at first sight, yet very successfully.

Though the King of Tonquin has no Forts, yet he keeps always a great many
Soldiers in the Frontier Towns of his Kingdom; especially on the S. W. part
thereof, to check the Cochinchinese, his implacable Enemies: and though there
seldom happens a pitched Battle between them, yet there are often Skirmishings,
which keep the Soldiers on each side upon their guards: and sometimes there are
considerable excursions made by one or other party into the Enemies
Territories, where they Cachao, ready on all occasions. The dry season is the
time for his Armies to take the Field, or go against an Enemy: for in these
Countries there is no marching in the Wet season. When he sends an Army by Land
on any expedition, the General, and other great Officers are mounted on
Elephants. These have neat little boarded Houses or Castles fastened on their
backs, where the great men sit in state, secured from the Sun or Rain. They
have no Fieldpieces in their Armies, but instead thereof they carry on men's
backs Guns that will carry a four ounce Shot. The barrels of these Guns are
about 6 or 7 foot long: but though one man carries one of them on his back, yet
he cannot hold it out to fire, like small Guns, but rests it on its Carriage,
which is another Man's burden, and they two manage it between them. The
Carriage is only a round piece of Wood, about 4 inches thick, and 6 or 7 foot
long. One end of the Carriage is supported with two Legs, or a Fork of three
foot high, the other rests on the ground. The Gun is placed on the top, where
there is an Iron Socket for the Gun to rest in, and a Swivel to turn the Muzzel
any way. From the britch of the Gun there is a short stock, for the man who
fires the Gun to traverse it withal, and to rest it against his shoulder. The
use of these Guns is to clear a Pass, or to fire over the Rivers, when the
Enemy is so commodiously placed, that there is no other way to move him; and
they are carried by these two men almost with as much ease as Muskets. In these
Land-expeditions they carry but little Baggage, besides their necessary Arms,
Ammunition, and Provender: so that if they are routed they lightly scamper
away; and generally

Besides the Soldiers on the Frontiers, and those who attend the King about
Cachao, he has many others that keep guards in several parts of his Kingdom,
especially in the great Roads, and on the Rivers. These search all exported
goods, to see that no prohibited goods are sent out of the Kingdom, especially
Arms: and no prohibited goods brought in. They also look after the Custom, and
see that all goods have paid, before they may pass further. All Travelers are
also searched by them, and strictly examined; and if any persons are taken only
on suspicion, they are used very severely, till they can clear themselves: so
that no disaffected or rebellious person can stir, without being presently
known; and this renders the King very safe in his Government.

The Kings Naval-force consists only in a sort of flat bottom Galleys, and
these seemingly designed more for State than service, except to transport
Soldiers from one place to another. These Vessels are 50, 60, or 70 foot long,
and about 10 or 12 foot broad in the waste; and the 2 ends near as many foot
high out of the water, especially the hinderpart or Stern: but the waste or
middle of the Vessel is not above 2 foot and an half from the water, that being
the place, by which all the men go in and out. from thence toward each end, it
is gently and very artificially raised, to a considerable height, so that the
whole fabric appears very graceful and pleasant, as it moves on the water. The
head or forepart is not altogether so high as the Stern, neither is there so
much cost bestowed on it for ornament: for though it wants neither carved work or
painting, yet it is not comparable to that of the Stern, which has great variety
of carving and is curiously lacker'd and gilded. The place

The Soldiers are always the men that row, and they are all naked, except that
they have a narrow piece of black Cloth like a Sash about their Wastes, which
is brought between their Thighs, and tuckt again under their Waste. Every one
stands upright behind his Oar, which lies in its ^otch on the Gunnal, and he
thrusts or pushes it forward with a great strength; and they plunge their Oars
all at one instant into the Water, keeping exact time with each other: and that
they may the better do this, there is one that strikes on a small Gong, or a
wooden Instrument, before every stroke of the Oar. Then the Rowers all at once
answer with a sort of a hollow noise, through the Throat, and a stamp on the
Deck with one foot, and immediately plunge their Oars into the Water. Thus the
Gong and the Rowers alternately answer each other, making a sound that seems
very pleasent and warlike to those who are at a small distance on the Water or
Shore.



The Soldiers in these Vessels are equipt with Bows, Swords, and Lances, and
when many of them are sent on any expedition, they are divided into Squadrons.
They are distinguished by their several Flags of different colors; as appeared
by an expedition they made up the River, against some of their Northern
Neighbors, while we were there. There were then about 60 of these Galleys sent
out up the River; and they had from 16 to 40 Soldiers in each, all well armed.
Their General was called Ungee Comei, who was a great Mandarin, and was the
person appointed by the King to inspect into our English Traffic; being made
director or protector of the English Factory, who used to speak of him as a
generous man. There were two more great Officers under him, each in a Vessel by
himself. These three had Flags of distinction: the first was yellow, the second
blue, the third red or green. They went away from Cachao toward the Mountains,
but did not return while we were there: but since we came from thence, I have
been informed that the expedition proved fruitless, and that the General Ungee
Comei was much disgraced.



Some of the Soldiers are employed also in keeping Watch and Ward, for the
security of private Men, as well as in the King's business: and the Tonquinese
are observed to keep good orders in the Night in all Towns and Villages; but
more particularly in the great Cities, and especially at Cachao. There every
Street is guarded with a strong Watch, as well to keep silence, as to hinder
any disorder. The Watchmen are armed with Staves, and stand in the Street by
the Watch-houses, to examine every one that passes by. There is also a Rope
stretched cross the Street breast high, and no Man may pass this place, till he
is examined, unless he will venture to be soundly banged by the Watch. These
Men can handle their Weapon so well, that if they design mischief, they will
dexterously break a Leg or Thigh Bone, that being the place which they commonly
strike at. There is a pair of Stocks by every Watch-house, to secure Night
Ramblers in: but for a small piece of Money a Man may pass quiet enough, and
for the

But notwithstanding these Abuses, they have one Custom in the Administering
Justice, that is pleasing enough. For if a difference or quarrel at any time
happens between 2 mean Men, and they are not to be reconciled without going
before a Magistrate, he usually considering their Poverty, lays no heavy mulct
on the Offender, but injoins him this as his penalty, that he shall treat the
injured Person with a Jarr of Arack, and a Fowl, or a small Porker, that so
feasting together, they may both drown all animosity in good Liquor, and renew
their Friendship.

But if it be a Controversy about a Debt, they take a very different Method.
For the Debtors are many times ordered to be Prisoners in their Creditors
houses, where they are beaten, or kept with a log of Wood made fast to their
Legs, to hinder them from running away. These poor Prisoners eat nothing but
Rice and drink Water, and are tyranically insulted over by their rigid
Creditors, till the Debt is satisfied. Their Corporal Punishments upon
Malefactors, and some times upon others are very severe. Some an laden with
Iron Chains fastened to their (...) with logs also like the Debtors, but now
mentioned Others have their Necks enclosed between 2 grea

There is another sort of punishing Instrument not unlike this, called a Gongo.
This also is made to wear about the Neck, but is shaped like a Ladder. The
sides of it are 2 large Bamboes, of about 10 or 12 foot long, with several such
rounds or sticks as Ladders have to keep the sides asunder; but much shorter:
for the 2 side Bamboes are no farther asunder, than to admit of a narrow room
for the Neck; and the 2 rounds in the middle are much at the same distance from
each other, on each side the Neck, forming a little Square: through which the Man
looks as if he were carrying a Ladder on his Shoulders, with his Head through the
rounds. If either of these Yokes were to be taken off in a short time, as in 6,
9, or 12 hours, it would be no great matter: but to wear one of them a Month,
2, 3, or longer, as I have been informed they sometimes do, seems to be a very
severe punishment. Yet it is some comfort to some, that they have the Liberty to
walk abroad where they will: but others are both yoked and imprisoned: and the
Prisoners in public Prisons are used worse than a Man would use a Dog, they
being half starved and soundly beaten to boot.

They have a particular punishment for such as are suspected to fire Houses, or
who are thought to have occasioned the Fire through their neglect. The Master
of the House, where the Fire first breaks out, will hardly clear himself from
suspicion, and the severity of the Law. The punishment in this case is to sit
in a Chair of 12 or 14 foot high, bare-headed, 3 whole days successively in the
hot scorching Sun: this Chair is set, for his greater disgrace, before the
place where his House stood.



They have no Courts of Judicature, but any single Magistrate issues out his
Warrants for the apprehending of Malefactors, and upon taking them immediately
tries them: and as the Sentence is final, and without appeal, so it is no sooner
past, but it is executed also without more ado. Their punishment in capital
crimes is usually beheading. The Criminal is carried immediately from the
Magistrates House to his own: for there is no common place of Execution, but
the Malefactor suffers near his own House, or where the fact was committed.
There he is placed sitting on the Ground, with his Body upright, and his Legs
stretched out: and the Executioner being provided with a large Curtane or
Backsword, and striking a full back blow on the Neck, at one stroke he severs
the Head from the Body; the Head commonly tumbling down into the owners lap,
and the Trunk falling backward on the Ground.

Theft is not thought worthy of Death, but is punished with cutting off some
Member, or part of a Member, according to the degree of the offense. For
sometimes only one joint of a Finger

The Magistrates and other great Men of this Kingdom are called Mandarins. Most
of them in Office about the King are Eunuchs, and not only gelded, but also
their Members cut quite off quite flat to their Bellies. These, as I have been
informed, are all very learned Men after their way, especially in the Laws of
the Country. They rise gradually by their merit or favor, from one degree to
another, as well they who are employed in Civil as in Military Affairs: And
scarce place of trust or profit goes beside them. No Man is permitted to walk
familiarly about the King's Palace without the leave of the Eunuch Mandarins;
and for this Reason having such free access to the King themselves, and
excluding whom they will, they engross his favor. This is taken so much to
Heart by some, that through envy and discontent, they often pine away, as is
commonly said, even to Death: And I heard of such an one, who was called Ungee
Thuan Ding: Ungee seems a Title of Honor among them. He was a Man of great
Learning in the Laws, extremely Politic, and mighty high Spirited. This Man
sought all the means imaginable to be preferred, but could not for want of
being an Eunuch. He fretted to see his Inferiors raised: but plainly seeing
that there was no rising without removing that objection, he one day in a rage
took up a sharp Knife, and qualified himself effectually. He had a Wife and 6
or 8 Children, who were all in great fear of his Life: but ^he was not at all
dismayed, though in that condition; and the King advanced him. He was living when
I was there, and was a great Mandarin. He had the care of the Armory and
Artillery, being great Master of the King's Ordnance.

Mandarin also, one Ungee Hane, who finding himself baffled by the Eunuchs, was
forced to make himself one to be upon the level with them. This Gentleman, it
seems, was Lord of a Village or two, where both he and his Tenants were often
plagued with the domineering Eunuchs, and having born their Malice for some
time, and seeing no end of it, he agreed with an expert Gelder to castrate him:
For here are many in this Country, who profess this Art, and are so expert at
it, that they will undertake to cut a Man of any Age, for so many thousand Cash
as the Man is Years old. It Is reported, that they first put the Patient into a
Sleep: But how long they are curing hm after the Operation is over, I know not.
I heard of but three Mandarins of any grandeur in the Government, who were not
Eunuchs. One was the Governor of the East Province, whose Daughter was married
to a Prince of the Royal Family. The other two, who were Governors of Cachao,
were also married Men, and had Children, and one of these married the Kings
Daughter. All the Mandarins rule with absolute Power and Authority in their
several Precincts, yet in great Obedience to the King; who is as absolute over
them, as they are over the Common People.

These Eunuch Mandarins especially live in great State. Many of these have
command of the Soldiery, and have Guards attending them at their own Houses:
There being a certain number of Soldiers allowed to attend on each Mandarin,
according to his Quality. They are generally covetous beyond measure, and very
malicious. Some of them are Governors of Provinces, but all are raised to
Places of trustand profit.

Once every Year the Mandarins receive an Oath of Allegiance to the King, from
all the principal Gold Coast of Guinea; where when Men or Women are taxed for a
Crime, be it of what Nature it will, but especially Adultery, and the matter
cannot be proved by Evidence, the Fetissero or Priest, decides the difference,
by giving a Potion of bitter Water, to the Person accused: which if they refuse
to take, they are supposed to be guilty without farther proof: but if they
drink it off, the event is said to be, that if the Persons be guilty, this
Water immediately swells their bodies till they burst; but if innocent, they
are not hurt thereby. What tricks the Fetissero's may play in compounding this
Water, I know not: but this kind of Trial is frequent among them, and seems to
be a remainder of the old Jewish Trial by the Waters of jealousy, spoken of in
the 5th. Chapter of Numbers. I am not sufficiently informed whether the Event
of the Trial, be such as it was among the Jews; but it seems they have a strong
persuasion of it: and a guilty Person does ordinarily so dread the being
brought to this Trial, that for the most part he or she choose rather to suffer
the punishment of the Country, which is to be sold to Europeans as Slaves. This
potion is called Bitterwater, and it is given by way of Trial upon any light
suspicion even of a small injury. This account I have had from several, who
have been in Guinea, but especially from Mr. Canby

But to return to the Eunuch Mandarins, though they are bitter Enemies to those
whom they take Tonquineers in general are very free to their Visitants,
treating them with the best cheer they are able to procure.

In their entertainments, and at their ordinary eating, instead of Forks and
Spoons, they use two small round sticks about the length and bigness of a
Tobacco Pipe. They hold them both in the right Hand, one between the fore
Finger and Thumb; the other between the middle Finger and the fore Finger, as
our Boys do their Snappers. They use them very dexterously, taking up the
smallest grain of Rice with them; nor is it accounted mannerly to touch the
Food after it is dressed, with their Hands: And though it be difficult for
strangers to use them, being unaccustomed to them, yet a little use will
overcome that difficulty; and Persons that reside here ought to learn this, as
well as other customs of the Country, that are Innocent, that so their Company
may be more acceptable. All the Tonquineses keep many of these Sticks in their
Houses, as well for their own use, as to entertain Strangers at Meals: They are
as ordinarily placed at the Table here, as Knives Forks, and Spoons are in
England: And a Man that cannot dexterously handle these Instruments, makes but
an odd figure at their Tables. The richer sort of People especially the
Mandarins, have them tipped with Silver. In China also these things are
constantly used: they are called by the English Seamen Chopsticks. When the
Eunuch Mandarins dye, all their riches sall to the King, who as Heir presently
seizes on their Estates, and by it gets vast Riches: For there is but little
Money in the Kingdom, but what falls into the Clutches of these Birds of Prey.
This probably may be one Reason why the King is for preferring none but them;
for they are excellent Spunges for him: and whatever some have said of their
Love to Justice, I could never learn that they deserve that Character: But
through their oppression, and injurious dealings, trading is discouraged, and the
Country is kept Poor, which otherwise might be a flourishing Kingdom. After
all, as very Eunuchs as these Mandarins are, yet they are as great admirers of
the Female Sex as any Men, and not satisfied without them, but they all keep
several handsome young Wenches to dally and spend their time withal. They also
love to be courted by Strangers to favor them with a Miss of their procuring.
Nothing will engage them more than to petition them on this account; and the
Person thus solicited will not fail to procure a young Damsel for his Friend,
be it but for a night or two, or for 4 or 5 Months. Ever afterward he will
take a more than ordinary care of the Persons he has thus brought together, and
their affairs; and this base sort of Office is here accounted very decent and
honorable. Yet the common Baudy-houses, though extremely rife here, are by all
of them accounted hateful and scandalous

CHAP. V.
Some Vessels sent from Cachao to Tenan to fetch Rice. A Rencounter with some
supposed Robbers. Cash, a sort of Coin, and Pearl-Oysters. The Author's second
Journey up to Cachao: Of the Pagoda's and Funeral Tower and Feast he met by the
way. the French Bishops and Missionaries at Hean, their House, the Author's
entertainment there, and discourse with one of their Priests. The state of
their Mission, and of Christianity, in these Idolatrous Countries. His making
of Gunpowder. He goes on from Hean to Cachao, and after a short stay there,
back again to the Ships. Of the Improvements that might be made of our English
Factory here. The Author's departure from Tonquin.

I Have already spoken of my first going up the River to Cachao, and my
returning back again to our Ships after a few days. There I lay on board for a
great while, and sickly for the most part; yet not so, but that I took a Boat
and went ashore one where or other almost every day: and by this means I took
as particular notice as I could of the Country, and have supplied my own
observations with those of our Merchants residing there, and other Persons of
Judgment, and Integrity.

During this interval, Rice being dear at Cachao, as it had been for some time,
both our Merchants and Natives were for making up a Fleet of small Tenan,
whither these Merchants were bound.

Captain Weldon was one who concerned himself in this expedition, hiring a
Vessel and Seamen of the Tonquinese, and sending some of his own Men with them
as a Guard, among whom I would very fain have gone, had I not been indisposed.
Mr. Ludford, who had lived sometime at Cachao before our arrival, was another
Undertaker, and went himself on board the Bark he had hired; but Captain Weldon
staid behind at the City, yet took care to get a Commission from the Governor
of the East-Province for his Vessel. In the Commission 'twas expressed, that his
Boat should be armed with (...) or other Weapons, and that his Men should
resist any that came to oppose them, or any Vessels in their Company; and that
they might kill and destroy any Robbers that they met with. The Passage to
Tenan lay most within Land, through Creeks and narrow Channels, among the Islands
beforementioned, which are so many, and lie on the East Side of the Bay so
thick together, and so nigh the shore, that at a small distance off at Sea they
appear to be part of the Main. This little Archipelago lies within the
precincts of the Governor of the East-Province, from whom Captain Weldon had
his Commission, and who was a very great Man in the Court of Tonquin. When the
Fleet came to this place, some who lay here came forth; and they concluded they
must be the Pirates, come to seize their Prey as at other times These always
choose rather to take the outwardbound Weldon's Dutch Pilot, the chief Man whom
he sent in his Bark, was aboard Mr. Ludford's: and when the supposed Pirates
came up, Mr. Ludford and he made the Seamen row the Bark to meet them, and in a
short time got so near, that they fired at them. These Men not expecting to
have met such a reception, for the Tonquinese have no Guns, but in the King's
Galleys, thought to save themselves by Flight: but were so eagerly pursued by
Mr. Ludford, that at last they yielded to his Mercy, after they had lost one
Man in Fight. He, joyful of this success, secured the Prisoners, and made the
best of his course to the next Town on the Coast in his way; there delivering
up his Prisoners to the Magistrates, and giving a full relation of the Action.
He expected a reward for his pains, or at least to be highly applauded for it;
but found himself mistaken. For the Prisoners obstinately denying what was
alleged against them by Mr. Ludford, saying they were poor Fishermen, they
were immediately acquitted as very honest Persons, and Mr. Ludford was accused
for committing a Riot on Men who were about their lawful occasions. Mr. Ludford
brought many of the Natives, that were in his company, to justify what he had
done, but to no purpose; for he was fined 100000 Cash, as our Merchants call
it, for the Man that was killed. Cash are a small kind of Copper-Money: and
it is the only Coin they have of their own, if it be their own, and not rather
brought them from China. They rise and fall in value according to the want or
plenty of them, or as the Women-exchangers can manage them: but at this time
they were at Ludford saw how hard it was like to go with him, he thought to
clear himself, or lessen his fine, by bringing Captain Weldon into the snare;
saying that he had no Guns in his Bark, but made use of Captain Weldon's, and
that Captain Weldon's Pilot was aboard his Vessel, and assisted in the Action.
But neither did this help him: for upon trying the matter at Cachao, whither
'twas carried by Appeal, Captain Weldon's Commission saved him: so that Mr.
Ludford was forced to pay the Money, which was more than he got by the Voyage.
This might be a warning to him, how he meddled with Tonquin Pirates again; for
it was not enough for him to plead that they came with an intent to rob him.
Indeed if he had been robbed, he might have been pitied by the Magistrates on
complaint of his misfortune: but yet it is very probable, that if he should
have taken them in the very fact, possessed of his Goods, these Vermin, would
have had one hole or another to creep out at; so corrupt are the great Men of
this Kingdom. And indeed it is not improbable that these Fellows were Fishermen,
and going about their business: For there is good Fishing in all the Bay of
Tonquin clear round it, and there are many Boats that go out a fishing, and the
Fishermen are generally very honest and harmless Men; except now and then, they
attempt to make a prize of some poor Vessel they meet, and can overcome by
their numbers without fighting; for such an one they board, and strip all the
Men naked even to there Skin. Among these Islands also, by report, their are
plenty of Pearl Oysters, that have good Pearls in them; but the Seamen are
discouraged from fishing for them by the King, for he seizes on all he finds.
But this by their way; nor was any thing else observable in this Voyage to
Tenan.

Tenan: And at their return Captain Weldon's Bark went not up to Cachao with
the Rice, but unladed it into our Ship to supply us. Soon after this I went a
second time up to Cachao, not in a Boat as before, but on Foot along the
Country, being desirous to see as much of it as I could: and I hired a
Tonquinese for about a Dollar to be my Guide. This, though but a small matter,
was a great deal out of my Pocket, who had not above 2 Dollars in all, which I
had gotten on board, by teaching some of our young Seamen Plain Sailing.

This was all I had to bear my own charges and my Guides; and 'twas the worse
with me, because I was forced to make short Journeys every Day by Reason of my
Weakness: It was about the latter end of Nov. 1688, when we set out. We kept on
the East Side of the River, where we found the Roads pretty dry, yet in some
places dirty enough. We ferry'd over several Creeks and Brooks running into the
great River, whese are Ferry Boats always plying, which have a few Cash for
their fare. The Fever and Ague which I brought with me from Achin was gone:
yet the Fruits I eat here, especially the small Oranges, brought me into a
Flux. However though I was but weak, yet I was not discouraged from this Journey,
being weary of lying still, and impatient of seeing somewhat that might further
gratify my curiosity.

We found no Houses of Entertainment on the Road, yet at every Village we came
we got Houseroom, and a Barbacue of split Bambooes to sleep on. The People were
very civil, lending us an earthen Pot to dress Rice, or any thing else. Usually
after Supper, if the Day was not shut in, I took a ramble about the Village, to
see what was worth taking notice of, especially the Pagoda of Pagodas
themselves were but small and low. I still made it dark Night before I returned
to my Lodging, and then I laid me down to sleep. My Guide carried my Sea-Gown,
which was my covering in the night, and my Pillow was a Log of Wood: but I
slept very well, though the weakness of my Body did now require better
accommodation.

The third day after my setting out, about 3 a Clock in the afternoon, I saw
before me a small Tower; such as I mentioned before, as erected for a time in
honor of some great Person deceased. But I knew not then the meaning of it,
for I had not seen the like before in the Country. As I came nearer to it, I
saw a Multitude of People, most of them Men and Boys; and coming nearer still,
I saw a great deal of Meat on the Stalls, that were placed at a small distance
from the Tower. This made me conclude that it was some great Market, and that
the Flesh I saw was for sale: Therefore I went in among the Crowd, as well to
see the Tower as to buy some of the Meat for my Supper, it being now between 4
and 5 a Clock in the Afternoon. My Guide could not speak English, neither could
I speak the Tonquinese Language: So I asked him no questions about it; and he
too went readily in with me; it may be not knowing my intent was to buy. First
I went round the Tower and viewed it: It was apiece, each side about 8
foot broad: at the Ground the height of it was about 26 foot, but at the top
somewhat narrower than at the bottom. I saw no door to enter into it: it seemed
to be very slightly built, at least covered with thin boards, which were all
joined close together, and painted of a dark reddish color. I then went on to
the Stalls, which Tonquin. I past by these, and seeing no other Fruit, I came
to the Flesh-Stalls, where was nothing but Pork, and this also was all cut into
quarters and sides of Pork: I thought there might be 50 or 60 Hogs cut up thus,
and all seemed to be very good Meat. When I saw that there was none of it in
small pieces, fit for my use, I, as was customary in the Markets, took hold of
a quarter, and made signs to the Master of it, as I thought, to cut me a piece
of 2 or 3 Pound. I was ignorant of any ceremony they were about, but the
superstitious People soon made me sensible of my error: For they assaulted me
on all sides, buffeting me and renting my Clothes, and one of them snatched
away my Hat. My Guide did all he could to appease them, and dragged me out of
the Crowd: Yet some surly Fellows followed us, and seemed by their Countenance
and Gestures to threaten me; but my Guide at last pacified them and fetched my
Hat, and we marched away as fast as we could. I could not be informed of my
Guide what this meant; but sometime after, when I was returned to our Ship, the
Guide's Brother, who spoke English, told me, it was a Funeral Feast, and that
the Tower was the Tomb which was to be burned; and some English Men who lived
there told me the same. This was the only Funeral Feast that ever I was at
among them, and they gave me cause to remember it: but this was the worst usage
I received from any of them all the time that I was in the Country. When I was
out of this trouble, my Guide and I marched forwards.

Two Days after this I got with much ado to Hean, for my Flux increased, and my
strength decreased. I presently made toward the French Bishops, as the
likeliest place for me both to rest at, and get larger Informations of the
Country, from the European Missionaries, whose seat it is. The Bishop's Palace
is a pretty neat low House, standing at the North end of the Town, by the side
of the River. It Is encompassed with a pretty high Wall, and has a large Gate to
enter at. The Gate stands fronting to the Street, and runs up with Houses on
both sides, and ends at the Palace. Within the Wall there is a small Yard, that
goes round the Palace; and at the farther end of the Yard there are small
lodging-rooms for the Servants, and other necessary Offices. The House it self
is not very large nor high; it stands not in the middle of the Yard, but rather
nearest the Gate, which Gate is open all day, but shut in the Night. That part
that fronts the Gate, has a pretty neat Room, which seems to be designed for
the reception of Strangers: for it has no communication with any other Room in
the House, though joined to it as one building: the Door by which you enter it,
fronts to the Gate, and this Dooor also stands open all the day.

European Pictures hung upon the Walls.

It was not long before one of the Priests came into the Room to me, and
received me very civilly. With him I had a great deal of Discourse: He was a
French Man by Nation, but spoke Spanish and Portuguese very well. It was
chiefly in Spanish that we entertained each other, which I understood much
better than I could speak: yet I asked him Questions, and made a shift to
answer him to such Questions as he asked me; and when I was at a loss in my
Spanish, I had recourse to Latin, having still some smatterings of what I
learnt of it at School in my youth. He was very free to talk with me, and first
asked me my business thither? I told him that my business was to Cachao, where
I had been once before: that then I went by Water, but now I was moved by my
curiosity to travel by Land, and that I could not pass by any Europeans without
a Visit, especially such a famous place as this. He asked me many other
Questions, and particularly if I was a Roman Catholic? I told him no, but
falling then into a Discourse about Religion, he told me what Progress the
Gospel was like to make in these Eastern Nations. First he began with the
Nicobar Islands, and told me what I have related of that matter, in the 17
Chapter of my Voyage round the World, page 177, for this was the Person I there
quoted, and from whom I had that Relation; as he told me he had it from the
Friar, who wrote to him from Fort St. George. But Weldon's Ship, from one of
the Nicobar Islands to Fort St. George, I asked the Captain's opinion of that
relation since my writing that Book, and he gave me a quite contrary account of
the People of Nicobar; that they were a very perverse, false and thievish
People, and did not deserve the good character the Friar gave of them.

But to proceed with the discourse I had with the French Priest at Hean. He
told me, that in Siom the Gospel was in a very fair way to receive
encouragement by the means of a French Bishop there, and several Ecclesiastics
he had with him there to assist him: That the great Minister of State, Constant
Falcon, had embraced the Romish Faith; and that the King was very much inclined
to it, the Courtiers also seeming well enough pleased with it. Insomuch that
'twas hoped that in a short time the whole Nation would be converted: And that
though the Country People in general were against it, yet by the example of the
King and his Court, the rest might come over by degrees; especially because the
Priests had free Toleration to use their endeavors. As for Tonquin, he told me
that the People in general were inclined to embrace the Christian Faith, but
that the Government was wholly averse to it: that the Missionaries who lived
here did not openly profess to be Teachers of their Doctrine, but that they
lived here under the notion of Merchants, and not as Clergymen; that this was
a great Obstacle to Christianity, yet nevertheless they found ways to draw the
People from their Ignorance: that at present they had about 1^000 Converts, and
more coming in daily. He told me, that here were two Bishops, I think both
French Men; one of them was entitled the Bishop of Ascalon the other of Auran;
and that here were Europe, and three more of the Natives of Tonquin, who had
been ordained Popish Priests. But since I have been informed, that these French
Bishops were not suffered to live at Cachao; neither may they at any time go
thither without a License from the Governor; and such a License also must be
procured by the Favor of some Mandarin who lives at Cachao, for whom the
Bishop or other Missionary is to perform some trivial Work or other. For the
Missioners living here are purposely skilled in mending Clocks, Watches, or
some Mathematical Instruments, of which the Country People are Ignorant; and
this gives them the opportunity of being often sent for to Cachao by the
Mandarins: And when they are there, a small job that would not require above 5
or 6 Hours to perform, they will be twice as many days about, pretending great
difficulty in the work; by which means they take their liberty, privately to
teach their Disciples that live there; and then also they enjoy themselves with
the English and Dutch Merchants, to whom they are always welcome.

As to the Converts these People have made, I have been credibly informed that
they are chiefly of the very poor People, and that in the scarce times, their
Alms of Rice have converted more than their preaching: and as to those also who
have been converted, as they call it, that is to Beads and new Images, and
belief in the Pope, they have fallen off again, as Rice grew plentiful, and
would no longer be Christians than while the Priests administered Food to them.
Yet I cannot think but that these People, who have such Notions of a supreme
Deity, might by the industry and example of good Men, be brought to embrace the
Christian Faith. But as things stand at present, it seems very improbable that
Christianity should fructify there: For as the English and Dutch in these parts
of the World are too loose Livers to gain Reputation to their Religion, so are
the other Europeans, I mean the Missionary Priests, especially the Portuguese,
but very blind Teachers. But indeed as the Romanists are the only Men who
compass Sea and Land to gain Proselytes, so they may seem to have one advantage
over Protestant Ministers in these Idolatrous Countries, that they present them
with such kind of Objects for Religious Worship as they have been used to
already: For the exchange is not great from Pagan Idols to Images of Saints,
which may serve altogether as well for the poor Souls they convert, who are
guided only by sense. But then even here also, these People having been bred up
in the belief of the goodness of their own Gods or Heroes, they will more
hardly be brought over to change their own Idols for new ones, without some
better Arguments to prove these to be more valuable, than the Missionaries
ordinarily are able to afford them: and If I may freely speak my opinion, I am
apt to think, that the gross Idolatry of the Papists is rather a prejudice,
than advantage to their Missions: and that their first care should be to bring
the People to be virtuous and considerate, and their next, to give them a plain
History and Scheme of the Fundmental Truths of Christianity, and show them how
agreeable they are to natural light, and how worthy of God.

But to return to the French Priest; he at length asked me if any of our
English Ships brought Powder to sell? I told him, I thought not. Then he asked
me if I knew the composition of Powder? I answered that I had receipts how to
make either Cannon or fine Powder, and told him the manner of the Composition.
Said he, I have the same receipts from France, and have tried to make Powder,
but could not; and therefore I think the England; and having drank a glass or
two of Wine with him, I went to work; and it succeeded so well, that I pleased
him extremely, and satisfied my own desire of trying the Receipt, and the
Reader shall have the History of the Operation, if he pleases. He brought me
Sulphur and Saltpeter, and I weighed a portion of each of these, and of Coals
I gathered up in the hearth, and beat to powder. While his Man mixed these in a
little Engine, I made a small Sieve of Parchment, which I pricked full of
Holes, with a small Iron made hot, and this was to corn it. I had 2 large
Coco-nuts to roll in the Sieve, and work it through the holes to corn it. When it
was dry we proved it, and it answered our expectation. The Receipt I had out of
Captain Sturmey's Magazin of Arts.

The being so successful in this put me afterward on the renewing of Powder at
Bencouli, when I was there Gunner of that Fort. There being then about 20
Barrels damnified, which was like mud, they took it out of the Cask, and put it
into earthen Jars, that held about 8 Barrels a piece. These they call Montaban
Jars, from a Town of that name in Pegu, whence they are brought and carried all
over India. In these 'twas intended to send the Powder to Fort St. George, to
be renewed there: But I desired the Governor to let me first try my skill on
it, because we had but little Powder in the Fort, and might have wanted before
any returns could be expected French Priest told me in conclusion, that the
Grandees make all their own Powder; and since I have been informed, that the
Soldiers make Powder, as I have already said.

I spent the remainder of the day in the Palace with the Priest. He told me
that the Bishop was not well, otherwise I should have seen him: and that
because it was a Fish day, I could not expect such entertainment, as I might
have had on another day; yet he ordered a Fowl to be broiled for my Dinner, and
I dined by my self. In the Evening he sent me out of the Palace, desiring to be
excused, that he could not entertain me all night: yet he ordered his Man to
lodge me in a Tonquinese Christian House not far from thence. The People were
civil, but very poor, and my Lodging such as I had met with on the Road. I have
since been told, that the new Christians come to do their Devotion in the
Palace at Night, and for that reason probably, I was so soon dismissed.

I was now again pretty well refreshed, and might have gone to Cachao City a
foot: but fearing my strength, I chose to go by Water. Therefore I sent back my
Guide: yet before he departed back to our Ships, he bargained with a Tonquinese
Waterman for my Passage to Cachao.

The Tide not serving presently to imbark, I walked about the Town, and spent
the Day in viewing it: in the Evening I embarked, and they choose an Evening
for coolness, rowing Gravesend Wherry, and was used purposely to carry
Passengers, having a small covering over-head to keep them dry when it rained.
There were 4 or 5 more of these Boats, that went up this Tide full of
Passengers. In our Boat were about 20 Men and Women, besides 4 or 6 that rowed
us. The Women chose their places and sat by themselves, and they had much
respect showed them: but the Men stowed close together, without showing any
respect more to one than to another, yet all very civil. I thrust in among the
thickest of them at first, but my Flux would not suffer me to rest long in a
place. About midnight we were set ashore to refresh our selves at a Baiting
place, where there were a few Houses close by the Rivers side, and the people
up, with Candles lighted, Arack and Tea, and little spits of Meat, and other
Provisions ready dressed, to receive us. For these were all Houses of
entertainment, and probably got their living by entertaining Passengers. We
stayed here about an hour, and then entered again on our Boat, and rowed
forwards. The Passengers spent the time in merry Discourse, or Singing, after
their way, though to us it seems like crying; but I was mute for want of a person
I could converse with. About 8 or 9 a clock the next day I was set ashore: the
rest of the Passengers remained in the Boat, but whither they were bound I know
not, nor whither the Boat went quite up to Cachao. I was now 5 or 6 mile short
of the City, but in a good path: for the Land here was pretty high, level and
sandy, and the Road plain and dry, and I reached Cachao by Noon. I presently
went to one Mr. Bowyers House, who was a free Merchant, with whom Captain
Weldon lodged; and staid with them a few days: but so weak with my Flux, which
daily increased that I was s^a^^e able to Weldon had by this time done his
business, and was preparing for his departure.

I went therefore down the River again to our Ships, in a Vessel our Merchants
had hired, to carry their Goods aboard from Cachao. Among other freight, there
were 2 Bells of about 500 weight each, which had been cast at Cachao by the
Tonquinese, for my Lord Falcon, the King of Siam's chief Minister of State, and
for the use of some of the Christian Churches in Siam. The person who bespoke
them, and was to carry them, was Captain Brewster, who had not very long before
come from Siam in a Ship of that King's, and had been cast away on the Coast of
Tonquin, but had saved most of his Goods. With these he traded at Cachao, and
among other goods he had purchased to return with to Siam, were these 2 Bells,
all which he sent down to be put on Board Captain Weldon's Ship. But the Bark
was no sooner come to Hean, in going down the River, but the Governor of Hean's
Officers came on board the Bark and seized the 2 Bells in behalf of the chief
of the English Factory; who understanding they were designed for the King of
Siam, which they were not so sure of as to the rest of the goods, and the
English being then at War with the Siamers, he made this his pretense for
seizing them, and got the Governor to assist him with his Authority: and the
Bells were accordingly carried ashore, and kept at Hean: This was thought a
very strange Siam, while they were in a River of Tonquin: but he was a person
but meanly qualified for the station he was in. Indeed had he been a man of
spirit, he might have been serviceable in getting a Trade with Japan, which is
a very rich one, and much cove^ed by the Eastern people themselves as well as
Europeans. For while I was there, there were Merchants came every year from
Japan to Tonquin; and by some of these our English Factory might probably have
settled a Corespondence and Traffic. but he who was little qualified for the
station he was in, was less sit for any new undertaking: and though men ought not
to run inconsiderately into new discoveries or undertakings, yet where there is
a prospect of profit I think it not amiss for Merchants to try for a Trade, for
if our Ancestors had been as dull as we have been of late, it is probable we had
never known the way so much as to the East Indies, but must have been beholden
to our Neighbors, for all the product of those Eastern Nations. What care was
formerly taken to get us a Trade into the E. Indies, and othet Countries? What
pains particularly did some take to find out the Muscovites by doubling the
North Cape, and a way thence by land Trade into Persia? but now, as if we were
cloyed with Trade, we sit still contented, saying with Cato, Non minor est
virtus quam quaerere parta tuiri. This was the saying of an eminent Merchant of
the East India Company to me: but by his leave, our Neighbors have encroached
on us, and that in our times too. However, it is certainly for the interest of
our Merchants to employ sit men in their Factories, since the reputation of the
Company rises or falls by the discreet management, or ill conduct of the
Agents. Nor is it enough for the chief of a Factory to be a good Merchant, and
an honest European Merchants reside among them, or trade to the same places;
for they keep a diligent Eye on the management of our Affairs, and are always
ready to take all Advantages of our Mis-improvements. Neither ought this care
to be neglected where we have the Trade to our selves, for there ought to be a
fair understanding between us and the Natives, and care taken, that they should
have no reason to complain of unjust dealings, as I could show where there has
been; but it is an invidious subject, and all that I aim at is to give a
caution. But to the matter in hand, it seemed to me that our Factory at Tonquin
might have got a Trade with Japan: and to China as much as they pleased. I
confess the continual Wars between Tonquin and Cochinchina, were enough to
obstruct the designs of making a Voyage to this last: and those other places of
Champa and Cambodia as they are less known, so was it more unlikely still to
make thither any profitable Voyages: yet possibly the difficulties here also
are not so great, but resolution and industry would overcome them; and the
profit would abundantly compensate the trouble.

But to proceed, we found there was no recovering the Bells: so we fell down
from Hean to our Ships: and Captain Weldon coming to us in a few days, and
Captain Brewster with him, to go as a Passenger in his ship, together with one
or two more; and 2 Ships who came with us being also ready for their departure,
we all weighed anchor, and took leave of Tonquin.

CHAP. VI.
They set sail out of the Bay of Tonquin. Of the R. and Country of Cambodia: Of
Chinese Pirates settled there, and the Buggasses a sort of Soldiers under the
King of Siam, both routed by the English in his service. They pass by Pulo
Condore, are in fear of the King of Siam, and enter the Streights of Malacca by
Brewster's Streights. They arrive at Malacca. The Story of Captain Johnson: his
buying a Vessel at Malacca, and going over to Bencalis, a Town on the opposite
Coast of Sumatra, to buy Pepper. His Murder by the Malayans there, and the
narrow espape of his Men and Vessel. The State of Trade in those parts. and the
Restraint put upon it. Captain Johnson's Vessel brought to Malacca by Mr.
Wells. The Author's departure from Malacca, and arrival at Achin.

IT was the beginning of Febuary 168^ when we left his Country. We went over
the Bar 3 Ships in Company, the Rainbow Captain Pool Commander, bound for
London, and Captain Lacy in the Sapphire, bound for Fort St George, and I was in
Captain Weldon's Ship the Curtane, bound thither also. We kept Company some
time after our departure from Tonquin, and having an Easterly Wind we kept more
to the middle of the Bay of Tonquin, or toward the Eastern side, than when we
entered: by which means we had the opportunity of sounding as well in the middle
of the Bay

Coming out of the Bay of Tonquin, we stood away Southward, having the Sholes
of Pracel on our Larboard, and the Coasts of Cochinchina, Champa, and Cambodia
on our Starboard. I have just mentioned these Kingdoms in my former Volume; and
here I have but little to say of them, having only sailed by them. But not
altogether to fail the Readers expectation, I shall give a brief account of one
or two particulars relating to Cambodia: for as to Champa I have nothing
material to speak; and Cochinchina, I have already spoken of in this Volume, as
I went to Tonquin.

The Kingdom of Cambodia seems to be much such a kind of Country within Land,
as the lower parts of Tonquin: low Land, very woody, and little inhabited,
lying on each side a great River that comes from the North a great way, and
falls into the Sea over against Pulo Condore. I know not the particular product
of Cambodia, but in the Vessels mentioned in my former Vol. p. 399. as taken at
Pulo Uby, and which came thither from Cambodia; there were besides Rice,
Dragons Blood, Lack, in great Jars, but it looked blackish and thick; and the
yellow purging Gum, which we from thence call Cambodia, in great Cakes, but I
know not whence they get it. This River and Kingdom (if it be one) is but
little known to our Nation, yet some English men have been there; particularly
Captain Williams and Captain Howel, the last of whom I came acquainted with
some time after this at Fort St George, and I had of him the following account,
the particulars of which I have also had confirmed by the Seamen who where with
them.

These two Captains, with many more English men, had been for some time in the
service of the King of Siam, and each of them commanded a English and some
Portuguese born at Siam. These the King of Siam sent against some Pirates, who
made spoil of his Subjects trading in these Seas, and nested themselves in an
Island up the River of Cambodia. Captain Howel told me, that they found this
River very large, especially at its mouth; that it is deep and navigable for
very great Vessels, 60 or 70 Leagues up, and that its depth and wideness
extended much further up, for ought we know: but so far they went up, at this
time, with their Ships. The Course of the River is generally from North to
South: and they found the Land low on each side, with many large Creeks and
Branches, and in some places considerable Islands. They bended their Course up
that branch which seemed most considerable, having the Tide of flood with them,
and the River commonly so wide, as to give them room to turn or make Angles
where the bending of the River was such as to receive a contrary East, or
South-East Sea-Wind. These Reaches or Bendings of the River East and West were
very rare; at least so as to make their Course be against the Sea-wind, which
commonly blew in their Stern, and so fresh, that with it they could stem the
Tide of Ebb. But in the night when the Land-winds came, they anchored, and lay
still till about 10 or 11 a Clock the next day, at which time the Sea-breezes
usually sprang up again, and enabled them to continue their Course, till they
came to the Island, where the Pirates inhabited. They presently began to fire
at them, and landing their Men, routed them, and burnt their Houses and
Fortifications; and taking many Prisoners, returned again.

These Piratical People were by Nation Chinese, who when the Tartars conquered
their Country, fled from thence in their own Ships: as chosing Tartars. These
it seems in their flight bent their Course toward this Country, and finding
the River of Cambodia open before them, they made bold to enter, and settle on
the Island before mentioned. There they built a Town, and fenced it round about
with a kind of Wood-pile, or Wall of great Timber Trees laid along, of the
thickness of 3 or 4 of these Trees, and of about as many in height. They were
provided with all sorts of Planters Instruments, and the Land hereabouts was
excellent good, as our Englishmen told me, so that it is like they might have
lived here happily enough, had their inclinations led them to a quiet Life: but
they brought Arms along with them, and chose to use them, rather than their
instruments of Husbandry: and they lived therefore mostly by rapin, pillaging
their Neighbors, who were more addicted to traffic than fighting. But the
King of Siam's Subjects having been long harrassed by them at Sea, he first
sent some Forces by Land to drive them out of their Fort: till not succeeding
that way, he entirely routed them by sending these 2 Ships up the River. The 2
English Captains having thus effected their business, returned out of the River
with many Prisoners: but the South West Monsoon being already set in, they
could not presently return to Siam, and therefore went to Macao in China; as
well to wait for the N. East Monsoon, as to ingratiate themselves with the
Tartars, who they thought would be pleased with the Conquest which they had
made over these Chinese Pirates. They were well entertained there by the
Tartarian Governor, and gave him their Prisoners: and upon the shifting of the
Monsoon, they returned to Siam. There they were received with great applause.
Nor was this the first successful expedition the English have Siam's service.
They once saved the Country, by suppressing an insurrection made by the
Buggasses. The Buggasses are a sort of warlike Trading Malayans, and mercenary
Soldiers of India: I know not well whence they come, unless from Macasser in
the Island Celebes. Many of them had been entertained at Siam in the King's
service: but at last being disgusted at some ill usage, they stood up in their
own defense. Some hundreds of them got together, all well armed: and these
struck a dread into the hearts of the Siamites, none of whom were able to stand
before them; till Constant Falcon the chief Minister, commanded the English
that were then in the King's service to march against them, which they did with
success, though with some considerable loss. For these services the King gave
every year to each of them, a great Silk Coat, on which were just 13 buttons.
Those of the chief Commanders were of Massy Gold, and those of the inferior
Officers were of Silver Plate. This expedition against the Chinese P^rats was
about the year 1687: the other broyl with the Buggasses was, as I take it, some
time before.

But to proceed with our Voyage, we still kept our way Southward, and in
company together, till we came about Pulo Condore; but then Captain Pool parted
from us, standing more directly South for the Streights of Sundy: and we
steered more to the Westward, to go through the Streights of Malacca, through which
we came before. Captain Brewster and another of our Passengers began now to be
in fear that the King of Siam would send Ships to lie at the mouth of the
Streights of Malacca, and intercept our passage, because there was a War broke
out between the English East India Company and that Prince. This seemed the
more likely, because the French at this time were employed in that King's
service, by the means of a French Bishop Ecclesiastics; who were striving to
convert the King and People to Christianity, through the Interest they had got in
Constant Falcon. Particularly they were afraid, that the King of Siam would
send the 2 Ships before mentioned, which Captain Williams, and Capt. Howel had
commanded a little before, to lie at the west end of the Streights mouth; but
probably manned with French Men and French Commanders, to take us. Now though
this made but little impression on the Minds of our Commanders and Officers,
yet so it happened, that we had such thick dark weather, when we came near the
first Entrance of the Streights of Malacca, which was that we came by, and by
which we meant to return, that we thought it not safe to stand in at night, and
so lay by till morning. The next day we saw a Jonk to the Southward, and chased
her; and having spoke with her we made Sail, and stood to the Westward to pass
the Streights, and making the Land, we found we were to the Southward of the
Streights first mouth, and were gotten to the Souther most Entrance, near the
Sumatra shore: but Captain Lacy, who chose to go the old way, made sail again
to the Northward, and so passed nearer the Malacca shore by the Sincapore, the
way we went before. His was also the best and nearest way: bBut Captain Weldon
was willing to satisfy his curiosity, and try a new Passage: which we got
through, though we had but little depth of Water: and this Entrance we past is
called Brewer's Streights.

Brewer's Streights are sometimes passed by small Ships, that sail from Batavia
to Malacca, because for them it is a nearer cut, than to run so far as Pulo
Timaon, or the Streights of Sincapore. In this Channel, though in some places we
found but 14 or 15 foot Water, yet the bottom was soft Oaze: and it lies so
among Islands, that there cannot go a Weldon had also a Dutchman aboard who
had been this way, and he professing to know the Channel, encouraged our
Captain to try it, which we affected very well, tho sometimes we had but little
more water than we drew. This made us make but an easy Sail, and therefore we
were 7 or 8 days before we arrived at Malacca; but Captain Lacy was there 2 or
3 days before us.

Here we first heard of the Death of Constant Falcon, for whom Captain Brewster
seemed to be much concerned. There also we found, besides several Dutch Sloops,
and our Companion Captain Lacy, an English Vessel of 35 or 40 Tuns. This Vessel
was bought by one Captain Johnson, who was sent by the Governor of Bencouli, in
a small Sloop, to trade about the Island of Sumatra for Pepper, but Captain
Johnson being killed, the Sloop was brought hither by one Mr. Wells.

Being thus insensibly fallen into the mention of this Captain Johnson; and
intending to defer what little I have to say of Malacca, till my coming thither
again from Achin, I shall bestow the rest of this Chapter in speaking of this
Man's Tragedy, and other occurrences relating to it; which though of no great
moment in themselves, yet the Circumstances I shall have occasion to relate
with them, may be of use to the giving some small light into the state of the
opposite Coast of Sumatra, which was the S^^ne of what I am going to speak of:
for though I shall have other occasion to speak of Achin and Bencouli, yet I
shall not have opportunity to say any thing of this part of that Island,
opposite to Malacca, unless I do it here. To go on therefore with his Story, it
seems Captain Johnson was part owner of the small Bencouli Sloop: but thinking
it too small for his turn, he came to Malacca, intending to buy a larger Sloop
of the Dutch, if he could light of a bargain. He had Spanish Money aboard, for
which one may purchase a good Sloop here: for the Dutch, as I have before
observed, do often buy Proe-bottoms for a small matter, of the Malayans,
especially of the People of Jihore, and convert them into Sloops, either for
their own use, or to sell. Of these sort of Vessels therefore the Dutchmen of
Malacca have plenty, and can afford good pennyworths; and doubtless it was for
this reason that Captain Johnson came hither to purchase a Sloop. Here he met
with a bargain, not such a Proe bottom reformed, but an old ill shaped thing,
yet such a one as pleased him. The Dutchman who sold him this Vessel, told him
withal, that the Government did not allow any such dealings with the English,
though they might wink at it: and that therefore the safest way for them both to
keep out of trouble, would be to run over to the other side of the Streights,
to a Town called Bencalis, on Sumatra; where they might safely buy and sell, or
exchange without any notice taken of them. Captain Johnson accepting the offer,
they sailed both together over to Bencalis, a Malayan Town on that Coast,
commanding the Country about it. There they came to an anchor, and Captain
Johnson paying the price agreed on for the Vessel, he had her delivered to him.
The Dutchman immediately returned over to Malacca again, leaving Captain
Johnson with 2 Vessels under his Command, viz. the Sloop that he brought from
Bencouli, and this new-bought Vessel. The Bencouli Sloop he sent into a large
River hard by, to Trade with the Malayans for Pepper, under the Command of Mr.
Wells. He was no Seaman; but a pretty intelligent Person, that came first out
of England as a Soldier, ^o serve the East India Company in the Island Santa
Helena. He lived some time very meanly in that Island, but having an aspiring
mind, he left that poor, but Bencouli; which though it is accounted the most
unhealthy place of any that we trade to, yet the hopes of preferment engaged
him to remove thither. After some stay there, he was sent with Captain Johnson
to assist him in this Pepper Expedition; more because he could use his Pen,
than his Hands in Sea service. He had 3 or 4 raw Seamen with him to work the
Sloop up into the River. Captain Johnson stayed near Bencalis to fit his new
Vessel: for with other necessaries she wanted a new Boltsprit, which he
intended to cut here, having a Carpenter with him for that purpose; as also to
repair and fit her to his mind. He had also a few other raw Seamen, but such as
would have made better Landmen, they having served the King of Siam as
Soldiers: and they were but lately come from thence with the French, who were
forced to leave that Country. But here in the Indies, our English are forced
for want of better, to make use of any Seamen such as they can get, and indeed
our Merchants are often put hard to it for want of Seamen. Here are indeed
Lascars or Indian Seamen enough to be hired; and these they often make use of:
yet they always covet an Englishman or 2 in a Vessel to assist them. Not but
that these Lascars are some of them indifferent good Sailors, and might do well
enough: but an English man will be accounted more faithful, to be employed on
matters of moment; beside the more free Conversation that may be expected from
them, during the term of the Voyage. So that though often times their English men
are but ordinary Sailors, yet they are promoted to some charge of which they
could not be so capable any where but in the East Indies. These Seamen would be
in a manner wholly useless in Europe, where we meet with more frequent and hard
storms, but here they serve indifferent well,

Mr. Wells being gone to purchase Pepper, Capt. Johnson went ashore about 5 or
6 Leagues from Bencalis Town with his Carpenter, to cut a Boltsprit; there
being there plenty of Timber Trees fit for his purpose. He soon chose one to
his mind, and cut it down. He and his Carpenter wrought on it the first and
second days without molestation. The 3d. day they were both set upon by a band
of armed Malayans, who killed them both. In the evening the Sailors who were
left aboard, looked out for their Commander to come off: but night approaching
without seeing or hearing from him. This put them in some doubt of his safety;
for they were sensible enough, that the Malayans that inhabited thereabouts
were very treacherous: as indeed all of them are, especially those who have but
little Commerce with Strangers: and therefore all people ought to be very
careful in dealing with them, so as to give them no advantage; and then they
may Trade safe enough.

There were but 4 Seamen aboard Captain Johnson's Sloop. These being terrified
by the absence of their Commander, and suspecting the truth, were now very
apprehensive of their own safeties. They charged their Guns, and kept
themselves on their guards, expecting to be assaulted by the Malayans. They had
2 Blunderbusses, and 3 or 4 Muskets: each man took one in his Hand, with a
Caduce-box at his Waste, and looked out sharp for fear of any Enemy. While they
were thus on their guard, the Malayans in 6 or 8 Canoas came very silently to
attack the Sloop. They were about 40 or 50 Men, armed with Lances and Cresses.
The darkness of the night favored their designs, and they were even aboard
before the Seamen perceived them. Then these began to Fire, and the Malayans
took fresh Courage and entered again; and the 2 Seamen who were not wounded,
betook themselves to close quarters in the Steerage; and there being Loop-holes
to fire out at, they repulsed the Malayans again, forcing them into their
Canoas. There bellies being now pretty full, they returned ashore without hopes
of conquering the Sloop. The poor Seamen were still in fear, and kept watch all
night; intending to sell their Lives as dear as they could, if they had been
attacked again. For they might not, neither did they expect quarter, from these
Salvage Malayans: but they were no more assaulted. These two that were wounded,
dyed in a short time.

The next day the 2 Seamen got up their Anchor, and run as nigh the Town of
Bencalis as they could, it may be within half a mile. There they Anchored
again, and made signs for the People to come aboard. It was not long before the
Shabander or chief Magistrate of the Town came off: to him they told all their
misfortunes, and desired him to protect them, because they were not of
sufficient strength to hold out against another attack. The Shabander seemed
very sorry for what had happened, and told them withal, that he could not help
what was past, for that the People that did it were wild unruly Men, not
subject to Government, and that it was not in his power to suppress them: but
that as long as they lay there some of his men should lie aboard to secure the
Ship; and he, in the mean time, would send a Canoa to their consort Mr. Wells,
to give him an account how things went. Accordingly he left 10 or 12 of his own
Malayans aboard the Bark, and sent a Letter written by the Seamen to Mr. Wells;
who was, as I have said, dealing with the Natives for Pepper, in a River at
some distance.

It was 2 or 3 days before Mr. Wells came to them. He had not then received the
Letter, and therefore they suspected the Shabander of falsehood; though his men
were yet very kind, and serviceable to the 2 Seamen. Mr. Wells had heard
nothing of their disasters, but returned for want of Trade; at least such a
full Trade as he expected. For though here is Pepper growing, yet not so much as
might allure any one to seek after it: for the Dutch are so near, that none can
come to Trade among them but by their permission. And though the Natives
themselves were never so willing to Trade with any Nation, as indeed they are,
yet the Dutch could soon hinder it, even by destroying them, if in order to it
they should set themselves to produce much Pepper. Such small quantities as
they do at present raise up, or procure from other parts of the Island, is
lickt by the Dutch, or by their friends of Bencalis for them: for the Town of
Bencalis being the principal of these parts, and so nigh Malacca, as only
parted by the narrow Sea or Streights, it is visited by the Dutch in their small
Vessels, and seems wholly to depend on a Trade with that Nation, not daring to
Trade with any besides: and I judge it is by the friendship of the Town, that
the Dutch drive a small Trade for Pepper in these parts, and by it also vend
any of their own Commodities: and these also trading with their Neighbors into
the Country, do bring their Cmmodities hither, Where the Dutch come for them.
The People of Bencalis therefore, though they are Malayans, as the rest of the
Country, yet they are civil enough, engaged thereto by Trade: for the more
Trade, the more civility; and on the contrary, Americans, who have not yet
tasted the sweetness of it, might be allured to it by an honest and just
Commerce: even such of them as do yet seem to covet no more than a bare
subsistence of meat and drink, and a clout to cover their nakedness. That large
Continent has yet Millions of Inhabitants, both on the Mexican and Peruvian
parts, who are still ignorant of Trade: and they would be fond of it, did they
once experience it; though at the present they live happy enough, by enjoying
such fruits of the Earth, as nature has bestowed on those places, where their
Lot is fallen: and it may be they are happier now, than they may hereafter be,
when more known to the Avaritious World. For with Trade they will be in danger
of meeting with oppression: men not being content with a free Traffic, and a
just and reasonable gain, especially in these remote Countries: but they must
have the Current run altogether in their own Channel, though to the depriving the
poor Natives they deal with, of their natural Liberty: as if all mankind were
to be ruled by their Laws. The Islands of Sumatra and Java can sufficiently
witness this; the Dutch having in a manner ingrost all the Trade of those, and
several of the Neighboring Countries to themselves: not that they are able to
supply the Natives with a quarter of what they want, but because they would
have all the produce of them at their own disposal. Yet even in this they are
short, and may be still more disappointed of the Pepper Trade if other People
would seek for it. For the greatest part of the Island of Sumatra propagates
this Plant, and the Natives would readily comply with any Dutch make against
it: for this Island is so large, populous, and productive of Pepper, that the
Dutch are not able to draw all to themselves. Indeed this place about Bencalis,
is in a manner at their devotion; and for ought I know, it was through a design
of being revenged on the Dutch that Capt. Johnson lost his life. I find the
Malayans in general, are implacable Enemies to the Dutch; and all seems to
spring from an earnest desire they have of a free Trade, which is restrained by
them, not only here, but in the Spice-Islands, and in all other places where
they have any Power. But it is freedom only must be the means to encourage any
of these remote People to Trade; especially such of them as are industrious,
and whose inclinations are bent this way; as most of the Malayans are, and the
major part of the People of the East Indies, even from the Cape of Good Hope
Eastward to Japan, both Continent and Islands. For though in many places, they
are limited by the Dutch, English, Danes, etc. and restrained from a free Trade
with other Nations, yet have they continually shown what an uneasiness that is
to them. And how dear has this Restraint cost the Dutch? when yet neither can
they with all their Forts and Guard-Ships secure the Trade wholly to
themselves, any more than the Barlaventa Fleet can secure the Trade of the
West Indies to the Spaniards: but enough of this matter.

You have heard before, that Mr. Wells came with his Sloop to Bencalis, to the
great joy of the two Men, that were yet alive in Captain Johnson's Vessel.
These two Seamen were so just, that they put all Captain Johnson's Papers and
Money into one Chest, then locked it and put the Key of it into another Chest;
and locking that, flung the Key of it into the Sea: and when Mr. Wells Bloom.

They were all now so weakened, that they were but just enough to sail one of
the Vessels. Therefore they sent to the Shabander of Bancalis, to desire some
of his Men, to help sail the Sloops over to Malacca, but he refused it. Then
they offered to sell one of them for a small matter, but neither would he buy.
Then they offered to give him the smallest: To that he answered, that he did
not dare to accept of her, for fear of the Dutch. Then Mr. Wells and his Crew
concluded to take the Pepper and all the Stores out of the small Vessel, and
burn her, and go away with the other to Malacca. This they put in execution,
and presently went away, and opening Captain Johnson's Chest, they found 2 or
300 Dollars in Money. This with all his Writings, and what else they found of
value, Mr. Wells took in his possession. In a very short time they got over to
Malacca. There they stayed expecting the coming of some English Ship, to get a
Pilot to Navigate the Sloop: for neither of them would undertake to Navigate
her farther. Captain Lacy coming hither first, he spared Mr. Wells his chief
Mate, to Navigate her to Achin. When we came hither they were ready to sail,
and went away 2 or 3 days before us.

To return therefore to our own Voyage, Captain Weldon having finished his
business at Malacca, we sailed again, steering toward Achin, where he designed
to touch in his way to Fort St. George. We overtook Mr. Wells about 35 Leagues
short of A^hi^ against the River Passange Jonca: and shortly after Achin, and
anchored in the Road, about the beginning of March 1689. Here I took my leave
of Captain Weldon, and of my friend Mr. Hall, who went with us to Tonquin, and
I went ashore being very weak with my Flux, as I had been all the Voyage.
Captain Weldon offered me any kindness that lay in his Power at Fort St.
George, if I would go with him thither: but I chose rather to stay here, having
some small acquaintance, than to go in that weak condition, to a place where I
was wholly unknown. But Mr. Hall went with Captain Weldon to Fort St. George,
and from thence in a short time returned to England in the Williamson of London.

CHAP. VII.
The Country of Achin described: its Situation and Extent. Golden Mount, and
the Neighboring Isles of Way and Gomez, etc. making several Channels and the
Road of Achin. The Soil of the Continent; Trees and Fruits; particularly the
Mangastan and Pumple-nose. Their Roots, Herbs, and Drugs, the Herb Ganga or
Bang, and Camphire: the Pepper of Sumatra, and Gold of Achin. The Beasts, Fowl,
and Fish. The People, their Temper, Habits, Buildings. City of Achin, and
Trader. The Husbandry, Fishery, Carpenters and Flying Proes. The
Money Changers, Coin and Weights. Of the Gold-Mines. The Merchants who come to
Achin: and of the Chinese Camp or Fair. The washing used at Achin. A Chinese
Renegado. Punishments for Theft and other Crimes. The Government of Achin; of
the Queen, Oronkeys or Nobles; and of the Slavery of the People. The State kept
by the Eastern Princes. A Civil War here upon the choice of a new Queen. The A
and the other English in a fright, upon a seizure made of a Moors Ship by an
English Captain. The Weather, Floods, and Heat at Achin.

BEing now arrived at Achin again, I think it not amiss to give the Reader some
short account of what observation I made of that City and Country. Sumatra; and
it makes the North West end of that Island. It reaches Eastward from that N. W.
point of the Island, a great way along the Shore, toward the Streights of
Malacca, for about 50 or 60 Leagues. But from Diamond point, which is about 40
Lagues from Achin, towads the Borders of the Kingdom, the Inhabitants, though
belonging to Achin are in less subjection to it. Of these I can say but little;
neither do I know the Bounds of this Kingdom, either within Land, or along the
West Coast. That West side of the Kingdom, is high and mountainous: as is
generally the rest of the West Coast of the whole Island. The point also of
Achin, or extremity of the Island, is High Land: but Achin, it self and the
Country to the Eastward, is lower, not altogether destitute of small Hills, and
every where of a moderate height, and a Champion Country, naturally very fit
for cultivation.

There is one Hill more remarkable than ordinary, especially to Seamen. The
English call it, the Golden Mount: but whether this name is given it by the
Natives, or only by the English, I know not. It Is near the N. W. end of the
Island; and Achin stands but 5 or 6 mile from the bottom of it. It Is very large
at the foot, and runs up smaller toward the head; which is raised so high, as
to be seen at Sea 30 or 40 Leagues. This was the first Land that we saw coming
in our Proe from the Nicobar Islands, mentioned in my former Voyage. The rest
of the Land, though of a good height, was then undiscerned by us, so that this
Mountain appeared like an Island in the Sea; which was the reason why our Achin
Malayans took it for Pulo Way. But that Island, though pretty high Champion Land,
was invisible, when this Golden Mount appeared so plain, though as far distant as
that Island.

Achin upon the Continent, there are also several Islands under its
Jurisdiction, most of them uninhabited; and these make the Road of Achin. Among
them is this Pulo Way, which is the Eastermost of a Range of Islands, that lie
off the N. W. end of Sumatra. It is also the largest of them, and it is
inhabited by Malefactors, who are banished thither from Achin. This, with the
other Islands of this Range, lie in a semicircular form, of about 7 Leagues
diameter. Pulo Gomez is another large Island about 20 mile West from Pulo Way,
and about 3 Leagues from the N. W. point of Sumatra. Between Pulo Gomez and the
Main are 3 or 4 other small Islands; yet with Channels of a sufficient breadth
between them, for Ships to pass through; and they have very deep Water. All Ships
bound from Achin to the Westward, or coming from thence to Achin, go in and out
through one or other of these Channels: and because shipping comes hither from
the Coast of Surrat, one of these Channels which is deeper than the rest, is
called the Surrat Channel. Between Pulo Gomez and Pulo Way, in the bending of
the Circle, there are other small Islands, the chief of which is called Pulo
Rondo. This is a small round high Island, not above 2 or 3 mile in
circumference. It lies almost in the extremity of the bending on the N. E. part
of the Circle, but nearer Pulo Way than Pulo Gomez. There are large deep
Channels on either side, but the most frequented is the Channel on the West
side. Which is called the Bengal Channel, because it looks toward that Bay;
and Ships coming from thence, from the Coast of Coromandel, pass in and out
this way. Between Pulo Way and the main of Sumatra, is another Channel of 3 or
4 Leagues wide: which is the Channel for Ships that go from Achin to the
Streights of Malacca, or any Country to the East of those Streights, and vice
versa. There is good riding Sumatra: but the Road for all Ships that come to
Achin is near the Sumatra Shore, within all the Islands. There they anchor at
what distances they please, according to the Monsoons or Seasons of the Year.
There is a small Navigable River comes out into the Sea, by which Ships
transport their Commodities in smaller Vessels up to the City. The Mouth of
this River is 6 or 7 Leagues from Pulo Rondo, and 3 or 4 from Pulo Way, and
near as many from Pulo Gomez. The Islands are pretty high Champion Land, the
Mold black or yellow, the Soil deep and fat, producing large tall Trees, fit
for any uses. There are Brooks of Water on the 2 great Islands of Way and
Gomez, and several sorts of wild Animals; especially wild Hogs in abundance.

The Mold of this Continent is different according to the natural position of
it. The Mountains are Rocky, especially those toward the West Coast, yet most
that I have seen seems to have a superficial covering of Earth, naturally
producing Shrubs, small Trees, or pretty good Grass. The small Hills are most
of them clothed with Woods; the Trees whereof seem by their growth to spring
from a fruitful Soil: the Champion Land, such as I have seen, is and;some
black, some gray, some reddish, and all of a deep Mold. But to be very
particular in these things, especially in all my Travels, is more than I can
pretend to: though it may be I took as much notice of the difference of Soil as I
met with it, as most Travelers have done, having been bred in my Youth in
Somersetshire, at a place called East Cocker near Yeovil or Evil: in which
Parish there is a great Variety of Soil, as I have ordinarily met with any
where, viz. black, red, yellow, sandy, stony, clay, morass or swampy, etc. I
had the more reason to take notice of this, because this Village per An. under
Coll. Helliar the Lord of the Manor: and most, it not all these Tenants, had
their own Land scattering in small pieces, up and down several sorts of Land in
the Parish: so that every one had some piece of every sort of Land, his black
Ground, his Sandy, Clay, etc. some of 20, 30, or 40 Shillings an Acre, for some
uses, and others not worth 10 Groats an Acre. My Mother being possessed of one of
these Leases, and having of all these sorts of Land, I came acquainted with
them all, and knew what each sort would produce, (viz.) Wheat, Barley, Maslin,
Rice, Beans, Peace, Oats, Fetches, Flax, or Hemp: in all which I had a more than
usual Knowledge for one so young; taking a particular delight in observing it:
but enough of this matter.

The Kingdom of Achin has in general a deep Mold: It is very well watered with
Brooks and small Rivers, but none navigable for Ships of burden. This of Achin
admits not of any but small Vessels. The Land is some part very Woody, in other
places Savannah; the Trees are of diverse sorts, most unknown to me by name. The
Cotton and Cabbage-trees grow here, but not in such plenty as in some part of
America. These Trees commonly grow here, as indeed usually wherever they
grow, in a Champion dry Ground, such at least as is not drowned or morassy; for
here is some such Land as that by the Rivers; and there grow Mangrove Trees,
and other Trees of that kind. Neither is this Kingdom destitute of Timbertrees
sit for building.

The Fruits of this Country are Plantains, Bonanoes, Guava's Oranges, Limes,
Jacks, Durians, Coco-nuts, Pumple-noses, Pomgranates, Mangoes, Magastans,
Citrons, Water-melons, Muskmelons, A new Voyage to the East Indies, there is
mention made of Mangastans, among the Fruits of Java: but the Author is
mistaken, in that he compares it to a Sloe, in shape, and taste: Yet I remember
there is such a sort of Fruit at Achin; and believe by the description he gives
of it, it may probably be the same that he calls the Mangastan, though nothing
like the true Mangastan.

The Pumple-nose is a large Fruit like a Citron, with a very thick tender
uneven rind. The inside is full of Fruit: It grows all in cloves as big as a
small Barly-corn, and these are all full of juice, as an Orange or a Lemon,
though not growing in such partitions. It Is of a pleasant taste, and though there
are of them in other parts of the East Indies, yet these at Achin are accounted
the best. They are ripe commonly about Christmas, and they are so much
esteemed, that English men carry them from hence to Fort St George, and make
Presents of them to their Friends there. The other Fruits mentioned here, are
most of them described by me in my first Volume.

Ganga, or Bang. I never saw any but once, and that was at some distance from
me. It appeared to me like Hemp, and I thought it had been Hemp, till I was
told to the contrary. It is reported of this Plant, that if it is infused in
any Liquor, it will stupify the brains of any person that drinks thereof; but
it operates diversely, according to the constitution of the person. Some it
makes sleepy, some merry, putting them into a Laughing fit, and others it makes
mad: but after 2 or 3 hours they come to themselves again. I never saw the
effects of it on any person, but have heard much discourse of it. What other
use this Plant may serve for I know not: but I know it is much esteemed here,
and in other places too whither it is transported.

This Country abounds also with Medicinal Drugs and Herbs, and with variety of
Herbs for the Pot. The chief of their Drugs is Camphire, of which there are
quanities found on this Island, but most of it either on the borders of this
Kingdom to the Southward, or more remote still, without the precincts of it.
This that is found on the Island Sumatra is commonly sent to Japan to be
refined, and then brought from thence pure, and transported whither the
Merchants please afterterwards. I know that here are several sorts of Medicinal
Herbs made use of by the Natives, who go often a simpling, seeming to
understand their Virtues much, and making great use of them: but this being
wholly out of my Sphere, I can give no account of them; and though here are
plenty of Pot Herbs,

There are many other very profitable Commodities on this Island: but some of
them are more peculiar to other parts of it than Achin, especially Pepper. All
the Island abounds with that Spice, except only this North West end; at least
so much of it, as is comprehended within the Kingdom of Achin. Whether this
defect is through the negligence or laziness of these People, I know not.

Gold also is found, by report, in many parts of this Island: but the Kingdom
of Achin is at present most plentifully stored with it. Neither does any place
in the East Indies, that I know of, yield such quantities of it as this
Kingdom. I have never been at Japan, and therefore can make no estimate of the
great Riches of that Kingdom: but here I am certain there is abundance of it.

The Land Animals of this Country are Deer, Hogs, Elephants, Goats, Bullocks,
Buffaloes, Horses, Porcupines, Monkeys, Squirrils, Guanoes, Lizards, Snakes,
etc. Here are also abundance of Ants of several sorts, and Woodlice, called by
the English in the East Indies White Ants. The Elephants that I saw here were
all tame: yet it is reported there are some wild; but I judge not many, if any
at all. In some places there are plenty of Hogs; they are all wild, and
commonly very poor. At some times of the Year, when the wild Fruits fall from
the Trees, they are indifferent fat, or at least fleshy: and then they are
sweet and good: they are very numerous; and whether for that reason, or
scarcity of Food, it is very rare to find them fat. The Goats are not very
many, neither are there many Bullocks: but the Savannahs swarm with Buffaloes,
belonging to some or other of the Inhabitants, Coromandel. The Porcupines and
Squirrels are accounted good food by the English; but how they are esteemed by
the Natives I know not.

The Fowls of this Country are Dunghill Fowls and Ducks; but I know of no other
tame Fowls they have. In the Woods there are many sorts of wild Fowls, viz.
Maccaws, Parrots, Parakites, Pigeons, and Doves of 3 or 4 sorts. There are
plenty of other small Birds; but I can say nothing of them,

The Rivers of this Country afford plenty of Fish. The Sea also supplies diverse
sorts of very good Fish, (viz) Snooks, Mullets, Mudfish, Eels, Stingrays, which
I shall describe in the Bay of Campeachy, Tenpounders, Old Wives, Cavallies,
Crawfish, Shrimps, etc.

The Natives of this Country are Malayans. They are much the same People with
those of Queda, Jihore, and other places on the Continent of Malacca, speaking
the same Malayan Language, with very little difference: and they are of the
same Mohammedan Religion, and alike in their haughty humor and manner of
living: so that they seem to have been originally the same People. They are
People of a middle stature, straight and well shaped, and of a dark Indian
copper color. Their Hair is black and lank, their Faces generally pretty long,
yet graceful enough. They have black Eyes, middling Noses, thin Lips, and black
Teeth, by the frequent use of Betle. They are very lazy, and care not to work
or take pains. The poorer sort are addicted to theft, and are often punished
severely for it. They are otherwise good natured in general, and kindenough to
strangers.

Eastern People use the Complement of uncovering their Heads when they meet, as
we do. But the general wear for all sorts of People is a small Turban, such as
the Mindanaians wear, described in the 12th Chap. of my former Volume, page
326. They have small Breeches, and the better sort will have a piece of Silk
thrown losely over their Shoulders; but the poor go naked from the Waste
upwards. Neither have they the use of Stockings and Shoes, but a sort of
Sandals are worn by the better sort.

Their Houses are built on Posts, as those of Mindanao, and they live much
after the same fashion: but by reason of their Gold Mines, and the frequent
resort of Strangers, they are richer, and live in greater plenty. Their common
food is Rice, and the better sort have Fowls and Fish, with which the Markets
are plentifully stored, and sometimes Buffaloes flesh, all which is dressed very
favourly with Pepper and Garlic, and tinctured yellow with Turmerick, to make
it pleasant to the Eye, as the East-Indians generally love to have their Food
look yellow: neither do they want good Achars or Sauces to give it a relish.

The City of Achin is the chief in all this Kingdom. It is seated on the Banks
of a River, near the N. W. end of the Island, and about 2 miles from the Sea.
This Town consists of 7 or 8000 Houses, and in it there are always a great many
Merchantstrangers, viz. English, Dutch, Danes, Portuguese, Chinese, Guzarats,
etc. The Houses of this City are generally larger than those I saw at Mindanao,
and better furnished with Household Goods. The City has no Walls, nor so much as
a Ditch about it. It has a great number of Mosques, generally square Turkey. The
Queen has a large Palace here, built handsomely with Stone: but I could not get
into the inside of it. It Is said there are some great Guns about it, 4 of which
are of Brass, and are said to have been sent hither as a Present by our K.
James the first.

The chief Trades at Achin are Carpenters, Blacksmiths, Goldsmiths, Fishermen,
and Money Changers: but the Country People live either on breeding Heads of
Cattle, but most for their own use, or Fowls, especially they who live near the
City, which they send weekly thither to sell: others plant Roots, Fruits, etc.
and of late they have sown pretty large Fields of Rice. This thrives here well
enough; but they are so proud, that it is against their Stomach to work:
neither do they themselves much trouble their heads about it, but leave it to
be managed by their Slaves: and they were the Slaves brought lately by the
English and Danes from the Coast of Coromandel, in the time of a Famine there, I
spoke of before, who first brought this sort of Husbandry into such request
among the Achinese. Yet neither does the Rice they have this way supply one
quarter of their occasions, but they have it brought to them from their
Neigbouring Countries.

The Fishermen are the richest working People: I mean such of them as can
purchase a Net; for thereby they get great profit; and this sort of employment
is managed also by their Slaves. In fair weather you shall have 8 or 10 great
Boats, each with a Sain or haling Net: and when they see a Shoal of Fish, they
strive to encompass them with these Nets, and all the Boats that are near
assist each other to drag them ashore. Sometimes they

The Carpenters use such Hatchets as they have at Mindanao. They build good
Houses after their fashion: and they are also ingenious enough in building
Proes, making very pretty ones, especially of that sort which are Flying-Proes;
which are built long, deep, narrow, and sharp, with both sides alike, and
Outlagers on each side, the Head and Stern like other Boats. They carry a great
Sail, and when the wind blows hard, they send a Man or two to sit at the
extremity of the Windward Outlager, to poise the Vessel. They build also some
Vessels of 10 or 20 Tuns burden, to Trade from one place to another: but I
think their greatest ingenuity is in building their Flying-Proes; which are
made very smooth, kept neat and clean, and will sail very well: for which
reason they had that name given them by the English.

There are but few Blacksmiths in this Town, neither are they very skilful at
their Trade. The Goldsmiths are commmonly strangers, yet some of the Achinese
themselves know how to work Metals, though not very well. The Money Changers are
here, as at Tonquin, most Women. These sit in the Markets and at Corners of the
Streets, with leaden Money called Cash, which is a name that is generally given
to small Money in all these Countries: but the Cash here is neither of the same
Metal, nor value with that at Tonquin; for that is Copper, and this is Lead, or
Block Tin, such as will bend about Cash, and it is the same with what they
called Petties at Bantam. Of these, 1500 make a Mess, which is their other sort
of Coin, and is a small thin piece of Gold, stamped with Malayan Letters on each
side. It is in value 15 pence English, 16 Mess, make a Tale, which here is 20
s. English, 5 Tale make a Bancal, a weight so called, and 20 Bancal make a
Catty, another weight. But the Gold Coin seldom holds weight, for you shall
sometimes have 5 Tale and 8 Mess over, go to make a Pecul, and though 1500 Cash
is the value of a Mess, yet these rise and fall at the discretion of the
Money Changers: for sometimes you shall have 1000 Cash for a Mess: but they are
kept usually between these two numbers; seldom less than 1000, and never more
than 1500. But to proceed with these Weights, which they use either for Money
or Goods, 100 Catty make a Pecul, which is 132 l. English weight. Three hundred
Catty is a Bahar, which is 396 l. English weight; but in some places, as at
Bencouli, a Bahar is near 500 English weight. Spanish pieces of Eight go here
also, and they are valued according to the plenty or scarcity of them.
Sometimes a Piece of Eight goes but for 4 Mess, sometimes for 4 and a half,
sometimes 5 Mess.

They Coin but a small quantity of their Gold; so much as may serve for their
ordinary occasions in their Traffic one with another. But as the Merchant,
when he receives large Sums, always takes it by weight, so they usually pay
him unwrought Gold, and quantity for quantity: the Merchants choose rather to
receive this, than the coined Gold; and before their leaving the Country will
change their Messes for uncoined Gold: perhaps because of some deceits used by
the Natives in their Coining.

Achin, but within their Dominions, and rather near to the West Coast than the
Streights of Malacca. I take Golden Mount, which I spoke of before, to lie at
no great distance from that of the Mines; for there is very high Land all
thereabouts. To go thither they set out Eastward, toward Passange Jonca, and
thence strike up into the heart of the Country. I made some inquiry concerning
their getting Gold, and was told, that none but Mahometans were permitted to go
to the Mines: That it was both troublesome and dangerous to pass the Mountains,
before they came thither; there being but one way, and that over such steep
Mountains, that in some places they were forced to make use of Ropes, to climb
up and down the Hills. That at the foot of these Precipices there was a Guard
of Soldiers, to see that no uncircumcised person should pursue that design, and
also to receive custom of those that past either forward or backward. That at
the Mines it was so sickly that not the half of those that went thither did
ever return again; though they went thither only to Traffic with the Miners, who
live there, being seasoned: that these who go thither from the City stayed not
usually above 4 Months at the Mines, and were back again in about 6 Months from
their going out. That some there made it their constant employment to visit the
Miners once every Year: for after they are once seasoned, and have found the
profit of that Trade, no thoughts of danger can deter them from it: for I was
credibly told, that these made 2000 per cent. of whatever they carried with
them, to sell to the Miners: but they could not carry much by reason of the
badness of the ways. The rich men never go thither themselves, but send their
Slaves: and if 3 out of 6 returns, they think they make a very profitable
journey Passange Jonca, and get Horses to carry their Cargo to the foot of the
Mountains. There they draw it up with Ropes, and if they have much goods, one
stays there with them, while the rest march to the Mines with their load; and
return again for the rest. I had this relation from Captain Tiler, who lived at
Achin, and spoke the Language of the Country very well. There was an English
Renegado that used that trade, but was always at the Mines when I was here. At
his Return to Achin he constantly frequented an English Punch-house, spending
his Gold very freely, as I was told by the Master of the house. I was told also
by all that I discoursed with about the Gold, that here they dig it out of the
Ground; and that sometimes they find pretty large lumps.

It is the product of these Mines that draws so many Merchants hither, for the
Road is seldom without 10 or 15 sail of Ships of several Nations. These bring
all sort of vendible Commodities, as Silks, Chints, Muzlins, Callicoes, Rice,
etc. and as to this last, a man would admire to see what great quanities of
Rice are brought hither by the English, Dutch, Danes and Chinese: when any
arrives, the Commanders hire each a House to put their goods in. The Silks,
Muzlins, Callicoes, Opium, and such like rich Goods, they sell to the Guzurats,
who are the chief men that keep Shops here; but the Rice, which is the bulk of
the Cargo, they usually retail. I have heard a Merchant say, he has received
60, 70, and 80 l. a day for Rice, when it has been scarce; but when there are
many sellers, s. worth in a day is a good sale: for then a Mess will buy 14 or
15 Bamboes of it: whereas when Rice is scarce, you will not have above 3 or 4
Bamboes for a Mess. A Bamboe is a small sealed measure, containing, to the best
of my remembrance, not much above half a Gallon. Thus it rises and falls as
Ships come hither. Those who sell Rice keep one constantly attending to measure
it out; and the very Grandees themselves never keep a stock before hand, but
depend on the Market, and buy just when they have occasion. They send their
Slaves for what they want, and the poorer sort, who have not a Slave of their
own, will yet hire one to carry a Mess worth of Rice for them, though not one
hundred paces from their own homes, scorning to do it themselves. Besides one
to measure the Rice, the Merchants hire a man to take the Money; for here is
some false Money, as Silver and Copper Mess gilt over: Besides, here are some
true Mess much worn, and therefore not worth near their value in tale. The
Merchants may also have occasion to receive 10 or 20 l. at a time for other
Commodities; and this too besides those little sums for Rice, he must receive
by his Broker, if he will not be cheated; for it is work enough to examine every
piece: and in receiving the value of 10 l. in Mess, they will ordinarily be
forced to return half or more to be changed; for the Natives are for putting
off bad Money, if possibly they can. But if the Broker takes any bad Money,
it is to his own loss. These sort of Brokers are commonly Guzurats, and it is
very necessary for a Merchant that comes hither, especially if he is a
Stranger, to have one of them, for fear of taking bad or light Money.

The English Merchants are very welcome here, and I have heard that they do not
pay so much Custom as other Nations. The Dutch Freemen Chinese are the most
remarkable. There are some of them live here all the Year long; but others only
make annual Voyages hither from China. These latter come hither some time in
June, about 10 or 12 sail, and bring abundance of Rice, and several other
Commodities. They take up Houses all by one another, at the end of the Town,
next the Sea: and that end of the City is called the China Camp, because there
they always quarter, and bring their goods ashore thither to sell. In this
Fleet come several Mechanics, (viz.) Carpenters, Joyners, Painters, etc. These
set themselves immediately to work, making of Chests, Drawers, Cabinets, and
all sorts of Chinese Toys: which are no sooner finished in their
Working-houses, but they are presently set up in Shops and at the Doors to
sale. So that for two Months or ten Weeks this Place is like a Fair, full of
Shops stuffed with all sort of vendible commodities, and People resorting hither
to buy: and as their goods sell off, so they contract themselves into less
compass, and make use of fewer Houses. But as their business decreases, their
Gaming among themselves increases; for a Chinese, if he is not at work, had as
lieve be without Victuals as without Gaming; and they are very dexterous at it.
If before their goods are all sold, they can light of Chapmen to buy their
Ships, they will gladly sell them also, at least some of them, if any Merchant
will buy; for a Chinese is for selling every thing: and they who are so happy
as to get Chapmen for their own Ships, will return as passengers with their
Neighbors, leaving their Camp, as it is called, poor and naked, like other
parts of the City, till the next Year. They commonly go away about the latter
end of September, and never fail to return again at the Season: China Camp.
Even the Europeans go thither for their diversion: the English, Dutch, and
Danes, will go to drink their Hoc-ciu, at some China Merchants House who sells
it; for they have no tippling Houses. The European Seamen return thence into
the City drunk enough, but the Chinese are very sober themselves.

The Achinese seem not to be extraordinary good at Accounts, as the Banians or
Guzurats are. They instruct their youth in the knowledge of Letters, Malayan
principally, and I suppose in somewhat of Arabic, being all Mahometans. They
are here, as at Mindanao, very superstitious in washing and cleansing
themselves from defilements: and for that Reason they delight to live near the
Rivers or Streams of Water. The River of Achin near the City is always full of
People of both Sexes and all Ages. Some come on purpose to wash themselves, for
the Pleasure of being in the Water: which they so much delight in, that they
can scarce leave the River without going first into it, if they have any
business brings them near. Even the sick are brought to the River to wash. I
know not whether it is accounted good to wash in all distempers, but I am
certain from my own Experience, it is good for those that have Flux, especially
Mornings and Evenings, for which reason you shall then see the Rivers fullest,
and more especially in the Morning. But the most do it upon a Religious
account: for therein consists the chief part of their Religion.

There are but few of them resort daily to their Mosques; yet they are all
stiff in their Religion, and so zealous for it, that they greatly rejoice in
making a Proyselyte. I was told, that while I was Tonquin, a Chinese inhabiting
here turned from his Paganism to Mahometanism, and being circumcised, he was
thereupon carried in great state through the City on an Elephant, with one
crying before him, that he was turned Believer. This man was called the Captain
of the China Camp; for, as I was informed, he was placed there by his
Countrymen as the chief Factor or Agent, to negotiate their affairs with the
People of the Country. Whether he had dealt falsely, or was only envied by
others, I know not: but his Countrymen had so entangled him in Law, that he
had been ruined, if he had not made use of this way to disingage himself; and
then his Religion protected him, and they could not meddle with him. On what
score the two English Runagadoes turned here, I know not.

The Laws of this Country are very strict, and offenders are punished with
great severity. Neither are there any delays of Justice here; for as soon as
the Offender is taken, he is immediately brought before the Magistrate, who
presently hears the matter, and according as he finds it, so he either acquits,
or orders punishment to be inslicted on the Party immediately. Small offenders
are only whipped on the back, which sort of punishment they call Chaubuck. A
Thief for his first offense, has his right hand chopped off at the Wrist: for the
second offense off goes the other; and sometimes instead of one of their hands,
one or both their feet are cut off; and sometimes (though very rarely) both hands
and feet. If after the loss of one or both hands or feet, they still prove
incorrigible, for they are many of them such very Rogues and so arch, that they
will steal with their Toes, then they are banished to Pulo Way, during their
Lives: and if they get thence to the City, as sometimes they do, they are
commonly sent back again; though sometimes they get a License to stay.

Pulo Way there are none but this sort of Cattle: and though they all of them
want one or both hands, yet they so order matters, that they can row very well,
and do many things to admiration, whereby they are able to get a livelihood:
for if they have no hands, they will get somebody or other to fasten Ropes or
Withes about their Oars, so as to leave Loops wherein they may put the stamps
of their Arms; and therewith they will pull an Oar lustily. They that have one
hand can do well enough: and of these you shall see a great many even in the
City. This sort of punishment is inflicted for greater Robberies; but for small
pilfering the first time Thieves are only whipped; but after this a Petty Larceny
is looked on as a great crime. Neither is this sort of punishment peculiar to
the Achinese Government, but probably, used by the other Princes of this
Island, and on the Island J^^a also, especially at Bantam. They formerly, then
the King of Bantam was in his prosperity, ^ priv'd men of the right hand for
Theft, and may full for ought I know. I knew a Dutchman so served: he was a
Seaman belonging to one of the King of Bantam's Ships. Being thus punished, he
was dismissed from his service, and when I was this time at Achin he lived there.
Here at Achin, when a member is thus cut off, they have a broad piece of
Leather or Bladder ready to clap on the Wound. This is presently applied, and
bound on so fast, that the Blood cannot issue forth. By this means the great
Flux of Blood is stop, which would else ensue; and I never heard of any one who
died of ^t. How long this Leather is kept on the Wound ^ know not: but it is so
long, till the blood is perfectly stanched; and when it is taken off, the ^lods
of Blood which were pressed in the Wound by he Leather, peel all off with it,
leaving the ^ound clean. Then, I judge, they use cleansing

I never heard of any that suffered Death for Theft. Criminals, who deserve
death, are executed diverse ways, according to the nature of the offense, or the
quality of the offender. One way is by Impaling on a sharp Stake, which passes
up right from the Fundament through the Bowels, and comes out at the Neck. The
Stake is about the bigness of a man's Thigh, placed upright, one end in the
ground very sirm; the upper sharp end is about 12 or 14 foot high. I saw one
man spitted in this manner, and there he remained 2 or 3 days: but I could not
learn his offense.

Noblemen have a more honorable death; they are allowed to fight for their
lives: but the numbers of those with whom they are to engage, soon put a period
to the Combat, by the death of the Malefactor. The manner of it is thus; the
person condemned is brought bound to the place of excution. This is a large
plain Field, spacious enough to contain thousands of People. Thither the
Achinese, armed, as they usually go, with their Cresset, but then more
especially, resort in Troops, as well to be spectators, as actors in the
Tragedy. These make a very large Ring, and in the midst of the multitude the
Criminal is placed, and by him such Arms as are allowed on such occasions,
which are, a Sword, a Cresset, and a Lance. When the time is come to act, he is
unbound, and left at his liberty to take up his fighting Weapons. The
spectators being all ready, with each man his Arms in his hand, stand still in
their places, till the Malefactor advances, He commonly sets out with a shriek,
and daringly faces the multitude: but he is soon brought to the ground, first
by Lances thrown at him, and afterward by their Swords and Cressets. One was
thus executed while Dennis Driscal, who was then one of the Spectators.

This Country is governed by a Queen, under whom there are 12 Oronkeys, or
great Lords. These act in their several precincts with great Power and
Authority. Under these there are other inferior Officers, to keep the Peace in
the several parts of the Queens Dominions. The present Shabander of Achin is
one of the Oronkeys. He is a Man of greater knowledge than any of the rest, and
supposed to be very rich. I have heard say, he had not less than 1000 Slaves,
some of whom were topping Merchants, and had many Slaves under them. And even
these, though they are Slaves to Slaves, yet have their Slaves also; neither can
a stranger easily know who is a Slave and who not among them: for they are all,
in a manner, Slaves to one another: and all in general to the Queen and
Oronkeys; for their Government is very Arbitrary. Yet there is nothing of
rigor used by the Master to his Slave, except it be the very meanest, such as
do all sorts of servile work: but those who can turn their hands to any thing
besides Drudgery, live well enough by their industry. Nay, they are encouraged
by their Masters, who often lend them Money to begin some trade or business
withal: Whereby the Servant lives easy, and with great content follows what
his Inclination or Capacity fits him for; and the Master also, who has a share
in the gains, reaps the more profit, yet without trouble. When one of these
Slaves dies, his Master is Heir to what he leaves; and his Children, if he has
any, become his Slaves also: unless the Father out of his own clear gains has
in his life time had wherewithal to purchase their Freedom. The Markets are
kept by these People, and you scarce Pulo Gomez, for thence those of this City
fetch most of their Wood, though there is scarce any thing to be seen but Woods
about the City. Yet though all these are Slaves, they have habitations or houses
to themselves in several parts of the City, far from their Masters Houses, as
if they were free People. But to return to the Shabander I was speaking of, all
Merchant Strangers, at their first arrival, make their Entries with him, which
is always done with a good Present: and from him they take all their dispatches
when they depart; and all matters of importance in general between Merchants
are determined by him. It seems to have been by his Conversion and Acquaintance
with Strangers, that he became so knowing, beyond the rest of the Great-men:
and he is also said to be himself a great Merchant.

The Queen of Achin, as it is said, is always an old Maid, chosen out of the
Royal Family. What Ceremonies are used at the choosing her I know not: Nor who
are the Electors; but I suppose they are the Oronkeys. After she is chosen, she
is in a manner confined to her Palace; for by report she seldom goes abroad,
neither is she seen by any People of inferior rank and quality; but only by
some of her Domestics: except that once a Year she is dressed all in white, and
placed on an Elephant, and so rides to the River in state to wash her self: but
whether any of the meaner sort of People may see her in that Progress I know
not: for it is the custom of most Eastern Princes to s^reen themselves from the
sight of their Subjects: Or if they sometimes go abroad for their pleasure, yet
the People are then ordered either to turn the^ b^^ks Bantam, or to hold their
Hands before their Eyes, as at Siam. At Mindanao, they may look on their
Prince: but from the highest to the lowest they approach him with the greatest
respect and veneration, creeping very low, and oft-times on their Knees, with
their Eyes fixed on him: and when they withdraw, they return in the same manner,
creeping backwards, and still keeping their Eyes on him, till they are out of
his sight.

But to return to the Queen of Achin, I think Mr. Hackluit or Purchase, makes
mention of a King here in our King James I. time. But at least of later Years
there has always been a Queen only, and the English who reside there, have been
of the Opinion that these People have been governed by a Queen ab Origin; and
from the antiquity of the present constitution, have formed notions, that the
Queen of Sheba who came to Solomon was the Queen of this Country: and the
Author of an old Map of the World, which I have seen, was, it seems of this
Opinion, when writing the old Hebrew names of Nations, up and down the several
parts anciently known of Europe, Asia, and Africa, he puts no other name in the
Isle of Sumatra, but that of Sheba. But be that as it will, it is at present
part of it under a Queen, though she has little power or authority: for though
there is seemingly abundance of respect and reverence shown her, yet she has
little more than the title of a Sovereign, all the Government being wholly in
the hands of the Oronkeys.

While I was on my Voyage to Tonquin, the old Queen died, and there was another
Queen chosen in her room, but all the Oronkeys were not for that Election; many
of them were for choosing a King. Four of the Oronkeys who lived more remote
from the Court, took up Arms to oppose the new Queen Oronkeys, and brought 5 or
6000 Men against the City: and thus stood the state of affairs, even when we
arrived here, and a good while after. This Army was on the East side of the
River, and had all the Country on that side, and so much of the City also, as
is on that side the River, under their Power: But the Queen's Palace and the
main part of the City, which stands on the West Side, held out stoutly. The
River is wider, shallower, and more sandy at the City, than any where else near
it: yet not fordable at low Water. Therefore for the better communication from
one side to the other, there are Ferry-boats to carry Passengers to and fro. In
other places the Banks are steep, the River more rapid, and in most places very
muddy: so that this place, just at the City it self, is the most convenient to
transport Men or Goods from one side to the other.

It was not far from this place the Army lay, as if they designed to force
their passage here. The Queens party, to oppose them, kept a small Guard of
Soldiers just at the Landing-place. The Shabander of Achin had a Tent set up
there, he being the chief manager of her Affairs: and for the more security, he
had 2 or 3 small brass Guns of a Minion Bore planted by his Tent all the day,
with their Muzzels against the River. In the Evening there were 2 or 3 great
Trees drawn by an Elephant, and placed by the side of the River, for a
Barricado against the Enemy: and then the Brass Guns were drawn from the
Shabander's Tent, which stood not far from it, and planted just behind the
Trees, on the rising Bank: So that they looked over the Trees, and they might
Fire over, or into the River, if the Enemy approached. When the Barricado was
thus made, and the Guns planted, the Ferry-boat^ passed no more from side to
side, till the nex^ morning. Then you should hear the Soldiers calling
Shabanders Tent, and the Trees were drawn aside, to open the Passage from one
side to the other: and every Man then went freely about his business, as if all
had been as quiet as ever, only the Shabander and his Guard staid still in
their stations: So that there was not any sign of Wars, but in the night only,
when all stood to their Arms: and then the Towns-people seemed to be in fear,
and sometimes we should have a Rumor, that the Enemy would certainly make an
attempt to come over.

While these Stirs ^asted, the Shabander sent to all the Foreigners, and
desired them to keep in their own Houses in the night, and told them, that
whatever might happen in the City by their own civil Broyls, yet no harm should
come to them. Yet some of the Portuguese, fearing the worst, would every night
put their richest Goods into a Boat, ready to take their flight on the first
Alarm. There were at this time not above 2 or 3 English Families in the Town,
and 2 English Ships, and one Dutch Ship, besides 2 or 3 Moors Ships of the
Moguls Subjects, in the Road. One of the English Ships was called the
Nellegree; the name taken from Nellegree Hills in Bengal, as I have heard. She
came from the Bay of Bengal, laden with Rice, Cotton, etc. the other was the
Dorothy of London, Captain Thwait Commander, who came from Fort St George, and
was bound to Bencouli with Soldiers, but touched here, as well to sell some
goods, as to bring a Present to the Queen from our East India Company. Captain
Thwait, according to custom went with his Present Malayan Habit, which she gave
him; and she sent also two Dancing Girls to show him some pastime there: and I
saw them at his Lodgings that Evening, dancing the greatest part of the night,
much after the same manner of the Dancing-women of Mindanao, rather writhing
their Hands and Bodies with several Antic Gestures, than moving much out of
the place they were in. He had at this time about twenty great Jars of Bengal
Butter, made of Buffaloes Milk; and this Butter is said also to have Lard or
Hogs fat mixed with it, and rank enough in these hot Countries, though much
esteemed by all the Achinese, who give a good price for it; and our English
also use it. Each of the Jars this came in contained 20 or 30 Gallons; and they
were set in Mr. Driscal's Yard at Achin: What other Goods the Captain brought I
know not.

But not long after this he being informed that the Moors Merchants residing
here had carried off a great Treasure aboard their Ships, in order to return
with it to Surrat, and our Company having now Wars with the Great Mogul,
Captain Thwait in the Evening drew of all his Seamen, and seized on one of the
Moors Ships, where he thought the Treasure was. The biggest he let alone: She
was a Ship that one Captain Constant took in the Road sometime before, and
having plundered her, he gave her to the Queen, of whom the Moors bought her
again. The Moors Merchants had speedy notice of this Action of Captain Thwait,
and they presently made their Application to the Queen for satisfaction. But
her affairs at this time being in such a posture as I mentioned, by reason of
their intestine Broyls, she said she could do nothing for them.

Thwaits proceedings: but seeing the Moors flock to Court, and not knowing what
answer they had from the Queen, we posted off to the Ships, for fear of being
imprisoned, as some English Men had been while I was at Tonquin, on the like
score. Indeed I had at this time great cause to be afraid of a Prison, being
sick of a Flux, so that a Prison would have gone near to have killed me: yet I
think it fared not much better with me, for the Ships I fled to afforded me but
little comfort. For I knew no man aboard the Dorothy, and could expect no
comfort there. So I and the rest went aboard the Nellegree, where we could more
reasonably expect relief, than in a Ship that came from England: for these
which come so long a Voyage, are just victualled for the Service, and the
Seamen have every one their stinted allowance, out of which they have little
enough to spare to Strangers.

But though there were Victuals enough aboard the Nellegree, yet so weak as I
then was, I had more mind to rest my self than to eat: and the Ship was so
pestered with Goods, that I could not find a place to hang up my Hammock in.
Therefore it being fair weather, I made a shift to lie in the Boat that I came
aboard in. My Flux was violent, and I slept but little; so I had the
opportunity of observing the Moon totally Eclipsed, had I been in a condition
to observe any thing. As soon as I perceived the Moon to be eclipsed, I gazed
at it indeed, as I lay, till it was totally obscured, which was a pretty while:
but I was so little curious, that I remembered not so much as what day of the
Month it was; and I kept no Journal of this Voyage, as I did of my other, but
only kept an account of several particular Remarks and Observations as they
occurred to me. I lay three or four days thus in this Moors had got a Pass from
the Dutch Captain then in the Road, for 4 or 500 Dollars, as I was then told,
and Captain Thwait delivered them their Ship again, but what terms he made with
them, I know not. Thus that Fray was over, and we came ashore again, recovered
of the fright we had been in. In a short time also after this, the Achinese all
agreed to own the new Queen, and so the War ended without any Bloodshed.

I was persuaded to wash in the River, Mornings and Evenings, for the recovery
of my Health: and though it seemed strange to me before I tried it, yet I found
so much comfort in the first trial, that I constantly appyed my self to it. I
went into the River till the water was as high as my waste, and then I stooped
down and found the water so cool and refreshing to my Body, that I was always
loath to go out again. Then I was sensible that my Bowels were very hot, for I
found a great heat within me, which I found refresht by the cool water. My Food
was Salt-fish broyled, and boiled Rice mixed with Tire. Tire is sold about the
Streets there: it is thick sower milk. It is very cooling, and the Salt-fish and
Rice is binding: therefore this is thought there the proper food for the common
people, when they have Fluxes. But the Richer Sort will have Sago, which is
brought to Achin from other Countries, and Milk of Almonds.

But to return to the state of Achin, before I go off from it I shall add this
short account of the Seasons of year there, that their weather is much the same
as in other Countries North of the Line, and their dry Seasons, Rains, and
Land-floods come much at the same time, as at Tonquin and other places of North
Latitude. Only as Achin lies within a few Degrees of the Line, so upon the Suns
crossing the March, the Rains begin a little sooner there than in Countries
nearer the Tropic of Cancer: and when they are once set in, they are as
violent there as any where. I have seen it rain there for 2 or 3 days without
intermission; and the River running but a short course, its head not lying very
far within Land, it soon overflows; and a great part of the Street of the City,
shall on a sudden be all under water; at which time People row up and down the
Streets in Canoas. That side of the City toward the River especially, where
the Foreign Merchants live, and which is lower ground, is frequently under
Water in the wet Season: a Ships Longboat has come up to the very Gate of our
English Factory laden with Goods; which at other times is ground dry enough, at
a good distance from the River, and moderately raised above it. I did not find
the heat there any thing different from other places in that Latitude; though I
was there both in the wet and dry Season. It Is more supportable than at
Tonquin; and they have constantly the Refreshment of Sea and Land Breezes every
24 Hours.

CHAP. VIII.
The Author prepares to go for Pegu. Among other^ a Ship arrives here from
Merga in Siam. Of the Massacre of the English there. His intended Cargo for
Pegu. The arrival of other English Men from the City of Siam. The Author sets
out for Malacca instead of Pegu. They are becalmed and soon after in great
danger of running aground. The Coast of Sumatra from Diamond Point to the River
Dilly. They water there and at Pulo Verero; where they meet a Ship of Danes and
Moors from Trangambar. Pulo Arii, and Pulo Parselore, a useful Sea-mark to
avoid Sholes near Malacca Shore. The Author arrives at Malacca Town. The Town
and its Forts described: the Conquest of it by the Dutch, from the Portuguese.
Chinese and other Merchants residing here. The Sale of Flesh and Fish; the
Fruits and Animals. The Shabander, State of the Trade, and Guard-Ships. Opium,
a good Commodity among the Malayans. Rattan-Cables. They prepare for their
return back to Achin.

AS soon as I was pretty well recovered, I was Shipped Mate of the Sloop that
came from Malacca with us, which Mr. Wells had sold to Captain Tyler, who
lately came from Siam: and I was sent aboard to take possession of her, about
the beginning of May, 1689. He who was designed to command Achin Mate of the
Nellegree; and we were now to go to Pegu, but before the middle of June he left
the Employ, being sick, and loath to go at this dead time of the year to Pegu,
because the Westerly Wind was set in strong, and the Coast of Pegu is low Land,
and we were both unacquainted on the Coast. I was then made Commander, and took
in Goods in order to depart for that Coast. In the mean time Mr. Coventry
arrived in his Ship from the Coast of Coromandel laden with Rice, and a small
Vessel belonging to Capt. Tyler came also from Merga much about the same time.

This last Ship had been at Merga a considerable time, having been seized on by
the Siamites, and all the Men imprisoned, for some difference that happened
between the English and them. Neither was a Prison then thought hard usage by
them, for during the Havoc was made of the English there, many of those who
lived at Merga were massacred. Those who were imprisoned, were kept there till
all the English who lived at the City of Siam, on the other side of the
Kingdom, withdrew from thence: and then these Men had their Liberty restored
also, and their Ship given them, but no Goods, nor satisfaction for their
Losses, nor so much as a Compass to bring with them, and but little Provision.
Yet here they safely arrived, this being a better Ship that I was gone aboard
of, Captain Tyler immediately ^itted her up for the Sea, in order to send her
to Pegu.

By this time my Vessel was laden, and my Cargo was eleven thousand Coco-nuts,
five or six hundred weight of Sugar, and half a dozen Chest of Drawers of Japan
work, two were very large, designed for a Present to the King. Besides this,
Capt. Tyler, for so we used to call him, though he was only a Merchant, said he
intended to send a good quantity of Gold thither, by which he expected to gain
60 or 70 per Cent; for by report the King of Pegu had lately built a very
magnificent Pagoda, and was gilding it very richly with Gold: besides he was
making a large Image of Masly Gold for the chief Pagod of this Temple. By this
means Gold was risen in its value here: and Achin being a place abounding in
that Metal, much of it had already been sent thither from hence, and more was
going in other Vessels, belonging to the Moors of Achin, beside what Captain
Tyler designed to send.

It was now about the middle of August; and though I was ready to sail, yet I was
ordered to stay for Captain Tyler's other Vessel, till she had taken in her
lading, which was daily sent off. Her Cargo also was Coco-nuts, and she had
about 8 or 9000 already aboard: When I received an order from Captaln Tyler to
hale aboard of her, and put all my Cargo into her; as also all my Water-ca^k,
and whatever else I could spare that they wanted; but withal he desired me to
be satisfied, and told me I should in a short time be sent to Sea: but that
Ship being the biggest, he thought it more convenient to dispatch her first. I
presently did as I was ordered; and finding that I should not go this Voyage. I
sold also my small Cargo, which consisted only of some Coco-nuts and about 100
Nutmegs, which had the Shells on as they grew on the Trees. I bought all that I
could meet with in the Town, and paid about 3 d. a piece, and expected to have
had 12 d. a piece for them at Pegu, where they are much esteemed if the Shells
be on, for else they don't value them.

About this time the George, a great English Ship belonging to one Mr. Dalton,
arrived here from the City of Siam, coming through the Streights of Malacca. He
had been there some years trading to and fro, and had made very profitable
Voyages: but the late Revolution that happened there by the Death of the Falcon,
caused the English to withdraw from thence. The French were all sent away some
Months before, being not suffered to stay in the Kingdom: but before this Ship
came from thence, the Broyls of State were over; for the new King being
settled, all Tumults which commonly arise in these Countries at the Death of
the King, were appeased. The English were then desired to stay there, and those
who had yielded up their Places and Offices, were even entreated to accept them
again, for they owned that they had all served the Nation faithfully. But not
long before the Revolution, the Governor of Fort St. George sent for all the
English from thence particularly, and from the Service of all other Indian
Princes, to come and serve the East India Company at the Fort, or where else
they should send them. For that reason they all came away with Mr. Dalton, and
he, in kindness to his Countrymen, refused to take in Goods or Freight,
because he would have room enough for their passage, and their Household Goods:
for here were some Families of Men, Women and Children.

They were a long time coming from Siam to Achin, because they came against the
Monsoon; and in their passage they touched at Malacca, and when they arrived at
Achin, Mr. Dalton went ashore and hired an House, as did also most of his
Passengers: and among the rest Captain Minchin, who had formerly served the
East India Company at Surrat, but on some disgust left that place and came to
Siam. There he was made Gunner of a Fort, and maintained his Wife and Family
very well in that Employ, till the Revolution there, and the Companies orders
came and called him from thence. He being now destitute of employment, the
Merchants there thought of making him Commander of the Vessel that I was in,
because Captain Tyler was minded to sell part of her. Accordingly they met
about it, and the Vessel was divided into four parts, three of which were
purchased by Mr. Dalton, Mr. Coventry, and Capt. Minchin, and Captain Tyler
kept the 4th. The next day Capt. Minchin came off with an order to me to
deliver him the possession of the Ship, and told me, that if I liked to go his
Mate, I might still keep aboard till they had agreed on a Voyage. I was forced
to submit, and accepted a Mates Employ under Captain Minchin. It was not long
before we were ordered for Malacca to buy Goods there. We carried no Goods with
us, besides 3 or 400 pound of Opium.

It was about the middle of September, 1689. when we sailed from Achin. We were
four white Men in the Vessel, the Captain, and Mr. Coventry, who went
Supercargo, my self and the Boatswain. For common Seamen we had 7 or 8 Moors:
and generally in these Country Ships the White-men are all Officers. Two days
after we left Achin, being becalmed under the Shore, we came to an Anchor. Not
long after a Ship coming in from the Seaward, came to an anchor about 2 mile
ahead of us. Mr. Coventry knew her to be a Danish Ship belonging to
Trangambar; and therefore we hoisted out our Boat, and thought to have spoken
with her: but a small breeze springing up, they weighed their Anchors and went
away; neither would they speak with us, though we made signs for them to stay. We
weighed also and jogged on after them, but they sailed better than we. We met
little Winds and Calms, so that it was seven or eight days before we got as far
as Diamond-point, which is about forty leagues from Achin.

Being about four leagues short of that point, Captain Minchin desired me to
set the Land, and withal prick the Card, and see what Course we ought to

After I had set the Land, I went into the Cabin to look over the Draught to
see what course we must steer after we came about the Point. Mr. Coventry
followed me, and when I had satisfied my self, he asked me what course we must
steer? I told him E. S. E. till 12 a clock, if the gale stood, and then we
might hale more Southerly. He seemed to be startled at it, and told me, that
the Captain and he had been pricking the Card, and thought that S. E. or S. E.
by S. course would do well at 8 a clock. I said it was a good course to run
ashore; he argued a long time with me, but I persisted in my opinion, and when
I told Captain Minchin of my opinion, he was well satisfied. Presently after
this we had a pretty strong Tornado out of the S. W. which obliged us to hand
our Topsail. When the stress of the weather was over, we set our sails again,
and went in to Supper, and ordered the Man at Helm not to come to the Southward
of the E. S. E. We stayed in the Cabin till about 8 a clock, and then we came
out to set the Watch. It was now very dark, by reason of a Thunder-Cloud that
hung rumbling over the Land: yet by the flashes of lightning we plainly saw the
Land, right ahead of us. I was much surprised, and ran into the Steeridge to
look on the Compass, and found that we were steering S. S. E. instead of E. S.
E. I clapped the Helm a Starboard, and brought her to N. E. by E. and N. E. and
we very narrowly escaped being cast away.

When we first went to Supper we were 3 leagues off Land, and then E. S. E. was
a good course, the Land lying E. S. E. parallel with our course.

Coventry was satisfied with what I told him in the Evening, and was convinced
of his Error. I undertook to direct the Man at Helm, and the Wind continuing, I
kept off till ten a clock: then I steered E. S. E. till 12, and then haled up
S. S. E. and in the morning we were about 4 leagues S. E. from Diamond-point,
and about 3 leagues to the North of an Island.

The Land from hence lying S. S. E. we steered so; but meeting with calms
again, we anchored several times before we came to the River of Dilly, which is
28 leagues from Diamond-point. The Land between seems to be uneven, most of it
pretty high, and very woody: and it is said that all this Country, as far as the
River Dilly, is under the Queen of Achin.

About a League before we came to that River, being within 2 mile of the Shore,
we saw the Water of a muddy gray color, and tasting it, sound it to be sweet.
Therefore we presently filled some of our Water Cask; and it is an ordinary
thing in several places to take up fresh Water at Sea, against the mouth of
some River where it floats above the Salt Water: but we must dip but a little
way down; for sometimes if the Bucket goes but a foot deep it takes up
Salt Water with the fresh.

In the Evening we had a fine Land Breeze, with which we ran along the Shore,
keeping on a wind, and sounding every now and then. At last we were got among
the Sholes, at the mouth of that River, and puzzled to get out again. The River
Pulo Verero, lying in Lat. 3 d. 30 m. N. seven Leagues from the Mouth of the
River Dilly. We having a fair Wind, stood after them, intending there to wood
and water at Pulo Verero. For tho we took no fresh Water the Evening before out
of the Sea, yet at the River of Dilly it was brackish: for though the fresh Water
is born up by the Salt, and it might be entire without mixture, yet by plunging
of the Bucket somewhat to low, we might probably take up some of the Salt water
with it. They came to an Anchor about 2 or 3 a clock in the Afternoon: but the
Wind slackened, and it was 8 a Clock at night before we came thither. We
Anchored about a mile from them, and presently hoysed out our Boat to go
aboard: for we judged that this was the Danish Ship, that we saw when we came
first from Achin. I went in the Boat, because Mr. Coventry told me, that Mr.
Coppinger was Surgeon of her, the same Person who was with me in the Boat when
I was set a shore at the Nicobar Isles, but was not suffered to stay with me.
Mr. Coventry was now in the Boat with me, and we went and haled the Ship,
asking whence she came; and who was Commander; They answered, they were Danes
from Trangambar, for 'twas the Ship we took it to be. Then they asked who we
were? I answered English from Achin, and that Mr. Coventry was in the Boat, but
they would not believe it till Mr. Coventry spoke and the Captain knew his
Voice: neither did they till then believe we were Friends; for they had every
man his Gun in his hand, ready ^o fire on us, if we had gone aboard without
haling, ^s Mr. Coventry would have done, in confidence Trangambar on the Coast
of Coromandel. They having no Ships of their own, when the Danes fit out a
Ship, on any Voyage that they are inclined to, these Moors are obliged to join
Stock with them, and they first make an Offer of it to them as a kindness: and
the Moors being generally desirous to Trade, frequently accept of it almost on
any Terms: but should they be unwilling, yet dare they not refuse, for fear of
disobliging the Danes, who are Lords of the place. In this Ship I found Mr.
Coppenger: and he was the first that I had seen of all the Company that left me
at the Nicobar Islands. The next morning we filled our water and weighed again;
the Dane being gone a little before. He was bound to Jihore, to load Pepper,
but intended to touch at Malacca, as most Ships do that pass these Streights.
He also sailed better than we, and therefore left us to follow him.

We stood on yet nearest to the Sumatra Shore, till we came in sight of Pulo
Arii, in Lat. 3d. 2 m. N. These are several Islands lying S. E. by E. *Easterly
from Pulo Verero, about 32 Leagues distant. These Islands are good marks for
Ships bound through the Streights: for when they bear S. E. at ^ or 4 Leagues
distance, you may steer away E. by S. for the Malacca Shore, from whence you
then may be about 20 leagues. The first Land you will see is Pulo Parsalore,
which is a high peeked Hill in the Country, on the Malacca Coast: which
standing by it self amidst a low Country, it appears like an Island, Malacca.
It is a very remarkable Hill, and the only Seamark for Seamen to guide
themselves through certain Sands that lie near the Main; and if it is thick
hazy Weather, and the Hill is obscured, Pilots, unless they are very knowing in
the Soundings, will hardly venture in: for the Channel is not above a League
wide, and there are large Shoals on each side. These Shoals lie ten leagues
from Pulo Arii, and continue till within 2 or 3 of the Malacca shore. In the
Channel there is 12 or 14 fathom water, but you may keep in 7 or 8 fathom on
either side; and sounding all the way, you may pass on without danger.

We had a good gale at West, which brought us in sight of Pulo Parsalore: and
so we kept sounding till we came within the Shore, and then we had the Town of
Malacca about 18 leagues distant from us, to the S. E. and by E. Being shot
over to the Malacca shore, there is a good wide Channel to sail in, you having
the Shoals on one side, and the Land on the other; to which last you may come
as nigh as you see convenient, for there is water enough, and good anchoring.
The Tide runs pretty strong here; the Flood sets to the Eastward, and the Ebb
to the West: and therefore when there is little wind, and Ships cannot stem the
Tide, they commonly anchor. But we being in with the Malacca Shore, had a
westerly Wind, which brought us before Malacca Town, about the middle of
October; and here I first heard that King William and Queen Mary were crowned
King and Queen of England. The Dane that left us at Pulo Verero was not yet
arrived: for, as we afterward understood, they could not find the way through
the Sands, but were forced to keep along without them, and fetch a great
Compass about, which retarded their Passage.

Malacca is a pretty large Town, of about 2 or 300 Families of Dutch and
Portuguese, many of which are a mixed breed between those Nations. There are
also many of the Native Malayans inhabiting in small Cottages on the Skirts of
the Town. The Dutch Houses are built with Stone, and the Streets are wide and
straight, but not paved. At the North West of the Town there is a Wall and Gate
to pass in and out: and a small Fort always guarded with Soldiers. The Town
stands on a level low ground, close by the Sea. The Land on the backside of the
Town seems to be morassy, and on the West side, without the Wall, there are
Gardens of Fruits and Herbs, and some fair Dutch Houses: but that Quarter is
chiefly the habitation of the Malayans. On the East side of the Town, there is
a small River which at a Spring Tide will admit small Barks to enter. About 100
paces from the Sea there is a Drawbridge, which leads from the midst of the
Town to a strong Fort, built on the East side of the River.

This is the chief Fort, and is built on a low level ground, close by the Sea,
at the Foot of a little steep Hill. Its form is semicircular, according to the
natural position of the adjacent Hill. It fronts chiefly to the Sea, and having
its foundation on firm Rocks, the Walls are carried up to a good height, and of
a considerable thickness. The lower part of it is washed by the Sea every Tide.
On the back of the Hill, the Land being naturally low, there is a very large
Moat cut from the Sea to the River, which makes the whole an Island; and that
back part is stockadoed round with great Trees, set up an end: so that there is
no entering when once the Drawbridge is haled up. On the Hill, within this Fort
stands a small Church big enough to receive all the Towns-people, who come
hither on Sundays to hear Divine Service: and on the Main, Malayans are also
seated close by the Sea.

The first Europeans who settled here were the Portuguese; They also built the
great Fort: but whether they moted round the Hill, and made an Island of that
spot of ground, I know not, nor what charges have been bestowed on it since to
make it defenceable; nor what other alterations have been made; but the whole
Building seems to be pretty ancient, and that part of it which fronts to the
Sea, was in all probability, built by the Portugnese; for there are still the
marks of the Conquerours shot in the Walls. It is a place so naturally strong,
that I even wonder how they could be beaten out: but when I consider what other
places they then lost, and their mismanagements, I am the less surprised at it.
The Portuguese were the first discoverers by Sea of the East Indies, and had
thereby the Advantage of Trade with these rich Eastern People, as also an
opportunity, through their weakness, to settle themselves where they pleased.
Therefore they made Settlements and Fortsamong them in diverse places of India,
as here for one: and persuming upon the strength of their Forts, they insulted
over the Natives; and being grown rich with Trade, they fell to all manner of
looseness and debauchery; the usual concomitant of Wealth, and as commonly the
forerunner of Ruin. The Portuguese at this place, by report, made use of the
Native Women at their pleasure, whether Virgins or Married Women; such as they
liked they took without control: and it is probable, they as little restrained
their lust in other places; for the Breed of them is scattered all over India;
neither are there any People of more different Complexions than of that Race,
even from the coal-black to a light tawney. These injuries exasperated the
Native Maylayans here who joining with the Dutch, as I have been informed,
found means to betray to them their insolent Masters the Portuguese: than whom
there are not a more despicable people now in all the Eastern Nations: and of
all they once possessed, they have now only Goa left, of any place of
consequence. The Dutch are now Masters of most of the places they were once
possessed of; and particularly this of Malacca.

Malacca is a place of no great Trade, yet there are several Moors Merchants
always residing here. These have Shops of Wares, such as come from Surrat, and
the Coast of Coromandel and Bengal. The Chinese also are seated here, who bring
the Commodities of their Country hither, especially Tea, Sugar Candy, and other
Sweetmeats. Some of them keep Tea-houses, were for a Stiver a man has near a
pint of Tea, and a little Porrenger of Sugar Candy, or other Sweetmeats, if he
pleases. Others of them are Butchers: their chief flesh is Pork, which you may
have very reasonably, either fresh or salted: Neither are you desired to take
any particular piece, but they will cut a piece at one place, and the like at
another, either ^at or lean, as you would have it* Others among these Chinese
are Trades-people; and they are all in general very industrious, but withal
extraordinary Gamesters: and if they can get any to play with them, all
business must submit to that.

This Town is plentiful stored with Fish also. When the Fishermen come in, they
all resort to a place built purposely for the sale of them. There are Soldiers
waiting, who take the best for the Officers of the Fort, Whether they pay for
it, or that it is a Toll of Custom belonging to the Governor I know not: but
after they have served, the rest are sold to any who will buy. The manner

As for other Provisions, their Rice is brought to them from abroad. Such
Fruits as they have are much the same as I have already described and are
proper to the Climate, as Plantains, Bonanoes, Pine-apples, Oranges,
Water-melons, Pumple-noses, Mango's, etc. but these are only in their Gardens,
in no great plenty; and the Country is all covered with Wood, like one Forest:
and most of our Walking-Canes used in England, are brought from thence. They
have also a few Cattle, Bullocks, and Horses, etc. having but little Pasturage,
but good store of tame Fowl, Ducks, and Poultry. The principal person in the
Town is the Shahander, a Dutch man, next in power to the Governor, who lives
in the Fort, and meddles not with Trade, which is the Shahander's Province, who
seems to be chiefly concerned about the Customs of Goods.

This Town has no great Trade, by what I could see, but it seems to be
designedly built to command the passage of Shipping, going this way to the more
Eastern Nations. Not but that Ships may pass far enough out of reach of their
Cannon; but Guardships belonging to the Town, and lying in the Road, may hinder
others from passing. How the Portuguese managed their Affairs I know not; Dutch
commonly keep a Guardship here; and I have been told they require a certain
Duty of all Vessels that pass this way, the English only excepted: for all
Ships touch at this place, especially for Wood, Water, and Refreshment.

Two days after our arrival here, the Danish Ship came also to an Anchor; but
reporting that they were bound to Jihore, to lade Pepper, the Dutch told them
it was but in vain for them to seek a Trade there; for that the King of Jihore
had agreed with the Dutch to Trade only with them; and that to secure that
Trade, they had a Guardship lying there. I had this account from the Surgeon,
Mr. Coppinger, who seemed a little concerned at it: because when he told me
this, he could not tell whether they should proceed thither or no; but they did
go thither, and sound all this a sham, and Traded there to their own and the
Natives satisfaction, as he told me the next time I met him. This of Jihore
being but a small Kingdom on the same Malacca Coast, it is not of strength
sufficient to resist the power of the Dutch: neither could it benefit the Dutch
to take it, should they attempt it; for the people would probably forsake it,
and it would be too great a charge for the Dutch to settle it themselves. And
therefore they only endeavor to ingross the Pepper Trade; and it is probable
enough that the Dutch might sometimes keep a Guardship there, as they do at
other places, particularly at Queda, Pulo Dinding, etc. For where there is any
Trade to be had, yet not sufficient to maintain a Factory; for where there may
not be a convenient place to build a Fort, so as to secure the whole Trade to
themselves, they send their Guardships, which lying at the mouth of the Rivers,
deter Strangers from coming thither, and keep the petty Princes in awe of them.
They commonly make a Malayans on this Coast. The Malayans, who inhabit on both
sides the Streights of Malacca, are in general a bold People, and yet I do not
find any of them addicted to Robbery, but only the pilfering poorer sort, and
even these severely punished among the Trading Malayans, who love Trade and
Property. But being thus provoked by the Dutch, and hindered of a free Trade by
their Guard-ships, it is probable, they therefore commit Piracies themselves,
or connive at and encourage those who do. So that the Pirates who lurk on this
Coast, seem to ^o it as much to revenge themselves on the Dutch, for
restraining their Trade, as to gain this way what they cannot obtain in way of
Traffic.

But to return to our concerns here. I have said already, that we had only 3 or
400 l. of Opium in Goods, the rest was in Money to the value of 2000 Dollars in
the whole: but we did not pretend, that we came hither purposely to trade, but
that finding our Vessel unfit for the Sea, we put in here to mend and repair
her. Leave was granted us for this; and I prepared to hale our Vessel ashore,
at the West end of the Town, not far from the small Fort. It is there soft Oazy
ground, near a mile off shore, and it deepens very leisurely, being shole water
just by the shore; and when the Tide goes out, it leaves the Oaz dry a quarter
of a mile from the shore: but a mile from shore, you have clean Sand, and about
4 fathom at low Water. Our Vessel floated in close to the Fort, and lay not 20
yards from it, and at low water it sunk down into the mud: that we could not
fit the after-part, as I would Opium, which is much used by the Malayans in
most places, was a great Commodity here at this time: but it is prohibited
Goods, and therefore though many asked for it, we were shy of having it too
openly known that we had any. But in short, Mr. Coventry found a Customer, and
they found means to get it ashore, while the Soldiers of the Fort were at
dinner. The Customer was a Dutch Man; and the price he was to pay for it was as
much as he was worth: and finding it to be naught, he would have been off his
Bargain; and when Mr. Coventry would not release him, he absconded. But Mr.
Coventry having an Interest in the Shabander, he compelled the Man's Wife to
pay for the Opium, under the Name of Gold; for so Mr. Coventry called it. The
Shabander chid Mr. Coventry for smugling with an inferior, when he might have
done it better with him: but stood his Friend in compelling the Woman, though
unjustly, to pay for the Opium. I saw this Dutchman on board his own Vessel,
when he had bought the Opium, and he was very pensive and sad. He had a pretty
fine House without the Gates, and a Garden which maintained his Family with
Pot Herbs, Sallading, and Fruits, besides some for the Market. This was managed
by his Wife, and he himself had two Sloops; and either employed them in Trading
among the Malayans for Pepper, carrying them such Commodities as they wanted,
especially Opium, or by hiring himself and Sloop to the Dutch East India
Company, to go whither they would send him. It was not long since he had been
at the Spice Islands with Rice, which he sold at a profitable rate: but he told
me he was not suffered to bring any Spice from thence, except eight or ten
pound for his own spending: neither was there so much profit that way for him,
Malayans, either on the Coast of Malacca or Sumatra. For though he and other free
Men are not suffered to trade for themselves to any places where the Company
have Factories, or Guardships, yet they could find Trade enough nearer home,
and by this Trade the Freemen of Malacca pick up a good livelihood. It was on
this Home Trade that he was now bound, and the Opium had been very beneficial
to him, had it been good: but he went away and ordered his Wife not to pay for
it, but left Mr. Coventry to take it again; and upon the Shabander's compelling
her to take it and pay for it, she complained they were utterly undone, for the
Opium, when it came to be examined was really very bad, and worth little or
nothing.

Here Mr. Coventry bought Irons Bars, Arack, Canes, and Rattans, wherewith we
load our Vessel, which was now set afloat again. The Dutch brought most of our
Goods aboard, and were more kind then I expected, for they had not used to
Trade with us, and I believe the news of our Revolution in England had sweetened
them; for they often drank the Konings Health with us very heartily. While we
were here we made two new Cables of Rattans, each of them 4 Inches about. Our
Captian bought the Rattans, and hired a Chinese to work them, who was very
expert at making such wooden Cables. These Cables I found serviceable enough
after, in mooring the Vessel with either of them; for when I carried out the
Anchor, the Cable being thrown out after me, swam like Cork in the Sea: so that
I could see when it was tight, which we cannot so well discern in our Hemp
Cables, whose weight sinks them down: nor can we carry them out but by placing
two or three Boats at some distance asunder, Malacca, our Goods being all
aboard, we filled our Water; and got all in a readiness for our departure back
again.

CHAP. IX.
The Author departs from Malacca. They lose a Yard, and return to refit. They
set out again, and run on a Shole, but get off with the flood. Pulo Sambilong.
They lose their Mizen-yard, and put into Pulo Dinding. The Island and Fort
described; The opposite Coast. Tutaneg, a sort of Tin. The Enmity between the
Dutch here, and the Malayans on the Coast. A Rencounter with them. They leave
Pulo Dinding and arrive at Achin. The escape of some English Prisoners out of
Bengal. The Author sets out again from Achin, and arrives at Fort St. George.
Its pleasant Prospect. He goes thence to Bencouli in Sumatra. Its sight at Sea.
Point of Sillabar. The Situation of Bencouli, Houses, Weather, Soil, Fruits,
Animals, and Inhabitants. The Pepper Trade here and elsewhere. The first
settlement of the English here. The Fort, and usage of the Natives. The
Conclusion of the Supplement.

WE departed from Malacca toward Achin about the middle of November 1689. Mr.
Coventry being weary of Captain Minchin's Company, had bought a small Vessel of
7 or 8 Tuns, and laded her also with the same kind of Goods. This he commanded
himself, having a Portuguese Pilot, and 3 or 4 Mariners under him, and we set
out both Ships in Company together. We had now in Captain Minchin's Ship but 2
white Men, the Captain and I, the Boatswain being gone with Mr. Coventry; but
we took in as a Passenger one Mr. Richards an Englishman, who having lately
married a Dutch Woman at Malacca, came aboard us with her, to go as Passengers
to Achin with us.

We had a Land Wind in the morning and about 11 a clock had the Wind at N. W. a
pretty strong gale: and at 12 our Fore-yard broke in the middle. We made signs
to Mr. Coventry to bear down to us; who weighing before was a mile to Windward
of us; but he kept on, fearing to return, as having bought his Ship there by
stealth: and we therefore returned alone into Malacca Road. As soon as we
anchored, Mr. Richards was sent ashore to buy a new Yard; I gave him the length
and bigness. It was Evening before he came aboard again, and he brought aboard
an old Yard much too big and too long for us. This piece I shortened and shaped
to my mind, and by 12 a clock at Night, had it fixed and slung, rigged and the
Sail bent to it.

Then we weighed again having a small land Wind; but the Tide of flood was
against us, and drove us to the Eastward. When the Ebb came we jogged on, and
got about three leagues, anchoring when the flood came, because the Winds were
against us. Thus we continued plying with the Ebb, and anchoring every flood,
till we came to Pulo Parselore, where the Captain told me he would not go out
the same way we came in, as I would have persuaded him, but kept the Malacca
Shore aboard, and past within the Sholes. But in a few Hours after we ran upon
a Shole, driven on it by the Tide of Flood, which here set to the Eastward,
though by our reckoning it should have been half Ebb, and the flood should have
set Westward, as we had it all the rest of the way from Malacca: but the Sholes
probably caused some whirling about of the Tide. However, the Sand we were
stuck upon was not above 100 yards in circumference, and the flood being rising
we Richards all the while being in great fear, lest the Malayans should come
off in their Boats and attack the Vessel.

We were now afloat again, and soon got without all the Sholes: yet we did not
stand over toward Sumatra, but coasted along nearest the Malacca shore, it
being now most proper for us so to do yet; for having the Winds westerly, we
could not have beat under the other shore. 2 or 3 days after this we had sight
of some Islands called Pulo Sambilong, which in the Malayan Language signifies
nine Islands, there being so many of them, lying scattering at unequal
distances from each other. It was near one of these Islands, that Captain
Minchin in a former Voyage was like to loose his hand by a prick with a
Cat-fishes Fin, as I have said in my former Vol. p. 149. und though his hand was
cured, yet he has lost the use of it ever since; and is never likely to regain
it more.

We stood in pretty near the shore, in hopes to gain a fresh Land Wind. About
10 a Clock the Land Wind came off, a gentle breez, and we coasted along the
shore. But a small Tornado coming off from the shore about midnight, we broke
our Mizen Yard, and being near a Dutch Island called Pulo Dinding, we made in
for it, and anchored there the Night ensuing, and found there a Dutch Sloop,
manned with about 30 Soldiers at an anchor.

This is a small Island lying so nigh the Main, that Ships passing by cannot
know it to be an Island. It is pretty high Land and well watered with Brooks.
The Mould is blackish, deep and fat in the lower Ground: but the Hills are
somewhat Rocky yet in general very Wood. The Trees are of diverse sorts, many of
which are good Timber, and large enough for any use. Here are also some good
for Masts and Yards; they being naturally

The Dutch, who are the only Inhabitants, have a Fort on the East side, close
by the Sea, in a bending of the Island, which makes a small Cove for Ships to
anchor in. The Fort is built 4 square, without Flankers or Bastions, like a
House: every Square is about 10 or 12 yards. The Walls are of a good thickness,
made of stone, and carried up to a good height, of about 30 foot, and covered
over head like a dwelling House. There may be about 12 or 14 Guns in it, some
looking out at every Square. These Guns are mounted on a strong Platform, made
within the Walls, about 16 Foot high; and there are steps on the out side to
ascend to the Door that opens to the Platform, there being no other way into
the Fort. Here is a Governor and about 20 or 30 Soldiers, who all lodge in the
Fort. The Soldiers have their lodging in the Platform among the Guns, but the
Governor has a fair Chamber above it, where h^ lies with some of the Officers.
About a hundred yards from the Fort on the Bay by the Sea, there is a low
timbered House, where the Governor abides all the day time. In this House
there were two or three Rooms for their use, but the chiefest was the
Governors Dining Room. This fronted to the Sea, and the end of it looked
toward the Fort. There were two large Windows of about 7 or 8 Foot Square; the
lower part of them about 2 or 3 foot from the Ground. These Windows were wont
to be left open all the day, to let in the refreshing Breeze; but in the night,
when the Governor withdrew to the Fort, they were closed with strong shutters,
and the Doors made fast til^ Malacca opposite to the Island, is pretty low
champion Land, clothed with lofty Woods; and right against the Bay where the
Dutch Fort stands, there is a navigable River for small Craft.

The product of the Country thereabouts, besides Rice and other Eatables, is
Tutaneg, a sort of Tin; I think courser than ours. The Natives are Malayans,
who, as I have always observed, are bold and treacherous: yet the Trading
People are affable and courteous to Merchants.

These are in all respects, as to their Religion, Custom, and manner of Living,
like other Malayans. Whether they are governed by a King or Raja, or what other
manner of Government they live under, I know not. They have Canoas and Boats of
their own, and with these they fish and traffic among themselves: but the Tin
Trade is that which has formerly drawn Merchant Strangers thither. But though the
Country might probably yield great quanities of this Metal, and the Natives are
not only inclinable, but very desirous to trade with Strangers, yet are they
now restrained by the Dutch, who have monopoliz'd that Trade to themselves. It
was probably for the lucre of this Trade that the Dutch built the Fort on the
Island; but this not wholly answering their ends, by reason of the distance
between it and the Rivers mouth, which is about 4 or 5 miles, they have also a
Guardship commonly lying here, and a Sloop with 20 or 30 armed men, to hinder
other Nations from this Trade. For this Tutaneg or Tin is a valuable Commodity
in the Bay of Bengal, and here purchased reasonably, by giving other
Commoditiesin exchange: neither is this Commodity peculiarly found hereabouts,
but farther Northerly also on the Coast; and particularly in the Kingdom of
Qu^da there is much of it: The Dutch also commonly keep a P. Dinding, no
Strangers dare approach to trade; neither may any Ship come in hither but with
consent of the Dutch. Therefore as soon as we came to an Anchor at the East end
of the Island, we sent our Boat a shore to the Governor, to desire leave to
wood, water, and cut a new Mizin yard. He granted our request, and the Boat
returned again aboard, and brought word also that Mr. Coventry touched here to
water, and went out that morning. The next morning betimes Captain Minchin sent
me ashore to cut a Yard. I applied my self to the Governor, and desired one of
his Soldiers might go with me, and show me the best Timber for that use; but he
excused himself, saying, that his Soldiers were all busy at present, but that
I might go and cut any Tree that I liked. So I went into the Woods, where I saw
abundance of very fine strait Trees, and cut down such a one as I thought fit
for my turn: and cutting it of a just length, and stripping off the Bark, I
left it ready to be fetched away, and returned to the Fort, where I dined with
the Governor. Presently after dinner, our Captain, with Mr. Richards and his
Wife came ashore, and I went aboard. The Governor met them at Landing, and
conducted them into the Dining Room I spoke of, where they treated the Govenour
with Punch, made of Brandy, Sugar, and Lime-juice, which they brought with them
from aboard: for here is nothing, not so much as the Governors drink, but what
is brought from Malacca: no Herbs or Fruit growing here: but all is either
fetch from Malacca, or is brought by the Malayans from the Main. It is not
through any sterility in the Soil, for that is very fat, and fruitful: neither
is it through laziness o^ the Dutch, for that is a vice they are net guilty of
Malayans, with whom though they have a Commerce, yet dare they not trust them so
far, as to be ranging about the Island in any work of Husbandry, or indeed to
go far from the Fort, for there only they are safe. But to return to the
Governor, he, to retalliate the Captains and Mr. Richard's kindness, sent a
Boat a fishing, to get some better entertainment for his Guests, than the Fort
yielded at present. About 4 or 5 a Clock the Boat returned with a good Dish of
Fish. These were immediately dressed for Supper, and the Boat was sent out again
to get more, for Mr. Richards and his Lady to carry aboard with them. In the
mean time the Food was brought into the Dining Room, and placed on the Table.
The Dishes and Plates were of Silver, and there was a Silver Punch-Bowl full of
Liquor. The Govenour, his Guests, and some of his Officers were seated, but
just as they began to fall to, one of the Soldiers cried out, Malayans, and
spoiled the Entertainment; for immediately the Governor without speaking one
word, leapt out of one of the Windows, to get as soon as he could to the Fort.
His Officers followed, and all the Servants that attended were soon in motion.
Every one of them took the nearest way, some out of the Windows, others out of
the Doors, leaving the 3 Guests by themselves, who soon followed with all the
haste they could make, without knowing the meaning of this sudden consternation
of the Governor and his People. But by that time the Captain and Mr. Richards
and his Wife were got to the Fort, the Governor, who was arrived before, stood
at the door to receive them. As soon as they were entered the Fort, the Door was
shut, all the Soldiers and Servants being within already: nor was any man
suffered to fetch away the Victuals, or any of the Plate: but they fired
several Guns to give notice Malayans that they were ready for them; but none of
them came on. For this Uproar was occasioned by a Malayan Canoa full of armed
Men that lay skulking under the Island, close by the Shore: and when the Dutch
Boat went out the second time to fish, the Malayans set on them suddenly, and
unexpected, with their Cressets and Lances, and killing one or two, the rest
leapt overboard, and got away, for they were close by the Shore; and they
having no Arms were not able to have made any resistance. It was about a mile
from the Fort: and being landed, every one of them made what haste he could to
the Fort, and the first that arrived was he who cried in that manner, and
frighted the Governor from Supper. Our Boat was at this time ashore for water,
and was filling it in a small Brook by the Banquettinghouse. I know not whether
our Boats Crew took notice of the Alarm, but the Dutch called to them; and bid
them make haste aboard, which they did; and this made us keep good watch all
night, having all our Guns laden and primed for service. But it rained so hard
all the night, that I did not much fear being attacked by any Malayans; being
informed by one of our Seamen, whom we took in at Malacca, that the Malayans
seldom or never make any attack when it rains. It is what I had before observed
of other Indians, both East and West: and though then they might make their
Attacks with the greatest advantage on Men armed with Hand-guns, yet I never
knew it practiced; at which I have wondered; for it is then we most fear them,
and they might then be most successful, because their Arms, which are usually
Lances and Cressets, which these Malayans had, could not be damaged by the
Rain, as our Guns would be. But they cannot endure to be in the Rain: and it
was in the Evening before the Rain fell, that they assaulted the Dutch Boat.
The next Morning the Dutch Sloop weighed, and went to look after the Malayans;
but having sailed about the Island, and seeing no Enemies, they anchored again.
I also sent Men ashore in our Boat to bring off the Mizen-yard that I had cut
the Day before: But it was so heavy a kind of Timber, that they could not bring
it out of the Woods. Captain Minchin was still ashore, and he being acquainted
with it, desired the Governor to send a Soldier, to show our Men what Trees
were best for our use: Which he did, and they presently cut a small Tree,
^about the bigness and length of that which I cut, and brought it aboard. I
immediately went to work, and having fitted it for use, bent my Sail, and
hoised it up in its place. In the Evening Captain Minchin and Mr. Richards and
his Wife came aboard, having staid one Night at the Fort; and told me all that
happened to them ashore.

We now waited only for a Land Wind to carry us out. The former part of the
Night we had much Rain, with Thunder and Lightning, but no Wind. At one a Clock
we had a small Land Wind, and got up our Anchors. We got out before Day clear
of the Island, and we steered along shore to the Northward, intending to keep
this shore aboard for 20 or 30 Leagues farther, if the Winds did not favor us;
for the Sea Winds were now at N. W. This Day we kept near the shore, and the
Night ensuing; but the next Day the Wind coming at N. and N. N. E. we stood
over for Sumatra, and the next Evening we past by Diamond Point: And the Wind
coming at E. N. E. we got, in about 2 Days more to Achin, about the end of
November 1689.

Here we found Mr. Coventry, who had got hither 2 or 3 Days before us. Captain
Minchin went ashore with his Passengers, and was discharged of his Command. I
kept aboard till all the Goods were unladen, and then lay ashore, and was very
sick for a Christmas I was sent aboard again, by order of Mr. Coventry, who had
then bought out Mr. Dalton's and Capt. Tiler's shares, to take the Charge of
the Vessel, which he had then laded with Pepper, Cubebs (which I think grow
somewhere in Sumatra) and Tutanegg, which he bought of an English Vessel that
came from Queda to Achin; and with these he had also some of our Malacca Cargo,
which we kept on board, viz. Rattans and Walking Canes. With this Cargo we were
bound for Fort St. George. We took in also 2 English Passengers, who had
escaped out of Prison in the Mogul's Country. The one belonged to the Defense,
Capt. Heath's Ship, which I came home to England in afterward; he was Purser
of it: the other was a Midshipman in the Princess Ann, which returned to
England at the same Time. But during our War with the Mogul these Ships had
been in the Bay of Bengal, to fetch away our Effects from the ^. of Hugly.
These 2 Men, with 2 or 3 others, went ashore upon some Occasion, and were taken
Prisoners by the Mogul's Subjects; who sent them a great way up into the
Country, where they were kept in close Custody, and often threatened with Death.
The old Anabob, or Governor of the Province, being removed, and a new one
coming thither, he released these Men, and gave them leave to go to the Sea
side, where finding a Dutch ship bound to Batavia, these 2, and one more, went
aboard her, the rest getting other Passage: But she meeting with that English
Ship coming from Queda, which brought the Tutanegg I but now mentioned to
Achin, they left the Dutch Ship, and went to Achin with the other English
Vessel; and those 2 were now for going with us to Fort St. George.

'Twas about New Years day, 1690. that we set out from Achin again: We steered
away toward the Nicobar Islands, and came in sight of that, which I had been
formerly set ashore upon. But leaving Coventry I had learnt there were
Northerly and North Easterly winds in the Bay at this time of Year. We stood
over therefore as high as Pallacat; and having then a fair North East Wind, we
run along the Coast till we came before Fort St. George, which was about the
middle of January.

I was much pleased with the beautiful prospect this place makes off at Sea.
For it stands in a plain Sandy spot of Ground, close by the shore, the Sea
sometimes washing its Walls, which are of Stone and high, with Half Moons and
Flankers, and a great many Guns mounted on the Battlements: so that what with
the Walls and fine Buildings within the Fort, the large Town of Maderas without
it, the Pyramids of the English Tombs, Houses, and Gardens adjacent, and the
variety of fine Trees scattered up and down, it makes as agreeable a Landscape
as I have any where seen.

But it is not my design to enter into a Description of a place so well known to
my Countrymen as this is. It may suffice to have mentioned it; and that after
some Months stay here, and meeting with Mr. Moody and Jeoly the Painted Prince,
I prepared to go for Sumatra again; to Bencouli, as I have said in my former
Vol. p. 512. I set out from Fort St. George with Captain Howel in July. 1690.
we steered a pretty way along the Coast of Coromandel, before we stood over for
Sumatra; and then made the best of our way for Bencouli. I have in that Volume
spoken of my Arrival there: but having given no account of the place, I shall
do it briefly now, and so shut up this Suppliment.

Bencouli lies on the West Coast of the Island of Sumatra, in about 4 d. S.
Lat. It is a place noted enough at Sea; by reason of a high slender Hill in the
Country. It has a small Island before it within which Ships ride. The point of
Stillabar lies 2 or 3 English Fort fronting to the Sea, which makes a fine
show: On the N. W. of the Fort is a small River, at the Mouth of which is a
large Storehouse to put Pepper in. About a quarter of a Mile from the Sea
stands a small Indian Village, close by the River; on the same side that the
Fort is on, and but a small distance from it. The Houses are small and low, all
built on Posts, after the Malayan manner, as at Mindanao and Achin; for it is a
Swamp that the Town stands on: But the Malayans usually choose to build in such
low places near Rivers, for the convenience of washing themselves, which they
greatly delight in; as it is indeed a part of their Religion as Mahometans: And
if they can, they will have their Houses stand on Posts over the River.

The Weather here is none of the pleasantest. There are great Rains chiefly in
September, October, and November, and pretty great Heats. But when the Wind
blew hard, which 'twould often do, the Air would be chill: And the Sea-breezes
in fair Weather were generally pretty fresh and comfortable. The Land Winds
coming over Swamps, usually brought a Stink with them. It Is in general an
unhealthy Place; and the Soldiers of the Fort were sickly and died very fast.
On the South side of the Fort is a fair champion Savannah, of a Mile or Two
Square, called Greenhil. It produces long thick Grass: The N. W. part of it
fronts the Sea, and the S. E. is bounded with lofty Woods.

The Soil of this Country is very different, according to its different
position: For within Land it is hilly, yet those Hills are clothed with Trees;
which shows it to be fruitful enough. The low Land, near the River, especially
near the Sea, is swampy, producing nothing but Reeds, or Bamboes:

The Trees in the Woods are mostly large bodied, straight and tall: They are of
diverse sorts, some or other of them fit for any uses. The Fruits of the Country
are much the same as at Achin and Malaca, viz. Limes, Oranges, Guava's,
Plantains, Bonanoes, Coco Nuts, Jacks, Durains, Mangoes, Mangastans; Pomkins,
Pine apples, and Pepper. The Roots are Yams, and Potatoes: Rice grows here
pretty well also; but whether the Natives sow enough for their own spending or
no, I know not. The Land Animals are Buffaloes, Bullocks, Deer, Wild Hogs,
Porcupines, Guanoes, Lizards, etc. The tame Fowls are Ducks and Dunghill Fowls,
both in great plenty. The wild Fowl are Parrots, Parakites, Pigeons,
Turtle-Doves, and many sort of smaller Birds.

The Natives also are swarthy Indians, like their Neighbors of Achin. They are
slender, straight, active, and industrious. They are sociable and desirous of
Trade; but if they are affronted, they are treacherous and revengeful. They
live together in Towns, and speak the Malayan Language: Conforming themselves
in their Habit, Food, and Customs to other Malayans; who are all, so far as I
learnt, of the Mohammedan Religion. There are some Mechanics among them; a few
Smiths: But most of them are Carpenters, and let themselves out to hire to the
English at the Fort. The Hatchets they work with are such as they use at
Mindanao, so contrived as to serve also for an Ads. Here are also Fishermen,
who get a livelihood by Fishing; and there are several sorts of Fish on the
Coast, besides plenty of Green Turtle: Such of the Malayans as live near the
English Fort are usually employed in the East India Companies Service, to work
for

Pepper is the chief vendible Commodity in this Country, it thrives very well
on all the Coast; but the greatest quantity of what is exported from hence, is
either brought down this River out of the Country, or fetched from Sillabar, or
other places bordering on the Sea in small Vessels. Pepper grows plenty in
other places of this Island; as at Indrapore, Pangasanam, Jamby, Bancalis, etc.
It grows also on the Island Java, on the Coast of Malacca, Malabar,
Cochinchina, etc. The Coast of Malabar is said to produce the best; or at least
there the Natives take most care to have the best, by letting it grow till it
is full ripe; for which reason it is larger and fairer than here, where they
gather it too soon, to avoid losing any: for as soon as it grows ripe it is apt
to shed, and fall in waste to the ground.

It was the Pepper Trade that drew our English Merchants to settle here. For
after Bantam was lost, our English, who were wont to trade thither for this
spice, were at a great loss to regain the Pepper Trade, which now was in a
manner fallen with the other sorts of Spice into the hands of the Dutch: though
the Pepper which we were wont to fetch from Bantam did not all grow on this
Island Java, nor perhaps the tenth part of it; for as I have been informed it
came most from Sumatra, particularly from Bencooly, and the adjacent parts. For
this Reason it behoved our Merchants to get an Interest here to prop up their
declining Trade. Yet, as I have been told, the success was more owing to the
Natives of this place than themselves; for that some of the Raja's of the
Country sent Ambassadors to Fort St. George to invite the English hither to
take possession, before the Dutch should get it; who are never slack to promote
their Interest, and were now setting out on the same design. But however that
were, the English had the good fortune to get hither first: Dutch were within
an ace of preventing them, their Ships being in sight before our Men got
ashore. But the Dutch coming thus too late, were put by their designs; for the
English immediately got ashore some Guns, and stood ready to defend their
interest. This might happen about the Year 1685, as I was informed; for they
told me it was 5 or 6 years before I came hither: and the English immediately
fortified themselves. The Fort, as I said before, fronts to the Sea, and stands
about 100 paces from the River. There has been a great deal of cost bestowed on
it, but to little purpose; for it is the most irregular piece I ever saw. I told
the Governor the best way was to new model it, and face it with Stone or Brick,
either of which might be easily had. He said he liked my Counsel, but being
saving for the Company, he rather chose to repair it, by the making some
Alterations: but still to as little purpose, for 'twas all made ground and
having no facing to keep it up, 'twould moulder away every wet season, and the
Guns often fall down into the Ditches. What was possible to be done I
endeavored to do while I was there. I made the Bastions as regular as I could
upon the Model they were made by: and whereas the Fort was designed to be a
Pentagone, and there were but 4 of the Bastions made, I staked out ground for a
5th, and drew a plan of it, which I gave the Government; and had I staid longer
I should have made up the other Bastion: but the whole Plan is too big by half
for so sorry a Garrison; and the best way of mending it, is to demolish all of
it, and make a new one.

The Fort was but sorrily governed when I was there; nor was there that care
taken to keep a fair Correspondence with the Natives in the Neighborhood as I
think ought to be, in all Trading places especially. When I came thither there
were 2 Neighboring Raja's in the Stocks, for no other reason, but Raja's rule
in the Country, and have a considerable number of Subjects: Who were so
exasperated at these Insolences, that, as I have since been informed, they
came down and assanlted the Fort, under the Conduct of one of these Raja's. But
the Fort, as bad as it is, is Guard enough against such indifferent Soldiers as
they are: Who though they have Courage enough, yet scarce any Arms besides
Back-swords, Cressets, and Lances, nor skill to use Artillery, if they had it.
At another Time they made an Attempt to surprise the Fort, under pretense of a
Cock match; to which they hoped the Garrison would come out to share in the
Sport, and so the Fort left with small Defense. For the Malayans here are great
lovers of Cockfighting, and there were about 1000 of them got together about
this Match, while their armed Men lay in ambush. But it so (...) that none of
the Garrison went out to the Cock match, but one John Necklin, a Dane, who was
a great Gamester himself: And he discovering the Ambush, gave notice of it to
the Governor; who was in Disorder enough upon their Approach: But a few of the
great Guns drove them away.

I have nothing more to add but what concerns my self; which is not so
material, that I should need to trouble the Reader with it. I have said in my
former Volume, p. 519. upon what Motives I left Bencouli: And the particulars
of my Voyage thence to England are also in that Volume: So that I may here
conclude this Supplement to my Voyage round the World.

FINIS.
map of the Bay of Campechy

Mr. DAMPIER's Voyages TO THE BAY of Campeachy.
Vol. II. Part II. Containing an Account of the Bay of Campeachy in the
West Indies, and Parts adjacent.
CHAP. I.
The Author's first going to Sea, to France, to Newfoundland, and after to the
East Indies. His setting out for the West Indies. Of St. Lucia, the
Caribbe-Indians, and Captain Warner. He arrives at Jamaica; His Abode and
Travels there, and first Voyage to Campeachy. The East and North of Jucatan
described. Key-Mugere, Cape Catoch. and its Logwood-Cutting. The Mount and its
Saltpeter Earth. The Indian Towns, the Tarpom-Fish, Fishermen, and Lookouts.
Rio de la Gartos, Salt-Ponds, Selam, Sisal, and Cape Condecedo. His first
Arrival at Island Trist, in the Bay of Campeachy. His Anchoring at
One-Bush-Key, and Entertainment among the Logwood-Cutters. The escape of four
English Prisoners from Mexico, and Campeachy. He returns for Jamaica, and is
chased by two Spanish Vessels. The difficulty of their Passage back, and his
falling foul of the Alcranes Isles. The Boobies and Egg-Birds there, etc.
Sword-Fish, Nurses, Seals, etc. Of Captain Long and others Ship-wrack'd here.
The Soundings here about: He passes through the Colorado Shoals, and Anchors
near Cape St. Antonio in Cuba; and coasting by the Island of Pines, Anchors at
the Island of Grand Kayman. He goes back and Anchors at Island Pines, its
Product, Racoons, Land-Crabs, fierce Crocodiles, Cattle, etc. He stands off to
Sea again, and with the help of a seasonable North Wind, after much difficulty,
arrives at Jamaica.

AMong other things referred to in my former Volume, I mentioned an Account I
intended to give of the Bay of Campeachy, where I lived first and last about 3
Years. I shall now discharge my self of that Promise; and because my Campeachy
Voyages were in order of time, before that Round the World, I shall upon this
occasion go so far back as to speak briefly of my first going to Sea, and the
Rambles I made till my setting out for Campeachy.

My Friends did not originally design me for the Sea, but bred me at School
till I came to Years fit for a Trade. But upon the Death of my Father and
Mother, they who had the disposal of me, took other Measures; and having
removed me from the Latin School to learn Writing and Arithmetic, they soon
after placed me with a Master of a Ship at Weymouth, complying with the
Inclinations I had very early of seeing the World: With him I made a short
Voyage to France: and returning thence, went to Newfoundland, being then about
eighteen Years of Age. In this Voyage I spent one Summer; but so pinched with
the rigor of that cold Climate, that upon my return I was absolutely against
going to those parts of the World, but went home again to my Friends. Yet going
up a while after to London, the offer of a warm Voyage and a long one, both
which I always desired, soon carried me to Sea again. For hearing of an
outward-bound East India Man, the John and Martha of London, Capt. Earning
Commander, I entered my self aboard, and was employed before the Mast, for
which my two former Voyages had some way qualified me. We went directly for
Bantam in the Isle of Java, and staying there about two Months, came home again
in little more than a year; touching at St. Jago of the Cape Verd Islands at
our going out, and at Ascension in our return. In this Voyage I gained more
experience in Navigation, but kept no Journal. We arrived at Plymouth about two
Months before Sir Robert Holms went out to fall upon the Dutch Smyrna Fleet:
and the second Dutch Wars breaking out upon this, I forbore going to Sea that
Summer, retiring to my Brother in Somersetshire. But growing weary of staying
ashore, I lifted my self on board the Royal Prince, Commanded by Sir Edward
Sprague, and served under him in the Year 1673. being the last of the Dutch
War. We had three Engagements that Summer; I was in two of them, but falling
very sick, I was put aboard an Hospital Ship a day or two before the third
Engagement, seeing it at a distance only; and in this Sir Edward Sprague was
killed. Soon after I was sent to Harwich, with Sick and Wounded: And having
languished a great while, I went home to my Brother to recover my health.

By this time the War with the Dutch was concluded; and with my health, I
recovered my old Inclination for the Sea. A Neighboring Gentleman, Colonel
Hellier of East-Coker in Somersetshire, my Native Parish, made me a seasonable
offer to go and manage a Plantation of his in Jamaica, under one Mr. Whalley:
for which place I set out with Capt. Kent in the Content of London.

I was then about 22 Years old, and had never been in the West Indies; and
therefore, lest I might be trapann'd and sold as a Servant after my arrival in
Jamaica, I agreed with Capt. Kent to work as a Seaman for my Passage, and had
it under his hand to be cleared at our first arrival. We sailed out of the
River Thames in the beginning of the Year 1674. and meeting with favorable
Winds in a short time got into the Trade-wind, and went merrily along, steering
for the Island Barbados. When we came in sight of it Captain Kent told his
Passengers, if they would pay his Port-Charges he would anchor in the Road, and
stop whilst they got refreshment: But the Merchants not caring to part with
their Money, he bore away, directing his Course toward Jamaica.

The next Island that appeared in our view was St. Lucia. It Is distant from
Barbados about 30 Leagues, and very wealthy in large Timber Trees fit for all
uses. For this reason it is often visited by the English, who stock themselves
here with Rollers, etc. They have endeavored to settle an English Colony
there, but hitherto unsuccessfully, because of the Caribbe-Indians.

The Caribbees are a sort of Warlike Indians, delighting to love on the Sea in
Periagoes or large Canoas. Their chiefest Habitations are on the Main;
Barbados was formerly much frequented by them; but since the English settled
there they have been forced to abandon it, and content themselves in their
Sea-Voyages, or with such Islands only as are not possessed by the Europeans;
except where they have hopes of conquering; as they have done at St. Lucia.

Near the Main where these Indians live, lies Tabago, which, when it was first
settled by the Dutch, was much infested by them. These Indians, as I have
heard, had formerly Plantations on most of the Caribbe-Islands; and in their
Sea Voyages did use to remain 3 Weeks or a Month at a time on an Island, and
then remove to another; and so visit most of them before their return to the
Main.

St. Vincent is another of these Islands lying near St. Lucia: We passed
between them; and seeing a smoke on St. Lucia, we sent our Boat ashore there.
Our men found some of the Caribbe-Indians, and bought of them Plantains,
Bonanoes, Pine-Apples, and Sugarcanes; and returning aboard again, there came
with them a Canoa with 3 or 4 of the Indians. These often repeated the word
Captain Warner, and seemed to be in some disquiet about him. We did not then
understand the meaning of it; but since I have been informed that this Captain
Warner, whom they mentioned, was born at Antego, one of our English Islands,
and the Son of Governor Warner, by an Indian Women, and bred up by his Father
after the English manner; he learned the Indian Language also of his Mother;
but being grown up, and finding himself despised by his English Kindred, he
forsook his Fathers House, got away to St. Lucia, and their lived among ^he
Caribbe-Indians, his Relations by the Mother Caribbees had done some spoil on
our English Plantations at Antego: and therefore Governor Warner's Son by his
Wife took a Party of Men and went to suppress those Indians; and came to the
Place where his Brother the Indian-Warner lived. Great seeming Joy there was at
their Meeting; but how far it was real the Event showed; for the English Warner
providing plenty of Liquor, and inviting his half Brother to be merry with him,
in the midst of his Entertainment ordered his Men upon a signal given to murder
him and all his Indians; which was accordingly performed. The Reason of this
inhumane Action is diversely reported; some say that this Indian Warner
committed all the spoil that was done to the English; and therefore for that
Reason his Brother killed him and his Men. Others that he was a great Friend to
the English, and would not suffer his Men to hurt them, but did all that lay in
his power to draw them to an amicable Commerce; and that his Brother killed
him, for that he was ashamed to be Related to an Indian. But be it how it will,
he was called in question for the Murder, and forced to come home to take his
Trial in England. Such perfidious Doings as these, beside the Baseness of them,
are great hindrances of our gaining an Interest among the Indians.

Putting from these Islands we steered away further West, and falling in with
the East end of Hispaniola, we ranged down along on the South side even to Cape
Tihuron, which is the West End of the I sland. There we lay by and sent our
Boat ashore; for Captain Kent had been informed that there were great Groves of
Orange Trees near this Cape; but our Men not finding any, he then Jamaica,
where we arrived in a short time, bringing with us the first News they had of
the Peace with the Dutch.

Here, according to my Contract, I was immediately discharged; and the nevt day
I went to the Spanish Town, called Sant' Jago de la Vega; where meeting with
Mr. Whalley, we went together to Colonel Hellier's Plantation in 16 Mile-Walk.
In our way thither we past through Sir Tho. Muddiford's Plantation, at the
Angels, where at that time were Otta and Cacao Trees growing; and fording a
pretty large River, we past by the side of it 2 or 3 Miles up the Stream, there
being high Mountains on each side, The way to 16 Mile-Walk was formerly a great
deal about, round a large Mountains; till Mr. Carry Hellier, the Colonel's
Brother, found out this way. For being desirous of making out a shorter cut, he
and some others coasted along the River, till they found it run between a Rock
that stood up perpendicularly steep on each side, and with much difficulty they
climbed over it. But a Dog that belonged to them, finding a hole to creep
through the Rock, suggested to them that there was a hollow Passage; and he
cleared it by blowing up the Rock with Gunpowder, till he had made a way
through it broad enough for a Horse with a Pack, and high enough for a Man to
ride through. This is called the Hollow Rock. Some other Places he levelled,
and made it an indifferent good Passage.

He was a very ingenious Gentleman, and doubtless had he lived, he might have
propagated some advantageous Arts on that Island. He was once endeavoring to
make Salt Petre at the Angels, but did not bring it to Perfection. Whether the
Saltpetre Earth in other Places, especially about Passage-Fort, where as I have
been informed, the Canes will not make good Sugar, by Reason of the Saltness of
the Soil.

I lived with Mr. Whalley at 16 Mile-walk for almost six Months, and then
entered my self into the Service of one Captain Heming, to manage his Plantation
at St. Anns, on the North side of the Island, and accordingly rode from St.
Jago de la Vega toward St. Anns.

This Road has but sorry accommodations for Travelers. The first night I lay
at a poor Hunters Hut, at the foot of Mount Diabolo on the South side of it,
where for want of Clothes to cover me in the Night I was very cold when the
Land-wind sprang up.

This Mountain is part of the great Ridge that runs the length of the Island
from East to West; to the East it is called the Blew Mountain, which is higher
than this. The next day crossing Mount Diabolo, I got a hard Lodging at the
Foot of it on the North side; and the third day after arrived at Captain
Heming's Plantation.

I was clearly out of my Element there, and therefore as soon as Captain Heming
came thither I disingaged my self from him, and took my passage on Board a
Sloop to Port Royal, with one Mr. Statham, who used to trade round the Island,
and touched there at that time.

From Port Royal I sailed with one Mr. Fishook, who traded to the North side of
the Island, and sometimes round it: and by these coasting Voyages I came
acquainted with all the Ports and Bays about Jamaica, and with all their
Manufactures; as also with the Benefit of the Land and Sea-winds. For our
Business was to bring Goods Port Royal; and we were always entertained civilly
by them, both in their Houses and Plantations, having Liberty to walk about and
view them. They gave us also Plantains, Yams, Potatoes etc. to carry aboard
with us; on which we fed commonly all our Voyage.

But after six or seven Months, I left that Employ also, and shipped my self
aboard one Capt. Hudsel, who was bound to the Bay of Campeachy to load Logwood.

We sailed from Port Royal about the beginning of August, 1675. in Company with
Capt. Wren in a small Jamaica Bark, and Capt. Johnson Commander of a Ketch
belonging to New England.

This Voyage is all the way before the Wind, and therefore Ships commonly sail
it in 12 or 14 Days; Neither were we longer in our Passage; for we had very
fair Weather, and touched no where till we came to Trist Island in the Bay of
Campeachy, which is the only place they go to. In our way thither we first
sailed by little Caimanes, leaving it on our Larboard side, and Key Monbrack,
which are two small Islands, lying South of Cuba. The next Land we saw was the
Isle of Pines; and steering still Westerly, we made Cape Corientes: and sailing
on the South side of Cuba, till we came to Cape Antonio, which is the West end
of it, we stretched over toward the Peninsula of Jucatan, and fell in with
Cape Catoch, which is in the extreme part of that Promontory toward the East.

The Land trends from this Cape one way South about 40 Leagues till you come to
the Island Cozumel, and from thence it runs S. W. down into the Bay of
Honduras. About 10 Leagues from Cape Catoch, between it and Cozumel, lies a
small Island called by the Spaniards Key-Muger, or Womens-Island; because it is
reported that when they went first to settle in these

About 3 Leagues from Cape Catoch, and just against it is a small Island called
Loggerhead-Key; probably because it is frequently visited by a sort of Turtle
so called: near this Island we always find a great Ripling, which Seamen call
the Rip-raps. This Cape, though it appears to be part of the Main, yet is divided
from it by a small Creek, scarce wide enough for a Canoa to pass through,
though by it it is made an Island. This I have been credibly informed of by
some, who yet told me that they made a shift to pass it in a Canoa.

The Cape is very low Land by the Sea, but somewhat higher as you go further
from the shore. It is all overgrown with Trees of diverse sorts, especially
Logwood; and therefore was formerly much frequented by the Jamaica Men, who
came thither in Sloops to load with it, till all the Logwoodtrees near the Sea
were cut down; but now it is wholly abandoned, because the Carriage of it to the
shore repuires more labor, than the cutting, logging and chipping. Besides
they find better Wood now in the Bays of Campeachy and Honduras, and have but a
little way to carry it; not about 300 Paces, when I was there: whereas at Cape
Catoch they were forced to carry it 1500 Paces before they left that Place.

From Cape Catoch we coasted along by the shore, on the North side of Jucatan
toward Cape Condecedo. The Coast lies nearest West. The distance between these
two Capes is about 80 Leagues. The shore lies pretty level without any visible
Points or Bendings in the Land. It is Woody by the shore, and full of sandy
Bays and lofty Mangroves.

The first place of note to the West of Cape Catoch, is a small Hill by the
Sea, called the Mount, and Spanish Mulatto to guard it. The Privateers at first
sight of the Packs were in hopes there had been Maiz or Indian Corn in them,
which they then wanted; but opening them they found nothing but Earth; and
examining the Mulatto for what use it was, he said to make Powder, and that he
expected a Bark from Compeachy to fetch it away. He further told me, that
tasting of it he found it very salt; as all the Earth thereabouts was. So that
it is not improbable that those Cisterns were made for the carrying on of
Saltpeter Work. But whatever was the design at first, it is now wholly laid
aside: for there is no use made of them; neither are there any Inhabitants near
this Place.

Between the Mount and Cape Condecedo, close by the Sea, are many little Spots
of Mangrove Trees, which at a distance appear like Islands: but coming nearer,
when other lower Trees appear, it shows like ragged and broken Ground; but at
last all the Land presents it self to your view very even.

Rio de la Gartos, almost in the midway between Cape Cotoch and Cape
Condecedo. This also is a very remarkable Place; for here are 2 Groves of High
Mangroves, one on each side the River, by which it may be known very well. The
River is but small, yet deep enough for Canoas. The Water is good, and I know
not any other Brook of fresh River on all the Coast from Cape Catoch till
within 3 or 4 Leagues of Campeachy Town.

A little to the East of this River is a Fish-Range, and a small Indian Hutt or
two within the Woods; where the Indian Fishers who are subject to the
Spaniards, lie in the Fishing-Seasons, their Habitations and Families being
farther up in the Country. Here are Poles to hang their Nets on, and Barbecues
to dry their Fish. When they go off to Sea, they fish with Hook and Line about
4 or 5 Leagues from the shore, for Snappers and Gropers, which I have already
described in my Voyage round the World. Chap. 4. page 91.

Since the Privateers and Logwood-ships have sailed this way, these Fishermen
are very shy, having been often snapp'd by them. So that now, when they are out
at Sea, if they see a Sail, they presently sink their Canoas even with the edge
of the Water; for the Canoas when they are full of Water, will sink no lower,
and they themselves lie just with their heads above Water, till the Ship which
they saw is passed by or comes nigh. I have seen them under sail, and they have
thus vanished on a sudden. The Fish which they take near the Shore with their
Nets, are Snooks, Dog-Fish, and sometimes Tarpoms.

The Tarpom is a large scaly Fish, shaped much like a Salmon, but somewhat
flatter. It Is of a dull Silver Color, with Scales as big as a Half Crown. A
large Tarpom will weight 25 or 30 Pound. It Is good sweet wholesome Meat, and the
Flesh solid and firm. Moskito-Men are very expert. The Nets for this purpose
are made with strong double Twine, the Meshes 5 or 6 Inches square. For if they
are too small, so that the Fish be not entangled therein, he presently draws
himself a little backward, and then springs over the Net: Yet I have seen them
taken in a Sain made with small Meshes in this manner. After we have enclosed a
great number, whilst the two ends of the Net were drawing ashore, 10 or 12
naked Men have followed; and when a Fish struck against the Net, the next Man
to it grasped both Net and Fish in his Arms, and held all fast till others came
to his assistance. Besides these we had three Men in a Canoa, in which they
moved side-ways after the Net; and many of the Fish in springing over the Net,
would fall into the Canoa: And by these means we should take two or three at
every draught. These Fish are found plentifully all along that shore from Cape
Catoch to Trist, especially in clear Water, near sandy Bays; but no where in
muddy or rocky Ground. They are also about Jamaica, and all the Coast of the
Main; especially near Carthagena.

West from Rio de le Gartos, there is a Look-out or Watchtower, called Selam.
This is a Place close by the shore, contrived by the Spaniards for their
Indians to watch in. There are many of them on this Coast: Some built from the
Ground with Timber, others only little Cages placed on a Tree, big enough for
one or two Men to sit in, with a Ladder to go up and down. These Watch-towers
are never without an Indian or two all the day long; the Indians who live near
any of them being obliged to take their turns.

Selam, is another Watch-box on a high Tree, called Linchanchee Lookout, from a
large Indian Town of that Name, 4 Leagues up in the Country; and two Leagues
farther within Land is another Town called Chinchanchee. I have been ashore at
these Lookouts, and have been either rowing in a Canoa or walking ashore on all
this Coast, even from Rio de la Gartos to Cape Condecedo: but did never see any
Town by the shore, nor any Houses besides Fishing-hutts on all the Coast,
except only at Sisal. Between Selam and Linchanchee are many small regular Salt
Ponds, divided from each other by little Banks; the biggest Pond not above 10
yards long and 6 broad.

The Inhabitants of these two Towns attend these Ponds in the Months of May,
June, and July to gather the Salt, which supplies all the Inland Towns of these
Parts; and there is a skirt of Wood between the Sea and the Ponds, that you can
neither see them nor the People at work till you come ashore.

From these Salt Ponds further West, about three or four Leagues, is the
Lookout called Sisal. This is the highest and most remarkable on all the Coast;
it stands close by the Sea, and it is built with Timber. This is the first
Object that we make off at Sea; and sometimes we take it for a Sail, till
running nearer we discover the High Mangrove-trees appearing in small Tufts at
several distances from it.

Not far from hence there is a Fort with 40 or 50 Soldiers to Guard the Coast;
and from this place there is a Road through the Country to the City of Merida.
This is the chiefest City in all the Province of Jucatan, it being inhabited
mostly with Spaniards: Yet there are many Indian Families among them, who live
in great subjection, as do the rest of the Indians of this Country. The
Province of Jucatan, Indians, who all live together in Towns; but none within
five or six Miles of the Sea, except (as I said) at 2 or 3 Fishing places; and
even there the Indians resort to fish but at certain Seasons of the Year.
Therefore when Privateers come on this Coast, they fear not to land and ramble
about, as if they were in their own Country, seeking for Game of any sort,
either Fowl or Deer; of both which there are great plenty, especially of the
latter, though sometimes they pay dear for it: A small Jamaica Privateer once
landed 6 or 7 Men at this Lookout of Sisal; who not suspecting any danger,
ordered the Canoa with 3 or 4 Men to row along by the shore, to take them in
upon their giving a sign or firing a Gun: But within half an hour they were
attacked by about 40 Spanish Soldiers, who had cut them off from the shore, to
whom they surrendered themselves Prisoners. The Spaniards carried them in
triumph to the Fort, and then demanded which was the Captain. Upon this they
all stood mute, for the Captain was not among them; and they were afraid to
tell the Spaniards so, for fear of being all hanged for Straglers; Neither did
any one of them dare to assume that Title, because they had no Commission with
them, nor the Copy of it; for the Captains don't usually go ashore without a
Copy at least, of their Commission, which is wont to secure both themselves and
their Men. -- At last one John Hullock cocked up his little crop^ Hat, and told
them that he was the Captain; and the Spaniards demanding his Commission, he
said it was aboard; for that he came ashore only to hunt, not thinking to have
met any Enemy. The Spaniards were well satisfied with this Answer, and
afterward respected him as the Captain, and served him with Merida about 12 or
13 Leagues from thence, Captain Hullock had a Horse to ride on, while the rest
went on Foot: And though they were all kept in close Prison, yet Hullock had
the honor to be often sent for to be examined at the Governor's House, and
was frequently Regaled with Chocolate, etc. From thence they were carried to
Campeachy Town, where still Captain Hullock was better served than his
Comrades: At last, I know not how, they all got their Liberties, and Hullock
was ever after called Captain Jack.

It is about 8 Leagues from Sisal to Cape Condecedo; twenty Leagues North of
which lies a small Island, called by the Spaniards Isles des Arenas, but the
English Seamen, as is usual with them, corrupt the Name strangely; and some
call it the Deserts, others the Desarcusses; but of this Island, having never
seen it, I can give no account.

All this Coast from Cape Catoch to Cape Condecedo, is low Land, the Mount only
excepted. It is most sandy Bay by the Sea; yet some of it is Mangrovy Land;
within which you have some Spots of dry Savannah, and small scrubbed Trees,
with short thick Bushes among them. The Sea deepens gradually from the shore,
and Ships may anchor in sandy Ground in any depth from 7 or 8 Foot to 10 or 12
Fathom Water.

In some Places on this Coast we reckon our distance from the shore by the
depth of the Sea, allowing 4 Fathom for the first League, and for every Fathom
afterward a League more.

But having got thus to Cape Condecedo, I shall defer the further description
of these Parts from this Cape Southward and Westward to the High-Land of St
Martin, which is properly the Bay of Campeachy; and from thence also further
Westward, till my second Cape Catoch, the Mount, Rio de la Gartos, Sisal, and
Cape Condecedo, we stood Southward directly for Trist, the Haven of our
Logwood-Cutters; at which Place being not above 60 Leagues distant, we soon
arrived.

Trist is the Road only for big Ships, Smaller Vessels that draw but a little
Water run 3 Leagues farther, by crossing over a great Lagune that runs from the
Island up into the Main-Land; where they anchor at a place called One-Bush-Key.
We stayed at Trist 3 days to fill our Water, and then with our 2 Consorts
sailed thence with the Tide of Flood; and the same Tide arrived there. This Key
is not above 40 Paces long, and 5 or 6 broad, having only a little crooked Tree
growing on it, and for that reason it is called One-Bush-Key. It seems to be
only a heap of Shells, for the Island is covered with them. The greatest part
are Oyster-shells. There are a great many Oysters-banks in this Lagune, and the
adjacent Creeks; but none afford better, either for largeness or taste, than
the Bank about this Island. In the wet Season the Oysters as well of
One-Bush-Key as other Places here, are made fresh by the Freshes running out of
the Country: But in the dry time they are salt enough. In the Creeks they are
smaller, but more numerous; and the Mangrove-Roots that grow by the sides of
the Creeks are laden with them; and so are all the Branches that hang in the
Water.

One-Bush-Key is about a Mile from the shore; and just against the Island is a
small Creek that runs a Mile farther, and then opens into another wide Lagune;
and through this Creek the Logwood is brought to the Ships riding at the Key.
Between the Oyster-Banks that lie about the Island and the Main, there is good
Riding in about 12 Foot Water.

Our Cargo to purchase Log-wood was Rum and Sugar; a very good Commodity for
the Logwood-cutters, who were then about 250 Men, most English, that had
settled themselves in several Places hereabouts: Neither was it long before we
had these Merchants came aboard to visit us; we were but 6 Men and a Boy in the
Ship, and all little enough to entertain them: for besides what Rum we sold by
the Gallon or Firkin; we sold it made into Punch, wherewith they grew
Frolicksome. We had none but small Arms to fire at their drinking Healths, and
therefore the noise was not very great at a distance; but on Board the Vessels
we were loud enough till all our Liquor was spent: We took no Money for it, nor
expected any; for Log-wood was what we came hither for, and we had of that in
lieu of our Commodities after the rate of 5 Pound per Tun, to be paid at the
Place where they cut it; and we went with our Longboat to fetch small
Quantities. But because it would have taken up a long time to load our Vessel
with our own Boat only, we hired a Periago of the Logwood-Cutters to bring it
on Board; and by that means made the quicker dispatch. I made two or three
Trips to their Huts, where I and those with me were always very kindly
entertained with Pig and Pork and Pease, or Beef and Dough-Boys. Their Beef
they got by hunting in the Savannahs. As long as the Liquor lasted, which they
bought of us, we were treated with it either in Drams or Punch. But for a more
particular account of the Logwood-Cutters I shall refer the Reader to my second
Voyage hither, Jamaica, because I saw a great prospect of getting Money here,
if Men would be but diligent and frugal.

But let us proceed with our Voyage: It was the latter end of September, 1675.
when we sailed from One-Bush-Key with the Tide of Ebb; and anchored again at
Trist that same Tide; where we watered our Vessel in order to sail. This we
accomplished in two Days, and the third day sailed from Trist toward Jamaica. A
Voyage which proved very tedious and hazardous to us, by reason of our Ships
being so sluggish a Sailor that She would not ply to Windward, whereby we were
necessarily driven upon several Shoals that otherwise we might have avoided,
and forced to spend 13 Weeks in our Passage, which is usually accomplished in
half that time.

We had now a Passenger with us, one Will. Wooders a Jamaica Seamen, that with
three others that were taken by the Spaniards, was sent to the City of Mexico,
where they remained Prisoners six or eight Months, but at last wereremanded to
La Vera Cruz, and from thence by Sea to Campeachy: They were not imprisoned,
but only kept to work on Board the Ship that brought them, and soon found an
opportunity to make their escapes in this manner. They had been employed ashore
all the day, and being sent aboard at Night, they fell to contrive how to run
away with the Boat; but considering that they wanted necessaries for their
Voyage, they resolved first to go back and supply themselves, which they might
then do the better, because they knew there were none but a few Indians on
Board. Accordingly having seized and bound the Indians, taking with them a
Compass, with some Bread and Water, they put off to Sea, and arrived at Trist a
Week before our departure: And this Will. Wooders was the means under God of
the Preservation of our Ship.

Trist, about 8 in the Morning, near 12 or 14 Leagues W. S. W. from Campeachy,
we saw two Sail about 3 Leagues to Windward coming directly toward us, the
Captain supposing that they had been Jamaica Vessels, would have lain by to
hear some News, and to get some Liquor from them; for we had now none on Board
but a few Bottles in a small Case, that the Captain reserved for his own
Drinking. But Wooders withstood the Captains Proposal, and told him, that when
he came from Campeachy there were two small Vessels ready to sail for Tobasco
River, which is not above 11 or 12 Leagues Leeward of Trist, and that it was
more probable these were those two Vessels than any from Jamaica. Upon this we
edged off more to Sea, and they also altered their Course steering away still
directly with us; so that we were now assured they were Spaniards; and
therefore we put away; quartering, and steering N. W. and though they still
fetched on us a-pace, yet to make the more speed they turned a Boat loose that
was in a Tow, at one of their Sterns, and She being a good Sailor came within
Gunshot of us; when, as it pleased God, the Land-wind dyed away o^ a sudden,
and the Sea Breez did not yet spring up.

While the Wind lasted we thought our selves but a degree from Prisoners;
neither had we yet great hopes of escaping; for our Ketch, even when light, was
but a dull Sailor, worse being deep laden. However, we had now time to unbend
the Foresail, and make a studding Sail of it, to put right before the Sea-Breez
when it should spring up. This was accordingly done in a trice, and in less
than an hour after the Breez sprung up fresh, and we put right before the Wind.
We had this advantage in it, that all the Sail we had did us service; while on
the contrary, those who chased us, being three

In about a Fortnight after this, we were got as far to the East as Rio de la
Gartos, and there overtook us a small Barmudoes Boat belonging to Jamaica which
had not been above ten days come from Trist, who sailed much better than we
did. Therefore our Merchant went on board of Her, for he saw we were like to
have a long Passage; and Provision began to be scarce already, which he could
not so well brook as we. Our Course lay all along against the Trade-wind.

All the hopes that we had was a good North, this being the only time of the
Year for it: and soon after we saw a black Cloud in the N. W. (which is a sign
of a North, but of this more in my Discourse of Winds) for two days, Morning
and Evening. The third day it rose apace and came away very swiftly. We
presently provided to receive it by furling all but our Main-sail; intending
with that to take the advantage of it. Yet this did us but little service; for
after an Hours time, in which it blew fresh at N. W. the Cloud went away, and
the Wind came about again at E. N. E. the usual trade in these Parts. We
therefore made use of the Sea and Land-Breezes, as we had done before; and
being now as high as the before mentioned Fishing Banks on the North of
Jucatan, we so ordered our Business, that with the Land-winds we run over to
the Banks; and while it was calm between the Land-winds and Sea-Breez, we put
out our Hooks and Lines and

Soon after this we got as high as the Mount, and then stood off about 30
Leagues from Land, in hopes to get better to Windward there, than near the
shore; because the Wind was at E. S. E. and S. E. by E. a fresh gale:
continuing so 2 or 3 days. We steered off to the North, expecting a Sea-Breez
at E. N. E. and the third day had our desire. Then we tacked and steered in
again S. E. for the shore of Jucatan. Our Ketch, as I said, was a heavy Sailer,
especially on a Wind: for she was very short; and having great round Bows, when
we met a Head-Sea, as now, she plunged and labored, not going ahead, but
tumbling like an Egg-shell in the Sea. It was my fortune to be at the Helm from
6 a Clock in the Evening till 8. The first 2 Glasses she steered very ill; for
every Sea would strike her dead like a Log; then she would fall off 2 or 3
Points from the Wind, though the Helm was a Lee; and as she recovered, and made
a little way, she would come again to the Wind, till another Sea struck her off
again. By that time 3 Glasses were out the Sea became more smooth; and then she
steered very well, and made pretty fresh way through the Water. I was somewhat
surprised at the sudden Change, from a rough Sea to a smooth; and therefore
looked overboard 2 or 3 times; for she steered open on the Deck, and it being
very fair Weather, all our Men were layn down on the Deck and fallen asleep. My
Captain was just behind me on the Quarter Deck fast asleep too, for neither he
nor they dreaded any Danger, we being

But while I was musing on the sudden alteration of the Sea, our Vessel struck
on a Rock, with such force that the Whipstaff threw me down on my back: This
frighted me so much that I cried out, and bad them all turn out, for the Ship
struck. The surge that the Ship made on the Rock, avvakened most of our Men,
and made them ask, What the matter was? But her striking a second time, soon
ansvvered the Question, and set us all to work for our Lives. By good fortune
she did not stick, but kept on her way still, and to our great comfort, the
water was very smooth, otherwise we must certainly have been lost; for we very
plainly savv the Ground under us: so we let go our Anchor, in 2 fathom Water,
clean White Sand: When our Sails were furled, and a sufficient scope of Cable
veered out, our Captain, being yet in amaze, went into his Cabin, and most of
us with him to view his draught, and we soon found we were fallen foul of the
Alcranes.

The Alcranes are 5 or 6 low sandy Islands, lying in the Lat. of about 23d.
North, and distant from the Coast of Jucatan about 25 Leagues; the biggest is
not above a Mile or two in Circuit. They are distant from one another 2 or 3
Miles, not lying in a Line, but scattering here and there, with good Channels
of 20 or 30 Fathom Water, for a Ship to pass between. All of them have good
Anchoring on the West sides, where you may ride in what depths you please, from
10 to 2 Fathom Water, clean sandy Ground. On some there are a fevv lovv Bushes
of Burton-vvood, but they are mostly Barren and Sandy, bearing nothing but only
a little Chicken-Weed; neither have they any fresh Water. Their Land-Animals
are only large Rats, which are in great Plenty; and of Fovvls, Boobies in
vastabundance, with Men of War and Egg-Birds. These inhabit (viz.) the Boobies
and the other two sorts each apart by themselves; and thus two or three of the
Islands are wholly taken up. The Boobies being most numerous, have the greatest
portion of Land. The Egg-Birds, though they are many, yet being but small, take
up but little room to the rest: Yet in that little part which they inhabit,
they are sole Masters, and not disturbed by their Neighbors. All three sorts
are very tame, especially the Boobies, and so thick settled, that a Man cannot
pass through their Quarters, without coming within reach of their Bills, with
which they continually peckt at us. I took notice that they sat in Pairs; and
therefore at first thought them to be Cock and Hen; but upon striking at them,
one flew away from each place, and that which was left behind seemed as
malicious as the other that was gone. I admired at the boldness of those that
did not fly away, and used some sort of violence to force them, but in vain;
for indeed these were young Ones, and had not yet learned the use of their
Wings, though they were as big and as well feathered as their Dams, only their
Feathers were something whiter and fresher. I took notice that an old one,
either the Cock or Hen, always sat with the young to secure them; for otherwise
these fowls would prey on each other, the strong on the weak, at least those of
a different Kind would make bold with their Neighbors: the Men-of-War-Birds as
well as the Boobies left Guardians to the Young, when they went off to Sea,
lest they should be starved by their Neighbors; for there were a great many
old and lame Men-of-War-Birds that could not fly off to Sea to seek their own
Food. These did not inhabit among their Consorts, but were either expelled the
Community, or else chose to lie out at some distance

There are abundance of Fish at some distance from these Islands, by which the
Fowls inhabiting here, are daily supplied.

The Fish near the Island, are Sharks, Sword-Fishes, and Nurses; all three
sorts delighting to be near sandy Bays; those that I saw here were but of a
small size, the Sword-Fish not above a Foot and a half, or two Foot long;
neither were the Sharks much longer, and the Nurses about the same length. The
Nurse is just like a Shark, only its Skin is rougher, and his used for making
the finest Rasps. Here are many Seals: they come up to sun themselves only on
two or three of the Islands, I don't know whether exactly of the same kind with
those in colder Climates, but, as I have noted in my former Book, they always
live where there is plenty of Fish.

To the North of these Islands lies a long ledge of Rocks bending like a Bow;
it seems to be 10 or 12 Yards wide, and about 4 Leagues long, and 3 Leagues
distant from the Island. They are above Water,

Though here was great store of such good Food and we like to want, yet we did
neither salt any, nor spend of it fresh to save our Stock. I found them all but
one Man averse to it, but I did heartily wish them of another mind, because I
dreaded wanting before the end of the Voyage; a hazard which we needed not to
run, there being here such plenty of Fowls and Seals, (especially of the later)
that the Spaniards do often come hither to make Oil of their Fat; upon which
account it has been visited by Englishmen Jamaica, particularly by Capt Long:
who having the Command of a small Bark, came hither purposely to make Seal-Oyl,
and anchored on the North side of one of the sandy Islands, the most convenient
Place, for his design: -- Having got ashore his Cask to put his Oil in, and set
up a Tent for lodging himself and his Goods, he began to kill the Seal, and had
not wrought above three or four days before a fierce North Wind blew his Bark
ashore. By good fortune she was not damnified: but his Company being but small,
and so despairing of setting her afloat again, they fell to contriving how to
get away; a very difficult task to accomplish, for it was 24 or 25 Leagues to
the nearest Place of the Main, and above 100 Leagues to Trist, which was the
next English Settlement. But contrary to their expectation, instead of that,
Capt. Long bid them follow their Work of Seal-killing and making Oil; assuring
them that he would undertake at his own peril to carry them safe to Trist. This
though it went much against the grain, yet at last he so far prevailled by fair
Words, that they were contented to go on with their Seal-killing, till they had
filled all their Cask. But their greatest work was yet to do, viz. how they
should get over to the Main, and then coast down before the Wind to Trist.
Their Boat was not big enough to transport them, so they concluded to cut down
the Barks Masts and rip up her Deck to make a Float for that purpose.

This being agreed on, the next Morning betimes, pursuant to their Resolution,
they were going to break up their Vessel; but it happned that very Night, that
two New England Ketches going down to Trist, ran on the backside of the Riff,
where they struck on the Rocks, and were bulged; and Captain Long and his Crew
seeing them in distress, presently took their Boat, and went off to help them
unlade their Goods, and bring them ashore; and Trist. This lucky accident was
much talked of amongst the Captain's Crew; and so exasperated the New England
Men, when they heard the whole story, that they were thinking, if the
Commanders would have suffered them, to have thrown him into the Sea, to
prevent his doing more mischief. For they were sure that he by his Art had
caused them to run aground. The whole of this Relation I had from Captain Long
himself.

From the main to these Islands, the Sea deepens gradually till you come to
about 30 Fathom Water, and when you are 25 or 26 Leagues off shore to the
Eastward of them, if you steer away West, keeping in that Depth, you cannot
miss them: The same Rule is to be observed to find any other Island; as the
Triangles, the Isles Des Arenas, etc. for the Bank runs all along the shore, on
which are Soundings of equal Depth, and the Sea appears of a muddy palish
Color, but when past the Bank on the North side of it, it resumes its natural
greenness, and is too deep for any Sounding till you are within 30 Leagues of
the North side of the Bay of Mexico, where by relation there is such another
Bank, (abounding with Oysters) running all along the shore: But to return to
our Voyage.

Having spent 2 or 3 Days among the Alcranes Islands we set sail again, and
steering in Southerly for the Main, having the Wind at E. N. E. we fell in with
it a little to Leeward of Cape Catoch, plying under the shore till we reached
the Cape; from thence we continued our Course Northerly, the Wind at E. by S.
The next Land we designed for was Cape Antonio, which is the Westermost Point
Cuba, and distant from Cape Catoch about 40 Leagues.

Some when they sail out of the Bay, keep along by the Land of Jucatan, till
they come as far as the Island Cozumel, and from thence stretch over toward
Cuba; and if the Wind favors them any thing they will get as high as Cape
Corientes before they fall in with Cuba; for in their Passage from thence they
are not in so much danger of being hurried away to the North by the Current
between the two Capes, or to the North of them, as we were: For taking our
Course Northward till the Latitude of 22 d. 30 m. we tacked again and the Wind
at E. steered away S. S. E. 24 hours, and having taken an Observation of the
Sun, as we did the Day before, found our selves in 23 d. being driven backwards
in 24 hours 30 Miles. We had then the Channel open between the two Capes, but
to the North of either: Yet at last we got over to the Cuba shore, and fell in
with the North of the Island, about 7 or 8 Leagues from Cape Antonio. Now we
both saw and ran through some of the Colorado Sholes, but found a very good
Channel among a great many Rocks that appeared above Water. Being thus got
within the Sholes, between them and Cuba, we found a pretty wide clear Channel
and good Anchoring; and advancing further, within a League of the Cape, we
Anchored and went ashore to get Water, but found none. In the Evening when the
Land-wind sprung up, we weighed again, and doubling the Cape, coasted along on
the South Side of the Island, taking the Advantages both of Sea and Land-winds:
For though we had now been about two Months from Trist, and this the time of
the Year, for Norths, yet to our great trouble they had hitherto failed us, and
besides, as I said before, our Ketch was such a Leewardly Vessel, that we did
not yet expect we could possibly reach Jamaica merely by turning, Pines, for 7
or 8 Leagues, and then stood off to Sea, and the third Morning fell in with the
West end of Grand Caymanes.

This Island is about 40 leagues South from Pines, and about 15 to the West of
little Caymanes. We anchored at the West end, about half a mile from the shore.
We found no Water nor any Provision, but saw many Crocodiles on the Bay, some
of which would scarce stir out of the way for us. We killed none of them
(which we might easily have done) though Food began to be short with us;
indeed had it been in the Months of June or July we might probably have gotten
Turtle, for they frequent this Island some Years as much as they do little
Caymanes. We stayed here but 3 or 4 Hours, and steered back for Pines,
intending there to hunt for Beef or Hog, of both which there is in great
plenty. The second day in the morning we fell in with the West End of Pines,
and running about 4 or 5 miles Northvvard, we anchored in 4 fathom Water clean
Sand, about 2 mile from the shore, and right against a small Creek through the
Mangroves into a vvide Lagune.

The Isles of Pines lies on the South Side, toward the West End of Cuba, and
is distant from it 3 or 4 Leagues. Cape Corientes on Cuba is five or six
Leagues to the Westward of the Isle of Pines. Between Pines and Cuba are many
small woody Islands scattered here and there, with Channels for Ships to pass
between; and by report there is good anchoring near any of them. Jamaica Sloops
do sometimes pass through between Cuba and Pines, when they are bound to
Windward, because there the Sea is always smooth: They are also certain to meet
good Land-winds; besides they can anchor Pines, they may either stand out to
Sea again, or if they are acquainted among the small Islands to the East of it,
(which are called the South Keys of Cuba) they may range amongand;st them to
the Eastward, still taking the greater benefit of the Landwinds and Anchoring;
besides, if Provision is scarce they will meet Jamaica Turtlers, or else may
get Turtle themselves, at which many of them are expert. There is also plenty
of Fish of many sorts, but if they are not provided with Hooks, Lines, or
Harpoons, or any other Fishing-Craft, nor meet with any Turtlers, Cuba will
afford them Sustenance of Hog or Beef. The great inconvenience of going in the
inside of Pines between it and Cuba, proceeds from a Spanish Garrison of about
40 Soldiers at Cape Corientes, who have a large Periago, well fitted with Oars
and Sails, and are ready to launch out, and seize any small Vessel, and seldom
spare the Lives as well as the Goods of those that fall into their Hands, for
fear of telling Tales. Such Villainies are frequently practiced not only here,
but also in several other places of the West Indies, and that too with such as
come to Trade with their Countrymen. The Merchants and Gentry indeed are no
way guilty of such Actions, only the Soldiers and Rascality of the People; and
these do commonly consist of Mulatoes or some other sort of Copper-colour'd
Indians, who are accounted very Barbarous and Cruel.

The Isle of Pines is about 11 or 12 Leagues long, and 3 or 4 broad. The West
end of it is low Mangrovy-Land; and within, which is a Lagune of about 3 or 4
Miles wide running to the Eastward, but how far I know not, with a small Creek
of 2 or 3 Foot Water, reaching to the Sea. The Lagune it self is so shallow,
especially near the Island, that

The Land-Animals are Bullocks, Hogs, Deer, etc. Here are small Savannahs for
the Bullocks and Deer to feed in, as well as Fruit in the Woods for the Hogs:
Here are also a sort of Racoons or Indian Conies, and in some places plenty of
Land-Turtle, and Land-Crabs of two sorts, white and black: Both of them make
holes in the Ground like Conies, where they shelter themselves all day, and in
the Night come out to feed; they will eat Grass, Herbs, or such Fruit as they
find under the Trees: The Manchaniel Fruit, which neither Bird nor Beast will
taste, is greedily devoured by them, without doing them any harm. Yet these
very Crabs that feed on Manchaniel, are venomous both to Man and Beast that
feeds on them, though the others are very good Meat; the white Crabs are the
largest sort; some of them are as big as a Man's two Fists joined together; they
are shaped like Sea-Crabs, having one large Claw, wherewith they will pinch
very

Here are also a great many Alligators and Crocodiles that haunt about this
Island, and are said to be the most daring in all the West Indies. I have heard
of many of their Tricks; as that they have followed a Canoa, and put their
Noses in over the Gunnal, with their Jaws wide open, as if ready to devour the
Men in it: and that when they have been ashore in the Night near the Sea, the
Crocodiles have boldly come in among them, and made them run from their Fire,
and taken away their Meat from them. Therefore when Privateers are hunting on
this Island, they always keep Sentinels out to vvatch for these ravenous
Creatures, as duly as they do in other Places for fear of Enemies, especially
in the Night, for fear of being devoured in their sleep.

The Spaniards of Cuba have here some Craules, i. e. Herds of Hogs, with a few
Indians or Mulatoes to look after them: Here are also Hunters that gain a
livelihood by killing wild Hog and Beef.

This Island is reported to be very wet. I have heard many say, that it rains
here more or less every day in the Year; but this I suppose is a mistake, for
there fell no rain about us, so long as we stayed

We were no sooner at an Anchor, but five of us went ashore, leaving only the
Cook and Cabbin-Boy aboard: We had but two bad fowling Pieces in the Ship;
those we took with us, with a design to kill Beef and Hog. We went into the
Lagune, where we found Water enough for our Canoa, and in some Places not much
to spare; when we were got almost over it, we saw 8 or 10 Bulls and Cows
feeding on the shore close by the Sea. This gave us great Hopes of good
success. We therefore rowed away aside of the Cattle, and landed on a sandy
Bay, about half a mile from them: there we saw much footing of Men and Boys;
the Impressions seemed to be about 8 or 10 days old, we supposed them to be the
Track of Spanish Hunters. This troubled us a little, but it being now their
Christmas, we concluded that they were gone over to Cuba to keep it there, so
we went after our Game; the Boatswain and our Passenger Will. Wooders having
one Gun, and persuming on their skill in shooting, were permitted to try their
fortune with the Cattle that we saw before we landed, while the Captain and my
selfwith our own Gun struck up directly into the Woods. The fifth Man, whose
genius led him rather to fish than hunt, stayed in the Canoa: and had he been
furnished with a Harpoon, he might have gotten more Fish than we did Flesh, for
the Cattle smelling our two Men before they came nigh them, ran away; after
that our Men rambled up into the Country to seek for some other Game.

The Captain and I had not gone half a Mile before we came among a Drove of
near 40 great and small wild Hogs. The Captain firing, wounded one of them, but
they all ran away; and though we followed the Blood a good way, yet did not
come up with him, nor with any other to get a second shot; Pines, and it now
blew a fierce Gale, and held thus two Days, and then came to the N. N. W.
blowing hard still, and from thence to the North: then we edged away S. E. for
it blew hard, and we could not bring her nearer the Wind. From the N. it came
about to the N. N. E. then we knew than the heart of it was broke, however it
blew hard still: then it came about to the N. E. and blew about 4 hours, and so
by degrees dyed away and edged more Easterly, till it came to the E. by N. and
there it stood. We were in good hopes while the North continued, to have gotten
to Jamaica before it ceased, and were sorry to find our selves thus
disappointed; for we could not see the Island, though we judged we could not be
far from it; at Noon we had a good observation, and found ourselves in the
Latiude of the Island.

We now had not one bit of any kind of Food Jamaica, or to bear away before the
Wind, for the South Keys. All the Seamen but my self, were for going to the
South Keys, alleging that our Ship being such a dull Sailer would never get to
Wind-ward without the help of Sea and Land Breezes, which we could not expect
at such a distance as we were, being out of the sight of any Land: and that it
was probable that in three or four days time we might be among the South Keys,
if we would put for it; and there we should find Provision enough, either Fish
or Flesh. I told them that the Craft was in Catching it, and it was as probable
that we might get as little Food in the Souths Keys, as we did at Pines, where,
though there was plenty of Beefs and Hogs, yet we could not tell how to get
any: besides we might be six or seven days in getting to the Keys; all which
time we must of necessity fast, which if 'twere but two or three days, would
bring us so low, that we should be in a weak condition to Hunt. On the
contrary, if they would agree to beat a day or two longer for the Island
Jamaica, we might in all probability see, and come so near it, that we might
send in our Boat and get Provision from thence, though we could not get in to
Anchor: for by all likelihood we were not so far from the Island, but that we
might have seen it, had it been clear; and that the hanging of the Clouds
seemed to indicate to us, that the Land was obscured by them. Some of them did
acquiesce with me in my Opinion; however, 'twas agreed to put away for the
South Keys, and accordingly we veered out our Sheets, trimmed our Sails, and
steered away N. N. W. I was so much dissatisfied, that I turned into my Cabin,
and told them we should be all starved.

Land! Land! I was very glad at the News, and we all immediately discerned it
very plain. The first that we saw was High-land, which we knew to be
Blewfields-Hill, by a bending or Saddle on the Top, with two small Heads on
each side. It bore N. E. by E. and we had the Wind at E. therefore we presently
clapped on a Wind, and steered in N. N. E. and soon after we saw all the Coast,
being not above 5 or 6 Leagues from it. We kept jogging on all the Afternoon,
not striving to get into any particular place; but where we could fetch, there
we were resolved to Anchor: The next day being pretty near the shore, between
Blemfields Point, and Point-Nigrill, and having the Wind large enough to fetch
the latter, we steered away directly thither; and seeing a small Vessel about
two Leagues N. W. of us, making signs to speak with us by hoysing and lowering
her Topsails, Nigrill, having been 13 Weeks on our Passage. I think never any
Vessel before nor since, made such Traverses in coming out of the Bay as we
did, having first blunder'd over the Alcrany Riff, and then visited those
Islands; from thence fell in among the Colorado Shoals, afterward made a trip
to Grand Caymanes; and lastly, visited Pines, though to no purpose. In all these
Rambles we got as much experience as if we had been sent out on a design.

As soon as we came to Anchor, we sent our Boat ashore to buy Provisions to
regale our selves, after our long fatigue and fasting, and were very busy
going to drink a Bowl of Punch: When unexpectedly Capt. Rawlins, Commander of a
small New England Vessel, that we left at Trist; and one Mr. John Hooker, who
had been in the Bay a Twelvemonth cutting Logwood, and was now coming up to
Jamaica to sell it, came aboard, and were invited into the Cabin to drink with
us; the Bowl had not yet been touched, (I think there might be six Quarts in
it) but Mr. Hooker being drunk to by Captain Rawlins, who pledged Capt.
Hudswel, and having the Bowl in his hand, said, That he was under an Oath to
drink but 3 Draughts of strong Liquor a Day, and putting the Bowl to his Head,
turned it off at one Draught, and so making himself drunk, disappointed us of
our Expectations, till we made another Bowl. The next day having a brisk N. W.
Wind, which was a kind of Chocolatto North, we arrived at Port Royal; and so
ended this troublesome Voyage.

CHAP. II.
The Author's second Voyage to the Bay of Campeachy. His arrival at the Isle of
Trist, and settling with the Logwood-Cutters. A Description of the Coast from
Cape Condecedo to Trist. Salinas or Salt Ponds. Salt gathered for the Spaniards
by the Indians. Hina, a remarkable Hill. Horse-hoof-fish. The Triangle Islands.
Campeachy Town twice taken. Its chief Trade, Cotton. Champeton River; and its
Logwood, a rich Commodity. Port Royal Harbor and Island. Prickly-Grass.
Sapadillo Trees. Trist Island described. Coco-Plum-bushes. The Grape-Tree. Its
Animals, Lizards. Laguna Termina and its strong Tides. Summasenta-River, and
Chucquebull Town. Serles his Key. Captain Serles his Adventure. The East and
West Lagunes, with their Branches inhabited by Logwood Cutters. Oaks growing
there, and no where else within the Tropicks. The Original of the
Logwood-Trade. The Rainy Season, and great Floods occasioned by Norths. The dry
Season. Wild Pine-plant. The Logwood-Tree. Blood-Wood, Stock Fish Wood and
Camwood. A Description of some Animals, Squashes, large long-tail'd Monkies,
Ant-bears, Sloths, Armadillos, Tigre-Cats, Snakes of three sorts Calliwasps,
Huge Spiders, Great Ants and Irishman from ^n Alligator.

IT was not long after our arrival at Port Royal, before we were paid off, and
discharged. Now Captain Johnson of New England, being bound again into the Bay
of Campeachy, I took the opportunity of going a Passenger with him, being
resolved to spend some time at the Logwood Trade; and accordingly provided such
necessaries as were required about it (viz.) Hatchets, Axes, Macheats, ( i. e.
Long Knives) Saws, Wedges, etc. a Pavillion to sleep in, a Gun with Powder and
Shot, etc. and leaving a Letter of Attorney with Mr. Fleming, a Merchant of
Port Royal, as well to dispose of any thing that I should send up to him, as to
remit to me what I should order, I took leave of my Friends and Embarked.

About the middle of Feb. 75, -- -6. We sailed from Jamaica, and with a fair
Wind and Weather, soon got as far as Cape Catoch; and there met a pretty strong
North, which lasted two days. After that the Trade settled again at E. N. E.
which speedily carried us to Trist Island. In a little time I settled my self in
the West Creek of the West Lagune with some old Logwood-Cutters, to follow the
Employment with them. But I shall proceed no farther with the Relation of my
own Affairs, till I have

I have in my former Voyage described the Coast from Cape Catoch to Cape
Condecedo. Therefore I shall now begin where I then left off, and following the
same method, proceed to give some Account of the Seacoast of the Bay of
Campeachy; being competently qualified for it by many little Excursions that I
made from Trist during my Abode in these Parts.

The Bay of Campeachy is a deep bending of the Land, contained between Cape
Condecedo on the East, and a Point shooting forth from the High-Land of St.
Martins on the West. The distance between these two place is about 120 Leagues,
in which are many large and navigable Rivers, wide Lagunes, etc. Of all which I
shall treat in their order, as also of the Land on the Coast; its Soil,
Product, etc. Together with some Observations concerning the Trees, Plants,
Vegetables, Animals, and Natives of the Country.

From Cape Condecedo to the Salinas is 14 or 15 Leagues; the Coast runs in
South: It is all a Sandy Bay between, and the Land also within is dry and
sandy, producing only some scrubbed Trees. Halfway between these two Places you
may dig in the Sand above High Water Mark, and find very good fresh Water.

The Salina is a fine small Harbor for Banks; but there is not above 6 or 7
Foot Water; and close by the Sea, a little within the Land, there is a large
Salt Pond, belonging to Campeachy Town, which yields abundance of Salt. At the
time when the Salt Kerns, which is in May or June, the Indians of the Country
are ordered by the Spaniards, to give their attendance, to rake it ashore, and
gather it into a great Pyramidal Heap, broad below and sharp at the top,
Indians, whose business I have told you, is to gather the Salt thus into Heaps,
wait here by turns all the Kerning Season, not less than 40 or 50 Families at a
time; yet here are no Houses for them to lie in, neither do they at all regard
it; for they are relieved by a fresh supply of Indians every Week; and they all
sleep in the open Air, some on the Ground, but most in very poor Hammocks
fastened to Trees or Posts, stuck into the Ground for that purpose. There Fare
is no better than their Lodging; for they have no other Food, while they are
here, but Tartilloes and Posole. Tartilloes are small Cakes made of the Flour
of Indian Corn; and Posole is also Indian Corn boiled, of which they make their
Drink. But of this more hereafter, when I treat of the Natives and their manner
of Living. When the Kerning Season is over, the Indians march home to their
settled Habitations, taking no more care of the Salt. But the Spaniards of
Campeachy, who are owners of the Ponds, do frequently send their Barks hither
for Salt, to load Ships that lie in Campeachy Road; and afterward transport it
to all the Ports in the Bay of Mexico, especially to Aluarado and Tompeck, two
great Fishing Towns: and I think that all the Inland Towns thereabouts, are
supplied with it; for I know of no other Salt Ponds on all the Coast, besides
this and those before mentioned. This Salina Harbor was often visited by the
English Logwood-Cutters in their way from Jamaica to Trist. And if they found
any Barks here, either light or laden, they made bold to take and sell both the
Ships and the Indian Sailors that belonged to them. This they Spaniards; though
indeed 'twas but a pretense: for the Governors of Jamaica knew nothing of it,
neither durst the Spaniards complain; for at that time they used to take all
the English Ships they met with in these Parts, not sparing even such as came
laden with Sugar from Jamaica, and were bound for England; especially if they
had Logwood aboard. This was done openly, for the Ships were carried into the
Havanna, there sold, and the Men imprisoned without any Redress.

From the Salinas to Campeachy Town, is about 20 Leagues; the Coast runs S. by
W. The first 4 Leagues of it, along the Coast, is drowned Mangrove-Land, yet
about two Mile South of the Salina, about 200 Yards from the Sea, there is a
fresh Spring, which is visited by all the Indians that pass this way either in
Bark or Canoa; there being no Water besides near it; and there is a small dirty
Path leads to it through the Mangroves; after you are past these Mangroves, the
Coast rises higher with many sandy Bays, where Boats may conveniently land,
but no fresh Water till you come to a River near Campeachy Town. The Land
further along the Coast is partly Mangrovy but most of it dry Ground, and not
very fruitful; producing only a few scrubbed Bushes: and there is no Logwood
growing on all this Coast, even from Cape Catoch to Campeachy Town.

About six Leagues before you come to Campeachy, there is a small Hill called
Hina, where Privateers do commonly Anchor and keep Sentinels on the Hill, to
look out for Ships bound to the Town: There is plenty of good Firewood, but no
Water; and in the Surf of the Sea, close by the shore, you find abundance of
Shellfish, called by the English, Horsehoofs, because the under part or Belly
of the Fish is flat, and somewhat resembling that Figure in shape and
Magnitude; but the Back is round like a Turtles;

There are three small low sandy Islands, about 25 or 26 Leagues from Hina,
bearing North from it, and 30 Leagues from Campeachy. On the South side of
these Islands there is good Anchorage; but neither Wood nor Water: and as for
Animals, we saw none, but only great numbers of large Rats and Plenty of
Boobies, and Men-of-War-Birds. These Islands are called the Triangles, from the
Figure they make in their Position. There are no other at any distance from the
shore, but these and the Alcranies, mentioned in the former Chapter, in all
this Coast that I have seen.

From Hina to Campeachy, as I have said before, is about 6 Leagues. Campeachy
is a fair Town, standing on the shore in a small bending of the Land; and is
the only Town on all this Coast, even from Cape Catoch to La vera Cruz, that
stands open to the Sea. It makes a fine show, being built all with good stone.
The Houses are not high, but the Walls very strong; the Roofs flattish, after
the Spanish Fashion, and covered with Pantile. There is a strong Citadel or
Fort at one end, planted with many Guns, where the Governor resides with a
small Garrison to defend it. Though this Fort commands the Town and Harbor,
yet it has been twice taken. First by Sir Christopher Mims; who about the Year
1659. having summoned the Governor, and afterward stayed 3 days for an Answer
before he landed his Men, yet then took it by Storm, and that only with small
Arms. I have been told that when he was advised by the Jamaica Privateers, to
take it by Stratagem in the Night, he replied, that he scorned to steal a
Victory; therefore when he went against it, he gave them warning of his
Approach, by his

It was taken a second time by English and French Privateers, about the Year
1678, by surprise. They landed in the Night about two Leagues from the Town,
and marching into the Country, lighted on a Path that brought them thither. The
next Morning near Sunrising, they entered the Town, when many of the
Inhabitants were now stirring in their Houses, who hearing a noise in the
Street, looked out to know the Occasion; and seeing armed Men marching toward
the Fort, supposed them to be some Soldiers of their own Garrison, that were
returned out of the Country for about a Fortnight or 3 Weeks before, they had
sent out a Party to suppress some Indians, then in Rebellion; a thing very
common in this Country. Under favor of this Supposition, the Privateers
marched through the Streets, even to the Fort, without the least Opposition.
Nay, the Towns-People bad them Good Morrow; and Congratulated their safe
return; not discovering them to be Enemies, till they fired at the Sentinels on
the Fort-wall, and pesently after began a furious Attack; and turning two small
Guns, which they found in the Parade, against the Gates of the Fort, they soon
made themselves Masters of it. The Town is not very rich, though as I said
before, the only Seaport or all this Coast. The chiefest Manufacture of the
Country is Cotton-Cloth; this serves for clothing the Indians, and even the
poorer sort of Spaniard wear nothing else. It is used also for making Sails for
Ships, and remitted to other parts for the same purpose.

Besides Cotton-Cloth, and Salt fetched from the Salinas, I know of no other
vendible Commodity exported hence. Indeed formerly this place was the Scale of
the whole Logwood-Trade; which is there Palo ( i. e. Wood) de Campeachy; though
it did not grow nearer than at 12 or 14 Leagues distance from the Town.

The place where the Spaniards did then cut it, was at a River called
Champeton, about 10 or 12 Leagues to Leeward of Campeachy Town; the Coast from
thence South, the Land pretty high and rocky. The Native Indians that lived
hereabouts, were hired to cut it for a Ryal a Day, it being then worth 90, 100
or 110 l. per Tim.

After the English had taken Jamaica, and began to cruise in this Bay, they
found many Barks laden with it, but not knowing its value then, they either set
them adrift or burned them, saving only the Nails and Iron work; a thing now
usual among the Privateers; taking no notice at all of the Cargo; till Capt.
James, having taken a great Ship laden with it and brought her home to England,
to fit her for a Privateer; beyond his Expectation, sold his Wood at a great
rate; though before he valued it so little that he burned of it all his Passage
home. After his return to Jamaica, the English visiting this Bay, found out the
Place where it grew, and if they met no Prize at Sea, they would go to
Champeton River, where they were certain to find large Piles cut to their Hand,
and brought to the Sea side ready to be shipped off. This was their Common
Practice; till at the last the Spaniards sent Soldiers thither to prevent their
Depredations.

But by this time the English knew the Trees, as growing; and understanding
their value, began to rummage other Coasts of the Main, in search of it, till,
according to their desire, they found large Groves of it, first at Cape Catoch;
(which, as I have said before, was the first Place where they settled to
Logwood-cutting) and loaded many Vessels from thence to Jamaica, and other
Places. But it growing scarce there, they found out the Lagune of Trist in the
Campeachy; where they followed the same Trade, and have ever since continued
it, even to the time of my being here: But to proceed.

From the River Champeton to Port Royal, is about 18 Leagues; the Coast S. S.
W. or S. W. by S. Low-land with a sandy Bay, against the Sea, and some Trees by
the shore, with small Savannahs, mixed with small shrubby Woods within Land all
the way. There is only one River between Champeton and Port Royal, called Port
Escondedo.

Port Royal is a broad entrance into a Salt Lagune, of 9 or 10 Leagues long,
and 3 or 4 wide, with 2 Mouths, one at each end. This Mouth of Port Royal has
a Bar, whereon there is 9 or 10 Foot Water. Within the Bar it is deep enough,
and there is good Anchoring on either side. The entrance is about a Mile over,
and two Miles in length; it has fair sandy Bays on each side, with smooth
Landing.

Ships commonly anchor on the Weather or East side next Champeton, both for the
convenience of some Wells they dug on the Bays by the Privateers and
Log-wood-Cutters, as also to ride more out of the Tide, which here runs very
strong. This Place is remarkable enough, because from hence the Land trends
away West, and runs so for about 65 or 70 Leagues farther.

On the West side of this Harbor is a low Island, called by Us
Port-Royal-Island; which makes one side of the Mouth, as the Main does the
other: It is about 2 Miles wide and 3 Leagues long, running East and West. The
East end of this Island is sandy and pretty clear of Woods, with some Grass,
bearing a small prickly Bur, no bigger than a Gray Pea, which renders it very
troublesome to those that walk barefoot, as the Bay-Men often do. There are
some Bushes of Burton-wood: and a little further to the West grow large
Sapadillo-Trees, whose Fruit is

On the West side of this Island, is another small low Island, called Trist,
separated from the former by a small Salt Creek, scarce broad enough for a
Canoa to paddle through.

The Island Trist is in some Places three Miles wide, and about 4 Leagues in
length; running E. and W. The East end is swampy and full of white Mangroves;
and the South side much the same: The West part is dry and sandy, bearing a
sort of long Grass, growing in Tufts very thin. This is a sort of Savannah,
with some large Palmeto-Trees growing in it. The North side of the West end is
full of Coco-Plum Bushes, and some Grapes.

The Coco-Plum Bush is about 8 or 9 Foot high, spreading out into many
Branches. Its Rind black and smooth, the Leaves oval and pretty large, and of a
dark Green. The Fruit is about the bigness of a Horse-Plum, but round; some are
black, some white, others reddish: The Skin of the Plum is very thin and
smooth; the inside white, soft and woolly, rather fit to suck than bite,
enclosing in the Middle a large soft Stone. This Fruit grows commonly in the
Sand near the Sea; and I have tasted some that have been saltish; but they are
commonly sweet and pleasant enough, and accounted very wholesome.

The Body of the Grape-Tree is about two or three Foot in Circumference,
growing 7 or 8 Foot high, then sends forth many Branches, whose Twigs are thick
and gross; the Leaves are shaped much like an Ivy Leaf, but broader and more
hard; the Fruit is as big as an ordinary Grape, growing in Bunches or Clusters
among the Twigs all over the Tree; it is black when ripe, and the inside
reddish, with a large hard Stone in the middle. This Fruit is very pleasant and
wholesome, but of little substance, the Stones

The Animals of this Island are, Lizards, Guanoes, Snakes and Deer: Beside the
common small Lizard, there is another sort of a large kind, called a
Lyon-Lizard: This Creature is shaped much like the other, but almost as big as
a Man's Arm, and it has a large Comb on its Head; when it is assaulted it sets
its Comb up an end; but otherways it lies down flat: Here are two or three
sorts of Snakes: some very large, as I have been told.

At the West end of the Island close by the Sea, you may dig in the Sand 5 or 6
foot deep, and find good fresh Water: There are commonly Wells ready made by
Seamen to water their Ships; but they soon fill up, if not cleared; and if you
dig too deep, your Water will be Salt. This Island was seldom clear of
Inhabitants when the English visited the Bay for Logwood; for the biggest Ships
did always ride here in 6 or 7 fathom Water close by the shore; but smaller
Vessels ran up 3 Leagues farther to One-Bush-Key, of which in my former Chapter.

The second Mouth or Entrance into this Lagune is between Trist, and
Beef-Island, and is about 3 mile wide. It is shoal without, and only two
Channels to come in: The deepest Channel on the Spring Tide, has 12 Foot Water.
It lies near the middle of the Mouth; hard Sand on the Bar; the West Channel is
about 10 Foot Water; and lies pretty near Beef-Island: you run in with the
Sea-Breez, and sound all the way; taking your sounding from Beef-Island shore.
The bottom is soft Oaz, and its shoals gradually. Being shot in within
Beef-Island Point, you will have three Fathom; then you may stand over toward
Trist, till you come near the shore, and Trist and Beef-Island, but the Tide is
much stronger than at Port Royal. This is the other Mouth or opening to the
Salt Lagune before mentioned. This Lagune is called by the Spaniards, Laguna
Termina, or the Lagune of Tides, because they run very strong here. Small
Vessels, as Barks, Periagoes or Canoas may sail through this Lagune, from one
Mouth to the other, or into such Creeks, Rivers, or smaller Lagunes, as empty
themselves into this, of which here are many: The first of note on the East
part of this Lagune, as you come in at Port Royal, is the River Summasenta.

This River, though but small, yet is big enough for Periagoes to enter. It
disembogues on the South side near the middle of the Lagune. There was formerly
an Indian Village named Summasenta, near the Mouth of the River; and another
large Indian Town, called Chucquebul, 7 or 8 Leagues up in the Country. This
latter was once taken by the Privateers; by whom I have been informed, that
there were about two thousand Families of Indians in it, and two or three
Churches, and as many Spanish Friars, though no white Men beside. The Land near
this River yields plenty of Logwood.

From Summasenta River to One-Bush-Key is 4 or 5 Leagues, the shore running
West. I have described One-Bush-Key, and the Creek against it, which, as I
said, is very narrow, and not above a mile long before it opens into another
wide Lake, lying nearest N. and S. called the (...) Lagune. It is about a
League and a half wide, and 3 Leagues long, encompassed with Mangrove-Trees. At
the S. E. corner of it there is another Creek about a mile wide at the Mouth,
running 6 or 7 Miles into the Country; on both sides of it grows plenty of
Logwood; therefore it was inhabited by Englishmen who lived in

At the North end, and about the middle of the East Lagune, there is another
small Creek like that which comes out against One-Bush-Key, but less and
shallower, which discharges it self into Laguna Termina, against a small sandy
Key, called by the English Serles's Key, from one Captain Serles, who first
Careen'd his Vessel here, and was afterward killed in the Western Lagune, by
one of his Company as they were cutting Logwood together. This Captain Serles
was one of Sir Henry Morgans Commanders, at the Sacking of Panama; who being
sent out to cruise in a small Vessel in the South Seas, happened to surprise at
Taboca, the Boatswain and most of the Crew belonging to the Trinity, a Spanish
Ship, on Board which were the Friars and Nuns, with all the old Gentlemen and
Matrons of the Town, to the number of 1500 Souls, besides an immense Treasure
in Silver and Gold, as I was informed by Captain Peralta, who then Commanded
her, as he did afterward, when she was taken by Captain Sharp; all which he
might have taken in the Ship had he pursued her.

On the West side of the East Lagune, there is a small Skirt of Mangroves, that
separates it from another running parallel with it, called the East-Lagune,
which is about (...) bigness of the former.

Toward the North (...) of this Lagune runs a small Creek, coming out of the
East Lagune, deep enough for small Barks to pass through.

At the South end of this Lagune, there is a Creek about a mile wide at its
Mouth; and half a mile from thence it divides into two Branches; one called
Season it is brackish. Four Miles from the Mouth, the Land on both sides these
two Branches is wet and swampy, affording only Mangroves by the Creeks sides;
only at the Heads of them, there are many large Oaks, besides which I did never
see any growing within the Tropicks: but 20 Paces within that grows plenty of
Logwood, therefore the Cutters settled themselves here also.

On the West side of the West Branch lies a large Pasture for Cattle about 3
Miles from the Creek; to which the Logwood-Cutters had made paths from their
Huts to hunt Cattle, which are always there in great numbers; and commonly
fatter than those in the Neighboring Savannahs; and therefore was called the
fat Savannah; and this West Creek was always most inhabited by Logwood-Cutters.

The Logwood-Trade was grown very common before I came hither, here being as I
said before, about 260 or 270 Men living in all the Lagune and at Beef-Island,
of which Isle I shall speak hereafter: This Trade had its Rise from the decay
of Privateering; for after Jamaica was well settled by the English, and a Peace
established with Spain, the Privateers who had hitherto lived upon plundering
the Spaniards, were put to their shifts; for they had prodigally spent whatever
they got, and now wanting subsistence, were forced either to go to Petit
Guavas, where the Privateer-Trade still continued, or into the Bay for Logwood.
-- The more Industrous ^ort of them came hither, yet even these, though they
could work well enough if they pleased; y^^ thought it a dry business to toil
at Cutting Wood. They were good Marks-Men, and so took more delight in Hunting;
but neither of those Employments affected them so Indian Towns; where they
plundered and brought away the Indian Women to serve them at their Huts, and
sent their Husbands to be sold at Jamaica; besides they had not forgot their
old Drinking-bouts, and would still spend 30 or 40 l. at a sitting aboard the
Ships that came hither from Jamaica; carousing and firing of Guns 3 or 4 days
together. And though afterward many sober Men came into the Bay to cut Wood, yet
by degrees the old Standards so debauched them that they could never settle
themselves under any Civil Government, but continued in their Wickedness, till
the Spaniards, encouraged by their careless Rioting, fell upon them, and took
most of them singly at their own Huts; and carried them away Prisoners to
Campeachy or La Vera Cruz; from whence they were sent to Mexico, and sold to
several Tradesmen in that City; and from thence, after two or three Years, when
they could speak Spanish, many of them made their Escapes, and marched in
Bypath back to La Vera Cruz, and by the Flota conveyed to Spain, and so to
England. I have spoke with many of them since, who told me that none of them
were sent to the Silver Mines to work, but kept in or near the City, and never
suffered to go with their Caravans to New Mexico, or that way. I relate this,
because it is generally suggested that the Spaniards commonly send their
Prisoners thither, and use them very barbarously; but I could never learn that
any European has been thus served; whether for fear of discovering their
Weakness, or for any other Reason, I know not. But to proceed. It is most
certain that the Logwood-Cutters, that were in the Bay when I was there, were
all routed or taken; a thing I ever feared, and that was the reason that moved
me at last to come away,

Having thus given an Account of the first settling of this Place by my
Countrymen, I shall next say something concerning the Seasons of the Year,
some particulars of the Country, its Animals, of the Logvvood-Trade, and their
manner of Hunting, and several remarkable Passages that happened during my stay
there.

This part of the Bay of Campeachy lies in about ^^d. of North Lat. The
Sea-Breezes here in fair weather, are at N. N. E. or N. The Landwinds are at ^.
S. E. and S. but in bad Weather at E. S. E. a hard gale for two or three days
together. The dry Season begins in September, and holds till April or May; then
comes in the wet Season, which begins with Tornadoes; first one in a day, and
by degrees increasing till June; and then you have set Rains till the latter
end of August. This svvells the Rivers so that they overflow, and the Savannahs
begin to be covered with Water; and although there may be some intermissions of
dry Weather, yet there are still plentiful showers of Rain: so that as the
water does not increase; neither does it decrease, but continues thus till the
North Winds are set in strong, and then all the Savannahs for many Miles, seem
to be but part of the Sea, The Norths do commonly set in about the beginning of
October, and continue by intervals till March. But of these I shall speak more
in my Chapter of Winds. These Winds blowing right in on the Land, drive in the
Sea, and keep the Tides from their constant Course as long as they last, which
is sometimes two or three Days; by this means the Freshes are pent up, and
overflow much more th^n before, though there be less Rain. They blow most (...)
in December and January; but afterward th^^ decrease in strength; and are
neither so frequent nor lasting, and then the Freshes begin to drain from off
Feb. The Land is all dry; and in the next Month perhaps you will scarce get
Water to drink, even in those Savannahs that but 6 Weeks before were like a
Sea. By the beginning of April, the Ponds also in the Savannahs are all dried
up, and one that knows not how to get Water otherways may perish for thirst;
but those that are acquainted here, in their Necessity make to the Woods, and
refresh themselves with Water that they f^^d in wild Pines.

Ths wild Pine is a Plant so called, because it somewhat resembles the Bush
that bears the Pine: they are commonly supported, or grow from some Bunch, Knot
or Excrescence of the Tree, where they take root, and grow upright. The Root is
short and thick, from whence the Leaves rise up in folds one within another,
spreading off at the top: They are of a good thick Substance, and about 10 or
12 Inches long. The outside Leaves are so compact as to contain the Rainwater
as it falls. They will hold a Pint and a half, or a Quart; and this Water
refreshes the Leaves and nourishes the Root. When we find these Pines, we stick
our Knives into the Leaves just above the Root, and that lets out the Water,
which we catch in our Hats, as I have done many times to my great relief.

The Land near the Sea or the Lagunes is Mangrovy, and always wet, but at a
little distance from it, it is fast and firm, and never overflowed but in the
w^^ Season. The Soil is a strong yellowish Clay; But yet the upper Coat or
surface is a black mould, though not deep. Here grow diverse sorts of Trees of no
great bulk or height. Among these the Logwood-Trees thrive best, and are very
plentiful; this being the most proper Soil for them: for they do not thrive in
day Ground; neither shall you see any growing in rich black mould. They are
much like our White-Thorns in England; but generally a great deal bigger:
Englishman not knowing the difference, would take them for White-Thorns; but
the Body and old Branches are blackish; the Rind rougher, with few or no
prickles. The leaves are small and shaped like the Common White-Thorn-Leaf, of
a palish Green. We always choose to cut the old black-rinded Trees; for these
have less sap, and require but little pains to chip or cut it. The sap is
white, and the heart red: The heart is used much for dying; therefore we chip
off all the white sap, till we come to the heart; and then it is fit to be
transported to Europe. After it has been chip'd a little while, it turns black;
and if it lies in the Water it dies it like Ink; and sometimes it has been used
to write with. Some Trees are 5 or 6 Foot in Circumference: and these we can
scarce cut into Logs small enough for a Man's Burden, without great Labor;
and therefore are forced to blow them up. It is a very ponderous sort of wood,
and burns very well, making a clear strong fire, and very lasting. We always
harden the Steels of our Firearms, when they are faulty, in a Logwoodfire, if
we we can get it, but otherways, as I said before, with Burton wood or the
Grape-tree. The true Logwood I think grows only in the Country of Jucatan; and
even there but only in some Places near the Sea. The chiefest places for it are
either here or at Cape Catoch, and on the South side of Jucatan in the Bay of
Honduras. There are other sorts of Wood much like it in color, and used for
dying also; some more esteemed, others of lesser value. Of these sorts
Bloodwood and Stock-fish-wood are of the natural growth of America.

The Gulf of Nicaragua, which opens against the Isle of Providence, is the
only Place that I know in the North Seas, that produces the Bloodwood.

This Wood is of a brighter red than the Logwood. It was sold for 30 l. per
Tun, when Logwood was but at 14 or 15; and at the same time Stock-Fish-Wood
went at 7 or 8. This last sort grows in the Country near Rio la Hacha, to the
East of St. Martha, by the sides of Rivers in the Lovv-Land. It is a smaller
sort of Wood than the former. I have seen a Tree much like the Logwood, in the
River of Conception in the Sambaloes; and I know it will dye; but whether it
be either of these two sorts, I know not: Besides here and in the places
beforementioned, I have not met with any such Wood in America.

At Cherburg near Sierra-Leone in Africa, there is Camvvood, which is much like
Blood-vvood, if not the same. And at Tunqueen, in the East Indies, there is
also such another sort: I have not heard of any more in any part of the World.
But to proceed.

The Land as you go farther from the Sea rises still somewhat higher; and
becomes of a more plantable Mould: There the Trees are generally of another
sort; growing higher and taller than the Logvvood-trees or any near them:
Beyond this, you still enter in large Savannahs of long Grass, two or three
Miles wide; in some Places much more.

The Mould of the Savannahs is generally black and deep, producing a course
sort of sedgy Grass: In the latter end of the dry time, we set fire to it,
which runs like Wildfire, and keeps burning as long as there is any Fuel;
unless some good shovver of Rain put it out: Then presently springs up a new
green Crop, which thrives beyond all belief. The Savannahs are bounded on each
side with Ridges of higher Land, of a light-brown Color; deep and very
fruitful: producing extraordinary great high

The Animals of this Country are, Horses, Bullocks, Deer, Warree, Precary,
Squashes, Possums, Monkies, Ant Bears, Sloths, Armadilloes, Porcupines,
Land-turtle, Guanoes, and Lizards of all kinds.

The Squash is a four-footed Beast, bigger than a Cat: Its Head is much like a
Foxes; with short Ears and a long Nose. It has pretty short Legs, and sharp
Claws, by which it will run up Trees like a Cat. The Skin is covered with short
fine yellowish Hair. The flesh of it is good, sweet, wholesome Meat. We commonly
skin and roast it; and then we call it Pig; and I think it eats as well. It
feeds on nothing but good Fruit; therefore we find them most among the
Sapadillo-Trees; This Creature never rambles very far: and being taken young,
will become as tame as a Dog; and be as roguish as a Monkey.

The Monkies that are in these Parts are the ugliest I ever saw. They are much
bigger than a Hare, and have great Tails about two foot and a half long. The
under side of their Tails is all bare, with a black hard skin; but the upper
side, and all the Body is covered with course, long, black, staring Hair. These
Creatures keep together 20 or 30 in a Company, and ramble over the Woods;
leaping from Tree to Tree. If they meet with a single Person they will threaten
to devour him. When I have been alone I have been afraid to shoot them,
especially the first time I met them. They were a great Company dancing from
Tree to Tree, over my Head; chattering and making a terrible Noise; and a great
many grim Faces, and showing Antic Gestures. Some broke down dry Sticks and
threw at me; others scattered

The Ant-Bear is a four-footed Beast, as big as a pretty large Dog; with rough
black-brown Hair: It has short Legs; a long Nose and little Eyes; a very little
Mouth, and a slender Tongue like an Earthworm about 5 or 6 Inches long. This
Creature feeds on Ants; therefore you always find them near an Ants Nest or
Path. It takes its Food thus. It lays its Nose down flat on the Ground, close
by the Path that the Ants travel in, (whereof here are many in this Country)
and then puts out his Tongue athwart the Path: the Ants passing forwards and
America, as well as here; ( i. e. in the Sambaloes) and in the South-Seas on
the Mexican Continent.

The Sloth is a four-footed, hairy, sad colored Animal; somewhat less than the
Ant-bear, and not so rough: Its Head is round, its Eyes small; it has a short
Nose, and very sharp Teeth; short Legs, but extra ordinary long sharp Claws.
This Creature feeds on Leaves, whether indifferently of all sorts, or only on
some particular kinds, I know not. They are very mischievous to the Trees where
they come, and are so slow in motion, that when they have eaten all the Leaves
on one Tree, before they can get down from that and climb another, and settle
themselves to their fresh Banquet (which takes them up 5 or 6 days, though the
Trees stand near: They are nothing but skin and bones, although they came down
plump and fat from the last Tree. They never descend till they have stripped
every Limb and Bough, and made them as bare as Winter. It takes them up 8 or 9
Minutes to move one of their Feet 3 Inches forward; and they move all their
four Feet one after another, at the same slow rate; neither will stripes make
them mend their pace; which I have tried to do, by whipping them; but they seem
insensible, and can neither be frighted, or provoked to move faster.

The Armad^^o (so called from its Suit of Armor) is as big as a small sucking
Pig: the body of it pretty long. This Creature is enclosed in a thick Shell,

The Porcupine being a Creature well known, I Will pass it in silence.

The Beasts of prey that are bred in this Country are Tigre-Cats, and (as is
reported by our Men) Lions. The Tigre-Cat is about the bigness of a Bull-Dug,
with short Legs, and a truss Body, shaped much like a Mastiff, but in all
things else, (viz.) its Head, the color of its Hair, and the manner of its
Preying, much resembling the Tigre, only somewhat less. Here are great numbers
of them: They prey on young Calves or other Game; whereof here is plenty. And
because they do not want Food, they are the less to be feared. But I have wished
them farther off, when I have met them in the Woods; because their aspect
appears so very stately and fierce. I never did see any Lion in this Country;
but I have been informed by two or three persons that they did see Lions here:
But I am assured, that they are not numerous.

Here are a great many poisonous Creatures in this Country; more particularly
Snakes of diverse sorts, some yellow, some green, and others of a dun Color,
with black and yellowish spots. The yellow

It is reported that sometimes they lirk in Trees: and that they are so mighty
in strength, as to hold a Bullock fast by one of his Horns, when they happen to
come so near that she can twist her self about the Limb of the Tree and the
Horn at once. These are accounted very good Meat by some, and are eaten
frequently: I my self have tried it for curiosity, but cannot commend it. I
have heard some Bay-men report, that they have seen some of this kind here as
big as an ordinary Man's Waste; but I never saw any such.

The green Snakes are no bigger about than a Man's Thumb, yet 4 or 5 Foot long:
The Backs are of a very lively green color, but their Bellies inclining to
yellow. These are commonly in Bushes among the green Leaves, and prey upon
small Birds. This I have often seen, and was once in danger to be bit by one
before I saw it: For I was going to take hold of a Bird that fluttered and
cried out just by me, yet did not fly away, neither could I imagine the reason
till reaching out my hand, I perceived the head of a Snake close by it; and
looking more narrowly, I saw the upper part of the Snake, about two or three
Inches from his Head, twisted about the poor Bird.

What they feed on besides Birds I know not, but they are said to be very
venomous.

The dun colored Snake is a little bigger than the green Snake, but not above
a Foot and a half, or two Foot long; these we should often see in and about our
Huts; but did not kill them, because they destroyed the Mice, and are very
nimble in chacing those Creatures. Besides Snakes, here are Scorpions

Here are also a sort of Spiders of a prodigious size, some near as big as a
Man's fist, with long small Legs like the Spiders in England, they have two
Teeth, or rather Horns an Inch and a half, or two Inches long, and of a
proportionable bigness, which are black as Jett, smooth as Glass, and their
small end sharp as a Thorn; they are not strait but bending. These Teeth we
often preserve. Some wear them in their Tobacco pouches to pick their Pipes.
Others preserve them for Tooth-Pickers, especially such as were troubled with
the Toothach; for by report they will expel that pain, though I cannot justify
it of my own Knowledge. The backs of these Spiders are covered with a dark
yellowish Down, as soft as Velvet. Some say these Spiders are venomous; others
not; whether is true I cannot determine.

Though this Country be so often over-flown with Water; yet it swarms with Ants,
of several sorts; viz. great, small, black, yellow, etc. The great black Ant
stings or bites almost as bad as a Scorpion; and next to this the small yellow
Ants bite is most painful; for their sting is like a spark of fire; and they
are so thick among the boughs in some places, that one shall be covered with
them before he is aware. These Creatures have Nests on great Trees, placed on
the Body between the Limbs: some of their Nests are as big as a Hogshead; this
is their Winter Habitation; for in the wet Season they all repair to these
their Cities: England. In the dry Season when they leave their Nests, they
swarm over all the Woodland; for they never trouble the Savannahs: You may then
see great Paths made by them in the Woods of three or four Inches broad beaten
as plain as the Roads in England. They go out light, but bring home heavy Loads
on their backs, all of the same substance, and equal in bigness: I never
observed any thing besides pieces of green Leaves, so big that I could scarce
see the Insect for his Burden; yet they would march stoutly, and so many still
pressing after, that it was a very pretty sight, for the Path looked prefectly
green with them. There was one sort of Ants of a black Color, pretty large,
with long Legs; these would march in Troops, as if they were busy in seeking
somewhat; they were always in have, and followed their Leaders exactly, let
them go whither they would; these had no beaten Paths to walk in, but rambled
about like Hunters: Sometimes a Band of these Ants would happen to march
through our Huts, over our Beds, or into our Pavilions, nay, sometimes into our
Chests; and there ransack every part; and wherever the foremost went, the
rest all came after: We never disturbed them, but gave them free liberty to
search where they pleased; and they would all march off before night. These
Companies were so great, that they would be two or three hours in passing by,
though they went very fast.

The Fowls of this Country are Humming Birds, Black Birds, Turtle Doves,
Pigeons, Parrots, Parakites, Quames, Corresoes, Turkies, Carrion Crows, Subtle
Jacks, Bill Birds, Cockrecoes, etc. The Humming Bird is a pretty little
feathered Creature, no bigger than a great overgrown Wasp, with a black Bill
no bigger than a small Needle, and his Legs and

The Black Bird is somewhat bigger than ours in England; it has a longer Tail,
but like them in Color: They are sometimes called Chattering Crows, because
they chatter like a Magpy.

There are three sorts of Turtle Doves (viz.) white brested Doves, dun colored
Doves, and ground Doves. The white breasts are the biggest; they are of a
bluish gray Color with white Breasts; these are fine, round and plump, and
almost as big as a Pigeon. The next sort are all over of a dun, lesser than the
former, and not so round. The ground Dove much bigger than a Sky-Lark, of a
dull gray, very round and plump, and commonly runs in pairs on the ground, and
probably thence have their name. The other two sorts fly in pairs, and feed on
Berries, which they commonly gather themselves from the Trees where they grow;
and all threes sorts are very good Meat.

Pigeons are not very common here; they are less than our Wood Quests, and as
good food.

The Quam is as big as an ordinary Hen Turkey, of a blackish dun Color; its
Bill like a Turkeys;

The Correso is a larger Fowl that the Quam: The Cock is black, the Hen is of a
dark brown. The Cock has a Crown of black Feathers on his Head, and appears
very stately. These live also on Berries, and are very good to eat; but their
Bones are said to be poisonous; therefore we do either burn or bury them, or
throw them into the Water for fear our Dogs should eat them.

Carrion Crows are blackish Fowls about the bigness of Ravens; they have bald
Heads, and redish bald Necks like Turkeys; and therefore by Strangers that come
newly from Europe, are often mistaken for such. These live wholly on flesh,
(and are therefore called Carrion Crows:) There are great numbers of them; They
are heavy, dull Creatures, and by their perching long at one place they seem to
be very lazy: yet they are quick enough to find out their Prey; for when we
hunt in the Woods or Savannahs, as soon as we have killed a Beast, they will
immediately flock about us from all parts, and in less than an hours time there
will be two or three hundred, though at first there was not one to be seen. I
have sometimes admired from whence so many came so suddenly; for we never see
above two or three at a place, before they come to feast on a Carcass.

Some of the Carrion Crows are all over white, but their Feathers look as if
they were sullied: They have bald Heads and Necks like the rest; they are of
the same bigness and make; without any difference but in Color; and we never
see above one or two of these white ones at a time; and it is seldom ^lso that
we see a great number of the black ones, but we see one white one amongst them.

1. The Logwood-Cutters call the white ones King Carrion Crows, and say, that
they are much bigger Jamaica that prohibits their destruction; and the
Logwood-Cutters, though under no such obligation, yet are so zealously
superstitious, that none will hurt them for fear of receiving some damage
afterward.

Subtle Jacks are Birds as big as Pigeons; they are mostly blackish; the tips
of their Wing Feathers are yellowish, as are also their Bills. They have a
peculiar and wonderful cunning way of building different from any others: Their
Nests hang down from the boughs of lofty Trees, whose Bodies are clean without
limbs for a considerable height: The branches to which they fasten them, are
those that spread farthest out from the body; and the very extremities of those
boughs are only used by them. O^ Trees that grow single by themselves at some
distance from others, they build clear round; but i^ they join to others, they
make choice of such only as are bordering upon a Savannah, Pond or Creek, and
hang down those Nests from those limbs that spread over their Savannahs, etc.
neglecting such as are near other Trees: Their Nests hang down two or three
foot from the twigs to which they are Subtle Jacks, because of this uncommon
way of building.

There are two or three sorts of Bill-Birds, so called by the English, because
their Bills are almost as big as themselves. The largest I ever saw are about
the size of English Wood-peckers, and much like them: There are others of a
smaller sort; but they are not often met with, and I never saw many of them.

Cockrecoes are short winged Birds, colored like Partridge, but somewhat
lesser; neither are they so plump and round. They have long Legs, delighting to
run on the Ground among Woods in swampy Places or near Creeks. They make a loud
Noise Mornings and Evenings, and Answer one another very prettily; and they are
extraordinary sweet Meat.

The Water-Fowls are Duck and Mallard; Curlews, Herons, Crabcatchers, Pelicans,
Cormorants, Fishing-Hawks, Men-of-War-Birds, Boobies, etc.

There are three sorts of Ducks, viz. The Muscovy, the Whistling and the common
Duck. Muscovy Ducks are less than ours, but otherwise exactly alike. They perch
on old dry Trees, or such as have no leaves on them, and seldom light on the
Ground but to feed. Whistling Ducks are somewhat less than our Common Duck, but
not differing from them in shape or Color: In flying, their Wings make a
pretty sort of loud whistling Noise. These also perch on Trees as the former.
The

Here are two sorts of Curlews different in bigness and color; the greater are
as big as Turkeys, with long Legs and long crooked Bills, like a Snipes, in
length and bigness proportionable to the Bulk of their Bodies: They are of a
dark color; their Wings black and white; their Flesh black, but very sweet and
wholesome: They are called by the English double Curlews, because they are twice
as big as the other sort.

The small Curlews are of a dusky brown, with long Legs and Bills like the
former: their Flesh is most esteemed as being the sweetest.

Herons are like ours in England in bigness, shape and color.

Crabcatchers are shaped and colored like Herons, but they are smaller: They
feed on small Crabs no bigger than ones Tumb, of which there is great plenty.

Pelicans are large flat-footed Fowls, almost as big as Geese, and their
Feathers in color like them: they have short Legs, long Necks, and their Bills
are about two Inches broad and 17 or 18 long; the fore part of their Necks or
Breasts is bare, and covered with a soft, smooth, yet loose Skin, like that
about the Necks of Turkies: This Skin is of the color of their Feathers, mixed
with a dark and light gray, so axactly interwoven that it appears very
beautiful. They are a very heavy Bird, and seldom fly far, or very high from
the Water: They commonly sit on Rocks at some distance from the shore, where
they may look about them. They seem to be very melancholy Fowls, by their
perching all alone: they sit as if they were sleeping, holding their Heads
upright, and resting the ends of their

Cormorants are just like young Ducks in shape, having such Feet and Bills:
They are black with white Breasts, and live on small Fish which they take near
the shore, or on Worms which they get out of the Mud at low Water. They taste
very fishy, yet are indifferent good Meat, they being very fat.

Fishing Hawks are like our smallest sort of Hawks in color and shape, with
such Bills and Talons; They perch upon stumps of Trees or dry Limbs that hang
over the Water about Creeks, Rivers or against the Sea: and upon sight of any
small Fish near them, they Skim along just over them, and snatching up the Prey
with their Talons, presently rise again without touching the Water with their
Wings. They don't swallow the Fish whole as all other Fishing Fowls, that ever
I saw do, but tear it with their Bills and eat it Piecemeal.

The Lagunes, Creeks and Rivers are plentifully stored with great variety of
Fish (viz.) Mullets, Snooks, Tenpounders, Tarpoms, Cavallies, Parricootas,
Gar-fish, Stingrays, Spanish Mackril, with many others.

Tenpounders are shaped like Mullets, but are so full of very small stiff
Bones, intermixed with the Flesh, that you can hardly eat them.

Parricootas are long Fish, with round Bodies like Mackril: They have very long
Mouths and sharp Teeth; they are about 8 or 10 Inches round, and three Foot and
half long. They commonly haunt in Lagunes among Islands, or in the Sea near the
shore. They are a floating Fish, and greedily take the Hook, and will snap at
Men too in the Water. We commonly take them when we are under sail, with a Hook
towing after our Stern. They are firm well-tasted Fish; but it is dangerous

Diverse Persons are of Opinion that these Creatures are poisonous in some
Places only, and that but at some times of the Year. I know that in many Parts
of the West Indies, some have been injured by eating them, and that at
different Seasons of the Year; therefore Seamen commonly taste the Liver before
they venture any further; and if that has a biting taste like Pepper, they
esteem the fish unwholsom, but if not, they eat it: and yet I have found even
this Rule fail too. I judge the Head and the Parts near it, to be chiefly
venomous.

Gar-fish are round, but neither so big nor long as the former; but what is
more peculiar, they have long bony Snouts, like the Sword-fish, only as the
Sword-fishes Snout is flat, and indented like a Saw on each side; so on the
contrary these have their Snouts like a Spear, round, smooth and sharp at the
end, and about a foot long. These area sort of floaty or Flying Fish: for they
skip along a Foot or two above the Water, for the length of twenty or thirty
Yards: then they just touch the edge of the Water, and spring forward so much
farther, and them touch the Water, and spring forward again, a great many times
before they cease. They dart themselves with such a force that they strike
their Snout through the sides of a Cotton-Tree Canoa; and we often fear that
they will strike quite through our very Bodies. -- They are extraordinary sweet
Fish.

Spanish Mackril are in shape and color like our Mackril, but larger: They are
three Foot or three and half long, and nine or ten Inches about, and they also
are generally esteemed very excellent Fish.

viz. the Stingray, the Raspray and the Whipray. The Stingray and Raspray are
much a like in shape; but the former has three or four strong sharp Prickles,
near two Inches long, at the Root of its Tail, which are said to be very
venomous, but the rest of his Skin is smooth. The Raspray has a rough knotty
Skin wherewith Rasps are made: the Skins of the largest are so rough, that the
Spaniards in some Places grate their Cassavy with them, which is a Root very
common all over the West Indies; and of which the Spaniards and English
frequently make their Bread; but the fairest Skins are used to cover Surgeons
Instrument Cases, and other such fine Things; but of late they are
counterfeited. I have been told that in Turkey Asses Skins are stamped with
small hard Seeds, which gives them Impressions like Raspray.

The Whipray differs from the other two sorts, having a small, but longer Tail,
and ending with a Knob, shaped like a Harpoon. All these three sorts are much
about a Foot and half broad. There is yet another sort of these flat Fish of
the Whipray kind, but of a prodigious bigness; viz. three or four Yards square,
and their Tails as long: these we call Sea-Devils; they are very strong Fish,
and are sometimes Gamesom; but they make an odd Figure when they leap out of
the Water, tumbling over and over.

Neither are Turtle and Manatee wanting in this Lagune. Here are some
Hawks-bill-Turtle, but the green Turtle is most plentiful. They are of a middle
size; yet here was once a very large one taken, as I have mentioned in my
Voyages round the World.

Here are abundance of Manatee, which are both large and sweet.

Campeachy; and I think that no part of the Universe is better stocked with
them.

The Alligator is a Creature so well known every where, that I should not
describe it, were it not to give an Account of the difference between it and
the Crocodile; for they resemble each other so nearly in their shape and bulk,
as also in their Natures, that they are generally mistaken for the same
Species; only the one supposed to be the Male, the other the Female: Whether
they are so or not, the World may judge by the following Observations. As to
their Bulk and length, I never saw any so large as some I have heard and read
of; but according to my best Judgment, though I have seen Thousands, I never
met with any above sixteen or seventeen Foot long, and as thick as a large
Colt. He his shaped like a Lizard, of a dark brown color, with a large head
and very long Jaws, with great strong Teeth, especially two of a Remarkable
Length, that grow out of, and at the very end of the under Jaw in the smallest
part, on each side one; there are two holes in the upper Jaw to receive these,
otherways he could not shut his Mouth. It has 4 short Legs and Broad Claws,
with a long Tail. The Head, Back and Tail is fenced with pretty hard Scales,
joined together with a very thick tough Skin: Over its Eyes there are two hard
scally Knobs, as big as a Man's Fist, and from the Head to the Tail, along the
Ridge of his Back it is full of such knotty hard Scales, not like Fish-Scales,
which are loose, but so united to the Skin, that it is all one with it, and
cannot be taken asunder, but with a sharp Knife. From the Ridge of the Back down
on the Ribs toward the Belly, (which is of a dusky yellow color like a Frog)
there are many of these Scales, but not so substantial nor so thick placed as
the other.

The Flesh smells very strong of Musk; especially four Kernels or Cods that are
always found about them, two of which grow in the Groin, near each Thigh; the
other two at the Breast, one under each Fore-leg, and about the bigness of a
Pullets Egg; therefore when we kill an Alligator, we take out these, and having
dried them wear them in our Hats for a perfume. The Flesh is seldom eaten but
in case of Necessity, because of it strong scent.

Now the Crocodile has none of these Kernels, neither does his Flesh taste at
all Musky, therefore esteemed better Food. He is of a yellow color, neither
has he such long Teeth in his under Jaw. The Crocodile's Legs also are longer,
and when it runs on Land, it bears its Tail above the Ground, and turns up the
tip of it in a round bow, and the Knots on the back are much thicker, higher
and firmer than those of the Alligator; and differ also as to the Places where
they are found. For in some Parts, as here in the Bay of Campeachy, are
abundance of Alligators, where yet I never saw nor heard of any Crocodiles. At
the Isle Grand Caymanes, there are Crocodiles, but no Alligators. At Pines by
Cuba, there are abundance of Crocodiles, but I cannot say there are no
Alligators, though I never saw any there. Both Kinds are called Caymanes, by the
Spaniards; therefore probably they may reckon them for the same. And I know of
no other difference, for they both lay Eggs alike, which are not
distinguishable to the Eye: They are as big as a Goose-Egg, but much longer,
and good Meat; yet the Alligators Eggs taste very musky: They prey both alike
in either Element,

Besides the forementioned difference between the Alligator and Crocodile; the
latter is accounted more fierce and daring then the Alligator: Therefore when
we go to the Isles of Pines or Grand Caymanes to hunt, we are often molested by
them, especially in the Night. But in the Bay of Campeachy, where there are
only Alligators, I did never know any Mischief done by them, except by accident
Men run themselves into their Jaws. I remember one Instance of this Nature,
which is as follows.

Pies Pond, on Beef-Island, to hunt. This Pond was never dry, so that the
Cattle drew hither in swarms, but after two or three days hunting they were
shy, and would not come to the Pond till Night, and then if an Army of Men had
lain to oppose them, they would not have been debarred of Water. The Hunters
knowing their Custom, lay still all Day, and in the Night visited this Pond,
and killed as many Beefs as they could. This Trade they had driven a Week, and
made great profit. At length an Irishman going to the Pond in the Night,
stumbled over an Alligator that lay in the Path: The Alligator seized him by
the Knee; at which the Man cries out, Help! help! His Consorts not knowing what
the matter was, ran all away from their Huts, supposing that he was fallen into
the Clutches of some Spaniards, of whom they were afraid every dry Season. But
poor Daniel not finding any assistance, waited till the Beast opened his Jaw to
take better hold; because it is usual for the Alligator to do so; and then
snatched away his Knee, and slipped the But-end of his Gun in the room of it,
which the Alligator griped so hard, that he pulled it out of his Hand and so
went away. The Man being near a small Tree climbed up out of his reach; and
then cried out to his Consorts to come and assist him; who being still within
Call, and watching to hear the Issue of the Alarm, made haste to him with
Firebrarnds in their Hands, and brought him away in their Arms to his Hut; for
he was in a deplorable condition, and not able to stand on his Feet, his Knee
was so torn with the Alligators Teeth.

His Gun was found the next day ten or twelve Paces from the place where he was
seized, with Trist, where their Ships were, which was six or seven Leagues
distant.

This Irishman went afterward to New England, to be cured, in a Ship
belonging to Boston, and nine or ten Months after returned to the Bay again,
being recovered of his Wound, but went limping ever after.

This was all the mischief that ever I heard was done in the Bay of Campeachy,
by the Creatures called Alligators.

CHAP. II.
Logwood Men's way of Living. Their Hunting for Beefs in Canoas. Alligators. The
Author's settling with Logwood-Men. He is lost in Hunting. Captain Hall and his
Men's disaster. The way of preserving Bullocks Hides. Two hairy Worms growing in
the Author's Leg. Dangerous Leg-worms in the West Indies. The Author strangely
cured of one A violent Storm. A Description of Beef-Island: its Fruits and
Animals. The Spaniards way of hocksing Cattle. Their care of preserving their
Cattle. The wasteful destruction made of them by the English and French
Privateers. The Author's narrow Escape from an Alligator.

THE Logwood-Cutters (as I said before) inhabit the Creeks of the East and West
Lagunes, in small Campanies, building their Huts close by the Creeks sides for
the benefit of the Sea-Breezes, as near the Logwood Groves as they can,
removing often to be near their Business: yet when they are settled in a good
open Place, they choose rather to go half a Mile in their Canoas to work, than
lose that convenience. Though they build their Huts but slightly, yet they take
care to thatch them very well with Palm or Palmeto Leaves, to prevent the
Rains, which are there very violent, from soaking in.



Another Frame they raise covered with Earth for a Hearth to dress their
Victuals: and a third to sit at when they eat it.

During the wet Season, the Land where the Logwood grows is so overflowed, that
they step from their Beds into the Water perhaps two Foot deep, and continue
standing in the wet all Day, till they go to. Bed again; but nevertheless
account it the best Season in the Year for doing a good days Labor in.

Some fell the Trees, others saw and cut them into convenient Logs, and one
chips off the Sap, and he is commonly a principal Man; and when a Tree is so
thick, that after it has lodged, it remains still too great a Burden for one
Man, we blow it up with Gunpowder.

The Logwood-Cutters are generally sturdy strong Fellows, and will carry
Burdens of three or four hundred Weight; but every Man is left to his choice
to carry what he pleases, and commonly they agree very well about it: For they
are contented to labor very hard.

But when Ships come from Jamaica with Rum and Sugar, they are too apt to
mis-pend both their Time and Money. If the Commanders of these Ships are Free,
and treat all that come the first Day with Punch, they will be much respected,
and every Man will pay honestly for what he drinks afterward; but if he be
niggardly, they will pay him with their worst Wood, and commonly they have a
stock of such laid by for that purpose; nay, they will cheat them with hollow
Wood filled with dirt in the middle and both ends plugg'd up Jamaica, they will
be sure to give him the best Wood.

In some places, especially in the West Creek of the West Lagune, they go a
hunting every Saturday to provide themselves with Beef for the Week following.

The Cattle in this Country are large and fat in February, March, and April: At
other times of the Year they are sleshy, but not fat, yet sweet enough. When
they have killed a Beef, they cut it into four Quarters, and taking out all the
Bones, each Man makes a hole in the middle of his Quarter, just big enough for
his Head to go through, then puts it on like a Frock, and trudgeth home; and if
he chances to tire, he cuts off some of it, and flings it away.

It is a diversion pleasant enough, though not without some danger, to hunt in
a Canoa; for then the Cattle having no other feeding Places than the sides of
the Savannahs, which are somewhat higher Ground than the middle, they are
forced sometimes to swim; so that we easily come to shoot them, when they are
thus in the Water.

The Beast, when she is so hard pursued that she cannot escape, turns about and
comes full tilt at the Canoa, and striking her Head against the Prow, drives
her back 20 or 30 Paces; then she scampers away again: But if she has received
a wound, she commonly pursues us till she is knocked down. Our chiefest care is
to keep the head of the Canoa toward her; for if she should strike against the
broad side, it would endanger over-setting it, and consequently wetting our
Arms and Ammunition. Besides, the Savannahs at this time swarm with Alligators,
and therefore are the more dangerous on that account.



The Alligators in this Bay are not so fierce as they are reported to be in
other Places; for I never knew them pursue any Man, although we do frequently
meet them; nay, they will flee from us: and I have drank out of a Pond in the
dry time, that has been full of them, and the Water not deep enough to cover
their backs, and the compass of the Pond so small that I could get no Water,
but by coming within two Yards of the Alligators Nose; they lying with their
Heads toward mine as I was drinking, and looking on me all the while. Neither
did I ever hear of any bit in the Water by them, though probably should a Man
happen in their way, they would seize upon him.

Having thus given some Description of the Country, I shall next give an
Account of my Living with the Logwood-Men, and of several Occurrences that
happened during my stay here.

Though I was a Stranger to their Employment and manner of Living, as being known
but to those few only of whom we bought our Wood, in my former Voyage hither;
yet that little Acquaintance I then got, encouraged me to visit them after my
second arrival here; being in hopes to strike in to work with them. There were
six in Company, who had a Hundred Tuns ready cut, log'd and chip'd, but not
brought to the Creeks side, and they New England in a Month or two, to fetch it
away.

When I came hither, they were beginning to bring it to the Creek: And because
the Carriage is the hardest Work, they hired me to help them at the rate of a
Tun of Wood per Month; promising me that after his Carriage was over, I should
strike in to work with them, for they were all obliged in Bonds to procure this
100 Tuns jointly together, but for no more.

This Wood lay all in the Circumference of 5 or 600 Yards, and about 300 from
the Creek-side in the middle of a very thick Wood, unpassable with Burdens.
The first thing we did was to bring it all to one Place in the middle, and from
thence we cut a very large Path to carry it to the Creeks side. We labored
hard at this Work 5 Days in the Week; and on Saturdays went into the Savannahs
and killed Beeves.

When we killed a Beef, if there were more than four of us, the Overplus went
to seek fresh Game, whilst the rest dressed it.

I went out the first Sunday and complied very well with my Master's Orders,
which was only to help drive the Cattle out of the Savannahs into the Woods,
where two or three Men lay to shoot them: And having killed our Game, we
marched Home with our Burdens. The next Saturdy after, I went with a design to
kill a Beef my self, thinking it more honor to try my own Skill in Shooting,
than only to drive the Game for others to shoot at. We w^^t now to a Place
called the Upper Savannah, going four Miles in our Canoas, and then landing,
walked one Mile through the Woods, before we came into the Savannah, and marched
about two Miles in it, before we came up with any Game. Here I gave my
Companions the slip, and wandered so far into the Woods that I lost my self;
neither could I find the May, and it was between ten a Clock and one when I
began to find that I was (as we called it, I suppose from the Spaniards)
Morooned, or Lost, and quite out of the Hearing of my Comrades Guns. I was
somewhat surpised at this; but however, I knew I should find my way out, as
soon as the Sun was a little lower. So I sat down to rest my self; resolving
however to run no farther out of my way; for the Sun being so near the Zenith,
I could not distinguish how to direct my Course. Being weary and almost faint
for want of Water, I was forced to have recourse to the Wild-Pines, and was by
them supplied, or else I must have perished with Thirst. About three a Clock I
went due North, as near as I could judge, for the Savannah lay East and West,
and I was on the South side of it.

At Sunset I got into the clear open Savannah, being about two Leagues wide in
most Places, but how long I know not. It is well stored with Bullocks, but by
frequent hunting they grow shy, and remove farther up into the Country. Here I
found my self four or five Mile to the West of the Place where I stragled from
my Companions. I made homewards with all the speed I could, but being overtaken
by the Night, I lay down on the Grass a good distance from the Woods, for the
benefit of the Wind, to keep the Muskitoes from me; but in vain: for in less
than an Hours time I was so persecuted, that though I endeavored to keep them
off by Fanning my self with Boughs and shifting my Quarters 3 or 4 times; yet
still they haunted me so that I could get no sleep. At Daybreak I got up and
directed my Course to the Creek where we landed, from which I was then about
two Leagues. I did not see one Beast of any

Such an Accident befell one Captain Hall of New England, who came hither in a
Boston Ship, to take in Logwood, and was fraighted by two Scotchmen, W. Cane,
an Irishman who designing to go with Goods from Jamaica to New England; for
that reason when his Logwood was aboard, tarried at Trist with the Ship, and
hunted once in 2 or three Days for Beef to lengthen out his Salt Provision. One
Morning the Captain designing to hunt, took five of his Men, with his Mate, as
also his Merchant Mr. Cane along with him. They Landed at the East end of the
Island, which is low Mangrove-land; the Savannah is a considerable distance
from the Sea, and therefore troublesome to get to it. However, unless they would
row four or five Leagues farther, they could not find a more convenient place;
beside, they doubted not of Mr. Canes skill to conduct them. After they had
followed him a Mile or two into the Woods, the Captain seeing him to make a
Halt (as being in some doubt) to consider of the way, told him in derision,
that he was but a sorry Woodsman, and that he would swing him but twice round,
and he should not guess the way out again; and saying no more to him went
forwards, and bid his Seamen follow him, which they did accordingly. Mr. Cane,
after he had recollected himself, struck off another way, and desired them to
go with him: But instead of that, they were all for following the Captain. In a
short time Mr. Cane got out of the Woods into the Savannah, and there killed a
good fat Cow, and quartering it, made it fit for Carriage, supposing the
Captain and Crew would soon be with him. But after waiting 3 or 4 hours, and
firing his Gun several times, without hearing any Answer, took up his Burden
and returned toward the Seaside; and upon giving a Signal a Boat came and
brought him aboard. In the Mean time the Captain and his Men after 4 or 5 Hours
ranging the Woods, began to grow tired, and then his Mate happily trusting more
to his own Judgment, left him and the four Seamen, and about

When he came Aboard he gave an Account whereabout, and in what a condition he
left the Captain and his Men; but it being then too late to seek him, the next
Morning very early Mr. Cane and two Seamen taking Directions from the Mate (who
was so fatigued that he could not stir) where he had left the Captain, went
ashore, and at length came within call of him, and at last found him laid down
in a Thicket, having just sense to call out sometimes, but not strength enough
to stand; so they were forced to carry him to the Seaside. When they had a
little refreshed him with Brandy and Water, he told them how his Company had
fainted for Thirst, and dropped down one after another, though he still
encouraged them to be cheerful and rest themselves a while, till he got some
supplies of Water for them; that they were very patient, and that two of his
Men held out till five a Clock in the Afternoon, and then they fainted also;
but he himself proceeded in quest of his way till night; and then fell down in
the place where they then found him.

The two Seamen carried the Captain Aboard, while Mr. Cane scarched about for
the rest, but to no purpose; for he returned without them, and could never hear
of them afterward.

This was a warning to me never to straggle from my Consorts in our Hunting.
But to proceed.

When my Months Service was up, in which time we brought down all the Wood to
the Creek side, I was presently paid my Tun of Logwood; with which, and some
more that I borrowed, I bought a little Provision, and was afterward
entertained as a West came to fetch it, according to his Contract, or else till
they should otherwise dispose of it. Some of them immediately went to
Beef-Island to kill Bullocks for their Hides, which they preserve by pegging
them out very tite on the Ground. First they turn the fleshy side, and after
the hair upwards, letting them lie so till they are very dry. 32 strong Pegs as
big as a Man's Arm, are required to stretch the Hide as it ought to be. When
they are dry they fold them in the middle from Head to Tail, with the Hair
outward; and then hang them cross a strong pole so high that the ends may not
touch the Ground, 40 or 50, one upon another, and once in 3 Weeks or a Month
they beat them with great Sticks, to strike off the Worms that breed in the
Hair, and eat it off, which spoils the Hide. When they are to be shipped off,
they soak them in salt Water to kill the remaining Worms; and while they are
yet wet they fold them in 4 folds, and afterward spread them abroad again to
dry. When they are fully dry, they fold them up again, and so send them Aboard.
I was yet a Stranger to this Work, therefore remained with 3 of the old Crew to
cut more Logwood. My Consorts were all three Scotch-men; one of them named
Price Morris had lived there some Years, and was Master of a pretty large
Periago; for without some sort of Boat, here is no stirring from one place to
another. The other two were young Men that had been bred Merchants, viz. Mr.
Duncam Campbell; and Mr. George -- These two not liking either the Place or
Employment, waited an opportunity of going away by the first Ship that came
hither to take in Logwood. Accordingly not long after the abovementioned.
Capt. Hall of Boston, came hither on that design, and was George should stay
behind to cut Logwood; but Campbell should go to New England to sell this
Cargo, and bring back Flower, and such other Commodities that were proper to
purchase Hides and Logwood in the Bay. This retarded our business; for I did
not find Price Morris very intent at Work: for it is like he thought he had
Logwood enough. And I have particularly observed there, and in other Places,
that such as had been well-bred, were generally most careful to improve their
Time, and would be very industrious and frugal, when there was any probability
of considerable Gain. But on the contrary, such as had been inured to hard
Labor, and got their Living by the sweat of their Brows, when they came to a
plenty, would extravagantly squander away their Time and Money in Drinking and
making a Bluster.

To be short, I kept to my Work by my self, till I was hindered by a hard, red
and angry Swelling like a Boil, in my right Leg; so painful that I was scarce
able to stand on it: but I was directed to roast and apply the Roots of White
Lillies (of which here is great plenty, growing by the Creek sides) to draw it
to a head. This I did three or four Days, without any benefit. At last I
perceived two White Specks in the middle of the Boil; and squeezing it, two
small white Worms spurted out: I took them both up in my Hand, and perceived
each of them to be invested with three Rows of black, short, stiff Hair,
running clear round them; one Row near each end; the other in the middle; each
Row distinct from other; and all very regular and uniform. The Worms were about
the bigness of a Hens Quill, and about three fourths of an Inch long.

I never saw Worms of this sort breed in any Man's Flesh. Indeed Guinea Worms
are very frequent in some Places of the West Indies, especially at Curasao;
Aruba and Bonariry may produce the same Effects; for many of those that went
with me from thence to Virginia (mentioned in my former Volume) were troubled
with them after our arrival there: particularly I my self had one broke out in
my Ancle, after I had been there five or six Months.

These Worms are no bigger than a large brown Thread, but (as I have heard)
five or six Yards long; and if it breaks in drawing out, that part which
remains in the Flesh will putrify, and be very painful, and endanger the
Patients Life; or at least the use of that Limb: and I have known some that
have been scarified and cut strangely, to take out the Worm. I was in great
torment before it came out: my Leg and Ancle swelled and looked very red and
angry; and I kept a Plaster, to it, to bring it to a Head. At last drawing off
my Plaster out came about three Inches of the Worm; and my pain abated
presently. Till then I was Ignorant of my Malady; and the Gentlewoman, at whose
House I was, took it for a Nerve; but I knew enough what it was, and presently
rolled it up on a small Stick. After that I opened it every Morning and
Evening, and strained it out gently, about 2 Inches at a time, not without some
pain, till at length I had got out about two Foot.

Riding with one Mr. Richardson, who was going to a Negro to have his Horse
cured of a galled Back, I asked the Negro if he could undertake my Leg: and
which he did readily; and in the mean

Then coming to me, and looking on the Worm in my Ancle, he promised to cure it
in three Days, demanding also a White Cock for his pains, and using exactly the
same Method with me, as he did with the Horse. He bad me not open it in three
Days; but I did not stay so long; for the next Morning the Cloth being rubbed
off, I unbound it, and found the Worm broken off, and the Hole quite healed up.
I was afraid the remaining part would have given some trouble, but have not
felt any pain there from that day to this.

To return. I told you how I was interrupted in following my Work, by the Worms
breeding in my Leg. And to complete my misfortune, presently after we had the
most violent Storm, for above 24 Hours, that ever was known in these Parts. An
Account of which I shall give more particularly in my Discourse of Winds and
shall now only mention some Passages.

I have already said, we were four of us in Company at this Place cutting
Logwood: and by this Storm were reduced to great Inconveniences; for while
that lasted we could dress no Victuals, no^ even now it was over, unless we had
done it in the Canoa; for the highest Land near us was almost 3 Foot under
Water: besides our Provision too was most of it spoiled, except the Beef and
Pork, which was but little the worse.

We had a good Canoa large enough to carry us all; and seeing it in vain to
stay here any longer, we One-Bush-Key, about 4 Leagues from our Huts. There
were 4 Ships riding here, when the Storm began: but at our arrival we found
only one, and hoped to have got some Refreshment from it, but found very cold
entertainment: For we could neither get Bread nor Punch, nor so much as a Dram
of Rum, though we offered them Money for it. The Reason was, they were already
overcharged with such as being distressed by the Storm, had been forced to
take Sanctuary with them: Seeing we could not be supplied here, we asked which
way the other three Ships were driven? they told us that Capt. Prout of
New England was driven toward Trist, and 'twas probable he was carried out to
Sea, unless he struck on a Sand, called the Middle Ground; that Capt. Skinner
of New England was driven toward Beef-Island; and Captain Chandler of London,
drove away toward Man-of-War Lagune.

Beef-Island lies North from One-Bush-Key; but the other two Places lie a
little on each side: One to the East; the other to the West. So away we went
for Beef-Island: and coming within a League of it, we saw a Flag in the Woods,
made fast to a Pole, and placed on the Top of a high Tree. And coming still
nearer, we at last saw a Ship in the Woods, about 200 Yards from the Sea. We
rowed directly toward her; and when we came to the Woods side, found a pretty
clear Passage made by the Ship, through the Woods, the Trees being all broke
down; and about three Foot Water Home to the Ship. We rowed in with our Canoa,
and went aboard, and were kindly Entertained by the Seamen: but the Captain was
gone Aboard Captain Prout, who stuck fast on the middle Ground
beforementioned. Captain Prout's Ship was afterward got off again; but the
Stumps of the Trees ran clear through the bottom of Captain Skinner's,
therefore there was no hope of saving her. Here we got Victuals and Punch, and
stayed about two Hours, in which time the Captain came aboard and invited us to
stay all Night. But hearing some Guns fired in Man-of-War Lagune, we concluded
that Captain Chandler was there, and wanted assistance. Therefore we presently
rowed away thither, for we could do no Service here: and before Night found him
also stuck fast on a Point of Sand. The Head of his Ketch was dry, and at the
Stern, there was above 4 foot Water. Our coming was very seasonable to Captain
Chandler, with whom we stayed two Days: in which time we got out all his Goods,
carried off his Anchor, etc. and so not being able as yet to do him more
Service, we left him for the present, and went away to hunt at Beef-Island.

At Trist were four Vessels riding before this Storm; one of them was driven
off to Sea, and never heard of afterward. Another was cast dry upon the shore,
where she lay and was never got off again: But the third rode it out. Another
was riding without the Bar of Trist, and she put to Sea, and got to
New England; but much shattered. About ^ days before this Storm began, a small
Vessel, Commanded by Captain Valley, went hence, bound to Jamaica. This Vessel
was given for lost by all the Logwood-Cutters: but about 4 Months after she
returned thither again; and the Captain said he felt nothing of the Storm, but
when he was about 30 Leagues to Windward of Trist, he had a fresh Summasenta
Wind that carried him as high as Cape Condecedo; but all the time he saw very
black Clouds to the Westward.

Beef-Island is about 7 Leagues long, and 3 or 4 broad. It lies in length East
and West. The East end looks toward the Island Trist; and is low drowned Land:
and near the Sea produces nothing but Trist is Low and Mangrovy; at the end of
which there is a small salt Creek, deep enough at high Water for Boats to pass.

From this Creek to the West end, is 4 Leagues all sandy Bay, closed on the
backside with a low Sandbank, abounding with thick prickly Bushes, like a
White-thorn; bearing a whitish hard shell-Fruit, as big as a Sloe, much like a
Calla-bash. The West end is washed with the River St. Peter St. Paul. This end
is overgrown with red Mangroves. About 3 Leagues up from the Mouth of this
River shoots forth a small Branch, running to the Eastward, and dividing
Beef-Island from the Main on the South, and afterward makes a great Lake of
fresh Water, called Fresh Water Lagune. This afterward falls into a Salt Lake,
called Man-of-War Lagune; which empties it self into Laguna Termina, about 2
Leagues from the South East Point of the Island.

The inside or middle of this Island is a Savannah, bordered all round with
Trees, most Mangrovy; either black, white or red, with some Logwood.

The South side, between the Savannahs and the Mangroves is very rich. Some of
this Land lies in Ridges higher than the Savannahs.

The Savannahs produce plenty of long Glass, and the Ridges curious high
flourishing Trees of diverse sorts.

The Fruits of this Island are Penguins, both red and yellow, Guavers,
Sapadilloes, Limes, Oranges, etc. These last but lately planted here by a
Colony of Indians; who revolted from the Spaniards and settled here.

It is no new thing for the Indians in these Woody Parts of America, to fly
away whole Towns at once, and settle themselves in the unfrequented Pecary and
Warree; but they that are thus stroling (or morooning, as the Spaniards call
it) have Plantain-Walks that no Man knows, but themselves; and from thence they
have their Food, till they have raised Plantation Provision near their
New-built Town. They clear no more Ground than what they actually employ for
their Subsistence. They make no Paths: but when they go far from Home; they
break now and then a Bough; letting it hang down; which serves as a Mark to
guide them in their return. If they happen to be discovered by other Indians,
inhabiting still among the Spaniards, or do but mistrust it, they immediately
shift their Quarters to another Place. This large Country affording them good
fat Land enough, and very Woody, and therefore a proper Sanctuary for them.

It was some of these fugitive Indians that came to live at Beef-Island; where,
besides gaining their Freedom from the Spaniards, they might see their Friends
and Accquaintances, that had been taken some time before by the Privateers, and
sold to the Logwood-Cutters, with whom some of the Women lived still though
others of them had been conducted by them, to their own Habitations. -- It was
these Women after their return made known the Kind Entertainment that they met
with from the English; and persuaded their Friends to leave their Dwellings
near the Spaniards, and settle on this Island; and they had been here almost a
Year before they were discovered by the English: and even then were
accidentally

The Animals of this Island are, Squashes in abundance, Porcupines, Guanoes,
Possomes, Pecary, Deer, Horses; and Horn Cattle.

This Island does properly belong to John d' Acosta a Spaniard of Campeachy
Town, who possessed it when the English first came hither to cut Logwood. His
Habitation was then at the Town of Campeachy; but in the dry Season he used to
come hither in a Bark, with six or seven Servants, and spend two or three
Months in hocksing and killing Cattle, only for their Hides and Tallow.

The English Logwood-Cutters happened once to come hither, whilst John d'
Acosta was there; and he hearing their Guns, made toward them, and desired
them to forbear firing; because it would make the Cattle wild; but told them
that any time when they wanted Beef, if they sent to him he would hor as many
as they pleased, and bring the Meat to their Canoas. The English thankfully
accepted his Offer; and did never after shoot his Cattle; but sent to him, when
they wanted; and he (according to his Promise) supplied them. This created him
so much Friendship, that they intended when they returned to Jamaica, to bring
him a present, and Goods also to Trade with him; which would have been very
Advantageous to both Parties: but some of his Servants acquainted the Townsmen
of it, at his return to Campeachy. And they being Jealous of the English, and
envying him, complained to the Governor; who presently cast him into Prison,
where he remained many Years: This happened about the Year 71 or 72. Thus the
Project of Trading with the English miscarried here, and John d' Acosta was
forced to relinquish his Right of this

This way of Hocksing Bullocks seems peculiar to the Spaniards; especially to
those that live hereabouts, who are very dextrous at it. For this Reason some
of of them are constantly employed in it all the Year; and so become very
expert. The Hockser is mounted on a good Horse, bred up to the Sport; who know
so well when to advance or retreat upon occasion, that the Rider has no
trouble to manage him. His Arms is a Hocksing Iron, which is made in the shape
of a Half Moon, and from one corner to the other is about 6 or 7 Inches; with
a very sharp Edge.

This Iron is fastened by a Socket to a Pole about 14 or 15 Foot long. When the
Hockser is mounted, he lays the Pole over the Head of his Horse, with the Iron
forward, and then rides after his Game; and having overtaken it, strikes his
Iron just above the Hock, and Hamstrings it. The Horse presently wheels off to
the left; for the wounded Beast makes at him presently with all his force; but
he scampers away a good distance before he comes about again. If the Hamstring
is not quite cut asunder with the stroke, yet the Bullock by continual
springing out his Leg, certainly breaks it: and then can go but on three Legs,
yet still limps forward to be revenged on his Enemy. Then the Hockser rides up
softly to him and strikes his Iron into the Knee of one of his Forelegs; and
then he immediately tumbles down. He gets off his Horse, and taking a
sharp-pointed strong Knife, strikes it into his Pole, a little behind the
Horns, so dexterously that at one blow he cuts the string of his Neck; and down
falls his Head. This they call Poling. Then the Hockser immediately Mounts, and
Rides after more Game, leaving the other to the

The right Ear of the Hocksing-Horse by the weight of the Pole laid constantly
over it when on Duty, hangs down always, by which you may know it from other
Horses.

The Spaniards pick and chufe only the Bulls and old Cows, and leave the young
Cattle to breed; by which means they always preserve their Stock entire. On the
contrary, the English and French kill without distinction; yea, the young
rather than the old; without regard of keeping up their Stock. Jamaica is a
remarkable Instance of this our Folly, in this Particular. For when it was
first taken by the English, the Savannahs were well stockt with Cattle; but
were soon all destroyed by our Soldiers, who suffered great Hardships
afterward for it: and it was never stocked again till Sir Thomas Linch was
Governor. He sent to Cuba for a supply of Cattle, which are now grown very
plentiful, because every Man knows his own proper Goods. Whereas before, when
there was no Property, each Man destroyed as fast as he could. The French (I
think) are greater Destroyers than the English.

Had it not been for the great care of the Spaniards, in Stocking the West
Indies with Hogs and Bullocks, the Privateers must have starved. But now the
Main, as well as the Island, is plentiful provided; particularly the Bay of
Campeachy, the Islands of Cuba, Pines, Hispaniola, Portarica, etc. Where,
besides wild Hogs, there are abundance of Crawls or Hogfarms; in some of which,
I have heard, there are no less than 1500. This was the main Subsistence of the
Privateers.

But to return again to Beef-Island. Our English Hunters have much lessened the
numbers of the Cattle there. And those that are left, by constant shooting are
now grown so wild and desperate, that it Baker, in the West Lagune; where
having tired themselves with cutting of Logwood, they took an occasion to go in
their Canoa to Beef-Island, to refresh themselves there a fortnight or three
Weeks; because here were several sorts of Fruits, and plenty of Cabbage to eat
with their fresh Beef, which they could not fail to meet with. They came to a
Place called the Salt-Greek; and there built them a Hut. About 4 a clock while
Mr. Baker lay down to sleep, his Consort marched out into the Savannah, about a
Mile from their Huts; and there coming within shot of a Bull, wounded him
desperately; but yet the Bull had still so much strength left as to pursue and
overtake his Adversary, trampling on him; and goring his Thigh, so that he was
not able Barker had not come the next Morning to seek him; who finding him by
the dead Beast, took him on his Back, and lug'd him home to their Hut. The next
day he put him in his Canoa, and delivered him aboard a Ship, into the hands of
a Surgeon, who cured him in a little time.

I told you we left Capt. Chandler, with a design of going to Beef-Island, to
spend some time in Hunting at Pies Pond, before mentioned. But before we came
thither we went a shore to kill a Beef for Supper; where I was surprised with
an odd accident. Passing throught a small Savannah, about 2 or 3 Foot deep, we
smelt a strong scent of an Alligator; and presently after I stumbled over one,
and fell down immediarely. I cried out for help; but my Consorts, instead of
assisting me, ran away toward the Wood. I had no sooner got up to follow them,
but I stumbled on him a second time; and a third time also; expecting still
when I fell down to be devoured. Yet at last I got our safe; but so frighted
that I never cared for going through the Water again as long as I was in the
Bay.

CHAP. IV.
The River St. Peter St. Paul. The Mountain-Cow and Hippopotamus. Tobasco
Island. Guavers. Tobasco River. Manatee. Villa de Mosa. Estapo. Halapo.
Tacatalpo de Sierra. Small Bees. Indians. Tartillos. Posole. Cotton Garments.
Early Marriages. Towns. Festivals. Shape and Features.

THE River St. Peter St. Paul springs from the high Mountains of Chiapo, about
20 Leagues within the Country, which are so called from a City not far distant.
Its first Course is Easterly for a considerable length, till it meets with
Mountains on that side: then it turns short about Northward, till within 12
Leagues of the Sea. And lastly, it divides its self into two Branches. The
Western Branch falls into the River Tobasco; the other keeps its Course till
within 4 Leagues of the Sea; then divides it self again. The Eastermost of
these Branches separates Beef-Island from the Main; and falls into Man-of-War
Lagune, as is before related. The other keeps its Course and Name till it falls
into the Sea, between Beef-Island and Tobasco Island; where it is no broader
than the Thames at Gravesend. There is a Bar at its Entrance, but of what depth
I know not; over which small Vessels may pass well enough by the Benefit of the
Tide. It is both deeper and broader after you are in; for there it is 15 or 16
Foot Water, and very good Riding. By Report of the Privateers who have been up
this River, it is very broad before it Summasenta; and many large Cacao and
Plantains walks: the Soil on each side being very fruitful. The unmanur'd Land
is overgrown with lofty Trees of many sorts, especially the Cotton or Cabbage;
of the latter there are whole Groves; and in some Places (especially a little
way from the Rivers side) great Savannahs full of Bullocks, Horses, and other
Animals; amongst which the Mountain Cow (called by the Spaniards Ante) is most
remarkable.

This Beast is as big as a Bullock of two Years old. It is shaped like a Cow in
Body; but her Head much bigger. Her Nose is short, and the Head more compact
and round. She has no Horns. Her Eyes are round, full, and of a prodigious
size. She has great Lips, but not so thick as the Cows Lips. Her Ears are in
proportion to the Head, rather broader than those of the Common Cow. Her Neck
is thick and short. Her Legs also shorter than ordinary. She has a pretty long
Tail; thin of Hairs, and no Bob at the end. She has course thin Hair all over
her Body. Her Hide is near two Inches thick. Her flesh is red; the grain of it
very fine. The Fat is white, and all together it is sweet wholesome Meat. One of
them will weigh 5 or 600 Weight.

This Creature is always found in the Woods near some large River; and feeds on
a sort of long thin Grass, or Moss, which grows plentifully on the Banks of
Rivers; but never feeds in Savannahs, or Pastures of good Grass, as all other
Bullocks do. When her Belly is full, she lies down to sleep by the brink of the
River; and at the least Noise slips into the Water: where sinking down to the
bottom, though very deep, she walks as on dry Ground. She cannot run fast,
therefore never rambles far from the River; for there she always takes
Sanctuary, in case

They are found, beside this Place, in the Rivers in the Bay of Honduras; and
on all the Main from thence as high as the River of Darien. Several of my
Consorts have killed them there, and knew their Track, which I my self saw in
the Isthmus of Darien; but should not have known it, but as I was told by them.
For I never did see one, nor the Track of any but once. The Impression in the
Sand, seemed much like the Track of a Cow, but I was well assured that none of
our common Cows could live in that Place: neither are there any near it by many
Miles.

My Consorts than gave me this Relation, and since I have had the same from
other Englishmen as well as Spaniards.

Having showed the foregoing Description to a Person of Honor, he was pleased
to send it to a Learned Friend in Holland; from whom he received this Answer.

SIR,
THE Account I have of this Paper from the English Minister at Leyden is this.
The Description of your Sea-Cow, agrees with the Hippopotamus kept hereso
exactly, that I take them to be Creatures of the same kind. Only this here at
Leyden is bigger than any Ox. For the Eyes, Ears and Hair, nothing can be said,
seeing this Skin wants all these. The Teeth are worth noticing, which are very
large, and firm, and fine as any Ivory.

I have spoke with a very Intelligent Person, Kinsman to the Burgomaster of
Leyden, who having had that Hippopotamus (as they call it) presented to him,
made a Present thereof to the University; who having viewed that Skin very
well, says, It Is much bigger than

Let me add of mine own, that perhaps they are greater, about the Cape of Good
Hope; whence that of Leyden came. And seeing there are no Horns, perhaps it may
as well be called a River-Horse as a River-Cow: But for that, it must bear the
denomination given it by the People of the Place where they are; which may be
different in Africa and America.

But what he says of her sinking to the bottom in deep Rivers, and walking
there, if he adds, what I think he supposes, that he rises again, and comes on
the Land; I much question. For that such a huge Body should raise it self up
again (though I know Whales and great Fishes can and do) transcends the Faith
of I. H.


I readily acknowledge, there is some resemblance between this Monntain-Cow of
America, and the African Hippopotamus; but yet am of Opinion that they must
needs be of a different Species; for the Mountain-Cow is never known to swim
out to Sea, nor to be found near it; and is not above half so big, and has no
long Teeth. But for further satisfaction, I have here infected two Accounts of
the African Hippopotamus, as they were sent; the one of the Honorable Person
beforementioned, from Captain Covent of Porbury, near Bristol, a Gentleman of
great Ability and Experience, as well as known Integrity, who used to Trade to
Angola: The other to my self, from my worthy Friend Captain Rogers, as he has
seen them in the River Natal, in the Latitude of 30, on the East side of the
Cape of Good Hope.

The Sea Horse's Head, Ears and Nostrils are like our Horses; with a short Tail
and Legs. And his Footsteps in the Sand like a Horses; but the Body above
Kittimpungo, and say he is Fetisso, which is a kind of a God; for nothing, they
say can kill him: And if they should do to him, as the White Men do, he would
soon destroy their Canoas and Fishing-Nets. Their Custom is when he comes near
their Canoas, to throw him Fish; and then he passes away, and will not meddle
with their Fishing Craft. He does most mischief when he can stand on the
Ground; but when a-float, has only power to bite. As our Boat once lay near
the shore, I saw him go under her, and with his Back lift her out of the Water;
and overset her with 6 Men aboard: but, as it happened, did them no harm.

This past Remark was made of a Seahorse at Loango, in the Year 1695.

Captain Roger's Letter.
SIR,
THE Hippopotamus or Seahorse, lives as well on the Land as in the Sea or in
Rivers. It is shaped much like an Ox, but bigger; weighing 1500 or, 1600 l.
This Creature is very full bodied, and covered with Hair of a Mouse Color;
thick, short and of a very beautiful sleekness, when he first comes out of the
Water. The Head is flattish on the top. It has no Horns: but large Lips, a wide
Mouth and strong Teeth; four of which are longer than the rest, (viz.) two in
the upper Jaw; one on each side and two more in the under: These last are four
or five Inches long; the other two are shorter. It has large broad Ears; great
goggle Eyes; and is very quick sighted. It has a thick Neck; and strong Legs,
but weak Footlocks. The Hoofs of his Feet are Cloven in the middle: And it has
two small Hoofs above the Footlock, which bending to the Ground when it goes,
make an Impression on the Sand like four Claws. His Tail is short and tapering
like a Swines; without any Bob at the end. This Beast is commonly fat and very
good Meat. It grazeth ashore in wet swampy Ground near Rivers or Ponds; but
retires to the Water, if purused. When they are in the Water, they will sink
down to the bottom; and there walk as on dry Ground. They will run almost as
fast as a Man; but if chased hard, they will turn about and look very fierce,
like a Boar; and fight if put to it. The Natives


The West branch of the River St. Peter St. Paul, after it has run 8 or 9
Leagues N. W. loses it self in Tobasco River about 4 Leagues from the Sea, and
so makes the Island Tobasco, which is 12 Leagues long, and 4 broad at the North
end: for from the River St. Peter St. Paul, to the mouth of Tobasco River, is
accounted 4 Leagues; and the Shore lies East and West.

The first League on the East is Mangrove Land, with some Sandy Bay, where
Turtle come ashore to lay their Eggs.

The West part of it is Sandy Bay quite to the River Tobasco. But because here
is constantly a great Sea, you have no good Landing till within the River. The
N. W. part of it is full of Guaver Trees, of the greatest variety, and their
Fruit the largest and best tasted I have met with; and it is really a very
delicious Place. There are also some Coco-Plums and Grapes, but not many. The
Savannahs here are naturally fenced with Groves of Guavers, and produce

Here are also Deer in great numbers; these weconstantly find feeding in the
Savannahs Mornings and Evenings. And I remember an unlucky Accident whilst I
was there. Two or three Men went out one Evening purposely to hunt; when they
were in the spots of Savannahs, they separated to find their Game, and at last
it so happened, that one of them fired at a Deer and killed it, and while he
was skinning it, he was shot stark dead by one of his Consorts, who fired at
him, mistaking him for a Deer. The poor Man was very sorry for so sad a
mischance; and for fear of the dead Man's Friends, durst never go back again to
Jamaica.

The River of Tobasco is the most noted in all the Bay of Campeachy, and
springs also from the high Mountains of Chiapo; but much more to the Westward
than that of St. Peter St. Paul. From thence it runs N. E. till within 4
Leagues of the Sea, where it receives the forementioned Branch of St. Peter
St. Paul, and then runs North till it falls into the Sea. Its Mouth is about
two Miles wide, and there is a Bar of Sand lying off it, with not above 11 or
12 foot Water; but a Mile or two within the Mouth, at a nook or bending of the
River on the East Side there is three Fathom, and good Riding, without any
danger from the strength of the Current. The Tide flows up about four Leagues
in the dry Season, but in the Rains not so far; for then the Freshes make the
Ebb run very strong.

During the Norths it over-flows all the low Land

This River, near its Mouth, abounds with Catfish, with some Snooks, and
Manatee in great plenty; there being good feeding for them in many of its
Creeks, especially in one place on the Starbord side about 2 Leagues from the
Sea, which runs into the Land 2 or 300 paces, and then opens very wide, and is
so shoal that you may see their backs above Water as they feed; a thing so
rare, that I have heard our Musketo-Men say, they never saw it any where else;
on the least noise they will all scamper out into the River: yet the
Musketo-men seldom miss of striking them. There are a sort of Fresh Water
Manatee, not altogether so big as the Sea kind, but otherwise exactly alike in
shape and taste, and I think rather fatter. The Land by the Rivers, especially
on the Starbord side, is swampy, and overgrown with Trees.

(Here are also abundance of Trees, the largest that I ever saw, till I came to
the Gallapagos Islands in the S. Seas) viz. Mangroves, Macaws, and other sorts
that I know not. In some places near the River side, further up the Country,
are Ridges of dry Land, full of lofty Cabbage and Cotton Trees, which make a
very pleasant Landscape. There is no Settlement within 8 Leagues of the River's
Mouth, and then you come to a small Breast-work, where there is commonly a
Spaniard with 8 or 9 Indians posted on each side the River, to watch for Boats
coming that way: And because there are diverse Creeks running in from the
Savannahs, some of these Sentinesl are so placed in the Woods, that they may
look into the Savannahs, for fear being surprised on the back side: Yet for all
their caution, these Sentinels were snap'd by Captain Nevil, Commander of a
small Brigantine, in a second Expedition that he made to take the Town called
Villa de Mose. His

Villa de Mose is a small Town standing on the Starboard side of the River, 4
Leagues beyond this Breast-work. It Is inhabited chiefly by Indians, with some
Spaniards, there is a Church in the middle, and a Fort at the West end, which
commands the River. Thus far Ships come to bring goods, especially European
Commodities; viz. Broad-cloth, Serges, Perpetuana's, Kersies, Thred-Stockings,
Hats, Osnabrugs white and blew, Kentins, Platilloes, Britannias, Hollandilloes,
Iron-work, etc. They arrive here in November or December, and stay till June or
July, selling their Commodities, and then load chiefly with Cacao, and some
Sylvester. All the Merchants and petty Traders of the Country Towns come hither
about Christmas to Traffic, which makes this Town the chiefest in all these
parts, Campeachy excepted; yet there are but few Rich Men that live here.
Sometimes Ships that come hither load Hides and Tallow, if they cannot freight
with Cacao. But the chiefest place for Hides is a Town lying on a Branch of
this River, that comes out a League below the Breast-work, where Spanish Barks
usually lade once a Year; but I can give no further account of it. Four Leagues
beyond Villa de Mose further up the River lies Estapo, inhabited partly with
Spaniards, but most Indians, as generally the Towns in this Country are: It Is
said to be pretty rich; stands close by the River, on the South side, and is so
built between two Creeks, that there is but one Avenue leading to it; and so
well guarded Captain Hewet a Privateer, who had under him near 200 Men, was
there repulsed, losing many of them, and himself wounded in the Leg. In his way
thither he took Villa de Mose, and left a Party there to secure his Retreat. If
he had taken Estapo, he designed to pass on to Halpo, a Rich Town, three
Leagues farther up the River, and from thence to visit Tacatalpo, lying 3 or 4
Leagues beyond, which is accounted the wealthiest of the three: the Spaniards
call it Tacatalpo de Sierra: whether to distinguish it from another Town of
that name, or to denote its nearness to the Mountains, I know not. It Is the
best Town on this River, having three Chnrches, and several Rich Merchants; and
between it and Villa de Mose are many large Cacao Walks on each side the River.

I have seen a sort of white Cacao brought from hence, which I never met with
any where else. It is of the same bigness and color on the outside, and with
such a thin husky Coat as the other; but the inner substance is white, like
fine Flower; and when the outward Coat is broken, it crumbles as a lump of
Flower does. Those that frequent the Bay call it Spama, and affirm that it is
much used by the Spaniards of those parts, to make their Chocolate froth, who
therefore set a great value on it. But I never yet met with any in England that
knew it, except the Right Honorable the Earl of Carbery, who was pleased to
tell me he had seen of it.

The Land on the South side of the River is low Savannahs or Pasture: The side
where the Town of Villa de Mose stands, is a sort of gray sandy Earth; and the
whole Country, the Up-land I mean, seems to be much the same: But the Low-land
is of a black deep Mould, and in some places very strong Clay; and there is not
a Stone to be found in all the Country. The healthy dry Land is very Woody,
except where inhabited or planted. It is pretty thick settled Indian Towns, who
have all a Padre or two among them, and a Cacique or Governor to keep the
Peace. The Cacao Tree thrives here very well; but the Nuts are smaller than the
Caraccus Nuts; yet Oily and Fat whilst new. They are not planted near the Sea,
as they are on the Coast of Caraccus, but at least 8 or 10 Miles up in the
Country. The Cacao-walks belong chiefly to the Spaniards; and are only planted
and dressed by Indians, hired for that purpose; yet the Indians have of their
own, Plantain-walks, Plantations of Maiz, and some small Cacao-walks; about
which they spent the chiefest of their time. Some employ themselves to search
in the Woods for Bees that build in hollow Trees: and get a good livelihood by
the Honey and Wax. These are of two sorts: One pretty large; the other no
bigger, but longer, than an ordinary black Fly: in other respects, just like
our common Bees; only of a darker color. Their Stings are not strong enough to
enter a Man's Skin; but if disturbed, they will fly at one as furiously as the
Great Bees; and will tickle, but cannot hurt you. Their Honey is white and
clear; and they make a great deal of it. The Indians keep of them tame, and cut
hollow Trunks for them to make their Combs in. They place one end of the Log
(which is sawed very even) on a Board, leaving a hole for the Bees to creep in
at: and the upper end is covered with a Board, put close over it. The young and
lusty Indians (such as want Employment) hire themselves to the Spaniards. They
Work cheap, and are commonly paid in such Goods as the Spaniards do not value.
And I have been told that they are obliged to Work for their Masters, one day
in a Week, gratis: But whether this Privilege belongs only to the Padres, or
to the Laity also, I know not. The Indians inhabiting these Villages, live like
Gentlemen in Comparison Campeachy or Merida: for there even the Poorer and
Rascally sort of People, that are not able to hire one of these poor Creatures,
will by violence drag them to do their Drudgery for nothing, after they have
worked all day for their Masters: nay, they often take them out of the Market
from their Business; or at least enjoin them to come to their Houses when their
Market is ended: and they dare not refuse to do it.

This Country is very fruitful; yelding plentiful Crops of Maiz; which is there
chiefest Subsistence. After it is boiled they bruise it on such a Rubbing-Stone
as Chocolate is ground on. Some of it they make into small thin Cakes, called
Tartilloes. The rest they are put into a Jar till it grows sour; and when they
are thirsty, mix a handful of it in a Callabash of Water, which gives it a
sharp pleasant taste, then straining it through a large Callabash pricked full
of small Holes to keep out the Husks, they drink it off. If they treat a Friend
with this Drink, they mix a little Honey with it; for their Ability reaches no
higher: And this is as acceptable to them as a Glass of Wine to us. If they
travel for two or three Days from Home, they carry some of this ground Maiz in
a Plantain Leaf, and Callabash at their Girdles to make their drink, and take
no farther care for Victuals, till they come home again. This is called Posole:
And by the English Poorsoul. It is so much esteemed by the Indians, that they
are never without some of it in their Houses.

Another way of Preparing their Drink, is to parch the Maiz, and then grind it
to Powder on the Rubbing-stone, putting a little Anatta to it; which grows in
their Plantations, and is used by them for no other purpose. They mix it all

In long Journeys they prefer this Drink before Posole.

They feed abundance of Turkies, Ducks and Dunghill Fowls, of which the Padre
has an exact Account; and is very strict in gathering his Tithe: and they dare
not kill any except they have his Leave for it.

They plant Cotton also for their Clothing. The Men wear only a short Jacket
and Breeches. These with a Palmeto-Leaf Hat is their Sundays Dress; for they
have neither Stockings nor Shoes; neither do they wear these Jackets on Week
Days. The Women have a Cotton-Petticoat, and a large Frock down to their Knees;
the Sleeves to their Wrists, but not gathered. The Bosom is open to the Breast,
and Imbroidered with black or red Silk, or Grogram Yarn, two Inches broad on
each side the Breast, and clear round the Neck. In this Garb, with their Hair
tied up in a Knot behind, they think themselves extreme fine.

The Men are obliged by the Padres (as I have been informed) to Marry when they
are Fourteen Years old, and the Women when Twelve: And if that Age they are not
provided, the Priest will choose a Virgin for the Man (or a Man for the Virgin)
of Equal Birth and Fortune; and join them together.

The Spaniards give several Reasons for this Imposition, viz. That it preserves
them from Debaucher, and makes them Industrious. -- That it brings them to pay
Taxes, both to the King and Church; for as soon as they are Married they pay to
both. -- And that it keeps them from rambling out of their own Parish, and
settling in another, which would by so much lessen the Padres

The Churches are large, built much higher than the Common Houses, and covered
with Pantile: and within adorned with Coarse Pictures and Images of Saints;
which are all painted tauny like the Indians themselves. Besides these
Ornaments, there are kept in the Curches Pipes, Hautboys, Drums, Vizars and
Perruques for their Recreation at solemn Times; for they have little or no
Sport or Pastime but in Common, and that only upon Saints Days, and the Nights
ensuing.

The Padres that serve here, must learn the Indian Language before they can
have a Benefice. As for their Tithes and other Incoms, Mr. Gage, (an English
Man) has given a large Account of them in his Survey of the West Indies. But
however, this I will add of my own knowledge, that they are very dutiful to
their Priests; observing punctually their Orders: and behave themselves very
circumspectly and reverently in their Presence.

They are generally well shaped, of a middle size; straight and clean Limbed.
The Men more spare, the Women plump and fat, their Faces are round and flat,
their Foreheads low, their Eyes little, their Noses of a middle size, somewhat
flattish: full Lips; pretty full but little Mouths: white Teeth, and their
Color of a dark tauny, like other Indians. They sleep in Hammacks made with
small Cords like a Net, fastened at each end to a Post. Their Furniture is but
mean, viz. Earthen Pots to boil their Maiz in, and abundance of Callabashes.
They are a very harmless sort of People; kind to

CHAP. VI.
The River of Checapeque. The River of Dos Bocas. The Towns up the Country.
Halpo. Their Trade. Old Hats, a good Commodity. A sad Accident in Hunting.
Tondelo River. Musketos troublesome on this Coast. Guasickwalp River.
Teguantapeque River. Few Gold Mines on all this part of the Seacoast.
Teguantapeque Town. Keyhooca and its Cacao-Trade. Vinellos. Alvarado River; and
its Branches. Its Fort, Town and Trade. Cod Pepper. La Vera Cruz. The Fort of
St. John d'Ulloa. The Barra la Venta Fleet; and their Navigation about the
West India Coast. The Town of Tispo. Paunuk River and Town. Lagune and Town of
Tompeque. Huniago Island. Its Trade in Shrimps. The Author's return to
Logwood-Cutting at Trist. Captain Gibbs killed there by some Indians he brought
from New England. The Author's setting out to Jamaica and return for England.

HAving given the Reader an Account of the Indians inhabiting about the River
of Tobasco; I come next to describe the Western Coast of this Bay, with its
Rivers and other most remarkable Particulars. From Tobasco River to the
Checapeque is 7 Leagues. The Coast lies East and West; all Woody low Ground,
sandy Bay, and good Anchoring; but there falls in a pretty high Sea on the
shore, therefore but bad Landing; yet Canoas may with care run in, if the Men
are ready to leap out, as soon as she touches the Ground; and then she must
immediately be dragged up out of the Surf. And the same caution and dexterity is
to be used when they go off again. There is no fresh Water between Tobasco
River and Checapeque. This latter is rather a salt Creek than a River; for the
Mouth of it is not above 20 Paces wide, and about 8 or 9 Foot Water on the Bar;
but within there is 12 or 13 Foot at low Water, and good riding for Barks, half
a Mile within the Mouth.

This Creek runs in E. S. E. about two Miles, and then strikes away South up
into the Country. At its Mouth between it and the Sea is a bare sandy Point of
Land: Where, on the side next the River, close by the Brink of it (and no where
else) you may scrape up the Sand (which is course and brown) with your Hands,
and get fresh Water; but if you dig lower the Water will be salt. Half a Mile
within the Mouth, when you are past the sandy Point, the Land is wet and
swampy, bearing only Mangroves on each side for 4 or 5 Leagues up; and after
that firm Land: where you will find a Run of fresh Water, it being all salt
till you come thither. A League beyond this is a Beef Estantion or Farm of
Cattle, belonging to an Indian Village. In the Woods on each side this River
there are plenty of Guanoes, Land Turtle, and abundance of Quams and Corresos,
with some Parrots; and there is no Settlement nearer than the Beef Estantion:
nor any thing else remarkable in this River that I know.

A League West from Checapeque there is another small River called Dos Boccas,
it is only fit for Canoas Rives and Captain Hewet, two Privateers, lost several
Men here in coming out; for there had been a North, which had raised the Bar,
and in going out most of their Canoas were overset, and some Men drowned.

This River will not float a Canoa above a League within its Mouth, and so far
is salt: but there you meet with a fine clear Stream of fresh Water, about a
League up in the Country: and beyond this are fair Savannahs of long Grass,
fenced in with Ridges of as rich Land as any in the World. The Mold such as is
formerly described; all plain and level, even to the Hills of Chiapo.

There are no Indian Towns within 4 or 5 Leagues of the Sea; but further off
they are pretty thick; lying within a League, 2 or 3 one after another: Halpo
is the chiefest.

The Indians make use of no more Land than serves to maintain their Families in
Maiz; and to pay their Taxes: And therefore between the Towns it lies
uncultivated.

In all this Country they rear abundance of Poultry, Viz. Turkies, Ducks and
Dunghill Fowls: but some of them have Cacao-Walks. The Cacao of these Parts is
most of it sent to Villa de Mose, and shipped off there. Some of it is sold to
Carriers that travail with Mules, coming hither commonly in Nov. or Dec. and
staying till Febr. or March. They lie a Fortnight at a time in a Village to
dispose of their Goods; which are commonly Hatchets, Macheats, Axes, Hoes,
Knives, Cizars, Needles, Thread, Silk for sowing, Women's Frocks; small
Lookingglasses, Beads, Silver or Copper Rings washed with Gold, set with Glass
instead of Stones, small Pictures of Saints, and such like Toys for the
Indians. La Vera Cruz.

From Dos Boccas to the River Palmas is 4 Leagues, low Land and sandy Bay
between.

From Palmas to the Halover is 2 Leagues.

The Halover is a small Neck of Land, parting the Sea from a large Lagune. It
is so called by the Privateers, because they use to drag their Canoas in and
out there.

From the Halover to St. Anns is 6 Leagues.

St. Anns is a Mouth that opens the Lagune before mentioned: there is not above
6 or 7 Foot Water, yet Barks often go in there to Careen.

From St. Anns to Tondelo is 5 Leagues. The Coast still West; the Land low, and
sandy Bay against the Sea: a little within which are pretty high Sand-Banks,
clothed with prickly Bushes, such as I have already described at Beef-Island.

Against the Sea near the West end, within the Sand Bank, the Land is lower
again; the Woods not very high, and some spots of Savannahs, with plenty of fat
Bullocks; In hunting of which a Frenchman unhappily lost his Life. For his
Company being stragled from him to find Game, he unluckily met a Drove of
Cattle flying from them in the Woods, which were so thick that there was no
passing but in these very narrow Paths that the Cattle themselves had made; so
that not being able to get out of their way, the foremost of the Drove thrust
his Horns into his Back and carried him 100 Paces into the Savannah, where he
fell down with his Guts trailing on the Ground.

Tondelo is but narrow, yet capable to receive Barks of 50 or 60 Tuns: there is
a Bar at the Entrance, and the Channnel crooked. On the West side of the Bar
there is a spit of Sand shoots out; therefore to avoid it at your coming in,
you must keep the East side aboard; but when once entered, you may run up for
two or three Leagues; on the East side a quarter of a Mile within the Mouth,
you may lie secure: but all this Coast, and especially this River, intolerably
swarms with Musketoes, that there is no sleeping for them.

About 4 or 5 Leagues from the Mouth this River is fordable, and there the Road
crosses it; where two French Canoas that lay in this River intercepted the
Caravan of Mules laden with Cacao, that was returning to La Vera Cruz, taking
away as much as they could carry with them.

From Tondelo River, to the River of Guasickwalp, is 8 Leagues more, the Coast
still West; all along sandy Bay and Sand-hills, as between St. Anns and
Tondelo; only toward the West part the Bank is lower, and the Trees higher.
This is one of the Principal Rivers of this Coast; it is not half the breadth of
the Tobasco River, but deeper. Its Bar is less dangerous than any on this
Coast, having 14 foot Water on it, and but little Sea. Within the Bar there is
much more, and soft Oasie Ground. The Banks on both sides are low. The East
side is woody, and the West side Savannah. Here are some Cattle; but since it
has been frequented by Privateers, the Spaniards have driven most of their
Bullocks from hence farther into the Country. This River has its rise near the
South Sea, and is Navigable a great way into Land; especially with Boats or
small Barks.

The River T^guantepeque, that falls into the South Seas, has its Origin near
the Head of Guasickwalp; and it is reported that the first Naval Stores for the
Manila Ships were sent through the Country from the North to the South Seas, by
the convenience of these two Rivers, whose heads are not above 10 or 12 Leagues
asunder, I heard this discoursed by the Privateers long before I visited the
South Seas; and they seemed sometimes minded to try their Fortunes this way:
supposing (as many do still) that the South Sea shore is nothing but Gold and
Silver. But how grossly they are mistaken, I have satisfied the World already.
And for this part of the Country, though it is rich in Land, yet it has not the
least appearance of any Mine, neither is it thick inhabited with Spaniards: And
if I am not deceived, the very Indians in the heart of the Country, are scarce
their Friends.

The Town of note on the S. Sea, is Teguantapeque; and on the N. Seas Keyhooca
is the chiefest near this River. Besides these two, the Country is only
inhabited by Indians; therefore it is wholly unfrequented by Shipping.

Keyhooca is a large rich Town of good Trade, about 4 Leagues from the River
Guasickwalp, on the West fide. It is inhabited with some few Spaniards and
abundance of Mulatoes. These keep many Mules, they being most Carriers, and
frequently visit the Cacao Coast for Nuts; and travel the Country between Villa
de Mose and La Vera Cruz.

This Country is pleasant enough in the dry Season; but when the furious North
Winds rage on the Coast, and violently drive in the Sea, it suffers extremely,
being so much overflown, that there is no traveling. It was in the wet Season
when Capt. Rives and Capt. Hewet made an Expedition in Canoas from the Island
Trist to the River Guasickwalp, and there landed their Men, designing to attack
Keyhooca; but the Country was so wet that there was no marching; neither was
the Water high Vinelles.

From the River Guasickwalp the Land runs West 2 or 3 Leagues, all low Land
with sandy Bay to the Sea, and very woody in the Country. About three Leagues
to the West of it the Land trends away to the North for about 16 Leagues;
rising higher also even from the very Shore, as you go up within Land, making a
very high Promontory called St. Martins Land; but ending in a pretty bluff
point; which is the West Bounds of the Bay of Campeachy.

From this bluff Point to Alvarado is about 20 Leagues; the first four of it a
high rocky shore, with steep Cliffs to the Sea; and the Land somewhat woody.
Afterward you pass by very high Sand-Hills by the Sea; and an extraordinary
great Sea falls in on the shore, which hinders any Boats from Landing. Within
the Sand-hills again the Land is lower, pretty plain and fruitful enough in
large Trees.

The River of Alvarado is above a Mile over at the Mouth, yet the entrance is
but shole, there being Sands for near two Mile off the shore, clear from side
to side, nevertheless there are two Channels through these Sands. The best,
which is in the middle, has 12 or 14 Foot Water. The Land on each side of the
Mouth is high Sand-banks, above 200 Foot high.

This River comes out of the Country in three Branches, meeting altogether just
within the Mouth, where it is very wide and deep. One of these Branches comes
from the Eastward: Another from the Westward: And the third, which is the true
River of Alvarado and the biggest, comes directly out of the Country, opposite
to the Sand-hills, about a Mile West of the Rivers Mouth. This last springs a
great way from the Sea, passing through a very fertile Country, thick settled
with Towns of Spaniards Indians. On the West side, and just against the Mouth
of the River, the Spainiarde have a small Fort of 6 Guns, on the declivity of
the Sand-bank, a great height above the River; which commands a small Spanish
Town on the back of it, built in a Plain close by the River. It is a great
Fishery, chiefly for Snooks, which they catch in the Lake; and when they are
salted and dried, drive a great Trade in Exchanging them for Salt and other
Commodities. Besides salt Fish, they export from hence abundance of dry
Cod-Pepper, and some pickled and put in Jars. This Pepper is known by the Name
of Guinea Pepper. Yet for all this Trade, it is but a poor Place, and has been
often taken by the Privateers, chiefly to secure their Ships while they should
go up in their Canoas to the rich Towns within Land, which notwithstanding they
never yet attempted, by reason that La Vera Cruz bordering so near, they were
still afraid of being attacqued both by Sea and Land from thence, and so never
durst prosecute their designs on the Country Towns.

Six Leagues West from Alvarado there is another large Opening out into the
Sea; and it is reported to have a Communication by a small Creek with this
River of Alvarado; and that Canoas may pass through it from one River to the
other. And at this Opening is a small Fishing Village. The Land by the Sea is a
continued high Sand-bank, and so violent a Sea, that it is impossible to land
with Boat or Canoa.

From this River to La Vera Cruz is six Leagues more, the Coast still West.
There is a Riff of Rocks runs along the shore from Alvarado to Vera Cruz, yet a
good Channel for small Vessels to pass between it and the Shore. And about two
Leagues to the East of Vera Cruz are two Islands called Sacrifice Islands. I
have set down the distance between Alvarado and La Vera Cruz, according to the
Common Account of 12 Leagues, which I take to be truer, but our Draughts make
it 24. The Land by the Sea is much the same.

La Vera Cruz is a fair Town seated in the very bottom of the Bay of Mexico, at
the S. W. Point or Corner of the Bay; for so far the Land runs West; and there
it turns about to the North. There is a good Harbor before it, made by a small
Island, or Rock rather, just in its Mouth; which makes it very Commodious. Here
the Spaniards have built a strong Fort, which commands the Harbor; and there
are great Iron Rings fixed in the Fort-Wall against the Harbor for Ships to
fasten their Cables. For the North Winds blow so violently here in their
Seasons that Ships are not safe at Anchors.

This Fort is called St. John d' Ulloa; and the Spaniards do frequently call
the Town of Vera Cruz by this Name.

The Town is a Place of great Trade; being the Seaport to the City of Mexico,
and most of the great Towns and Cities in this Kingdom. So that all the
European Commodities, spent in these Parts, are Landed here, and their Goods
brought hither and exported from hence. Add to this, that all the Treasure
brought from Manila, in the East Indies comes hither through the Country from
Accapulca.

The Flota comes hither every three Years from Old Spain; and besides Goods of
the Product of the Country, and what is brought from the East Indies and shipped
aboard them: The King's Plate that is gathered in this Kingdom; together with
what belongs to the Merchants, amounts to a vast Sum. Here also comes every
Year the Barralavanta Fleet in October or November, and stays till March. This
is a small Squadron, consisting of 6 Spanish Seaport Town^ once every Year;
chiefly to hinder Foreigners from Trading; and to suppress Privateers. From
this Por^ they go to the Havana on the North side of Cuba to sell their
Commodities. -- From hence they pass through the Gulf of Florida; standing so
far to the North as to be out of the Trade-Winds, which are commonly between
30d. and 40d. of Lat. and being in a variable Winds-way they stretch away to
the Eastwards till they may fetch Portarica, if they have Business there; if
not, they keep still to the Eastward till they come to Trinidado, an Island
near the Main, inhabited by the Spaniards, and the most Eastern part of any
Consequence in the North Seas. The Barralaventa Fleet touches there first, and
from thence sails to the Margarita, a considerable Spanish Island near the
Main. From thence they Coast down to Comana and La Guiary, and passing by the
Coast of Carraccus, they sail toward the Gulf of Mericaia, from thence they
double Cape La Vell, and so down to Rio la Hacha, St. Martha and Carthagena. If
they meet with any English or Dutch Trading Sloops, they chase and take them,
if they are not too nimble for them: The Privateers keep out of their way,
having always Intelligence where they are.

From Carthagena they sail to Portobelo; and from thence to Campeachy: and
lastly, to La Vera Cruz: And this is their Annual Navigation about the
West-Indian Coast.

La Vera Cruz was taken by the Privateers, about the Year 85. under the conduct
of one John Russel an old Logwood Cutter that had formerly been taken by the
Spaniards and sent to Mexico; where learning Spanish, he by that means escaped
to La Vera Cruz; and being released from thence, he afterward managed this
Expedition.

Old Vera Cruz is 5 Leagues. This was the first Town of that Name; but wanting
a good Harbor there, it was removed to the place where it now stands.

From Old Vera Cruz to Tispo is about 15 Leagues; the Coast lies N. and S.
Tispo is a pretty handsome small Town, built close by the Sea, and watered with
a little Rivulet; but wanting a Harbor, it is destitute of any Maritime-Trade.

From Tispo to the River Panuk is about 20 Leagues; The Coast lies N. and S.
nearest, it is a large River descending out of the very Bowels of the Country,
and running East, falls into the Gulf of Mexico, in Lat. about 21-50 m. It has
10 or 11 Foot Water on the Bar, and is often visited with Barks that sail up
it, as far as the City Panuk; lying distant from the Sea about 20 Leagues; and
is the principal of this Country, being a Bishops See. There are two Churches,
one Convent and a Chapel; and about 500 Families of Spaniards, Mulatoes and
Indians, The Houses are large and strong; with Stone Walls; and they are
thatched with Palmeto Leaves.

One Branch of this River comes out of the Lagune of Tompeque, and mixes with
this, three Leagues before it falls into the Sea. Therefore it is sometimes
called the River of Tompeque. The Lagune of Tompeque lies on the South side of
the River; and breeds abundance of Fish, especially Shrimps. There is a Town of
the same Name, built on its Banks, whose inhabitants are most Fishermen. Beyond
this Lagune there is another large one, wherein is an Island and Town, named
Haniago; its Inhabitants most Fishermen, whose chief employment is to take
Shrimps. These they boil with Water and Salt, in great Coppers for the purpose;
and having dried them afterward in the Sun, they are made up in Packs and
Mexico, where, though but a hungry sort of Food, they are mightily esteemed.

The Account I have given of the Campeachy Rivers, etc. was the result of the
particular Observations I made in cruising about that Coast, in which I spent
11 or 12 Months. For when the violent Storm, beforementioned took us, I was
but just settling to Work, and not having a stock of Wood to purchase such
Provision as was sent from Jamaica, as the old Standards had; I, with many more
in my circumstances, was forced to range about to seek a subsistence in Company
of some Privateers then in the Bay. In which rambles we visited all the Rivers,
from Trist to Alvarado; and made many Descents into the County among the
Villages there, where we got Indian-Corn to eat with the Beef, and other Flesh
that we got by the way, or Manatee and Turtle, which was also a great support
to us.

Alvarado was the Westermost place I was at Thither we went in two Barks with
30 Men in each and had 10 or 11 killed and desperately wounded in taken the
Fort; being four or five Hours engaged in that Service, in which time the
Inhabitants having plenty of Boats and Canoas, carried all their Riches and
best Movables away. It was after Sunset before the Fort yielded; and growing
dark, we could not pursue them, but rested quietly that Night; the next day we
killed, salted and sent aboard 20 or 30 Beefs, and a good quanity of Salt-fish,
and Indian Corn, as much as we could stow away. Here were but few Hogs, and
those eat very fishy, therefore we did not much esteem them: but of Cocks, Hens
and Ducks were sent aboard in abundance. The tame Parrots we found here were
the largest and fairest Birds of their kind that I ever saw in the West Indies.
Their color was yellow and red, very coursly mixed; and they would prate very
prettily; and there was scarce a Man but what sent aboard one or two of them.
So that with Provision, Chests, Hen-Coops and Parrot-Cages, our Ships were full
of Lumber, with which we intended to sail: But the second Day after we took the
Fort, having had a Westerly Wind all the Morning, with Rain, 7 Armadilloes that
were sent from La Verd Cruz appeared in sight, within a Mile of the Bars,
coming in with full sail; but they could scarce stem the Current of the River;
which was very well for us; for we were not a little surprised. Yet we got
under sail, in order to meet them; and clearing our Decks by heaving all the
Lumber overboard, we drove out over the Bar, before they reached it: But they
being to Wind-ward, forced us to exchange a few shot with them. Their Admiral
was called the Toro. She had 10 Guns and 100 Men; another had 4 Guns and 80
Men: The rest having no great Guns, had only 60 or 70 Men apiece, armed with
Muskets, and the Vessels barricadoed round with Bull-hides Breast high. We had
not above 50 Men in both Ships, 6 Guns in one and two in the other. As Soon as
we were over the Bar, we got our Larboard-Tacks aboard and stood to the
Eastward, as nigh the Wind as we could lie. The Spaniards came away quartering
on us; and our Ship being the Head-most, the Toro came directly toward us,
designing to board us. We kept firing at her, in hopes to have lamed either
Mast or Yard; but failing, just as she was shearing aboard, we gave her a good
Volley, and presently clapped the Helm a Weather, wore our Ship, and got our
Starboard Tacks aboard, and stood to the Westward; and so left the Toro, but
were saluted by all the small Craft as we past by them, who stood to the
Eastward after the Toro, that was now in pursuit and close by our Consort. We
stood to the Westward till we were against the River's Mouth; then we tackt,
and by the help of the Current that came out of the River, we were near a Mile
to Wind-ward of them all. Then we made sail to assist our Consort, who was hard
put to it; but on our approach the Toro edged away toward the Shore, as did
all the rest, and stood away for Alvarado: And we, glad of the Deliverance,
went away to the Eastward, and visited all the Rivers in our return again to
Trist; and searched the Bays for Munjack to carry with us for the Ship's use,
as we had done before for the use both of Ships and Canoa's.

Munjack is a sort of Pitch or Bitumen, which we find in Lumps, from three or
four pounds to thirty pounds in a lump; washed up by the Sea, and left dry on
all the Sandy-Bays on all this Coast: It is in Substance like Pitch, but
blacker; it melts by the Heat of the Sun, and runs abroad as Pitch would do if
exposed, as this is, on the Bays: The smell of it is not so pleasant as Pitch,
neither does it stick so firmly as Pitch, but it is apt to peel off from the
Seams of Ships Bottoms; however we find it very useful here where we want
Pitch; and because it is commonly mixed with Sand by lying on the Bays, we melt
it and refine it very well before we use it; and commonly temper it with Oil or
Tallow to correct it; for though it melts by the heat of the Sun, yet it is of
a harsher Nature than Pitch. I did never find the like in any other Part of the
World, neither can I tell from whence it comes.

And now the Effects of the late Storm being almost forgot, the Lagune Men
settled again to their Employments; and I among the rest fell to Work in the
East Lagune, where I remained till my departure for Jamaica.

I will only add as to this Logwood-Trade in general, that I take it to be one
of the most profitable to England, and it nearest resembles that of
Newfoundland; since what arises from both, is the product of bare Labor; and
that the Persons employed herein are supported by the Produce of their Native
Country.

It is not my Business to determine how far we might have a right of cutting
Wood there, but this I can say, that the Spaniards never receive less Damage
from the Persons who generally follow that Trade, than when they are employed
upon that Work.

While I was here the last time, Capt. Gibbs arrived in a Ship of about 100
Tuns, and brought with him 20 stout New England Indians that were taken in the
Wars there, designing to have sold them at Jamaica, but not finding a good
Market, brought them hither to cut Logwood, and hired one Mr. Richard Dawkins
to be their Overseer, who carried them to work at Summasenta: But it so
happened that about a Week after, the Captain came thither in his Boat from
One-Bush-Key where his Ship lay, and the Overseer having some Business, desired
leave to be absent for two or three Days: But as soon as he and the Seamen were
gone, the Indians taking their Opportunity killed the Captain and marched off,
designing to return to their own Country by Land: They were seen about a Month
afterward, and one of them was taken near the River Tondelo.

After I had spent about ten or twelve Months at the Logwood Trade, and was
grown pretty well acquainted with the way of Traffic here, I left the
Employment, yet with a design to return hither after I had been in England; and
accordingly went from hence with Captain Chambers of London, bound to Jamaica.
We sailed from Trist the beginning ginning of April, 1678. and arrived at
Jamaica in May, where I remained a small time, and then returned for England
with Captain Leader of London. I arrived there the beginning of August the same
Year: and at the beginning of the following Year, I set out again for Jamaica,
in order to have gone thence to Campeachy; but it proved to be a Voyage round
the World, of which the Public has already had an Account, in my former
Volume, and the First Part of This.

FINIS.
Cap. Dampier HIS DISCOURSE OF THE Trade-Winds, Breezes; Storms, Seasons of the
Year, Tides and Currents of the TORRID ZONE throughout the World.
A Scheme of the following Treatise.
In or near the Torrid Zone. Trade-winds, p. 1. True, or General at Sea. 2.
Coasting Constant. 12 Shifting to Oblique Points 17. Opposite Points; Monsoons
in the E. Indies. 21.


Breezes Sea. 26. Land General. 28. Peculiar to some Coasts. Summasenta-Winds.
43. Carthagena-Breezes. 44. Popogaios. 46.
Producing particular Effects; Terrenos, or hot winds of Coromandel 47 Malabar.
48. The Persian Gulf. 48.
Harmatans, or cold Terrenos of Guinea. 49.


Storms and their Presages. In the West Indies. Norths. 60. and Chocolatta
North. 62. Souths, of Jamaica. 65. Campeachy. 66.
Hurricans of the Caribbe Islands. 68.
In the East Indies. Tuffoons, 71, 72. Stormy Monsoons. 72. and Elephanta. 74.

Seasons of the Year, dry, wet, Tornadoes, etc. 76. Tides. 90. Currents. 100
An Account of the Country of Natal. 108.
map of trade-winds in the Atlantic and Indian oceans

map of trade-winds in the South Ocean

Mr. DAMPIER's Voyages.
Vol. II. Part III. A Discourse of Winds, Breezes, Storms, Tides and Currents.
CHAP. I. Of the General Trade-Wind.
The Introduction.
Of the General Trade-Wind at Sea. Of the best time of the Year to cross the
Equinoctial. The Winds near the Line commonly uncertain, and attended with
Calms and Tornadoes. A Reason of the Winds blowing South near the Line, in the
Atlantic Sea. How Ships homeward-bound from the Bite of Guinea, should cross
the Line. Of the Trade-Wind in the South Sea; and in the East-Indian Ocean.

I Shall reduce what I have to say on this Subject to some general Heads;
beginning with the Trade-winds, as being the most remarkable.

Trade-Winds are such as do blow constantly from one Point or Quarter of the
Compass, and the Region of the World most peculiar to them is from about 30 d.
North, to 30 d. South of the Equator.

There are diverse sorts of these Winds; some blowing from East to West, some
from South to North, others from West to East, etc. Some are constant in one
Quarter all the Year; some blow one half the Year one way, and the other six
Months quite contrary; and others blow six Months one way, and then shifting
only eight or ten Points, continue six Months more, and then return again to
their former Stations, as all these shifting Trade-Winds do; and so as the Year
comes about, they alternately succeed each other in their proper Seasons.

There are other sorts, called Sea-Winds and Land-winds, differing much from
any of the former, the one blowing by Day, the other by Night, constantly and
regularly succeeding each other.

Within the Torrid Zone also are violent Storms, as fierce, if not fiercer,
than any are in other Parts of the World. And as to the Seasons of the Year, I
can distinguish them there, no other way than by Wet and Dry; and these wet and
dry Seasons do as successively follow each other, as Winter and Summer do with
us.

Here are also strong Currents, sometimes setting one way, sometimes another;
which though it is hard to describe, with that accuracy which is desirable, yet
I shall give as particular an Account of them, as also of the several sorts of
Winds, as my own Observations, and the Judicious Informations from others, will
afford me Matter to do.

Of the General Trade-Wind.
Of all Winds beforementioned, I shall endeavor to treat distinctly;
beginning with the True Trade-VVind first, which I call the General Trade-VVind
at Sea; because all other Trade-VVinds, whether constant or shifting, seem to
have their dependence on some accidental Cause; whereas the Cause of these, be
it what it will, seems uniformand constant.

These General Trade-VVinds are only in the Atlantic Ocean which parts Africa
from America, in the East-Indian Ocean, and in the Great South Sea.

In all these Seas, except just under or near the Line, they constantly blow
without Intermission, as well to the South, as to the North of the Equator, but
not with equal force at all Times, nor in all Latitudes; Neither do these
constant Trade-VViuds usually blow near the shore, but only in the Ocean, at
least 30 or 40 Leagues off at Sea, clear from any Land; especially on the West
Coast, or side of any Continent: For indeed on the East side, The Easterly
VVind being the true Trade-VVind, blows almost home to the shore; so near as to
receive a check from the Land-VVind; and ofttimes to admit of the Sea-Breez, by
which it is drawn from its Course frequently 4 or 5 Points of the Compass: But
of the Sea-Breez I shall speak in its place. In some Places, and particularly
the South Seas, in Sonth Lat. the true Eastern Trade ^s not found to blow
within 150 or near 200 Leagues of the Coast, but in North Lat. in those Seas,
it comes within 30 or 40 Leagues distance of the Shore: And this I shall give
as a general Rule, That in North Lat. these Winds are commonly at E. N. E. in
South Lat. at E. S. E.

When we go from England, and are bound to ^e East or West Indies, or to
Guinea, we commonly find these Winds in the Lat. of 30d. some^imes sooner, as
in the Latitudes of 32 or 35. And (...) may so happen that we may meet with an
Easterly Wind in 40 d. or go out of our Channel with a North East Wind; which
sometimes also fails us not till we come into a true Trade-wind; but this is
only accidental, therefore is not the Wind that I speak of; but between 32 and
28 I did never know nor hear, that the true Trade-wind failed.

If in coming from England, we have a North Easterly Wind that brings us hither
( i. e. into the true Trade-wind) it sometimes stays at North East, especially
if we keep near the African Shore, as Guinea Ships do, till we are near the
Tropic of Cancer, and then comes to the E. N. E. where it settles; but
commonly it settles there in 28 d. if we are so far off Shore as to receive the
true Trade. When the VVind is thus settled, we have commonly fair Weather, and
a clear Sky, especially if the Sun is in any Southern Sign; but if in a
Northern Sign, the Weather is usually cloudy.

On the contrary, when we are in South Lat. in the Atlantic, if the Sun is in
Northern Signs, the Sky is clear, but if in Southern Signs, the Sky is cloudy.
This I once experienced to my sorrow, in my return from Bantam, in the Year
1671. We had cloudy VVeather and brisk Winds, while we were crossing the
East-Indian Ocean and had a very good Passage also about the Cape of good Hope;
where we had fair clear VVeather; And steering from thence, for the Island St.
Hellena, where we thought to Water and refresh, as all our English East India
Ships do, we mist it for want of an Observation. For before we came to the
Tropic of Capricorn, the Sky was again clouded, so that we seldom saw the Sun
or Stars, till we were quite past the Island. However we found the Isle of
Ascension, where we struck two Turtle, (for this was not the laying time, but
the beginning of the Cooting or Ingendring Season; therefore some few only were
drawn hither.) This was the latter end of November. From the time that we
thought our selves to the West of St. Hellena, we had our Water measured out
to us, 2 Pints a Man per day, till we came into our Channel. This was the first
time that I began to know the value of fresh Water; for we took in none in all
our way home from Bantam. But so much for this Digression.

The Winds, as I said before, as we run to the Southward from England, do
first settle in the E. N. E. about the Lat. of 28d. or be sure between that and
24d. especially when the Sun is to the Southward of the Line; but in May, June
and July you will find the Winds at E. by S. or E. S. E.

These Winds, whether we meet them to the North of the East, or to the South of
it, we find blowing a moderate Gale from our first meeting them in 30 or 28d.
till we come to the Tropic, there we find the Trade stronger: It commonly
blows a good Topsail-gale, as we sail large: And if we were to sail on a Wind,
our lower Sails would be enough.

These brisk Gales blow in the Atlantic Ocean, and North of the Equator, from
the Lat. of 23 to 12 or 14 constantly, between the E. N. E. and the E. but
between 10 or 12 degrees and the Line, they are not so fresh nor constant, to
that Point; for in the Months of July and August, the South Winds do often times
blow even to 11d. or 12d. of North Lat. keeping between the S. S. E. and the S.
S. W. or S. W. but in December and January the true Trade blows within 3d. or
4d. of the Equator. And as the Sun returns again to the Northward, so the
Southerly Winds do increase and draw more to the Northward of the Line, till
July, and them gradually withdraw back again toward the Line: When the Sun is
in Southern Signs, it is the best time of the Year to cross the Line, if bound
to the Southward; for besides the benefit of the true Trade, to bring a Ship
near the Line, the Wind is then more constant and fresh, the Weather clearer,
and the Winds which at other times are between the S. S. E. and S. S. W. are
now at S. E. or S. E. and by E. but in our Summer Months we find nothing but
Calms and Tornadoes; and though Tornadoes do usually rise against the settled
Wind; yet but few Commanders will endeavor to take the Advantage of the Winds
that come from them, but rather furl their Topsails, hall up their Corses, and
lie still till the gust of Wind is past, except necessity requires haste; for
the sudden Tornadoes do not continue long; and besides often very violent and
fierce, so that a Ship with her sails loose, would be in danger to be over-set
by them, or at least lose Masts or Yards, or have the Sails split; besides the
Consternation that all Men must needs be in at such a time, especially if the
Ship, by any unforeseen accident, should prove unruly, as by the mistake of the
Man at Helm, or he that Conns, or by her broaching to against all endeavors,
which often happens when a fierce gust comes; which though it does not last long,
yet would do much damage in a short time; and though all things should fall out
well, yet the benefit of it would not compensate the danger: For it is much if a
Ship sails a Mile before either the Wind dies wholly away, or at least shifts
about again to the South. Nor are we sure that these Winds will continue 3
Minutes before they shift; and sometimes they fly round faster than the Ship
will, though the Helm lies for it; and all Seamen know the danger of being taken
a-back in such Weather.

But what has been spoken of the Southerly Winds, Calms, and Tornadoes is to be
understood of the East side of the Atlantic to as far West as the Longitude of
359d. or thereabouts; for farther Westerly we find the Winds commonly at S. E.
even in crossing the Line, and a very brisk gale; it is for that reason our
experienced Guinea Commanders do keep to the Southward of the Line, till they
are about that Longitude. Some run over nearer the American Shore before they
cross the Line; Our East India Commanders do also cross the Line, coming from
India near the American Coast, and find brisk Gales at S. E. all the times of
the Year; but going to the Indies, they steer away South, from the Island St.
Jago, where they commonly Water and meet the Winds in that Longitude. But of
this enough.

The Winds near the Line in the Indian Ocean and South Sea are different from
this, yet there the Winds are also Southerly and therefore different from what
they are farther off, for 2 d. or 3d. on each side the Line, the Winds are
commonly very uncertain, and oftentimes there are perfect Calms, or at least
very small Winds and some Tornadoes in the East-Indian Sea. In the South Seas,
near and under the Line, the Winds are at South 130 Leagues off from the Shore,
but how farther off I know not; there the Winds are but small, yet constant,
and the Weather clear from March till September; but about Christmas there are
Tornadoes; yet in both the East-Indian Sea, and the South Sea, the Winds near
or under the Line, are often at South; yet these Winds do not blow above 2 or 3
d. to the North or South of the Line, except near some Land; but in the
Atlantic Sea, as I have said before, the South and South West Winds do
sometimes blow even to 10 or 12 d. North of the Line. And for the South Winds
to blow constantly near the Line in the Atlantic, between Cape Verd in Africa,
and C. Blanco in Brazil, is no wonderful thing, if a Man will but consider
those Promontories that shoot out from the Continents on each side the Sea; one
on the North, the other on the South side of the Equator, leaving but a small
space clear for the Winds to blow in; where there is always a pretty brisk
Gale, especially on the American side. And as within 2 or 3 d. of the Equator,
it is most subject to Calms and Tornadoes and small faint Breezes in other Seas
not pend up as this is. So this Sea, except just in the very opening between
both Promontories, is much more subject to it than any other, especially on the
East side: that is, from the Bite or the Inland corner of the Coast of Guinea
to 28 or 30 d. distance West: But this seems not to be altogether the effects
of the Line, but owing partly to the nearness of the Land to the Line, which
shoots out from the Bite of Guinea, even to Cape St. Anns, almost in a parallel
with the Equator (allowing for the Bays and Bendings) and this is 23 or 24 d.
of Longitude, and not above 80 Leagues from the Line in some Places: So that
this part of the Sea between the Coast of Guinea, and the Line or 2 d. South of
it, lying, as it were, between the Land and the Line, is seldom free from bad
Weather; especially from April to September; but when the Sun is withdrawn
toward the Tropic of Capricorn, then there is something better Weather there.

And in the Sea under the Line between the African Promontory and the American,
it is free from Tornadoes and Calms, and more subject to fair Weather and fresh
Breezes. Therefore both our English and Dutch East India Ships, when
outwardbound, endeavor to Cross the Line as near as they can in the mid
Channel, between both Promontories; and although they meet the Winds some times
at S. S. E. or at S. S. W. or farther Easterly or VVesterly; yet will they not
run above a degree to the East, or a degree to the West of the mid Channel,
before they tack again, for fear of meeting with the soaking Current on the
West, or Calms on the East side; either of which would be alike prejudicial to
their Course.

The Portuguese in their Voyages to Brazil, take the same method, and get to
the South of the Line before they fall in with the Land, for fear of falling to
leward of Cape St. Augustine, for there are so many things which make that a
difficult Cape to pass, that hardly any Man would try to do it, but at a
distance.

But our Guinea Ships do generally pass on to their Ports on the Coast of
Guinea, at any time of the Year, without using such Methods; because their
Business lies mostly on the North of the Line, where they always find a fair
VVesterly VVind. But in their returns from thence, they cross the Line, and run
3 or 4d. to the Southward of it, where they meet the Wind between the S. S. E.
and the S. S. W. and a brisk gale: with this VVind, they run away in the same
parallel 35 or 36 d. before they cross the Line again to the Northward, which
is about midway between the Extremes of both Promontories, there they find a
brisk gale, which carries them to the West Indies, or where they please. Some
run West 40 d. before they cross the Line, and find strong Gales; whereas
should they come from Old Callabar, or any other Place in the Bite, on the
North of the Line, and steer away West, thinking to gain their Passage the
sooner because it is the nearest way, they would doubtless be mistaken, as many
Men have been: For if they keep near the Line, they meet with great Calms; and
if they keep near the Land, they meet with VVesterly Winds; and if they keep
in the middle between both, they must of necessity meet with both
Inconveniences, as also with Tornadoes, especially in May, June, July and
August.

By which means some Ships, if they go any of these three ways now cautioned
against, spend more time in going from the Bite to Cape Verd, than another Ship
will do if it cross the Line in the right Places beforementioned, in going to
the Barbados.

Sometimes unexperienced Guinea Masters in their return from thence, after they
have crossed the Line from N. to S. and are in a fair way to gain a speedy
Passage, will be so obstinate in their Opinions, after they have run 26, 28 or
30 d. West from Old Callabar (with a fair Wind) to steer away W. by N. or W. N.
W. it being the directest Course they can steer for Barbados, then they must
of necessity keep within a degree of the Line, while they are running 2 or 300
Leagues, which may prove to be a long time in doing, because of the uncertainty
of the Winds near the Equator; therefore they that cross it near the middle,
between both Promontories, or near the American Coast, when they are minded to
fall away to the Northward, steer away N. W. or N. W. by N. and so depress or
raise a degree in running 28 Leagues at most; therefore (which is best) they
are but a short time near the Equator: And besides, in thus crossing it in the
middle between both Promontories, they seldom miss of a Wind: for the Wind in
these Seas has no other Passage, but between these two Promontories.

What I have said already on this Head, has been chiefly of the Atlantic, and
of that too mostly about the Line, because it is the most difficult Place to
pass in going to the Southward. In other Seas, as in the East India Sea, and
the Great South Sea there is no such difficulty to pass any way, because there
is Sea-room enough, without coming into such Inconveniences, as we meet with
in the Atlantic; and as to the Winds between the Line and the Tropicks, in the
East-Indian Sea and the South Sea, they are in their Latitudes, as I said
before, viz. in South Latitude, at E. S. E and in North Lat. at E. N. E.
blowing constantly fresh Breezes, especially in the South Seas, even from
within a degree or two of the Line, on each side to the Tropic, or to 30
degrees of Lat. And this I may truly say, That neither the Atlantic nor the
East-Indian Seas have the true Trade-Winds so constant nor brisk at all times
of the Year, and in all Latitudes, as they are here. For being once got in the
Trade, I mean without the verge of the coasting Trade-Wind, it blows a very
brisk gale all over the Ocean. Capt. Eaton experienced this in sailing from the
Gallapagos Islands to the Ladrones, in the latter end of the Year 1685. We had
the like experience, sailing from Cape Corientes to Guam the Year after (as
appears by my Journal of that Run, in my Voyage round the World. Chap. 10. Page
185.) And as for the Wind to the Southward of the Line, I had great Experience
of it in my ramble there with Capt. Sharp; and since that Capt. Davis, in his
return out of the South Sea, had greater Experience, because he took his
departure from the Gallapagos Islands also, and steering W. S. W. from thence,
till he met the True Trade at E. S. E. he steered directly South, clear from
the Line, till he got to the Southward of the Tropic of Capricorn, and so
quite without the Trade.

In the East-Indian Sea, between the Lat of 30 d. and 4 degrees South of the
Equator, the true Breez is at E. S. E. or S. E. by E. yet not so constant nor
brisk as in the South Seas; besides that part of it which lies to the Northward
of the Line, has not such a constant steady Breez, but is more subject to
Calms, and near the shore to shifting Winds, according to the Seasons of the
Year.

CHAP. II. Of the constant coasting Trade-Winds.
A Parallel of the South Part of Africa and Peru. The Trade-Winds blowwith an
acute Angle on any Coast. The Winds about Angola and in the South Seas alike;
as also at Mexico and Guinea. The Winds shift not in some Places. Sand blown
from the Shore about Cape Blanco in Guinea An Account of the Trade-Winds from
thence to Cape Logos.

THE Trade-winds which blow on any Coast, are either Constant or Shifting.

The Coasts that are subject to Constant Trade-winds, are, the South Coast of
Africa and Peru, and part of the Coast of Mexico, and part of Guinea.

The South part of Africa and Peru, are in one Lat. both Coasts trending North
and South; both on the West side of their Continents; both in South Lat. and
though they do not lie exactly parallel, by Reason of some Capes or Bendings in
the Land, yet are the Winds much alike on both Coasts, all the Year long.

On the Coast of Angola the Winds are between the S. VV. and S. And on the
Coast of Peru, we reckon them between the S. S. VV. and S. S. E. But this the
Reader must take notice of, That the Trade-winds that blow on any Coast, except
the North Coast of Africa, whether they are constant, and blow all the Year, or
whether they are shifting Winds, do never blow right in on the Shore, nor
right along Shore; but go slanting, making an accute Angle of about 22 degrees.
Therefore as the Land trends more Easterly or VVesterly from the North or South
on these Coasts, so the Winds do alter accordingly; as for example, where the
Land lies N. and S. the VVind would be at S. S. VV. but where the Land lies S.
S. W. the Trade would be at S. VV. But if the Land lies S. S. E. then the Wind
would be at South. This is supposed of Coasts lying on the West side of any
Continent, and on the South side of the Equator, as the two Coasts of Africa
and Peru are; but the North part of Africa has the Trade blowing off from the
shore, two or three Points.

These Southerly Winds do blow constantly all the Year long, on both the
Coasts of Peru and Africa; they are brisk, and blow farther off from the Coasts
than any shifting Winds.

On the Coast of Peru, these Winds blow 140 or 150 Leagues off Shore, before
you can perceive them to alter; But then as you run farther off, so the Wind
will come about more Easterly, and at about 200 Leagues distance it settles at
E. S. E. which is the true Trade.

Between Angola and Brazil the Winds are much as they are in the South Seas, on
the West side of the Peruvian Coast; only near the Line, within 4 degrees of
it, in South Lat. the Wind holds in the S. S. W. or S. W. for 28 or 30 d. of
Longitude, and so it may in the same Lat. in the South Seas, for ought I know;
for it was at South, as far as any of us were, which was 200 Leagues.

As the Coasts of Peru and Angola have their constant Trade-winds, so has the
Coast of Mexico and Guinea. And as the Coast of Peru lies North and South, so
those lie nearer East and West. According to the Course of the general Trade
the Winds should be Easterly on these Coasts; but here we meet with the quite
contrary; for from the Lat. of 10 d. North to 20 d. North on the Coast of
Mexico, the Winds are constantly near the West on all the Coast, except checked
sometimes with Tornadoes, which do commonly rise against the Wind, the same is
observed on the Coast of Angola; where there are Tornadoes also: But the Coast
of Peru is not subject to any, yet on that Coast there are sometimes Calms two
or three days together off of the Bay of Arica, between the Lat. of 16 and 23.
In the Lat. of 19 you shall have Calms 30 or 40 Leagues off Shore, but not so
far on either side the Bay, neither are such Calms usual on the Coasts of
Angola and Mexico only after a Tornado, as is common in other Places.

As the Coasts of Angola and Peru, do in most things run parallel each with
other; so do the Coasts of Mexico and Guinea: And if I am not mistaken, the
Winds on both these Coasts are much alike; Both these Coasts do begin at the
Bite or Bending of the Land, where the other two Parallel Lands do end; for as
the Mexican Continent begins at or near Panama, which is 8 or 9 degrees North
of the Equator; so that part of Guinea, which I speak of, begins about Old
Callabar, in about 4 or 5 degrees of North Lat.

The Land trends away VVesterly from both these Places some hundreds of
Leagues; and though not on one Point of the Compass, because of the small Points,
Bays and Bending in the Land, yet the Winds that on more regular Shores, keep
their constant Course, and blow in upon the Shore, about two Points from the
Sea, do also here on the Guinea Coast, blow on the Shore from the West
Quarter, and as the Land lies pointing in on the Shore, even from Cape Mount to
Old Callabar, which is above 400 Leagues; and that with such constancy that the
East part of that Coast is called the Leeward Coast; and the West part the
Windward Coast; And yet this is so contrary to the general Opinion of Seamen,
concerning the Course of the Winds, that nothing but their own Experience will
convince them of the Truth of it; for thus they generally reason; Barbados is
the Easter-most of the Carribbe-Islands, therefore the rest are said be to
Leeward of it, and so of any other Island; as indeed it usually holds true,
because the Winds there are commonly at East; but this Counter Wind on the
Coast of Guinea astonishes most Seamen that have seen nothing like what they
meet with here. There are other Coasts where the Winds shift very little, as on
the Coast of Carraccos, and the South side of the Bay of Mexico, i. e. in the
Bay of Campechy, and all the Carribbe Islands. Indeed there may be sometimes
some small flurts of a Westerly VVind on these Coasts, but neither constant,
certain or lasting.

And indeed this was the great stumbling Block that we met with in running from
the Gallapagos Islands for the Island Cocos, mentioned in my former Book, Chap.
5. Page 111.

But that part of Africa, which lies between Cape Verd in 14d. North, and Cape
Bayedore in 27. has commonly Northerly Winds; or between the N. and N. E. very
fresh gales; therefore our Guinea Ships, bound to Guinea strive to keep near
that Shore, and often times make the Capes: And being to the Southward of Cape
Blanco, which lies in Lat. about 21. they are sometimes so troubled with the
Sand, which the Wind brings off Shore, that they are scarce able to see one
another: Their Decks are also strewed with it, and their Sails all red, as if
they were tanned with the Sand that sticks to them, it being of a reddish
color.

From Cape Verd to Cape St. Anns, which is about 6 degrees North, the Trade is
between the E. and S. E. from Cape St. Anns, to Cape Palmas, in about 4 d.
North, the Trade is at S. W. from Cape Palmas to the Bite of Guinea, which is
at the bending of the Coast, the Wind is at W. S. W. from this bending the Land
begins to turn about to the South; and from thence to Cape Logos, which is to
the South of the Line, the Trade is at S. W. as it is on all that Coast, even
to 30 degrees South.

This last Account I had from Mr. Canby, who has made many Voyages to Guinea.

CHAP. III. Of the Coasting Trade-Winds that shift.
The Coasts where the Winds shift. Of the Winds between Gratia de Dios, and
Cape La Vela. Of those on the Coast of Brazil: At Panama: About Natal: And Cape
Corientes; And the Red Sea: From the Gulf of Persia to Cape Comorin. Of the
Monsoons in India: Their Benefit for sailing from Place to Place. Sea and Land
Breezes serviceable for the same purpose. By what helps long Voyages are made
in an open Sea.

THE Coasts where the Winds do usually shift, are some in the West Indies, as
that part of the Coast between Cape Gratia de Dios, and Cape La Vera chiefly:
The Coast of Brazil; the Bay of Panama in the South Seas, and all the Coast of
the East Indies, even from the River Natal, which is in the Lat. of 30d. South,
on the East side of Africa, beyond the Cape of good Hope, to the North-East
Parts of China, comprehending all the Bays between. The Islands also have their
Annual changes; Of all these I shall treat in their order, beginning first with
that Coast which lies between Cape Gratia de Dios and Cape La Vela: And I the
rather begin with this part first, because this part of the West Indies is all
that is subject to change; neither is the change altogether so orderly, or
certain as the Monsoons in the East Indies, or the shifting Winds on the Coast
of Brazil.

The Common Trade-Wind on this Coast is betweea the N. E. and the East; This
Trade blows constantly from March till November, but is often checked with
Tornadoes in the Months of May, June, July, and August, especially between the
River of Darien and Costarica; but to Wind-ward there is a more serene Air, and
a brisker Wind: From October till March there are Westerly Winds, not constant,
nor violent, but blowing moderately sometimes 2 or 3 Days or a Week; and then
the Breez may blow again as long. These Winds are most in December and
January; before and after these two Months the Trade-VVind is only checked a
Day or two near the full or change of the Moon; and when the VVesterly Winds
blow longest and strongest on the Coast, the Easterly Trade-wind blows off at
Sea, as at other times. Near Cape La Vela, the true Trade blows within 8 or 10
Leagues off the Shore, when the Westerly Winds blow on the Coast, except in a
strong North, which turns the Trade-Wind back, and on the Costorica, and
between it and the River Darien, the Westerly Winds, as they are more frequent
and lasting, than toward Cape La Vela, so also they blow farther of^ at Sea, as
sometimes as far as to 20 or 30 Leagues from the Shore.

Therefore Ships bound to Windward, if they have far to go, either take the
opportunity of the Westerly Wind-Season, or else go through the Gulf of
Florida, and stretch away to the North, till they get into a variable Winds
way, and then run to the Eastward as far as they think convenient before they
stretch to the Southward again. All that are bound from the West Indies to
Guinea must take this course, if they sail from Jamaica (because they must pass
through the Gulf of Florida) but from other Islands they may stretch away
directly to the North, and use the same method.

But if Ships have only a small way to Sail to Wind-ward, they make use of the
Sea and Land Breezes, making no account of the time of the Year.

The Winds on the Coast of Brazil, are from September till March at E. N. E.
and from March till September again they are at South.

The Winds in the Bay of Panama are from September till March Easterly, and
from March till September again they are at S. and S. S. W.

From the Cape of good Hope Eastwards, as far as the River Natal, which lies in
30 d. South Latitude, and Cape Corientes in Lat. of 24 degrees South, the Winds
from May to October are constantly from the West to the North West within 30
Leagues of the Shore: They blow hardest at North West. When the Wind comes to
North West, it is commonly stormy and tempestuous Weather, attended with much
Rain, and then the Weather is cold and chilly. From October till March the
Winds are Easterly from the E. N. E. to the E. S. E. you have then very fair
Weather: The E. N. E. Winds are pretty fresh, but the Winds at E. S. E. are
small and faint, sometimes affording some drops of Rain.

From Cape Corientes to the Red Sea, from October till the middle of January
the Winds are variable, but most times Northerly, and often shifting round the
Compass: The strongest Winds are at North; these are often very violent and
stormy, and accompanied with much Rain, and thus it blows about the Island of
Madagascar and the adjacent Islands.

These storms are commonly preceded by a great Sea out of the North. From
January till May the Winds are at N. E. or N. N. E. sine fresh gales and fair
VVeather. From May till October the VVind^ are Southerly, in July, August and
September then are great Calms in the Bay of Pate and Melende, and a strong
Current setting into the Bay: Therefore Ships that have occasion to pass this
way in those three Months, ought to keep at least 100 Leagues from the Coast to
avoid being driven by the Current into the Bay; for these Calms do sometimes
last 6 Weeks, yet off at Sea, at the distance of 100 Leagues the Winds are
fresh a^ South. At the entrance into the Red Sea near Cape Guardefuer there are
commonly very hard gales and turbulent Weather, even when the Calms are so
great in the Bay of Melende, and not above 10 or 12 Leagues at Sea from the
said Cape, there is also very fair Weather, and pretty fresh Gales.

In the Red Sea from May till October, the Winds are strong at S. VV. and the
Current setting out strong, so that there is no entering into that Sea in those
Months, except you keep close to the South Shore, there you have Land-VVinds,
and an eddy Current. In the Months of September or October, the VVind shuffles
about to the North, and at last settles at N. E. then comes fair VVeather on
this Coast; and so continues till the Monsoon shifts, which is in April or May;
then it first takes one flurry at North, and from thence veers to the East, and
so about to the South, and there it settles.

The Account of this Coast from the Cape of good Hope hither, I had from Capt.
Rogers.

And as this hither-most part of the East Indies, even from the Cape of good
Hope to the Red Sea, which Coast lies nearest N. E. and S. VV. has its
shifting Seasons, so the other Parts of India, from the Gulf of Persia to Cape
Comorin, has its constant Annual change, and from Comorin, clear round the Bay
of Bengal, the change is no less; and even from thence, through the Streights
of Malacca, and Eastwards as far as Japan, the shifting Trade-Winds do
alternately succeed each other as duly as the Year comes about.

It cannot be supposed that the Trade-Wind in all these Places, should be
exactly on one Point of the Compass: For I have already shown, that these
Trade-Winds on any Coast do commonly blow slanting in on the Shore about 2 or 3
Points; therefore in Bays where the Land lies on several Rombs, the Winds must
alter accordingly. Though that Rule does not hold altogether true in Bays that
are deep, but is chiefly meant for a pretty straight Coast, which lies near
alike; allowing for Points of Land and small Coves, which make no alteration:
But on the sides and in the bottom of large Bays, such as the Bay of Bengall,
the Bay of Siam, etc. the VVind differs much on one side of the Bay from what
it does on the other; and both sides differ from the constant Trade on the open
Coast; yet all shift in the shifting Seasons, which are April and September, at
one and the same time, to their opposite Points: I mean on the open Coast, for
in some Bays there is a little alteration from that general Rule.

These shifting Winds in the East Indies, are called Monsoons; one is called
the East Monsoon, the other the West Monsoon. The East Monsoon sets in about
September and blows till April; then cease, and the West Monsoon takes place
and blows till September again.

And both the East and West Monsoons blow in their Seasons slanting in on the
Coast, as is before described: The East Monsoon brings fair VVeather; the West
brings Tornadoes and Rain. For, (as I said before in the first Chap. of the
General Trade-VVind at Sea) when the Sun comes to the North of the Linethen all
Places North of the Equator, within the Tropicks, are troubled with Clouds and
Rain, but when the Sun is in Southern Signs then the Sky is clear. And as most
of the Trading Countries in the East Indies, especially those on the Main
Continent, do lie between the Line and the Tropic of Cancer: So these
Countries are all subject to the Changes and Seasons already described. But the
Islands lying under the Line, and to the South between the Line and the Tropic
of Capricorn, have contrary Seasons to these. Yet do they change at the
self-same time.

The difference between the Monsoons on the North of the Line, and the Monsoons
on the South of the Line is that in April, when the West Monsoon sets in to the
North of the Line, the S. S. W. Winds sets in to the South of the Lat. and is
called the S. S. VV. Monsoon. And in September when the East Monsoon sets in to
the North of the Line, the N. N. E. VVind blows in South Lat. and is called the
N. N. E. Monsoon. And whereas the West Monsoon is accompanied with Tornadoes
and Rain in North Lat. the S. S. W. Monsoon, which blows at the same time in
South Lat. is accompanied with fair Weather. And as the East Monsoon is
attended with fair Weather in North Lat. the N. N. E. Monsoon, which blows at
the same time in South Lat is attended with Tornadoes and very bad Weather. And
though these Winds do not shift exactly at one time in all Years; yet Sept. and
Apr. are always accounted the turning Months, and do commonly participate of
both sorts of Winds. For these Monsoons do as constantly shift by turns, as the
Year comes about. And by means of this change of Wind, Ships have the benefit
to sail from one part of India, with one Wind, and return with the contrary: So
that most of the Navigation in India depends on the Monsoons. And Ships do
constantly wait for these Changes; and the Merchants fit out to any Place
according as the Season of the Year draws on: And wheresoever they go they
certainly dispatch their business so as to return back again with the next or
contrary Monsoon: For here is no sailing to and from any Place, but with the
Monsoon; One carries them out, the other brings them back. Neither do I know
how it were possible for Merchants in these Parts to Trade by Sea from one
Country to another, were it not for these shifting Monsoons. For, as I have
said before, most of the Trading Kingdoms in India do lie between the Line, and
the Tropic of Cancer. And the Land lies so to the North, that Ships cannot go
to the North of the Tropic, and by that means get into variable Winds way; as
they may and do in the West Indies, when they are bound far to the Eastward.
Neither could it be any advantage to stand off to Sea, as they may in the South
Sea; for that would be of little moment, because they would then come so near
the Line, that they would be always liable to Tornadoes and Calms; and should
they cross the Line and run to the Southward of it, thinking that way to gain
their Passage, it is likely they might succeed no better there: For that part
of the Sea which lies to the Southward of the Line is open and free to the true
Trade, which seldom fails: But indeed that Wind would carry them to the
Southward quite beyond the Trade into a variable VVinds-way. But the Sea is not
open there, for Ships to pass so far to the Eastward as to gain their Ports.

For our East India Ships that are bound to Siam, Tunqueen, China, etc. cannot
get thither but in the Season of the West Monsoon, though they go directly from
England; and though, after they are past the Cape, they have the convenience to
stretch to the Eastward, as far as the Land will permit, yet they cannot go so
far as is convenient before they will be obliged to steer down within the
Course of the Trade-Winds, which would obstruct their Passage, if they were as
constant here as in other Places. And therefore if these Anniversary Monsoons
did not constantly succeed each other, Ships could not pass but one way; they
might sail to the Westward, but there they must lie up, or be 3 or 4 Years in
their return from a place which may be failed in 6 Weeks, yet I say that to
Places near each other, Ships may and do very often sail against the Monsoon,
and that with success: For here are Sea and Land-Breezes under the shore, and
in many Places good Anchoring, by which means Ships may stop when they find the
Current against them: But Voyages of a great distance cannot be made only with
Land and Sea-Winds without some other helps.

In the West Indies we have these helps of Land-Winds and Sea-Breezes by which
we sail from one place to another, provided they are no great distance asunder,
and perform our Voyages well enough; but when we are to sail a great way to the
Eastward against the Trade-Wind, then we are forced, as is said before, either
to pass through the Gulf of Florida, if we are far to Leeward, or else to pass
between the Islands, and so stretch away to the Northward, till we are clear
out of the Trade, and so get our Longitude that way. So in the South Seas also,
and on the Coasts of Guinea, the Coast of Brazil, and the Coast of Africa,
between the Cape of good Hope and the Red Sea, there are Sea and Land Breezes,
which may be made use of to sail against the Trade, if the Voyages be short:
But when we are to sail a great way against the Trade-Wind, we must not wholly
depend on the Sea and Land Breezes; for then we should be a long time in
accomplishing such Voyages. In such Cases we have recourse to other helps, such
as Providence has supplied these Seas with, which seems to be wanting in the
East Indies: as for example, in the South Seas and on the Coast of Peru where
the Sontherly Winds blow constantly all the Year, there Ships that are bound to
the Southward stretch off to the Westward till they are out of the Coasting
Trade-Wind, and there meet with the true Trade at E. S. E. with which they sail
as far as they please to the Southward, and then steer in for their Port. So on
the Coast of Mexico, where the Coasting Trade is westerly, there they run off
to Sea, till they meet the true E. N. E. Trade; and then stretch away to the
Northward, as far as their Port; and Ships that come from the Philipines, bound
for the Coast of Mexico, stretch away to the North, as far as 40 degrees, to
get a Wind to bring them on the Coast.

Thus also all Ships bound to the East Indies, after they have past the Line in
the Atlantic Ocean, stretch away to the Southward beyond the Trade, and then
stand over to the Eastward, toward the Cape; so in returning home, after they
have crossed the Line to the Northward, they steer away North, with the Wind at
E. N. E. till they are to the Northward of the Trade-Wind, and then direct
their Course Easterly. All Guinea Ships and West India Ships do the same in
their returns: And this is the Benefit of an open Sea. But to return.

The Monsoons among the East India Islands that lie to the Southward of the
Line, as I said before, are either at N. N. E. or S. S. W. These also keep
time, and shift, as the Monsoons do, to the North of the Line, in the Months of
April and September, but near the Line, as a degree or two on each side, the
Winds are not so constant. Indeed there they are so very uncertain, that I
cannot be particular so as to give any true Account of them: Only this I know,
that Calms are very frequent there, as also Tornadoes and sudden Gusts; in
which the Winds fly in a moment quite round the Compass.

CHAP. IV. Of Sea and Land-Breezes.
How Sea-Breezes differ from Common Trade-Winds. The time and manner of their
Rise; And particularly at Jamaica. Of the Land-Breezes. The time and manner of
their Rise; As on the Isthmus of Darien and at Jamaica. The places where these
Winds blow strongest or slackest; as at Capes and Head Lands, deep Bays,
Lagunes and Islands. Seals-Skin Bladders used instead of Bark Loggs.

SEA-Breezes, generally speaking, are no other than the Common Trade-Wind of
the Coasts on which they blow, with this difference, that whereas all
Trade-Winds, whether they are those that I call the general Trade-Winds at Sea,
or coasting Trade-Winds, either constant or shifting, do blow as well by Night
as by Day, with an equal briskness, except when Tornadoes happen; So contrarily
Sea-Winds are only in the Day, and cease in the Night; and as all Trade-Winds
blow constantly near to one Point of the Compass, both where the constant
Trade-Winds are, or where they shift; on the contrary these Sea-Winds do differ
from them in this, that in the Morning when they first spring up, they blow
commonly as the Trade-Winds on the Coast do, at or near the same Point of
Compass; but about Midday they fly off 2, 3 or 4 Points further from the Land,
and so blow almost right in on the Coast, especially in fair Weather; for then
the Sea-Breezes are truest; as for instance, on the Coast of Argola the Land
lies almost North and South, there the Trade-Wind is from the S. S. W. to the
S. W. the true Sea-Breezes near the shore are at W. by S. or W. S. W. and so of
any other Coast.

These Sea-Breezes do commonly rise in the Morning about Nine a Clock,
sometimes sooner, sometimes later: they first approach the shore, so gently, as
if they were afraid to come near it, and of^times they make some faint
breathings, and as if not willing to offend, they make a halt, and seem ready
to retire. I have waited many a time both ashore to receive the pleasure, and
at Sea to take the benefit of it.

It comes in a fine, small, black Curle upon the Water, when as all the Sea
between it and the shore not yet reached by it, is as smooth and even as Glass
in Comparison; in half an Hour's time after it has reached the shore it fans
pretty briskly, and so increases gradually till 12 a Clock, then it is
commonly strongest, and lasts so till 2 or 3 a very brisk gale; about 12 at
Noon it also veers off to Sea 2 or 3 Points, or more in very fair Weather.
After 3 a Clock it begins to dye away again, and gradually withdraws its force
till all is spent, and about 5 a Clock, sooner or later, according as the
Weather is, it is lulled asleep, and comes no more till the next Morning.

These Winds are as constantly expected as the day in their proper Latitudes,
and seldom fail but in the wet Season. On all Coasts of the Main, whethre in
the East or West Indies, or Guinea, they rise in the Morning, and withdraw
toward the Evening, yet Capes and Head-Lands have the greatest benefit of
them, where they are highest, rise earlier, and blow later.

Bays contrarily have the disadvantage, for there they blow but faintly at
best, and their continuance is but short. Islands that lie nearest East and
West, have the benefit of these Winds on both sides equally; for if the Wind is
at S. W. or S. W. and by S. on the South side of any Island, then on the North
side it would be at N. W. or N. W. by N. i. e. in fair Weather; but if
turbulent Weather it would be E. S. E. on the Southside, and E. N. E. on the
other: But this true Sea Breez does not veer so far out, except only near the
shore, as about 3 or 4 Leagues distant; for farther than that, you will find
only the right Coasting Trade-Wind. This I have experienced in several Parts of
the World, particularly at Jamaica; about which I have made many Voyages, both
on the North and the South side, where I have experienced the Sea-Breezes very
much to differ; for on the South side I have found the true Sea-Wind after 12 a
Clock, and in very fair Weather at S. or S. S. E. though it sprung up in the
Morning at E. S. E. or S. E. And on the North side I have found the Sea-Breeze
at N. or N. N. E. though it rose in the Morning at E. N. E. but whether there
may be the like difference about smaller Islands, as at Barbados, etc. I
cannot determine, though I am apt to believe there is not. So much far the
Sea-Winds, next of the Land-Breezes.

Land Breezes are as remarkable as any Winds that I have yet treated of; they
are quite contrary to the Sea-Breezes; for those blow right from the shore, but
the Sea-Breez right in upon the shore; and as the Sea-Breezes do blow in the
Day and rest in the Night; so on the contrary, these do blow in the Night and
rest in the Day, and so they do alternately succeed each other. For when the
Sea-Breezes have performed their Offices of the Day, by breathing on their
respective Coasts, they in the Evening do either withdraw from the Coast, or
lie down to rest: Then the Land-VVinds, whose Office is to be breath in the
Night, moved by the same order of Divine Impulse, do rouse out of their private
recesses and gently fan the Air till the next Morning; and then their task ends
and they leave the Stage.

There can be no proper time set when they do begin in the Evening, or when
they retire in the Morning, for they do not keep to an hour; but they commonly
spring up between 6 and 12 in the Evening, and last till 6, 8, or 10 in the
Morning. They both come and go away again earlier or later, according to the
VVeather, the Season of the Year, or some accidental Cause from the Land: For
on some Coasts they do rise earlier, blow fresher, and remain later than on
other Coasts, as I shall show hereafter.

They are called Land-VVinds, because they blow off shore contrary to the
Sea-Breez, which way soever the Coast lies: Yet I would not so be understood,
as if these Winds are only found to breathe near the shores of any Land, and
not in the Inland Parts of such Countries remote from the Sea; for in my
Travels I have found them in the very heart of the Countries that I have passed
through; as particularly on the Isthmus of Darien, and the Island of Jamaica:
Both which places I have traveled over from Sea to Sea; yet because these are
but small Tracts of Land in comparison with the two main Bodies of Land of
Mexico and Peru, and those vast Regions in Asia and Africa lying within the
Tropicks, I cannot determine whether the Land-VVinds are there, as I have fonnd
them in my small Travels: therefore I shall only confine this particular
Discourse to these and other Places within my ow^ Observations. I shall begin
first with the Isthmu^ of Darien; there I have found the Land-Winds it the
middle of the Country blowing all Night, and till 10 or 11 a Clock in the
Morning, before I could perceive the Sea-Breeze to arise, and that not
discernable many times, but by the flying of the Clouds, especially if I was in
a Valley; and it was in Valleys that I did chiefly perceive the Land-Winds,
which blew in some places one way, in others contrary, or side-ways to that
according as the Valleys lay pend up between the Mountains; and that without
any respect to either the North or the South Seas, but indeed near either side
of the Land, they always bent their course toward the nearest Sea, unless
there was any Hill between them and the Sea, and then they took their Course
along in the Valleys; but from both shores, as well from the North as the South
they blow right forth into the Sea.

In the Island of Jamaica these Land-Winds are in the middle of the Country,
also I have found them so, as I traveled from one side of the Island to the
other, having lain 2 Nights by the way, as I had before observed them, when I
lived at 16 Miles Walk, where I continued about 6 Months; but there and in
other Islands the Land-Winds do blow toward the nearest shores, and so from
thence off to Sea, whether the shore's lie East, West, North or South.

These Winds blow off to Sea, a greater or less distance according as the Coast
lies more or less exposed to the Sea-Winds: For in some Places we find them
brisk 3 or 4 Leagues off shore; in other Places not so many Miles, and in some
Places they scarce peep without the Rocks, or if they do sometimes in very fair
Weather make a sally out a Mile or 2, they are not lasting, but suddenly vanish
away, though yet there are every Night as fresh Land-Winds ashore at those
Places as in any other part of the World.

Places most remarkable for the fewest or faintest Land-Winds, are those that
lie most open to the Common Trade-Winds, as the East ends of any Islands where
the Trade-Winds do blow in upon the Shore, or the Head-Lands on Islands or
Continents that are open to the Sea-breez, especially where the Trade-Wind
blows down side-ways, by the Coast; for there such Head-Lands as stretch
farthest out to Sea are most exposed to Winds from the Sea; and have the less
benefit of the Land-Breezes.

I shall give a few Instances of either. And first of all begin with the N. E.
and S. E. Points of the Island of Jamaica: These Points are at the East end of
the Island, one is at the very Extreme of the North side toward the East, the
other on the South Extreme toward the same Point; at these two Places we
seldom light of a Land-Wind; nor very often at the End of the Island between
them, except near the shore. For that Reason the Sloopmen of Jamaica that Trade
round the Island are commonly put to their Trumps, when they come there in
their Voyages: For if they meet no Land-Wind they are obliged to beat about by
turning to Wind-ward against the Sea-breez in the Day time; they then curse
these Points of Land, and are foolishly apt to believe that some Demon haunts
there.

And if they are 2 or 3 days in beating about (as sometimes they are) when they
return to Port Royal, they will talk as much of their Fatigues, as if they had
been beating a Month to double the Cape of Good Hope, though indeed the Men are
brisk enough, and manage their Sloops very well; which also are generally very
good Boats to sail on a Wind. I think they are the best small Trading-Boats in
the King's Dominions.

Point Pedro on the South Side of the Island, is another very bad Point to
double, if a Ship come from the West End of the Island; This Point runs out far
into the Sea, and is not only destitute of the Common Land-VVinds. But if there
is any Current setting to Leeward, here the Sloop-men meet it. Therefore they
are many times longer beating about it, then about the two former Points of the
South-East and the North-East, and not without bestowing some Curses upon it.
Nay some Captains of Privateers, when they have been beating about it, have
stood close into the Point, and fired their Guns to kill the old Demon that
they say inhabits there to disturb poor Seamen. I have related these odd
Passages to show how ignorant Men are that cannot see the Reason of it. And
because I am not willing to leave my Reader in the dark, I shall give a few
Instances more on this subject. The North side of Jucatan, at the entrance into
the Bay of Campeachy, gives us another Instance of bad Land-VVinds; and
commonly where the Land-VVinds are scanty, the Sea-Breezes are but indifferent
neither. This will partly appear by what I have observed of them on this Coast
between Cape Catoach; and Cape Condecedo at the entrance of the Bay of
Campeachy, which two places are about Eighty Leagues distant; for there the
Land trends East and West. It is a straight Coast and lies all of it equally
exposed to the Trade-VVind, which is commonly there at E. N. E. To the VV. of
these Places the Sea and Land-VVinds do as duly succeed each other, as on any
other Coast, but here they are each of them of a Bastard kind; for the
Sea-Breezes are at N. E. by E. which is no better than a Coast Trade-VVind, and
the Land-VVind is at E. S. E. or S. E. by E. whereas if the Winds were as true
there as on other Coasts, the Sea-Breez would be at N. N. E sometimes at N. and
the Land-Winds would be at S. S. E. and S. as they are indeed close under the
shore; which if they do at any time come off from, they are very faint. The
Land on this Coast is low and even, and the Land-Winds ashore are pretty brisk.

The Capes on the Peruvian Coast in the South Seas, will more fully make it
appear, that Head-Lands do seldom afford any Land-Winds. I shall only Instance
in Cape Passao, in Lat. 8 Minutes South, Cape St. Laurence, in Lat. 1 d. --
South, and Cape Blanco, in 3 d. -- South. I have passed by them all several
times and at different Seasons; yet did never find any Land-winds there, though
between these Places there are very good Land-winds. Therefore Ships that sail
to the Southward against the Breeze, must beat it about by hard Labor,
especially about Cape Blanco, for that lies more exposed than the other 2: and
if there is any Current, as commonly, the Spaniards are a long time getting
about, sometimes a Fortnight or 3 Weeks; and when they have split their Sails,
which are seldom very good, they run back to Guiaquill to mend them again. We
found it hard getting about, though our Sails were good; and I think we could
work our Ships better than the Spaniards are ever able to do in those Seas.

I have already given several Instances of such Places, as have no Land-winds,
or at least but very ordinary ones; I shall next proceed in order to show where
the strongest or best Land-Winds are met with; and then I shall speak of those
Places where there blows a moderate and indifferent Gale between both Extremes:
That so any one may judge by the Lying of the Land, whether it may afford a
good Land-wind or know.

The briskest Land-winds are commonly in deep Bays, in great Lakes within Land,
and among great Ranges of Islands or small Keys that lie near the shore: I
shall give Instances of all these. And as for Bays, I shall first pitch on the
Bay of Campeachy, which lies between Cape Condecedo and the High-Land of St.
Martin; between both these Places the Land-winds are as brisk 2 or 3 Leagues
off at Sea, as in any Place that I know. In the Cod or Middle of the Bay, the
Land trends from East to West, there the Sea-Breezes are at North, and the
Land-winds at South; they commonly begin to blow at 7 or 8 a Clock in the
Evening, and continue till 8 or 9 the next Morning, in the dry Season
especially. In that Bay there is an Island, called by the English Beef-Island
from the multitude of Bulls and Cows that inhabit it. The smell of these wild
Cattle is driven off to Sea, by the Land-winds so fresh, that by it Masters of
Ships sailing in the Night on this Coast have known where they were, and have
presently anchored that Night, and come into the Island of Trist the next Day;
whereas they would otherwise have past farther to the Westward quite out of
their way, if they had not smelled the strong scent of these Cattle.

So all the bottom of the Bay of Mexico, even from the High-Land of St. Martin
down to Lavera Cruz, and from thence Northerly toward the River Meschasipi
affords good Land-winds and Seabreezes. The Bay of Honduras also, and almost
all the Coast between it and Cape La Vela, affords the like, allowing for the
Capes and Points of Land, which lie between; where it fails more or less, as
the Points do lie more or less exposed to the Sea-Breezes.

So in the South Seas, the Bays of Panama, Gui^quil, Paita, etc. have their
fresh Land-winds and Seabreezes. But in some Places, as particularly at Paita,
the Land-winds do not spring up till 12 a Clock in the Night, but then are
always very fresh, and last till 7 or 8 the next Morning; and they are constant
all the Year long: Whereas in the Bay of Panama, and also in all the Bays and
Coasts of the other, or North side of America already described, they are not
so constant in the wet Season as they are in the dry.

The Bay of Campeachy will also afford us Instances of the Land-winds that blow
in Logunes: As for Instance, the Lagune of Trist, which is about 9 or 10
Leagues long and 3 broad, is barricadoed from the Sea by the Island of Trist.
There the Land-winds blow in the dry Season from 5 or 6 a Clock in the Evening,
till 9 or 10 in the Morning. There are two other Lagunes lying within that, and
parted from it by low Mangrove-Land: there the Land-winds are fresher and the
Sea-Breeze duller, and of a less continuance, than in the Lagune of Trist. Nay,
sometimes the Land-wind blows all Day; so in the Lagune of Maracabo to
Wind-ward of Cape Alta Vola, the Land-winds are very fresh and lasting. The
like may be said of the Lagune of Venizuella or Comana.

Sometimes in the forementioned Lagunes, the Land-winds do blow for 3 or 4
Days and Nights together, scarce suffering the Sea-Breez to breath there;
though at the same time the Sea-Breez may blow fresh out at Sea: and if the
Sea-Breez at such times should make a bold Sally into these Lagunes, it would
be but of a short continuance. On the other Hand at Capes and Head-Lands more
exposed to Sea-Breezes, the Land-winds are shier of coming there, than the
Sea-winds are into Lagunes. Neither may we forget the Harbor of Jamaica, for
there are very good Land-winds. It is compassed in on one side with a long Neck
of Sand, and many small Islands at the mouth of it, and within there is a
pretty deep Lake, in which are constant Sea and Land-winds, by which the
Wherry-men run with full sail, both to Legamy or Passage Fort, from the Town
and back again. They go away with the Sea-Breeze, and return with the
Land-wind. Therefore Passengers that have occasion to go either way, wait for
the coming of these Winds, except their Business requires have: for then they
are rowed against the Breez; and though the Land-winds do sometimes fail or come
very late, yet the Wherries seldom stay beyond their constant Hours of 7 or 8 a
Clock, and sometimes the Land-winds do come by 3 or 4, but when they come so
early it is commonly after a Tornado from the Land. This may suffice as to the
Land-winds in Lakes or Bays.

As to what may be spoken concerning the Land-winds among Islands, I shall only
mention 2 Places, both of them in the West Indies; the first are the Keys of
Cuba, which are abundance of small Islands bordering on the South side of Cuba,
reaching in length from East to West, or near those Points as the Island lies,
about 70 Leagues; and in some Places reaching near 20 Leagues from the said
Island. Among these Islands, even from the outermost of them, quite home to
Cuba, there are very brisk Land-winds. They spring up early in the Evening, and
blow late in the Morning. The Jamaica Turtlers visit these Keys with good
success for Turtle all the Year long, and from thence bring most of their
Turtle wherewith the Market of Port Royal is served. The other Islands I shall
mention are the Sambaloe Islands betwixt Cape Samblass and Golden Island, though
they are not so large a Range as the Keys of Cuba, yet do they afford very good
Land-winds; near as good as the Keys of Cuba do. And thus much for the Places
where the best as well as where the scantiest or faintest Land-winds are found.
I shall next give some Instances of the Medium between both Extremes.

I have already shown that Capes and such Head-Lands as lie out farthest from
the rest of the shore, are thereby most exposed to the Sea-winds, and
consequently the Land-winds are there much fainter than in other Places,
especially in deep Bays or Lagunes within Land, or among Islands and small Keys
near the Land; All which is no more than my own experience has taught me. I
shall now show how the Land-winds blow on Coasts that do lie more level. As all
Coasts have their Points and bendings, so accordingly the Land-winds are
fresher or fainter, as you come either toward these bendings or toward
intermitting Points or Head-Lands.

I shall give an Instance of this by showing how the Winds are on the Coast of
Coraccos. It is as straight a Shore as I can pitch on, yet full of small Bays,
divided from each other by a like number of Ridges of High-Land, that shoot
forth their Heads a little way without the Bays on each side. There in the
Night or Morning, while the Land-wind blows, we find fresh Gales out of the
Bays: but when we come abreast of the Head-Lands, we find it Calm; yet see the
Breeze curling on the Water on both sides of us, and sometimes get a spurt of
it to help us forward: and having recovered the Wind out of the next Bay, we
pass by the Mouth of it presently, till we come to the next Head; and there we
lie becalmed as before.

These Bays are not above half a Mile or a Mile wide; neither are the Heads
much wider; but these Heads of the Ridges lying in between the Bays, have steep
Cliffs against the Sea; and wherever I have met the like steep Cliffs against
the Sea, I have seldom found any Land-Winds. But in all other Places where the
Bays strike deeper into the Land, there we find the Land-winds more lasting and
strong; and where the Points are farther out, there are still the less
Land-winds, and the brisker Sea-Breezes. For the Capes and smaller Points on
all shores seem to be so many Barricadoes to break off the violence of the
Sea-Breezes; for this we always find when we are turning to Windward being to
Leeward of a Cape, that the Breez is moderate, especially if we keep very near
the shore; but when once we come within a Mile, more or less of the Cape and
stand off to Sea, as soon as we get without it, we find such a hussing Breez,
that sometimes we are not able to ply against it, but in the Night we find a
fresh Land-wind to Leeward; though when we come to the Cape we find it Calm; or
perhaps sometimes meet with a Sea-wind. The Land-Breezes on the Coast of Guinea
between Cape St. Anns and Cape Palmas, (mentioned in the second Chapter of this
Discourse,) are at E. blowing brisk 4 Leagues off shore: the Sea-winds there
are at S. W. The Land-winds on the Coast of Angola are at E. N. E. the
Sea-winds at W. S. W. these are very true Winds of both kinds.

The Land-winds on the Coast of Peru and Mexico in the South Seas, are in most
Places right off from the shore, else the Fishermen could never go out to Sea,
as they do, on Bark-Loggs. And as the Land-winds are true there, so are the
Sea-Breezes also; for with the Land-wind they go out to Fish, and return in
again with the Sea-winds. In some Places they use Seals-Skins instead of
Bark-Loggs; they are made so tight that no Bladder is tighter. To these they
have long Necks like the Neck of a Bladder, into which they put a Pipe and blow
them up, as we do Bladders; two of these being fastened together, a Man sets
a-stride them, having one before and the other behind him; and so sits firmer
than in a Troopers Saddle. His Paddle is like a Quarter-staff, with a broad
Blade at each end; with this he strikes the Sea back, first on one side, and
then on the other, with each end of his Paddle, and so gives himself fresh way
through the Water.

In the East Indies also there are true Sea-Breezes, as well on the Islands, as
on the Main. On Islands, as at Bantam in the Island Java, and at Achin in the
Island Sumatra, and in many Places on the Island Mindanao: And on the Main
also, as particularly at Fort St George on the Coast Coromandel. There the
Land-winds blow right off from the shore, and the Sea-winds right in; but
sometimes they come slanting in; and about Christmas they blow from the N. E.
or N. N. E. I found them so when I came on the Coast, and being advised of it
by Mr. Coventry, in whose Sloop I then was, I fell in with the Land 10 or 12
Leagues to the Northward of the Fort, and had a brisk Northerly Sea-wind to
bring me into the Road.

I think these Instances are enough to show how these Land-winds do usually
blow in most parts of the World; should I be very particular, it is not a larger
Treatise then I intend this to be, would hold a quarter-part of it. But I have
been more particular in the West Indies and South Seas, because these
Land-winds are of more use there than in the East Indies: For though sometimes
Men in the East Indies do turn against the Monsoons, yet they do generally
tarry for them before they budge.

Indeed these Winds are an extraordinary blessing to those that use the Sea in
any part of the World, within the Tropicks; for as the constant Trade-winds do
blow, there could be no sailing in these Seas: But by the help of the Sea and
Land-Breezes, Ships will sail 2 or 3 hundred Leagues; as particularly from
Jamaica, to the Lagune of Trist, in the Bay of Campeachy; and then back again,
all against the Trade-wind; And I think this is one of the longest Voyages that
is used of this kind. If any of our Jamaica Sloops do go to Trist, and design
to carry their Wood to Curasao, then they put through the Gulf of Florida.

The Spaniards also that come from any part of the Bay of Mexico, and are bound
to any Place to Windward of the Island Cuba, are wont to put through the Gulf,
and so stretch away to the Northward, till they come clear of the Trade, and
then stand away as far as they please to the Eastward; This is also the usual
way from Jamaica to Barbados, though sometimes they turn up by the Carribbee
Islands, only taking the Benefit of these Sea and Land-winds. So also Ships may
and do pass from Portobello to Carthagena, or to St. Martha, or to any other
Place, by the help of these Breezes, if the distance is not too far. So by
taking the Advantage of these Winds, Sloops in the West Indies sail clear round
the Islands, or to any part of them, in a short time.

In the South Seas also the Spaniards in their Voyages from Panama to Lima, by
taking the Advantage of these Winds, do sail as high as Cape Blan^o; but in all
their Voyages to the Southward of that Cape, they stand quite off to Sea into
the Trade. Thus you see the use and advantage of them.

The Seamen that sail in Sloops or other small Vessels in the West Indies, do
know very well when they shall meet a brisk Land-Wind, by the Foggs that hang
over the Land before Night; for it is a certain sign of of a good Land-Wind, to
see a thick Fogg lie still and quiet, like Smoke over the Land, not stirring
any way; and we look out for such Signs when we are plying to Windward. For if
we see no Fog over the Land, the Land-wind will be but faint and short that
Night. These signs are to be observed chiefly in fair Weather: for in the wet
Season Foggs do hang over the Land all the Day, and it may be neither Land-wind
nor Sea-Breeze stirring. If in the Afternoon also in fair Weather, we see a
Tornado over the Land, it commonly sends us forth a fresh Land-Wind.

These Land-winds are very cold, and though the Sea-Breezes are always much
stronger, yet these are colder by far. The Sea-Breezes indeed are very
comfortable and refreshing; for the hottest time in all the Day is about 9, 10
or 11 a Clock in the Morning, in the interval between both Breezes: For then it
is commonly Calm, and then People pant for breath, especially if it is late
before the Sea-Breez comes, but afterward the Breez allays the heat. However,
in the Evening again after the Sea-Breez is spent, it is very hot till the
Land-wind springs up, which is sometimes not till 12 a Clock or after.

For this reason Men when they go to Bed uncloath themselves and lie without
any thing over them: Nay, the ordinary sort of People spread mats at their
Doors, or else in their Yards, in Jamaica, and lie down to sleep in the open
Air.

In the East Indies at Fort St. George, also Men take their Cotts or little
Field-Beds, and put them into the Yards, and go to sleep in the Air: And Seamen
aboard Ships in these hot Countries lie on the Deck, till the Land-wind comes.

The Inhabitants of Jamaica or Fort St. George, have somewhat to cover
themselves when the Land-wind comes, beside a Pillow on their Breast, or
between their Arms. But Seamen who have wrought hard all Day, lie naked and
exposed to the Air, it may be all Night long, before they awake, without any
covering, especially if they have had their dose of Punch. But next Morning
they are scarce able to budge, being stiff with cold, that brings them to
Fluxes, and that to their Graves; and this is the fate of many stout and brave
Seamen: and it is a great pity that Masters of Ships have so little regard for
their Men, as not by some good Orders, to prohibit this dangerous Custom of
lying abroad and naked in the Nights.

CHAP. V. Of Land-winds and Sea-Breezes, peculiar to some Coasts at some
particular seasons of the Year; as also of some Winds that produce strange
Effects.
Of the Summasenta-Winds in the Bay of Campeachy. Of the Winds peculiar to the
Coasts of Carthagena. Winds on the Mexican Coasts, called Popogaios. Others on
the Coast of Coromandel, called Terrenos: The same about Malabar, but at a
different Season: As also in the Persian Gulf. And of the Hermatans on the
Coast of Guinea.

I Shall begin with the Summasenta-Winds, as they are called, which blow in the
Bay of Campeachy. These are Winds that come in the Months of Feb. March and
April, and they blow only in that Bay between the High-Land of St. Martin and
Cape Condecedo; which Places are about 120 Leagues asunder. They are, properly
speaking, neither Sea-Breezes nor true Land-winds, yet in respect of their
blowing in some measure from the shore, they are in that somewhat of kin to the
Land-winds. These Winds are commonly at E. S. E. in the Cod or Middle of the
Bay where the Land lies E. and W. and the true Land-winds there are at S. S. E.
but from thence toward Cape Condecedo, the Land trends away N. E. and N. N. E.
and N. So that they become Land-winds there respecting the Land from whence
they blow; but then they differ both from Sea and Land-Breezes in respect to
their duration: For these Summasenta-Winds blow 3 or 4 Days, sometimes a Week,
both Night and Day before they cease. They are commonly dry Winds and blow very
fresh, and Ships that go from Trist with Logwood at the time when these Winds
blow, will be at Cape Condecedo in 3 or 4 Days; whereas if they go at any other
time, it will take up 8 or 10 Days, though seldom more than that: For here are
good Land-winds and Sea-Breezes at other times.

These Winds are commonly colder than the Sea-winds, though not so cold as the
Land-winds, yet stronger than either. I never could perceive that these Winds
did make any alteration on our Bodies different from other Winds. But the Tides
when these Winds blow on that Coast, are very small, especially in the Lagunes
of Trist; so that the Legwood-Ba^^s that bring the Wood aboard of the Ships,
are then forced to lie still for want of Water to float them over some flats in
the Lagunes.

On the Coast of Ca^thagena there are a peculiar sort of Winds that blow in the
Months of April, May and June so very fierce, that Ships are not able to ply to
Windward on that Coast while these Winds last. These Winds blow about 40 or 50
Leagues to Windward of Carthagena Town, and about 10 to Leeward of it. They are
very fierce from the middle of the Channel between it and Hispaniola, and so
continue almost to the Coast of Carthagena. Though they are sometimes a little
fainter within 2 or 3 Leagues of the shore, especially Mornings and Evenings.
They commonly rise in the Morning before day, sometimes at 3 or 4 a Clock, and
so continue till 9, 10 or 11 at Night, and thus they will blow 10 or 11 Days
together very fiercely. At this time the Land-winds besides their short
continuance are very faint and blow but a little way off shore: So that from 10
or 11 at Night till ^ in the Morning it is quite Calm and not one breath of Wind
from a League distant off the shore; though 3 or 4 further off you will find the
Breez, and nearer a small Land-Wind. These Winds are at E. N. E. as the Common
Trade is; whereas the Sea-Breezes are at N. E. by N. or N. N. E.

While these fierce Winds stay, the Sky is commonly clear without any Cloud to
be seen; though doubtless it is imperceptibly hazy, for then the Sun does not give
a true black shade on the Ground, but very faint and dusky. The Horizon too
looks very dusky, thick and hazy, and while the Sun is near the Horizon, either
in the Morning or Evening, it looks very red. Sometimes, though but seldom, when
these Winds blow the Sky is over-cast with small Clouds, which afford some
drizling small Rain. But though these Winds are so fierce on the Coast of
Carthagena, yet both to Windward and to Leeward at the distances
beforementioned, the Breezes blow moderate as at other times. For the Sea and
Landwinds do there keep their constant and regular Courses. Neither are the
Coasts of Hispaniola or Jamaica troubled with these fierce Winds, any nearer
than half Channel over as was said before.

It has not been my fortune to have been on this Coast when these Winds have
blown, yet I have had the Relation of it so often, and from so many Persons
that I am very well satisfied of the truth of it: Nay, it is so generally known
among the Jamaica Seamen and Privateers that they call a Talkative Person in
derision, a Carthagene-Breeze. I remember 2 or 3 Men that went by that Name,
and I knew them by no other, though I was in the same Ship with them several
Months.

Some of our English Frigots that have been sent to Jamaica have experienced
these Breezes when the Governor has sent them upon business to that Coast: For
plying between Portobello and Carthagena, when they have been within 10 Leagues
of Carthagena, they have met with the Sea Breez so strong that they have been
forced to riff their Topsail, which even then they could not maintain, but have
been obliged to furle it quite up; and so with only their lower Sails, which
sometimes they have been forced to riff too, have been beating 8 or 10 Days, to
get only so many Leagues; which though at last they have done, yet has it been
with much trouble, and not without damage to their Sails and Rigging. Neither
can I forget a Squadron of French Frigots, Commanded by the Count de Estrees,
that came to Jamaica, and demanded leave of the Governor to Wood and Water
there; which because it seemed strange that they should want in coming only
from Petit Guavas; it was demanded of them why they came from thence so ill
provided? They said they went from Petit Guavas over to the Coast of
Carthagena, with a design to have plied to Wind-ward under that shore, but met
the Breezes so hard on the Coast, that they were not able to hold up their
sides against it, and for that Reason stood back again toward Petit Guavas;
but not being able to fetch it, therefore they came to Wood and Water at
Jamaica, designing to go from thence through the Gulf: And though the Pilots of
Jamaica did all conclude that the Breeze-time was past by more than a Month,
yet the Governor gave them leave to Wood and Water at Blew-fields Bay, and
sent one Mr. Stone to be their Pilot thither. This was in 1679 and in one of
our Summer Months, but I cannot tell which, though I was there.

In the South Seas on the Mexican Coast, between Cape Blanco in the Lat. of 9
D. 56 M. North and Realeja, in Lat. 11 North, which two Places are about 80
Leagues distance, there are Winds which blow only in the Months of May, June,
and July, called by the Spaniards Popogaios. They blow Night and Day without
intermission, sometimes 3 or 4 Days or a Week together. They are very brisk
Winds, but not violent: I have been in one of them when w went from Caldera
Bay, bound to Realeja mentioned in my Voyage round the World, Chap. 5. Page
118. which blew at North.

In the East Indies on the Coast of Coromandel, there are Winds called by the
Portuguese Terrenos, because they blow from the Land. These are not those
Land-Winds that I have already treated of; for these blow only in June, July
and Aug. and are in several respects quite contrary to them. For whereas the
true Land-Winds blow only in the Night, including Evenings and Mornings; on the
contrary, these blow 3 or 4 Days without intermission; nay sometimes a Week or
10 Days together: and as the true Nocturnal Land-Winds are very cold, on the
contrary these are the hottest of all Winds I ever heard of: They come with hot
Blooms, such as I have mentioned in my Voyage round the World, Chap. 20. Page
530. These Winds are at West, and they blow only in the Months of June, July
and August, which is the West Monsoon-Season, though the proper Monsoon then on
this Coast is S. W. When these hot Winds come, the better sort of People at
Fort St. George keep close: They also shut up their Windows and Doors to keep
them out; and I have heard Gentlemen that lived there say, that when they have
been thus shut up within Doors, they have been sensible when the Wind shifted
by the Change they have felt in their Bodies. And notwithstanding that these
Winds are so hot, yet the Inhabitants don't sweat while they last, for their
Skins are hard and rough, as if they had been parched by the Fire, especially
their Faces and Hands, yet does it not make them sick. The Sands which are
raised by these Winds are a great annoyance to those whose business lies
abroad, and who cannot keep their Houses. For many times they wheel about and
raise the Sands so thick, that it flies like ^moak in Peoples Eyes; and the
Ships also that lie in the road at that time have their Decks covered with this
Sand.

On the Coast of Malabar they have of these sons of Winds also, but not at the
same time of the Year. For as these on the Coast of Coromandel blow in the
Months of June, July and August, when the West Monsoon Reigns; on the contrary
on the Malabar Coast they blow in the Months of December, January and February,
when the East or North East Monsoon blows: for then the Easterly Wind, which is
then the true Monsoon, comes from over the Land of this Coast; This being the
West Side, as the Coast of Coromandel is the East Side of this long East-Indian
Promontory.

The Person Gulf is as remarkable for these hot Winds as either of the former;
they come there in the Months of June, July and August in the West-Monsoon
time; and the heat there by all Accounts does by far exceed that on the other
two Coasts.

The European Merchants that are employed in the Ports within the King of
Persia his Dominions, do leave their Coast, Habitations and Business there,
during these hot Months, and spend their time at Ispahan till the Air is more
agreeable to their Bodies; but their Servants must endure it. And if any Ships
are there, then the Seamen also must do as well as they can. It Is reported the
Commanders do keep Bathing-Troughs full of Water to lie and wallow in, and hide
their Bodies from the noisome hot Blooms. I was never in any of these hot Winds,
for I went from Fort St. George before they came on the Coast.

On the Coast of Guinea there are a particular sort of Land-winds, which are
very remarkable; not for their Heat, as those last-mentioned, but for their
exceeding Cold and Searching Nature. They are called Harmatans. I have had an
Account of them from several who have Traded to Guinea; but more especially
from a very Sensible and Experienced Gentleman, Mr Greenhill, Commissioner of
His Majesty's Navy at Portsmouth; who upon my Request, was pleased to send me
the following Account: which the Reader cannot have better than in his own
Words. Where, together with the Harmatans, he gives an Account also of all the
Winds on that Coast.

Mr. Greenhill's Letter.
SIR,
I Have been very ill since my return Home with the Gout; so that I have not
been capable of answering your Expectation: But being a little better
recovered, I shall make as good a return to your Enquiry of the Harmatans on
the Coast of Guinea, as my Circumstances will permit. The usual Time of their
blowing is between the latter part of December, and the beginning of February;
before and beyond which Seasons, they never exceed. They are of so very cold,
sharp and piercing a Nature, that the Seams of the Floors of our Chambers and
the Sides and Decks of our Ships (as for as they are above Water) will open so
wide, as that with facility you may put a Caulking Iron a considerable way into
them; in which condition they continue so long as the Harmatan blows, (which is
sometimes two or three, and very rarely five Days, which is the very utmost I
ever observed or heard of) and when they are gone, they close again and are as
tight as if it never had been. The Natives themselves and all Persons who
inhabit those parts (during that short Season) to preven^ their pernicious
Effects, are obliged to confine themselves within Doors; where they endeavor
their own security, by rendering their Habitations as close and impenetrable as
possible: Neither will they once sti^ abroad, unless induced thereto by a more
than ordinary Occasion. It is as destructive to the Cattle also; whose safe
Guard consists in their Proprietors Care, who against this Season ought to
provide some such like place for them: Otherwise they must expect but a
pitiful Account when the Season is over; for it most certainly destroys them,
and that in a very short time.

This I accidentally experimented by exposing a couple of Goats to the Asperity
thereof; which in four hours space or thereabouts; were deprived of Life. Nay
we our selves (unless assisted by the like Convenience and the benefit of some
sweet Oils to correct the Air) cannot fetch our Breath so-freely as at other
times; but are almost suffocated with too frequent and Acid Respirations. They
generally blow between the E. and E. N. E. to the Northward of which they never
exceed, being the most settled and steady (but fresh) Gale, I ever observed;
coming without Thunder, Lightning or Rain; but close gloomy Weather; the Sun
not shining all the time: And when they expire, the Trade-wind (which
constantly blows on that Coast at W. S. W. and S. W.) returns with the
accustomary seasonableness of Weather.

The Coast of Africa from Cape Palmas to Capes Formosa, lies E. and E. by N.
and near those Pointy the Land-Breezes blow on that Coast, which commo^ll begin
about seven in the Evening, and continue al^ Night, till near that time the
next Morning: During which interval, we are troubled with slinking Fogs and
Mists off Shore, which by return of the Sea Breezes upon the opposite Points
are all driven away; and we have the benefit of them, in a curious fresh Gale,
till about 5 in the Afternoon.

And here let me Note it for a general Observation, That in these and all
eother Places within the Tropicks (as far as ever I took notice) the Wind is
drawn by the Land. For if an Island or Head-Land, were inclining to a circular
Form, the Sea and Land-Breezes fall in Diametrically opposite to that part
where you are. So that if you are on the South side, the Sea-Breez shall be at
South, and the Land-Breez (when it comes in its Season) at North.

In getting on the Coast, we endeavor to fall in with Cape Mount or Cape
Miserada, which is about 18 Leagues to the E. S. Eastward thereof; and after
that we double Cape Palmas (whence as aforesaid, the Land trends away E. by N.)
the Current near the shore sets upon that Point down into the Bite. But in
getting off, we as much attempt (if possible) to lay hold of St. Thomas; and
thence to run to the Southward of the Line, perhaps 3 or 4 Degrees; for the
further Southerly we go, the stronger we find the Gales, and more beneficial
for getting off the African Coast; but those who keep to the Northward thereof,
generally meet with more Calms; and consequently longer Voyages ensue. In or
about those Latitudes we continue, till we are got between 25 and 30 Degrees to
the Westward of Cape Lopez de Gonsalvo, and then we cross again to go either
for England or the West Indies. But by the way let me observe to you, that when
once we are to the Westward of the said Cape, and in South Latitude, the
Current sets Northerly, and the Wind to 20 Degrees of Latitude, is at E. S. E.
as (to the like number of Degrees) on the North side of the Line it blows at E.
N. E. Neither did I ever observe any Mutation of the Currents, unless in the
Tornado-Season, when during their blowing, they commonly set to Wind-ward; though
perhaps the Moon upon Full and Change, may have the like influence there, as in
other Places; but I never took any particular notice thereof.

The said Tornadoes usually come in the beginning of Apr. and seldom relinquish
the Gold Coast till July commences, and with frequent visits make us sensible
of their Qualities. We have sometimes three or four in a day; but then their
continuance is but short; perhaps not above two hours, and the strength or fury
(it may be) about a quarter or half an Hour; but accompanied with prodigious
Thunder, Lightning and Rain; and the violence of the Wind so extraordinary, as
that it has sometimes roled up the Lead wherewith the Houses are covered, as
close and compactly, as possible it could be done by the Art of Man. The Name
implies a variety of Winds: But the strength of them is generally at S. E. and
by Ships that are bound off the Coast, they are made use of to get to Windward.

I shall conclude with that most worthy Observation of the Season wherein the
Rains begin; which on the Gold Coast is about the 10th of April and this may be
generally remarked, from 15 d. N. to 15 d. South Latitude, that they follow the
Sun within 5 or 6 d. And so proceed with him till be has touched the Tropic,
and returns to the like Station again. This I shall illustrate by the following
Example, Viz. Cape Corso Castle lies in 4 d. 55 North. About the 10th of April
the Sun has near 12 degrees N. Declination. At that time the Rains begin, and
continue with the Inhabitants of that Place, until he has performed his Course
to the greatest obliquity from off the Equator, and returned to the like
Position South. The same I suppose may be observed, and understood of other
places within the Tropicks.

The Variation (of which in the Y ar 1680. I made frequent Observations) was 2
d. 14 m. Westerly: And it generally flows at the aforesaid place S. S. E. and
N. N. W. upon the Full and Change. The Water rising upon Spring Tides about 6
or 7 Foot up and down. I remain,

SIR, Your Humble Servant, Henry Greenhill.
From His Majesty's Yard, near Portsmouth, the 5th. June School.

Upon the Receipt of this from the Gentleman aforesaid, I wrote to him again,
to have his Opinion about what I have said concerning the particular Longitude,
in which it is best to cross the Line, in going from Guinea to the West Indies:
And so much of his Answer as concerns this Matter was in these Words.

Mr. Greenhill's second Letter.
SIR,
I Do not dissent from Crossing the Line at 35 or 36 d. Longitude, Westward of
Cape Lopes, and it may as well be done at 30 provided the Breezes continue
fresh. But if we have but little Winds, we generally run on the South side of
the Line, till we reach the distance West: And then Crossing we steer away West
North West and West by North for Barbados.

And this you may observe, (as I have already hinted to you,) that the further
we keep to the Southward of the Line, the fresher, and consequently more
advantageous the Breezes are.

I remain, SIR, Your obliged Friend, And most humble Servant, Henry Greenhill.


And here I judge it will not be unacceptable to the Reader to insert two other
Letters from an Experienced Captain of a Ship, because they have a general
Relation to the Subject I am now upon, as well as to the Coast of Guinea in
particular.

Part of two Letters from Captain John Covant of Portbury, to a Gentleman in
London. LETTER I.
Honored Sir,
I Have sent Mr. Dampier's Book, which you were pleased to send me, to Captain
S -- I have gone through it, and find it very well worth my time, being very
delightsome, and I believe true.

I have made some Remarks on it, as having found the like of what be asserts,
in other places. As p. 65. mention is made of the Sucking-Fish, or Remora (as
Mr. Dampier calls it.) These are mighty plenty on the Coast of Angola and at
Madagascar, and between Cape Lopes de Gonsalvas and the River Gabon. They are
shaped as he describes them.

As to what he says, p. 73. I have found the Indians in the Gulf of Florida,
offering false Ambergreece to sale, and particularly in Lat 25d. where in the
Year 1693. several of our Men were cheated with it.

What Mr. Dampier says of the Laziness of the People of Mindanao, p. 326. the
very same may be said of the People of Loango on the Coast of Guinea exactly.

Their manner of Worship, mentioned p. 338. is the very same with what I have
seen at Algier, on the Coast of Barbary.

The Nocturnal Dancings used by the Hottantotts at the Cape of good Hope every
Full and New Moon, p. 541. are also practiced by the Inhabitants of Loango,
Molinbo and Cabendo.

I shall give you the trouble of a small Relation of a Passage to Loango in the
Year 1693. When we came so far to the Southward as 2 d. 40 m. N. Lat. and 8 d.
25 m. Longi. Westward from the Meridian of Lundi, it being 31 st of March we
had small Wind at S. S. W. and S. W. with showers of Rain. There we met with
prodigious shoals of Fish, consisting chiefly of Albicores and Bonetoes. There
were also great numbers of Sharks; some 10 or 12 foot long. For diversion we
caught above an 100 of them at times. The other Fish we took as we had
occasion, fresh and fresh: and one day we caught a Barrel of them with empty
Hooks. These shoals of Fish kept us Company till we were under the Equator in
Long 4 d. 3 m. Eastward of the Meridian of Lundy. This was April 27. we had the
Winds at S. E. and S. E. by E. fresh Gales and clear Weather; but a mighty
Leeward Current. At the Fishes parting with us that day, I caught an Albicore
that weighed 75 l. It is a mighty strong Fish, so that the Fishing-Craft must
be very strong to take them.

The City of Loango I find to lie in Lat. 4d. 30m. S. and Longi. 18d. 8m.
Eastward from the Meridian of Lundy: from whence I took my departure, bound for
Jamaica, Oct. 7. 1693.

When we find the Winds South, S. by W. and S. S. W. fresh Gales; veerable to
S. W. and back to South, we stand off to the Westward with Larboard Tacks on
Board, till we get 14 d. Long. to the Westward of Loango. And there we find the
Winds veerable from S. S. E. to S. E. fresh Gales. When we get 34 d. to the
Westward of Loango, we are then 16d. Westward from the Meridian of Lundy: and
there we find the Winds veerable from S. E. by E. to E. by S. and East; and so
they continue blowing fresh as we will still run to the Westward between the
Lat. of 3 and 4 d. South, till we make the Island Fernando de Noronho, which I
find to lie in Lat. 3 d. 54m. 30s. South. And by the Experience of two Voyages
have found its Longi. 40 d. 59 m. Westward from Loango, and 22 d. 51 m. from
the Meridian of Lundy. This Island appears with a very high Pyramid. And when
we come close to it, the Pyramid looks like a large Cathedral. On the N. W.
side is a small Bay to anchor in. But Ships must come pretty near the shore,
because it is deep Water. Here is plenty of Fish. And on the Island is some
fresh Water, and low shrubs of Trees. We could see no living Creature on it but
Dogs. It was formerly inhabited by the Portuguese, but the Dutch having then
War with them, took it, and carried the Portuguese all away. The Body of the
Island I judge to be about 4 Miles long, lying N. E. and S. W. near on the
North side are some Rocks, pretty high above Water; and many Birds, as Sea
Gulls and Man-of-War-Birds (which are something like our Kites in England) I
find the Current sets strong to the N. W. The variation very little. From
thence I steered N. VV. with fresh Gales S. E. and at E. S. E. in order to
cross the Equator, and designing to make the Island Tobago: which by my Run
from the aforesaid Island, I find to lie in Lat. 11 d. 33 m. North Longi.
VVestward of Fernando, 28 d. 19 m. The Meridian distance from Fernando 1721
Miles* And by my reckoning or Journal Tobago is West from the Meridian of the
Isle of Lundy 51 d. 10 m. In this Passage between the said Islands we find
strange Ripling and Cockling Seas, ready to leap in upon the Ships Deck; which
makes us think the Current to be strong: And it seems to be occasioned by the
great River on the main Land; which is not far from us in this Passage. Tobago
is an high Island with a brave sandy Bay on the S. W. side, where the Dutch had
formerly a great Fort, till molested by the English in the last Dutch War. From
this Island I shaped my Course for Jamaica, and found the N. E. Corner to lie
in Lat. 18 d. North; and in Longi. West from Tobago 13 d. The Meridian distance
from Tobago is 749 Miles West. In our passage we saw no Land or Island, till we
made the N. E. end of Jamaica: which lies in Longi. West from the Meridian of
Lundy 64 d. 10 m. and West from the City of Loango 82 d. 18 m. I shall only
add that I am of Opinion that the Gallopagos Islands do lie a great deal
further to the Westward than our Hydrographers do place them, according as Mr.
Dampier hints, p. 100 of his Voyage round the World. I am,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, John Covant.
Portbury, October. 20. School.

Part of a second Letter from Captain Covant; dated from Bristol, December. 10.
1697. LETTER II.
SIR,
YOurs of the 6th Instant came to my Hands, with the enclosed Queries, which I
shall endeavor to answer in part, as far as my memory will assist me, being
now from home, and at a distance from my Journals, etc.

Answers to the Queries.
1. The Common Trade-Winds on the Coast of Angola, blow from the S. W. to
South, till about 12d. Long. from the Meridian of the Isle of Lundy. 2 I have
found them always in the same Quarter, and not subject to shift in all the time
I have used this Coast, except that at a small distance off the shore, they are
sometimes a Poine more to the Westward. 3. The Dry Season on this Coast I
observed to be from the latter end of April to September; though sometimes
intermixed with some pleasant showers of Rain. I cannot be so punctual as to
the time of the Wet Seasons. 4. The true Sea-Breez I have commonly found here
to be from W. S. W. to W. by S. if it be fair Weather: and the Land-Breez is at
E. by N. But if a Tornado happens, it causes the Winds to shift all round the
Compass, and at last it settles at S. W. which is the former true Trade-Wind.
I am yours John Covant.




CHAP. VI. Of Storms.
Storms less frequent, but more fierce between the Tropicks. Presages of their
coming of Norths, the times and Places where they blow: Signs of their
approach: N. Banks. A Chocolatta North. A North beneficial to Ships going from
Campeachy to Jamaica. A very uncommon way of wearing a Ship in a North. Of
Souths, the Times and Places where they Blow. A Description of a South at
Jamaica, and at the Bay of Campeachy: Much Fish killed by that Storm. Of
Hurricanes. A Description of a terrible one at Antegoe, where abundance of Fish
and Sea Fowls were destroyed by it. The difference between North Banks, and the
Clouds before an Hurricane: the latter adorned with radiant Colors. Tuffoons
in the East Indies the same with Hurricanes in the West. Of Monsoons in the
East Indies. A Storm called by the Portuguese, the Elephanta, which is the
violentest Monsoon of that Season.

STorms within the Tropicks are generally known to us by some Name or other, to
distinguish them from other common Winds: and though Storms are not so frequent
there, as they are in Latitudes nearer the Poles; yet are they nevertheless
expected yearly in their proper Months; and when they do come, they blow
exceeding fierce, though indeed some years they do not come at all or at least
do not blow with that fierceness as at other times. And as these Winds are
commonly very fierce, so are they but of a short continuance, in comparison
with Storms that we meet with in higher Latitudes.

In the West Indies there are three sorts, viz. Norths, Souths and Hurricanes:
In the East Indies there are only two sorts, viz. Monsoones and Tuffoones.

All these sorts of violent Storms, except the Norths, are expected near one
time of the year: and this is taken notice of by those that have been in any of
them; that they give certain Presages of their being at hand, several hours
before they come. Norths are violent Winds, that frequently blow in the Bay of
Mexico from October till March: They are chiefly expected near the full or
change of the Moon, all that time of the year, but they are most violent in
December and January. These Winds are not confined to the Bay of Mexico only,
but there they are most frequent, and rage with the greatest Violence. They
blow on the North side of Cuba very fierce too, and in the Gulf of Florida; as
also about Hispaniola, Jamaica, etc. and in the Channel between Jamaica and
Portabel; and in all the West Indian Sea between the Islands and the Main as
high as the Island Trinidado. But from Jamaica Eastward, except on the North
side of the Island Hispaniola, they blow no harder than a pretty brisk Sea
Wind. They are here at W. N. W. or N. W. though in the Bay of Mexico they blow
strongest at N. N. W. and this is the Season of Westerly Winds in these East
parts of the West Indies, as I have before noted in the third Chapter of this
Discourse. I shall be most particular of them that blow in the Bay of Mexico,
and what Signs they give us before hand.

Commonly before a North the Weather is very serene and fair, the Sky clear,
and but little Wind; and that too veering from its proper Point, or the common
Trade-Wind of the Coast; and breathing gently at S. at S. W. and West a Day or
two before the North comes. The Sea also gives notice of a Storm, by an
extraordinary and long Ebb. For a Day or two before a North, there will be
hardly any discernable Flood, but a constant ebbing of the Sea. And the
Sea-Fowls also before a Storm, do commonly hover over the Land, which they do
not at other times use to do, in such great flights and numbers. All these
Signs concurring, may give any Man notice of an approaching Storm, but the
greatest and most remarkable Sign of a North, is a very black Cloud in the N.
W. rising above the Horizon to about 10 or 12 degrees: the upper edge of the
Cloud appears very even and smooth, and when once the upper part of the Cloud
is 6, 8, 10 or 12 degrees high, there it remains in that even form parallel to
the Horizon without any motion; and this sometimes 2 or 3 Days before the Storm
comes: At other times not above 12 or 14 hours, but never less.

This Cloud lying so near the Horizon, is not seen but in the Mornings or
Evenings, at least it does not appear so black as then; this is called by
English Seamen a North Bank, and when ever we see such a Cloud in that part of
the World, and in the Months before mentioned, we certainly provide for a
Storm; and though sometimes it may happen that such a Cloud may appear several
Mornings and Evenings, and we may not feel the effects of it, or but very
little; yet we always provide against it; for a North never comes without such
a foreboding Cloud. But if the Winds also whiffle about to the South, with fair
flattering Weather, it never sails. While the Wind remains at S. S. W. or any
thing to the South of the West, it blows very faint; but when once it comes to
the North of the West, it begins to be brisk and veers about presently to the
North West, where it blows hard; yet does it not stay there long before it
veers to the N. N. W. and there it blows strongest and longest. Sometimes it
continues 24 or even 48 hours, and sometimes longer. When the Wind first comes
to the N. W. if the black Cloud rises and comes away, it may chance to give but
one flurry, like that of a Tornado; and then the Sky grows clear again; and
either the Wind continues at N. W. blowing only a brisk Gale, which the Jamaica
Seamen call a Chocolatt North, or else it veers about again to the East, and
settles there. But if when the Wind comes to the N. W. the Cloud still remains
settled, the Wind then continues blowing very fierce even so long as the black
Bank continues near the Horizon. It is commonly pretty dry and clear, but
sometimes much Rain falls with a North: and though the Clouds which bring Rain,
come from the N. W. and N. N. W. yet the black Bank near the Horizon seems not
to move till the Heart of the Storm is broke. When the Wind starts from the N.
N. W. to the N. it is a sign that the Violence of the Storm is past, especially
if it veers to the East of the North; for then it soon flies about to the East,
and there settles at its usual Point and brings fair Weather: But if it goes
back from the N. to the N. W. it will last a day or two longer, as fierce as
before; and not without a great deal of Rain.

When our Jamaica Logwood-ships are coming laden out of the Bay of Campeachy
in the North Season, they are glad to have a North. For a good North will bring
them almost to Jamaica; neither have any of our Vessels miscarried in one of
these Storms that I did ever hear of, though sometimes much shattered; but the
Spaniards do commonly suffer by them, and there is seldom a Year but one or
more of them are cast away in the Bay of Campeachy in this Season: for they
don't work their ships as we do ours. They always bring their ships too under a
Foresail and Mizan, but never under a Mainsail and Mizan, nor yet under the
Mizan alone; but we generally bring too under Mainsail and Mizan; and if the
Wind grows too fierce we bring her under a Mizan only; and if we cannot
maintain that, then we balast our Mizan: which is by riffing and taking up
great part of the Sail. If after all this, the Winds and Seas are two high for
us, then we put before it, but not before we have tried our utmost, especially
if we are near a Leeshore. On the contrary, the Spaniards in the West Indies,
(as I said before) lie under a Foresail and Mizan: But this must needs be an
extraordinary strain to a Ship, especially if she be long. Indeed there is this
convenience in it, when they are minded to put away before it, it is but halling
up the Mizan, and the Foresail veers the Ship presently: and I judge it is for
that Reason they do it. For when the Wind comes on so fierce that they can no
longer keep on a Wind, they put right before it, and so continue till the Storm
cease, or the Land takes them up ( i. e. till they are run ashore.) I knew
two Spaniards did so, while I was in the Bay. One was a Kings ship, called the
Piscadore. She run ashore on a Sandy Bay, a Mile to the Westward of the River
Tobasco. The other was come within 4 or 5 Leagues of the shore, and the Storm
ceasing, she escaped shipwreck, but was taken by Captain Hewet, Commander of a
Privateer, who was then in the Bay. Her Mainmast and Mizan were cut down in the
storm. Both these Ships came from La Vera Cruz, and were in the North side of
the Bay when first the storms took them. And though we don't nse this method, yet
we find means to wear our ships as well as they; for if after the Mizan is
hall'd up and furled, if then the ship will not wear, we must do it with some
Headsail, which yet sometimes puts us to our shifts. As I was once in a very
violent storm, sailing from Virginia, mentioned in my Voyage round the World,
we scudded before the Wind and Sea some time, with only our bare Poles; and the
ship by the mistake of him that con'd, broched too, and lay in the Trough of
the Sea; which then went so high that every Wave threatened to overwhelm us. And
indeed if any one of them had broke in upon our Deck, it might have foundred
us. The Master, whose fault this was, raved like a mad Man, and called for an
Axe to cut the Mizan Shrouds, and turn the Mizan Mast over Board: which indeed
might have been an Expedient to bring her to her course again. Cap. Davis was
then Quartermaster, and a more experienced Seamen than the Master. He did him
hold his hand a little, in hopes to bring her some other way to her course: The
Captain also was of his Mind. Now our Main-yard and Fore-yard were lowered down
a Port last, as we call it, that is down pretty nigh the Deck, and the Wind
blew so fierce that we did not dare to loose any Head-sail, for they must have
blown away if we had, neither could all the Men in the ship have furled them
again; therefore we had no hopes of doing it that way. I was at this time on
the Deck with some others of our Men; and among the rest one Mr. John Small^on,
who was the main Instrument at that time of saving us all. Come said he to me,
let us g^ a little way up the Fore-shrouds, it may be that may make the Ship
wear; for I have been doing it before now. He never tarried for an Answer, but
run forward presently, and I followed him. We went up the Shrouds Half-mast up,
and there we spread abroad the Flaps of our Coats, and presently the Ship wore.
I think we did not stay there above (...) Minutes before we gained our. Point
and came dow^ again, but in this time the Wind was got into our Mainsail, and
had blown it loose; and though the Main-yard was down a Port-last and our Men
were got on the Yard as many as could lie one by another, besides the Deck full
of Men, and all striving to furl that Sail, yet could we not do it, but were
forced to cut it all along by the Head-rope, and so let it fall down on the
Deck.

Having largely treated of Norths, I shall next give some account of Souths.

South Winds are also very violent Winds. I have not heard any thing of these
sorts of Storms, but at Jamaica or by Jamaica Sailers. The time when they blow
at Jamaica is about June, July or August, Months that Norths never blow in. The
greatest stress of Wind in these storms is at South, from whence its probable
they are named Souths. In what they differ from the Hurricanes that rage among
the Carribee Islands, I know not, unless in this, that they are more Constant
to one Point of the Compass, or that they come sooner in the Year than
Hurricanes do, but those Storms called Hurricanes, had never been known at
Jamaica when I was there. Yet since I have heard that they have felt the fury
of them several times. But I was at Jamaica when there happened a violent
South. It made great havoc in the Woods; and blew down many great Trees; but
there was no great damage done by it. Port Royal was in great danger then of
being washed away, for the Sea made a breach clear through the Town; and if the
violence of Weather had continued but a few hours longer, many of the Houses
had been washed away: For the Point of Land on which that Town stands, is Sand;
which began to wash away apace: but the Storm cealing, there was no further
damage. This was in July or August in the Year 1674.

I was afterward in the Bay of Campeachy, when we had a much more violent
Storm than this, called also by the Logwood-Cutters a South. It happened some
time in June 1676.

I was then cutting Logwood in the Western Creek of the West Lagune. Two days
before this storm began, the Wind whiffled about to the South, and back again
to the East, and blew very faintly. The Weather also was very fair, and the
Men-of War-Birds came hovering over the Land in great numbers; which is very
unusal for them to do. This made some of our Logwood-Cutters say, that we
should have some Ships come hither in a short time; for they believed it was a
certain token of the arrival of Ships, when these Birds came thus hovering over
the Land. And some of them said they had lived at Barbados, where it was
generally taken notice of: and that as many of these Birds as they saw hovering
over the Town, so many Ships there were coming thither. And according to that
Rule they foolishly guest that here were a great many Ships coming hither at
that time: Though it is impossible that they could imagine there could be the
hundredth part of the Ships arrive, that they saw Birds fly over their Heads.
But that which I did most admire was, to see the Water keep ebbing for two Days
together, without any flood, till the Creek, where we lived, was almost dry.
There was commonly at low Water 7 or 8 foot Water; but now not above 3, even in
the middle of the Creek.

About 4 a Clock the 2d day after this unusual Ebb, the Sky looked very black,
and the Wind sprung up fresh at S. E. and increasing. In less than two hours
time it blew down all our Huts, but one; and that with much labor we propt up
with Posts, and with Ropes cast over the Ridge, and fastening both ends to
stupms of Trees, we secured the Roof from flying away. In it we huddled
altogether till the storm ceased. It rained very hard the greatest part of the
storm, and about two hours after the Wind first sprang up, the Waters flowed
very fast in. The next Morning it was as high as the Banks of the Creek: which
was higher than I had ever seen it before.

The Flood still increased, and run faster up the Creek than ever I saw it do
in the greatest Springtide; which was somewhat strange, because the Wind was
at South, which is right off the shore on this Coast. Neither did the Rain any
thing a bate, and by 10 a Clock in the Morning the Banks of the Creek were all
overflown. About 12 at Noon we brought our Canoa to the side of our Hut, and
fastened it to the stump of a Tree that stood by it; that being the only refuge
that we could now expect; for the Land a little way within the Banks of the
Creek is much lower than where we were: So that there was no walking through
the Woods because of the Water. Besides, the Trees were torn up by the Roots,
and tumbled down so strangely across each other, that it was almost impossible
to pass through them.

The storm continued all this Day and the Night, following till 10 a Clock:
then it began to abate, and by two in the Morning it was quite calm.

This storm made very strange work in the Woods by tearing up the Trees by the
Roots: The Ships also riding at Trisl and at One-Bush-Key, felt the fury of it
to their sorrow; for of four that were riding at One-Bush-Key, three were
driven away from their Anchors, one of which was blown into the Woods of
Beef-Island. And of the four Ships that were at Trist, three also were driven
from their Anchors, one of which was cast up about 20 Paces beyond high Water
Mark on the Island of Trist. The other two were driven off to Sea; and one of
them was never heard of since.

The poor Fish also suffered extremely by thy storm, for we saw multitudes of
them either cas on the shore, or floating dead on the Lagunes. Ye this storm
did not reach 30 Leagues to Wind-war^ of Trist, for Captain Valley of Jamaica,
went henc^ but 3 days before the storm began, and was no^ past 30 Leagues off
when we had it so fierce, ye^ he felt none of it: But only saw very black
dismal Clouds to the Westward, as he reported at his return from Jamaica to
Trist 4 Months after.

I shall speak next of Hurricanes.

These are violent storms, raging chiefly among the Carribee Islands; though,
by Relation, Jamaica has of late been much annoyed by them; but it has been
since the time of my being there. They are expected in July, August or
September.

These storms also as well as the Norths or Souths, give some signs of their
approach before they come on. I have not been in any one of them my self, but
have made enquiry of many Men that have, and they all agree that either they
are preceded by flattering unusual small Winds and very fair Weather, or by a
great glut of Rain, or else by both Rains and Calms together.

I shall give an Instance of one that gave such warning. It happened at Antego
in August 1681. I had the Relation of it from Mr. John Smallbone, before
mentioned, who was Gunner of a Ship of 120 Tuns and 10 Guns, Commanded by Capt.
Gadbury.

Before this storm it rained two days excessively, then it held up two or three
days more: but the Sky was clouded and appeared to be much troubled, yet but
little Wind. The Planters by this, were certain of a Hurricane, and warned the
Ship-Commanders to provide for it, especially Capt. Gadbury; who had careen'd
his Ship in Muskito Cove in St. John's Harbor, but a little before, and by
this warning given him by the Planters, had gotten his Goods on Board again,
which though all he had, yet was but about half his lading of Sugar, Molosses
and Rum. He also moored his Ship as secure as he could, with all his Cablesand
Anchors, besides some Cables which he had made fast ashore to great Trees. And
about 7 a Clock that evening that the storm came, he dreading it, went ashore
with all his Men, and retired into a poor Planters House about half a Mile from
the shore. By that time he and his Men were arrived at the House, which was
before 8 a Clock; the Wind came on very fierce at N. E. and veering about to
the N. and N. W. settled there, bringing with it very violent Rains. Thus it
continued about four hours, and then fell flat calm, and the Rain ceased.

In this Calm he sent 3 or 4 of his Men down to the Cove to see what condition
the Ship was in, and they found her driven ashore dry on the Sand, lying on one
side, with the Head of her Mast sticking into the Sand; after they had walked
round her and viewed her a while, they returned again to the Capt. to give him
an Account of the Disaster, and made as much haste as they could, because the
Wind began to blow hard at S. W. and it blew so violently before they recovered
the House, that the Boughs of the Trees whipped them sufficiently before they got
thither; and it rained as hard as before. The little House could scarce shelter
them from the wet; for there was little beside the Walls standing: For the 1st
Northerly Gust blew away great part of the Ridg and most of the Thatch. Yet
there they stayed till the next Morning, and then coming to the Ship found her
almost upright; but all the Goods that were in the Hold were washed out, and
the Sugar was washed out of the Cask. Some of the Rum they found; a Cask in one
place and a Cask in another: some on the shore, and some half a Mile in the
Woods; and some stav'd against the Trees and leek'd out; for it seems there had
been a violent Motion in the Sea, as well as in the Air. For in the beginning
of the Night when the N. E. Gust raged, the Sea ebbed so prodigiously, or else
was driven off the shore by the violence of the Wind so far, that some Ships
riding in the Harbor in 3 or 4 fathom Water, were a ground; and lay so till
the S. W. Gust came, and then the Sea came rolling in again with such
prodigious fury, that it not only set them a-float, but dashed many of them on
the shore. One of them was carried up a great way into the Woods: another was
strangely hurled on two Rocks that stood close by one another; with her Head
resting on one Rock, and her Stern on the other: And thus she lay like a Bridge
between the two Rocks, about 10 or 11 Foot above the Sea, even in the highest
Tides; for the Tides do usually rise here but little, not above 2 or 3 Foot,
but in these Hurricanes it always ebbs and flows again prodigiously.

It was not the Ships only that felt the fury of this Storm, but the whole
Island suffered by it; for the Houses were blown down, the Trees tore up by the
Roots, or had their Heads and Limbs sadly shattered, neither was there any
Leaves, Herbs or green Thing left on the Island, but all looked like Winter.
Insomuch that a Ship coming thither a little after, that used that Trade, could
scarce believe it to be the same Island. Neither did the fury of this Storm
light only here, for Nevis and St. Christophers had their shares also; but
Mountsurat felt little of it, though not above a Fortnight after there happened
another Storm, as violent as this, and raged extremely there, but did little
damage at Nevis and St. Christophers. Antego had a great share of this too.
Capt. Gadbury's Ship, that lay a-ground before it came, was by it hurled over
to the opposite part of the Harbor, and there thrown dry on the Sand.

The day after the storm, the shore was strewn with Fish of diverse sorts, as
well great as small; such as Porpoises, Sharks, etc. and abundance of Sea Fowls
also were destroyed by it.

I would not have any Man think that these Hurricanes, or any other Storms, do
always give warning of their coming exactly alike: For there may be some
difference in those signs, though all of them be plain enough if well observed.
Besides sometimes they are duplicated, sometimes only single signs, and
sometimes the signs may be more visible and plain than at other times: when by
some accidental cause those signs may be less visible by Reason of some high
Hill or Mountain that may be interposed between you and the Horizon, especially
if any Hill lies N. E. from you, which is the Quarter that Hurricanes do
commonly rise in.

The Clouds that precede a Hurricane are different from the North Banks, in
this, that whereas the Clouds preceding Norths are uniform and regular; of an
exact blackness even from the Horizon to the upper edg of it, and that as
straight and even as a Line stretched out. On the contrary, the
Hurricane-Clouds tower up their Heads, pressing forwards as if they all strove
for precedence; yet so linked one within another, that all move alike. Besides,
the edges of these Clouds are gilded with various and afrighting Colors, the
very edg of all seems to be of a pale fire color, next that of a dull yellow,
and nearer the Body of the Cloud of a Copper Color, and the Body of the Cloud
which is very thick appears extraordinary Black: and altogether it looks very
terrible and amazing even beyond expression. Though I have never been in any
Hurricane in the West Indies, yet I have seen the very Image of them in the
East Indies, and the effects have been the very same; and for my part I know no
difference between a Hurricane among the Carribee Islands in the West Indies,
and a Tuffoon on the Coast of China in the East Indies, but only the Name* And
I am apt to believe that both Words have one signification, which is a violent
Storm.

I have given a large Account of one of these in my Voyage round the World:
Chapter XV. Page 414. That gave warning by flattering Weather before hand, and
a very dismal Cloud, set out with such colors as I have before described,
rising in the N. E. from whence the violence of the first Gust came, which was
wonderful fierce and accompanied with extraordinary hard Rain; then it
afterward fell calm about an hour, and then the Wind came about at S. W. and
blew as fierce as it did before at N. E. which is much like the Hurricane
beforementioned at Antego, but of a longer continuance than that: Besides, in
both places they blow at one time of the Year, which is in July, August or
September; and commonly near the Full or Change of the Moon.

Another thing that we must also take notice of is, that both Places are North
of the Equator, though not exactly in one Latitude.

But of these Tuffoons I shall say no more now, having described them
particularly in my Voyage to Tonquin, Chap. II. Page 36.

The Monsoons in the East Indies are the next to be treated of; by which I do
not mean the Coasting Trade-wind, so called, which I have already described in
Page 21. of this Discourse; for though [ Monsoon] is a general word for the Wind
there, distinguished by East or West, according to the Points from whence they
blow; yet it sometimes also signifies a Storm, as I now take it. And it is
easy to be understood, when it is used in reference to the Trade-wind, or when
spoken of a Storm; for if applied to a Storm, it is expressed by some ^pethite
going before: As Violent, Terrible, etc. without any distinction of East or
West, which is commonly used in speaking of the Trade-Wind.

These Monsoons or Storms on the Coast of Coromandel are expected either about
April or September, which are accounted the two shifting Months. For in these
two Months the Winds begin to shift and turn from that Point, on which they
have blown several Months before, to the contrary Points of the Compass; as
from East to West, or the contrary: but commonly this shift is attended with a
turbulent Sky, which ends in a violent storm of Wind, or excessive Rains, or
both: And this is called also the breaking up of the Monsoon. It was in one of
these that I past from Nicobar Island to Sumatra, mentioned in my Voyage round
the World, Chap. XVIII. Page 496. This was the April Monsoon.

The September Monsoons are generally more violent than these last: yet by the
Account I have lately had from Fort St. George, they have suffered very much by
one of the April Monsoons (if it may be so called) for it came before its usual
time, even before it could be expected.

As for the September Monsoons, though the time of the Year is so well known, and
the warnings of their approach almost certain; yet our East India Merchants
have had very considerable losses there; for the stress of the Winds blows
right in upon the shore, and often hurries the Ships from their Anchors, and
tosses them in a moment on the sandy Bay.

Indeed the want of a secure Place to Ride in, is the greatest Inconvenience of
that Factory, a Place doubtless designed by the English from its Original to be
the Center of the Trade of these Parts. For all our Factories, and the Trade in
general, East from Cape Comorin, are now subordinate to this.

The Dutch had once a place of Consequence, called Pallacat, on this Coast,
about 20 Leagues to the North of it; but they withdrew most of their Families
and Effects from thence in the Year 1691. mentioned in my Voyage round the
World, Chap. XX. Page 522. And it is very probable that these raging Winds
might be one cause of this their deserting it, whatever was the Motive of
settling here; for they have secure Harbors, and Roads enough in India, which
we to our great disadvantage very much want.

But to return to the Monsoons.

These (as I have told you) blow fiercest in September, and, as I have been
informed, blow on several Points of the Compass.

The stormy Monsoons on the Mallabar Coast differ from these on the Coast of
Coromandel, in that they are more common, and last even from April to
September, which is as long as the common West Monsoon lasts, though not so
frequent and lasting in the beginning of the Monsoon, as toward the latter end.

The Months of July and August afford very bad Weather, for then there is
hardly any intermission; but a continued troubled Sky full of black Clouds
which pour down excessive Rains, and often very fierce Winds. But toward the
breaking up of the Monsoon, they have one very terrible Storm called by the
Portuguese the Eliphanta, which concludes the bad Weather. For after that they
put to Sea without fear of any more Storms that Season.

These violent Winds blow directly in upon the shore; and they dam up the
Harbors on this Coast, especially that of Goa, so that no Ships can go in or
come out then; but after the violent Winds are past, the Channel opens again,
and so continues till the next Season.

This Relation I had from a very ingenious Gentleman who was at Goa during the
bad Weather.

I shall only take notice that these Storms are also at the same time of the
Year, when the Hurricanes and Souths are in the West Indies, and the Tuffoons
on the Coasts of China, Tunqueen, Cochinchina and Cambodia in the Eastern Parts
of the East Indies, and that all these Places are to the North of the Equator.

CHAP. VII. Of the Seasons of the Year.
The Wet and Dry Seasons on the North side of the Equator; and on the South of
it. Places famous for much dry Weather; as part of Peru, and Africa. A
Comparison between those Coasts. Of raining Coasts; as Guinea. Why Guinea more
subject to Rains than the opposite Coast of Brazil. The time of Sugar-making.
Of the Seasons at Suranam. Bays more subject to Rain than Head-Lands. Several
instances of this, as at Campeachy, Panama, Tunqueen, Bengala, etc. Mountains
more subject to Rains than Low Land; An instance of this at Jamaica. The Isle
of Pines near Cuba, a wet Place. So is also Gorgonia in the South Seas. The
manner how Tornadoes arise.

AS Summer and Winter are the two most different Seasons in our Climate; so the
Dry and the Wet are within the torrid Zone; and are always opposite to each
other. They are often called by Europeans Winter and Summer, but more
generally, Dry and Wet.

The Seasons on each side of the Equator, are as different as the Seasons of
Summer and Winter are in temperate Climates, or near each Pole. For as it is
Summer near the North Pole, when it is Winter near the South Pole, and the
contrary: so when it is fair and dry Weather North of the Equator, it is
blustering and rainy Weather South of it, and the contrary; except within a few
degrees of the Line, and that in some places only.

There is also this difference between the Torrid and Temperate Zones, either
North or South of the Equator; that when it is fair and dry Weather in the one,
it is Winter in the other: and when it is wet in the one, it is Summer in the
other. I speak now of Places lying on the same side of the Equator: For as the
Sun when it passes the Equinox, and draws toward either of the Tropicks,
begins to warm their respective Poles, and by how much the nearer he
approaches, by so much is the Air without the Tropicks clear, dry and hot. On
the contrary, within the Torrid Zone (though on the same side of the Line) the
farther the Sun is off, the drier is the Weather. And as the Sun comes nearer,
the sky grows more cloudy and the Weather more moist: for the Rains follow the
Sun, and begin on either side of the Equator, within a little while after the
Sun has crossed the Equinox, and so continue till after his return back again.

The wet Season on the North side of the Equator in the torrid Zone, begins in
April or May, and so continues till September or October.

The dry Weather comes in November or December, and continues till April or May.

In South Latitudes the Weather changes at the same times, but with this
difference, that the dry Months in South Latitude, are wet Months in North
Latitude, and the contrary, as I have said before. Yet neither do the wet or
dry Seasons set in or go out exactly at one time, in all Years; neither are all
places subject to wet or dry Weather alike. For in some places it rains less
than in others; and consequently there is more dry Weather. But generally
Places that lie under the Line, or near it, have their greatest Rains in March
and September.

Head-Lands or Coasts that lie most exposed to the Trade-winds have commonly
the best share of dry Weather. On the contrary, deep Bays or bendings of the
Land, especially such as lie near the Line, are most subject to Rains. Yet even
among Bays or Bendings, there is a great deal of difference in the Weather as
to dry or wet; for the Weather, as well as the Winds seem to be much influenced
by accidental Causes; and those Causes themselves, whatever they are, seem to
be subject to great variation.

But to proceed with Matter of Fact; I shall begin with the driest Coasts; and
first with that of Peru, from 3 d. South 30 d. South. There it never Rains,
neither at Sea for a good distance off shore, as for 250 or 300 Leagues; no nor
on the shore for a considerable way within Land; though exactly how far I know
not; yet there are small Mists, sometimes in a Morning for two or three Hours;
but seldom continuing after 10 a Clock; and there are Dews also in the Night.

This Coast lies N. and S. it has the Sea open to the West, and a chain of very
high Mountains running a long shore on the East, and the Winds constantly
Southerly, as I said before in the second Chapter of Winds.

In which Head I have made a Comparison as well of the Winds on the Coast of
Africa in the same Latitude, as of the lying of the Coasts. Only there is this
difference, that the coasting Trade-winds on the American side do blow further
from the Land than those on the African side. Which difference may probably
arise from the disporportion of the Mountains that are in the two Continents;
for it is known that the Andes in America are some of the highest Mountains in
the World, but whether there are any on the Continent of Africa in those
Latitudes so high, I know not. I have not heard of any, at least none such are
visible to Seamen.

I come now to speak of the Weather on the African Coast, which though it is not
so dry as the Coast of Peru, yet is it the next to it. The Weather there is
very dry from March till October, which is the dry Season.

The rainy Season, which is from October till March, is moderate, without that
excess that is in most other Places in those Latitudes; so that the wettest
Season can only be called so from some gentle showers of Rain.

There are some Tornadoes, but not so many as are in any other Places, both of
the East or West Indies, the Peruvian Coast excepted. And if the height of the
Andes are the cause that the true East Breez does not take place in the
Pacifick Sea, within 200 Leagues distance from the shore, when yet the Trade
blows within 40 Leagues of the African Coast; that Coast may perhaps be
supposed to want such high Mountains. And if those American Mountains do stop
the Winds from their Career, why may they not as well break the Clouds before
they reach near the shore, and be the cause of the dry Weather there? And
seeing both Coasts do lie alike, and the Wind is alike; why should not the
Weather be the same; were it not for the disproportion between the Mountains of
these Coasts? For the East side of those Mountains are supplied with Rain
enough, as may be known by the great Rivers that disembogue from thence into
the Atlantic Sea; whereas the Rivers on the South Sea Coast are but very few
and small; some of which do wholly dry away for a good part of the Year; but
yet they constantly break out again in their Seasons, when the Rains in the
Country do come, which always fall on the West side of those Mountains, and
this is about February.

As I have spoken before of dry Coasts, so now I shall speak of rainy ones. I
shall begin with the Coast of Guinea, from Cape Lopos, which lies one degree
South, taking in the Bite or Bending of the Land, and all the Coast West from
thence, as far as Cape Palmas.

This is a very wet Coast, subject to violent Tornadoes and excessive Rains,
especially in July and August: In those Months there is scarce any fair Day.
This Coast lies all of it very near the Equator, and no where above 6 or 7
degrees distance; so that from its nearness to the Equator only, we might
probably conjecture that it is a rainy Coast; for most places lying near the
Line are very subject to Rains: yet some more than others; and Guinea may be
reckoned among the wettest Places in the World. There may be Places where the
Rains continue longer, but none are more violent while they last.

And as its nearness to the Line may be a great cause of its moisture; so by
its situation also one would guess that it should be subject to a great deal of
Rain; because there is a great Bite or Bending in of the Land, a little to the
North of the Line; and from thence the Land stretches West parallel with the
Line. And the^e Circumstances singly taken, according to my observations do
seldom fail, but more especially where they both meet. Yet there may be other
causes that may hinder those Effects, or at least serve to allay the violence
of them, as they do on some other Coasts. I shall only instance in the opposite
Coast of America between the North Cape, which lies North of the Equator, and
Cape Blanco on Brazil, in South Latitude. Now this Land lies much after the
Form of the Coast of Guinea, with this difference, that one Coast lies in South
Lat. the other lies North of the Equator, both of these Promontories lay
parallel with the Equator, and there is not much difference in their distance
from it; but that which makes the difference is, that one juts out Westward,
the other Eastward; and so one is the very Westermost Land of the Continent of
Africa, the other is the Eastermost Land of the Continent of America: The one
has only an eddy Wind, which seems to me to be the Effect of two contrary
Winds: The other Coast lies open to the Trade, and never wants a Breez. And the
former is troubled with Tornadoes and violent Rains during the wet Season,
which is May, June, July, August and September: But the extremest wet Months
are July and August; when it Rains in a manner continually. April and October
also sometimes are wet Months.

The other Coast on the American Continent, which lies open to the E. and N. E.
or S. E. and which enjoys the freer Trade-Wind, is less subject to Rain; only
as it lies near the Line, it has its part, but not to excess, nor in any
comparison with Guinea. And as the Line is to the N. of it, so its wet Months
are from October till April, and the dry Season from April to October. And
these Seasons reach even to 6 or 7 degrees North of the Line: Which I do not
know to be so in any other part of the World again. Indeed Cape Lopes in
Guinea, is in one degree South, yet participates of the same Weather that the
rest of Guinea has, which lies to the North of the Line.

Now the reason why Europeans do account the dry Season Summer, and the wet
Season Winter, is because the dry Season is their Harvest time, especially in
our Plantations, where we chiefly make Sugar; for then the Canes are as yellow
as Gold. They have then indeed less juice, but that little there is, is very
sweet. Whereas in the wet Season, though the Canes are ripe, and come to their
Maturity; yet do they not yield such quantities of Sugar, neither is it so
good, though the pains in boiling it be also greater. Therefore in Northern
Climates, as all our Plantations are in, they commonly begin to work about
making of Sugar at Christmas, after the dry Season has brought the Canes to a
good perfection. But in South Climates, as on the Coast of Brazil, they begin
to work in July. Some Places there are in the North Latitudes also near the
Line, where the Weather bears time with the Seasons in South Lat. as at
Suranam, which though it is in North Lat. yet are the Seasons there the same as
in South Latitudes; but I know not such another instance any where. And though
the dry Season is the time to gather in the Canes, and the wet Season to plant,
yet are they not so limited as to make use only of these Seasons for either,
but do it chiefly for their best convenience; for they may plant at any time of
the Year, and that with good success, especially after a moderate shower of
Rain, which often happens even in the dry Seasons.

But I must proceed.

I have said before, that Bays have greater quantities of Rain than Head-Lands.

The Bay of Campeachy is a good Instance of this, for the Rains are very great
there, especially in the Months of July and August. On the contrary, the Coast
from Cape Catoch, to Cape Cond^cedo, which lies more exposed to the Trade, has
not near the Rains as the Bay of Campeachy has.

The Bay of Honduras also is very wet, and all that bending Coast from Cape
Gratia de Dios, even to Carthagena. But on the Coast of Caraccos, and about
Cape La Vela, where the Breezes are more brisk, the Weather is more moderate.
Whereas in those little Bays between, there is still a difference: For in the
Bay of Mericaya, which lies a little to the East of Cape La Vela, there is much
more Rain than at or near the Cape.

The Bay of Panama also will furnish us with a proof of this, by its Immoderate
Rains; especially the South side of it, even from the Gulf of St. Michael, to
Cape St. Francis; the Rains there are from April till November; but in June,
July and August, they are most violent.

There are many small Bays also West from the Bay of Panama, which have their
shares of these wet Seasons, as the Gulf of Dulce, Caldera Bay, Amapala, etc.
but to the West of that, where the Coast runs more plain and even, there are
not such wet Seasons; yet many times very violent Tornadoes.

The East Indies also has many Bays that are subject to very violent Rains, as
the Bay of Tonqueen, that of Siam, the bottom and the East side of the Bay of
Bengall. But on the Coast of Coromandel, which is the West Side of that Bay,
the Weather is more moderate; that being an even, plain, low Coast. But on the
Coast of Mallabar, which is on the West side of that Promontory, the Land is
high and mountainous, and there are violent Rains. Indeed the West sides of any
Continents are wetter than the East sides, the Coast of Peru and Africa only
excepted; in the former of which the dryness may be occasioned (as is said
before) by the height of the Andes. And it is probable that the violence of the
Rains near those Mountains falls chiefly on the East-sides of them, and seldom
reaches to their Tops: which yet if the Rains do, they may there be broke in
pieces, and reach no further. For, among other Observations, I have taken
notice, that Mountains are supplied with more Rains than low Lands; I mean the
low Land bordering on the Sea. As for instance, the South side of Jamaica
beginning at Leganea, and from thence away to the Westward, as far as Black
River, including all the plain Land and Savannahs about St. Jago de la Vego,
Old Harbor and Withywood Savannahs. This is a plain level Country for many
Miles lying near East and West, having the Sea on the South, and bounded with
Mountains on the North.

Those Mountains are commonly supplied with Rain before the low Lands. I have
known the Rains to have begun there three Weeks before any has fallen in the
plain Country, bordering on the Sea; yet every Day I have observed very black
Clouds over the Mountains, and have heard it Thunder there. And those very
Clouds have seemed by their Motion to draw toward the Sea, but have been
checked in their Course, and have either returned toward the Mountains again,
or else have spent themselves before they came from thence, and so have
vanished away again, to the great Grief of the Planters, whose Plantations and
Cattle have suffered for want of a little Moisture. Nay, these Tornadoes have
been so nigh, that the Sea Breeze has dyed away, and we have had the Wind fresh
out of the Clouds, yet they have vanished, and yielded no Rain to the low
parched Lands.

And I think that the want of seasonable Showers is one of the greatest
Inconveniences that this part of the Country suffers; for I have known in some
very dry Years, that the Grass in the Savannahs has been burned and withered
for want of Rain, and the Cattle have perished thereby for want of Food. The
Plantations also have suffered very much by it; but such dry Seasons have not
been known on the North-side of the Island, where the Mountains are bordering
on the Sea, or at least but a little distance off it. For there they are
supplied with seasonable Showers almost all the Year, and even in the dry time
it self, near the Full and Change of the Moon. But in the wet Season, the Rains
are more violent, which is their Inconvenience.

As for the Valleys in the Country, they are not subject to such Droughts as
the plain Land by the Sea, at least I have not observed it my self, nor have I
heard it mentioned by others.

The Isle of Pines near Cuba, is so noted a Place for Rain, that the Spaniards
inhabiting near it on Cuba, say, that it Rains more or less every Day in the
Year, at one Place or another. It is generally spoken also and believed by
Privateers, for it has been often visited by them. I have been there my self, but
cannot confirm that Report. However, it is well known to be a very wet and
rainy Place.

It is but a small Island of about 9 or 10 Leagues long, and 3 or 4 broad; and
in the midst is a high picked Mountain, which is commonly clouded; and the
Privateers say that this Hill draws all the Clouds to it; for if there is not
another Cloud to be seen any where else, yet this Hill is seldom or never clear.

Gorgonia in the South Seas also has the same Report. It is much smaller than
Pines. I have mentioned it in my Voyage round the World. Chap. VII. Page 172.

This Isle lies about 4 Leagues from the Main: but the Isle of Pines not above
2, and is a great deal bigger than it. The Main against Gorgonia is very low
Land; but Cuba near Pines is pretty high, and the Mountain of Pines is much
bigger and higher than the Hill of Gorgonia, which yet is of a good height, so
that it may be seen 16 or 18 Leagues off; and though I cannot say that it Rains
every Day there, yet I know that it Rains very much and extraordinary hard.

I have been at this Isle three times; and always ^ound it very rainy, and the
Rains very violent. I remember when we touched there in our return from Capt.
Sharp, we boiled a Kettle of Chocolate before we cleaned our Bark; and having
every Man his Callabash full, we began to sup it off, standing all the time in
the Rain; but I am confident not a Man among us all did clear his Dish, for it
rained so fast, and such great drops into our Callabashes, that after we had
supped off as much Chocolate and Rainwater together as sufficed us, our
Callabashes were still above half full; and I heard some of the Menswear that
they could not sup it up so fast as it rained in: At last I grew tired with
what I had left, and threw it away; and most of the rest did so likewise.

As Clouds do usually hover over Hills and Mountains, so do they also keep near
the Land. I have mentioned something of this in my Voyage round the World,
Chap. X. Page 283. where I have said, that in making Land we commonly find it
Cloudy over the Land, though it is clear every where beside: And this may still
confirm what I have said in the foregoing Discourse, that Hills are commonly
clouded; for high Land is the first discerned by us, and that, as I said
before, is commonly clouded. But now I shall speak how we find the Clouds, when
we are but a little way from Land, either coasting along the shore, or at an
Anchor by it. I hope the Reader will not imagine that I am going to prove that
it never Rains at Sea, or but very little there; for the contrary is known to
every Body, and I have already said in this Discourse of Winds in my first
Chapter, That there are very frequent Tornadoes in several Seas, especially
near the Equator, and more particularly in the Atlantic Sea. Other Seas are
not so much troubled with them; neither is the Atlantic so to the North or
South of the Line; especially at any considerable distance from the shore, but
yet it is very probable however, that the Sea has not so great a portion of
Tornadoes as the Land has. For when we are near the shore within the Torrid
Zone, we often sec it Rain on the Land, and perceive it to be very cloudy
there, when it is fair at Sea, and scarce a Cloud to be seen that way. And though
we have the Wind from the Shore, and the Clouds seeming to be drawing off, yet
they often wheel about again to the Land, as if they were Magnetically drawn
that way: Sometimes indeed they do come off a little; but then they usually
either return again or else insensibly vanish; and that is the Reason that
Seamen when they are sailing near the Shore and see a Tornado coming off, they
don't much mind it, but cry, The Land will devour it: But however, sometimes
they fly off to Sea; and it is very rare that Tornadoes arise from thence; for
they generally rise first over the Land, and that in a very strange manner; for
even from a very small Cloud arising over the top of a Hill, I have often seen
it increase to such a bulk, that I have known it Rain for 2 or 3 Days
successively. This I have observed both in the East and West Indies, and in the
South and North Seas. And it is impossible for me to forget how often I have been
disturbed by such small Clouds that appeared in the Night. It Is usual with
Seamen in those parts to sleep on the Deck, especially for Privateers; among
whom I made these Observations. In Privateers, especially when we are at an
Anchor, the Deck is spread with Mats to lie on each Night. Every Man has one,
some two; and this with a Pillow for the Head, and a Rug for a Covering, is all
the Bedding that is necessary for Men of that Employ.

I have many times spread my Lodging, when the Evening has promised well, yet
have been forced to withdraw before Day; and yet it was not a little Rain that
would afright me then; neither at its first coming could I have thought that
such a small Cloud could afford so much Rain: And oftentimes both my self and
others have been so deceived by the appearance of so small a Cloud, that
thinking the Rain would soon be over, we have lain till we were dropping wet,
and then have been forced to move at last. But to proceed.

I have constantly observed, that in the wet Season we have had more Rain in
the Night than in the Day; for though it was fair in the Day, yet we seldom
escaped having a Tornado or two in the Night. If we had one in the Day, it rose
and came away presently, and it may be we had an Hour's Rain, more or less; but
when it came in the Night, though there was little appearance of Rain, yet we
should have it 3 or 4 hours together; but this has commonly been nigh the
Shore; and we have seen thick Clouds over the Land, and much Thunder and
Lightning; and to our appearance, there was more Rain there than we had; and
probably out farther off at Sea, there might be still less, for it was commonly
pretty clear that way.

CHAP. VIII. Of Tides and Currents.
The difference between Tides and Currents. No place in the Ocean without
Tides. Where the Tides are greatest and where smallest. Of the Tides in the
Harbor and Lagunes of Trist; in the Bay of Campeachy. Of those between the
Capes of Virginia. The Tides in the Gulf of St. Michael; and the River of
Guiaquil, in the South Sea. A mistaken Opinion of a Subterranean Communication
between the North and South Seas, under the Isthmus of Darien. Of the Tides at
the Gallapagos Islands; at Guam, one of the Ladrones; about Panama; In the
Gulf of Dulce and Necoya River; on the Coast of Peru, in the West Indies; and
at Tonqueen; where, and at New-Holland, they are very irregular. A guess at the
Reason of so great an irregularity. Of the Tides between the Cape of Good Hope
and the Red Sea. Of Currents. They are influenced by the Trade-Wind. Instances
of them at Berbadoes, etc. at Cape la Vela, and Gratia de Dios. Cape Roman.
Isle Trinidado, Surinam; Cape Blanco; between Africa and Brazil. Of
Counter-Currents. Of Currents in the Bay of Campeachy; and of Mexico; in the
Gulf of Florida. Of the Cacuses. No strange thing for the surface of the Water
to run Counter to its lower Parts. Of the Currents on the Coa^ of Angola;
Eastward of the Cape of Good Hope: On the Coast of India, North of the Line:
And in the South Sea.

HAving treated of the Winds and Seasons of the Year in the Torrid Zone, I now
come to speak of the Tides and Currents there.

And by the way Note. That,

By Tides I mean Flowings and Ebbings of the Sea, on or off from any Coast.
Which property of the Sea seems to be Universal, though not regularly alike on
all Coasts, neither as to Time nor the height of the Water.

By Currents I mean another Motion of the Sea, which is different from Tides in
several Respects, both as to its Duration, and also as to its Course.

Tides may be compared to the Sea and Land-Breezes, in respect to their keeping
near the shore; though indeed they alternately flow and ebb twice in 24 hours.
Contrarily the Sea Breezes blow on the shore by Day, and the Land Winds off
from it in the Night, yet they keep this Course as duly in a manner as the
Tides do. Neither are the Tides, nor those Breezes, far from the Land.

Currents may be compared to the Coasting Trade-Winds, as keeping at some
farther distance from the shore, as the Trade-winds do; and it is probable they
are much influenced by them.

It Is a general belief, especially among Seamen, That the Tides are governed by
the Moon: That their Increase and Decrease, as well as their Diurnal Motions,
are influenced by that Planet; though sometimes accidental Causes in the Winds
may hinder the true regularity thereof.

We are taught, as the first Rudiments of Navigation, to shift our Tides; i. e.
to know the Time of full Sea in any Place; which indeed is very necessary to be
known by all English Sailors, because the Tides are more regular in our
Channel, than in other parts of the World.

But my subject being to speak of the Tides within, or near the Tropic, I
leave those in places nearer England to be discoursed on by Coasters, who are
the only knowing Men in this Mystery: They having by Experience gained more
knowledge in it than others; and that is always the best Master.

I have not been on any Coast in the World, but where the Tides have ebbed and
flowed, either more or less; and this I have commonly observed, that the
greatest Indraughts of Rivers or Lagunes, have commonly the strongest Tides.
Contrarily such Coasts as are least supplied with Rivers or Lakes have the
weakest Tides; at least they are not so perceptible. Where there are great
Indraughts either of Rivers or Lagunes, and those Rivers or Lagunes are wide,
though the Tide runs very strong into the Mouths of such Rivers or Lagunes, yet
it does not flow so high as in such Places where the Rivers or Lakes are
bounded in a narrow Room, though the Tides do run of an equal strength at the
Mouths o^ Entrances of either. Neither do the Tides flow so much on or about
Islands remote from the main Land, as they do on the Coasts of it.

I shall first give some Instances of these general Observations, and then
proceed to Particulars.

The Places that I shall mention shall be such as I have been in my self, and
where I have made the Observations before mentioned; I shall begin with the
Lagune of Triest, in the Bay of Campeachy.

This Place is very remarkable, in that it has two Mouths of a considerable
bigness; the one is about a Mile and half wide, and about two Mile through,
before you come to a Lagune, which is seven o^ eight Leagues long, and three
wide. The other Mouth is 7 Leagues from it, and is about 2 Mile and half, or 3
Miles wide, and about 2 Miles long before it opens into the Lagune. Besides,
farthe^ within Land there are 3 or 4 more Lagunes les^ than the former.

The Tides that flow or ebb in all the Lagunes pass in or out at the two Mouths
beforementioned, which makes them run very swift, insomuch, that the Spaniards
have named that Great Lagune Laguna Termina, or, the Lake of Tides; because the
Tides are so very strong in those two Mouths. Yet, though the Tides do run so
swift at the Mouth of the Lagune, they do not rise in height proportionable to
that swiftness; for the greatest Tides here do not rise or fall above 6 or 7
Foot, except forced by extraordinary Causes, as Storms, or the like: Of which I
have spoken before.

I could also instance in the Channel; between the 2 Capes of Virginia, where
the Tides do run very swift; yet the Floods and Ebbs are not proportionable to
the swiftness of the Tides between the Capes. There are not indeed such
Lagunes, as at Triest in the Bay of Campeachy; but there are many wide Rivers,
and abundance of smaller Creeks. Besides, in some places there is low Land,
which is overflown by the Tides; so that all the Water that runs in with such
swiftness within the Capes is insensibly swallowed up there.

These are instances of strong Tides, occasioned by great Indraughts; yet where
there is but little Rising and Falling of the Water in comparison with the
strength of the Tides at the Mouths of those Indraughts ^ shall next give some
Instances of the great Indraughts, where the Tides flow and ebb much more than
in the former Places; though the Tide at the Mouths of those Indraughts does not
run swi^^e^ than in those Places beforementioned.

I shall only mention two Rivers in the South Sea, that I have taken Notice of
in my Voyage round the World, (viz.) the Gulf of St. Michael; and the River of
Guiaquill.

In the Gulf of St. Michael there are many large Rivers, which all disembogue
into a Lagune of 2 or 3 Leagues wide. This Lagune is barricadoed from the Sea
with some small low Mangrovy Islands, and between them are Creeks and Channels,
through which the Tides make their daily passes into the Lagune; and from
thence into the Rivers, and so back again; many times overflowing the said
Islands, and leaving the tops of the lower Trees above Water.

The Rivers that run into this Lagune are pretty narrow and bounded on each
side with steep Banks, as high as the Floods use to rise, and but very little
higher. For at High Water, and on a Springtide, the Water is almost, or
altogether even with the Land.

The Lagune at the Mouth of the Rivers is but small, neither is there any other
way for the Water to force it self into, beside the Lagune and Rivers; and
therefore the Tides do rise and fall here 18 or 20 Foot.

The River of Guiaquil, in this respect, is much the same with the Gulf of St.
Michael; but the Lagunes near it are larger. Here the Tides rises and fall 16
Foot perpendicular.

I don't know of any other such Places in all the South Seas; yet there are
other large Rivers on the Coast, between these Places; but none so remarkable
for high Tides. The great Tides in the Gulf of St. Michael have doubtless been
the occasion of that Opinion, which some hold, that there is a subterranean
Communication between the North and the South Seas; and that the Isthmus of
Darien is like an Arched Bridge, under which the Tides make their constant
Courses, as duly as they do under London Bridge. And more to confirm this
Opinion some have said, that there are continual and strange Noises made by
those Subterranean Fluxes and Refluxes; and that they are heard by the
Inhabitants of the Isthmus; and also that Ships sailing in the Bay of Panama
are tossed to and fro at a prodigious rate: Sometimes (say they) they are by
the boiling of the Water, dashed against Islands; and in a moment left dry
there, or staved in pieces; at other times they are drawn or sucked up, as
'twere, in a Whirl-pool, and ready to be carried under Ground into the North
Seas, with all Sails standing. They have said also, that when the Tide flows,
especially on a Spring, the Islands in the Bay are all over-flown; nay, and
even the Country for a great way together: and then nothing is to be seen but
the tops of Trees. But if this were so, it is much that I, and those that I was
with, should not have heard or seen something of it: For I passed the Isthmus
twice, and was 23 Days in the last Trip that I made over it; but yet did I
never hear of any Noises under Ground there. I sailed also in the South Seas
(taking in both times that I was there) near 3 Years: and several Months of it
I was in the Bay of Panama. And after I went away, those of our Crew, that
remained there, spent a great deal more time in that Bay. Yet did they never
meet with such strange Whirl-Pools, but found as pleasant sailing there, as any
where in the World. Neither did I ever hear any of the Spaniards or Indians
make mention of any such thing in all my Converse with them; which certainly
they would have done, if they had ever experienced it, had it been only to
terrify us, and scare us away from their Coasts.

I remember indeed our Countryman Mr. Gage, gives some hints of these strange
Currents in this Bay, in his Book, called, A New Survey of the West Indies,
from p. 538 to 440. but I am afraid he took most of it upon trust from others;
or else he was Sea-sick all that little Voyage: for he gives a very imperfect
and lame Account of that Business, as if he understood not what he wrote. I
should dislike his whole Book for that one stories sake, if I did not know that
he has writ heartily upon other Matters; but I think I have said enough of
this. To proceed then.

As to the great Tides, which are reported to be in these Seas, I have given
instances of them, but they are not so great as is reported; neither do they
ebb and flow so much any where as in the Gulf of St. Michael only: where
indeed they flow over those small low Mangrove Islands, at the Mouth of the
Lagune, and leave only the tops of the low Trees above Water, for those Islands
are very low, neither do they afford any high Trees. But however, the Islands
at the Mouth of the Gulf, before you come to these low ones, are near
overflown; yet are they very small and low, in comparison with other Islands in
the Bay of Panama. And indeed, should the Islands in that Bay be overflown, the
City of Panama would soon be many Yards under Water. But so far is this from
being true, that the Pearl Islands, which are very flat and low, are yet never
overflown. For there the Tide rises and falls not above 10 or 11 Foot on a
Spring, at the Southermost end of them, which is almost opposite to the Gulf
of St. Michael, and not above 12 or 14 Leagues distant from it. And yet there
it flows more than it does at or near Panama, or any other Place in the Bay
(except just at the Mouths of Rivers) by 2 or 3 Foot. Therefore all that report
is wholly groundless.

But to go on.

I have also observed, that Islands lying afar off at Sea, have seldom such
high Tides as those that are near the Main, or as any Places on the Main it
self; as for example, at the Gallapagos Islands, which lie about 100 Leagues
from the Main; the Tides don't rise and fall above a Foot and half, or two
Foot, which is less than they do on the Coast of the Main. For on most places
of the Main it rises and falls 2 or 3 Foot, more or less, according as the
Coast is more or less exposed to Indraughts or Rivers.

Guam, one of the Ladrone Islands, is also another instance of this. There the
Tide rises not above 2 or 3 Foot at most. In the Bay of Panama the Tides do
keep a more constant and regular Course than on other places on the Coasts of
Peru and Mexico; it was for that reason I called them Currents in some places
(mentioned in my Voyage round the World, as particularly near Guatuloa, on the
Mexican Continent, in Chap. IX. Page 238.) but it was truly a Tide (which there
I called a Current) and it sets to the Eastward as the Ebb does to the West.
The Tides there do rise and fall about 5 Foot, as they do on most parts of that
Coast.

At Ria Leja they rise and fall about 8 or 9 Foot.

At Amapala they also rise and fall about 8 or 9 Foot, and the Flood there runs
to the East, and the Ebb to the West.

In the Gulf of Dulce and Neicoya River, they rise to 10 or 11 Foot; but on
the Coast of Peru they don't rise so high, especially on all the Coast between
Cape St. Francis and the River Guiaquil; there the Flood runs to the South, and
the Ebb to the North.

At the Island Plata the Tide rises and falls 3 or 4 Foot; but from Cape
Blanco, in about 3 d. South, to 30 d. South, the Tides are smaller; there they
rise and fall not above a Foot and a half, or 2 Foot. The Flood on this Coast
sets to the South, and the Ebb to the North.

In all my Cruisings among the Privateers, I took notice of the risings of the
Tides; because by knowing it, I always knew where we might best hall ashore and
clean our ships: which is also greatly observed by all Privateers.

In most Places of the West Indies, the Tide flows but little over what it does
in our Channel.

In the East Indies also the Tides are but small on most Coasts, neither are
they so regular as with us.

The most irregular Tides that I did ever meet with, are at Tonqueen in about
20d. North Latitude, and on the Coast of New Holland, in about 17d. South. In
both these places, the neap Tides are scarce discernable. Those of Tonqueen are
described at large by Mr. Davenport, who was imp^oyed by Mr. James when he was
chief of the English Factors there, to observe them: And the whole Discourse is
published in The Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society: whither I
refer you.

At New Holland I had two Months time to observe the Tides. There the Flood
runs E. by N. and the Ebb W. by S. And they rise and fall about five Fathom.

In all the Springs that we lay here, the highest were 3 Days after the Full or
Change, and that without any perceptible Cause in the Winds or Weather. I must
confess we were startled at it; and though some of us had observed it in the
Springs, that happened while we lay on the Sand to clean our Ship, (as I have
mentioned in my former Volume, ^ntituled, A New Voyage round the World. Chapter
XVI. Page 471.) yet in that Spring that we designed to hall off, in order to be
gone from thence, we did all take more particular notice of it than in the
preceding Springs; for many had not taken notice of it before: And therefore
the Major part of the Company, supposing that it was a mistake in us who made
those former Observations, expected to hall off the Ship the third Tide after
the Change; but our Ship did not float then, nor the next Tide neither, which
put them all into an amazement, and a great Consternation too: For many thought
we should never have got her off at all, but by digging away the Sand; and so
clearing a Passage for her into the Sea. But the sixth Tide cleared all those
doubts; for the Tide then rose so high, as to float her quite up; when being
all of us ready to work we hall'd her off; and yet the next Tide was higher
than that, by which we were now all thoroughly satisfied, that the Tides here do
not keep the same time as they do in England.

This I must also observe, That here was no River, nor Lagune, nor any other
Indraught on the Land near us, that might occasion these great Tides; though it is
very probable that the great Bending between New Holland and New Guinea, may
have both Rivers and Lagunes, which may cause these great Tides; or else there
may be a Passage of the Sea between both Places; as it is laid down in some
Draughts: Or if neither of these, there may be at least a large and deep Sound.

This is the more probable, because of the extraordinary Flood that sets to the
Eastward in all that Sea, between New Holland, and the Islands lying North of
it, which we most sensibly perceived, when we were near New Holland: And such a
Tide as this must of necessity have a greater Indraught than barely a River or
Lagune; and it is the more likely still, that this Tide should have a Passage
through between New Holland and New Guinea, or at least a deep Sound there;
because it keeps along by the Main, and does not run in among the Islands to
the North of it. And besides, the Northermost Promontory of New Holland shoots
down almost to the Line, which seems to be a Barrier to it on that side;
therefore it may in reason be supposed to have its Passage some other way; but
of this guess, I have said enough.

In the Streights of Malacca the Flood sets to the East, and the Ebb to the
West.

I have found the Tides at Malacca Town, to rise and fall about six Foot on a
Spring. I had the Experience of two Spring-Tides, when I was Captain Minchins
Mate, as is beforementioned in my Voyage from Achin to Malacca.

On the East side of the African Coast, between the Cape of good Hope and the
Red Sea; the Tide keeps its constant Course. The Flood runs to the Southward;
the Ebb to the Northward. And at a Springtide in the Rivers on that Coast,
the Tide rises and falls six Foot, especially in the River of Natal, in Lat. 30
d. South.

I have this Relation from Capt. Rogers, who is a very Ingenious Person, and
well experienced on that Coast; and is now gone Commander of a small Vessel
thither to Trade.

Having already largely treated of Tides, I come now to speak somewhat of
Currents.

CUrrents and Tides differ many ways; for Tides run forward, and back again,
twice every 24 Hours: on the contrary Currents run a Day, a Week, nay,
sometimes more, one way: and then, it may be, run another way.

In some particular Places they run six Months one way, and six Months another.

In other Places they constantly run one way only a day or two, about full
Moon, and then they run strong against the former Course; and after that,
return the same way again:

In some Places they run constantly one way, and never shift at all.

The force of Tides is generally felt near the shore; whereas Currents are at a
remote distance; neither are the Effects of them sensibly discerned by the
rising or falling away of the Water as those of the Tides are; for these
commonly set along shore.

It Is generally observed by Seamen, that in all Places where Trade-winds blow,
the Current is influenced by them, and moves the same way with the Winds; but
it is not with a like swiftness in all Places; neither is it always so
discernable by us in the wide Ocean, as it is near to some Coast; and yet it is
not so discernable neither, very near any Coast, except at Capes and
Promontories, that shoot far forth out into the Sea; and about Islands also the
Effects of them are felt more or less, as they lie in the way of the
Trade-Winds.

I shall Instance Barbados for one, and all the Carribbes may as well be
included.

The greater Islands as Hispaniola, Jamaica and Cuba have only some particular
Capes or Head-Lands, exposed to Currents, as Cape Tiberoon on Hispaniola, Point
Pedro, and the N. E. Point of Jamaica, Cape de Cruz, Cape Corientes, and Cape
Antonios on Cuba: But of all the Islands in the West Indies there are none more
sensible of Currents than Corrisao and Aruba, nor any Capes on the Continent so
remarkable for Currents as Cape Roman, which shoots out against the Sea,
between those two Places, as also Cape Coquibaco and Cape La Vela to Leeward,
all three on the same Head-Land, which shoots forth far, without any other Land
on the Coast.

There is no such Head-Land till you come to Cape Gratia de Dios, which is
about 260 Leagues to Leeward. Indeed to the Eastward there is Land that trends
out almost so far, within 150 Leagues of it: (Viz.) The Island Trinidado and
the Land against it; and there also are great Currents. But I shall first speak
of the Currents between Cape La Vela and Cape Gratia de Dios.

The Currents at Cape La Vela do seldom shift, therefore Ships that ply to
Wind-ward to get about it, do not ply near the shore, but stand off to Sea,
till they come in sight of Hispaniola, and then back again, till within about 6
or 8 Leagues of the Cape, but not nearer. But in the Westerly Wind-Season,
which is from October till March, Ships often meet Westerly Winds that last two
or three Days with which they may run to the Eastward, without any trouble.

Between Cape La Vela and Cape Gratia de Dios, the Currents are much different
from what they are against the Cape: and this seems to proceed from the make of
the Land; for the shore between the two Capes, runs into the Southward, making
(...) great Bay: And this Bay affords more varieties (...) Winds and Currents,
than any one part of the West Indies besides.

Here, in the Westerly Wind-Season, the Current sets to the Westward
constantly; but sometimes stronger than at other times. At about four Leagues
off shore, you find it, and so it continues till you are 20, -- 25, -- or 30
Leagues off. Beyond that you meet with an Easterly Wind; and if there is any
Current it runs also to the Westward: therefore Ships that are bound to the
Westward, must run off to Sea Thirty or Forty Leagues to get a Wind, or else if
they have but a little way to go, they must ply close under the shore, that so
they may Anchor when they please: Otherwise they will be carried away to the
Eastward, Fourteen or Sixteen Leagues in a Nights time; and that too, though they
have a faint Easterly Wind, as frequently they meet with, though it is the
Westerly Wind-Season.

To the East of Cape Roman, as high as the Island Trinidado, you meet only a
soaking faint Current, setting to the Westward, except only near such places as
shoot out farthest into the Sea, as about the Testegos, which are small Islands
lying to Wind-ward of the Island Margarita. Between those Islands and the Main,
you meet with a pretty strong Current: therefore it is hard getting to the
Eastward there; but on all the Coast, between Cape Roman and the Head-Land,
shooting out toward the Testegos, you may ply up with the Land and Sea-Breezes.

From thence, till you come as high as the East End of Trinidado Isle, you meet
with an extraordinary strong Current.

From the East End of Trinidado, till you come to Surinam, though you meet an
Easterly Current, yet it is possible to beat it up with the Land and Sea-Breezes.

From Surinam also to Cape Blanco, you may turn it up, though to be sure you will
meet with Currents setting to the West; except near the Full of the Moon; and
then on all the Coasts before mentioned, we commonly meet with Currents,
setting to the Eastward; at least then it slackens and stands still, if it does
not run to the Eastward. But when you are come as far to the East as Cape
Blanco, on the North of Brazil, you meet with a Current always against you; and
so from thence Southerly, as far as Cape St. Augustine.

There is no dealing with this Promontory; for it shoots out so far into the
Sea, and thereby lies so exposed to the Sea-Breezes and the Currents, that soak
down between Africa and Brazil, that it is quite contrary to reason to think
there should not always be a strong Current setting to the N. W

I have before hinted, That in all Places where the Trade blows, we find a
Current setting with the Wind, which is not so perceptible in the wide Sea as
nearer the Shores; yet even there the force of the Winds constantly blowing one
way, may, and probably does, move the surface of the Water along with it.

From hence it may be inferred, that the Southerly Winds on the Coast of
Africa, and the true Trade between it and Brazil, gently move the surface of
the Sea with it, and the Trade being mostly at S. E. drives the Sea to the
Northward, slanting in on the Coast of Brazil; which being there stopped by the
Land, bends its Course Northerly toward Cape St. Augustine: And after it has
doubled that great Promontory, it falls away more gently toward the Coast of
Surinam; and from thence toward the West Indies. For after it has doubled
that Promontory, it has more room to spread it self, and thereby becomes weaker
in motion, being agitated by the Trade-winds, which to the North of the Line,
we find commonly blowing at E. N. E and this still bears the Sea slanting down
along the Coast to the Westward. And probably it is for this reason, that we
find the Current setting strongest near those Head-Lands beforementioned.
Whereas at Barbados, and other of the Caribbee Islands, we find only a soaking
Current, such as seems to arise only from the constancy of the Trade-winds
blowing there, and not from an original Current, from the South part of the
Atlantic: which, as I said before, doubles about Cape St. Augustine, and so
Coasts along pretty nigh the shore.

The Currents about the Island Trinidado, and at Currisao and Aruba, as also
between them and Cape Roman seem to indicate as much. The Currents also between
Cape Roman, and Cape La Vela indicate the same.

From Cape La Vela the Currents set still to the Westward, toward Cape Gratia
de Dios; but in a direct Line, and not borrowing or slanting in toward the
shore. For, as I said before, it is a large Bay, and Currents commonly set from
one Head-Land to another; so that Bays have seldom any; or if they have, they
are only Counter Currents. And these Counter Currents too do set from one Point
to another, without interfering with the little Bays between. And it is also
very probable that these Counter Currents, suchas we meet with in this Bay, in
their Seasons, after they have surrounded the Bay, and are got as far to the
East as Cape La Vela, wheel off there, and turn about again with the Stream to
the Westward, like an Eddy in a River.

From Cape Gratia de Dios the Current sets away N. W. toward Cape Catoch, and
so passes away to the Northward, between Cape Catoch on Jucatan, and Cape
Antonio on Cuba.

In the Channel between those two Capes, we commonly find a strong Current
setting to the Northward: And here I have found them extraordinary strong.

On the North side of Jucatan, as you pass into the Bay of Campeachy, you meet
with a small soaking Current to the Westward, even down to the bottom of the
Bay of Mexico; but on the North side of the Bay of Mexico the Current sets to
the Eastward: And it is probable that is the reason, that the Spaniards, coming
from La Vera Cruz, keep that shore aboard. And it is as probable that the
Current, which sets to Leeward, on all the Coast from Cape St. Augustine to
Cape Catoch, never enters the Bay of Mexico; but bends still to the Northward,
till it is checked by the Florida shore; and then wheels about to the East, till
it comes nearer the Gulphs Mouth, and there joining with the soaking Current
that draws down on the North sides of Hispaniola and Cuba, passes altogether
with great strength through the Gulf of Florida, which is the most remarkable
Gulf in the World for its Currents; because it always sets very strong to the
North. Yet near the shores on each side this Gulf, there are Tides, especially
on the Florida shore; and Ships may pass which way they please, if they are
acquainted.

It has formerly been accounted very dangerous to meet with a North in this
Gulf; and for that (...) our Jamaica Ships to avoid them, have rather chosen
to go to the Eastward, and pass through the Cacuses in the Season that the
Norths do blow. The Cacuses are Sands that lie off the N. W. end of Hispaniola.
Those that went from Port Royal in Jamaica had good Reason for this; for if a
North took them at their going out, it would help them forward in their way,
which, should they have been going toward the Gulf, it would obstruct them.
Then besides, if a North take a Ship in the Gulf, the Wind blowing against the
Current makes an extraordinary Sea, and so thick come the Waves one after
another that a ship cannot possibly live in it; yet of late they go through at
all times of the Year, and if a North takes them in the Gulf, they put a way
right before the Wind and Sea, with a small Head-Sail; yet the Current is then
as strong or stronger then at other times; and forces them back, stern foremost
against both Wind and Sea: For though the surface of the Sea is raised in Waves
and driven violently with the Winds to the Southward, yet the Current
underneath runs still to the Northward; neither is it any strange thing to see
two different Currents at one place and time, the superficial Water running one
way, and that underneath running a quite contrary: For sometimes at an Anchor,
I have seen the Cable carried thus by two different Streams, the under part
having been doubled one way, and the upper part the contrary. But it is certain,
in all other parts of the World, the Current shifts at certain times of ^he
Year; As in the East Indies they run from East to West one part of the Year,
and from West to East the other part: Or as in the West Indies and Guinea,
where they shift only near a Full Moon. This is meant of parts of the Sea near
any Coast; yet there are strong Currents in the wide Ocean also, setting
contrary to the Rules before-going: I mean against the Trade; but it is not
common.

On the Coast of Guinea the Current sets East, except at or near a Full Moon;
but to the South of the Line from Loango, to 25 or 30 d. the Current ^ets with
the Wind from S. to N. except near the Full.

To the Eastward of the Cape of good Hope, from 20 d. South, to 24 d. South,
the Currents from May ^ill Oct. set E. N. E. and the Winds then are at W. S. W.
or S. W. but from Oct. till May, when the Winds are between the E. N. E. and E.
S. E. the Currents run to the West. These Currents are thus found from 5 or 6
Leagues off the shore to about 50. Within 5 Leagues off the shore you have the
Tide, and not a Current; and being past 50 Leagues off shore, the Current
either cease quite, or is imperceptible.

On the Coast of India, North of the Line, the Current sets with the Monsoon,
but does not shift altogether so soon, sometimes not by 3 Weeks or more, and
then never shifts again till after the Monsoon is settled in the contrary way.
As for Example, the West Monsoon sets in the middle of April, but the Current
does not shift till the beginning of May: So when the East Monsoon sets in
about the middle of September, the Current does not shift till October.

In the South Seas on the Coast of Peru, the Current sets from South to North,
even from 30 d. to the Line, and to 3 or 4 d. North of it.

At the Gallapagos Islands we found a soaking Current, not very strong, but so
strong that a ship could get very little by turning; and it is probable that
nearer the Main, they are stronger because of the constant Southerly Winds.

The most remarkable Places for Currents in the South Seas; are, Cape St.
Francis, Cape Passao, Cape St. Laurence and Cape Blanco. This last has commonly
very strong Currents setting to the N. W. which hinders ships mightily; and the
more because ^t is a very windy place; so that many times ships are not able to
carry their Topsails; and then it is but ^ad plying to Wind-ward against a
Current. I had not so much Experience of the Mexican Coast, because we commonly
kept within the Verge of the Tides. But on the Coast of Guatamala, in the Lat.
of 12 d. 50 m. and 13 d. we had a Current setting S. VV. and it is probable
that there also the Current sets with the Winds. For, as it is before noted,
the Currents on all Coasts sets as the coasting Trade does.

And thus have I finished what my own Experience, or Relations from my Friends,
have furnished me with on this useful Subject of Winds, Tides, Currents, etc.
which I humbly offer, not as a complete and perfect account, but as a rude and
imperfect Beginning or Specimen of what may better be done by abler Hands
hereafter. And I hope this may be useful so far as to give a few hints to
direct the more accurate Observations of others.

The following Paper, containing a short Description of a part of Africa that
is not well known to Europeans, I thought would not be unacceptable to the
curious Reader. I have therefore annexed it, as I received from my ingenious
Friend Capt. Rogers, who is lately gone to that Place: and has been their
several times before.
THE Country of Natal takes about 3 d. and half of Lat. from N. to S. lying
between the lat of 31 d. 30 m. South and 28 N. It Is bounded on the S. by a
Country inhabited by a small Nation of Savage People, called by our English,
Wildbush Men, that live in Caves and in holes of Rocks, and have no other
Houses, but such as are formed by Nature; They are of a low stature, tauny
colour^d, with crisped Hair: They are accounted very cruel to their Enemies.
Their Weapons are Bows and Poisoned Arrows. These People have for their
Neighbors on the S. the Hottantots. Dellagoa is a Navigable River in Lat. 28
S. that bounds Natal on the N. The Inhabitants of this River have a Commerce
with the Portuguese of Mozambique, who often visit them in small Barks, and trade
there for Elephants Teeth; of which they have great plenty. Some English too
have lately been there to purchase Teeth, particularly Capt. Freak, just
mentioned in my former Volume, Chapter 23. P. 51c. who after he had been in the
River of Dellagoa, and purchased 8 or 10 Tun of Teeth, lost his Ship on a Rock
near Madagascar. The Country of Natal lies open to the Indian Sea on the East,
but how far back it runs to the Westward is not yet known.

That part of the Country which respects the Sea is plain Champion and Woody;
but within Land it appears more uneven, by Reason of many Hills which rise in
unequal Heights above each other Yet is it interlaced with pleasant Valleys and
large Plains, and it is checkered with Natural Groves and Savannahs. Neither is
there any want of Water; for every Hill affords little Brooks, which glide down
several ways; some of which, after several turnings and windings, meet by
degrees and make up the River of Natal, which discharges it self into the
East-Indian Ocean in the Lat. of 30 d. South. There it opens pretty wide and is
deep enough for small Vessels. But at the Mouth of the River is a Bar which has
not above 10 or 11 foot Water on it in a Springtide; though within there is
Water enough. This River is the principal of the Country of Natal, and has been
lately frequented by some of our English Ships particularly by a small Vessel
that Captain Rogers, formerly mentioned, commanded.

There are also other Streams and Rivers, which bend their Courses Northerly,
especially one of a considerable bigness about 100 Mile within Land, and which
runs due North.

The Woods are composed of diverse sorts of Trees; many of which are very good
Timber, and fit for any uses, they being tall and large. The Savannahs also are
clothed with kindly thick Grass.

The Land-Animals of this Country are Lions, Tigers, Elephants, Buffaloes,
Bullocks, Deer, Hogs, Conies, etc. Here are also abundance of Sea-Horses.

Buffaloes and Bullocks only are kept tame, but the rest are all wild.

Elephants are so plenty here that they feed together in great Troops; 1000 or
1500 in a Company; Mornings and Evenings they are seen grazing in the
Savannahs, but in the heat of the Day, they retire into the Woods, and they are
very peaceable if not molested.

Dears are very numerous here also. They feed quietly in the Savannahs among
the tame Cattle, for they are seldom disturbed by the Natives.

Here are Fowls of diverse sorts; some such as we have in England, viz. Duck and
Teal, both tame and wild: and plenty of Cocks an d Hens. Besides abundance of
wild Birds, wholly unknown to us.

Here are a sort of large Fowls as big as a Peacock, which have many fine
colored Feathers. They are very rare and shy.

There are others like Curlews, but bigger. The flesh ^ these is black, yet
sweet and wholesome Meat.

The Sea and Rivers also do abound in Fish of diverse sorts yet the Natives do
but seldom endeavor to take any, exce^ Tortoises; and that is chiefly when
they come ashore in th Night to lay their Eggs. Though they have also anothe
very odd way, which they sometimes make use of to cat^ Turtle or Tortoises.
They take a living sucking Fish or R^mora, and fastening a couple of strings to
it, (one at the hea^ and the other at the tail) they let the sucking Fish down
int the Water on the Turtle Ground, among the half-grown o young Turtle: and
when they find that the Fish has fastne^ himself to the back of a Turtle, as
he will soon do, they the draw him and the Turtle up together. This way of
Fishin (as I have heard) is also used at Madagascar.

The Natives of this Country are but of a middle Statur^ yet have very good
Limbs: The Color of their Skins i black: their Hair crisped: they are oval
visaged: their Nose neither flat nor high, but very well proportioned: their
Teet are white, and their Aspect is altogether graceful.

They are nimble People, but very lazy: which probable: for want of Commerce.
Their chief Employment is Husbandry. They have a great many Bulls and Cows,
which the carefully look after; for every Man knows his own, thoug they run all
promiscuously together in their Savannahs; y^ they have Pens near their own
Houses, where they make them gentle and bring them to the Pail. They also pla^
Corn and fence in their Fields to keep out all Cattle as we tame as wild. They
have Guinea Corn, which is their Bread and a small sort of Grain no bigger than
Mustard seed, w^^ which they make their Drink.

Here are no Arts nor Trades professed among them, b^ every one makes for
himself such necessaries, as Need or O^nament requires, the Men keeping to
their Employment, an the Women to theirs.

The Men build Houses, Hunt, Plant, and do what is to ^ done abroad. And the
Women Milk the Cows, dress the ^ctuals, etc. and manage all Matters within
Door^. The Houses are not great nor richly furnished; but they are man close
and well thatched, that neither Winds nor Weather (...) hurt them.

They wear but few Clothes, and those extraordinary me^ The Men go in a manner
naked, their common ^arb being only a square piece of Cloth made with Silk
Grass, or M^h^ R^^ and wrought in form of a short Apron. At the upper Corn it
has two straps to tie round their Wastes; and the lower or being finely fringed
with the same hang* down to their Kne^

They have Caps made with Beef Tallow of about 9 or 10 Inches high. They are a
great while of making these Caps: for the Tallow must be made very pure, before
it is fit for this use. Besides they lay on but a little at a time and mix it
finely among the Hair; and so it never afterward comes off their Heads, When
they go a Hunting, which is but seldom, they p^re off 3 or 4 Inches from the
top of it, that so it may sit the snugger, but the next Day they begin to build
it up again; and so they do every Day till it is of a decent and fashionable
height.

It would be a most ridiculous thing for a Man here to be seen without a Tallow
Cap. But Boys are not suffered to wear any, till they come to Maturity; and
then they begin to build upon their Heads. The Women have only short Petticoats
which reach from the Waste to the Knee. When it Rains they cover their Bodies
with a simple Cows-hide, thrown over their Shoulders like a Blanket.

The common Subsistence of these People is Bread made of Guinea Corn, Beef,
Fish, Milk, Ducks, Hens, Eggs, etc. They also drink Milk often to quench their
Thirst: and this sometimes when it is sweet, but commonly they let it be sower
first.

Besides Milk, which is the common Drink, they make a better sort of the same
Grain before mentioned, purposely to be merry with. And when they meet on such
occasions, the Men make themselves extraordinary fine, with Feathers stuck into
their Caps very thick. They make use of the long Feathers of Cocks Tails, and
none else.

Besides these Head Ornaments they wear a piece of Cowhide, made like a Tail,
and it is fastened behind them as a Tail, reaching from their Waste to the
Ground. This piece of Hide is about six Inches broad, and each side of it is
adorned with little Iron Rings of their own making.

When they are thus attired, their Heads a little intoxicated and the Music
playing they will skip about merrily, and shake their Tails to some purpose; but
are very innocent in their Mirth.

Every Man may have as many Wives as he can purchase and maintain: And without
buying here are none to be had; neither is there any other Commodity to be
bought or sold but Women.

Young Virgins are disposed of by their Fathers, Brothers, or nearest Male
Relations. The price is according to the Beauty of the Damsel.

They have no Money in this Country, but give Cows in exchange for Wives: And
therefore he is the richest Man that has most Daughters or Sisters; for to be
sure he will get Cattle enough.

They make merry when they take their Wives; but th Bride cries all her Wedding
Day. They live together in sma^ Villages, and the oldest Man governs the rest;
for all the live together in one Village are a kin, and therefore willing (...)
to his Government.

They are very just and extraordinary civil to Strangers This was remarkably
experienced by two English Seame^ that lived among them five Years; their Ship
was cast awa^ on the Coast, and the rest of their Consorts marched to the River
of Dellagoa; but they stayed here till Captain Roger^ accidentally came hither
and took them away with him: They had gained the Language of the Country: And
the Native freely gave them Wives and Cows too. They were belove^ by all the
People; and so much reverenced that their Word^ were taken as Laws. And when
they came away, many o^ the Boys cried because they would not take them with
them

FINIS.
A General INDEX To both Volumes of DAMPIER's VOYAGES.
Note, That in this Index the several Parts of the Work are thus distinguished.

O. refers to Voyage round the World; or Vol. I.

S. to the Suppliment of the Voyage round the World; or Vol. II. Part 1.

C. to the Campeachy Voyages; or Vol. II. Part 2.

W. to the Discourse of the Winds, etc. or Vol. II. Part 3.

Any Figure that has not one of these Capital Letters immediately prefixed, is
to be taken as referring to that which goes nearest before it.

d. signifies Described, whether wholly or in part.

A.
ACapulco, its remarkable Land, d. O. 244. the T. Port and Castle, d. 244, 6,
7. its Trade and Course of it, C. 125. O. 244, 5, 6. 277. Acapulco-Ship, its
Course, O. 245, 6. 255. 260. 283. 290, 1. 351. 387, 8, 9. and why, 280. aimed
at by the Privateers, 244. 255, 7. 389. but mist, 260. 303. 384. like to be
lost on a shoal, 303. 384. taken by Cavendish, 260. Accomptants, bad and good,
S. 137. Achar's, Pickles, what and where, O. 391. S. 129. Achin, Kingdom, d. S.
120, etc. its Rains and Floods, 148, 9. and Winds, W. 49. the Road, and
Islands, and Channel lying off it, S. 121, 2, 3. O. 476. the Soil and
Vegetables, S. 123. 126. 181. O. 392. Animals, S. 127, 8. O. 321. Malayan
Inhabitants, d. S. 128, 9. their Features, Habit, etc. ib. Arts and Trades,
130, 1. Proe's, O. 475; and Coire-Cables, 295. their Coins, Sums and Weights,
S. 131, 2. Mohammedan Learning and Religion, O. 490. 343. S. 137, 8. 148. 180.
Laws and Punishments, 138, 9. 140. Government by a Queen and Oromkey's, 141.
her Election, 142, 3. a War upon it, 143, 4, 5, 8. the Oromkey's have the real
Power, S. 141, 2, 3. the Commons most Slaves, and how, 141. City of Achin, and
Buildings, 129. Merchant-strangers there, 129. 132, 4, 5, 6. 146.
Guzarat-Brokers, 135. Siammers, O. 405. China Camp. Chinese and their Trade
there, S. 136, 7, 8. O. 420. Price of Nutmegs there, S. 152. Plenty of Gold, O.
510. 152. and Gold Mines, d. S. 133, 4. J. d' Acosta's Imprisonment, and why,
C. 96, 7. Adds, Tools, where used, O. 332. S. 181. Aethiopick Sea, what so
called by the A; Pref. Vol. 2. See Atlantic, Indian. Africa, its
Coasting-Trade-w. W. 12. 13. 15. 16. 19. 20. 103. not so broad a Course as the
Peruvian, and why? 78, 79. its Breezes (S. and L.) W. 24. 29. 50, etc. its West
Coast where and when Dry, 78, 9. 83. Tides on its East Coast, 99. and Currents,
107. and Ambergriese, O. 74. and Seals, 90. see Angola, C. Blanco, Guinea, R.
Sherbono, C. Verd. Harmatan's. Hippopotamus. Aguala Wood, what and whence, S.
8. Ague, the A. taken with one, O. 255. where frequent, 334. Air good, where
and when, O. 63. 108. 186. 218. 297. 321. 532, 4, 8. S. 31. bad, where and
when, O. 153. 186. 221. 297, 8. S. 180. had where there are Gold Mines, O. 153,
195. Sulphurous, when, 131. Sick Men die coming from Sea to Land-Air, 113.
Albicore, Fish, where, W. 55. Alcranes, Island, d. their Bushes, Rats, and
Birds, C. 24, 5, 6. 45. Seals, O. 90. Alfores, Mindanian's, d. O. 325. their
Wars, 325. 337. 444. Algatrane, a sort of Tar, d. O. 134. Algatross, a Bird,
where, O. 531. Algatross, a Rock, d. O. 242. Alligator, d. C. 33. 74, 5, 6, 7,
8. 81, 2. where found, 75, 5. O. 256. their Flesh and Eggs musky, C. 75. yet
eaten, ib. O. 274. but seldom, C. 75. their Musk-Cods, ib. good for Dropsies,
O. 256. Dogs covered by them, and fearful of them, C. 76. an Irish Man in
danger by one, 77. (see Dampier also) the Campeachy ones less fierce than some
are said to be, 82. and in general than the Crocodile, 76. how they and the
Crocodile differ, 75, 6. Almanac of Mexico, a Receipt in it. O. 256. of
Tonquin and China, S. 60. Almond-Milk, where used, S. 148. Alms of Missionaries
make and keep up their Proselites, S. 96. Lignum Aloes, whence, S. 8. C. Alta
Vela, its Winds, W. 35. Altars of Idols, where and what, O. 396. 412. S. 43.
Alvarado R. T. Fort, Fishery, Trade, and Commodities, d. C. 43. 123, 4, 6, 8.
130. taken by Privateers, 124, 8. its fine Parrots, 128, 9. Amapalla Gulf, d.
O. 121, 2, 4, 5, 8. its Tides, W. 96. Towns, O. 122, 3, 6. Amapalla, I. d. O.
122, 4, 5, 8. Ambergriese, where found, O. 72, 3, 4. 477. where a profitable
Trade to be driven for it, 480, 1. a large piece of it, d. 73, 4. found above
High-water-mark, ib. and with Beetles in it. ib. Counterfeit, where and what,
72, 3. 477. W. 54. America, its Breezes, W. 35. and Savannahs, O. 87. its
distance from Asia reckoned too great, 288. from Africa too little, 289.
Plantains, how esteemed there, and where found. 313, 4, 5. Plantains and
Bonano's used there as Bread, S. 23. Blood-wood and Stock-wood, its natural
growth, C. 57. Tobacco of the Phillippines probably from thence, O. 333. its
Savages less so than reported, 485. desirous of Trade, S. 116. paint
themselves, O. 537. and wear Skins nastily, 539. see Atlantic Sea, South Sea.
North America, Seals there, O. 90. and where none, ib. see California,
New England, West Indies, Isthmus, Mexico, Virginia. South America, its West
Course generally rocky, O. 90. its Fish and Seals, ib. its Rock-fish, 91. and
Snappers, ib. its Coasting Trade-wind broader than the African in the same
Latitude, and why, W. 78, 9. where the Coast makes like that of Guinea, and
what the effects of it, 80, 1. Blooms or hot Blasts thence, O. 529. see Andes,
Brazil, Chili, T. del Fuego, West Indies, Peru. Amoy (Anha) in China, its Trade
great, O. 417. and free, 418. Anatta (Otta) a Dye, where and what, O. 226, 7.
C. 7. 113. how used by Indians, ib. more valuable than Indico, O. 227, 8. price
of it, 227. an advantage in it slipped, 227, 8. Anchorings, where and what, O.
46, 8. 55, 7. 77, 8. 81, 4. 91, 6. 100, 9. 110, 3, 9. 125, 8. 132, 3, 4, 6.
144, 5, 6, 9. 151, 2. 163, 4, 9. 172, 3, 5, 7, 8. 188. 196, 8, 9. 202, 4, 7, 8,
212, 3. 232, 3, 8, 9. 242, 7, 8, 9. 250, 4, 7, 9. 262, 6, 7. 275, 6, 7. 291.
309, 346, 7, 8. 378, 9. 382, 4, 5, 9. 399. 401, 6. 417. 421, 2, 3, 4, 5. 436.
448. 454, 8. 463, 4, 5. S. 4, 9. 10. 12. 13. 123. 154, 7, 9. 171, 4. C. 16. 18.
19. 23, 6, 9. 30, 2. 44, 5. 50, 1. 101. 118. 125. W. 24. 34. 56. good on Shoal
Coasts, O. 422, 3, 4, 5. bad on bold Coasts, or where Cliffs and Rocks, ib. see
Harbors, Roads. Anchovy, a pickled Fish like it, where, S. 27. Andeman's,
Islands, O. 476. Andes, Ms. of Chili, Peru (Sierra Nu^vada des Andes) the
highest in the World, O. 94, 5. cause deep Seas, 423. and the greatest breach
in the True General Trade-w. W. 78, 9. and catch the Rains, 83. St. Andrea's,
I. its Cedars, O. 29. no Provision there, 31. Port Angels, d. O. 239. Angola,
its Coast, d. W. 27. and Winds, 12. 13. 14. 38. 58. Sucking-fish there, 54.
Anhay see Amoy. Animals, see Beasts, Birds, Fish, Insects. St. Ann's in
Campeachy, C. 120. C. St. Ann's in Guinea, its Winds, W. 16. 38. Coast, 8.
Anniseed, where, S. 6. a Berry called so by the Dutch, 63. who steep it in
their Arack, 64. Ants of several sorts, d. their Nests, Traveling, Labor,
O^conomy, etc. C, 60, 1, 4, 5. Ants-Eggs, where and why esteemed, ib. White
Ants, or Wood-Lice, where, S. 127. Ant-Bears, d. C. 59. 60, 1. Ante, or
Mountain-Cow, where found, and d. C. 102, 3, 4. Antego, harrass'd by the
Caribbe Indians, C. 6. its Currents, W. 101, 105. a Hurricane there, d. 68, 9,
72. another, 70. Anthropophagi or Man-Faters, see Canibals. C. Antonio in Cuba,
C. 9. 28, 9. its Currents, W. 101, 5. Anvil, what used instead of it, O. 332.
Apples, where, O. 532. Pine-Apples, Fruit, see Pine. Arabic, where used in
Prayers, etc. O. 331. and studied, S. 137. Aracan, China Farthen Ware a
Commodity there, S. 63. Arack, what and where, O. 371. 420. S. 53. 78. 167.
drank with Hens Blood, 83. a Drug like Annise infused in it, 63, 4. and Snakes
and Scorpions, 167. Arek tree and Nut (miscalled Betle) d. O. 318, 9. where and
how used, 311, 8, 9. 328. 336. 355, 9. 457. S. 54. Punta Arena, O. 149. Arica
Bay, Calms, W. 14. Arica Town, O. Intr. iv. v. Pulo Arii, d. S. 158, 9. Arms,
Silver Hoops worn on them, where, O. 365. Arms kept neat, S. 70, 1. see
Weapons. Armor of Buffalo's Hide, O. d. 432. Armada (Spanish) its arrival, at
Portobel, O. 171, 9. 180. its general Course, 179. 180, 4, 5. Armadillo
(Animal) d. C. 59. 61, 2. Arrows headed with Flint, O. 85, 6. poisoned, W. 108.
Art of Indians, see Indians. Arts Liberal, what and where studied, S. 52, 60.
-- Mechanic, see Artificers, O. 331, 2. S. 60, etc. 136. 181. Aruba, I. d. O.
47. its Currents, W. 101, 4. Water there breeding Worms in the Body, C. 90.
Ascension, I. deep Sea about it, O. 393. laying and breeding place for Turtle,
107. 393. W. 4, 5. but no Food for them there, O. 393. Ash, I. (Vacca) a Ship
like to be lost there, O. Intr. II. Asia, reckoned too broad, and too far to
the East, O. 288, 9. see China, Indies (East) Persia. Asses, where, O. 74. see
Mules. Asses Skins how grained in Turkey, C. 7. Wild Ass finely stripped, O.
533. Atlantic Sea, what so called by the A. see Vol. 2. Preface, reckoned too
broad, O. 289. its True Trade-winds, W. 3, 5. 11. O. 549, 550. Calms and
Tornado's on the East Side of it, W. 6. and near the Line, 86. where least, and
what Winds at the Line, and why, 7, 8. Shy Turtle, O. 449. Ares, I. d. O. 49,
50. D'Estrees shipwreck there, ib. C. St. Augustine of Brazil, why hard to
double, W. 9. 103, 4, 5. C. St. Augustine of Florida, its Pearl-Oisters, O. 173.
C. St. Augustine of Madagascar, the Cygnet sunk there, O. 511. Avogato-Pear, d.
O. 203. Terra Australis incognita, Discoveries how to be made there, O. 351, 2.
an Island of it (as supposed) seen by Captain Davis, ib. see N. Holland. The
Author, see Dampier. Axes, what and where used, O. 332. much valued by Indians,
O. 483, 6. C. 41. see Hatchet. Aynam, I. its Situation, S. 8. 20, 1. and
Pearl-Oysters, O. 178. the Chinese Inhabitants and their Jonks, S. 8, 9.
Azymuth-Compasses, most used by English, O. 533.
B.
BAcalao, see Rock-fish. Bahama I. Ambergriese there, O. 74. Bahar, what, S.
132. Balachaun, a Pickle, d. S. 27, 8. 30. Balderas, see Valderas. Baldivia, O.
83. 192. Bamboe's, and Hollow Bamboe's, where and how used, O. 1^. 299. 330, 5,
6. 367. 398. 480. 490. S. 71, 9. 180. Bambo- Achar or Pickle, O. 391. Bamboing,
what, S. 80. Bambo, a Measure so called, S. 135. Bancal, a Weight, S. 132.
Bancalis, its Pepper-trade, S. 182. awed by the Dutch, 111, 4. 5, 7, 8.
Bancouli, see Bencouli. Banda I. its Nutmegs, O. 447. Cloves near it, 317.
Banditti, maimed, and arch, S. 138, 9. Bang (Ganga) intoxicating, S. 136.
North-Bank (a Cloud) see North. Fishing-Banks, C. 21, 2. of Oisters, 17. 28.
Sand-Bank, high, d. C. 123, 4. Banks about Villages, where, S. 44. Bantam, its
Breezes, W. 39. and Pepper, whence, S. 18. Petties there, what, 132. Theft how
punished, 139. reveren^ done to the King, 142, 3. Bao or Boutan, Kingdom,
where, S. 61. its Commodities an Trade, 64. Barbados ravaged by
Caribbee-Indians, O. 485. C. 5. Cour^ thither from Jamaica, W. 40. from Guinea,
10. 53. its Current^ 100, 4. Barbecu, what and where, O. 20. S. 90. C. 12. 80.
Sancta Barbara, Harbor, O. 46. Bark-Logs for Fishing, O. 134. d. 141, 3, 5.
153, 4. for carrying Goods, d. 141, 2. where used, ib. and for what, 143. 214
for single Men, and where used, 143. 189. d. 38. see Catamarans. Barks, see
Shipping. Bark for Tanning, O. 54. Barlaventa-Fleet, its progress, d. C. 125,
6. ineffectual, S. 117 Barley at the C. of Good-Hope, O. 532. Bashee-Drink, O.
422. d. 431, 4, 5. Bashee, or the Five Islands, O. 385. d. 420, 1, 2, 5, 6.
431, 6 its Product, 426, 7, 8, 9. 430, 4, 5, 6. Houses and T. on Preci pices,
428, 9. Boats, 429. Inhabitants, their Habit, 427. Food 426, 9. 430, 3.
Employments, 429. 433. Trade, Government, etc. 431, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7. Oeconomicks
and Manners, 432, 3, 4. see Bullawan. See Goat I. Grafton I. Monmouth I. Orange
I. and Bashee I. properly so called, d. O. 385. 422, 5, 8. 431, 6. Baskets of
Palmeto, O. 150. Bastinadoing, what and where, O. 367. see Bamboing,
Punishments. Batavia, its Trade, etc. O. 317. 445. S. 12. 63. Course to
Malacca, 109. Bathing in Rivers, where much used, and why, O. 330. S. 148 Bats
great, d. and where found, O. 321. 381. I. of Bats, d. O. 380, 1, 2. Batsha,
its Pilots, S. 11. 29. C. Bayedore, its Winds, W. ^15. Bay's, how caused, O.
422, 3, 4, 5. have most Rain, W. 78. 80 1, 2, 3. and Heat, S. 32. Sea-Breezes
scarce there, ib. W. 28. 38 but good Land Br. 34. seldom any but
Counter-Currents, 104. Beacons set on shoals, O. 450. Beads valued by Indians,
O. 13. 23, 4. C. 119. Ant-Bears, see Ant. Beards of the Chinese, O. 407. where
none, 4^4. of Tortoiseshell, 32. Beasts, where none, O. 31. none of prey, 302.
track of one at N. Holland, 463. in the Woods of Nicobar, 483. venemons one
like a Guano, 321. 392. see Alligators, d. Ant^ (Mountain-Cow) d. Ant-Bears, d.
Armadillo's, d. Beeves, Buffalo's, Cats, Conies, Crocodiles, d. Deer, Dogs,
Elephants, Goats, Guano, d. Hippopotamus (River-horse or Seahorse) d. Hogs,
Horses, Jaccals, Lions, Lizards, Mice, Monkies, Pecary, Porcupines, Poss^^s,
(O-possum) Racoons (Indian Conies) Rats, Sheep, Sloths, d. Squashes, d.
Squirrels, Tigers, Tiger-Cats, d. Land-Tortoise, d. Warree. Beaver-hats, old, a
Commodity, C. 120. Beef, how cut and ordered, C. 81. S. 30. Irish, a Commodity,
O. 48. see Beeves. Bees, a large and small sort, d. C. 112. their Honey and
Trunkhives, ib. see Honey, Wax. Beetles found in Ambergriese, O. 73. Beeves in
the W. Indies, whence, C. 98. impatient of Thirst, 77. where, O. 44, 6. 8. 62.
72. 75. 124, 8. 157. 176. 186. 211, 8. 221, 3. 239. 240. 250. 8, 9. 260, 4, 5,
9. 320. 364, 9. 378, 9. 382, 7. 406. 419. 540, 6. S. 25. 30. 127. 163. 181. W.
34. smelt off at Sea, ib. bad where, S. 31. eaten raw, 30. singed like Hogs,
ib. Hides how dressed, C. 88. Beeve-hunting, d. C. 81, 3, 4, 5, 6. in a Canoa,
81. (dangerous) 99. 120. see Hocksing. Beef I. d. C. 50, 1, 3. 77. 88. 92 to
101. 120. W. 34. 67. fugitive Indians there, d. C. 94, 5, 6. Begging-people, O.
327, 8. 358, 9. 365, 9. 370. 433. S. 13. Bells, where made, S. 60. 101.
Musical, struck upon, O. 342. with Claws, worshipped, 411, 2. Bellows, a
particular sort, d. O. 332. 429. Benches for Rowing, moveable, O. 480, 1.
Bencouli, d. S. 179, etc. sickly, 112. 180. bad Water, O. 524. yet a good
Spring there, 525. Product and Native Malayans. S. 180, 1. Idolatrous Sacrifice
there, O. 397. S. 59. The Fort, d. S. 180, 3. ill governed, O. 518. 519. 520.
S. 183, 4. the A. Gunner of it, O. 512. 518. S. 183. its Trade, O. 420. S. 63.
110, 1. 182. Bengal Bay, low shoars, O. 425. its Winds, S. 179. W. 20, 1.
Commodities, S. 145. 173. Butter, d. 146. a venomous Beast there, O. 321.
Bengal Channel by Achin, S. 122. Bermudas, I. dangerous Coasts, O. 405. Cedars,
29. Palmetoworks, 150. Ambergriese, 74. Berries used in Drink, see Arack,
Bashee-Drink. Betle-tree and leaf, d. (miscalled Arek) O. 319. S. 24. how used,
54. whence, 8. 25. blacks the Teeth, 128. see Arek. Chinam. Bill-birds, d. C.
65, 9. Birds (and Fowls) where none, O. 31. 282. many or few as the^ is Grain,
426. at Sea a sign of Land near; 282. 531. killed by a Hurri cane, W. 71.
small, of several sorts, O. 321. 406. 426. S. 26. s^ Algatross, d. Bats, large,
d. Bill-birds, d. Black small Birds, (...) Black-Birds or chattering Crows, d.
Boobies, d. Cockrecoo's Cormorants, d. Corroso's, d. Crab-catchers, d.
Crockadores, (...) Carrion-Crows, d. Curlews, d. Ducks, Wild-Duck and Mallard
d. Egg-birds, d. Fishing-Hawks, d. Flamingoes, d. Geese, Sea- Gulls, Herons, d.
Humming-birds, d. Maccawes. Man of War-Bird, d. Mango-Volucres, d. Natal-bird,
d. Noddies, d. Parrakites, Parrots, d. Partridges. Pelicans, d. Penguins, d.
Poultry (Dunghil-Fowl, Cocks and Hens) d. Quams, d. Subtle-Jacks, d. Teal.
Tropick-birds, d. Turkies. Turtle-Doves. Black small Bird, d. O. 97.
Blackbird, a sort, called Chattering-Crows, d. C. 65, 6. C. Blanco of Africa,
its Sands blown off to Sea, W. 15. C. Blanco of Brazil, its Coast, d. W. 80, 1.
Weather, ib. Winds, 7. Currents, 103. C. Blanco of Mexico, d. O. 111, 2. its
Popogaio's, W. 46. C. Blanco of Peru, lies N. of the Pacifick-Sea, O. 153. d.
138, 9. 147. why hard to double, W. 33. 40. its Tides, 96. and Currents, 107.
I. Blanco, d. O. 57, 8. its large Green-Turtle, 105. Blue Mountain in Jamaica,
C. 8. Blewfields, R. d. O. 33. its Manatee and Indians, ib. their
stonehatchets, ib. 85. Blewfields in Jamaica, C. 38. W. 46. its Lance-wood, O.
118. Blood-wood, d. O. 115. C. 57, 8. See Cam-wood. Blooms or Hot-Blasts,
where, O. 529. W. 47. Boats, what, where and how used, O. 2. 292, 8, 9. d. 429.
d. 480. 492. W. 31. S. 8. 13. 14. 45, 8. none where, O. 464, 8. See Canoa's,
Oars, Proes, Tholes, Shipping. Bob-wood, O. 39. R. des Bocca's, d. C. 118, 9.
120. Bocca del Drago, its Manatee, O. 33. and Savages, 486. Bocca-Toro, its
site and careening, O. 38. Green Turtle, ib. 105. Manatee, 33. Vinello's,
plenty, 235. Savages, 38. 486. Bodies of People, see Complexion, Countenance,
Features, Hair, Limbs, Shape, Stature. Bonairy (Bonayre) I. d. its Road,
People, Product, O. 48. Saltpond, 49. Water breeding Leg-worms, C. 90. how its
Indians get Fire, O. 466. Bonano's, a sort of Plantains, d. O. 316. drink made
of them, ib. where found, O. 175. 183, 7. 198. 311. 426. 546. S. 23. 124. 163.
181. C. 5. See Plantains, Plantations. Boneto's, Fish, where, O. 321. B^^^ies,
Heathen Priests, O. 396. Boobies, d. O. 49. where found, 52. 97. 132. 146.
(their Eggs) 159. 282. 473. C. 23, 4, 5, 6. 45. 69. course food, 146. Boots
limber, O. 419. of Guts, and eaten, 538. B^^^^^, I. a Letter from English
there, O. 370. 504. low Anchoring Coasts, 425. Malayan spoken there, 394, 5.
Boua, or Pageant King of Tonquin, his Palace, etc. S. 48. 66, 7, 8. Boutan
Kingdom by China, see Ba^. Boutan I. and Kingdom, and City, d. O. 453, 4. its
Product, 455, King and People, d. 454, 5, 6, 7, 8. inslave and sell the
Inlanders. 456. Boy with double rows of Teeth, 457, 8. shy Turtle, 453, see
Callasusung. Bows and Arrows, where used, S. 72. W. 108. Boxes, lacker'd for
Chinam, S. 54, 5. leathern for Cartages, 70. Brazil, approached in E. India
Voyages, O. 531. Course thither, W. 9. its Winds, 13. 18. 19. 24. Coast and
Weather, d. 80, 1. Currents, 103. see C. St. Augustine. C. Blanco. Bread, fine
Cakes of it, O. 418, 9. Plantains, etc. where used as bread, O. 12. where not,
S. 23. none of any sort, where, O. 464, 8. see Corn, Fruits, Roots: see Melory,
Sago, and Bread-fruit and tree, d. where, and how made, O. 296, 7. Breeches,
where and what, O. 326. 408. 419. 456. S. 129. C. 114. Breezes, see among
Winds. Bremes, where, O. 321. Brewers streights, a. S. 109. 110. Bricks dried
in the Sun, O. 139. 140. Brick, where used, ib. 411. S. 45, 8. Brokers of
Guzurat, d. 134, 5, 7. Brooms of Palmeto Leaves, O. 150. Buccaniers, see
Privateers. Hist. of Buccaniers referred to, O. Intr. III. IV. (...) 252. 272.
Buffadore, Rock and Spout, d. O. 232, 3. Buff-Jacket, a Plantain-Pudding, O.
314. Buffalo's, where, O. 320. 359. 365. 378. 387. 406. 410. 458. S. 25. 30.
127, 9. 181. draw the Plow and tread out Rice, O. 410, 1. their Hides bought,
431. Coat Armor thereof, 432. Butter of their Milk, d. S. 146. Buggasses, who,
S. 108. Bullawan, a name for Gold, where, O. 431. 513. a Metal like Gold, so
called, where and what, 426, 7. 431, 4, 9. Mines of it, 426. and Earrings,
427. 431, 2, 9. how burnished, 427, 8. 439. Bumkins, Water-Vessels, O. 2.
Burrs, troublesome, where, C. 48. Burton-wood, d. O. 101. where found, ib. C.
23. 48. 57. makes good Coals, ib. Burying, alive, where and why, O. 432. see
Funeral. Bushes (Shrubs) C. 44. a prickly sort, 94. see Burton, Dildo. One Bush
Key, d. C. 17. 50, 1, 2. 92. 77. W. 67. Wild-Bush Men, d. and where, W. 108.
Butchers, Chinese, at Malacca, S. 162. Butter (of Buffalo's Milk and Lard, d.)
S. 146. where little made, O. 115. Buttons, presented at Siam, S. 108.
C.
CAbbage-tree and fruit, d. O. 165, 6, 7. 318. where found, 166. C. 102, 9. S.
124. Cabbinets (Combs, etc.) what Tortoise-shell used for them, O. 103. see
Lacquer-ware. Cables, see Coire; and of Rattans. Cacao-tree and fruit, d.
kinds, Husbandry of it, and where found, O. 59. 60, 1, 2. 152. C. 7. 102. 110,
1, 2, 9. Trade of it, O. 64. 152. 245. C. 110, 9. goes for Money where, O. 62.
C. 119. 120. carriage of it, 119. 121, 2. White-Cacao (Spuma) what, and where,
C. 111. see Chocoatte. Cachao City and Prove. S. 13. 15. 16. 19. 20. 21. d. 45,
etc. 57. 61. 73, 7. 86, 7, 9. 90, 6, 9. 100, 1. Cacuses (Caycos) what and
where, W. 106. Caihooca, d. C. 122. its Vinello's, 123. O. 235. Caimanes, both
Alligators and Crocodiles called so, C. 75. I. Caimanes, Great, d. C. 30. its
Crocodiles, ib. Breeding-place for Green Turtle, O. 107. I. Caimanes, Little,
d. C. 9. 30. Calabashes and Gourd-shells, their use, O. 153. 293. 434. C. 115.
W. 86. Caldera, Bay, d. O. 112. its distance from the L. of Nicaragua, 113. and
Trade with i^, 115. its Lance-wood, 118. its Popogaio's, W. 46, 7. Rains and
Tornado's, 83. California, not known to be an Island, O. 272. its W. Coast only
known to the Spaniards, ib. its Lake or Sea why purposely unknown by them, ib.
Coast low toward Guatimala, 425. Communication with Mexico by Boats, 244. 264.
Pearl-Fishery and Trade, 173. 244. 264. Trade-Wind, 245. its Indians Enemies to
the Spaniards, 264. 272. a Root eaten by them, 275. Callabar, Old, W. 9. 10.
14. Callasusung, d. O. 454, 7, 8. see Bouton, I. Callico's, Chints, etc. where
and how a Commodity, O. 245 333. 379. S. 61. 134. Calms, a presage of storms,
O. 413. 451. W. 61, 6, 8, 9. 72 Calm between S. and L. Breezes, W. 27. 41. C.
21. Calms where and when usual, W. 6. 8. 9. 11. 14. 20, 3, 5, 7. met by the A.
O 2. 79. 82. 120. 135. 400. 413, 5. 448. 451. S. 154. C. 20, 1. Cambodia,
Kingdom, Women prostituted there, O. 395, its Idols, 397. Product and Trade,
399. 400, 1. S. 105. a profitable one to be had there, 3. and how, 102, 3.
Coast and Point, O. 399. Islands lying off it, 389. 390. see P. Condore. P.
Vby. River, d. S. 105, 6, 7. Pirates routed thence, ib. Cam-chain, and
Cam-quit, Oranges, d. S. 23, 4. Campeadry (Campeache) Bay and Country, Coast,
Lagunes, Rivers, Towns, etc. d. O. 87. 424. C. 16, 7. 41 to 53, 5, 6, 8. 79.
83, 6. 92, 3, 4. 101, 7, 8. 110, 1. 7 to 122. its Bounds, 16. 42. 123. W. 32.
4. Soil, C. 42, 56, 8, 9. Weather, S. 32. W. 82. C. 55. Land-stoods, S. 35. C.
55. 80, 1, 2. 91, 2, 3. 108, 9. 122. W. 67. Storms, 66, 7. C. 80, 1, 2. Fish
killed by them. O. 524. W. 68. Winds, 15. 32, 4, 5. Tides, 92. its Vegetables,
O. 59. 62. 101. 123. 152. 166. 203. 235. 263. C. 43, 6, 8, 9. 50, 6, 7, 8. 79.
85. 94, 5. 102. 7, 9. 111. 2, 3. see Logwood, Mangroves, Beasts, Insects, 44.
50. 2, 3. d. 59 to 64. 74 to 78, 80, 4. 96, 8. d. 102, 7, 9, 111 to 119, 8,
121. O. 87. Beef-hunting, 81, etc. 97, etc. Birds, d. 650 to 71. 114, 8, 9.
Fish, 17. 44. 70. d. 71, 2, 3. 109. O. 33. 90. 105. Commodities, Manufactures,
and Trade, O. 62. C. 17, 8, 42, 3, 6, 7, 8. 50, 1, 3, 4, 6, 7. 80, 8. 96, 7, 8.
110 to 115, 8, 9. 120, 1, 2. 125, 6. Ship-worms, O. 363. Carriers there, 119.
121, 2. Privateers, 43, 5, 6, 7. 50, 1, 3, 4. make Slaves of the Indian
Inhabitants, 43. These insulted by the Spaniards, 42. 113. and even their
Negro's, 116. yet the Villagers live comfortably, O. 124. C. 112, 3, 5. till no
more Land than barely for their subsistence, 119. most of the Towns consist of
them, 110. their Food and Drink, 43. d. 113. Clothing, 46. 114. Government,
Employment, Marriages, Churches, Manners, 112, 3, 4, 5, 6. 42, 3, 7. see
Logwood-cutters, Spaniards, (for particular places) the Map, C. 1. Campeachy-T.
Fort, Buildings, Trade, and Spaniards, C. 12, 9. 10. 42, 3, 4. d. 45, 6. 113.
taken by Privateers, 45, 6. 96. 110. Log-wood called thence Palo de Campeachy,
46, 7. Camphire, whence, S. 128. Cam-wood, for Dying Red, O. 78. C. 58.
Canales, I. d. O. 213. Caneo, I. O. 215. Canes, how used, S. 29. for walking,
where, 178. and how growing, O. 380. a Commodity, where, S. 167. 178. see
Bambo's, Rattans. Canibals, whether any in the World? O. 485. Stories of them
refuted, ib. Inhabitants of the Isles of Canibals (Caribbe's) Trade with
Europeans, ib. hurt done by them, but why, 485, 6. Canoa's, what, where and how
used, O. 2. 35. 515. S. 4. 118. how made, O. 214, 5. by wild Indians, 85.
floating full of water, C. 12. hunting in Canoa's, where and how, C. 81. see
Boats made with Outlayers, d. O. 480, 1. 492, 5, 6, 9. see Proe's. best Canoa's
made of Cedar, 29, few Canoa's, where, 117. Cantarras I. d. O. 213. Canton,
City and Prove. of China, its great Trade, O. 405, 6. Houses, 410. China-ware
made of a Clay there, 409. Course from Manilla thither, 405. Tea called there,
Cha^, 410. see China, St. John's, d. China, Maccao. Pulo Canton, its
Chochinchinese, S. 6. R. Capalita, of O. 233. Capes, are driest, W. 78. have
most Sea-Breezes, 28. and break them, 38. have seldom Land-Br. 33, 5, 7. Capes
R. that of C. Gratia Dio, so called, O. 128. Privateers go up it into the S.
Sea, 129. it Cataracts, ib. Caps, what and where, O. 418, 9. S. 42. 129. of
Tallow, W. 111. Caraccos Coast, its singular make, and product, d. W. 37. O.
58, 9. 203. 423, 4. its Boundary and Trade, 63, 4. its Cacao (best of any) d.
59 to 62. C. 112. never blighted, O. 62. Fish, 249. Winds, W. 15. 37. dry and
scabby. O. 63. Weather, ib. W. 82. the Barlaventa-Fleet sails by it yearly, C.
126. Low Coast thence to Sancta Martha, O. 424, 5. Caraccos City and Country,
d. O. 62, 3, 4. Careening and cleaning, places fit for it, etc. O. 33, 8. 46.
52, 5. 97. 110. 121. 138. 147. 169. 171, 6. 249. 272, 6. 362. 380. 395, 7. 436.
443. 469. 481. C. 120. W. 68. 97. where and why to be done often, O. 363.
Caribbe, why called Leeward Islands, W. 15. Winds there, ib. 41. Hurricanes
there, d. 65, 7 to 71. Indico there growing, O. 227. see Antego, Barbados,
Sancta Lucia, Tabago, St. Vincent. Caribbe Indians of the Continent, their
Roving at Sea, at Sanct^ Lucia, etc. C. 4. 5. 6. less Savage than thought to
be, O. 485, 6. Carpentes R. its Cacao, O. 59. a rich T. there, 28, 9. Carriers,
in America, O. 185. 249. 250. 269. d. C. 119. 120, 1, 2. Carrion-Crows, black,
white, and King-carrion-crows, d. C. 65, 7, 8. 82. not killed, where and why,
ib. Cartagena Coast, low, O. 424. wet, W. 42. its Westerly Winds, O. 44. and
Breezes, W. 40. see Cartagena-Breeze. in Product. O. 203. 213, Fish, C. 13.
Trade, O. 45. Correspondence with L^ma by Land, 180, 4. Course of the Armada
and Barlaventa Fleet there, 185. C. 126. A fair City, open to the Sea, O. 41.
Cartagena-Breeze, d. W. 44, 5, 6. a Prater so called, ib. Carving, the Chinese
curious at it, O. 409. Cash (a Coin) of Tonquin, S. 60. 131. value of it, 72.
88. of China. ib. of Achin, 131, 2. Casica (Cacique) the chief of an Indian
Village, O. 124. 8. C. 11. Point Casivina, d. O. 122. Cassavy Root common in
the W. Indies, C. 73. Catamarans, Bark-Logs, what and where, O. 143. Cataracts,
where, O. 129. Cats, where, O. 122. S. 25. eaten, 30, 1. Tigre-Cat, see Tigre.
Cat-fish, d. O. 148, 9. venomous fins, and where found, 129. 262, 4. S. 171. C.
109. C. Catoch in Jucatan, d. C. 9. 10. 28, 3. 45, 7. its Winds, W. 32.
Weather, 82. Currents, 105. Logwood, 10, 57. Fish, 12, 13. Cattle, where, O.
218. 231. 406. 416. killed by Winds, W. 50. Catty, a weight, S. 132.
Caput-Cavalli Hill, d. O. 266. Cavallies, Fish, where, O. 321. S. 128. C. 71.
Sir T. Cavendish, his taking the Acapulco-Ship, O. 260. his Course over the S.
Sea, 280. Cedars, where and what, O. 29. 275. best for Cano's, 29. Celebes, I.
d. O. 446, 7, 8. low Anchoring Coasts, 425. Inlets, Bays and Lakes, 447.
Islands and Shoals near it, 447, 8. 450, 1. see I. Bouton. Beacons set on the
Shoals, 450. Tornado's and Spouts, 450, 1. vast Trees, 448, 9. 450. wild Vine
good for Ulcers, 449. Shy Turtle and vast Cockles, ib. Land-crab found by Sir
Fr. Drake on an Island near it, 473. see Macasser. Centipee, a venomous Worm,
d. O. 320, 1. where found, ib. S. 25. C. 64. Centiquipaque (falsely Santa
Pecaqu^) d. O. 268, 9. pillaged, 270, 1. its Silver-Mines, 269. Ceylon, I. its
Cinnamon, O. 447. Chagre R. Goods sent down it, O. 26, 7. 185. Chairs, none
used, where, O. 329. Chambongo T. and H. d. O. 378. Chametly, Isles near C.
Cori^ntes, d. 275. Chametly Isles near the Trop. of Cancer, d. O. 262, 3, 4.
Champa, Kingdom, its Trade and Commodities, O. 400. likelihood of a good Trade
there, S. 3. Means of it, 102, 3. Idolatrous Inhabitants, O. 400. their
Character, 401. their Arms, Vessels, and Skill in Shipping, 400, 1. Pulo
Champello de la Mar, S. 6, 7. Pulo Champello de la Terra, S. 7. Champetun R.
and T. d. C. 47, 8. Chandy, Point, O. 147. Channels, what and where, O. 38. 48.
55, 7. 82. 97. 110. 9. 124, 5. 130. 146. 151. 169. 175, 6, 7. 188. 193, 4. 206.
213, 5. 242, 6. 262. 346. 378, 9. 390. 406. 436. 459. 460. S. 9. 10. 11. 109.
110. 122. 158. C. 23, 9. 30. 50. 123. W. 91, 2, 3. English Channel, great
Tides, 97. and most Regular, 91, 7. Chau, Tea where so called, O. 409. S. 31.
41. see Tea. Chaubuck, a Punishment, S. 138. Cheapo T. in the Isthmus,
attempted by Privateers, O. 180, 3. 102, 5. Cheapo R. 21, 3. 202, 5. d. 204, 5.
Cheapo in Mexico (Chiapa) its Cochineel, O. 229. Mountains, C. 1^0, 8. 119.
Checapeque R. d. C. 118. Cheese, where, O. 250. where little of it made, 115.
Chepelio, I. d. O. 202. Chequetan, d. O. 249. Cherburg, see Sherboro. Children,
how Educated and Employed, O. 7. 8. 330, 1. 432, 3. Dutiful to Parents, 432.
civil to Strangers, 433. W. 112. held out to move Strangers Bounty, O. 433.
sold by Parents, S. 37, 8, 50. and gam'd away, 42. a witty and active one of
Mostesa, O. 249. 250, 1. Chick-weed, where, C. 23. Chili, its High Land, O. 94,
5. 423. see Andes. No Rains, ib. nor Rivers of note, ib. nor any perennial, but
caused by Rains within Land, 95, 6. ib. S. 35. W. 79. 80. its quiet Sea, O. 94.
deep, and why, 423. its Rock-fish, 91. See Peru. See Baldivia, John Fernando's
I. Guasco, Coquimbo, and Chiloe I. its Timber, a Commodity, O. 140. Chins of
People, short, where, O. 32. China, its S. Borders, S. 18. 20. 1. 64, 6. low
Anchoring Coast, O. 425. S. 10. its Winds, W. 17. 23. and Storms, 71, 5. See
Tuffoons. Good Stages thither, O. 394. S. 103. Chinese subject to the Tartars,
O. 406. 7. 417. 421. who force them to cut their Hair, 407. which they dote
upon, ib. S. 42. and Rebel upon it, O. 407. 421. and flee their Country, S. 7.
42. of these, Pirates, where, 106, 7. Manilla threatened by the Chinese, O. 331.
their Jonks, where, and what, 396. 401. 417. S. 16. d. O. 401. 412, 3. parted
like Well-boats, 412. their Sails at and Masts, 412, 3. Custom of Measuring
strange Ships, O. 354. Wrecks at I. Prata, 405, 6. Their Merchants and Trade,
how, and where, 308. 383, 7, 8. 417. S. 8. 10. 15. 16. 36. 65. 134, 6, 7, 8.
162. bent upon it, 15, 136, 7. 162. Cash or Coin, 88. China Camp or Fair,
where, and what, 136, 7, 8. Accomptants, where, O. 360. Mechanics, S. 136.
167. Manufactures and Employments, etc. O. 408, 9. China Dishes, etc. made of
what, ib. a Commodity, where, S. 63. their Chop-sticks, 84. Drinks, see Tea,
Sam-shu, Hoc-shu. Fans and Umbrellos, O. 407, 8. their Personages, d. Hair of
Head and Beard, small Eyes and Habit, 406, 7, 8. 426. Ingeny, 409, 10. Customs,
407, 8, 9. are sober, S. 137. but love Gaming unmeasurably, 42. 136. 162. O.
409, 10. and hang themselves when all is lost, ib. their Religion, hideous
Idols, etc. 396, 7. 411, 12. S. 59. Renegado where, 138. Chinese Language how
spoken, O. 43. and written, S. 59. 60. the Fokien, Dialect of it, the Court
Tongue at Tonquin, 59. the Women's tying the Hair, O. 407. little Feet and
Shoes, 408. China Gold, see Gold. China Silk, see Silk. See Amoy, Aynam,
Canton, Fokien, St. John's I. Macao, Yunam. China, Root, where found, O. 409.
S. 63. Chinam, and Chinam-Box, d. S. 54, 5. Chinchanch^^, T. C. 14. Chirapee
Bay, d. Bad for Ships, O. 144. Chocolatte, O. 2. 250. W. ^5. why much dried by
the Spaniards, O. 60. See Cacoa, Sp^^a. Chocolatta-North (a Wind) d. W. 60. C.
39. Ch^p or Pass requisite at Tonquin, S. 16. Ch^^^, or Governing King of
Tonquin, see Tonquin. Christianity, state of it in Tonquin, etc. S. 95, 6, 7.
Obstacles to it, ib. Monte Christo, d. O. 136. Chucho, I. d. O. 211.
Chucquebul, T. d. C. 51. taken by Privateers, ib. Churches, where, and what,
and how adorned, O. 42. 122, 3. 135, 9. 140, 1. 152. 179. 188. 218. 223. 233.
242. 266, 9. 387. C. 51. 110, 1. 115. 127. S. 160. Business transacted there,
and Pastimes, O. 127. C. 115. Cinnamon, whence, O. 447. Circumcision, where and
how used, O. 339. See Mahometanism. Solemnities at it, 339. 340, 1, 2. 369.
370. Citrons, where, S. 124. Clam, a sort of Oyster, d. O. 176, 7. St. Clara I.
d. O. 147. Clothes, worn neat and tight, O. 454. fine, give a Reputation,
where, 361, 2. none from abroad, where, 431. Old, a Commodity, where, 13, 72,
6. 489. C. 120. where little or none worn, see Naked. Of Skins, where used,
464, 538, 9. What Clothes, and where worn, 327. 407, 8. 419. 427. 8. 42, 3.
129. C. 46. 115. see Armor, Breeches, Caps, Coats, Frocks, Hats, Jackets,
Ornaments, Petticoats, Sash, Scarf, Shoes, Slippers, Stockins, Turbans. Cloth,
long, O. 327. Cotton, 427. S. 42. C. 46. 114. Plantain, d. O. 315. Coco, d.
224, 5. 327. 427. Indian, S. 61, 5. Cloth (Linen and Woollen) what and where a
Commodity, O. 74. 115. 142, 3. 152, 4, 245. 333. S. 42. 65. 129. 134. C. 110.
120. see Callico's, Muslin's, Silks. Clouds, how a sign of Land near, O. 283.
hover about it, 282. about Mountains, W. 79. 83, 4, 5, 6. their motion when
Spouts come, O. 451. how they presage the Monsoons shifting, 490. and Storms,
322. 413, 5. See North Banks, Hurricanes, Tuffoons. looking dismally, W. 71.
Cloves, where, O. 311. 447. 512. store to be had, 317. 350. 447. how they grow,
316. trick to swell them, 318. Clove-Bark, where, O. 316. 350. 511. Coals, of
what Wood best to harden Steel, C. 50, 7. Coasts, no where of a continued
height, O. 423. high and low cause what Seas and Anchoring, 422, 3, 4, 5. how
they make Bays, 423, see Bays. Convenience of bold Coasts, 424. remarkable, see
Caracco's, Chili, Mexico, Peru, see Marks, (at Sea) the West-Coast, what so
called, 476. Coats short, O. 419. Coat Armor of Buff; see Armor. Cochinchina,
Islands off it, S. 9. has Tuffoons, W. 75. Shipwrecked men detained there, S.
7. Chinese Refugees there, ib. Women Prostitutes, O. 395. its Tea, 409. and
Pepper, S. 181. Wars with Tonquin, 21. 67. 72. once under it, 67. Cochinchinese
of Pulo Canton, 6. of Pulo Condere, and what they bring thence, O. 395. ^. 8.
their Boats, ib. this a fit place to introduce a Trade with Codi^china, O. 394.
probably a good one, S. 3. further means of it, 102, 3. Cochineel, Tree, Fruit,
Insect, where found, and management of it, O. 124. 225, 228, 9. Cockles, where,
O. 153. ^ew 465. vast ones, 449. Cock, white, required as a Fee for a strange
Cure, C. 91. Cock-fighting, where used, S. 184. Cocks and Hens (Dunghill Fowl)
see Poultry. Cockreco's, Birds, d. C. 65, 9. Coco-Trees and Nuts, where, O. 76,
7. 111, 187. 291, 4, 5. 311. 378. 454, 7. 472, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9. 480, 8. S. 4. 23,
4. 124. 181. d. 291 to 296. 318. usefulness of this Tree, 295. of the Sap, 293.
4. 479. 480, 6, 8. See Toddy, Arack; of the Water or Milk of the Nuts, 292,
474, of the Nuts, 292, 4. 474, 6, 7, 8. 537, 8. of the Shell, 294. 490. of the
Husk, 294, 5. see Coire. how neglected in the W. Indies, ib. the Guam-Nuts,
295, 6. those of Sumatra, 296. of an Island drowned every Tide, 474. floating
at Sea, ib. Groves at Nicobar, 478, 9. what Soil and Air best for them, 295, 6.
where a Commodity, S. 151, 2. Cocos, I. in the S. Sea, d. O. 111. 231. why mist
by the A. W. 15. Bacos I. in the E. Indies, d. O. 470, 2. Coco-plum, Bush and
Fruit, d. and where found, C. 49. 107. Cod-Pepper, see Guinea-Pepper. Coins,
see Cash, Fanam, Mess, Petti. Coire cables of Coco-nut Husks, O. 294, 5. of
Strings hanging from a Tree, 295. 460. East-Coker in Sommersetshire, its
Variety of Soil, S. 123, 4. the Author born and bred there, ib. C. 2. 3. Colan,
its Water, and Indian Fishermen, O. 141. Colanche, R. O. 134. Coldest Winds
what, O. 529. 530. see Harmatans. Colima, T. and rich Valley, O. 251, 2, 3. its
Volcan always burning, ib. its Cacoa, ib. 60. Colorada, Sholes, d. C. 29. 39.
Color of Face and Skin, Natural, see Complexion; by Pigments, O. 514. 538. see
Dammer, Jeoly. Colors; see Dies. Comana, in vain attempted by Privateers, O.
63. The Barlaventa Fleet touches there, C. 126. Commodities, Spanish, American,
E. Indian, how mutually exchanged, O. 244, 5, 6. Commodities what, and where,
see Cacao and Chocalatte, Corn and Flower, Drugs, Dies, Pieces of Eight,
Fruits, Gold, Hides, Iron in Bars and wrought, Lack, Leather, Marmalade,
Molosso's, Negro's, Oil, Pitch, Quicksilver, Silver, Soap, Spice, Tallow, Tea,
Timber, Tin, Wine. See Manufactures. C. C^^^rin, its Winds, W. 20. Company, E.
India, see Dutch, English. Compass (see Azimuth) Winds flying round it, W. 58.
see Tornado's. Complexion of People, Coal-black, face and body, O. 464. dark
Copper-Colour, 7. 32. 170. 297. S. 128. 181. C. 31. 115. Indians generally so.
ib. O. 297. very dark, 427. 537. W. 110. Ashy, O. 407, dark Tawny, 395. C. 115.
W. 108. light Tawny or Yellow, O. 326. 454. S. 40. the Women of a brighter
Yellow than the Men, O. 326. 454. Compostella in Mexico, d. O. 269. its Gold
and Silver Mines, 266, 9. its Merchants, and Silver refined there, ib. Comrade,
who so called at Mindanao, O. 327, 8. 358. 365. see Pagally. Conception, R. O.
22. a Wood there dying like Logwood, C. 58. Conch-shells, said to make
China-Ware, O. 409. C. Condecedo, d. C. 10, 1, 2, 4. 6. 42. its Winds, W. 32,
4. 43, 4. and Weather, 82. Pulo Condore, its commodious Situation, O. 394.
Course by it, S. 6. the Harbor, Channel, Trees, Fruits, Tar, and Animals, d.
385, 9. to 394. Cochinchinese Inhabitants, 394, 8. their Persons, 395. Women
Prostitutes, ib. Trade, ib. S. 8. Language, O. 394. Religion, 396. an old Pilot
there, 398. 400. Congo, R. O. 7. 15. d. 193. Conies, where, W. 109. Indian
Coneys, see Raccoons. Cookery, what and where, O. 79. 294. 313, 4. 329. 357, 9.
429. 430. 473, 4. 388, 9. 490. S. 27, 8. 30, 1. 129. C. 18. Coolecan, R.
(Cullacan) O. 264. A rich T. by it trading for Pearl, ib. Cooting or engendring
time of Turtle, see Turtle. Copper-rings, a Commodity. where, C. 119. C.
Coquibocoa, its Currents, W. 101. Coquimbo, whence its Timber, O. 140.
Coral-bank, where, O. 50. Cordage, what and where, O. 223. 294, 5. Cordial of
Snakes and Scorpions, where used, S. 53. C. Corrientes in Mexico, its Winds,
and how and when to be made, O. 245. 257. d. 256 to 261. its Longitude 256. C.
Corrientes in Peru, d. O. 174. C. Corrientes of Cuba, C. 9. 29. 30, 1. its
Currents W. 101. C. Corrientes of Africa, its Winds, W. 19. Cormorants, d. and
where, C. 69. 71. Corn, where, O. 75. 99. 114. 253. See Barley, Guinea-Corn,
Maiz, Millet, Rice, Wheat. Corn-Islands, and their Indians, d, O. 31, 2.
Coromandel, its low Anchoring Coasts, O 325. Winds, W. 48. Storms, 73. 4.
Weather, 83. Famines, and Sale of Wives and Children, S. 37, 8. 50. 130. See
Catamarans. See Cunnimere, Port St. George, Pallacat, Ponticherri. Trangambar.
Coronada Mount, or Crown-land, d. O. 256. Corpus Sant, a Meteor, and what a
sign of, O. 414, 5. Coroso, a Bird, where, O. 39. C. 65. 118. d. C. 67, Bones
poisonous, ib. C. Corso, its Rains, W. 52. Variation and Tides, 53. Corunna
(the Groin) bad Beef there, why, S. 31. Costa Rica, its Cacao, O. 59. Cotton
Shrub, Cotton and Cloth, where, O. 165. 384. 426, 7. S. 42. C. 46. 115. where
a Commodity, S. 145. Cotton-tree (vast and soft) where found, and its kinds, d.
O. 85, 164, 5. its Down of little use, ib. Capt. Corant's Letters to the A. W.
54, 7. Countenance of People, where stern and hard-favoured, O. 7. 44. 170.
297. 464. Graceful, 326. 470, 8. S. 128. See Face, Feature. Courses steered, or
to be steered, what, where and why, O. 4. 77, 8, 9. 119. 135, 8, 9. 147. 167.
171. 184, 5. 193. 201. 211. 245. 281, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9. 351, 2. 378, 9. 421. 439.
440, 2, 3, 6, 8. 450, 1. 3, 8, 9. 460, 1, 2. 527. 531. 549. S. 6. 10. 109. C.
28, 9. 30, 1. 125, 6. W. 7. 85. 18. 23, 5. 33, 9. 40. 51, 3, 5, 6. 101. 2, 5,
6. Courtiers all Learned, how and where, S. 59. Courts of Judicature, where
none, S. 80. Cows, see Beeves. Mountain-Cow, see Ante. Sea-Cows, see Manatee.
Coz^mel I. C. 9. 29. Crabs (Sea) where, S. 27. C. 70. Crabs (Land) where, O.
473. S. 27. d. C. 32, 3. when ^^^sonous, 32. Crabcatchers, Birds, where, S. 26.
d. C. 69. 70. Craw-fish, where, S. 27. 128. Craws, what and where, O. 168, 9.
C. 33. 98. See Hogs. Creeks, how caused, O. 422, 3, 4, 5. See Harbors.
Cressets, what and where used, O. 337. 400, 1. S. 140. (...). Criole's, who so
called, O. 68. Crockadore, Bird like a Parrot, where, O. 458. Crocodiles,
where, C. 30, 3. 74, 5. d. and how they differ from Alligators, 74, 5, 6. and
their Eggs, 75. their boldness, 33. 76. greedy of Dogs, and terrible to them,
ib. Carrion-Crows, see Carrion. Chattering Crows, see Black Birds. La Vera Cruz
(and St. John d' Vlloa) C. 45. 120, 1. d. 124, 5. Course thence, W. 105. its
Communication and Trade, C. 120, 1, 5. O. 180, 5. 244. 261. 277. taken by
Privateers, C. 126. Hawks-bill Turtle, O. 105. Old Vera Cruz, d. C. 127. C. de
Cruz in Cuba, its Currents, W. 101. Venta de Cruzes, O. 185. Cuba I. C. 9. 29.
30, 1, 3, 4. its Savannahs, O. 87. its Beeves and Hog-Crawls, 168. C. 33. 98.
Commodities, O. 45. 227. Weather, W. 85. Currents, 105. see C. Antonio, C. de
Cruz, C. Corrientes, I. of Pines, and S. Keys of Cuba, C. 31. d. W. 36. Winds,
ib. stored with Fish and Flesh, C. 37 O. 33. 106, 7. Cubebs, where, S. 138.
Cudda (Queda) good Trade, O. 495. Use of Oil there, 537. Cunnimere an English
Factory in Coromandel, O. 509. Cups of Coco-Nut, O. 294. see Calabash. Cure, of
Amputations, 138, 9. of Leg-worms, a strange one, C. 90, 1. of Diseases, see
Alligators Cods, Bathing, Cam-chain, Herbs, Mangastan, Sago, Sands hot,
Vine-wild. Curlews, great and small, d. C. 69. 70. like them W. 110. Curasao,
or Querisao, a Dutch I. O. 45. d. 46. W. 40. its Currents, 101, 4. desired but
mist by the French, O. 47. 50. Currents, their kinds, courses etc. d. W. 100 to
108. soaking and Counter Currents, what, 104 influenced by Trade-Winds, 90.
100, 3. strengthened by a contrary Wind, O. 401. forward or retard the Log,
290. how they differ from Tides, W. 90. 100. what and where, 4. 20. 32. 3. 51,
5, 6, 7. O 57 139. 200. 401, 5. 462. 494. S. 156. C. 26, 9. Curtana's, what and
where us'^, O. 400. S. 70. 80. Customs, O. 327. see Arts and Artificers,
Begging, Children, Clothes, Cookery, Cure, Dancing, Drink Entertainments,
Feasts, Fighting Fishing, Food, Funeral Gaming, Government, Hunting, Houses,
Husbandry, Learning, Manners, Marriage, Ornaments, Religion, Shipping, Singing,
Slaves, Trades, Washing, Women, Writing.
D.
DAmmer, a sort of Pitch and Pigment, where, O. 514. Dampier, his Education,
and first Voyages to France, Newfoundland, and Bantam, and back to England, C.
1. 2. 3. S. 123, 4. W. 4. 5. to Jamaica, C. 4. 7. 8. and Campeachy, 9 to 17. he
returns, 19. is in danger of the Spaniards, 20. 34, 5. of Shipwreck, 22, 3, 6.
and starving at Sea, 36, 7, 8. but recovers Jamaica, 38, 9. His second Voyage
to Campeachy, and cutting of Logwood, 41. 82, 3, 7, 8, 9. 91. 128. 130, 1. his
danger from a Snake, 63. Alligators, 82. 100. a Leg-worm (strangely cured) 89.
90, 1, losing in the Woods, 83, 4, 5. a violent Storm and Flood, 91, 2, 3. W.
66, 7. and return to Jamaica and England, C. 131, 2. He goes again to Jamaica,
ib. O. Intr. I. II. crosses the Isthmus of America, ranges in the S. Sea, and
returns, III. IV. 11 to 24. care of his Journal, 16. hardships, 14, 6, 8. 23,
7. cruises about the W. Indies, 26, etc. goes to Virginia, 65. sets out again,
66, 9. great Storm, 70. W. 64. touches at C. Verd Isles, ib. R. Sherboro, 78.
reenters the S. Sea, 83. his Traverses there, and dangers, (see Privateers)
ib. to 279. Sickness, 255. and Cure, 276. 288. Hazardous Voyage cross the S.
Sea, 279. 281, 3, 4. he arrives at Guam, 284. the Philippines, 306. Mindanao,
309. P. Condore, 389. Coast of China, 406. (a Typho, 413, 4, 5, 6. S. 35, 6,)
the Piscadores, 416, 7. Bashee-Isles, 421. I. Bouton, 453. N. Holland, 462. he
plots to leave the Privateers, 402. 440. 470, 2, 4, 6. is left to shift at
Nicobar I. 481, 2, 3. puts to Sea in an open Boat, 486, 7. 490. his Danger,
Fatigue, and sad Reflections, 492, etc. long Sickness; upon it, 501. S. 2. 3.
90. 101. 111, 9. 147, 8. 177. arrival at Achin, O. 502. and harsh Physic, 503.
He goes to Malacca and Tonquin, 505. S. 2. 3. 8. 11. 2, 6. 90, 4, 9. 100.
Occurrences, 90 to 101. returns, 101, 3, 4, 5. to Malacca, 110. and Achin, 119.
goes again to Malacca, 154, 9. and back to Achin, 177. dangers, 92. 145, 6, 7,
8. O. 526, 7. He goes to Fort St. George, 505. 511. S. 178, 9. and (with Jeoly)
to Bencouli, ib. O. 505. 512. to C. Good Hope, 520, 1, 8. St. Hellena, 54. and
England, 550. Dancing and Singing, what and where, O. 127, 337. d. 361, 7, when
none, 359. 360, 1.) C. 115. W. 111. in the Night, O. 127. 459. at N. and F.
Moon. 541. I. Thackers, O. 361, 2. Dancing Women, etc. d. 340, 1, 2. S. 146.
Danes of St. Thomas I. O. 46. of Trangambar, 505. S. 130. 154, 7, 8 Darien
Isthmus, see Isthmus. Darien R. d. O. 40. Spaniards there, 41, its Savages,
their Trunks and poisonous Arrows, ib. Enemies to the Isthumus Indians, ib.
Manatee there, 33. 41. and Ante, C. 103. Trade-Winds and Tornadoes to the W. of
it. W. 18. Davenport's Account of the Tides of Tonquin, referred to W. 97.
Capt. Davis's Discovery, O. 352. Davis's Straight, see N. West Passages. A Day
lost or got in compassing the World, O. 376, 7. Debtors, how used at Tonquin,
S. 78, 9. Declination, care to be had of it in compassing the World, O. 377, 8.
Decoys of Hogs, where, O. 168. Deer, where, O. 9. 39. 212. 320. 347, ^. 369. S.
25. 127. 181. C. 32. ^2, 9. 108. W. 109. A Degree of the Eq. how much, O. 288,
9. 290. Degrees taken, and Examinations for them, where, S. 60. Dellagoa R. d.
its Negro's and Elephants Teeth, W. 108, 9. 112. Desert, Isles, Desarcusses,
Seals there, O. 90. See des Arena's. Devil, where feared, and how called, O. 9.
Dews at Night where it never rains, W. 78. Monte-Diabolo in Jaimaca, C. 8.
Diamond-point, d. O. 499. S. 121. 154, 6. 177. Dice made of Sea-Lions Teeth, O.
90. Dildo-bushes, where, O. 81. d. 101. Dilly R. d. and its Pirates, S. 156, 7.
Pulo Dinding, Dutch Fort, etc. S. 164. d. 171 to 177. Gratia Dios, Nombre de
Dios; see Gratia, Nombre. Directions for sailing, see Course. Discoveries (see
Davis's) what and how to be made, O. 272. 3, 4. 351, 2. Diseases, see Ague,
Dropsy, Fever, Flux, Gripes, Headache, Leprosy, Scurvy, Smallpox, Worms.
Itching in the Anus, see Penguin-fruit. Dishes of Coco-nut-shell, O. 294.
Ditches and Drains, what and where, S. 26. 38. 44, 5. Dogs where, O. 122. S.
25. C. 67. 76. W. 56. where none, O. 369. where eaten, S. 30, 1. coveted by
Alligators and Crocodiles, and fearful of them, C. 76. not suffered to eat what
bones, 67. English one where valued, O. 302. Dog-fish, where. C. 12. 35. Domea
R. and Bar (a branch of Tonquin-R.) and T. d. S. 10, 6, 9. 11, 9. 90. Doves of
three or four sorts, where, S. 128. see Turtle-Doves, Pigeons. Doughboys or
Dumplins, C. 18. Dragon-tree, and Gum (Tragacanth) d. and where, O. 463. Sir
Fr. Drake's Bowels where buried. O 39. I. Plata named from him, 132, his taking
Guatulco, 233. Course over the S. Sea, 280. Land-Crab found by him at an Isle
near Celebes, 473. Draughts or Charts Erroneous, see Mistakes. Drift-wood,
what, and where, O. 230. Drink long abstained from, yet Urine voided, O. 282.
Water the common Drink of Indians, 431. where Corn-drink of Maiz (Posole) O.
12. d. C. 43. 113. with Honey, ib. Rice-drink, O. 368, 9. Samshu, 419. of
Wheat, see Hoeshu. Of Millet, W. 110, 1. of Sugarcanes and a Berry, see
Bashee-drink. Water sweetened and spic'd, O. 359. Pine-drink, a Canoa of it,
10. Plantain-drink, 314, 5. Bonano-drink, 316. Milk, sour, W. 111. see Tire.
See Arack, Toddy, Tea, Water, Wine. Drinking to one another, where used, 434.
set and hard, 10. 369. 419. W. 111. see Drunken. Dropsies, where frequent and
mortal, and how cured, O. 255, 6. 276. Drugs, where a Commodity, O. 152. where
several, S. 61, 3. 126. see Aguala-wood, d. Alligators-Cods, d. Aloes,
Ambergriese, d. Annise, d. Arek-nut, d. Bang, d. Betle, d. Cambodia (Gumbooge)
Camphire, China-Roots, Cubebs, Gum-Dragon, d. Galinga, Lack, d, Musk, d.
Rhubarb, Sago, d. Sarsaparilla, Scorpions, Tea, Vine wild, d. Vinello's d. see
Dies, Fruits, Herbs, Roots, Spice. Drums used, C. 115. heard in the night, O.
458. where a Terror, 469. Drunken Men lost at Sea, O. 51. Dry, see Season,
Weather. Ducks, tame, where, O. 321. 9. 406. 533. 546. S. 25. 30. 128. 163.
181. W. 109. 111. C. 69. Duck-houses. S. 25, 6. Wild-Ducks, where, S. 26.
(caught with Nets, ib.) 30. W. 109. Duck and Mallard, their kinds, d. C. 69.
70. Dulce, Gulf, O. 215. its Weather, W. 83. Tides, 96. Dunghill fowl (Cocks
and Hens) see Poultry. Durian-tree and fruit, d. and where, O. 319. 320. S.
124. 181. Dutch, and Dutch East India Company, diligent, S. 174. 182. Seamen
thievish and close, 318. their tricks to swell Cloves, ib. Jealous of the
English, 331. Possessions and Trade in the W. Indies, 45, 6, 7, 8. 63, 4. C.
90. 126. see Aruba, Bonairy, Currasao Tabago. In the E. Indies, O. 318. 333.
456. S. 145, 8. Vessels bought and new fitted, 5. 110, 1. they engross the
Spice-Trade O. 316. 350. S. 164, 6. destroy the Spice, O. 316, 7. inslave or
awe the People, 316. 331. 366. S. 115. 6. 8. 164, 5. with Guard-ships, 163, 4.
173, 4. therefore hated and dreaded, O. 316. 331. 350, 9. 366. 456. S. 117.
Free Merchants of them excluded the Spice-Island by the Company, O. 317. yet
allowed to Trade where the Company not, ib. S. 135, 6. other Spice-Islands yet
free, O. 350. 513. Their Factory and Trade at Tonquin, S. 10, 1, 2, 3, 6. 26.
41. (their House, d.) 49. 51, 2. 61, 3, 4, 5. Intrigue wi^h Womenbrokers, 51.
Places got by them, 162. W. 56. O. 545. and lost again, ib. narrowly mist by
them, 182, 3. Dutch Ship surpised, O. 51, 2. eaten with Worms, 362. see
Batavia, P. Dinding, C. Good Hope, Maeasser, Spice-Islands. Dies, what and
where, S. 61, 4. poisonous used for dying the Teeth black, 41. see Anatta or
Otta, d. Blood-wood, d. (or Red-wood of Nicoya, or Nicaragua-wood Came wood,
Coch^^eel, d. Indico, d. Log-wood, d. Sappan-wood, d. Silvester, d. Stock
fish-wood, d. The Skin died or stained by Indians, O. 538. see Dammer,
Painting.
E.
EArs bored with wood in them, O. 32. Ear-ri^^gs, 427. 514. Earth yielding
Saltpeter, where, C. 11. see Soil. Earthen-ware, what and where, O. 250. S.
61, 3. C. 115. see China-ware, Jars. Eating, how, O. 329. 430. a Probation for
Soldiers, S. 61. Ebb, long, a presage of a Storm, W. 66. 70. see Tide. Eels,
where, S. 128. Eggs, found, eaten, traded for, O. 14. 22. 54. 76. 500. S. 30.
W. 111. of Boobies and Penguins eaten, O. 159. of Estriges, 464. 533. Of
Land-Crabs. C. 33. of Alligators (musky) 79, of Crocodiles, ib. Ants-Eggs, see
Ants. See Birds. Egg-Birds, d. and where, O. 54. C. 23. 4, 6. Pieces of Light
traded with, how and where, O. 245. Elephants, where and what, and how ordered,
S. 22, 5. 47. 49. 73. 142, 4, 6. Elephant-Idols, where, S. 56, 7. 91.
Elephant-Mountain, at Tonquin, 11. 19. Elephanta, a Storm, d. W. 74, 5.
Empaling where used, S. 140. Employments, what and where, O. 395. see
Artificers, Fishing, Trades. England, English Channel, most Regular Tides, W.
91. great, 97. see E. Coker. English, Possessions, and Trade in the W. Indies,
O. 64. 227. 485. C. 4. 5. 98. 126. see Caribbe-Islands, Jamaica,
Logwood-Cutters, Privateers. In Africa, O. 78. see Guinea, Sancta Hellena,
Natal. In the E. Indies, Factories and Trade, and English E. India Company, S.
101, 2, 3, 8, 9. O. 355, 8. 401. 476. 509, 512. ill managed where, S. 101, 2,
3. 183, 4. 146, 8. at Tonquin, 10, 1, 2, 3 6. 41. (their House, d.) 48, 9. 61,
3, 5. 86 to 90. 101, 5. at Achin, O. 502, 3, 4, 5. S. 130. 145. (present to the
Queen, 145, 6.) etc. at Malacca by stealth, 111. 166. able Men to be employed
in Factories, 102. Trade to be improved, S. 102. how and where, ib. 103. O. 64.
316, 7. 331. C. 131. where desired to settle, O. 316, 7. 331. 349. 359. 438, 9.
W. 112. and Trade, S. 5. welcome to it, 135. well spoken of, O. 455, 6. thought
less incroaching than the Dutch or Spaniards, 331. 359. once traded to Formosa,
421. how they got Bencouli, S. 182, 3, and Sancta Hellena, O. 545. English
Women there, d. 548. Exploits under the K. of Siam, S. 105, 6, 7. reward, 108.
some massacred there, others leave it, 150, 1, 2, 3. War with Siam, O. 504. and
with the Mogul, S. 146. 178. English summoned to Fort St. George, 153.
Renegado's, 138. English at Bornco, O. 370. 504. See Bencouli, Cunnimere, Fort
St. George, Indrapor^. English Seamen scarce and valuable in the E. Indies, S.
112. careless of their health, W. 42. serve the Mogul, O. 507. use
Azimuth-Compasses, 531. seldom touch at the C. Good Hope; and their Course to
double it, ib. see Barbado's, Course, Guinea, Jamaica, India. Entertainments,
how and where made, O. 328. 355, 9. 434 to 439. 457. 486. 8. 53, 4, 5. 78. C.
113. W. 110, 1. enjoined as a Mulct to end Quarrels, S. 78. see under Manners
good, Hospitable. Equator or Equinoctical, (the Line) not so hot as near the
Tropicks, and why, S. 32, 3. what Winds and Weather there, and near it, ib. O.
2. 100, 8. 110. 549. W. 6. 7. 8. 9. 11. 53, 4. 80, 2. Why S. Winds there, 6. 7.
when and where best to cross it. W. 5. 6. 51, 3, 6. and how to be done, 6. 7.
9. from St. Hellena, O. 549. Escondedo R. and Port, C. 48. Estantions or
Beef-farms, see Beeves where. Estapa in the S. Sea, d. and its Muscles, O. 250.
Estapo in Campeachy, d. C. 110, 1. in vain attempted, ib. Count d'Estree's
Expedition, W. 46. O. 47. Shipwreck, ib. 50, 1. Estridges (Ostridges) and their
Eggs (eaten) where, O. 464. 533. Ethics, (Moral Philosophy) studied at
Tonquin, S. 60. Eunuch, where the almost only preferred, S. 69. 81, 2. and why,
85. their qualities, 83, 4, 5. Voluntary Eunuchs, 81, 2. Europe, plenty of
Seals in the N. of it, O. 90. see Gallicia, England. Europeans, liked by the
Women, where, O. 327. Children born of them in the W. Indies, called Crioles,
68. Prisoners sent to Mexico, C. 54. see Danes, Dutch, English, French,
Portuguese, Spaniards. Eyes (see sight) small, O. 32. 170. 395. 407. 427.
meanly proportioned, 297. black, 32. 395. 478. 537. S. 128. hazel, 426, 7.
Eyebrows, hanging over the Eyes, O. 32. thick, 426. great, 464. 537. Women
with none, 479. Eyelids, half closed to avoid Flies, O. 464.
F.
FAces, where People of Round, O. 32. 426. Oval, 325, 537. S. 40. (Negro-make)
W. 110. flattish, O. 537. S. 40. long, O. 7. 44. 170. 297. 395. 407. 464. 478.
S. 128. full, O. 32. thin, 170. Women rounder visag'd than Men, where, 326.
well featured, ib. see Complexion, Countenance, Features. Factory, what Men
best for settling one, O. 352. 3. S. 102, 3. Constant Falcon's power at Siam,
S. 95. 108, 9. 110. 152. Famines, where and how occasioned, S. 37. 8. 130.
Fanam, of Coromandel, how much, O. 508. Fans of Palmeto-leaves, to blow the
Fire, O. 150, 1. Feasts at Weddings, O. 334. at a Circumcision, 339. 34^.
Idolatrous, 397. Annual, 53, 5. Funeral, d. S. 52. 91, 2. see Entertainments.
Feathers wore in Caps, O. 4^8, 9. W. 111. Features, see Chin, Eyes, Face,
Forehead; Limbs, Lips, Mouth, Nose, Shape. People of not one graceful Feature,
O. 464. Feet, small, O. 32. Women's, very, and why, and what the consequence,
327. 408. going barefoot, O. 32. 326. 408. 456. S. 43. I. John Fernando, d. O.
87, 8. 423. discovery of it, 88. its stocking with Goats, ib. fertility, 87, 6.
fish, 89, 90, 1. strength, ib. Herbage, 92. a black Fowl there, 97. History of
a Moskito-man left there, 84, 5, 6. I. Fernando de Noronho, d. W. 56, 7.
Fetissero's, or Negro-Priests, S. 83. Fevers, Men taken with them, O. 79. where
frequent, 153. 297. 334. a malignant one, 224. 230. what bad for them, S. 23.
good, ib. Fighting, manner of it, where, O. 337. 8. where none, 516. short and
hasty, S. 74. fighting to death, a punishment, 141. Indians loath to fight in
the Rain, 176. Mock-fight, 339, 340. see Cock-fighting. Fir Tree, where, and
how used, S. 62, 4. Fire, how got by Indians, O. 466. of what wood, strong, C.
50, 7. Fires seen in the night, where, O. 459. 382. a Spanish signal, ib. and
Privateers, 252. Laws and Provision against Fires, S. 45, 6, 7. and Punishment,
79. Fish and Fishermen, what and where, O. 2. 9. 110. 134. 141, 9. 159. 181.
241, 2, 3. 257. 276. 283. 297. 321. 348. 358. 395, 7, 9. 400. 429. 448. 463.
474. 480, 5, 9. 514, 5. 533. S. 6. 8. 11. 20, 1, 7, 8, 9. 30. 43. 64. 89. 128.
130, 1. 142. 162, 3. 175, 6. 181. C. 12, 3, 5. 21, 2, 5, 6. 31, 4. 71, 2, 3.
124, 7. W. 110, 1. see Boneto, Breme, Cat-fish, d. Cavally, Dog-fish, Eel,
Flying-fish, Gar-fish, d. Jew-fish, d. Limpit, Sea-Lion, d. Manatee, d. Spanish
Mackril, d. Mud-fish, Mullet, Nurse, d. Parricoota, d. Porpus, Ray (Sting,
Rasp, Whip-Ray) d. Remora or Sucking-fish, d. Rock-fish, (Grooper, Baccalao) d.
Shark, Snapper, d. Snook, d. Sword-fish, d. Tarpom, d. Tenpounder, Turtle, d.
Old-wives. see Shellfish. Where none, O. 31. 282. 381. scarce, 117. 302. 429.
463, 9. most on Rocky Coasts, 90. 264. 283. Fish and Shoals where a sign of
Land near, ib. Fish unwholesome from their food, where, 103, 4. killed by Storms
and Floods, 524. W. 68. 70, 1. Wild Indians love Fish, O. 514. and Privateers
always seek for it, 117, 8. where the main Subsistence, and how caught, 465, 6.
way of Fishing at Tonquin, and Fish Ponds, S. 26, 7, 8, 9. 48.
Fishing-Instruments, and how used, O. 2. 7. 8. 9. 10. d. 35, 6, 7. 395, 7. S.
27, 8, 9. 130, 1. C. 13. see Harpoons, Hooks and Lines, Nets, ^egs. see
Manatee, Turtle, Moskito-men, Strikers. Fishing-Towns, C. 43. 124, 7. and
Banks, 17. 21, 2, 8. Pearl fishing, see Pearl. Salt-fish, where, 124, 8. O.
269. Pickled-fish, 303. C. 124. a small sort less than a Herring, O. 533. like
Anchovy, S. 27. Composition, 28. see Balach^^^, ^uke-(...), Soy. Fish eaten
raw, with Goats maw dressed, O. 430. Fishers I. by Tonquin, d. S. 10.
Fishing-Hawks, Birds, where, C. 69. d. 71. The Five Islands, see Bashee
Islands. Flags used, where, S. 76. with Devices, O. 455. Flamingo, where, d. O.
70, 1, 2. its Tongue, and singular Nest, 71. Fleet (Plate) from Lima, and its
Course, O. 171, 7, 9. 184, 5. 207. Sailing Orders, 200, 1. strength, 207.
fight, 209. Mexican-Fleet, see Armada, Barlaventa, Flota. Flesh eaten raw, 5.
30. how dressed, see Cookery. Flies troublesome, where, O. 464. see Moskitos or
Gnats. Flint-heads to Arrows, see Arrows. Floats in the Sea, see Bark-logs.
Flood, Flowing water, see Tide. Floods, Land, how, when and where, O. 16, 7.
20. 96. 195. 322. 360. C. 80, 1, 2. 91, 2. 3. 108, 9. 122. S. 34, 5. stated in
the Torrid Zone, and whence, ib. cause of N^le's, ib. Rivers made by them only,
ib. and Harvest depending on them, 37, 8, 9. Mole to keep them off, d. 49. and
Banks, 44. Havoc made by them, 49. 50. C. 92, 3. W. 67, 8, etc. Water then
unwholesom, O. 524. Houses standing as in Ponds, 329. 360. S. 180. Floors, how
laid, covered, etc. O. 151. 328, 9. 330. 411. 457. Florida, Gulf, its Storms,
W. 60. Currents, 105. Course through it, 18, 9. 24. 40. of the Barlaventa Fleet,
C. 126. its Ambergriese, W. 54. O. 73. Indians less savage than reported, 485.
Flower, a Commodity, where found, O. 99. 142, 3, 5. 172. 194, 6. 223. 249. 250.
260. 418, 9. see Corn. Fluxes, where ordinary, O. 153. 334. S. 148. how caught,
W. 42. and cured, O. 311, 6. 330. S. 125. 137. 148. see Dampier's long illness.
Flying-fish, where, O. 80. Flying-Proes, d. and where, S. 131. Fogs and Mists,
where and when, O. 94, 5. 153. 322, 3. W. 50, 1. chiefly in fair weather, 41.
turn to wind, 40. 51. none in Peru, O. 186. Fogo I. of the C. Verds, d. its
Volcan and Fire, O. 77. Ambergriese, 73. Fokien, Prove. of China, its Shipping
and Trade, O. 417, 8. its Dialect the Court Language at Tonquin, S. 59. Food,
what and where, O. 8. 9. 14. 39. 329. 357. 464, 5, 6. 473, 4. 540. S. 22. 30,
1. 55. 129. C. 33. 59. 61, 2, 3, 7, 9. 70, 2, 5. 113. W. 110, 1. see Beasts,
Birds, Cookery, Corn, Flower, Fruits, Insects, Roots, Poison. Foreheads,
People of high, O. 407. low, 32. 426. round, 464. C. 115. flat, ib. O 325.
(Women's) 326, 7. I. Formosa, d. past and present State, English excluded, etc.
O. 421. C. Formosa in Africa, its Fogs and Breezes, W. 50, 1. Fortifications
and Forts, what and where, O. 46. 63. 11^. 141, 4. 179. 217. 221. 242, 6, 7.
300. 331, 7, 8, 9. 378, 9. 387, 8. 416, 7. 447. 454. 518, 9. 522. 533. 546. S.
106, 7. (of Trees) 145. d. 160, 5. d. 173, 4, 5, 6, 9. 180, 1, 3. C. 8. 14. 31.
45. 110. 124, 8, 9. W. 57. Places advantageous to be Fortified, O. 91. 119.
120. 394. Forty legs, Insect, see Centipees. Fowl, see Birds. C. St. Francisco,
d. O. 131. 162. its Rains, W. 83. Tides, 96. Currents, 107. French, Factory at
Tonquin, S. 15. and Missionaries, 93 to 99. their Interest at Siam, 108, 9.
dismissed thence, 112. 153. fight before F. St. George, O. 522, 3. Refugees,
where, 532. 547. Civility to the A. 52. bad Husbands of the W. India Cattle, C.
98. one killed by a Bullock, 120. see D' Estrees, Petit-G^av^es, Privateers.
Fresh Water Lagune in Campeachy, d. C. 94. see Water. Friars, see Priests.
Friday, the Mohammedan Sabbath, O. 338. 377. the same day at Mindanao, as in
Europe, ib. Frocks, what and where worn, d. O. 327. 408. d. C. 114. sold, 119.
Frogs eaten, where, S. 25, 7. 31. 55. Fruits which Birds have peck'd, wholesome,
O. 39. but few Birds where Fruits and Roots only, and no Grain, 426. what juice
unripe Fruits have in both India's, 222. A small shell-fruit and bush, d. C.
94. 120. one like a Sloe, S. 125. Fruits growing wild, O. 258. none in N.
Holland, 464. see Annise-berry or Fruit, Apple, Arek-nut, d. Avogato-pear, d.
Betle-leaf, see Trees, Bonano, d. Bread-fruit, d. Cacao, d. Cam-chain, d.
Cam-quit, d. Citron, d. Coco, d. Coco-plum, d. Durian, d. Grape-tree of
Campeachy, d. of P. Condore, d. Guava, d. Hog-plum, d. Jaca, d. Lichea, d.
Lime, d. Maccaw, Mammee, d. wild Mammee, d. Mammee-sappota, d. Manchineel, d.
Mangastan, d. Mango, d. Melon, (Musk, and Water melon) d. Melory, d. Mulberry,
d. Orange, d. Penguin, d. Pineapple, Plaintain, d. Pomegranate, Prickle-pear,
d. Pumkin, Pumplenose, Sapadillo, d. Star Apple, d. Vinello, d. see Spice.
Funeral Feast, d. S. 52. 91, 2. Goods buried with the dead, O. 517.
G.
GAbon R. Remora or Sucking-fish near it, W. 54. Gage's Survey of the W. Indies
noted, W. 94, 5. Gallapago's Isles, d. O. 99. 100, 1, 9. 110. laid in Charts
too near America, O. 100. W. 57. Trade-wind brisk thence to Guam 11. Current
there, 107. Weather, O. 108. Soil, 109. the Trees Guano's, Turtle (Land and
Sea) and Turtle-grass and feed, 101, 2, 3, 6, 7, 9. their Turtle found at
Plata, 160. A good Stage, whither, 352. Galleons (Spanish) see Armada,
Barlaventa-Fleet, Fleta. Gallera, I. d. O. 174, 5. Gallicia in Spain, its
Course and Seas, O. 423. hot Blooms there, 530. its bad Beef, and why, S. 31.
see Corunna. Gallingal, where, S. 63. Gallio, I. Timber thence, O. 3. 140.
Rains there, ib. good Anchorage, 163, 4. d. 169. Galliwasp, a poisonous Insect,
d. C. 64. Galleys and Gally-house, what and where, S. 76, 7. see Boats, Proe's.
Gaming, where much used, S. 42. Wives and Children gam'd away, ib. see Chinese,
Tonquinese. Ganga, see Bang. Garachina, point, d. O. 174. 193. misnam'd in
Maps, ib. strong Flood there, 4. 5. its Oysters, 177. Gardens, where and what,
O. 118. 221. 296. d. 534, 5. S. 44, 5. 160. Garlic, where and how used, S.
129. Garr-fish, d. C. 71, 2. the Snout dangerous, ib. Garrisons at Tonquin
without Forts, S. 72, 4. See Forts. R. de la Gartos, d. C. 12, 3. 21. Geese,
where, O. 546. S. 26. Gentou's, who and where, O. 507, 8. F. St. George or
Maderas, Course thither, its fine Prospect, etc. S. 178, 9. its Breezes, W. 39.
sleeping there in the open Air, why, 41, 2. its Terreno's, 47. and stormy
Monsoons, 37. it wants a good Road, ib. A Fight before it, d. O. 522, 3.
Idolatrous Procession there, 397. Lascars, thence, S. 51. its Mango's, O. 391,
2. Hoc-shu sold there, 420. Trade for Manilla Tobacco, 307. 333. P. George's I.
O. 276. see Maria's Isles. Giddiness caused by what, O. 319. and Delirium, S.
126. Gilded-Rings a Commodity, where, C. 119. see Bullawan, Gold. Gilolo I. its
low Coasts, O. 425. 447. Clove-Islands near it, ib. see Ternate and Tidore.
Ginger, where, S. 63. Glass-Jewels, and Looking-Glasses, valued by Indians, C.
119. O. 23, 4. Globe of the Earth, its Ciranit, O. 288, 9. 290. Breadth of its
Oceans and Continents mis-reckon'd, ib. A day lost by the A. in compassing it,
376, 7. daily increase of Sun's Declination to be allowed for, 377, 8. Goa,
almost all that remains to the Portuguese in India, S 162. stormy Monsoons
there, W. 74, 5. Goa-Arak, what, O. 293. Goats, where, O. 48. 56. 70, 4, 5, 6,
7. 84, 6, 7, 8. 132, 7. 320. 387. 406. 416. 419. 422, 6. 435, 6, 458. 532. 545.
S. 25. 30. 127. W. 50. killed by Winds, ib. not killed by the Owners, O. 429.
yet their Skins and Maws eaten, ib. 430. Skins dressed, a Commodity, where, 142,
3. 214. Goat I. of the Bashees, d. O. 385. 422, 5. Gold, traded for, O. 169.
170, 1. 333. S. 61, 4. 129. 151, 2. taken by weight and little coined where,
132. of China and Japan, S. 61, 4. Rate of it, what and where, 61. 132. O. 356.
Gold Mines, Mountains and Rivers, and Gold gathered, where, 41. 124. 153, 8, 9.
163. 171, 5, 8. 193, 4, 5. 211. 260, 1, 6, 9. 273. 307, 8. 310. 333. 350, 1.
387. 513. S. 22. 61, 4. 127, 9. 133, 4. and perhaps, O. 426, etc. see Bullawan.
how gathered, 153. 195. Lumps of it, and so dug, where, ib. S. 133, 4. Indians
and their Padres enriched by it, O. 124. 195. 308. Gold Countries all
unhealthy, 153. S. 133, 4. Rings, etc. worn, O. 365. 514. see Bullawan.
Gold-Image, and gilded Pagoda, S. 152. Goldsmiths, working, where, 130, 1. O.
331, 2. Gold-Coast of Guinea, Trials there by Bitter Waters, S. 8. 83. its
Weather, Tides, and Variation, W. 52, 3. see C. Corso. Golden I. of the
Samballo's, its Turtle, O. 182. Breezes, L. W. 36. Golden Mountain in Sumatra,
d. O. 199. S. 121. 133. Pulo Gomez, d. S. 122, 3. 142. Gong, what and where
used, O. 338. S. 69. 75, 7. Gongo, a punishing Instrument, d. S. 79. C. Lopez
de Gonsalvo, see C. Lopez. C. of Good Hope, see Hope. Capt. Goodlud's Trading
in the E. India and to China, O. 308. 349. Gorgonia, I. d. O. 172. very wet,
why, W. 85, 6. Government, where Arbitrary (damping Industry) O. 326. 334, 5.
(at Tonquin the Choua and Pageant Boua) S. 42. 66, 8, etc. (at Achin, under
Oromkeys, and a Pageant Queen) 141. where no Form of it, but domestic only, O.
432. 465. 479. W. 112. see Mandarin, Prince, Punishment, Shabander. Graston I.
of the Bashees, d. O. 385. 422, 5, 6, 8, 9. 436. Grain, see Corn. Small, in
Africa, see Millet. Gramadael, an Herb, O. 111. R. Grande, rapid, O. 42. its
Mouth, 43. R. Grande de Darien, see Darien, R. Grapes, where and what, O. 532.
Grape-tree of P. Condore, d. O. 392. of Campeachy, d. C. 49. makes strong
Coals, ib. Grass, what and where, O. 54, 6, 7. 87. 112, 3. 121. 132. 218. 231.
240. 265. 347. 406. 416. 426. 463. 532. S. 24. C. 48. 58. 94. 108. 119. W. 109.
set on fire to burn Enemies, 265. to manure Ground, C. 58. none in deep Seas,
O. 393. Silk-grass, where and how used, W. 110. C. Gratia Dies, its Trade-w. W.
17. weather, 82. Currents 101, 2, 4, 5. its River, see Cape-R. Greasing the
Body, where used, O. 537. Capt. Greenhill's Letters to the A. W. 49. 53.
Gripes, where frequent, O. 153. 334. Grooper, see Rock-fish. Groves, what and
where, O. 62. 258. S. 24. 44. C. 6. 107. see Woods. Idol-Grove, where, O. 411.
Guam (Guahon) I. of the Ladrones, its Tides, W. 96. brisk Trade-w. thither, 11.
O. 285, 6. its Distance from Mexico, variously reckoned, and how found, 279.
280, 2, 3, 5 to 8. 290. what from Mindanao, 288. 306. the Stage of the
Acapulco-ship, going out, 245. 283. 290, 1. Guam, d. 290, etc. its Fruits, 291.
Fish and Indians, 297. their Proe's, d. 298, 9. 300. Hogs, 302. Fort and
Spaniards, 300, etc. Time reckoned there as in Europe, 377. Guanchaquo, Port to
Truxillo, O. 98. Guano, d. and where, O. 57. 101. 177. 212. 263. 320. 392. C.
50, 9. 63. 96. 118. Venomous Beast like it, O. 321. 392. Guards of Princes,
what and where, O. 335. 455, 7. S. 69. 8^. Guard-ships (Dutch) where and why
kept, 163, 4. 173. 4. C. Gardafuer (de Guardafuy) its winds and weather, W. 20.
Guasco, whence its Timber, O. 140. Guasickwalp (Guazacoalco) R. d. C. 121, 2,
3. Guatimala City and Volcan, d. O. 225. 230. product, 225, 7, 9. Coast high,
425. low thence to California, ib. Current, W. 108. Guatulco (Aguatulco) Port,
d. its Buffadore, O. 232, 3, 9. its Tides, 238. W. 96. T. here once, taken by
Sir Fr. Drake, O. 233. Guava, d. and where, O. 222. 258. 311. S. 23, 4. 124.
1^1. C. 94. 107, 8. Petit-Guavre (French Tortuga) O. 30, 1. 45. 54, 5. 192. C.
53. W. 46. Guaxaca, its Cochineel, O. 329. Guiaquil or Wyakil, Bay, R. and T.
d. O. 147, 9. 150, 1, 2, 6. in vain attempted, 153, etc. when taken, 157. Port
to Quito, 152. its Commodities, ib. 60. 96. 140. 152. Rains, 140. unhealthy,
153. La Guiare, (Porto de Guayva) d. O. 63. 185. C. 126. Guinca, Coast, d. W.
8. 14. 80, 1. why divided into Lee- and Windward, 15. low and good Anchoring,
O. 425. spout there, d. 452, 3. Winds, Weather and Course thither and thence,
etc. W. 3. 4. 7. 8. 9. 10, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8. 24. 5, 7. 38. 51, 2, 3, 5. 6 80. its
Harmatans, d. 49. Currents, what, 51. and when they shift, 106, 7. Hawks bill
Turtle, O. 105. Hippopotamus, d. C. 104 5 6. Palm-wine, O. 78. 248. Plantains,
315. its Negro's Coal black, 464. grease themselves, 537. Trade for Slaves,
510. Women, (even the King's) prostituted, 395, 6. see C. St. Anne, old
Callabar, R. Gabon, Gold-Coast, Loango, C. Lopez de ^onsalvo, C. M^^^t or
Miserada, C. Palmas, She^her^ R. and Bite of Guinea, d. winds and weather, W.
8. 16, 8. Current, 51. Guinea-Corn, where, O. 48. W. 110, 1. Guinea or
Cod-pepper, Sauce and Pickle of it, O. 296. C. 124. Guinea-worms, where, a
Disease, and how cured, C. 89. 90, 1. Sea-Gulls, where, W. 56. Gum, see
Cambodia, Dragon, Lack. Gums cleans'd by what, O. 319. Guns, great and small,
where and what, O. 329. 331. 343. S. 69. 70. a Commodity, 65. C. 41. when
discharged, O. 343, 9. 354. turning on a Swivel, 400. rests and covering, S.
71. 3. Sticks, O. 118. Gunpowder, made where and how, S. 70. 97, 8, 9. see
Forts. Guts eaten, where, O. 538. See Maw. Guzurats, Brokers at Achin. S. 129.
134, 5, 7.
H.
R. 'de la Hacha, d. O. 43. its Stock-fish-wood, C. 58. the Galleons touch
there, O. 185. and Barlaventa-Fleet, C. 126. Hair of the head, where black, O.
7. 32. 44. 170. 297, 325, 6. 395. 407. 427. 464. 478. S. 40. 128. Lank or
straight, O. 7. 325, 6. 395. 427. 464. 478. S. 40. Long, O. 297. 326. 407. 464.
S. 40. 128. Thick, O. 427. S. 40. Short, curled or crisp'd, O. 464. 537. W.
108. 110. shortened to the Ears, O. 427. 438. Chinese fashion of it, 407, S. 15.
and fondness for it, 32. see Chinese. Most cut off, or shaved, see Tartars. Cut
off to prevent Fevers, O. 186. how tied by Women, 326. 407. C. 114. stuck with
shells, O. 538. with Tallow and Feathers, W. 111. shown, to express a
Multitude, O. 514. Of the Beard, see Beard. Of the Brows, see Eyebrows.
Horse-hair red worn in Caps, 419. Half-moon-Proes, d. where, S. 5. Hallover in
Campeachy, d. C. 120. Halpo, d. C. 111, 9. Hammocks of Indians, C. 65. 115.
Haniago, its Shrimp-trade, C. 127, 8. Harbors, what and where, O. 46. 50, 6.
76. 99. 111, 8, 9. 120, 6. 151, 2. 176. 185. 193, 8. 215, 7. 221. 232, 3, 9.
243 to 7, 9. 254, 6. 321. 378. 383, 5, 7, 8. 390. 4. 417. 421. 454, 8. 533, 5.
S. 173. C. 42, 3, 4, 8. 125, 6, 7. W. 35. 74. on what Coasts best, O. 309. and
how made, 422. 3, 4, 5. Harmatans, Winds, d. W. 49. 50. Harpoons or Fisgigs, O.
2. 7. 8. 9. 10. d. 35, 6, 7. C. 13. Harvest in the Torrid-zone is in the dry
Season, W. 81. Two in a Year, S. 25. depends on the Annual Rains and Floods,
37, 8. see Rice. Hats, what and where made, O. 150. worn, C. 114. S. 43. a
Commodity, O. 76. 115. C. 110. 120. Hatchets, what and where, S. 131. 181. a
Commodity, where C. 41. 119. Stone-hatchets, d. and where, O. 85. 466. see Axe.
Havana in Cuba, its Plantains, O. 313. touched at, 185. C. 126. Havens, see
Harbors. Hautboys used in Churches, C. 115. Heads, People of Little, O. 325.
Great, 464. used to be bare, 407. 427. S. 43. a punishment, 79. see Caps, Hair,
Hats, Turbans. Head ach, frequent, where, O. 153. Healthy places and unhealthy,
O. 153. 297, 8. see Air, Diseases. wet season unhealthy, 297, 8. Wet places, to
people of Dry, 186. Hean T. Province, Trade, etc. d. S. 14, 5, 6, 9. 20, 1, 5.
49. 93. Passage-boat to Cachao, 99. 100. Heat, what and where, S. 32, 3, 4.
149. how Indians live in, Hot Climates, O. 542. Hedges, what and where, O. 296.
534. S. 45. Sancta Hellena, I. a baiting-place, W. 4. healthy but poor, S. 111,
2. deep Sea, and high Coast, O. 423. d. 544, 5. its change of Masters, Product,
Inhabitants, English Women, etc. 545, 6, 7, 8. Point Sancta Hellena, and
Village, d. O. 133, 4. its Product, 159. Hemp, where, O. 218, 9. 223. Hens,
(Dunghil-fowl) see Poultry. Herbs, where, O. 532. Sallade, S. 12. 22, 3. 30.
45. 126. Medicinal, O. 92. 334. S. 22, 3. 126. devoured by Locusts, O. 430. see
Bur, Gramadael, Grass, Moss, Purslain, Thistles. Herons, d. and where, C. 69.
70. S. 26. Hides, how dressed, C. 88. a Commodity, 110. O. 115. 151. worn, W.
111. see Skins, Leather, Bark. Hilanoons, Mindanaians, their Proe's, Mines,
etc. O. 325. 333. Hills ragged, O. 251. see Mark, Mountain, Soil, and
Hina-hill, d. C. 44. Hippopotamus, River, or Seahorse, of Loango, d. C. 104,
5, 6. of Natal, d. 104, 6, 7. W. 109. of C. Good Hope, d. C. 103, 4.
Hispaniola, its Storms, W. 44, 5. 60. Currents, 101. Savannahs, O. 87. Anatta
and Indico, 227. Orange-groves, C. 6. divided between French and Spaniards, O.
192. see C. Alta Vela, Petit-Guavres. Hives for Bees, what and where, C. 112.
Hocksing of Beeves, d. and where, C. 96, 7, 8. Hocksing-Iron. d. 97. Hoc shu,
its Jars, etc. where sold O. 419. 420. S. 137. Hoe's, a Commodity, where, C.
119. see Plantations. Hogs, what and where, O. 9. 62. 76. 141. 166. 7, 8. 176.
186. 200. 240. 302. 320. 343, 4. 379. 382. 7. 392, 7. 406. 410, 1, 9. 426. 435,
6, 7. 48^, 9. 532. 545 6. S. 25. 123 7. 181. C. 3^, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7. 98. 128.
(eating fishy, ib.) W. 109. food for them, O. 166. and Decoys of them, 168. the
W. Indies how stocked with them. C. 98. not killed, nor the Guts meddled with,
where, O. 429. eaten raw, S. 30. Hog-farms, see Crauls. China-hogs, d. O. 436.
much meazled, ib. how abhorred by Mahometans, 343, 4. 490. 515. see Pecary,
Warree. Hog-Isle, d. O. 475. others near it, ib. Hog-plum-tree a fruit, d. and
where, O. 123. New-Holland, reckoned too far to the E. O. 289. and to the N.
462. its Lat. to be kept, by what Ships, 289. how to be coasted, 351.
Discoveries to be made, 352. Dangerous Shoal near it, 461, 2. Coast, d. 462, 3.
Tides, 462, 9. W. 99. Manatee and Turtle, shy, O. 33. 449. 463, 4. Vegetables
and Animals, 462, 3. troublesome Flies, 464. The sorry Inhabitants, d. 464,
etc. 485. subsistence, 465. weapons, 466. fear of Strangers, 467. disesteem of
Clothes, etc. 468. awkardness at work, greediness, incuriosity, ib. fear of
Guns, 469. greasing themselves, 537. penury, 464, 5, 6. 485. greater than the
Hottentots, 464. Honduras, Bay, low Coast thence to Sancta Martha, O. 424. wet,
230. Breezes, W. 34. Hawks-bill Turtle, O. 104. and Green, 105. Ambergriese
found, 73. China-Roots, 409. Mountain-Cow, C. 103. Logwood and Logwood-cutting,
10. 53. O. 449. 450. first Trading of English there, 227. Honey where, O. 78.
371. C. 112, 3. see Bees. Hooks and Lines, fishing, S. 28. 131. C. 12. 31, 4.
Hoops, or Wrist-bands of Silver, O. 365. of Gold, 514. C. of Good Hope, season
of doubling it, O. 527. and course to do it, 531. cold Winds there, why, 529.
530. Trade-winds, W. 19. Breezes, 24. not the nearest way to the Eastern
Indies, O. 331. touching there, 531. signs of being near it, ib. Coast and
Prospect, 530, 1. Table-land and Harbor, ib. 535, 3. Dutch Settlements and
French Refugees, 531, 2. Product, 532, 3. Dutch Fort, T. and Garden, d. 533, 4,
5. Provision and Taxes, ib. Hippopotamus, d. C. 103, 4. Negro's, see
Hottentots. Horizon, Clouds there, how and of what a sign, see Clouds. The Dawn
high or low, presages such Winds, O. 498. Horns of Spiders, Pickers for Teeth,
and Tobacco-pipes, C. 64. Horses, where, O. 48. 115. 253, 4, 5, 8, 9. 265, 9.
270 1. 320, 387. 532. S. 25. 47, d. 69. 127. 134. C. 52, 9. 102. None, O. 223.
eaten, 259. S. 30, 1. Horse-Idols, 56, 7. 91. O. 396. Horse hoof, a Shellfish,
d. C. 44, 5. Hospital, where, O. 221. Hottentots, or Hodmadois, of Monomatapa,
d. O. 539 to 542. their Make and Habit, 537, 8. Houses, 464. 539. food,
bartering, and way of living, 464. 540, 1, 2. Dancing at N. and Full Moon, 541.
W. 55. their Neighbors, 108, etc. Houses, what and where. O. 139. 140. 300.
322, 8 9 330, 5, 6, 7. 365. 387. 410. 417. 428. 457. 479. 539. S. 12, 3. 43, 4
5, 6, 7, 8. 93, 4. C. 115. 127. 110. None, O. 464, 5, 7. W. 108. Duck-houses,
S. 25, 6. Galley-houses, d. 77. see Floors, Posts, Roofs, Walls, Windows,
Household Stuff, S. 43. 93. 129. 131. W. 110. Hudson's Bay, not best way to seek
a N. W. Passage, O. 273. Humming-Bird, d. C. 65, 6. Hunting, where and how, O.
364, 6, 7, 8, 9. C. 33, 4, 5. (in a Canoa, d.) 81, 3, 4, 5, 6. W. 110, 1.
little, S. 25. see Beeves, Deer, Hogs. Hurricans, what and where, W. 60, 5. d.
68, 9. 70, 1, 2. Clouds presaging them, d. 71. Husbandmen and Husbandry, where
and what, O. 269. 410. S. 130. 182. W. 110. by burning of Grass, C. 58. of
Cattle, 98. see Harvest, Plantations, Plowing, Rice.
J.
JAca (Jack) tree and fruit, d. and where, O. 320. S. 124. 181. Jaccals, where,
O. 240. Jackets, what and where, O. 427. S. 43. C. 114. Subtle-Jacks, Birds, d.
and their Nests, C. 65, 8, 9. St. Jago I. of the C. Verds, d. O. 76, 7. St.
Jago R. in Mexico, d. O. 267, 8. the T. 270. St. Jago R. in Peru, d. O. 163, 4.
Jamaica, Coasts, d. W. 31, 2, 5, 6. 83, 4, 101. Savannahs and Mountains, 83, 4.
O. 87. C. 7. 8. 98. its Breezes, 28 to 32. 45. Weather, 83, 4. Storms, 60, 5,
8. Currents, 101. Course to or from it, 18, 9. 39. 40. 62. 106. best Boats, 31
Trading about it, C. 8. 9. Salt-Petre-Earth, 7. 8. Cattle, whence and how
managed, 98 and what it owes to the Spaniards, ib. O. 60. 203, 4. 224.
Centipee's, 320. Vegetables, Trade, etc. 60, 4. 118. 123. 203, 4. 222, 6, 7, 8.
296. 314. 409. C 7. 8. 9. neglected, O. 204. 227. Fish, 33. 104. 249. Nets for
Turtle, d. 395. where taken, W. 36. price of Slaves, 184. sleeping in open Air,
W. 41, 2. French Squadron there, 46. see Blewfields, Blew, Mountain, Monte
Diabolo, Legamy, Point Negril, Point Pedro, Port Royal. Jamby, its Pepper, S.
182. Japan, store of good Tea there, O. 409. Soy thence, S. 28. its Gold pure,
61. 127. Lacquer-ware, 61. 151. Camphire rehn'd there, 126. Trade thither,
what, 15. rich, and how to be settled, 102, 3. 117. O. 394. Monsoons, W. 21.
Jars, d. O 196, 7. 419 420. 434, 5. S. 98, 9. 105. 146. Java, I. high Coast, O.
425 an I. off it, d. 472, 3. anointing used there, 537. Maiming, S. 139. Trade,
5. Pepper, 182. engrost by the Dutch, 116. Fruit like a Sloe, 125. Malayan
spoken there, O. 394. Counter winds in Streights to the E. of it, 351.
Streights of Sunda, 394 see Bantam, Batavia. Idolatry, see Altars, Feasts,
Groves, Images, Incense, Lamps, Papers, Processions, Sacrifices, Temples,
Torches, and Idols, where and what, O. 396, 7. 400. 411, 2. S. 56, 7, 8. 152.
Jeoley the painted Prince, etc. O. 350. 511, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 529. 549. Jew-fish,
d. and where, O. 249. 259. 277. salted, 277, 9. Jihore (Ihor.) R. and Kingdom,
d. S. 4. its Half-Moon-Proes, d. and Trade, 5. 158 164. Malayan Natives, 128.
Images, see V. Mary, Saints. Incense, where used in Sacrifice, S. 58. Indies
and Indians, General Observations of them, O. 222. 244, 5, 6. 296. 433, 4. 466.
514. 542. S. 46. 116, 7. 128. 176, C. 6. W. 41, 2. 74. East India, Coasts, O.
425. Product, 174. 315. 387. 391. 518. Indians, E. Habit, Usages, State, etc.
295, 6, 7. 309. 328. 348. 380, 3, 7. 391, 4, 5. 433, 4. 455, 6, 9. 537. S. 13.
24. 37, 8. 40, 2. 64. 112. 129. 130. 142, 3. 153. 164. East-Indian Ocean, its
breadth, O. 289. discovered by Sea, 530. S. 161. how to be further discovered,
O. 331, 2. Course to and from, 531. 549. W. 3. 7. 8. 18, 9. 22, 3, 4, 5.
Baiting-places, 4. O. 527. 531. Winds and Weather, 306. W. 3. 4. 7. 11, 7, 9.
20 to 7. 39. 47, 8. Storms, 60. Tides, 97. Currents, 107. Fish, O. 90. 105.
174. 449. see Aracan, Bao or Boutan, Bashee Islands, Bengal, Bouton, I.
Cambodia, Champa, Celebes, Ceylon, China, Cochinchina, P. Condore, Coromandel,
Formosa, Japan, Java, Ladrones, Malabar, Malacca and Malayan, Meangis, Nicobar,
Omba, Pentare, Pegu, Philippine Isles, Piscadores, Pracel, Prata, Siam,
Spice-Islands, Sumatra, Timor, Tonquin, P. Vby, E. India Voyage ( Glanius's)
noted, S. 125. West Indies, Course to or from it, W. 9. 18. 24, 5. 39. 40. 53.
Winds and Weather, 17, 24, 7. 102. Season of Sugar-making, 81, 2. Storms, 60.
O. 451. Tides, W. 97. Currents, 101, 2, 4, 5, 6. Change there, O. 58.
Productions, 34. 87. 91. 101, 2, 3, 4. 204. 213. 222, 7. 313, 4, 5. 320. 426.
453, 4. S. 24. C. 89. Indians, W. their Habit, Stage, Management, Usages, etc.
O. 7, etc. 12, 3, 8, 9. 20, 1, 3, 4. 31, 2, 8. 41, 3, 4. 113, 4. 123, 4, 7, 8.
134. 141, 4, 5, 8, 9. 153, 4, 7, 163, 7, 8, 9. 170. 181, 2, 3, 4. 191, 4, 5, 8.
218. 229. 233, 4, 5. 249. 250, 1, 7, 8, 9. 264, 5, 6. 272, 3. 309. 484, 5, 6.
538, 9. C. 31. 42, 3, 6. 94, 5. 110 to 124. 7, 8. 131. see America, Atlantic
Sea. See St. Andreas, Aruba, Aves Blanco, Boccadel Drago, Bocca Toro, Bonairy,
Campeachy, Caraccos, Caribbe, Cartagena, Comana, Coquibocoa, Corn, I Cuba,
Currasao (Q^erisao) Darien, Grande R. Guiare, (Guayra) Florida, R. la Hacha,
Hispa^^la, Honduras, Jamaica, Isthmus, Jucatan, Maracaybo, Margarita, Sancta
M^rtha, Mexico Gulf, Moskito's, Nicaragua, Pearl Isles, Madre de Popa, Costa
Rica, Porto Rico, Providence, C. Romaa, Sambalo's, Scuda, Tortuga, Trinidada,
C. la Vela, Ven^zucla, Verina. Indian Corn, see Maiz. Indico, d. where, and how
made, O. 225, 6. (price of it) 227. Indrapore in Sumatra, O. 511, 2, 3. its
Pepper, S. 182. Indr^^ght-Land, what the Dutch call so, O. 289. Insects. a
poisonous one, d. O. 321. see (...) Bees, Beetles, Centipees, Cochineel,
Land-Crabs, Flies, Frogs, Galliwasps, Guano's, Lizards, Locusts, Maggots,
Moskito's or Goats, Scorpions, Snakes, Soldiers, Spiders, Toads, Wood-Lice or
White-Ants. Instrument-Cases, coverings for them, C. 73. St. John's I. by
China, d. its Animals, Rice, Inhabitants, Houses, Husbandry, O. 406 to 410.
Bell-Idol and Temple, 411, 2. Shipping, 412, 3. St. John I. of the Philippines,
d. O. 306, 8, 9. 384. 442, 3. Capt. Johnson's Murder, S. 110, etc. Jonks, of
Anyam, d. S. 8. 9. of the Chinese, 136. see Chinese. Irish Beef, a Commodity,
O. 53. Men, 388. C. 77, 8. Iron, how wrought by the Moshito's, O. 48, 5. where
none, 464, 6. wild Indians have not the use of it, 85. its value among them,
and how and where a Commodity, 12, 3, 8. 23. 356. 360, 3. 371. 431, 4, 5, 8, 9.
S. 167. O. 110, 9. understood and wrought where, O. 429. 432. Iron Rings made,
W. 111. see Axes, Guns, Hatchets, Hocksing-Iron, Hoes, Knives, Macheats,
Needles, Saws, Scissars, Wedges. Islands, ranges of them have best
Land-Breezes, W. 34, 6. remote from the Continent have small Tides, 91, 5, 6.
Islands Anonymous, in the B. of Panama, O. 175, 6, 7, 8. 188. 198. of Spice,
317. see Spice, near Sebo, with Canes, d. 379. 380. The Five Islands, see
Bashee. Ispahan, Merchants spend the Hot Season there, W. 48. Isthmus of
America or Darien, its Breezes on the N. W. 29. Cedars, O. 29. Mountain Cow, C.
103. its Indians, O. 1^, 3, 4, 5, 8. to 24. 40. 182. Enemies to those of the R.
Darien, 41. a Receipt of theirs, 449. Intercourse with the English, and how
began, 22. 180 to 4. 261. and Privateers crossing the Isthmus, Intr. III. 11,
to 24. 191, 6, 7. shortest Passage 23. Soil, 18. Crosses, ib. Main Ridge, 22.
for particular places, d. see the Map, O. 1. Jucatan (Yucatan) Coasts, Rivers,
Towns, etc. d. C. 9 to 16, 21, 2. and Winds, W. 32, 3. Weather, 82. Currents,
105. Lookouts, C. 13, 4, 5. Soil, 14. 5. Saltpeter, 11. Salt-ponds, 14. Trade,
10, 1. Vegetables, 10, 1, 2, 4 6. 57. Fowl and Deer, 15. Indians Watchmen, 13,
4. Fishermen, Fish, Fishing-Banks and Towns, 12, 3, 4, 5. go in sunk Canoa's,
12. Spaniards, 11, 5. Privateers there, 11, 2, 5. For particular places, d. see
the Map, C. 1. Port St. Julian, its Oysters, O. 177. Justice, by agreement, O.
432. corrupt. S. 78. amicable, ib. no Courts of it, Appeal, nor Delay, So. Just
Seamen, 117.
K.
KEYS or Islands, see of Cuba, Quibo. Keyhooca, see Caihouca. Kings, see
Princes. Kings-Islands, see Pearl-Islands. Kitti^pung^, the Hippopotamus so
called, C. 105. Knives, a Commodity, C. 41. 119. valued by Indians, O. 13. 23.
L.
LAck, (Lacque) for Japaning, what, and where, S. 22, 4, 5. d. 61, 2. 105. a
Commodity, ib. O. 400. Lacker-ware, what, and where made, 409. S. 24. 41. 54.
60. d. 61, 2. 71, 4. Ladders, how and where used, O. 151. 428, 9. see Gouge.
Ladles made of Coco-nut shall, O. 294. Ladrone Isles, Situation and Winds, O.
297, 8, 9. 300. see Guam. Lagunes, or Salt Water Lakes, O. 241, 2. 262, 4. most
fish, 241, 3. 264, 5. and L. Breezes, W. 34, 5, 6. and Tides, 91, 2, 3. see
Termina. Lamps burning before Idols, O. 396, 7. 412. Lances, where used, O.
117. 337. 400. 432, 466, 7, 9. S. 72, 6. 113. 176. Lance-wood, d. where found,
and uses of it, O. 118. Land, how known to be nigh, see Clouds. See Bays,
Capes, Coasts, Marks, Mountains, Rocks, Soil. Landing, bad, O. 75. 231, 2, 9.
247. 251, 3, 4. 262, 4, 7. 422, 3, 4, 5. C. 107. 118. 123. good, 48. O. 133.
169. 233. 258. 264. 422, 3, 4, 5. Land discovered by Capt. Davis, 352.
Languages, what and where spoken, O. 330, 1. 431. see Arabic, Chinese,
Malayan, Meangian, Philippine, Spanish, Tonquiness. Words of several, see
Words. Laos, Kingdom, S. 18. 21. Lascars, poor E. Indian Seamen, S. 112.
Latitudes, by Observation, O. 82, 3. 110. 281, 5, 6, 7. 421. 453. 474. 494. by
Reckoning, erroneous, 288, 9. 290. the A. in 60. S. Lat. 83. Lavelia, d. O.
176. 211. Commodities, 186. Lima Fleet shelter there, 200, 1, 8. Raja Laut,
who, 336. his Character, Family, Expeditions, etc. 336, 7, 8, 9. 344. 356, 7,
366, 7, 8. Intercourse between him and the English, 316. 349. 353, 4, 6, 7, 8,
9. 361, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9. 370. 444, 5, 6. Laws, studied, S. 38, strict, 138.
see Fire, Government, Justice, Punishment. Lead, a Commodity, where, O. 360, 3.
435. S. 65. Learning, what and where, O. 330, 1. S. 59. 60. 81. 137. Leather,
see Goats-skins. Leeward Islands, the Caribbe, why called so, W. 15. see
Guinea. Legs, how swathed, and why, O. 32. how broken, S. 77. clogged, 78.
People going bare-legg'd, 43. O. 326. 480. 456. sitting crosslegg'd, 329.
Legamy, Leganea, in Jamaica, W. 36. 83. Lempa R. Boundary of the Spanish Trade,
etc. O. 225. Leon, O. 213. Port, 215. see Realeja. Creek, 217. City and
Country, d. 218. taken, 217, 8. and burnt, 219. Leprosy, where and what, O.
297. 334. S. 14. 68. Antidone, 53, 4. Letters, Spanish, intercepted, O. 171.
180. 200, 1. English, 355, 6. 370. Communicated to the Author, C. 103, 6. W.
49. 53, 4, 7. Leyden, Skin of an Hippopotamus there, C. 103, 4. Libby-tree, and
its Sago, d. and where, O. 110, 1. Lice, Negro's and Indians subject to them,
O. 538, 9. Woodlice, S. 127. Lichea-tree and fruit, S. 23. d. 24. Lightning
frightful, O. 131. 225. 322. 414. 459. S. 145. W. 52. 88. see Thunder,
Torn^doe's. A Light in Storms, see Corpus Sant. Lignum Aloes, and Aguala-wood,
where, S. 8. Lima, its Trade, Fleet, Course to and fro, etc. O. 136, 8. 142, 3.
171, 9. 180, 4. 5. 200, 1, 6, 7, 8, 9. W. 40. Ship and Cargo to and from
Acapulco, O. 243 to 7. Limbs, People of good, W. 110. O. 7. 170. 478, strong
and large, 32. 297. long, 464. clean, S. 40. C. 115. small, 325, 7. 464. (and
thin bodies) 537. see Feet, Heads, Legs. See Shape, Stature. Lime or
Plaistering on Wall, where, O. 140. made, ib. 398. other use of it, ib. Lime,
chewed, O. 318, 9. S. 54, 5. see Arek, Betle, Chinam. Lime-tree and fruit, C.
94. S. 23. d. 24. 43. 124. d. 181. O. 258. 291, 6. hedges of it, ib.
Lime-juice, ib. 313. Limpits, d. and where, O. 64. 176. 393. Linchanche, T. and
Look-out, C. 14. Lines for Fishing, see Hooks. The Line, see Equator. Lions,
where, W. 109. Sea-Lions, d. and where, O. 90, 1. 547. Lion-Lizard, d. C. 50.
Lips, full and thick, where, O. 32. 537. thin and red, 325. S. 128. how died
so, O. 319. well proportioned and graceful, S. 40. with Tortoise shell hanging
in them, O. 32. made scabby by a Wind, 63. Liver how affected by Poison, O.
398. Lizards, where, O. 320. 392. S. 127. 181. C. 50. 9. Lion-Liz, d. 50.
Loango, Coast and City, W. 55. Course to and from it, ib. 56, 7. Current, 107.
its Hippopotamus, d. C. 104, 5, 6. I. Libos de la Mar, d. O. 96, 7. its
Provision, ib. 146. 159. I. Lobos de la Terra, O. 96. d. 145, 6. its Birds and
Eggs, 159. Locusts, d. and where, and how eaten, O. 430. d. S. 26, 7, 30. The
Log forwarded or retarded by Currents, O. 290. Logwood, how it grows, C. 56, 7.
and where, 10. 47. 51, 3, 7. 79. 83. 94. none, 44. how ordered, 17, 8. 57. 80.
makes good Coals, 57. Tree like it, where, 58. see Blood-wood, Cam-wood,
Sappan-wood. Its Trade and Rates, W. 40. C. 17, 8. 46, 7. 82, 3, 7. ^, 9. 80,
1, 2. (profitable to England) 131. Logwood-Cutters, where and who, way of
Living, Working, Trade, etc. O. Intr. II. 449. 450. C. 10, 2, 7, 8. 4^. 3, 5 to
8. 51 to 4. 65, 80 to 3, 5 to 9. 91, 5, 6. 128, 9. Loggerhead Key, in
Campeachy, C. 10. Capt. Long's Shipwreck, C. 27, 8. Longitudes, computed, O.
28. 256. 285, 6, 8. 472. amiss, 288, 9. ^90. 377. Look-outs, or Watch-kept,
where, O. 28. 63. 149. 150, 4. C. 13, 4, 5. C. Lopez de Gonsalvo, wet, W. 80,
1. Winds, 16. 51, 3. fish, 54. Port of Martin Lopez, O. 125. C. St. Lorenzo,
(St. Laurence) O. 7. 135. d. (miscalled in Maps) 193. its Current, W. 107. no
Land-Breezes, 33. C. St. Lucas in California, O. 245. 272, 5. see California.
I. Sancta Lucia, ravaged by the Caribbe-Indians, C. 4. 5. O. 485. Luconia, I.
Spanish Trade, etc. d. O. 307. 383, 4, 7. Prospect, 385. Winds, 383, 9. Gold,
387. Iron, 431. Indians, 383, 4, 7. see Acapulco-Ship, Manilla, Pangasanam.
Islands N. of it, 442.
M.
MAcao in China, free Port, Government, etc. d. O. 418 S. 107. Macasser in
Celebes, d. O. 447. Slave Trade, 456. Buggasses, S. 108. Maccaw-tree and berry,
where, O. 20. C. 109. Maccaw-bird, where, S. 128. Macheats or Long-knives,
where valued, O. 13. C. 41. 119. Spanish Mackril, d. C. 71, 2. Madagascar I.
(St. Laurence) its Land-Tortoise, O. 102. quarrelling Negro's, and sale of
them, 501. Shipwrecks, 511. W. 109. Winds, 19. Sucking-fish, 54. used for
catching other fish, 110. Maderas, its fine Prospect, S. 179. see F. St.
George. Magellan killed at Luconia, O. 307. Str. of Magellan, O. 80, 4. Seals
there, 90. Maggots in Fruit, O. 123. Maguella Valley, d. O. 251. Maho tree and
bark, Cordage of it, O. 37. and Cloth, W. 110. Mahometanism, where and how, O.
325. 331, 8. 454. 490. S. 4. 128. 137, 8. 180, 1. W. 55. see Circumcision,
Hogs, Mosque, Prayers, Ramdam, Sabbath, Washings. Le Mair's Streights, d. O.
81, 2. Maiz or Indian Corn, where, O. 12, 9. 48. 59. 122, 3. 141, 151, 9. 167.
176. 240, 4. 259. 260, 5, 6, 8, 9. 270, 1, 9. 281, 2. C. 113, 9. 128. none, O.
426. 433. the Gram of the W. Indies, and support of Birds there, 426. where a
Commodity, 134. Cakes and Drink of it, d. C. 43. 113, 4. Malabar, Famines
there, and selling Children, S. 37, 8. 50. best Pepper, 182. its Storms, 48.
74. Weather, 83. Malabrigo, O. 201. Malacca, Streights, a great Thorough-fair,
O. 394. 401. S. 3. 4. dangerous for Islands and Sholes, O. 439. S. 4. 5. 108,
9. 170, 1. its Winds, O. 351. W. 20, 1. Tides, 99. Dutch Guard-Ships there, S.
163, 4, 5. 173, 4. Cat-fish, 171. O. 149. see (...), Brewers Streights, P.
Dinding, P. Nuttee, P. Oro, Sincapore Streights, P. Timaon, P. Verero. See
Sumatra, and Malacca Coast and Prom. S. 4. low. 158, 9. 170, 1. its fruits,
etc. 163. 181, 2. use of Oil, O. 537. see Jihore, P. Parsalore, Queda, and
Malacca Town, touched at, S. 4. 158. 163, 4. Harbor, 165, 170. Tides, W. 99.
Pilots, S. 4. Forts, change of Masters, Markets, Trade, etc. d. 111, 5. 159 to
168. 174. O. 400. Sloops, d. S. 5. 110, 1. see Dutch, its Tongue, O. 394. see
Malayan Language, how and where spoken, O. 330. (the Lingua Franca of the East)
394, 5. 444. 484. 513, 4, 5. S. 128. 132. 171. a smooth Tongue, 59. where
learnt for Trade, etc. O. 395, 8. 513, 5. not, S. 59. where the Vulgar Tongue,
O. 394. 454. 513, 5. S. 128. 181. the Bashean unlike it, O. 431. and
Nicobarian, 479. yet a few words of it, ib. 482. see Malayans (of Malacca,
Sumatra, etc.) their Vessels full of Men, O. 401, 2. their Arms, 401, S. 176.
184. fight not in the Rain, 176. bold and desperate, O. 400, 1. S. 108. 114.
165. 171, 3, 5, 6, 7. 181. haughty, 128. treacherous, 113. 181. O. 402. Frays
with them, 400, 1. 518, 9. S. 110 to 115. 175, 6, 184. their Raja's abused, ib.
love Trade, 117. 165, 6, 7. civilized by it, but awed by the Dutch, 115, 7, 8.
163, 4, 5. 173, 4, 5. 181. see Dutch Indians. Their Employments, 181, 2. love
Opium, 166. and Cock-fighting, 184. have Houses on Posts, 180. see Houses,
Floors. Maldive Isles, Coco-Cordage there, O. 294, 5. Mammee-tree and fruit, d.
and where, O. 187, 8. 101. 110. 187. 202. Wild Mammee, d. O. 202.
Mammee-sappota, d. and where, O. 203, 4. Man of War, Bird, d. and where, O. 49.
132. 473. C. 23, 4. (their Policy) 5, 6. 45. 69. 109. Man of War Lagune, in
Campeachy, C. 92, 3, 4. 101. Manatee, d. and where, O. 2. 9. d. 33, 4, 5, (how
taken) 6, 7. 41. (small) 381. (shy) 463, 9. 547. C. 73. 109. 128. thongs of the
Skin, 35. quick of hearing, 37. but not of sight, 454 Manatee-grass, d. 34. C.
109. a smaller fresh water Manatee, d. ib. the Mindanian less than the W.
Indian, O. 321. see Moskito's. Manchineel, tree and fruit poisonous, d. and
where, O. 39. 40. C. 32, 3. Mandarins or Nobility of Tonquin, their Power,
State, Manners, etc. S. 16. 29. 42. 50, 1, 2. (91, 2.) 58. 69. 76. 80. Eunuchs,
81, 2, 3, 4, 5. 96. Of Achin, see Oromkeys. Mangera I. and T. d. O. 122, 5.
Mangastan-tree and fruit, d. and where, S. 124, 5. 181. Mango-tree and fruit,
d. and where, O. 391, 2. S. 23. 124. 163. 181. Mango-Achar or Pickle, O. 303.
391, Mango-volucre, Bird, where and what, O. 531. Mangrove-trees and their
kinds, (white, black, red,) and Mangrove-land, d. and where, O. 52. d. 54, 5.
112. 119. 150, 1, 5, 6. 194. 217. 221. 264. S. 124. C. 11, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8. 30,
1, 2. 49. 51, 2, 3, 6. 94. 107. 118. W. 35. 93, 5. Oysters growing to their
Roots, C. 17. Manilla T. Harbor, Shipping there, and Trade, d. O. 245, 6. 331,
2, 3. 383, 7, 8. (P. Condore, a good Stage to it, see Guam) 394. 405, 6. C.
121, 2, 5. see Acapulco Ship. Prospect of the Coast, Manilla threatened by the
Chinese, O. 331. their Factors there and Gaming, 410. an Irish man settled
there, 388. see Spaniards. Manilla-Tobacco, see Tobacco. Manners of People,
Moral Qualities, etc. what and where, -- Good, -- Brisk and Courageous, O. 8.
44. 400. S. 50. Patient, O. 432, 3. C. 116. Obedient, ib. S. 42. O. 454. Quiet
and Peaceable, and Cheerful, etc. 433. (said to be, 477. not, S. 95.) C. 115,
6. Just and true, O. 433, 5. (said to be 477. not, S. 95.) S. 166. see Justice,
Punishment. Contented in Poverty, C. 116. O. 123. begging modestly, 433.
Cleanly, neat and tight, ib. 454. Laborious and Diligent, S. 41, 2. 174. 181.
Good natured, 128. Affable, Courteous and Civil, O. 297. 395. 434, 5. 486. 490.
S. 50. 181. Hospitable, Civil to Strangers, and easily acquainted with them, O.
12. 19. 20, 1. 78. 326, 7, 8. 400. 433 to 9. 482, 6. 490. S. 84. 128. W. 112.
Natural Affection, O. 250. 432. -- ^ad, -- Lazy and Idle, Proud and Haughty,
Ambitious, Insolent, O. 326. S. 30. 128. 138. W. 55. 110. sullen or stubborn,
O. 8. 44. Implacable and Cruel, 326. S. 83. W. 108. Revengeful, O. 8. 326. 358.
374. (see Poisoning) S. 181. Sly and Treacherous, ib. O. 38. 362, 4. 370. (see
R. Laut) 401, 2. Oppressive, S. 85. ^alse and perverse, said to be, 95.
contrary to O. 477. Thievish, ib. S. 50. 128. 138, 9. O. 76. 318. 326. 356.
Overreaching, 365, 9. 370. Wheedling and Dissembling, 358, 9. 362, 7. Begging,
327, 8. 365, 9. 370. (but modestly) 433. Lowspirited, S. 42. Gaming, ib. see
Gaming. Nasty in Diet, see Cookery; in Habit, O. 537, 8, 9. Drinking hard, 10.
369. 4^^. W^nton and Pimps, S. 85. Prostituting of Women, see Wom^n. Unnatural,
see Parents, Children, Wives. -- Mixed -- Melancholy and thoughtful, O. 127, C.
116. Injurious, O. 9. 11. 46, 7, 8, 9. subtle, S. 60. 138, 9. in awe of Princes
severity, O. 326. Fierce, bold and Savage, O. 38. 41. 167. 401, 2. less than
reported, 484, 5, 6. easily amused, 484, Loving Trade, see Indians, Malayans.
Fearful of Europeans, and soon affrighted, 309. 435. 467, 9. 488. not liking
the same House with Strangers, 482, 6. nor to drink after them, 501. see
Mahometans. Allowing them a general Conversation with their Women, 327, 8. 367,
8. yet jealous, 367. 374. loving to be visited, S. ^4. living in Common, O.
465. from hand to mouth, ib. 326. ignorant of working, 468. Natural Qualities,
see Qualifications. Manta, d. O. 135. touched at by Panama Ships, ib.
Manufactures, see Callico's, Cloth, Earthen-ware, Lacker-ware, Fans, Leather,
Molosso's, Mustins, Palmeto-works, Pitch, Salt, Silks, Soap, Stockings, Sugar,
wine. See Commodities. Maracaybo, Gulf, its Breezes. W. 3. Weather, 82, 3. The
Galleons and Barlaventa-Fleet touch there, 185. C. 126. Marble Rocks, where, S.
19. 20. Margarita, I. its Currents, W. 102. Pearl-Oysters, O. 173. The Armada
and Barlaventa-Fleet touch there, 185. C. 126. Maria's Isles, d. O. 274, 5, 6.
Maria I. of the Ladrones, see Guam. Sancta Maria R. T. and Gold Mines, d. O.
158, 9. 175. 1^3, 4, 5. taken by Privateers, Intr. III. quitted to them, 191,
5. V. Mary's Image, a celebrated one, O. 42. one taken, 99. see Saints. Marks
and Makings of Land off at Sea, O. 42. 59. 57. 82. 94, 5. 111, 2, 8, 9. 120. 2,
131, 3, 6. 147. 172, 4. 216. 225. 230, 1, 2, 3, 9. 242, 4, 8. 251, 2, 5, 6, 7.
261, 2, 3, 6, 7. 275, 9. 291. 309. 379. 382, 4, 5, 9. 390. 416. 447, 8. 454. 9.
460. 530, 1. S. 9. 10, 1. 121. 258, 9. 179. 180. C. 16. W. 56. 85. Markets and
Provision, what and where, S. 30. 129. 136. 162, 3. Marmalade, a Commodity,
where, O. 44. 99. 174. Port Marquis, d. O. 247. Marriages, early, C. 114, 5.
Feasts, O. 334. W. 111, 2. Sacta Martha, and its High-land, d. O. 42. low
Coasts to the E. and W. 424. Rains, 44. Breezes and Course, W. 40. Stockfish
wood, C. 58. the Galleons and Barlaventa-Fleet touch there, 126. O. 185. St.
Martin's High-land, d. C. 16. 42. 123. Breezes, W. 34. 43. Don Mascarin's I. or
English Forest, its Land-Tortoise, O. 101. Masking used in Churches, where, O.
127. C. 115. Massaclan, d. O. 265. Masts of Ships, O. 394. 412, 3. S. 64. 571,
2. see Timber, Trees. Mathematics learnt, where, S. 60. Matique Gulf, O 225,
7. Maws of Goats eaten, how and where, O. 429. 430. Maxentelbo Rock, d. O. 267.
Mayo I. of the C. Verds, d. and its Governor trepan'd, O. 75. Meangu Isles, O.
347. Commodities, 350. 512, 3, 4. the Inhabitants, their Painting, Ornaments,
Food, etc. 514, 5, 6, 7. see J^oly. Mechanics, S. 41. 60. 130, 6. 181. see
Artificers. Melinde Bay, Calms there, W. 20. Melons, where, O. 222. S. 23.
Musk-Melons, 124. O. 302. 311. Water-Melons, 134. 302. 311. 418. 420. S. 124.
163. Melory-tree, Fruit, and Bread, O. 478. 480, 8, 9. 490. Men, see Bodies,
Customs, Government, Manners, Ornaments, Religion, Women. Merchants at T^nquin,
S. 39. 52. 65. A^bin, 122, 3. 134, 5. Malacca, 162, 4. Free, who so called, O.
317. S. 135, 6. Merga in Siam, a Massacre of the English there, S. 151. Merida
in Jucatan, d. C. 14. 113. Meschasipi K. Breezes near it, W. 34. Mess, a Gold
Coin, what and where, O. 504. S. 132. Mexico Kingdom, and W. Coast of it, where
low, 425. its Trade-winds, W. 12. 25. Breezes, 38. Weather, 83. Currents, 108.
small Green T^^tle, O. 107. Oysters, 177. fishing, 243. little Shipping or
Trade at Sea, 243, 4. 251. 267. most within Land, and by Land Carriage, 260, 1.
277. Silver, 269. People thin at the Coast, and poor, 290, 1, 5, 7, 8. 261. see
Indians, W. Rich and pleasant parts of it, see C^lima, Guatimala, Valdera^. For
other places, d. see the Map, O. 24. and New Mexico, mutinous Indians, and rich
Mines con^^al'd, O. 172. 3. C. 54. Spanish Trade, how far, O. 225. see the Map,
24. Mexico Bay, and its Coast, Trade-winds, W. 15. Breezes, 34. 40. Storms, d.
60 to 5. Currents, 105. Oyster-bank near it, C. 28. its Main Port, 125. Course
of its Plate and Barlaventa-Fleet, ib. O. 180. see Alvarado, La Vera Cruz,
Guaxaca, Haniago, Mechasipi, Panuk, Sacrifici^s, Tompeque. See Campeachy,
Jucatan, Florida: Its Indians no great Friends to the Spaniards, C. 122. Mexico
City, Passengers and Ports to it, O. 185. 244, 5. 255. Salted Shrimps a
Commodity there, C. 127, 8. Mice, where, C. 63. St. Michael's Gulf, O. 5. d.
193. Weather, W. 83. Tides, 93, 5. St. Michael's Mount, and T. d. O. 122, 3.
Milk sour (Tire) for Fluxes, S. 148. (of Almonds, ib.) drank ordinarily,
where, W. 111. Mindanao, d. Coasts, Towns, Rivers, Harbors, Soil etc. O. 3. 9.
310. 346, 7, 8, 9. 357, 8. 362, 7, 9. 378, 9. 384. Weather and Winds, 321, 2,
3. 346, 7, 8. 353, 4, 7. 360. 370. W. 39. ^loods, O. 360. City, R. and Houses
on Posts, etc. 328, 9. 330. 346, 8, 9. 357, 8. 360, 2, 5. 479. S. 180. Plenty,
O. 305. Vegetables, 310, 1. 315, 6. 320. 347, 8. 511. Animals, 33. 320, 1. 346,
7, 8. 358. 364, 5, 8, 9. 378, 9. 381. 515. Ship-worms, 362, 3. Arts,
Manufactures and Utensils, 315. 327. 331, 2. 360. 515. S. 131. 181. Shipping
and Trade, O. 325. 332 to 6. 354, 6. 360, 3. seemingly desired with the
English, 349. 359. Spaniards hated. Dutch feared, ib. 331. once had a Commerce
with Manilla Spanlards, 305. subject to them, 331. Advantage of settling at
Mindanao, and way thither, 349. 350, 1, 2. Opportunity the A. had for it, 316,
7. 331. 349. 350, 2, 4. Mindanaians (see Alforees, Hilanoons, Sologues) and
Mindanians peculiarly so called, d. their Persons, Clothes, Qualities, etc. 324
to 8. 334 to 8. 340, 1, 2, 6, 8. 356 to 9. 361, 2, 4 to 9. 370, 4, 8. S. 129.
Eating and Entertainments, O. 311, 9. 329. 355 to 9. 365, 8, 9. what Betle best
liked, S. 24. Marriages and Diseases, O. 334. Weapons and way of Fighting, 337,
8, 9. Sports, Ornaments, Music and Dancing Women, ib. to 342. 361. Comrades
and Pagallies, 327, 8. 358, 9. 364, 5. 373. Wives and Concubines, 328. 334 to
8. 366, 7, 8. 374. Languages and Learning, 327. 330, 1. 431. Religion, Mosques,
338. Circumcision, etc. 337, 9. 340, 1, 2, 3. 369. 370. Ramdam, 343. 359. 361.
Washings and Hogs hated, 330. 343, 4. some Baptized, 516. Government and
Sultan, d. his Person, Qualities, etc. 326. 331, 4, 5. Wives and Children, 325.
335, 6. 341, 2, 9. 353. Brother, see R. Lant. Wars, 325. 337. 444. State, S.
143. Presents, etc. O. 354, 5, 7. Punishments, 356, 7. 367. English Letters at
Mindanao 349. 355, 6. 370. Seamen revelling, 373. See Comrade and Pagally. See
Chambongo Islands near, 331. 346. 443. See Meangis. Mindora I. O. 307. d. 382.
Streights, 384. Mines, see Silver, Gold, Bullawan; where none, C. 122. Mishlaw
of Plantains, what and where, O. 314. Missionaries and Missions in the E.
Indies, O. 477. S. 93 to 7, 9. Mists and Fogs, where, O. 94, 5. W. 50, 1. where
no Rain, 78. Mistakes or Errors, Geographical, etc. as to Point Garachina, and
C. St. Lorenzo, O. 193. the breadth of the Oceans and great Continents, 288, 9.
290. Sun's Declination, 377, 8. Mindanao City and Harbor, 309. 310. N. Holland
Coast and Shole near (...), 461, 2. Gallapago's, 100. W. 57. 96. Isthmus of
America, 93, 4, 5. Tides in the South Sea, ib. Trade-Winds, 15. Cold Land
Breezes, 42. Omissions in Sea-charts, O. 382. 443. Defects, 41^. 444. 454. As
to the Clove Countries, 447. Jeoly, 517. Du Quesries Fight, 522. Cold at the
Cape of Good Hope, and S. Wind, 529. Manatee at St. Hellena, 547. Canibals,
484, 5, 6. Mangastan, S. 125. Malayan at Tonquin, 59. in confounding Alligator
and Crocodile, C. 74, 5, 6. Mountain-Cow and Hippopotamus, 102 to 7. Arek and
Betle, S. 54. as to Cedars never being Worm-eaten, O. 29. the Acapulco-Trade,
O. 246. Mogul, English serve him, O. 507, 9. War with him, S. 146, 7, 8. Mole
to keep off Floods, d. and where, S. 49. Molinbo, Cabenbo, etc. Negro's dance
at N. and F. Moon, W. ^^. Molosso's, where, O. 186. Monastery, Spanish, where,
O. 42. of Nuns, 124. Money brought from Japan, S. 15. of Ac^in, 132. Trade
hindered through want of it, 41, 2. 51. where none, W. 111. Cacao goes instead
of it, O. 62. C. 120. Money Changers, Women, S. 60. ^30, ^1. 142. see Coin,
Pieces of Eight. Monkeys, eaten and where found, O. 14. 20, 1. 39. (black and
little) 17^, 3. 212. 320. S. 124. ( d. and their tricks) C. 59. 60. Monmouth I.
d. O. 385. 422, 5, 6, 8, 9. 436. Monsoons, see among Winds. Moon, influencing
Tides, where, W. 90, 7, 8. Currents, 100, 3, 6, 7. not, 51, 2. Trade-winds, 18,
9. Storms, 60. 72. S. 36. Lunar Year, 53. Eclipse, 147. Dancing at N. and Full,
O. 541. W. 55. 111. Half Moon Proes, d. and where, S. 5. Moors, who in E.
India, O. 507, 8, 9. S. 146. 158. 162. Moro de Porcos, d. O. 211. Moroon'd,
where and when Men said to be, C. 84. Villa de Mose taken, C. 109. 110. d. and
Trade, 110, 1, 9. Moskito (Mosquito) Indians, their Qualifications, Country,
Habit of Body, way of Living, Ingeny, etc. d. O. 7. 8. 9. 10, 1. 85. Dextrous
striking of Fish, and management of Canoas, 1. 2. 35, 6, 7. 160. 234. 277. 453.
C. 13. 109. Hist. of one left at J. Fernando's, O. 84, 5, 6. love English and
English Names, 86, 7. breed up I. Great, 181. Moskito's or Gnats, where, O. 356,
7. C. 80. 120. -- Cove, W. 68. Mosques, where, O. 338. S. 129. d. 130, 7. Moss,
Turtle feeding on it, O. 104. long on Trees, 132. Mould, see Soil. Mountains
interrupt the Atmosphere, W. 78, 9. gather Clouds and Rain, 83, 4. 5, 6.
Burning, see Volcans. Yielding Gold, see Bullawan Gold. Mountains, what and
where, O. 22. 42. 59. 94, 5. 118, 9. 131, 6. 153. 162. 174. 216. 224. 231, 9.
242. 251, 2, 6. 262. 310. 347. 378. 380, 2, 4, 5, 7. 442, 7. 460. 531, 3. 545,
6. S. 11, 9. 20, 2. 64. 121, 3. 133. C. 7. 8. 32, 8. 101, 8. 111 9, 123. W. 78.
83, 4, 5. See Blue Mountain, and Monte Diabolo, in Jamaica, C. 8. and The Mount
in Jucatan, d. C. 10, 1, 6. 22. and C. Mount or Miserada in Guinea, its Winds,
W. 14, 5. 51. Mountain Cow, see Ante. Mountserat, I. Storm there, W. 70.
Mouths, People of large and wide, O. 325. 464. middle sized, 427. little, 395.
(yet pretty full) C 115. Mozambique, Ambergriese, O. 74. Trade, W. 108.
Mud-fish, where, S. 128. Muger-Key, or Women's I. C. 8. 9. Mullatto's and
Mosteso's, who and where, O. 186. 249. 250, 1. C. 122. Mulberry tree and fruit,
what, where, and how used, S. 23, 4. Mules, where, O. 99. 249. 250. 277. C.
122. Mullets, where, O. 321. S. 128. C. 71. Munjack, Pitch, d. where, and its
use, C. 130. Muscles, where, O. 153. 173, 4, 7. 393. (scarce) 465. Music,
where used, W. 111. see Bells, Drums, Gongs, Hautboys, Pipes, Strumstrums. That
of the W. Indians doleful, O. 127. Musk, where a Commodity, S. 61. whence and
how got, 64. Musk-kernels; Musky-flesh and Eggs of the Alligator, C. 75. O.
256. Muslins, a Commodity, where, O. 137. 245. see Cloth.
N.
NAil of the left Thumb kept long, where, O. 326. Naked, People going so, all
but a Cloth about the middle, a Sash, or short Petticoat, O. 11. 31, 2. 40,
427. 479. 516. or Thong with Grass or Leaves, 464, 5. or Apron of Silk-grass
Cloth, W. 110. Sir J. Narborough misinformed, in what, O. 246. Nassau I. d. and
an I. of Coco-trees near it, O. 475. Natal, d. O. 176. 211. Nata Winds, W. 19.
Tides, 99. R. and Country, Product, Negro's, etc. d. 108, etc. R. and
Hippopotamus, d. C. 104, 6, 7. Natural Philosophy learnt, where, S. 60.
Needles, a Commodity, where, C. 119. Negro's, where and what, O. 175. 195. 200.
534. see N. Hollanders, Hottentots, Natal, Wild-bush Men; a Bark full of them,
154. taken, 158. advantage might have been made of them, 158, 9. Trade for
them, C. 90. O. 46, 7. 154. Wars and sale of one another, 510. Spanish armed,
64. 270. encouraged in domineering over the Indians, C. 116. Subject to
Leg-worms, 90. Negro's Hair and Guiney Negro's Coal black, O. 464, Trial by
bitter Waters, S. 83. those of Sherboro R. Hospitable, O. 78. Nellegree Hills
in Bengal, S. 145. Nets for Fishing, what and where, O. 395. S. 28, 9. 130. 1.
C. 12, 3. News I. a Hurricane there, W. 70. New Year, see Year; New Moon, see
Moon; New Holland, etc. see Holland. See New England Indians, exploit of some
of them, C. 131. Newfoundland, a cold Country, C. 2. its Trade profitable to
England, 131. Penguins, O. 97. High Coasts and deep Seas, 423. Nigean, Prove. of
Tonquin, S. 21. Insty Men and good Eaters, 71. Nicaragua, L. Trade by it, and
its Wood, O. 115. See Bloodwood. Nicobar Isles, d. O. 476. Commodities and
different Characters of the Inhabitants, 477. with S. 94, 5. Ambergriese, True
and Counterfeit, O. 72, 3. 477. 481, 2. Canons, 480, 1. See Nicobar I. properly
so called, d. O. 477, ^. its Fruits, Animals, Plantations, 478, 9. 480. See
Melory. The Inhabitants, their Habit, Language, Houses, way of Life,
Disposition, etc. 478, 9. 482, 6, ^, 9. 490. Proes or Cano^'s, d. 480, 1, 6, 7,
8, 9. 492. Night, then most Rain in the wet Season, W. 88. Singing and Dancing
then usual, where, O. 127. 459. 541. Fites then seen, 382. 459. Dr^^ heard,
458. Nigril Point in Jamaica, C. 3^. 9. Noddy Bird, d. O. 53. Nombre de Dios,
now a Ruin, O. 58. Fernando de Noronho's I. d. W. 56. Norths, Storms, and
North-Banks, Clouds presaging them, d. W. 60, 1, 2. 71. 105, 6. C. 21.
Chocolatta North, 39. d. W. 60. North-Seas, store of Seals, O. 90. North-Sea.
See Atlantic. North West and North-East Passages, how to be tried, O. 273, 4.
Noses, where People of short and low, O. 32. 325, 6. 427. thick, 32. and flat,
ib. 326. 537. high or Aquiline, 44. 297. 395. 407. large, 407. small, 170. 326.
mean bigness and well proportioned, 395. 478, S. 40. 128. C. 115. W. 110.
Nuke-mum, a Pickle, what and where, C. 28. 30. Nurse Fish, d. and where, C. 25.
35. Nutmegs, where, O. 316. 447. 513. a Commodity, and Price, S. 152. Wild or
Bastard Nutmegs, without smell or tas^e, O. 391, 2. Pulo Nuttes, Water and
Provisions, S. 4.
O.
OAkam for calking Ships, O. 295. Oaks, the only ones seen by the Author in the
Torrid Zone, C. 53. Oarrha, d. O. 255. Oars, what, where, and how used, O. 429.
490. S. 5. 13, 4. 75. best Looms or Handles, of what Wood, 54. 118. Oath of
Allegiance, where and how taken, S. 82, 3. Observations taken of the Sun, O.
^2. 281. see Latitudes by Ob. Offerings to Idols, flesh, O. 411. burnt sticks,
412. see Paper. Oil, a Commodity, where, O. 442, 3. 196. 214, of Coco-nuts, how
made, 294. where used (and Palm-Oil) for anointing the Body, 537, 8. Train-Oil
of Seals, where to be had, 90. C. 26, 7, 8. of Sea-Turtle, O. 109. 110. 395,
(and of Forpusses) S. 6. 8. sweet Oils used against Harmatans, W. 50. Old
Wives, Fish, where, S. 128. Oleta R. d. O. 267. Omba I. d. and Isles and Sholes
near it, O. 459. One-bush K^y, see Bush. Onions, where, S. 23. 127. Opium, a
valuable Commodity, where, S. 154. 165, 6. Oranges, what and where, O. 258.
291. 311. ( Cam-chain and Cam-quit) S. 23, 4. 45. 90, 2. 124. 163. 181. C. 6.
94. Orange I. d. O. 385. 421, 2, 9. Ornament, of Dancing Women, O. 340.
Princesses, 342. of several People, 32. 326, 7. 407, 8. 418, 9. 427. 456. 464.
479. 514, 5. 537, 8, S. 40, 1. C. 114. W. 111. Pulo Oro, S. 5. Oromkeys of
Achin, O. 500. S. 141, 2, 3, 4. Ostridges, see Estriges. Otoque I. d. O. 200.
Otta, see Anatta. Oven made in Sand, O. 275. a fence from Fire, S. 45, 6.
Outcry of Fish at Malacca, manner of it, S. 163. Outlagers of Boats, what, O.
299. 480. how serviceable, 487. 492, 5, 7. see Proes. Oysters, Oyster-banks,
and Pearl-Oysters, what and where, O. 43. 153. 173, 4, 6, 7. S. 9. 89. 163. C.
17. 28.
P.
PAcheca I. O. d. 175. 196, 9. 206. Pacifick-Sea, what properly so, O. 94. and
how made so, W. 78, 9. 83. Dews and Mists though no Rain, 78. O. 94. and great
Waves, ib. healthy Coast, 153. Paddles, how and where used, O. 299. W. 38, 9.
Padres, see Priests (Spanish.) Pagally, what and where, O. 327, 8. 358. 364, 5.
377. S. 52. Pageants, O. 340, 1. Pageant Princes, see Boua, Q. of Achin.
Pagoda's, Idol Temples, what and where, S. 56, 7. 90, 1, 2. 152. Pagoda, Coin,
how much, O. 509. Paita, see Payta. Painters, where, S. 60. 136. O. 409.
Painting the Body, where and how, 514. 537. the Teeth black, S. 41. Palaces, d.
S. 47, 8. 130. see Houses. Palankin, of the Sultan of M^^ianno, O. 341.
Palimham in Sumatra, its Pepper-Trade, O. 401. Pallacat in Coromandel, O. 522.
why deserted, W. 74. Palm Tree, and Dwarf-Palm or Palmeto-Royal, d. O. 248.
318. and thatch, 328. d. S. 46, 7. ^ 79. 115. Palm-Wine, O. 78. whence, 248.
Palm-Oil, where used for anointing the Body, O. 537. Palma- Mari^, d. and
where, O. 212, 3. Palmeto, and Works and Thatch of it, d. and where, O. 150, 1.
300. 328. 335. 412. 479. S. 46, 7. C. 11. 49. 79. 114, 5. 127. C. Palmas, Coast
and Winds, W. 16. 38. 50, 1. Weather, 80. R. Palmas, C. 120. Palo de Campeche,
Logwood, why so called, C. 47. Panama Bay, its Coast, O. 186. low, 34. 425.
Bounds, 164. Rivers, 178. Ship-worms, 363. Rains, Air, etc. 186. W. 83, Winds,
17, 9. 34, 5. 40. O. 186. Tides, W. 95, 6. Islands, 95. d. O. 174, 5. 193, 9.
200, 2, 6. 211. see the Map, O. 1. Panama City, d. O. 178, 9. 186. its
strength, 205. whence its Provision, 176. its Commerce with Portobel, 179. 184,
5. Course toward Lima, 4. 135. 167. and from Lima thither, 200, 1. Old Panama
burnt, 178. Panay, a Spanish I. unfrequented, O. 382. Fires in the night, ib.
Pangasanam (Pangassinay) of Luconia, d. O. 383. Pangasinam in Sumatra, its
Pepper, S. 182. Pan-tile, see Roofs. Panuk, R. and City, d. C. 127. Paper, what
and where made, S. 60, 1. burnt in Sacrifice to Idols, 58, 9. O. 396. Parades
in Spanish Towns, O. 219. 269. 387. C. 46. Parakites, where, O. 321. 392. 426.
458. S. 26. 128. 181. C. 65. Parents play away Children, where, S. 42. sell
them, 37, 8, 9. 50. their Daughters to Husbands, ib. see Children. Pulo
Parsebor, d. S. 158, 9. Parracota, Fish, d. (sometimes poisonous) C. 71, 2.
Parrots, where and what, O. 39. 321. 392. S. 26. 128. 181. C. 65. 118. (a fine
sort, d.) 128, 9. Partridges, where, S. 26. C. Passao, d: O. 162. No L.
Breezes, W. 33. its Currents, 107. Passage-Fort in Jamaica, Salt Earth, C. 18.
Breezes, W. 36. Passages North-West and North-East, how to be attempted, O.
273, 4. Passange-Jonca, O. 499. 500, 1, 2. S. 118. 133, 4. Pastla R. see
Coolecan. Pastures, where, O. 218. 231. S. 14. 21. see Savannahs. Patagonia, a
Stage to East India. O. 351, 2. Arrow-heads of Flint, 85, 6. Pate Bay, great
Calms there, W. 20. Pattache, a Spanish Galleon, its Course, O. 185. Pavillions
to sleep in, a Commodity, C. 41. necessary, 80. Paving of Streets, S. 47. see
Floors. St. Paul's I. O. 175. 206. Paunches of Goats, how dressed and eaten, O.
429. 430. Peace, where growing, O. 532. Peacock, a Bird like it, where and what,
W. 109. Pears, where growing, O. 532. Pearl, Pearl-Oysters and Fishery, where
and what, O. 43. 173, 4, 5. 244. S. 8. 89. Mother of Pearl, where good, O. 173.
Pearl-Islands by Tonquin, S. 11. Pearl-Islands in the W. Indies, see
Corn-Islands. Pearl-Islands, or Kings-Islands by Panama, O. 171. d. 175, 6, 7,
8. W. 95. see the Map, O. 1. Santa Pecaque, see Centiquipaque. Pecary, where,
O. 9. 12, 8. 39. 169. C. 59. 96. Pecul, how much, S. 132. Pedro-Point in
Jamaica, hard to double, W. 32. Currents, 101. Pegu, its Achar, O. 391. Women
prostituted there, 395. Shipwrack'd Men kept there, S. 8. its Jars, 98. low
Coast, rich Pagoda and Image, and Commodities imported, 151, 2. Pelicans, d.
and where, C. 69. 70, 1. S. 26. Penguin, Bird, d. and where, O. 97. 146. (Eggs)
159. Penguin Fruit, yellow and red, d. and where, O. 263. C. 94. Pentare I. d.
and Smoaks and Fires seen on it, O. 459. People all less Savage than thought to
be, O. 484, 5, 6. Country populous and poor, S. 40, 1. see Poor, Manners,
Customs, etc. Pepper, where growing, and Trade, S. 8. 65. 110, 1, 2, 3, 5, 6,
7. 127. 158. 164, 6. 178. 180, 1. d. 182, 4. O. 400. heats Water in Ships
holds, 525. Meat seasoned with it, S. 129. Guinea or Cod-pepper, Sauce, d. O.
296. 313. Fish-pickle, C. 124. Indian-pepper where, O. 10. Periago's, see
Canoa's. Perica I. Road for Panama Shipping, O. 184. d. 186. Perewinkles,
Shellfish, where, O. 174. scarce, 465. Persia, Winds, W. 20. hot, 48. O. 504,
5. Pearl-Oysters, 174. Peru, Coast, Soil, Winds and Weather, O. 94, 5, 6. 140,
1, 3. W. 12, 3, 4. 33, 8. 78, 9. 83. Tides, 96. Currents, 107. Rivers not
perennial, 79. 80. S. 35. O. 95, 6. how far dry, and whence their Timber, 140.
Cacao and Woollen whence, 152. E. India Commodities whence, 245. its Silver,
see Pieces of Eight, Potosi. Buildings, see Churches, Houses. Rock-fish, 91.
see Andes, Chili, Pacifick Sea, Gallapago's Isles. For particular Places, see
the Globe-Map, O. Title; and the Map, O. 24. Petaplan Hill, d. O. 248. St.
Peter St. Paul, R. d. C. 94. 101, 7, 8. Petit Guavre, see Guavre. Petticoat an
acceptable Present to an Indian, O. 13. of several Nations, d. 327. 427. 479.
C. 114. Potties, Bantam Coin, S. 132. Peuns, who and where, O. 507, 8.
Philippine Islands, d. O. 306, 7, 8. Spanish Isles, ib. and Trade there, 185.
(see Acapulco-Ship, Manilla) how managed, 244, 5, 6. Smuggling, 307. Gold
there, ib. 308. 350, 1. how named, 431. 513. Malayan learnt there, 395. People
anoint themselves, 537. Course thence, W. 25. Anonymous I. by Sebo, and its
Canes, d. O. 379. 380. other Isles, 382, 4. see Bashee Isles, Bat I. St. John's
I. Luconia, Meangis Isles, Mindanao, Mindora, Panay, Sebo. Philosophy, Natural
and Moral, where studied, S. 60. Frenzy, Laughing, etc. caused by a Plant, S.
126. Pickers for Teeth and Tobacco, of Spiders Teeth, C. 64. Pickles, see
Achar, Pepper-Sawce. Pickled Fish, what and where, O. 303. 533. S. 27, 8. 30.
C. 124, 7. Pictures in Houses, O. 140. S. 94. of Saints in Churches, C. 115.
painted like Indians, ib. O. 123. where a Commodity, C. 119. see Painting,
Images, Idols. Pies-Pond in Beef-Island in Campeachy, C. 77. Pigeons, where, O.
39. 177. 276. 321. 392. S. 128. 181. C. 65. d. 66. see Doves, Turtle-doves.
Pillory, what and where, S. 78, 9. Pilots, where to be taken in, S. 4. 11. O.
149. 155. where unacquainted, 163. 224, 5. Pilot-Book, a Spanish Manuscript,
quoted, O. 163. 198. 232, 9. 240. 251, 3, 5. 267. 272. 425. see Preface, Vol.
II. Pine-Trees, where, O. 198. see Pines-Port, O. 198. and I. of Pines by Cuba,
d. C. 30. to 7. Beasts, Fish, Hunting, ib. 75. 98. Mangroves, 32. Violences of
the Spanish Garrison there, 31. Land-Tortoise, O. 102. Wet Weather, W. 85.
Pineapple, Fruit, where, O. 10. 291. 418. 420, 6. S. 125. 163. 181. C. 5.
Pine-drink, O. 10. Wild Pine, Shrub, d. and its keeping Water, C. 56. Pipes,
Musical, where used, C. 115. see Hautboys. Pirates, Chinese, routed, S. 106, 7.
Malayans, 157. 165. falsely supposed, 87, 8, 9. see Privateers, Buggasses.
Piscadore Isles, Harbor, T. Fort, Tartar Garrison and Shipping, O. 416, 7.
Fruits, etc. 418. Liquors and Jars, 419. Clothes, 418, 9. Pisco, its Wine, O.
196. Pitch, what and where, O. 223. 394. (see Tar) 398. (how ordered for
coating Ships, (ib.) 509. S. 8. Munjack, d. C. 130. Piura, d. O. 143, 4.
Planets, their Motions where studied, S. 60. Plank not sawn but split, O. 332.
see Timber. Plantains, where, O. 9. 12, 9. 20, 1. 59. (set to shelter Cacao)
62. 74, 5, 7, 8. 122, 3. 141. 167, 8. 175. 183, 7. 198, 9. 200, 2, 6. 253. 311,
3, 4, 5, 6. 426. 455. 480. 546. S. 4. 23. 124. 163. 181. C. 5. 9. 112. Tree and
Fruit, d. O. 311 to 6. how raised, 311, 2. in what Soil, 313. where valued,
313, 4, 5. how eaten, 313, 4. 426. Plantain-drink, 314, 5. Cloth, and where
worn, ib. 327. 427. A peculiar fort at Mindanao, with Seeds good for Fluxes,
315, 6. see Bonano's. Plantations, what and where, O. 9. 12, 4, 5, 8, 9. 22.
114. 175. 348. 429. 432, 3. 546. S. 130. of Cacao, O. 60, 1, 2. Coco-nuts, 479.
480. Maiz, 123. C. 112, 3. Cotton, 114. see of Plantains, Tobacco, Yams,
Sugarcanes. When the Harvest in these Plantations, W. 81, 2. suffering for
want of Rain, 84. where managed by Women, O. 9. 429. 432, 3. Plantations where
usually begun with Plantains, 313. Plata I. O. Intr. IV. V. d. 132, 3. Tides,
W. 69. Plate of Mexico, C. 125. see Silver. Plate-Fleet, see Lima, Armada,
Barlaventa-Fleet. Plow and Plowing, how and where, O. 410. Plum-Trees and
Fruit, see Coco-plum, Hog-plum. Poisonous, Dye or Paint, S. 41. Food, see
Manchaneel, Pattacooda. Bones, see Corroso. Fins, see Cat-fish. Poisoning, what
and where used, O. 326. 374. how the Liver affected with it, 398. Darts
poisoned, 41. Arrows, W. 108. Poles for several uses, S. 26, 9. 47. Polar
Winds, cold, O. 530. S. Pole, Winds thence, 544. Polygamy, where, O. 334. (the
Sultan) 455. 514. S. 50. 64. W. 111. Pomgranates, where and what, O. 532, 4. S.
124. see Mangastan. Ponds, Medicinal Herbs floating on them, S. 22, 3.
Duck-ponds, 26. Fish Ponds, 27, 9. 48. 55. Pone tree, d. and its use, S. 24.
62, 4. Ponticherri, French Fort, taken by the Dutch, O. 522. Pontique Point, d.
O. 258. 261. Poor People through want of Trade, O. 334. 395. S. 39. 41^. 51.
and with it, 64, 5. begging, 14. thievish, 50. sell Wives and Children, 37, 8,
9. Madre, or Nuestra Sennora de Popa, rich Monastery, O. 42. Popogaio's,
Mexican Breezes, d. W. 46, 7. Porcelan, China Ware, made where and of what, O.
409. Moro de Porcos, d. O. 211. Porcupines, where, C. 59. 62. S. 127. eaten,
128. Pork, how eaten, and young Pigs, S. 30, 1. 92. abhorred, see Hogs.
Porpusses, and Oil of them, S. 6. killed by a Storm, W. 71. Porta Nova in
Coromandel, O. 388. Portobel, low Coasts on each side, O. 424. Winds and
Tornado's, 44. Breezes and Course, W. 40. stormy Norths, 60. unwholesome Turtle
to the East of it, O. 103. Plantains there, 313. Commerce with Panama, 27, 184,
5. Goods taken, and Air sickly, ib. Barlaventa-Fleet touches there, C. 126.
Portorico-Island, Trade, O. 227. Hog-Crauls, C. 98. touched at, 126. Port Royal
in Campeachy, Harbor and Island, d. C. 48. 51. a vast green Turtle there, d.
O. 105, 6. Port Royal in Jamaica, its Turtle, whence, O. 106. W. 36. endangered
by a Storm, 65. otherwise useful, 107. Ports, see Harbors. Free, O. 418.
Portugal, high Coasts and deep Seas, O. 423. Portuguese of Cape Verd Isles
poor, 70, 2, 4, 5. Trade and Shipping, where, 307. 383, 7, 8. 460. S. 145. W.
108. see Goa, Macao, places lost by them, 400. 545. (and why) S. 161, 2. W. 56.
Discoveries of the E. Indies by Sea, O. 530. S. 161. their Course to Brazil, W.
9. Portuguese words where spoken, O. 479. Posole (poor Soul) an Indian Drink,
d. C. 43. 113. Possum (Opossum) Beast, where, C. 59. 96. Posts, Houses built on
them, how and where, O. 151. 328, 9. 454, 7. 479. S. 129. 145, 6. 180.
Potato's, where, O. 9. 12, 4, 8, 9. 46, 8. 75. 141. 151. 311. 426. 433, 5, 7.
454. 458. the Leaves devoured by Locusts, 430. where no Potato's, 480. 464, 6.
Potosi, its Silver inferior to the Mexican, O. 269. Potters, where, S. 60. see
Earthen Ware, Jars. Poultry, (Dunghill Fowl,) Cocks and Hens, where, O. 122.
240. 321. (how kept) 329. 406. 426. 464. (like ours) 480, 9. 509. 533. 546. S.
25. 30. 163. 184. (Cock-fighting, ib.) C. 118. 128. W. 111. a wild sort, d. O.
392, 3. Powder (Gun) a Commodity, where, C. 41. ill corn'd, and made by every
one for his own use, S. 70. 99. how by the Author, 97, 8, 9. Smallpox, see
small. Pracel Sholes, dangerous, O. 389. 405. S. 7. 9. 105. Prata I. and
dangerous Rocks, d. O. 405, 6. Prawns, where, S. 27. Prayers, how and where
made, O. 338. 343. S. 57, 8. Precipices, Towns built on them, O. 425, 8. 9.
Presents expected, O. 328, 9. what and where made, 354, 5. 301, 2, 3, 4. 354,
5. 418. 9. 420. 457, 8. 500, S. 108. Prices of Goods, what and where, O. 227.
333. 356. 365. 427. 487, 9. S. 61. 132, 4, 5. 152. C. 47. Priests, Spanish
Padre's among Indians, O. 44. 123, 5, 6, 7. 131. 300, 1, 3, 4, 8. 383, 7. C.
112, 4. power and wealth, O. 124. 308. C. 114, 5. learn the Languages of the
Indians, ib. see Missionaries. Heathen Priests, where and what, O. 396. S. 52,
7, 8. 83. Princes, Eastern, their State, etc. S. 142, 3. (abused, 184.) O. 329.
335, 6, 7. 340, 1, 2. 354, 5. Devices in Flags, 455. see Mindanaian and Bouton
Sultans, R. Laut, Tonquinese ruling King or Chou^, Government, Guards,
Presents, Soldiers, Women. Painted Pr. see J^oly. Pageant Princes (without real
power) see Boua, and Q. of Achin, A Prince of a Spice I. invites the English to
Trade, 350. 366. 444, 6. Privateers, Buccaneers, always seek for Fish, O. 117,
8. and take Moskite-men with them, 1, 2. soon mutinous if in want, 146.
venturous, 242. Signals to find each other, 252. their knowledge oath the W.
India Coasts, 27. Queries put to Prisoners, 27, 8. Commissions taken from Petit
Gua^res, ib. 39. 68. 192. burnt Vessels they take, and save the Nails, C. 47.
Manage Canoa's well, 119. sleep on Deck, W. 87. observe Tides much, 9. Their
Ravages in Jucatan, Campeachy, New Spain, and B. of Mexico, C. 12. 5, 33. 47.
53, 4. 95, 8. 109. 110, 1. 121, 2, 4, 6. Cruisings among the W. India Coasts
and Islands, O. 26 to 66. Revelling, 50. Exploits, etc. 50, 6, 8. 63, 8, 9.
Repulse, 63. French, Ordinary Seamen, 30. Their Entering the S. Seas by the
Cape-R. 129. by crossing the Isthmus (and Return) Intr. III. 7. 11 to 24. 191,
6, 7. and first occasion of it, 180, 1, 2, 3. entering by Sea, 83, 4. Cruising,
Occurrences, etc. in the S. Sea, 93 to 278. several particulars relating to
them, 116, 7. 153 to 8. 171. 187, 8, 9. 191, 6, 7. 202, 5, 8, 9. 213. 5, 9.
220, 1, 3, 4. 241, 2, 3, 7. 254, 5, 8, 9. 260, 1, 6, 7, 8. 270, 1, 7, 8. In the
E. Indies, 358, 9. 364, 5. 371, 2, 3, 4, 6. 439. 470. 481, 2. 506 to 511. see
Pirates. Procession at a Circumcision, O. 340, 1, 2. of Idolaters, 397. Proes,
what and where, their make, Outlayers, etc. d. O. 298, 9. 300. d. 335, 6. 397.
448. 450, 8. 475, 7. 480. d. S. 5. d. 131. Proebottoms built upon, 111. see
Boats, Outlayers, Paddles. Prophecy or presage of the stirs in America, O.
180, 1. Prospects pleasant, O. 42. 58, 9. 87. 111, 2. 135. 152, 7. 163. 177, 8,
9. 186, 7. 202. 231, 3. 251, 2, 3, 8. 309. 384. 417. 478. 530, 1. S. 14. 24.
179. C. 109. W. 109. Prostituting of Women, see Women. Providence I. C. 57. by
whom settled, O. 33. Puebla Nora attempted, O. Intr. III. taken, 213. Pulo
signifies Island, O. 389. see Cond^re, Vby, etc. Pumice-stones, where and
whence, O. 230. Pumkins, where, O. 311. 426. S. 23. 45. 181. Pumps (Spanish)
for Ships, how made, O. 443, 4. Pumple-Nose, fruit, d. S. 124, 5. 163. Puna I.
T. and Pilots, d. O. 149. Oysters, 177. Punishments, what and where used, O.
356, 7. 367. 432. S. 77 to 81, 3. 138, 9. 140. Purification-City, d. O. 257.
Purslain wild, and benefit of it, where, S. 22.
Q.
QUalifications of People, Docil and Apprehensive, Ingenious, of good natural
Wit, Active, Dexterous, etc. O. 78. 9. 10. 35, 6, 7, 8. 298. 300. 326. 400, 1.
429. S. 41, 2. 181. W. 110. see Artificers, Mechanics, Proes, Jonks, etc.
Learning, Customs, etc. Qualities of People, see Manners. Quam, a Bird, d. and
where, O. 19. 39. C. 65. d. 66, 7. ^5. Quantung, Province of China, see Canton.
Queda, Cudda, Oil used, O. 537. Trade, 501. S. 173, 8. Queen of Achin, her
Election, State, etc. S. 141 to ^. Queriasao, see Currasao. Du Quesne's Voyage,
a Fight related in it, O. 522. 3. Quibo (Cobaya) I. and its other Keys or
Islands, O. Intr. IV. d. 212, 3, 5. Cantarras I. 213. see Canales I. Rancheria
I. and, Quicaro I. d. O. 212, 5. Quicksilver, whence, and a Commodity, O. 245.
Quinam, Metropolis of Cochinchina, S. 7. Quinces, where growing, O. 532. Quito,
its Cloth a Commodity, where, O. 142, 3. 152. City and Gold Mines, d. 152, 3.
Rains, sickly Air, and rich Rivers, 164, 9.
R.
RAccoons, or Indian Conies, and Rats, O. 172, 276. C 6. 32. Rack, see Arack.
Rafts, see Bark-Logs. Rags, a Commodity, where, O. 489. Raja's, Princes,
abused, S. 184. see R. Laut. Rain, what, when and where met by the Author, etc.
4. 14, 6 to 21. 79. 83. 199. 360. 414, 5. 438. 459. 461. W. 55. where and when
much usual, O. 44. 108. 153. 167. 173. 195. 230. 322. 360. S. 34, 6. 149. C.
33. 79. W. 19. 52. 62, 8, 9. 72, 8. 80, 2 to 6. pleasant, 58. Season of Rains
in particular places, when and how, O. 186. 207. 297. 321, 2, 3. 360. 394. S.
34. 148, 9. 180, 1. W. 52. see Season, Weather. Bays most subject to Rain, 78.
80, 2, 3. and Mountains, 83, 4, 5, 6. much from a small Cloud, 87, 8. hurt done
by them, S. 37, 8. Floods caused, see Floods. Rivers made by them, 35. O. 95,
6. whose overflow fattens the Land, S. 37, ^. Rain where a sign of Land nigh,
O. 283. No Rain, where, 94. 139. 140. 186. and why, W. 78, 9. Ramdam, or
Mohammedan Lent, how kept, O. 343, 359, 361. Rancheria, its Pearl-Fishery, etc.
d. O. 43, 4. Rancheria I. in the S. Sea, d. O. 212. Rashbouts, who and where,
O. 507, 8. Rates of Goods, see Price. Rattan-Canes, use, O. 496. S. 46.
Rattan-Cables, d. 167. Rats, many, where, C. 23. 45. in Ships, O. 279. Raw Fish
eaten, O. 430. Flesh, S. 30. Realeja, Ria Lexa, Port to Leon City, O. 215. the
Harbor and Island, d. 118 to 121. the T. d. taken and burnt, 119. 221, 3. bad
Air, 221, 4. 230, 6. Recreations, S. 53. see Gaming. Red Sea, Ambergriese, O.
74. Pirates fond of cruising there, 439. when bad going thither, 510. Weather
and Winds, W. 20, 4. Tide, 99. Red-wood, see Blood-w. Cam-w. Log-wood. Reeds,
Hats made of them, where, S. 43. Refugees, French, where, O. 532. 547.
Religious Belief, Prayers, etc. where, S. 56, 7, 8. O. 338. Done visible, 432.
466. 479. 541. state of it in the E. S. 95, 6, 7. see Christianity, Idolatry,
Mahometanism, and Renegado's, Chinese and English, S. 138. Revolution at Siam,
S. 151, 2, 3. Rhubarb, whence S. 63. Ria Lexa, see Realeja. Rice, where
growing, and a Commodity, O. 78. 175, 291, 7. 303. 329. 333. 353. 384. 397, 9.
400. S. 14. 21, 2, 4, 5. 30. 64. 87, 8. 105. 130, 4, 5, 6. 145. 151. 183, 6.
181, 2. in wet Soil, O. 297. 406. 410. S. 25. yet hurt by much Rain, 37.
depends on the Rains, where, 37, 8. dear bought, 50. Harvest, when and how
ordered, 25. O. 353. trod out with Buffalo's, 410, 1. how dressed and eaten,
see Cookery; with Tamarinds, good for sick People, 526. the Grain and main
Sustenance of the E. Indians, 399. 426. S. 22. 30, 8. 50, 5. 126. 148. where
none, O. 426. 433. 480. 464, 6. Rice-Drink, see Drink. Mr. Ringrose killed, O.
271, 2. referred to, see H. of Buccaneers. Rings, what and where worn, O. 365.
514, 5. C. 119. W. 111. Ripling or Cockling Sea, O. 133. W. 57. see Sea. Rivers
not perennial, where, O. 95, S. 35. all in the Torrid Zone overflow in the wet
Season, 34. ^rackish in the dry Season, O. 258. how used for Bathing, 330. S.
180. see Bathing, Washing. Fit for building Ships, O. 114. unfrequented, 163.
stored with Fish, S. 27. 128. how caught, 28, 9. Ripling or Cockling Sea caused
by Rivers, W. 57. and what Tides, 91. For particular Rivers, see the Maps.
Gold-Rivers, see Gold. River-Frigats, d. and where, S. 16. 74, 5, 6, 7.
River-Horse, see Hippopotamus. Roads and Riding for Ships, what and where, O.
48. 55, 6, 8. 63. 74. 97. 125. 144. 151, 2. 164, 9. 170, 9. 184. 204. 238, 9.
257. 321. 380. S. 122, 3. 165. C. 17, 108. W. 73. 4. See Anchorings, Harbors.
Roca's Isles, d. O. 52, 5. Sky-Rockets fired at Mindanao, O. 342. Rocks, what
and where, O. 50, 1, 2, 6. 74. 81. 97. 101, 9. 112, 6. 122. 132, 3, 6, 9. 145,
6. 174, 186. 198. 212. 232, 5, 8, 9. 240, 1, 2, 8. 256, 7. 261, 2, 3, 7. 275.
282, 3. 291, 381, 2. 405. 422, 6. 458. 461, 3. 475. 545, 7. S. 19. 122. 160.
171. C. 23, 5, 6. 47. 124, 5. W. 56. (People dwelling in them, 108.) 109. Rocky
Coasts have deep Seas, and where so, O. 422, 3, 4, 5. abound in Fish, 91. 264.
see Rock-fish (Grooper, Bacalao) d. and where, O. 91. 257. Rocho, a Branch of
Tonquin R. d. S. 9. 10, 5, 6, 9. 21. C. Roman, its Currents, W. 101, 2, 4. Pulo
Rondo, d. S. 122. Roofs of Buildings, what and where, O. 139. 218. 387. 479.
539. S. 43, 5. 57. 130. C. 45. 115. 8. see Thatch. Roots, eatable, where little
need of them, S. 22. sold, 30. planted, 182. see Cassavy, Onions, Potato's
Yams. Rosario, R. T. and Gold. Mines, d. O. 266. Rowing how, see Proes. To the
sound of a Gong, in exact cadence, S. 75. without hands, 139. see Oars,
Paddles. Port Royal, Porto-Rico, see Porto. Rudder, a Paddle used for it, O.
299. S. 5. Rum, a Commodity, where, C. 18. 92. Rushes burnt on Idol-Altars, S.
43. 58. Rusk, a sort of wheaten Biscuit, O. 303.
S.
SAbbath of the Mahometans, Friday, O. 338. 377. Sacrificio I. in the S. Sea,
d. O. 238. Sacrificio Isles in the G. of Mexico, their true Site, C 124, 5.
Sacrifices to Idols, what and where, O. 396, 7. 43. 58, 9. Saggen, Plantain,
and Plantain-Cloth, O. 327. Sago, where, what, how made, and used, O. 310, 1.
329. S. 148. Sails, and Sail-cloth, d. O. 295. 384. 413. S. 13. C. 46. bad, W.
33. Sailing swift, O. 281, 5, 6. 300 in E. India, depends on the Monsoons, W.
22, 3, 4. see Course, shipping. Saints, painted like Indians, O. 123. C. 115.
sold, 119. see V. Mary. Saker, of great Guns, where the most valued, S. 65.
Sale or Outcry at Malacca, manner of it. S. 163. Sal I. of the C. Verds, and
its Salt, etc. d. O. 70, 2. Rio de Sal, d. O. 264. Salina Harbor and Salt in
Campeachy, C. d. 42, 3. see Salt. Sallagua T. O. 245. 253. Harbor, d. 254.
Salt, and Salina's or Salt-ponds, where, O. 49. 56. 70, 5. 11^ 240, 3. 265, 9.
430. (making, d. and time of kerning, 56,) C. 42, 3 Wells dug in Sand, Salt if
deep, where, 50. 118. Salt Water under Fresh, S. 156, 156, 7. 42. Salt-Lakes
stored with Fish, 241, 2, 3 see Lagunes. Salt-Creek in Campeachy, C. 99.
Saltpeter, imported, S. 65. (used) 98. Earth, C. 7. 8. Sambaloe's Isles, and
Point Samblass, Rendezvous of Privateers. Vegetables and Animals, O. 22, 3, 6.
39. 40. 101, 3. C. 58. 61. Breezes, W. 36. see Golden I. Pulo Sambilong, and
their Cat-fish, S. 171. Sambo, R. d. O. 193, 8. Sam shu, a sort of Arack, d. O.
419. Sands, hot, a Cure, O. 276. a Punishment, 357. raised by Winds, W. 15. 47,
8. Wells, C. 50. 118. Banks, 120. high, 123, 4. see Anchoring, Bays, Sholes,
Soil. Santa Pecaque, see Centiquipaque. Sapadilly, fruit, where, O. 39. d. 202,
3. C. 48, 9. 94. Sarsaparilla, grows in water, and where, O. 152. Sash worn
instead of other Clothes, O. 479. see Naked. Savages, misreported, and easily
amused, O. 484, 5, 6. Savannahs, Champaign, or Pasture, what and where, O. 44.
50. 62, d. 87, 8. 112, 4, 5. 121. 150. 205. 211, 8. 231, 2. 240. 250, 3, 20. 2.
264, 5, 9. 347, 8. 369. 384, 7. 406. 442. S. 19. 22. 124. C. 32. 48, 9. 52, 3,
8, 9. (drowned, 55, 6. 80, 1, 2.) 84, 5, 6, d. 94. 102, 7, 8. 120, 1. Sauces,
Pepper-sauce, O. 396. see Achars, Pickle, Cookery. Sausages of raw Pork eaten,
where, S. 30. Sawyers and Saws, S. 60. C. 41. O. 357. none, 332. Scabby Lips
caused by a Wind, O. 63. Scales, not used, where, O. 434. Scarf, what and where
worn, O. 456. S. 129. Scholars, whre the only Courtiers, S. 59. Schools, O.
330, 1. Scuchadero, d. O. 195. Scissars, a Commodity, where, C. 119. O. 23.
Scorpions, O. 320. C. 63. S. 25. an Antidote, 53, 4. Scuda, I. Sir Fr. Drake's
Bowels buried there, O. 39. Scurvey cured, O. 92. 548. Sea, where, high, great,
tough, swelling, O. 55. 134. 198. 231, 2. 3, 9. 241, 7. 253. 2^2. 4. 7. 543, 4.
C. 123, 4. increased by contrary Winds, W. 106, 7. O. 421. see Tornado's,
Storms. No Grass or Weeds in deep Seas, 393. where deep or shallow, and
deepning gradually, ib. 422, 3, 4, 5. C. 16. 48. Head-Sea, 22. Cocking or
Ripling, O. 82. 133. 425. W. 57. sparkling and working Waves, in Storms, 69. O.
414. always smooth, C. 30. long Ebb presaging Storms, W. 61, 6. 70. Change of
Color, O. 80. usually a sign of Sholes, or Land near, C. 28. Sea and Wind rise
and fall together, O. 217. At Sea, Land-Breezes faintest, W. 31, 2, 3. fewest
Tornado's, 86, 7, 8. Far at Sea, weakest Currents, 104. and Birds not seen, O.
282. 531. Sea-winds warmest, 529. see Weather, Winds. Fresh Water taken up at
Sea, 42, S. 156. warily, 157. Sea-Marks, see Marks, see Atlantic, Indian, Red
Sea, G. of Mexico, and South Sea. Seamen, good, S. 4. 5. bad, see Spaniards.
Ignorance, O. 276, 7, 8. 507. W. 15. Superstition, 31. lost by carelessness, 41,
2. Proverb, 45. hardship, 48. tricks, O. 318. thievish, ib. 528, 9. just, S.
117, 8. scarce, 112. see Lascars. Sea-Devils, fish, d. C. 73. Sea-Cow, see
Manatee. Sea or River-Horse, see Hippopotamus. Sea-Lion, see Lion. Sea-Dog, see
Seals, d. and where (where plenty of Fish) O. 89. 90. 146. salted, 263, 4. 276.
533. C. 25, 6. Seal-skin Floats, d. W. 38, 9. Seasons of the Year, wet and dry,
what and where, d. W. 76 to 88. S. 148, 9. (divide the Year, as Summer and
Winter) 31, 2. Wet, when, 34, 5. 180. O. 277. 322. C. 55. W. 52. see Rains,
Floods. Most Rain then at night, 88. incommodious, S. 45. 73. Oysters then
fresh. C. 17. Dry, when and where, O. 197. 258. 297. 323. 361. 394. S. 36. 90.
C. 55. W. 58. the Harvest-time of Plantations, W. 81, 2. pleasant, C. 122.
Water how preserved then, 56. 76, 7. Rivers brackish, O. 258. 277. Season of
Winds, what and where, 38, 9. 44. 280. 298. 303, 6. 322. 346, 7. 353, 4, 7.
401, 5. 413. 437, 9. (and sign) 490. 544. S. 179. W. 4. 8. 9. 11, 2, 3. 22, 7.
30, 5. 43, 4, 6. 101, 2. for sailing, bad, O. 354. 416. 439. 461. 504, 5. 510.
524. for Tornado's, 458. W. 51. Tuffoons, S. 36. Norths, 60. C. 29. Souths, W.
65. Hurricanes, 68. stormy Monsoons, 73. Currents, 106, 7. crossing the Line,
see Equator. Making Salt, etc. see Salt, Sugar. Fishing, C. 15. Periodical
Seasons of Traveling kept by Fish and Fowl, O. 394. see Turtle. Sebo I. and
one of Canes by it, d. O. 379. 380. Segoria, in Mexico, visited by Privateers,
O. 129. Selam Look-out, C. 13, 4. Serle (Captain) and Serles-Key, C. 52.
Serpents, see Snakes. Settlements, Provision and Persons necessary for them, O.
352, 3. (and where to be made) 158, 9. 349. 350, 1. 394. S. 101, 2, 3. see
Factories, Trade. Shabander of Achin, O. 502. S. 141, 2, 4, 5. of Malacca, 163,
6, 7. Shackles and Wrist-bands of Gold, where worn, O. 514, 5. Shallow places,
O. 33. 125. 169. see Sholes. Shape of People, where straight, well-made, or
shaped, O. 7. 170. 297. 395. 406. 454. 464. 478. C. 115. (and slender) S. 181.
rawbon'd, O. 406. squat, 426. thin, 537. see Limbs. Sharks, where, O. 65. 79.
110. 472. C. 25. 35. W. 55. killed by Storms, S. 1. how dres^ to eat, O. 79.
Sheathing of Ships, how necessary, O. 360, 2, 3. Sheep, where, O. 387. 464.
532. 540. (a few for the King) S. 25. their Skins worn, and Guts eaten, O. 538,
9. 540. Shellfish, where, and what, S. 27. C. 17. O. 449. 540. scarce, 465. a
sort red like boiled Shrimps, 81. see Clams, d. Cockles, Conchs, Crabs, d.
Craw-fish, Horse-hoofs, d. Muscles, Oysters, d. Periwinkles, Prawns, Shrimps.
Shells stuck in the Hair, 538. Sherboro, Cherburg R. near Sierra Leona, English
Factory and Trade of Cam-wood, O. 78. c. 58. Ships and Shipping, where built,
O. 114. whither sent, see Trade. Little used, where, 117. 243. 267. C. 122.
suppressed, S. 118. E. Indian, what and where, O. 332. S. 5. 8. 9. 74, 5, 6, 7.
88. 110. 1. Houses built to attend them, 12, 3. measured, O. 354. see Champa,
Chinese Jonks, Proes. Spanish, see Acapulco Ship, Armada, Barlaventa-fleet,
Flota, Lima. Eaten with Worms, see sheathing. Quarter Deck cut down, 380. how
made to wear, W. 64. cast on Land by Storms, C. 92, 3. W. 67, 9. 73. see
Wrecks. Seams opening in Harmatams, 49. Hold hot with Pepper, O. 525. see
Anchoring, Bark-logs, Boats, Cables, Canoa's, Careening, Masts, Oakam, Oars,
Outlagers, Paddles, Pitch, Pumps, Rudder, Sails, Tar, Well-boat. Shirts, none
worn, S. 43. see Clothes. Shoes, none worn, O. 326. 408. 456. S. 43. 129. like
Slippers, and small ones of Chinese Women, O. 408. see Feet. Shooting of Birds,
newly learnt, where, S. 26. Shootingmatches, solemn, 72. Shot, a Commodity, C.
41. Sholes and shallow places, Bars, Flats, etc. where, O. 75, 8. 119. 133, 6.
144, 7, 9. 164. 193. 212. 242. 253. (a sign of Land near) 283. 297. 303. 378.
(very dangerous) 382, 9. 425. 447, 8. 450, 8, 9. 460, 1. (ill placed in Charts)
462. S. 5. 9. 10, 1, 2. 105. 156, 9. 170, 1. C. 28. 9. 35. 123. usually near
low Land, O. 422, 3, 4, 5. discovered by change of Color in the Water, 80.
Beacons set on them, 450. proper to Fish on, 297. see Fishing Banks. See
Anchorings. Shrimps, and Trade of them, S. 27, 8. 128, C. 127, 8. Shrubs, see
Bushes, Fruits, Trees. Siam Bay, d. Isles and Fishermen there, O. 398 9. 400,
1. 425. Winds, W. 21. Course, 23. 399. Weather, 82. Aguala-wood, S. 8. Kingdom
of Siam, their Trade at Tonquin, 10. 16. at Achin, O. 504. War with the
English, Bells bought for the King, and English in his service, ib. S. 101, 2,
3, 5 to 9. Massacred at Merga, 151. Revolution, and English from Siam City,
152, 3. Women Prostitutes, O. 395. Achars. 391. Sibbel de Wards, Sebald de
Waerdts, Isles, d. O. 80, 1. Sick men refreshed with Herbs and Fruits, O. 92,
526. 542. S. 23. see Diseases, Cures. Sick place, 180. O. 524, 5. see Air bad.
Sight, good, O. 8. bad, 464, 5. see Eyes. Signs of Winds, Weather, etc. see
Clouds, Fogs, Land, Sky, Storms, Sun. Silks, a Commodity, where, O. 137. 245.
379. S. 15. (and raw Silk) 61. C. 120. for sowing, 119. Silkworms, and Silks
made, where, O. 409. S. 21, 2, 5. d. 61. Worn, 42. (presented) 108. 129. O.
419. China-silk, 333. 409. S. 15. Silk Countries poor, 39. Silkpaper, 61.
Silk-grass Aprons, W. 110. Sillabar, O. 401. S. 179. 180. its Pepper, 182.
Silver Mines, where, O. 260, 1. 9. European Prisoners not sent thither, C. 54.
out of a Wreck, O. 148. imported, S. 61, 5. Buttons, 108. Rings, a Commodity,
C. 119. see Pieces of Eight, Plate-fleet. Quicksilver, see Quick. Silvester,
tree, fruit, dye, d. O. 124. 225, 9. Sincapore Streights, S. 4. 109. Singing,
Songs, what and where, O. 127. 337. 342. 459. 541. Sisal, Look out, d. C. 14.
Sitting cross-leg'd, where used, O. 329. Situation pleasant, etc. O. 218. see
Air, Prospect. Skins worn, lousy, O. 539. 540. for Instrument-Cases, C. 73.
eaten, O. 429. 430. see Asses, Goats, Manatee, Seals, Leather. Sky clear, when,
W. 4. 45. black, 66. see Clouds, Weather. Slaves working, where, O. 266, 9.
534. see Negro's, made Slaves, 184. 456. 510, 1, 5, 6. S. 7. 8. (by Parents and
Husbands) 37, 8. (see Children, Wives; the usual punishment, where) 83. 130.
slavish state, 132, 4, 5. d. 141, 2. Slippers, Sandals, worn, O. 408. S. 129.
Sloth, Beast, where, C. 59. d. 61. Smallpox, where, O. 334. Smiths (Black,
Gold) etc. d. O. 331, 2. S. 60, 130, 1, 6. 181. Smoaks and Fires seen, O. 82.
459. a signal, 252. Snakes and Serpents, what and where, O. 103. 172. 212. 320,
1. (in Houses, etc.) 373. S. 25. (an Antidote) 53, 4. 127. C. 50. 62. (yellow,
green, dun) d. 62, 3. Snapper, fish, d. and where, O. 91. C. 12. 109. Snook,
fish, d. and where, O. 243. C. 12. 71. 124. Soap, a Commodity, where, O. 142,
3. 214. Soil, what and where, O. 11, 5, 8. 21, 9. 44. 59. 70, 4, 6. 95, 7. 101,
9. 112. 122. 132, 4, 5, 9. 140, ^. ^0^. ^72, 5. 187. 196. 202. 218. 222, 5.
240. 250, 3, 5, 6. 261. 275, 291, 7. 309. 310. 333. 351. 380, 4. 390. 406. 425,
6. 447. 457. 463. 473, 8. 532. S. 14, 9. 20, 1, 2, 5. (variety of it) 123, 4.
171, 4. 181. C. 11. 23. 56, 8. 94, 5. 102. 111, 3, 9. 122, 3. W. 109. see
Savannahs, Rocks, Sands, Trees, Rice. Soldiers, what and where, S. 60.
Exercises, 69, 72. rowing, 75, 7. Arms, 70, 1, 6. trial by eating, and how
raised, ib. Fights and Expeditions, 70, 4. Watch, 77, 8. hired, 108. see
Guards, Arms, Fighting. Soldier-Insect, d. eaten, but sometimes poisonous, O.
39. Sologues of Mindanao, d. O. 325. Proes and Trade, 379. Soundings, O. 232,
3. see Anchorings. La Sounds Key in the Samballo's, O. 22, 3, 6. South Keys or
Islands, see of Cuba. South Sea, bold Shore, and great deep Seas, O. 423. 34.
no Manatee, ib. nor Hawks-bill Turtle, 105. its Pearl-Oysters, 173. Jewfish,
249. Red-wood, C. 58. see Blood-wood. Ant-bears, 61. Oakam, O. 295. see Bark
Logs, Cat-fish. Far in it no Rocks, Fish or Fowl, where, 282. Course across it,
see Course. Breadth, under-reckon'd, O. 288. 290. Winds, W. 3. 10, 1. 24. 40.
Weather, 78, 9. Tides, 93, 5, 6. Currents, 107, 8. what part free from Storms
and Rain, see Pacifick Sea. Better Landing about Peru than Mexico, see Landing
bad. See Weather, Winds, Bark-logs, Chili, Peru, Panama Bay, Mexico,
California. Commerce with the Atlantic by the Cape-R. O. 129. by the Isthmus,
see Isthmus. Souths, Storms, where, O. W. d. 65 to 8. Soy, whence and how made,
S. 28. Spain, presage of the stirs in America, O. 180, 1. Cargo thence; C. 125.
see Spaniards, particulars relating to them in America, O. 2. 3. 4. 6. 12, 3,
4, 8. 27, 8. 30, 3, 8. 41 to 6. 56 to 60, 3, 8. 75. 83, 4, 8. 91, 4, 6, 7, 8.
100, 2. 113 to 7. 120, 2, to 8. 131, 4, 5, 6, 9. 140, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9. 152, 3, 5,
to 8. 163, 6, to 173, 5, 7, to 182, 4, to 209. 211, 3, 4, 7, to 221, 3, 5, to
235, 9, to 261, 4, to 273, 5, 7, 9. 280, 2, 3. S. 117. C. 13, 9. 20. 34, 5. 42
to 7. 51, 2, 3, 4. ^3. 90, 5, to 8. 109, to 116. 120, to 7, 9. 130, 1. (their
sailing) W. 40. 105. (bad Seamen) 33. 62, 3. (O. 190, 1.) at Guam, O. 290, 1,
300, etc. at the Philippines. 328. 331, 3, 4. 377, 9. 382, 3, 4, 7, 8. 515, 6.
Trade, etc. 184, 5. 243 to 6. 333, 4. C. 42, 3. 90. 110, 1. 120 to 7. 131. see
Armada, Atapulco-ship, Barlaventa-fleet, Flota, Lima fleet, Carriers,
Commodities, Trade. Fighting, Intelligence, etc. Stratagems, O. 99. 114, 7.
120, 1. 135, 6. 144, 7. 188, 9. 208, 9. 225, 7, 8. 243. 259. 265. 382.
Government, Policy, Seventy, etc. 43, 4. C. 19. 31. 44. 54. 94, 5, 6. 109. 112,
3, 4, 6. 272, 3. O. 43, 4. 331. 359. 372, 3. Superstition, 42. Gaming, 410.
Honor, 221, 3. C. 96. Buildings, see Churches, Houses, Parades. Ship-Pumps, d.
O. 443, 4. Husbandry, 235. 313. C. 98. Spanish spoken, O. 331. 349. 355. 515,
6. New Spain, Coasts and places of it, d. C. 123, etc. Spanish Makril, where,
C. 71. d. 72. Spears used, what and where, S. 72. Spice, a Commodity, S. 65. O.
245. ing^oss'd and suppressed, 316, 7. 350. 366. see Dutch. Where to be had,
ib. 317. 350, 1, 3. see Cinnamon, Cloves, Clove-bark, Ginger, Nutmegs, Pepper.
Spic'd-water, 359. see the Spice-Islands, Malayan learnt there, O. 395.
Libby-tree and Sago, 311. anointing used, 537. Trade monopoliz'd, S. 117. 166.
see Spice, Dutch. See Amboina, Banda, Ceylon, Gilolo, Meangis, Sumatra,
Ternate, Tidore. See Prince. Spiders large, and use of their Teeth o^ Horns, C.
64. Spittle provoked by Betle, O. 319. Spoons of Coco-nut, O. 294. none used,
329. 430. Sports at Tonquin, S. 53. of others, see Dancing, Gaming. Spouts, d.
(follow a Calm) and where, O. 451. 2, 3. Spuma, a white frothing Cacao, d. and
where, C. 111. Squashes, Beasts, d. and where, C. 59. 96. Squirrels, where, S.
127. eaten, 128. Star-apple, d. and where, O. 204. State of East-Indian
Princes, O. 335. S. 142, 3. see Princes. States I. d. O. 82. 424. Stature of
People, low, O. 395. 426. 454. W. 108. mean, O. 31, 2. 170. 325. 537. S. 40. C.
115. tall, O. 7. 406. 464. 478. Stealing with the Toes, S. 138. see Thieves.
Steel, what Coals best to harden it, C. 50, 7. Sticks burnt on Altars, O. 412.
Chop-sticks, d. S. 84. Sting-rays, Fish, see Rays. Stocks, an usual punishment,
where, S. 77. Stock-fish-wood, d. where, and price, C. 57, 8. Stockings, a
Commodity, C. 120. O. 137, none worn, 326. 408. 456. S. 43. 129. see Legs,
Naked. Stomach, what good for it, O. 319. Stone, Friable, O. 140. scarce, ib.
none, C. 111. see Rocks, Soil. Stone-Hatchets, see Hatchets. Storms, what and
where usual, or met by the Author, etc. and their presages, O. 70. 83, 4. 401.
413, 4, 5, 6. 437, 8, 9. 495, etc. 504. S. 35, 6. C. 91, 2, 3. 128. d. W. 2.
19. 59 to 64. 75. most at the N. and F. Moon, O. 416. see Moon. Turning then
dangerous, 414. how effected, W. 64. see Clouds, Corpus Sant, Elephanta,
Hurricanes, Monsoons, stormy Norths, Souths, Spouts, Tornadoes, Tuffoons. None
where, O. 94. see Pacifick Sea. Strangers, carriage toward them, O. 327, 8. S.
50, 1. 34, 5. see Entertainments, Comrades and Pagallies, Manners, (good,
hospitable, etc.) Women prostitutes. Straw-hats worn at Tonquin, S. 43.
Streets, what and where, O. 387. inaccessible, 428. ill paved, S. 47. guarded,
77. hot Tea sold there, 31. Strumstrum, a Musical Instrument, d. O. 127.
Subtle-Jacks, and their Nests, d. and where, C. 65, 8, 9. Sucking-fish or
Remora, d. and where, O. 64, 5. W. 54. used for catching Turtle, 110. Sugar,
where a Commodity, O. 45. 142, 3. 196. 214. 269. S. 151. C. 18. Canes growing,
and Works, O 22. 46. 78. 143. 199. 218. 223. 409. 429. C. 5. hindered by
Salt-Earth, 8. Season, W. 80, 1. Sulphur imported, S. 65. (used, 68.) smell, O.
131. Sumatra I. Coasts, O. 425. 472, 3, 6. called Sheba in an old Map, S. 143.
anointing used there, 537. Malayan spoken, 394. Breezes, W. 39. Commodities and
Trade, O. 40 1. S. 5. 110, 1. (monopoliz'd) 116, 7. (see Dutch) 182. see
Pepper. See Achin, P. Arii, Bancul^, Bencouli, Diamond Point, R. Dilly,
Golden-M. P. Gomez, Hog-I. Indrapore, Palimbam, Pangasinam, Passange-Jonca, P.
Rondo, Sillabar, Trist-^, P. Verero, P. Way, Malacca and Sunda Streights.
Summasenta R. and T. d. C. 51. 102. 131. Summasenta-W. or Breeze, 93. d. W. 43,
4. Sun, in what Signs, what Weather, W. 4. 6. 21, 2. often Clouded about Noon,
O. 494. Halo round it presages Storms, 495. see Clouds, Sky. Its Amplitude
sailed by, 531. exposing to it, a Punishment, 357. S. 79. see Declination,
Latitude by Obs. Sunda Streights, much used, O. 394. Counter-winds, 351.
Superstition, O. 9. 42. 127. 415. 541. W. 31, 2. 104. C. 91. see Idolatry,
Mahometanism. Suranam, Seasons there, W. 82. Currents, 104. low Land, and
Manatee, O. 33. 425. Surat-Merchants at Achin, S. 146. Surat-Channel, 122.
Swampy and flooded Waters, why unwholesome, O. 524. Capt. Swan, particulars
concerning him, O. 137. 278. 280, 1, 2, 3, 4. 302, 3, 6. 340, 1, 2, 8, 9. 350,
3, to 7. 362, 4, 6 to 374. his Murder, 445, 6. Ship, the Cygnet, 506, 7. 510,
1. Swearing, manner of it, where, S. 83. Sweating in hot Sands, Cure of a
Dropsy, O. 276. Swimming of one only in a fright, O. 402. Swines-flesh
abhorred, see Hogs, Mahometans. Swings at Tonquin, d. S. 53. Swivels used for
Guns, where, O. 400. S. 73. Swords, what and where used, O. 337. (wooden) 466,
9, 5. S. 70, 6. (Back-swords) 184. see Cressets, Curtana's. Sword fish, d. and
where, C. 25. 35.
T.
TAbagilla I. O. 188. Tabago I. and T. by Panama, d. O. 187, 8. Tabago I. of
the Caribbes, wasted, O. 485. C. 5. d. W. 56, 7. Tabasco R. and I. C. 20. d.
131, 7, 8. 117, 8. 121. W. 63. Table-Mount at the C. G. Hope, d. O. 531.
Tacatalpo de Sierra, d. C. 111. Tail of Cows Hide, worn and trimmed, W. 111. of
Cocks, ib. Tale, a sum, what and where, S. 61. 132. Tallow, a Commodity, O.
152. C. 110. Tallow-Caps, d. W. 111. Tamarinds, their benefit with Rice, O.
526. Tangola I. d. O. 232. Tanning, see Bark, Leather. Tar, where found or
made, and how ordered, (Algatrane) O. 223. (Tartree, d.) 390. 1, (a Commodity)
4, 5, 7, 8. S. 8. Tarpom, fish, d. and where, C. 12, 3. 71. Tartars, Trade,
inslaving the Chinese, Habit, d. etc. O. 406, 7. 417. 9. 421. S. 15. 4. 107.
see China. Tartillo's, Cakes, d. and where, C. 43. 113. Tea, Chau, whence, and
where, O. 409. S. 31. 41. 53. Teal, where, S. 26. W. 109. Teguantapeque
(Tecoantepeque) R. and T. d. O. 232. C. 121, 2. Teeth, where white, S. 115. W.
111. O. 297. 395. 427. Black, yet sound, 325. by chewing Betle, 319. S. 128.
blackened with a Dye, for Beauty, 41, 2. Pickers for them of Spiders Teeth, C.
63. Elephants Teeth, plenty, W. 111. see Elephants. Idol-Temples, Pagoda's,
where and what, O. 396. 411, 2. S. 56, 7. 152. Mohammedan, see Mosque.
Christian, see Church. Tenan, Prove. of Tonquin, d. S. 20, 1. 87. Tenehoa, Prove.
of Tonquin, d. S. 20, 1. 68, 9. Teneriffe, not so high as Santa Martha, O. 42.
see Andes. Tenpounders, fish, d. and where, C. 71. S. 128. Laguna Termina, or
of Tides, C. 51, 2. 94. W. 92. Ternate I. its Product and Trade, O. 311. 333.
447. see Spice-I. Terre^o's, hot Winds, d. 47, 8. Cold ones, see Harmatans.
Testigoe Isle and Currents, d. W. 102. Thatching of Houses, O. 254. C. 79. 127.
W. 110. S. 45. moveable, in panes, 46. see Palm, Palmeto, Roofs. Thelupan, d.
O. 251. Thieves, where, and what, S. 128, 9. O. 318. 528, 9. and how punished,
356, 7. 432. S. 80, 1. 138, 9. 140. 165. Thistles great, where, O. 133. St.
Thomas, a Danish I. O. 45, 6. St. Th. under the Line, W. 51. Thongs and Tholes
for Boats, of Manatee-hide, O. 35. Thread, of what, O. 37. 294, 5. 315. a
Commodity, where, C. 119. Thumb Nail (the left) kept long, where, O. 326.
Thunder and Lightning, where, O. 16. 79. (sulphurous smell) 131. 199. 225.
322. 414. 459. S. 155. 177. W. 52. 88. see Lightning, Tornadoes. C. Tiburon of
Hispaniola, Oranges, C. 6. 7. Current^, W. 101. Tide, what and where, d. W. 90
to 100. W. 44. 50, 1, 3. 66. 70. O. 5. 40, 8. 90. 82. 108. 119. 133. 149. 151.
173, 4 194 8. 238, 9. 378. 9. 382. 401. 436. 447. 460, 9. S. 10, 1, 2, 4, 6.
106, 156 9. 170. C. 50, 1. 108. see Currents, Ebb, Moon. Tidore I. Product and
Trade, O. 311. 333. 447. see Spice-I. Tigres, where, W. 109. Tigre-Cats, d. and
where, W. 109. Pulo Timaon, d. S. 5. 109. Timber, a Commodity, O. 96. 138. 140.
169. 170. what used, and for what, 166, 7. 360. see Masts, Trees. Time, how
kept, S. 75, 5. O. 338. see Day. Time of Year, see Feast, Harvest, Moon,
Ramdam, Season, Year. Timor I. high Coast, O. 425. d. and Isles and Sholes near
it, and Trade, 459. 460. Tree with strings, ib. 295. Tin, Cash of it, S. 131,
2. see Tutaneg. Tire, thick sour Milk eaten, where, S. 148. Tispo in N. Spain,
d. C. 127. Toads, where, S. 25. Tobacco, used and Entertaining with it, O. 328.
336. 355, 9. 457. a Commodity, 45. 333. 540. growing, Verina, 63. Manilla and
Mindanaian, 304. d. and whence, 333, 4. Tobago; Tobasco: see Tab. Toddy and
Toddy-Arack, d. and where, O. 293, 4. 480, 6, 8. Tomaco R. and Village, O. 169.
170. Tompeque, Lagune and Village, C. 43. d. 127. Tondelo R. C. 120. d. 121.
131. Tonquin, Tunking, Stage thither, O. 394. B. of Tonq. S. 6. 7. d. 8. 9.
104, 5. Isles in it. 9. 10. Tides, W. 97. Tonquin Kingdom, its Rise, S. 66, 7.
Bounds, 8. 18. and Provinces, 16. d. 20, 1, 2. see Ngean, Tenan, Tenehoa.
Towns, how seated, 44, 5. see Cachao, Domea, Batsha. Rivers, 19. 20. chief R.
see its branches, Domea, Rokbo. Country, Soil, Prospects, Mountains, Plains,
etc. 11, 4, 9. 20, 1, 2. 37, 8, 9. 44, 5. 90. 100, 5. Weather, Floods, Seasons
and Harvest, 32, 9. 49. 50, 5. 73. 149. W. 23. 75. 83. Vegetables, C. 58. S.
14. 21. d. 22 to 5. 45. 61, 2, 3 4. 90, 2. Animals, 21. 2. d. 25, 6, 7. 30, 1.
47. 55. 69. 73. 89. 92. Commodities, 21, 2, 4, 5. 38, 61, 2, 3, (imported) 4,
5. 87, 9. 101. Manufactures, 24, 5, 8. 39. d. 60 to 3. Art and Contrivances,
26, 7, 8. 45, 6, 7, 9. 59. 60, 1, 2, 3. 70, 1, 3, to 7. 82. 90, 6, 7, 8, 9.
People numerous and poor, 14. 25. 37 to 42. 50, 1. 64, 5. 96, 9. their Manners
and Qualifications, 12, 4. 41, 2. 50, 1, 3, 5. 65, 8. 71, 8. 81 to 5. 90, 2. 9.
100. Language, Writing and Learning, 23. d. 59. 60, 7. 81. Buildings and
Furniture, Gardens, etc. 43 to 9. 52, 6, 7. 90, 1, 4. Clothes, Fashions, 41, 2.
3. 72. Customs, 12. 3, 4. 37. 41, 2, 5, 6, 7. 50 to 9. 71, 2, 4, 7 to 85. 90,
1, 2. 100. O. 375. Markets, Food, Cookery, Tea, Entertainments, 409. S. 28. 30,
1. 53, 4, 5. 90, 1, 2, 3. 100. Feasts, Religion, and Worship, O. 396, 7. S. 53,
5 to 9. 67. 91, 2, 5, 6, 7. Trade, 13, 5. 20. 37. 41, 2, 50, 1. 60, 1, 3, 4, 5.
86, 7. 101, 2, 3. Com, 60. 72. 82, 8. Shipping and Boats, 14, 6. d. 74 to 7.
Government, Justice, Punishments, 13, 5, 6. 42. 74. d. 77 to 83, 5, 8, 9. The
two Kings, and their Palaces, 47, 8. 66, 7, 8. see Boua. The Choua or governing
K. his State, etc. 42. 58. 81, 2, 3. his Rise, Character and Family, 66, 7, 8,
9. Exactions, 65. 85. 9. Wealth, Stables, Artillery, Guards, Galleys, 69 to 77.
Wars, 21. 67. 72, 6. Officers, see Eunuchs, Mandarins. Foreign Merchants,
Factories and Missionaries, 12 to 5. 48, 9. 93 to 103. Toona, Cochin^el-tree,
so called, O. 229. see Cochineel. Torches carried in a Heathen Procession, O.
397. Tornadoes, d. and where, O. 31. 44. 79. 120. 131. 211, 6, 7. 225. 247 322.
450, 1, 3, 8. S. 155. C. 21. 55, W. 6. 7. 8. 9. 14, 8. 21, 2, 3, 5, 6. 36. 41.
51, 2. 79. 80, 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8. see Calms, Lightnings and Thunder. Tornato,
Timber and Rains there, O. 140. Tortoise, Land, and its kinds, (Heca^^^,
Terapen) d. and where, O. 101, 2. C. 32. 59. 105. 118. Tortoise-shell Beards,
d. O. 32. what best, 103, 5. Oil of them, eaten, 106. 110. see Turtle. Salt-
Tortuga I. d. O. 55, 6, 7. French Tort. see Petit-Guavre. Tower, Funeral, d. S.
52. 91, 2. Watch, see Look out. Towns, Spanish in America, how built, see
Parades, Churches O. 219. on Precipices, 428, 9. Malayan, etc. see Houses on
Posts. Tonquinese in Groyes, with Banks and Ditches, S. 14 44, 5. see Mole,
Streets. See Forts, Harbors, Prospect pleasant. Toys, a Commodity, where, C.
119. see Iron, and Trade, what and where, O. 22, 7. 43 to 8. 56, 9. 62. 115.
152. 179. 188. 227, 8. 244, 5, 6. 261. 277. 307, 8. 332. 3, 4. 383, 8. 399.
400, 1, 5. 417, 8. 421. 431, 4, 5, 7, 9. 447. 456. 460. 537. S. 5. 9. 13. 5.
20, 2, 4, 5. 37. 41, 2. 50, 1. 60, 1, 3, 4, 5. 86, 7. 101, 2, 3, 5. 110, 1, 3,
5. 127. 130 to 7. 142, 5, 6, 8. 150 to 4, 8. 162 to 7, 9. 173, 4, 8. 182, 3. C.
10, 1, 8. 40, 2, 6, 7, 8. 58. 83, 9. 92, 8. 110, 1, 9. 120, 2, 4 to 7. 131. W.
73, 4. 108, 9. to be established, O. 64. 235. 272, 3. 16 7. 331. 349. 350. 383.
394. 439. 477. 480, 1. S. 3. 5. 7. 102. 3, 5. 182. 3. C. 131. W. 108, 9.
restrained, where and how, O. 188. 307 8. S. 115, 7, 8. 164, 5, 6, 7. 173, 4.
183, 4. Trade civilizes People, O. 325. 434. S. 113, 5, 6. brings Oppression,
ib. but thrives by Liberty and Honesty, 116, 7. 161, 2. Language used for it,
see Malayan. See Commodities, Manufactures, Money, Shipping, etc. Trades and
Employments, what and where, O. 331, 2. 395. 409. S. 130, 1, 5, 6. 181.
Trade-wind, True or General, Coasting, Shifting Monsoons, see among Winds.
Train-Oil of Seals, Turtle, Porpusses, see Oil. Trangambar, Danes and Moors, O.
506, 7. S. 154, 7, 8. Traveling by Land, bad, where, O. 14, 5, 6, 7, 9. 20, 3,
7. 23^. of Fish and Fowl, 393. see Turtle. Treachery, O. 75. C. 6. S. 173. see
Manners, bad, R. Laut. Treats, see Entertainments. Trees, Shrubs, etc. what and
where, O. 11, 8. 101. 110, 2. 121. 132, 5. 150, 1. 162, 3, 4. 172, 5, 7. 188.
194, 6. 212. 232, 3, 5. 247, 255, 8. 309. 310. 380, 2. 390, 7. 406. 416. 426.
443, 8. 463. 472, 3, 5 8. 532. S. 5. 14. 24. 64. 113. 123, 4. 181. C. 32. 43.
55, 8. 9. 94. 102, 7, 8, 9. 120, 1, 3. W. 93, 5. 109. torn up by a Storm, 67.
O. 322. floaring in the Sea, 230. Timber Trees, fit for Shipping, Masts, Yards,
Canoas, etc. 29. 87. 101. 122. 131. 169. 191, 5. 204. 213. 394. S. 24. 64. 113.
123, 4. 181. C. 58, 9. 94. 102. W. 95. 109. see Plank, Masts, Yard. See of use
for Cloth, Cordage, Gun-sticks, Lances, Oars. Tree with strings, O. 295. 460. a
very great one, d. 449. 450. Trees for Dying, see Dies; Fruit Trees, see Fruit:
Spice-trees, see Spice. See Aguala, Aloes, Betle, Cabbage-tree, Cedar,
Cotton-tree, Cotton-^u^h, Dragon, fir, Lack, Lance-wood, Libby, Palm,
Palma-Mariae, Palmeto, Pone, Silvester, Tax-tree, Toona or Cochineel-tree,
Turpentine. See Bushes, Groves, Woods. Triangles, Isles in the G. of Mexico, C.
28. 45. Trinidada I. C. 126. Currents, W. 101 to 4. Turtle, O. 104. Trist I.
Harbor and Lagune in Campeachy, C. 13. d. 17, 9. 20, 1. 41, 7 to 53, 6. 81.
92, 3, 4. 122, 8. 130. W. 34, 5, 9. 40, 4. 67. Tides, 91, 2. Trist I. by
Sumatra, low, d. and its Coco-Nuts, etc. d. O. 474. Tropicks, greater heat
there than at the Line, S. 32. why, 33. and General Trade-w. stronger, W. 5.
see Zone. Tropick-bird, d. and where, O. 53. Trunks to shoot Arrows with, O.
41. for Bee-hives, d. C. 112. Elephants-trunks, accounted a choice Dish, S. 31.
Truxillo, a rich T. O. 98. see Guanchaquo, Malabrigo. Tuffoons (Typhones) d.
and where, S. 35, 6. W. 60. 71, 2, 5. Tunquin, Tunking, see Tonquin. Turbans,
where worn, d. O. 326. 456. S. 129. Turkey, Asses Skins how grained there, C.
73. Turkeys, where, O. 546. C. 65. 85. 114. Turmerick, used to color food,
where, S. 129. Turpentine, and Pitch made of it, where, S. 62, 3. Turtle,
Sea-Tortoise, what and where, O. 2. 9. 38, 9. 56, 7, 8. 75. d. 103 to 110. 133.
146. 159. 160. 181, 2. 215. 276. 321. 378. 393, 7. 449. 453, (very large) 4.
463, 9. S. 5. 6. 27. 181. C. 10, 30, 1. 73. W. 4. 4. 36. 110. live long, O.
108. how and when they C^ot or couple, ib. 160. W. 4. 5. how they Travel and
Lay, and where, O. 75. (and their Eggs) d. 104 to 8. 215. (confirmed) 393. C.
27. 30. 1. W. 4. 5. their food (Sea-Moss, Turtle-grass) 103, 4. d. 106. none at
their Laying-places, 393. often rise to breath, ib 108. and bl^w hard, 454. how
struck or taken, 35. (and Turtle-Irons or Pegs) d. 37. 105, 8, 9. see Moskito
men, where shy, 449. 453. 463. their fight better than hearing, and best struck
in the night, ib. Turtle Nets, what and where, 395. Sucking-fish sticking to
Turtle, 65. and used for taking them, W. 110. Wears to keep them, O. 106. Oil
of Sea-Turtle. ib. S. 6. Kinds of Turtle: Trunk-Turtle, d. O. 103.
Loggerhead-T. d. ib. and where, C. 10. Hawks-Bill-T. (best Tortoiseshell, flesh
of some unwholesome, their feed, etc.) d. and where, O. 103, 4, 5. C. 73.
Green-T. (largest, best meat, thin shell for in^^ying, eat Turtle-grass, etc.)
where, O. 38. (best of all the W. Indies) 58. 103 to 7. (one very large, 105,
6.) 378. 393. S. 5. 6. 181. Ba^land sort of Green-T. d. and where, O. 106. 160.
and a small sort, 107. 133. 234. Land-Turtle, see Tortoise. Turtle-Doves,
where, O. 39. d. 103. 177. 276. 321. 392. S. 26. 128. C. 65. (white, dun,
ground) d. 66. Tutaneg, a sort of Tin, and Trade of it, S. 173, 8.
V.
VAcca I. see Ash. Valderas (Balderas) d. O. 258, 9. 261. 277. Vallensuella
(Venezuella) Lagune, d. O. 63. Valleys, rich, etc. see Soil. Variation of the
Needle, what and where, W. 53, 6. O. 80, 3. 2^7, 8. Doubling the C. G. Hope by
it, 531. Varnish made of Lack, where, S. 61, 2. Pulo Vby, d. and Trade, O. 399.
400. S. 105. Vegetables, see Bushes, Corn, Drugs, Dies, Fruits, Herbs, Roots,
Trees, Weeds. C. La Vela, its Trade-winds, W. 17, 8. Breezes, 34. Currents,
101, 4, 5. Barlaventa-fleets coasting it, C. 126. C. Alta Vela, its Winds, W.
35. Venomous Creatures, see Centipees, Galliwasp (Beast like a) Guano, Snakes.
Fruit, Fins, Bones, etc. see Poisonous. La Vera Cruz, see Cruz. C. Verd, Winds
near it, W. 7. 9. 15, 6. C. Verd Isles, their Product, Portuguese, etc. d. O.
70 to 7. Pulo Verero, d. S. 157, 8. Verina, its excellent Tobacco, O. 63.
Vermin of Negroes and Indians, how bred, O. 538, 9. Vessels to hold Liquids,
etc. O. 2. 10, 6. 294. 412. 490. C. 115. see Bambo's hollow, Baskets, Bumkins,
Cabinets, Calabash, Chinam-box, Cups, Earthen-ware, Jars, Ladles, Spoons. For
Navigation, see Boats, Canoa's, Shipping. Vice, Smiths, none used, where, O.
332. Villages, taxed to provide Soldiers, where, S. 71. how seated, built, etc.
see Towns. See Victualling houses or Inns at Tonquin, S. 100. St. Vincent I. of
the Caribbees, C. 5. St. Vincent I. of the C. Verds, O. 77. Vines, Vine-yards,
where, O. 532, 5. see Grape-tree, Wine. Wild Vine, its Leaves good for Ulcers,
where, O. 449. Vinello's, Plant and Cods, curing of them, and use, and where to
be had, O. 38. 124. d. 234, 5. C. 123. Virginia, its Cedars, O. 29. Ship-worms,
363. Cold N. W. Winds, 530. Tides, W. 92. Lignum Vita, where, O. 57. Ulcers,
Cure for them, O. 449. St. John d'Vlhoa, Fort, d. C. 125. see (La Vera) Cruz.
Umbrello's, where used, O. 407. Vng^^, a Title (probably) at Tonquin, S. 81.
Voice, deep in the Throat, where, O. 466, 9. Volcans, their Eruptions
accompanied with Storms, O. 225. throw out Pumice-stones, 230. see Volcan Vejo,
d. 118 9. 216. see Volcans of Colima, Fogo, Guatimala, Leon. Voyages, see
Course. See Dampier, Drake, du Quesne. Glanius's Noted, S. 125. Tavernier's
Brothers, 59. Utensils, see Adds, Anvil, Bambo's, Barbeu's, Barklags, Beacons,
Bellows, Benches, Bob-Bricks, Broom, Capes, Chairs, Coals, Cordage, Dice,
Flags, ^ammocks, Hives, Instrument-Cases, Ladders, Pageants, Palankins, Paper,
Pavillions, Pickers, Pictures, Planks, Plows, Powder, Pumps, Scales, Thongs,
Thread, Vices. See Boats, Canoa's, Clothes, Fishing-Instruments, Iron,
Lacker-ware, Musical-Instruments, Ornaments, Palmeto-works, Shipping, Weapons.
Vulgar Errors, see Mistakes.
W.
WAfer, left among the Isthmus Indians, O. 15. and his Return from them naked
and painted, 40. his Book referred to, 24, 151. Wallesaw, the Devil so called
by the Moskito-men, O. 9. Walking-Canes, whence, S. 178. 167. see Canes.
Cacao-walks, C. 111, 2. d. 119. see Cacao, (and of Plantains) Plantains,
Plantations. Walls, what and where, O. 140. 218. 335. 411. C. 45. 115. 127. Man
of War, Bird, where, W. 66. and d. see Man. Sibbel de Wards (Sebald de Waerdts)
Isles, d. O. 80, 1. Wares, see Earthen, Lacker, Manufactures. Warner's causing
a Breach with the Caribbee-Indians, C. 6. Warree, wild Hog, where, O. 9. 39.
169. C. 59. 95. Wars among E. Indians, O. 325. 337. 444. S. 21. 67, 72, 8. 103,
6, 8. 143, 4, 5, 8. 176. see Fighting. Washing, for health, pleasure, or
Religion, where, O. 322, 9. 330. 343. S. 137. 148. 180. Watch kept in Streets,
d. S. 77, 8. on Coasts, see Look-outs. Water, fresh, for Ships, etc. where, O.
49. 50, 3. 101. 110 to 3. 121. 132, 4. 6. 141. 159. 169. 172, 4, 7. 188. 198,
9. 204. 212, 3, 8. 232, 3, 4. 241, 2, 4, 9. 254, 5, 8. 268. 274, 7. 347. 379.
380, 2. 393, 4, 8, 9. 401. 416. 426. 436. 443. 472, 8. 482, 490. 525. S. 4. 5.
123, 4. 156, 7, 8. 164. 171, 4. C. 12. 9. 32, 5. 42, 4. 50, 3. 109. 118. W. 46.
56. 109. where none, O. 49. 50. 81. 97. 141. C. 23, 9. 30. 44, 5. see Rivers.
none but by digging Wells in the Sand, O. 463, 7. (Salt, if dug deep) C. 50.
118. Brackish in the Dry Season, O. 258. 277. C. 53. how kept then, 11. 56. 77.
84. where gone then, O. 95, 6. 167. 198. 394, 8. S. 35. taken up fresh at Sea,
O. 42. S. 156. to be done cautiously, 157. Jars of it carried on Bark-logs, O.
142, 3. a valuable Commodity, 144, 4. the common Drink of Indians, 431.
Prisoners confined to it, S. 78. swampy and flooded waters unwholesome, O. 524.
turning black in the Cask, and heated with the fumes of Pepper, 525. Aluminous
or Copperish, where, 53. Water breeding Worms in the Legs, etc. C. 90. and
Ship-worms (brackish) O. 363. Spic'd-water, 359. Bitter-waters, Trial by them
in Guinea, S. 83. see Waves, rolling one way, and Current underneath a
contrary, W. 106. see Sea. Beeswax, a Commodity, and where, O. 333. 356. C.
112. Pulo Way, O. 499. d. S. 121, 2, 3. Banditti, 138, 9. Weapons, what and
where used, S. 70. 113. 176. W. 108. see Arrows, Bows, Cressets, Curtana's,
Guns, Lances, Spears, Swords. Wears to keep Turtle, where, O. 106. to catch
Fish, 465. Weather, wet, dry, fair, hot, cold, what and where, d. professedly,
W. 70 to 88. and 2. 4. 6. 7. 8. 19. 20, 1, 2, 7. 30. 40, 1, 5, 7, 8, 9. 50, 2,
5, 8. 66, 8. 74. O. 94, 5. 186. 321, 2, 3. S. 31 to 6. 148, 9. C. 55, 6.
scattered Observations or Instances of it, O. 2. 4. 11, 2, 4, 6. 21, 2, 7. 31,
9. 44. 79. 81, 3. 94, 5. 108. 111. 131, 2. 162. 173. 207. 212, 5, 6. 225. 230,
2, 3, 8. 242. 251, 5. 261, 7. 274. 281, 3, 5. 297. 306. 347, 8. 360. 378. 389.
399. 400, 5. 413, 5, 6. 420. 437, 8. 459. 472, 3, 5. 493 to 9. 502, 4. 529.
530. 544. S. 16. 62. 90. 109. 177. 180. C. 9. 22. 33. 41. 79. 129. flattering
Weather presaging Storms, W. 68. O. 413. see Storms. Most stormy at N. or F.
Moon, 416. see Moon. See Rains, Seasons, Winds. Wedges, a Commodity, where, C.
41. Weeds, none in deep Seas, O. 393. see Chick-weed, Gramadael, Grass, Moss,
Purslain, Thistles. Weights of Achin, S. 132. Wells dug in Sand, where, 463, 7.
Salt, if deep, C. 50. 118. Well-Boat fashioned Jonks, d. O. 412, 3. The West
Coast, that of Sumatra so called, O. 476. its Pepper, S. 182. Islands lying off
it, etc. see Sumatra. Westerly-wind Season, see Winds shifting. Wheat, where
growing, O. 532. Indian, see Maize. See Flower, Guinea-Corn. Whip-Ray, fish,
two kinds of it, d. 73. see Ray. White Cacao, or Spuma, d. 111. White Cock, a
see for a strange Cure, C. 91. White Lillies, where, C. 89. Wigeon, Birds,
where, S. 26. Wild-bush-men, Negroes, d. and where, W. 108. Winds Variable,
somewhat without the Tropicks and Polar, W. 23. C. 126. O. 70. 81, 2, 3. 245.
351. 526, 8. 530. 544. Stated, in and near the Torrid Zone: Trade-winds, d. W.
1. 2. 26. 31. 90. 100, 3, 6. True or General at Sea, d. professedly, 2 to 11,
occasional Observations, or Instances, 32, 45. 55, 6. 81. 103, 4. O. 55, 7. 63.
77, 8. 81. 100. 275. 281, 3, 4, 5, 6. 290, 1, 8. 309. 351. 549. C. 9. 21. 41.
126. -- Coasting and Constant, d. professedly, W. 12 to 6. occasionally, 25, 8.
50, 8. 78, 9. 90. O. 2. 3. 4. 6. 93, 4. 100. 110, 1, 9. 131, 2, 3, 9. 142, 3,
6. 162, 7. 172, 4. 201, 2. 239. 267. 274, 5. -- Shifting, d. professedly, W. 17
to 25. occasionally, 15. 72. O. 143. 178. 186. 198, 9. 207. 442, 3, 6.
Monsoons, and their Benefit, etc. d. W. 21 to 5. 107. (stormy Monsoons, d. 72
to 5. O. 322. 402, 4. 494 to 9. see Storms) N. E. Monsoon, O. 303. d. 321, 3.
370, 8, 9. 381, 3, 9. 399. 437. 481, 7, 8. 490. S. 11. 62. 104. 179. S. W.
Monsoon, S. 11. O. 303, 6. d. 221, 2. 346, 7, 8. 353, 4, 7. 399. 401, 5. 413,
5, 7. 420. 437, 8, 9. 481, 7, 8. 490, 3 to 9. 540, 7. (Westerly-wind Season in
the W. Indies, d. W. 17, S, 9. 101, 2. O. 38, 9. 44.) Dubious, Irregular,
Stormy, etc. 405, 6. 413, 4, 5. 437. 448. 451, 3. 458, 9. 461, 2. 472, 3, 5.
504. S. 4. 36. 155, 7. 159. 170, 7. C. 22, 8, 9. 36, 8. 129. Counter-winds, O.
351. Norths; their Season, C. 21, ^. 39. 41, 8. see Norths, Seasons, Storms,
Breezes. (Sea and Land) d. professedly, W. 26 to 42. W. 5. 8. 18, 9. 20, 4, 5,
7. 50, 8. 102, 3. O. 2. 6, 119. 130, 8. 186. 201, 9. 218, 6, 7. 251, 2, 7. 262,
7. 273. 280. 321. 348. 450, 1. 502. 548. S. 12. 32 105. 149. 156. 170, 1, 7.
180. C. 22. 30, 1, 7. 55. Sea-winds, warm, O. 529. 530. Land-winds, cold, ib.
W. 41, 2. C. 8. see cold, whiffling winds presaging Storms, W. 61. O. 413.
attending Spouts, 451, 2, 3. Tempestuous, see Storms. Eddy winds from two
contrary ones, W. 81. Wind and Sea rise and fall together, 531. Scabby winds,
63. see ^arthagena-Br. Elephanta, Harmetans, Popogaios, Terreno's,
Summasenta-W. Windows, what and where, S. 43. 172. O. 335. Wine made, what and
where, O. 74. 532. and a Commodity, 142, 3, 5. 170. 194, 6. 214. see Wines,
Palm-wine. Wives, plurality of them, O. 334. 455. 514. S. 50. 68. W. 111. where
but one, O. 9. 432. bought of their Parents, S. 50. W. 111. married early, C.
114. prostituted by their Husbands, O. 395. see Women prostitutes. Allowed free
Conversation with Strangers, 327, 8. 367, 8. see Pagillies, Agreements, with
their Husbands, 432. influence over them, 13. Employments, 9. 432. W. 110. of
Princes, S. 67, 8. O. 335. 514. sold by their Husbands, S. 50. gam'd away, 42.
see Manners, Marriage, Women. Old-Wives, Fish, where, S. 128. Women, respect
shown them, S. 100. abused, 161. negotiating Trade, 51, 2. familiar with
Strangers, 327. see Pagallies; civil to them, 12. 433. begging modestly, ib.
Natural Affection, etc. 432, 3. 250. C. 115. Prostitutes, O. 365. 395. S. 13.
50, 1. Dancing Women, 146. O. 340, 1, 2. selling Tea, O. 409. S. 31.
Money Changers, 60. 88. 131. 142. all the Women Slaves, 146. Persons, d. C.
115. see Bodies. Clothes, 114, 9. O. 32. 427. W. 111. see Cloth, Ornaments.
Love of Finery, O. 13. see Wives. With little Feet, 327. 408. and large Calves,
32. see Ornaments. Women's I. (Key Muger) in Campeachy, C. 9. 10. Woods, Wood
lands, Wood for Fuel in Ships, etc. where, O. 11, 4, 6. 21. 39. 58. 87. 112.
125. 150. 162, 3, 4, 7. 174, 7, 8. 188. 19^. 205. 211, 6, 8. 231, 2, 9. 240, 2,
9. 250, 1, 3, 5 to 8. 263, 9. 275. 291. 309. 335. 347. 378, 9. 380, 2, 4, 5.
393, 9. 402, 6. 421. 442, 3, 8. 454. 463. 472, 8. 480. S. 4. 5. 19. 20, 2, 4.
44. 105. 128. 142. 164. 173, 4. 180, 1. C. 14. 30. 2. 4. (Men lost in them) 83
to 7. (Ships lodged there by Storms, W. 70. C.) 92, 5, 9. 111, 2. W. 46. 56.
109. none, O. 106. C. 45. see Trees. Wood for Dying C. 57, 8. see Dies Best for
Lacker-Ware, S. 61, 2, 4. see Lack. Drift-wood, 8. O. 230. Wood-lice or white
Ants, where, S. 127. Wooders, his Escape from the Spaniards, C. 19. Words,
Names, Exotic, of Indians, Negroes, etc. O. 9. 143. 327, 8. 359, 389. 391.
409. 419. 431. 469. 478. (479. see Language) 498, 9. 502, 7, 8. 513, 4, 5. 536,
7. S. 23, 8. 31. 56. 81, 3. 32, 8. 132, 8. 171, 3. 9. C. 105. Working, see
Log-wood-cutting. Workhouses unhealthy, S. 62. World, see Globe. Worms, in
hides, C. 88. breeding in Men's Legs, etc. 89. d. and Cure, 90, 1. Silkworms,
where, 5. 25. Ship-worms, where bred, Hurt and Remedy, O. 362, 3. Worm-seed, a
Commodity, S 91. and whence, 64. Worship (Mohammedan) alike in the E. and
West-I. W. 55. what at Tonquin, S. 57, 8. see Idolatry. See Religion, Idolatry,
Mahometanism. Wound of Amputations, how cured, S. 139. 140. Wrecks, what and
where, O. 50. 134. 148. 405, 6. S. 27, 8. C. 62, 3. W. 63, 9. 70. Ship-wreckt
Men kept, where, S. 7. 8.
Y.
YAms, Roots, where, O. 9. 12, 4, 8, 9. 22. 46, 8. 75. 141, 151. 311. 426. 433,
5, 7. 544. 546. S. 22. 93. 126. 181. C. 9. none, O. 480. 464, 6. Yards of
Ships, Timber fit for them, where, O. 394. S. 171, 2. Year, Seasons of it where
distinguished into Wet and Dry, W. 2. S. 31, 2. New-year, when it Begins, and
New Years Feast at Tonquin, 53. see Day, Time. Ylo R. not perennial, O. 95. S.
35. Yucatan, see Jucatan. Yunam (Junan) Province of China, its Site and
Commodities. S. 64
Z.
ZElisco (Xalisco) Hill, d. O. 267. Zone, Torrid, its Seasons best
distinguished into Wet and Dry, S. 32. W. 2. yet the Weather various, even in
the same Latitudes, 77, etc. greatest Heat there, where and why, S. 32, 3. the
Cause of Land-Floods there, and Nile's overflowing, 34, 4. Rivers made by the
Floods only, ib. Weather, and Winds there, Storms, Tides, and Currents, see the
Scheme, W. 1. see Equator, Oaks, Tropicks, Tropick-Birds.
BOOKS printed for, and sold by James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's
Church Yard.
A New Voyage Round the World. Describing particularly, the Isthmus of America,
several Coasts and Islands in the West Indies, the Isles of Cape Verd, the
Passage by Terra del Fuego, the South Sea Coasts of Chili, Peru, and Mexico;
the Isles of Guam one of the Ladrones, Mindanao and other Phillippine and
East India Islands near Cambodia, China, Formosa, Luconia, Cel^bes, etc. New
Holland, Sumatra Nicobar Isles; the Cape of good Hope, and Santa Hellena. Their
Soil, Rivers, Harbors, Plants, Fruits, Animals, and Inhabitants Their Customs,
Religion, Government, Trade, etc. By William Dampier. Vol. the First.
Illustrated with particular Maps and Draughts. The Fifth Edition, Corrected. A
Voyage to New Holland, etc. In the Year 1699. Wherein are described, the
Canary-Islands, the Isles of Mayo and St. Jago. The Bay of All Saints, with the
Forts and Town of Bahia in Brasil. Cape Salvadore. The Winds on the Brasilian
Coast. Abrohlo Shoals. A Table of all the Variations observed in this Voyage.
Occurrences near the Cape of Good Hope. The Course to New-Holland. Shark's Bay.
The Isles and Coast, etc. of New-Holland. Their Inhabitants, Manners, Customs,
Trade, etc. Their Harbors, Soil, Beasts, Birds, Fish, etc. Trees, Plants,
Fruits, etc. Illustrated with several Maps and Draughts; also diverse Birds,
Fishes, and Plants, not found in this Part of the World, curiously Engraven on
Copper Plates. Vol. III. By Captain William Dampier. Price 3 s. 6 d. A new
Voyage and Description of the Isthmus of America. Giving an Account of the
Author's Abode there, the Form and Make of the Country, the Coasts, Hills,
Rivers, etc. Woods, Soil, Weather, etc. Trees, Fruit, Beasts, Birds, Fish, etc.
The Indian Inhabitants, their Features, Complexion, etc. their Manners,
Customs, Employments, Marriages, Feasts, Hunting, Computation, Language, etc.
With Remarkable Occurrences in the South Sea and elsewhere. By Lionel Wafer.
The Second Edition. To which are added, the Nacural History of those Parts, By
(...) ^^llow of the Royal Society: And Davis's Expedition to the Gold Mines, in
1702. Illustrated with several Copper Plates. A Collection of Original Voyages:
Containing. 1. Captain Cowley's Voyages Round the Globe. 2. Captain Sharp's
Journal over the Isthmus of Darien, and Expedition into the South Seas. Written
by himself. 3. Capt. Wood's Voyages through the Streights of Magellam. 4. Mr.
Robert's Adventures among the Co sairs of the Levaut, his Account of their way
of Living, Description of the Archipelago Islands, taking of Scio, etc.
Illustrated with several Maps and Draught. Published by Captain William Hack,
Price 3 s. 6 d. A Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God: More
particularly in Answer to Mr. Hobbs, Spinoza, and their Followers. Wherein the
Notion of Liberty is stated, and the Possibility and Certainty of it proved, in
Opposition to Necessity and Fate. Being Eight SERMONS preached at the
Cathedral-Church of St. Paul, in the Year 1704. at the Lecture founded by the
Honorable Robert Boil Esquire; By Samuel Clarke, M.A. Chaplain to the Right
Reverend Father in God John, Lord Bishop of No^wic^ Jacobi Rohaulti Physica.
Latin vertit, recensuit, and uberioribus jam Annotationibus ex illustrissimi
Isaaici Neutoni Philosophia maximam partem haustis, amplificavit and ornavit
Samuel Clarke, A.M. Admodum Reverendo in Christo patri, Joanni Episcopo
Norvicensi, a Sacris Domesticis. Accedunt etiam in hac sec^nda Editione, novae
aliquot Tabulae aeri incisae. 8 v^ Price 8 s. The Artificial Clock-Maker. A
Treatise of Watch and Clock-work. Wherein the Art of Calculating Numbers for
most sorts of Movements is explained, to the Capacity of the Unlearned. Also,
the History of Watch and Clock-work, both Ancient and Modern. With other Useful
Matters never before Published. The Second Edition Enlarged. To which is added
a Supplement, containing. 1. The Anatomy of a Watch and Clock 2. Monsieur
Romer's Satellite-Instrument, with Observations concerning the Calculation of
the Eclipses of Jupiter's Satellites, and to find the Longitude by them. 3. A
nice way to correct Pendulum Watches. 4. Mr. Flamsteed's Equation Tables. 5. To
find a Meridian-Line, for the Governing of Watches, and other Uses. 6. To make
a Telescope to keep a Watch by the fixed Stars. By W. D. M. A. Price 1 s. 6 d.
Mr. Wingate's Arithmetic: Containing a plain and familiar Method for attaining
the Knowledge and Practice of Common Arithmetic. Composed by Edmund Wingate of
Gray's Inn, Esquire; And upon his Request Enlarged in his Lifetime, also since his
Decease carefully Revised and much Improved, as will appear by the Preface and
Table of Contents. By John Kersey, late Teacher of the Mathematics: The
Eleventh Edition. With a new Supplement, of easy Contractions in the necessary
Parts of Arithmetic, useful Tables of Interest and Flemish Exchanges, as also
Practical Mensuration. By George Shelley, Writing-Master at the Hand and Pen in
Warwick Lane, near St. Paul's. Price 4 s. Dictionarium Sacrum seu Religiosum. A
Dictionary of all Religions, Ancient and Modern; whether Jews, Pagan, Christian
or Mohammedan. More particularly comprehending, I. The Lives and Doctrines of
the Authors and Propagators. II. The respective Divisions, Sects and Heresies.
III. Not only the true, but false Objects of Worship, such as Heathen Gods,
Idols, etc. IV, The various Ways and Places of Adoration. V. All Religious
Orders and Communities. VI. Sacred Rites, Utensils and Festivals. VII. Distinct
Offices and Functions. VIII. Rules, Customs, Ceremonies, etc. Price 4 s. 6 d.
The Surgeon's Assistant. In which is plainly discovered the true Origin of most
Diseases. Treating particularly of the Plague, ^rench pox, Leprosy, etc. Of
the Biting of mad Dogs, and other Venomous Creatures. Also a Complete Treatise
of Cancers and Gangreens. With an Enquiry whether they have any Alliance with
Contagious Diseases. Their most easy and speedy Method of Cure. With diverse
approved Receipts. By John Brown, Sworn Surgeon in Ordinary to his late most
Excellent Majesty King William III. and late Senior Surgeon of St. Thomas's
Hospipital in Southwark. Price 2 s. 6 d. The Government of the Passions,
according to the Rules of Reason and Religion, viz. Love, Hatred, Desire,
Eschewing, Hope, Despair, Fear, Anger, Delight and Sorrow. The Second Edition.
Twelves. Price 1 s. A New Method of Curing all sorts of Fevers, without taking
any thing by the Mouth. Being a new Prescription for giving the Bark in
Clyster. Whereby all the Inconveniences of administering it in any other Form
are avoided; and a more speedy, certain Cure is obtained. Writ by A. Helvet,
M.D. The Second Edition. Price 1 s. A Discourse upon Grants and Resumptions:
Showing how our Ancestors have proceeded with such Ministers as have procured
to themselves Grants of the Crown-Revenue; and that the forfeited Estates ought
to be applied toward the payment of the Public Debts. By the Author of, The
Essay on Ways and Means. Three Practical Essays, viz. On Baptism, Confirmation
and Repentance. Containing Instructions for a Holy Life: With Earnest
Exhortations, especially to young Persons, drawn from the Consideration of the
Severity of the Discipline of the Primitive Church. By Samuel Clark, M.A.
Chaplain to the Right Reverend Father in God, John, Lord Bishop of Norwich, and
Fellow of Caius College in Cambridge. The Godfathers Advice to his Son: Showing
the Necessity of performing the Baptismal Vow, and the Danger of neglecting it.
With general Instructions to young Persons to lead a Religious Life, and
prepare them for their Conffrmation, and worthy Receiving of the Blessed
Sacrament. Very necessary for Parents, etc. to give their Children, or others
committed to their Care. By John Birket. Vicar of Milford and Hordle in
Hampshire. The Second Edition, with a Preface. Price 3 d. 100 for 20 s. Some
Reflections on that part of a Book called Amyntor: Or, The Defense of Milton's
Life, which relates to the Writings of the Primitive Fathers, and the Canon of
the New Testament. In a Letter to a Friend. 8o. Dr. Sydenham's Practice of
Physic, faithfully translated into English, with large Annotations,
Animadversions, and practical Observations on the same. By W. Salmon, M.D.
Twelves. The Penitent, or Entertainments for Lent. Written in French by R. F.
N. Causin, and translated into English by Sir B. B. Tenth Edition. To which is
added several Sculptures. The Memoirs of Monsieur Pontis, who served in the
French Armies 56 Years. Translated by Charles Cotton Esquire Folio.
Where may be had all Modern Plays.


