A TOUR IN WALES.

MDCCLXXIII

CAERGWRLE CASTLE


LONDON, Printed by Henry Hughes. MDCCLXXVIII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THESE home-travels are the first part of an account of my own country; and
were actually performed in the year mentioned in the title page. The world
justly loves the reality; therefore, this is mentioned to satisfy the public,
that they are not formed out of tours undertaken at different periods.

THESE make of themselves a complete tour of the tamer parts of our country. In
a future volume, the wild and romantic scenery will be presented, intermixed
with the rich valleys so frequently interspersed. To this will be added an
Appendix, containing the subjects referred to in this volume, with variety of
other matter. I implore the aid of my countrymen to assist me in the attempt;
and to favor me with the necessary materials. They will see, that great part of
Denbighshire, and all parts of the four remaining counties of our principality,
are still to be described. My frequent journies through them, render me a
tolerable master of their topography. I look up to my friends for history and
anecdote latent among their papers; or references to our writers, least any
facts lodged in books might escape my memory.

AMONG the gentlemen I am chiefly indebted to for information respecting the
present work, I cannot pass unthanked:

PHILIP YORK Esquire of Erddig; JOHN MYTTON Esquire of Halston: THOMAS MOSTYN Esquire of
the house of Trelacre; PETER DAVIES Esquire of Broughton; KENRICK EYTON Eq of
Eyton; PAUL PANTON Esquire of Bagilt; LLOYD KENYON Esquire of Greddington; Mr. ROGER
KENYON of Cesn;
TO OWEN BRERETON Esquire I owe the loan of the curious antiquities found in his
estate near Flint, which are engraven in the plates viii. and ix.

TO RICHARD WILLIAMS Esquire of Vron, I am highly obliged for his poetical
translations, marked R. W. and for the elegant version of the ode on Owen
Glyndwr, to which that mark is omitted.

TO RICHARD MORRIS Esquire of the navy office, I owe much general information; and
am particularly indebted to him for the correction of the press. Mr. HAWKER of
the custom house Chester, favored me with a particular account of the commerce
of that city.

THE reverend Mr. EDWARDS, rector of Llanvechan, favored me with some excellent
accounts of the parishes of Oswestry, Sellatyn, and Hops.

I RECEIVED several historical facts respecting the parish of Whittington, from
the reverend Mr. ROBERTS, rector of the parish.

THE reverend Mr. JOHN PRICE, public librarian, and the reverend Mr. JOHN
JONES, fellow of Jesus college Oxford, were indefatigable in furnishing me with
extracts from the manuscripts of the university.

As due, I must repeat my thanks to the reverend Mr. JOHN LLOYD, rector of
Nnanerch, my constant companion in these excursions, for variety of
information, which his great knowledge of our ancient language qualified him to
do, to my singular advantage.

MR. WILKINSON, painter in Chester, obliged me with many materials relative to
that city.

To Mr. CALVELY land surveyor of the same city, I owe some elegant plans, which
will appear in a future volume.

THE drawings marked MOSES GRIFFITH, are the performances of a worthy servant,
whom I keep for that purpose. The candid will excuse any little imperfections
they may find in them; as they are the works of an untaught genius, drawn from
the most remote and obscure parts of North Wales. Those that wish to anticipate
the views in the intended progress I am to make through the remaining counties,
may satisfy themselves by the purchase of the late publications of the
admirable Mr. PAUL. SANDBY, His views in North and South Wales are FIRST SET,
SOUTH WALES.
1. Chepstow castle, Monmouthshire 2. Cardiff Glamorganshire 3. St. Quintin's
Glamorganshire 4. St. Donat's Glamorganshire 5. View up Neath River
Glamorganshire 6. Pembroke castle Pembrokeshire 7. Llanphor court Pembrokeshire
8. Manervawr castle Pembrokeshire 9. Inside of ditto Pembrokeshire 10. Carey
castle Pembrokeshire 11. Burton castle, Milford Haven 12. The episcopal palace
at St. David's.
SECOND SET, NORTH WALES.
1. Overton bridge, Flintshire 2. The new bridge over the river Dee, near Chirk
castle 3. Chirk castle from Wynnstay park 4. Llangollen 5. The abbey of Llan
Egwest, or Vale Crucis, and Castle Dinas Bran 6. The iron forge near Dolgelleu
7. Harlech castle 8. Caernarvon castle 9. Bangor 10. Pengwern, andC. near
Festiniog 11. Conway caftle 12. Pont y Pair, above Llanrwst
THIRD SET, Consist of views in SOUTH and NORTH WALES,
1. The west gate of Cardiff 2. Cardiff castle from the west 3. The entrance to
Chepstow castle 4. View of ditto 5. Inside of ditto 6. Tra^th mawr, North Wales
7. Pont Aber Glaslyn, North Wales 8. Carew, or Carey castle, from north-west 9.
The river Dee, near Bala, North Wales 10. Pimble Mere, North Wales 11. Dinefawr
castle 12. Rhaiadr y Wennel, North Wales

, in whose labors fidelity and elegance are united.

DOWNING, February 1. 1778. THOMAS PENNANT.

PLATES.
Frontispiece, CAERGWRLE CASTLE. I. MAEN Y CHWYNFAN Page 12 II. Two Plants Page
19 III. Whiff Flounder Page 20 IV. BASINGWERK Abbey Page 24 V. Another View Page
26 VI. ST. WENEFREDE'S Well Page 28 VII. FLINT Castle Page 42 VIII. ROMAN
Antiquities Page 70 IX. ROMAN Antiquities Page 72 X. Tombs at NORTHOP Page 84
XI. HAWARDEN Castle Page 100 XII. Chief Justice GLYNNE Page 102 XIII. ROMAN
Gate. OLD OSWESTRY, p. 258. Page 110 XIV. Vestibule of the Chapter House at
CHESTER Page 177 XV. Chapter House Page 178 XVI. HOLT Castle Page 205 XVII.
Plan of ditto Page 212 XVIII. Coffin-lids at BANCOR Page 224 XIX. ANGOLA
Vulture Page 228 XX. HALSTON Page 232 XXI. Sir JOHN OWEN Page 263 XXII. CHIRK
Castle Page 270 XXIII. CASTLE DINAS BRAN Page 279 XXIV. VALLE CRUCIS Abbey Page
369 XXV. VALLE CRUCIS Abbey Page 372 XXVI. Pillar of ELISDG Page 373
THE TOUR IN NORTH WALES, MDCCLXXIII.
I NOW speak of my native country, celebrated in our earliest history for its
valor and tenacity of its liberty; for the stand it made against the Romans;
for its slaughter of the legions Vita Agricolae.
; and for the subjection of the nation by Agricola, who did not dare to attempt
his Caledonian expedition, and leave behind him unconquered so tremendous an
enemy.

WHEN our first invaders landed in Great Britain, North Wales was possessed by
the Ordovices, a name derived from the language of the country, signifying the
situation; being almost entirely bounded by the river Deva, or the modern Dee,
and another river of the name of Dyvi Mr. Llwyd in Cambden II. 778.
. The one flows into the Irish sea below Chester, the other into the same sea
on the borders of Cardiganshire.

THE spirit which the people showed at the beginning, did not desert them to
the last. Notwithstanding they were obliged to submit to the resistless power
of the Romans, they never fell a prey to the enervating charms of luxury, as
the other nations of this island did. They never, with womanish invocations,
requested the aid of the deserting conquerors, or sunk beneath the pressure of
the new invaders; they preserved an undaunted courage amidst their native
rocks, and received among them the gallant fugitives, happy in congenial souls.
The hardy Saxons, for above three centuries, could not make an impression even
on our low lands. Offa was the first; who extended his kingdom for some miles
within our borders. His conquest was but temporary; for we possessed Chester,
the capital of the Cornavii, till the year 883, when it was wrested from us by
the united force of the Heptarchy beneath the able Egbert. This indeed reduced
our confines; but did not subdue our spirit. With obdurate valor we suftained
our independency for another four centuries, against the power of a kingdom
more than twelve times larger than itself: and at length had the glory of
falling, when a divided country, beneath the arms of the most wise, and most
warlike of the English monarchs.

I NATURALLY begin my journey from the place of my nativity, FLINTSHIRE.
Downing in the county of Flint. To give a general idea of this shire, the
reader must learn, that it is lest of the twelve Welsh. Its northern side is
washed by the estuary of the Dee, the Seteia Estuarium of Ptolemy. The land
rises suddenly from the shore in fine inequalities, clayey, and plenteous in
corn and grass, for two, three or four miles, to a montanous tract that runs
parallel to it for a confiderable way.

THE lower part is divided by picturesque dingles, which run from the
mountains, and open to the sea, filled with oaks. The inferior parts abound
with coal and freestone; the upper with minerals of lead and calamine, and
immense strata of limestone and chert. The principal trade of the country is
mining and smelting.

The northern part of the county is flat, and very rich in corn, especially
wheat, which is generally exported to Liverpool. The shire, in most places,
raises more than is sufficient for the use of the inhabitants. It is extremely
populous; and in the mineral parts composed of a mixed people, whose fathers
and grandfathers had resorted here for sake of employ out of the English mine
counties; many of whose children, born of Welsh mothers, have quite lost the
language of their fathers.

A LOFTY range of mountains rise on the west, and form a bold frontier. Our
county is watered by several small rivers; such as the Allen, the Terrig, and
the Wheeler; part of its western boundary by the Clwyd; and Maelwr, a disjoined
part of the country, by the DEE.

WE are ignorant of the classical name of this little province. The Ordovices,
of which all west of Cheshire was part, were subdivided in the time of the
Romans, in all probability, as the rest of the country was. They had Reguli or
Lords who ruled over little districts, and united under a common leader when
the exigencies of the time required. These factions weakened the state,
separated their interest, and facilitated their conquest by the first invaders.

THE names of these districts are now unknown. Gwynedd is the most ancient we
are acquainted with for the country of North Wales. The portion I inhabit was
called Tegangle, which comprehends the ^hree modern hundreds of Coleshill,
Prestatyn, and Rudland. The name is preserved in the montanous parts of this
parish, and some others, to this day called Mynnydd Tegang. I reject the
translation of Tegangle into Fair England, as a mongrel compound. The word is
of a much more ancient date; it being derived from Cangi or Ceangi, a set of
people, according to the learned Baxter, belonging to every British nation; who
attended the herds and resided with them in different grazing grounds at
different times of the year. The neighboring Cornavii had their Ceangi, who
wintered in Wiral, and took their summer residence in Tegangle; a word to be
properly derived on that account from Teg, fair, Cang, the name of the people,
and Lle, a place. To corroborate which, at this very day is a plain in the
parish of Caerwys, a part of the old Tegangle, adjoining to this mountain, that
still retains the title of Maes can havod, or the plain of the hundred summer
residences. For this reason I presume to differ from Mr. Baxter, in his notion
of the summer residence of these Cangi. He places it near the Canganorum
Promontorium, or Braich y pwll head in Caernarvonshire; but those were the
Cangi of the Ordovices, these of the Cornavii.

IT may be remarked, that, contrary to what happens to most subdued nations,
our country preserved its own language: and the conquerors even deigned to
adopt the names of the British towns and people, latinizing them from the
original words. Thus Londinium from LUNDEIN, i. e. LLONG DIN or DINAS, the city
of ships Cambden I. 370.
, from its considerable commerce; DEVA from its situation on the river Deva Or
Dysi.
; DUNMONII from Dunmnyn, or the hill of ore; BRIGANTES from Brig, choice or
chief men; Coritani, or rather Coitani, from Coed, a wood Mr. Pegge.
. On the retreat of their Roman masters, the latinized names were dropped, except
in a very few instances, and their own resumed; but the rest of the Britons,
who submitted to the Saxon yoke, universally received with it the names of
places from their conquerors.

THE whole of Flintshire was subdued by the Saxons immediately after the taking
of Chester by Egbert. It was an open country, destitute of inaccessible rocks
and mountains, like the rest of North Wales; and consequently incapable of
defense against so potent an enemy. The conquerors, as usual, new-named the
towns, villages, and hamlets; but could not cancel the ancient. Thus Hawarden
still is known to the Welsh by the name of Pennardd Lag, or Halawg; Mold by
that of Wyddgryg; and Hope by that of Estyn; which (with the continuance of our
language to this day) proves that even at that time it mixed but little with
our conquerors. Numbers of Saxons were settled among us, who held their lands
from the Mercian governors or earls: we find in the Doomsday book many of their
names who had possessions in this tract; such as Ulbert, Osmer, and Elmer.

THE first notice of any sub-division of the tract called Flintshire, DOOMSDAY
BOOK.
appears in the Doomsday book. When that survey was taken, it was made a part
of Cheshire, to which it was considered as an appendage, by conquest. Old
records affirm, that the county of FLINT appertains to the dignity of the
sword of CHESTER. It was soon subdued by Robert de Rothelent, commander in
chief under Hugh Lupus, who carried his arms far into Wales; and secured his
conquests in the marches by building, or rather by adding new works to the
castle of Rudland, which he had wrested from one of our princes.

THE tract from Chester to the Clwyd was then considered as a hundred of
Cheshire, and called in the Doomsday Book Atiscros hundred. Numbers of places
still existing are mentioned in it, disguised often by the Norman spelling.
Whiteford, the place in question, is called Widford: notice is also taken of
some of the present townships, such as Tre-mostyn, Tre-bychton, and Merton,
under the names of Mostone, Widsord, Putecaine, and Meretone. MOSTONE was then
a plough-land, terra unius Carucae. It had on it four villeyns and eight boors;
( Bordarii Borda signifies a cottage, with a small piece of land annexed, held
by the service of finding for the lord, poultry, eggs, etc. for his bwrdd, or
table.
,) a wood a league long, and forty perches, particatae, broad, and was valued
at twenty shillings.

WIDFORD is joined with Putecaine: The first seems to have comprehended our
present Trelan, or the place where the church-village now stands. These had one
plough-land, two villeyns, and twelve others between men and maid servants,
fisheries, and a wood half a league long and forty perches broad; the value was
the same with that of Mostone.

WITH Meretone is joined the third part of Widford; and the Berewicha or hamlet
of Caldecote, the last at present a township of the parish of Holywell. In this
division was a presbyter, a church, and six villeyns. Here was a wood half a
league long and twenty perches broad. One Odin held these of the earl.

AT the time of the conquest, all this tract of Flintshire, which was called by
the Saxons Englefield, and afterward by the Normans Atiscros, was in
possession of Edwin, the last Earl of Mercia; and on his defeat and forfeiture,
bestowed, with the earldom of Chester, on Hugh Lupus. The whole was in a manner
depopulated and reduced to a waste, I imagine by the two inroads made into
those parts by Harold, at the command of Edward the confessor, to revenge on
Griffith ap Lhewelyn the insult offered him, by giving protection to Algar, one
of his rebellious subjects Powell, 100.
.

It is observable, that there were only seven churches at that time in the
whole hundred: 1. Haordine, the present Hawardin; 2. Widford; 3. Bissard,
Boteuuaral, and Ruagor; 4. Inglecroft, Brunfor, and Alchene; 5. Danfrond,
Calston, and Wesbie; 6. Prestetone and Ruestoch; and finally, the 7th at
Roelend; besides one that lay waste at Cancarnacan and Whenescol. Parochial
divisions had not yet taken place. Mr. Agard Antiquary Discourses, I. 194.
, a writer in the latter end of the sixteenth century, remarks, that the old
historians make no mention of either parishes, parsons, vicars, incumbents, or
curates. The people attended, in those days, either the cathedral churches, or
the conventual; which were served by the prelates or monks, and those often
assisted by presbyters, clerks, and deacons. As piety gained strength, other
churches, for the convenience of the devout, were erected by the nobility and
men of property, who were desirous of spiritual assistance within their
precincts; and to this were owing the churches, which, at the period in
question, were so sparingly scattered over the land. The places which enjoyed
this advantage had the title of Lhan prefixed; as that of Tree, which signifies
primitively a habitation, is to the townships.

THUS in our parish is Tre-mostyn, TRE-MOSTYN.
remarkable for the ancient seat of the family of the same name, which acquired
it by the marriage of Jevan Vychan with Angharad, heiress of Howel ap Ithel
Vychan of Mostyn, in the reign of Richard II. The great gloomy hall is of very
old date, furnished with the high Dais, or elevated upper end, and its long
table for the lord and his jovial companions; and another in the side, the seat
of the inferior partakers of the good cheer. The walls are furnished, in a
suitable manner, with ancient militia guns, swords, and pikes; with helmets and
breast plates; with funereal achievements; and with variety of spoils of the
chase. A falcon is nailed against the upper end of the room, with two bells
hung to each foot. With these encumbrances it flew from its owner, a gentleman
in the county of Angus, on the morning of the twenty-fourth of September 1772,
and was killed near this house on the morning of the twenty-sixth. The precise
time it reached our country is not known; therefore we are uncertain whether
this bird exceeded in swiftness the hawk which flew thirty miles in an hour in
pursuit of a woodcock; or that which made a flight out of Westphalia into
Prussia in a day: instances recorded Miscellany Tracts, Tr. V. p. 38.
by the learned Sir Thomas Brown. The adjacent kitchen is overlooked by a
gallery leading to the ancient apartments of the lady of the house, at a period
when the odours of the pot and spit were thought no ill savours. At one end of
the gallery is a great room, remarkable for a singular event. During the time
that Henry earl of Richmond was secretly laying the foundation of the overthrow
of the house of York, he passed concealed from place to place, in order to form
an interest among the Welsh, who favored his cause on account of their respect
to his granfather, Owen Tudor, their countryman. While he was at Mostyn, a
party attached to Richard III. arrived there to apprehend him. He was then
about to dine; but had just time to leap out of a back window, and make his
escape through a hole, which to this day is called the King's. Richard ap
Howel, then lord of Mostyn, joined Henry at the battle of Bosworth, and after
the victory received from the King, in token of gratitude for his preservation,
the belt and sword he wore on the day: he also pressed Richard greatly to
follow him to court; but he nobly answered, like the Shunamitish widow, I dwell
among mine own people. The sword and belt were preserved in the house till
within these few years. It is observable, that none of our historians account
for a certain period of Henry's life, previous to his accession. It is very
evident, that he passed the times, when he disappeared from Bretagny, in Wales.
Many cotemporary bards, by feigned names, record this part of his life, under
those of the LION, the EAGLE, and the like, which were to restore the empire to
the Britons: for the inspired favorers of the house of Lancaster did not dare
to deliver their verses in other than terms allegorical, for fear of the
reigning prince.

THERE is little more remarkable about the house than what is common to others
built at different times. Here are two remarkable portraits; one of Sir Roger
Mostyn, knight, with a white beard and locks, in black, with great breeches
stuck round the waist-band with points. This piece of magnificence gave rise to
a very coarse proverb, applied to inferior people ambitious of acting beyond
their station. The other portrait is of his Lady, Mary, eldest daughter of Sir
John Win of Gwedir, baronet. Both are full lengths, dated 1634, and I think
painted by Mytens.

HERE is another picture, not less remarkable for its ridiculous composition,
than for the distinguished person painted in it. A kit-cat length of Sir Roger
Mostyn, the first baronet; in a strange long flaxen wig, a breast plate, buff
skirts, and antique Roman sleeves; a black holding his helmet; his lady
reading, with one hand on a scull; and by her husband a lap-dog. This gentleman
was the most eminent loyalist of our county: raised a regiment in support of
the crown, consisting of fifteen hundred men, in twelve hours time Whitelock,
78.
, mostly colliers; and garrisoned his house, which, in September 1643, was
surrendered to the parlementary forces, with four pieces of cannon and some
arms Ibid.
.

THE busts collected in Italy deserve mention. BUSTS.
That of the elder Brutus is particularly fine, as if formed in the instant
that the love of his country got the better of paternal affection; when with a
steady voice he was delivering to the lictors his Titus and Tiberius, to
receive the reward of their treasons.

A BEAUTIFUL head of a young faun in a Phrygian bonnet.

A FINE head of one of the Cornelii. An Homer, and an Hippocrates. A Seleucus,
with two wings fastened to an imperial diadem; symbols of dispatch and
expedition. Two busts in brown alabaster of a male and female faun, with the
flammeum on their heads: both are of hideous deformity; but well executed. Here
are besides a few small monumental marbles, with inscriptions, which the
antiquarian reader may find in the Appendix.

IN the Library is a most elegant collection of the classics, LIBRARY.
containing variety of the most ancient and rare editions; a numerous
collection of books relating to the Greek and Roman antiquities, especially
those which comprehend the medallic history; variety of manuscripts, mostly on
vellum, and many of them richly illuminated. In a few words, scarce any private
library can boast of so valuable an assemblage; which remain indisputable
evidences of the taste and judgment of that excellent man, its accomplished
founder, the late Sir THOMAS MOSTYN. The family are besides possessed of other
very valuable antiquities; such as the cake of copper found at Caer-hen in
Caernarvonshire; the Torques This very curious antiquity is engraven in the
Appendix, with the account drawn up by my learned countryman Llwyd
, discovered near Harlech; and the silver harp which the family had the power
of bestowing on the most skilful minstrel, rythmer, or bard, at the Eisteddfad,
or assembly held for trials of their several merits. Each of these shall be
spoken of in their proper places.

BEFORE I quit the house, I must take notice, that Thomas ap Richard ap Howel
ap Jevan Vychan, Lord of Mostyn, and his brother Piers, founder of the family
of Trelacre, were the first that abridged their name; and that on the following
occasion. Rowland Lee, bishop of Lichfield, and president of the marches of
Wales, in the reign of Henry VIII. sat at one of the courts on a Welsh cause,
and, wearied with the quantity of aps in the jury, directed that the panel
should assume their last name, or that of their residence; and that Thomas ap
Richard ap Howel ap Jevan Vychan, should for the future be reduced to the poor
dissyllable Mostyn; no doubt to the great mortification of many an ancient line.

IN the higher part of this township stands the curious cross called MAEN
ACHWYNFAN, MAEN ACHWYNFAN.
or the stone of lamentation; because penances were often finished before such
sacred pillars, and concluded with weeping and the usual marks of contrition:
for an example, near Stafford stood one called the weeping cross, a name
analogous to ours. This is of an elegant form and sculpture: is twelve feet
high, two feet four inches broad at the bottom, and ten inches thick. The base
is let into another stone. The top is round, and includes, in raised work, the
form of a Greek cross: beneath, about the middle, is another in the form of St.
Andrew's: and under that, a naked figure, with a spear in its hand. Close to
that, on the side of the column, is represented some animal. The rest is
covered with very beautiful fret-work, like what may be seen on other pillars
of ancient date in several parts of Great Britain.

MAEN Y CHYFAN


I do not presume (after the annotator on Cambden has given up the point) to
attempt a guess at the age. Only must observe, that it must have been previous
to the reign of gross superstition among the Welsh, otherwise the sculptor
would have employed his chizzel in striking out legendary stories, instead of
the elegant knots and interlaced work that cover the stone.

THOSE, who suppose it to have been erected in memory of the dead slain in
battle on the spot, draw their argument from the number of adjacent tumuli,
containing human bones, and sculls often marked with mortal wounds; but these
earthy sepulchers are of more ancient times than the elegant sculpture of this
pillar will admit. This likewise (from the crosses) is evidently a Christian
monument. The former were only in use in Pagan days.

THERE are likewise, GILLI.
near to it, an ancient chapel, now a farmhouse, called Gelli, the name of an
adjacent tract. This might have relation to the cross: as well as a place for
performance of divine service to the abbot of Basingwerk, who had a house at no
great distance, in one of our townships still called Tre-r-abbot, or the
abbot's habitation. This tract (mis-spelt by the English, Getely Ayloff's,
Rotuli Walliae, 64, 72, 95.
,) with the wood (at that time on it) was granted by Edward I. to the abbot and
convent, on the tenth of November, at Westminster, before the death of our last
prince. He also gave him power to grub up the wood, which, by the present
nakedness of the place, appears to have been done effectually.

FROM the summit of Garreg, a hill in this parish, the traveller may have an
august foresight of the lofty tract of Snowdon, from the crooked Moel Shabog at
one end, to the towering Penmaen-mawr at the other: of the vast promontory of
Llandidno, and part of the isle of Anglesea, with the great bay of Llandulas,
forming a vast crescent; the estuaries of the Dee and the Mersey: and to the
north (at times) the isle of Man and the Cumberland Alps, the sure presages of
bad weather.

I WILL descend now to Tre-Bychton, TRE-BYCHTON.
another of our maritime townships, where stands my paternal house, attended
(with what was very frequent in our principality) a summer house, at a very
small distance, and a cellar beneath; used as a retreat for the jolly owners
and their friends, to enjoy, remote from the fair, their toasts and noisy
merriment. This, and the other lower parts of the parish, are finely wooded
with oaks; which grow so spontaneously, that, was the place depopulated, it
would in a very few years relapse into an impenetrable forest.

IN Tre-lan is the parish church, dedicated to Saint Mary. The rectory is a
sinecure, which, with the vicarage, is in the gift of the Bishop of St. Asaph.
The church, I imagine, retains the ancient site it had at the time of the
conquest. The present building consists of a nave and one aile. The last was
built by a Blethyn Drow, of the house of Mostyn, to whom that part belongs.

THE two Mertons, MERTON.
Uch glan and Isglan, are adjacent townships. In the reign of Edward I. (before
his conquest) the lands of the men of Merton, to the amount of sixteen
plough-lands, were taken from them, and bestowed on the abbot and convent of
Basingwerk, against the laws of Wales, and the custom of the country; and
contrary to the peace between the King and Prince Lhewelyn Pewel, 360.
. This violent act was done by Reginald de Gray Dugdale's Baron. I. 713.
, justice of Chester, probably by connivance of the King, to provoke the Welsh
to commit some outrage that would give color to the English to break the truce.

FOLEBROC, FOLEBROC.
or Feilebroc, belonged to the monks of Basingwerk: and is mentioned in the
confirmation of the grants to that convent by Henry II. and again in the
charters renewed to it by Lhewelyn ap Jorwerth, and David ap Lhewelyn, princes
of North Wales. The monks had a grange on it, and right of pasturage on the
mountain, in common with neighboring inhabitants Dugdale's Monast. I. 720, 721.
.

THE products of this parish are corn of every sort excepting rye. Little
cheese or butter is made here for sale, as the grass is chiefly consumed by
horses; for the farmers are greatly employed in carrying the minerals of the
country: the same may be said of the shire in general. Every cottager has his
potatoe garden, which is a great support to them; and was a convenience unknown
fifty years ago. The lower parts are well wooded; and much timber is at times
sold to Leverpool and other places, at good prices; much is also used at home
in the mines.

THE collieries of Mostyn and Bychton have been worked for a very considerable
space; COAL.
and in the last century supplied Dublin and the eastern side of Ireland with
coal. They are at present but in a low state; partly from the rise of the works
at Whitehaven, but more from the loss of the channel of the Dee; which in the
beginning of this century flowed so close to our shore, that ships of two
hundred tons lay under this parish, with their cables twisted round the trees.
At this time vessels of sixty or seventy cannot approach nearer than two miles,
the Dee now flowing under the opposite shore. Still we load a few vessels for
Ireland and some parts of North Wales. Much is also consumed by the neighboring
smelting-houses, and the inland parts of Denbighshire. The improvements of land
by lime has of late occasioned a great comsumption of coal by the farmer, and
by the persons who burn it for sale.

THE coal is of different thickness, from three quarters to five yards. The
beds dip from one yard in four to two in three. They immerge beneath the
estuary of the Dee; are discovered again on the south side of Wiral in
Cheshire, as if corresponding with some of the Flintshire: they remain as yet
lost, on the northern part of the same hundred; but are found a third time in
vast quantities in Lancashire, on the opposite side of the Mersey. Their extent
from west to east, in this county, may be reckoned from the parish of Llanasa,
through those of Whiteford, Holywell, Flint, Northop, and Hawarden. Our coal is
of different qualities, suited to the variety of demands of the several sorts
of founderies in the neighborhood. Beds of canal are met with; inferior indeed
in elegance to those of Lancashire, but greatly coveted by the lime-burners.
Sometimes is also found the Peacock-coal of Doctor Plot Hist. Staffordshire,
126.
, remarkable for the beauty of its surface, glossed over with the changeable
brilliancy of the colors of that beautiful bird.

COALS were known to the Britons before the arrival of the Romans, who had not
even a name for them: yet Theophrastus In his book on stones.


describes them very accurately, at lest three centuries before the time of
Caesar: and even says that they were used by workers in brass. It is highly
probable that the Britons made use of them. It is certain they had a primitive
name for this fossil, that of Glo; and as a farther proof, I may add, that a
flint-ax, the instrument of the Aborigines of our island, was discovered stuck
in certain veins of coal, exposed to day in Craig y Parc in Monmouthshire Ph.
Tr. No 335. p. 500.
; and in such a situation as to render it very accessible to the inexperienced
natives, who, in early times, were incapable of pursuing the veins to any great
depths. The artless smelters of ancient times made use of wood only in their
operations, as we find among the relics of their hearths, as shall be
observed hereafter.

A VERY useful species of ash-colored greasy clay is discovered over one of the
beds. It resists the fire remarkably well; and has been used with great success
in the mineral smelting furnaces.

THE beds of sandstone are frequent in the lower parts of the parish, FREESTONE.
and reach within half a mile of the mountain; when the stratum changes: first
to a blackish shale, soon dissolluble by exposure to the air; after that to a
whitish limestone, or to a hard chert. Both are found in strata a of vast
thickness: LIME.
the first is burnt into excellent lime, and is also used as a flux for lead
ores. The common sort of houses are built with it; for which it is less proper
by reason of its excessive dampness at change of weather.

IN the township of Tre-mostyn, near the shore, is a cliff of a very singular
appearance, looking like the semi-vitrified lava of a volcano. The stratum is
in front universally changed in its disposition, and run into a horrible mass
of red and black; often porous, but in all parts very hard. In it is a hollow,
a vein in which was lodged the pyritical matter that took fire, and caused the
phenomenon. Its fury chiefly raged toward the front, and diminished gradually
in the internal part of the bed; which, at some distance within land, appears
only discolored. The stratum is a sandstone of the common sort Da Costa's
Fossils, 133.
. I am informed, that these appearances are not uncommon in Derbyshire; and
that Mr. Ferber, an ingenions Swede, and Mr. Whitehurst, our ingenious
countryman, has taken notice of them in their writings.

THE chert is the petros^ex of the later writers. It is of a flinty nature,
CHART.
and is the only stone that resembles flint in our county. The annotator on
Cronsted justly remarks, that the true flint abounds in chalk, which is an
absorbent earth, as chert does in the neighborhood of limestone, which is also
calcareous. As yet, this species of stone has nor been found of any use. I
susspect, that in case it was burnt and ground, it might prove serviceable in
making a coarse stone ware, as the nodular flints are in making the finer.

THE hilly part of our parish has been for a long succession of years rich in
minerals of lead and calamine. Some years ago, about seventeen hundred of
copper ore was discovered; but none since, notwithstanding it has been
diligently searched Arenaria Saxatilis
Scarlet Mushroom
after I shall suspend enquiry after these and other minerals and fossils of
this tract, till I am about to leave the part of Flintshire productive of these
sources of wealth. I shall here only take notice of a vegetable, rare in other
places, which grows on certain parts of the mountain in plenty; and in May
makes a pretty appearance with its white flowers. This is the arenaria
saxatilis, or mountain chickweed, engraven in the annexed plate; with a scarlet
kind of mushroom, unnoticed by Linnaeus; but described by Mr. Ray, p. 18. No 5.
of his Synopsis of British Plants.

IN my road to the next parish south of this, I take that which lies on the
shore; and pass by the ancient smelting-house of Llanerchymor, which is still
in use for fusing of lead ore, and extracting of silver.

THE sea, or the estuary of the Dee, lies at a small distance on the left, a
verdant marsh intervening. The hundred of Wiral, a portion of Cheshire, is seen
on the other side; a hilly tract, woodless and dreary, chequered with
corn-lands and black heaths; yet formerly was so well clothed, as to occasion
this proverbial distich:

From Blacon point to Hilbree
A squirrel might leap from tree to tree.
THE view of this branch of the sea terminates on one end with Chester, and the
rock of Beeston; on the other with the two little islands of Hilbree or Ilbre.
On one, had been a cell of Benedictines, dedicated to our lady, and depqndent
on Chester. This possibly was the hermitage called Hilburghy which, in the
second of Edward III. received ten shillings a year from an old charity
belonging to the castle at Chester Janner, 63.
.

THE tides recede here so very far, as to deny us any variety of fish. The
species most plentiful are of the flat kind; such as flounders, a few plaice,
small soles, and rays. Dabs visit us in November; and in the last year was
taken that rare species or flounder the whiff, whose figure is given in the
annexed plate. The weever is very common here: other species are taken
accidentally.

THE herring in this sea is extremely desultory. At times they appear in vast
shoals, even as high as Chester; arrive in the month of November, and continue
till February; and are followed by multitudes of small vessels, which enliven
the channel. Great quantities are taken and salted; but are generally shotten
and meagre. It is now about ten years since they have paid us a visit.

EXCEPTING the Caryocatactes or nut-breaker Corvus Caryocatactes, Lin. Syn.
157. de Buffon III. 122. Gesner Av. 244. Scopoli. 37. Kramer, 334. Br, Zool II.
531.
, I do not recollect any very uncommon bird to have visited this parish: one of
this species was killed in the garden at Mostyn in October 1753. Its native
country is Savoy, Switzerland, Lorraine, and some parts of Germany. These birds
do not regularly migrate, but in a certain period quit their usual habitations;
for example, in October 1754, multitudes appeared in Burgundy, and other parts
of France. The one that visited us was probably a strayed bird out of some
flock that had quitted its native land. It is a species of some beauty, yet
without variety or richness WHIFF
of colors; being spotted with triangular marks of pure white in rusty brown.
In size it is somewhat inferior to a jackdaw: the bill very strong, sharp, and
fitted for the piercing of trees; which makes it very destructive to timber. It
inhabits the vast forests of firs; from which it has been styled Pica abietum
guttata. Like the jackdaws, it also nestles in lofty towers; and like them is
very noisy. Its food is nuts, which it breaks with its bill; the cones of firs,
acorns, berries, and insects. From the first circumstance, the Germans have
named it nuss-bretcher, a name adopted in the British Zoology.

ON crossing a little rill beneath the banks, I enter the parish of HOLYWELL:
And very soon after cross its noted stream, near its discharge into the estuary
of the Dee. On the right ascend to the site of the abbey and castle of
Basingwerk, a place of importance in the wars between the English and the
Welsh. The land toward the sea is steeply sloped. The west side was protected
by a deep gully, formed by the river; the south-east by the vast ditch, which
has hitherto been universally supposed to have been that made by Offa, king of
the Mercians. I owe the detection of that mistake to Mr. John Evans of Llwyn y
Groes This gentleman is now engaged in an actual survey of North Wales, and of
publishing a large map of that part of the principality: a work extremely
worthy of public encouragement, A farther account of the plan will be printed
in the last page of this volume.
, who proves it to be one termination of another stupendous work of the same
kind, known by the name of Wat's ditch; of which a full account will be given
in some of the following pages, with remarks on the mounts, and other works
that lie near its course.

THE only vestige of this fortress appears in the foundation of a wall on the
edge of Offa's ditch. BASINGWERK CASTLE.
Lord Lyttelton Hist. Henry II. 3d edit. II. 383.
says, that the founder was an earl of Chester. I imagine that it must have
been Richard, son of Hugh Lupus, and second earl of Chester; and that the abbey
was fortified on the following occasion; for even religious institutions had no
exemption, tempore necessitatis belli, licitum est, hospitari et incastellari
in ecclesia Innocentius de immunitate ecclesiae, quoted in Coll. Curious
Discourses, I, 102.
.

ACCORDINGLY, the first notice I find of it is in the life of St. Werburg, by
Bradshaw; who informs us, that Richard, on his return out of Normandy, where he
had been educated, began his reign with an act of piety. He attempted, in 1119,
a pilgrimage to the well of St. Wenefrede; but either in going or returning,
was attacked by the Welsh, and obliged to take shelter in Basingwerk. He
applied to St. Werburg for relief; who miraculously raised certain sands
between Flintshire and Wiral, and thus gave means to his constable to pass to
his assistance: which sands, from that time were called the Constable's Sands.
Bradshaw styles the place of his retreat an abbey; a proof that here had been a
religious community before the time usually assigned for the foundation of this
house. I must also draw from Lord Lyttelton's authority (for I can find no
other) that this castle was demolished by the Welsh in the reign of Stephen
Hist. Henry II.
.

HENRY II. in 1157, after his escape from the ambuscade of Eulo, left
Basingwerk restored, well fortified, and manned M.Paris, 129.
, in order to secure a retreat on any future disaster. He did the same by the
cast of Rudland. In his days the inland parts of our county were a dangerous
wild of forest. After his defeat he never trusted himself among our woods; but
made his marches along the open shores.

THE same monarch left another species of garrison Powel, 208.
; for he established here a house of knights templars, a military order
introduced into England in the preceding reign. They were first instituted in
the Holy Land for the protection of pilgrims; and possibly Henry might have,
the same view in fixing them here, to secure the English devotees in performing
their vows to our neighboring saint, who seems about this time to have come
into reputation. It is singular, that these religious knights were allowed at
their institution only one horse between two; yet so greatly did they flourish,
that about the year 1240, or a hundred and fifty years after their institution,
the order had acquired, in different parts of Christendom, nineteen thousand
manors.

THIS castle was but of very short duration; for in 1165, the gallant prince
Owen Gwynedd laid siege to it, took The same, 223.
and levelled it to the ground; after which the name occurs no more as a
Fortress. I think at this period it belonged to Hugh de Bello Campo, or
Beauchamp, on whom this and Rudland castle had been bestowed by the English
monarch Annals Waverleienses. 159.
.

THE abbey Called also by the Welsh, Maes-glas, or Greenfield.
, ABBEY.
of which there are some considerable remains, was founded in 1131 (according
to the opinion of Bishop Tanner) by Randle the second earl of Chester:
according to Bishop Fleetwood, by Henry II. For my part, I believe it to be of
greater antiquity; but do not pretend to derive its origin. No light into the
matter can be collected from the charters preserved by Sir William Dugdale.
There are three of them, either serving to confirm the ancient donations, or
confer new: in each is mention of the earl as a benefactor; but there is not
the left hint of his having been the founder. I must attribute that honor to
one of the princes of Wales; for both Lhewelyn ap Jorwerth, and his son David,
in their respective charters recite, that they give and confirm the several
donations to GOD, St. Mary, the monastery of Basingwerk, and the monks, which
had been bestowed on them by their predecessors for the salvation of their
souls.

RANDAL was certainly a great benefactor; for it appears, that before his days
the monks had only a chapel here. From that period it became considerable; and
about that time part of the present buildings were erected, for the convenience
of its inhabitants, who were of the Cistorcian order.

THE architecture is mixed. Here appears what is called Saxon; having the round
arches and short columns in some parts; and the

BASINGWERK ABPRY.


Gothic narrow slips of high-pointed windows in others. The first: species had
not fell out of use, and the last was coming into fashion, in the days of the
first great benefactor.

THE church lay on the east side; but is now totally destroyed. The refectory
is pretty entire; and on one side has a great recess, with two round arches and
a plain in front.

ABOVE were the cells for the lodgings of the monks, with a small window to
each.

THE chapel of the knights templars is a spacious building. The windows are
long, narrow, and pointed; the pilasters between them on the inside slender and
elegant.

THERE are some remains of offices, used at present by a tanner. Within less
than fifty years, much of the habitable part was standing; and sometimes used
by the worthy family, the Mostyns of Trelacre: a lady now living was born
within the walls.

DURING the preparations for the conquest of Wales by Edward I. the abbey was
under the protection of the English. There are extant two orders for the
purpose, providing that they had no commerce with what are styled the Welsh
rebels Ayloff's Rotuli Walliae, 68, 82.
. I imagine that the convent was firmly attached to the victor; for I have been
informed that there are, among the lists of summons in the Tower, writs for
calling the abbot to parliament, in the 23d, 24th, 28th, 32d, and 34th of Edward
I.

ACCORDING to the valuation of its revenues in 1534, the gross sum at the
dissolution was, according to Dugdale, 150 l. 7 s. 3 d.; to Speed, 157 l. 15 s.
2 d. In 1553, there remained in charge 4 l. in annuities Willis's Abbeys, I.
312.
.

THE particular endowments, as I collect from Dugdale Menasticon, I 720, etc.
, were these: Henry III. by charter, grants and confirms ten librates in
Longenedale in Derbyshire, with the church of Glossope, and all its
appertenances, to be held by them as freely as William Peverel held the same in
the time of Henry his grandfather. The same charter confirms the donations of
Ranulph carl of Chester, and other barons, viz. Holywell, Fulbrook, the chapel
of Basingwerst, the ancient residence of the monks, with the mills and their
appertenances; likewise Holes, and a moiety of Lecche, and one hundred
shillings of the revenues of Chester, the gift of the said earl. Calders with
its inhabitants, and finally, Kethlenedei, the gift of Robert Banastre.

LHEWELYN AP JORWERTH, prince of Wales, and cotemporary with Henry III.
confirms all the donations of his ancestors; particularly the site of their
house, the mill before their gate, and the land before their doors; which last
was granted to them by Ranulphus, and his brother Aeneas. The same grant gives
them also the land of Meredeth Wawor in Holywell; Fulbrook, a community of
pasturage on the mountains; Hanot de le Weceb, and Creicgraft, with all their
appertenances. His son and successor David, by another charter, confirms the
donations of his father, and adds the lands of Huttred, brother to Meredeth
Wawor of Holywell; the grange of Fulbrook; the church of Holywell, and the
chapel of C^lsul; and the land and pasturage

(...)


of Gelli, before granted by his father. He likewise empowers them to buy and
sell every thing toll-free in all his territories, for the use of their house.
Also, the fifth part of the fish taken in his fisheries at Rudland; and the
tenth of the fish belonging to him in other parts. He confirms to them all the
village of Wenhewm, with all its inhabitants and appertenances, being the gift
of Howen de Porkenton, and confirmed by Helyso. He at the same time confirms
the lands and pasturage in Penthlin, the gift of his father.

THIS charter is dated from Coleshill in 1240, and witnessed by Hugh bishop of
St. Asaph, and his chancellor, the famous Ednyfed Vychan, and others.

TANNER Notitia, 711.
mentions the tithes of Blackbrook, and the wood of Langdon; lands in
Chanclesworth; the manor of West Kirkby in Cheshire; the silver mine near
Basingwerk; free warren in Gethli, Menegrange, Ouregrange, Beggerburgh, and
Holywell.

THE abbey also was possessed of the hospital or chapel of Sponne near Coventry,
which had been originally founded by Hugh Ceveilioc earl of Chester, who
probably bestowed it on these monks Dugdale's Warwickshire, I. 197.
.

THE revenues of the abbot amounted in the whole, reckoning ^^^^rising from the
mills, lands, cows, and sheep, to 46 l. 11 s. Willis's St. Asaph, 176.
.

IN 1540, the house and lands in the neighborhood were granted to Henry ap
Harry, whose only daughter Anne, by her marriage with William Mostyn esquire,
of Trelacre, conveyed it into that family, in which it now remains.

I CANNOT recover the names of any more than two of the abbots; both of the
same with my own. Thomas ap Dafydd Pennant presided over the house in the time
of Guttun Owain; a bard who flourished in the year 1480, and celebrates the
hospitality of the abbot, in some verses printed in the collection of Mr. Rhys
Jones. The poet is so liberal of his praise as to say, That he gave twice the
treasure of a king in wine.

Er bwrw yno, aur Brenin
Of a roes, deuswy a'r win.
HE speaks also of his works of utility; of the water and of the windmills he
erected. Neither is he silent on a subject, pleasing to every Welsh ear, the
pedigree of his patron; whom he derives from Edwin and from Elidir ap Rhys
Sais, a direct descendant from Tudor Trevor

THE last abbot conformed, and married Angared daughter to Gwillim ap Gryssydd
ap Gwillim. The Harleian MS. calls him Sir Thomas Pennant. The remains of a
very ancient oak, still to be seen near the ruins of the house, is called the
abbot's, and is supposed to be his cotemporary.

THE road from hence is remarkably picturesque, along a little valley, bounded
on one side by hanging woods, beneath which the stream hurries toward the sea,
unless where interrupted by the frequent manufactories. Its origin is
discovered at the foot of a steep hill, ST. WENEFREDE'S WELL.
beneath the town of Holywell, or Trefynnon, to which it gave the name. The
spring boils with vast impetuosity out of a rock;

ST WENEFRED'S WELL, MOSS, and SEAL.


and is formed into a beautiful polygonal well, covered with a rich arch
supported by pillars. The roof is most exquisitely carved in stone. Immediately
over the fountain is the legend of St. Wenefrede, on a pendent projection, with
the arms of England at the bottom. Numbers of fine ribs secure the arch, whose
intersections are coupled with some sculpture.

SOME are mere works of fancy; grotesque figures of animals: but the rest
allude chiefly to the Stanley family. This building, and the chapel over it,
rose from the piety of that great house, who left these memorials of their
benefactions: there are besides some marks of illustrious donors; for example,
the profile of Margaret, mother to Henry VII. and that of her husband the earl
of Derby, cut on the same stone.

THE compliments to the Stanlies are very frequent. The wolf's head is the arms
of the earls of Chester: it is enclosed in a garter, in respect to Sir William
Stanley, knight of that order, who had been chamberlain of that city, and
justiciary of North Wales. The tun with a plant issuing out of it, is a rebus,
the arms of his wife Elizabeth Hopton, allusive to her name. This proves, that
the building was erected before 1495, in which year Sir William lost his head.
The other badges of the same house are, the stag's head; the eagle's leg; and
the three legs, the arms of the isle of Man.

WE also find, that Catherine of Arragon, widow to prince Arthur, and
afterward the unfortunate wife of his brother Henry VIII. was a benefactress
to this building; at lest her arms appear here: three pomegranates in a shield,
surmounted with a crown; the badge of the house of Granada, in memory of the
expulsion of the Moors, by her father Ferdinand Sandford's Geneal. 475.
. The eagle seems also to belong to her, being one of the supporters of the
arms of her family.

OVER one of the lesser arches, on each side of the well, are the dragon and
gre-hound, the supporters of the arms of England during the reign of Henry VII.
and part of that of Henry VIII. The first was born by Henry VII. as a badge of
the house of Tudor, which derived itself from Cadwalader, last king of Britain,
who bore on his ensign a red dragon. Henry, in imitation of him, at the battle
of Bosworth carried on his standard a red dragon, painted on white and green
silk; which afterward gave rise to the office of Rouge dragon among the
heralds.

ON one side of a wall that supports the roof, was painted the tale of the
tutelar saint; at present almost defaced: over it is inscribed, in honorem
Sanctae Wenefredae, V. and M.

IN another wall is an elegant nich, in which stood a statue of the Virgin
Mary; pulled down, as I have been informed, in the year 1635.

I have also heard, that there had been another of St. Wenefrede. To grace the
image on high festivals, it is probable, that Isabel, countess of Warwick,
widow to the great Richard Beauchamp, left to St. Wenefrede, in 1439, her gown
of russet velvet Dugdale's Warwickshire, I. 414.
.

OVER this spring is a chapel, CHAPEL.
of the same date with the other building: a neat piece of gothic architecture;
but in a very ruinous state. This had been a free chapel, in the gift of the
bishop, with the reserve of a stipend to the chapter; but the rest of the
offerings were to be expended on the chapel. In Richard III.'s time, the abbot
and convent had from the crown ten marks yearly, for the sustentacione and
salarie of a priest, at the chapelle of St. Wynesride Harleian MSS. No 433,
338.
. The chapel is the property of John Davies esquire, of Llanerch. The well is
common; for I find by a decision of the court of chancery, on a lawsuit
respecting the lordship of Holywell, between Sir John Egerton knight, and John
Eldred; chancellor Ellesmere decrees, That on calling to mind, that within the
said manor there is a fountain or well of ancient and worthy memory, he does
not think fit that the petitioner, or any other, should have the property
thereof, notwithstanding the general words of the grant of the manor: and
therefore his lordship does order, that notwithstanding the said grant, that
the well shall continue as now it is, or heretofore has been; saving to the
petitioner, and his heirs and assigns, the benefit of the stream and
watercourse, with the appertainances.

THERE are two different opinions about the origin of this stream. One party
makes it miraculous: the other assert it to be owing only to natural causes.
The advocates for the first, deliver their tale thus:

IN the seventh century lived a virgin of the name of Wenesrede, OF SAINT WING
FREDE.
of noble parents; her father's name was Thewith, a potent lord in the parts
where Holywell now stands; her mother's, Wenlo, descended from an ancient
family in Montgomeryshire, and sister to St. Beuno. Beuno assumed the monastic
habit, retired to Clynnog, in Caernarvonshire, where he built a church and
founded a convent. After completing this work of piety, he visited his
relations in Flintshire, and obtaining from his brother-in-law a little spot at
the foot of the hill on which he resided, erected on it a church; and took
under his care his niece Wenefrede. A neighboring prince of the name of
Cradocus, son of King Alen, was struck with her beauty, and at all events
determined to gratify his desires. He made known his passion to the lady; who,
affected with horror, attempted to escape. The wretch, enraged at the
disappointment, instantly pursued her, drew out his sabre, and cut off her
head. Cradocus instantly received the reward of his crime: he fell down dead,
and the earth opening, swallowed his impious corpse. Hidgen, in his
Polychronicon adds, that even the descendents of this monster were visited with
horrible judgments, to be expiated only by a visit to this well, or to the
bones of the saint at Salop.

Ad Basingwerk sons oritur
Qui satis vulgo dicitur.
Et tantis bullis scaturit
Quod mox, injecta, rejicit.
Tam magnum flumen procreat
Ut Cambriae sufficiat.
Aegri qui dant rogamina
Reportant medicamina.
Rubro guttatos lapides
In scatebris reperies
In signum sacri sanguinis,
Quem VENEFREDAE virginis
Guttur truncatum fuderat.
Qui scelus hoc patraverat,
Ac nati, ac nepotuli
Latrant ut canum catuli
Donec sanctae suffragium
Poscant ad hunc sonticulum:
Vel ad urbem Salopiae
Ubi quiescit hodie Gale's Script. III, 190.
.
THE severed head took its way down the hill, and stopped near the church. The
valley, which, from its uncommon dryness, was heretofore called Sych nant, now
lost its name. A spring of uncommon size burst from the place where the head
rested. The moss on its sides diffused a fragrant smell Life of St. Wenefrede,
from which the materials for this part are mostly taken.
. Her blood spotted the stones, which, like the flowers of Adonis, annually
commemorate the fact, by assuming colors unknown to them before.

Luctus monumenta manebunt
Semper, Adoni, mei: repetitaque mortis imago
Annua plangoris peraget simulamina nostri.
For thee, blessed maid, my tears, my endless pain
Shall in immortal monuments remain.
The image of thy death each year renew;
And prove my grief, to distant ages, true.
ST. BEUNO took up the head, carried it to the corpse, and, offering up his
devotions, joined it nicely to the body, which instantly reunited. The place
was visible only by a slender white line encircling her neck, in memory of a
miracle, which surpassed far that worked by St. Dionysius, who marched in
triumph after decapitation, with his head in his hands, from Mont martre to St.
Dennis's Histoire de l'abbaye de St. Denis, 76.
or that of St. Adelbertus, who, in like circumstances, swam across the Vistula.

TO conclude: St. Wenefrede survived her decollation fifteen years. She died at
Gwytherin in Denbighshire, where her bones rested till the reign of king
Stephen; when, after divine admonition, they were surrendered to the abbey of
St. Peter and St. Paul at Shrewsbury. The memory of the two great events, that
of her first death is celebrated on the 22d of June: that of her translation
the 3d of November.

A FRATERNITY and gild was established in honor of our faint at Shrewsbury. It
had its common seal, which, through the kindness of my friend, Mr. Henry
Levingston, is now in my possession. It is of copper, of the form expressed in
the plate. In the center is a representation of the martyrdom; above is a cross
in form of a T, placed between the letters T. m. which mark the time when the
fraternity was instituted, during the abbacy of Thomas Mind; who was elected
in 1459, and died in 1499, a period in which these religious societies were
much in fashion. The T or cross refers to the church of St. Cross within this
monastery. Beneath are probably the arms of the house, a sword and a key,
symbols of its tutelar apostles; and round the margin is this inscription:

sigillu coe pfraternitat beat wenefride virginis
i^ ecc^i^a sc^e cruc i^ fra monaster. sc^i petri salopie.
A bell belonging to the church was also christened in honor of her. I cannot
learn the names of the gossips, who, as usual, were doubtlessly rich persons.
On the ceremony, they all laid hold of the rope; bestowed a name on the bell;
and the priest sprinkling it with holy water, baptized it in the name of the
Father, etc. etc. Stavely's Hist. Churches, 130.
He then clothed it with a fine garment: after this the gossips gave a grand
feast, and made great presents, which the priest received in behalf of the
bell. Thus blessed, it was endowed with great powers; allayed (on being rung)
all storms; diverted the thunderbolt; drove away evil spirits. These
consecrated bells were always inscribed. The inscription on that in question
ran thus:

Sancta Wenefreda, Deo hoc commendare memento,
Ut pietate sua, nos servet ab host cruento.
And a little lower was another address:

Protege Prece pia, quos convoco, virgo Maria. AFTER her death, her sanctity,
says her historian, was proved by numberless miracles. The waters were almost
as sanative as those of the pool of Bethesda: all infirmities incident to the
human body met with relief; the votive crutches, the barrows, and other proofs
of cures, to this moment remain as evidences pendent over the well. The saint
is equally propitious to Protestants and Catholics; for among the offerings are
to be found these grateful testimonies from the patients of each religion.

THE Holy Father gave all encouragement to the piety of pilgrims to frequent
this fountain. Pope Martin V Selden's notes on Michael Drayton, 289.
. in the reign of Henry V. furnished the abbey of Basingwerk with pardons and
indulgences, to sell to the devotees. These were renewed again in the reign of
queen Mary, by the interest of Thomas Goldwell bishop of St. Asaph Powel's
notes on Girald. Cambr. 874. Mr. Addison says he saw his picture at Ravenna, in
the convent of Theatins, among the eminent men of that order.
, who fled into Italy on the accession of Elizabeth. Multitudes of offerings
flowed in; marks of gratitude from such who had received benefit by
intercession of the virgin.

THE resort of pilgrims of late years to these Fontanalia has considerably
decreased; the greatest number are from Lancashire. In the summer, still a few
are to be seen in the water in deep devotion up to their chins for hours,
sending up their prayers, or performing a number of evolutions round the
polygonal well; or threading the arch between well and well a prescribed number
of times. Few people of rank at present honor the fountain with their presence.
A crowned head in the last age dignified the place with a visit. The prince who
lost three kingdoms for a mass, paid his respects, on August 29th 1686, to our
saint; and received as a reward a present of the very shift in which his great
grandmother Mary Stuart lost her head The late Doctor Copper of Chester's MSS.
. The majority of devotees are of the fair sex, attracted hither to commemorate
the martyrdom of St. Wenefrede, as those of the East did the death of the
Cyprian favorite,

Whose annual wound in Lebanon allured
The Syrian damsels to deplore his fate
In woeful ditties all the summer's day:
While smooth Adonis from his native rock
Ran purple to the sea, supposed with blood
Of Thammuz yearly wounded.
WE, whose ancestors, between two and three centuries ago, abridged our faith
to the mere contents of the Old and New Testament, and to the creed called the
Apostles, do not think the belief in the above, and other legends, requisite. I
refer the reader to the arguments used by the antiquary Doctor Powel, in his
notes on the Itinerary of Giraldus Cambrensis, and to bishop Fleetwood's
annotations on the life of the saint, for proofs against the truth of the tale:
but with Protestants, and temperate Catholics, it carries with it
self-confutation.

THE waters are indisputably endowed with every good quality attendant on cold
baths; and multitudes have here experienced the good effects that thus result
from natural qualities, implanted in the several parts of matter by the divine
Providence in order to fulfill his will. Heaven for a short period deigned to
convince a dark and obdurate age with a series of miracles; which were
delivered down to succeeding times, as incontestible proofs of the reality of
the divine mission. Without them, a sufficient ground of trust and reliance
upon the Supreme Being has long since been established. Second causes
innumerable are dispersed throughout the universe, subordinate to the FIRST.
Every element proves to us a medicine or a bane, as suits His unerring
dispensation. We cannot want, we cannot have the mediation of poor departed
mortals. The supposition would be bestowing on them the attributes of the
Deity; omnipresence and omniscience.

SOME eminent botanists of my acquaintance have reduced the sweet moss, MOSSES
and the bloody stains, to mere vegetable productions, far from being peculiar
to our fountain. The first is that kind of moss called a Jungermannia,
imperfectly described and figured by Dillenius, in his history of mosses; which
has induced us to give a new engraving of it. This species is also found in
another holy well in Caernarvonshire, called Ffynnon Llandeniolen, in a parish
of the same name.

THE other is a Byssus, likewise odoriferous: common to Lapland, and to other
countries besides our own. It adheres to stones in form of fine velvet.
Linnaeus calls it Byssus Jolithus Sp. Pl. II. 1638. Fl. lap. 369. No 528.
, or the violet-smelling. He says, the stone to which it adheres easily betrays
itself by the color, being as if smeared with blood; and if rubbed, yields a
smell like violets. Micheli, in his Genera of plants, mentions the same Genesis
210. tab. 89. fig. 3.
; and Schwenckselt discovered it among the vegetables of Silesia. He calls it a
muscus subrubeus, and informs us, that the smell is grateful to the heart; and
that, if put among clothes, it gives them a good scent, and serves to drive
away moths Cat. Stirp. etc. Silesiae, 382.
. Linnaeus says As quoted by Baron Halier, No 2090.
, that it is of use in eruptive disorders.

ABOVE the well stands the church, dedicated to St. Wenefrede. The parish wakes
are celebrated in November, the time of her translation. The living, before the
dissolution, belonged to the abbey of Basingwerk; and is a vicarage in the gift
of Jesus College Oxford, which nominates; and John Davies esquire, of Llanerch,
the lay-rector, presents.

ABOVE the church is a hill called Bryn y Castle, narrow, and very steep on
the sides, projecting at the end over the little valley. On this might have
stood the castle of Treffynnon, or St. Wenefrede, built by Randle III. earl of
Chester, in the year 1210 Powel, 262.
. There are not at present any vestiges left.

IT is singular, that no mention is made in the Doomsday book of either chapel,
church, or well; yet townships now of less note are named; such as Brunford
Caldecote, and others. Notwithstanding bishop Fleetwood's opinion, I think the
legend of St. Wenefrede was known previous to that survey; for the very name of
Holywell is Saxon, probably bestowed on it before the Conquest, on account of
the imputed sanctity of the well.

THE spring is certainly one of the finest in these kingdoms; and, by the two
different trials and calculations lately made for my information, is found to
fling out about twenty-one tons of water in a minute. It never freezes; or
scarcely varies in the quantity of water, in droughts or after the greatest
rains. After a violent fall of wet, it becomes discolored by a wheyey tinge.

THE stream formed by this fountain runs with a rapid course to the sea, which
it reaches in little more than a mile's distance. The industry of this century
has made its waters of much commercial utility. The principal works on it at
this time are battering mills for copper; a wire-mill, coarse paper mill,
snuffmill, a foundery for brass; and at this time, a cotton manufactory is
establishing, the success of which will be an extensive blessing to the
neighborhood.

DURING the reign of pilgrimages, nothing but a corn-mill or two, the property
of the monks, found employ for this beneficial stream.

THE town was also very inconsiderable till the beginning of this century; the
houses few, and those for the most part thatched; the streets unpaved; and the
place destitute of a market. The flourishing mines, that for some time were
discovered in the neighborhood, made a great change in the appearance, and
introduced the effects of wealth. The town, or rather township, contains
somewhat more than two thousand souls.

THE monks of Basingwerk obtained for it the grant of a fair and a market. The
first has been dropped beyond the memory of man. The market was also lost, till
it was renewed by letters patent, dated Jan. 20th, 1703, granted to Sir John
Egerton baronet. The patent also contains a grant of three fairs, viz. on the
23d of April, the Tuesday in Easter week, and the 2d of September. The market
has been the most flourishing in North Wales; but the fairs never could be
established.

THE situation of the town is pleasant and healthy. On the back is a lofty
hill, at times extremely productive of lead ore. Toward the sea is a pretty
valley, bounded by woods: the end finishes on one side with the venerable abbey.
To such who requ^^e the use of a cold-bath, few places are more proper; for,
besides the excellence of the waters, exceeding good medical assistance, and
comfortable accommodations, may be found here; and the mind entertained, and
the body exercised, in a variety of beautiful rides and walks.

MY next visit was to Flint. I took the lower road, by the shore, blackened
with the smoke of smelting-houses; and, in the more flourishing times of the
collieries, with vast stacks of coal. The last township in Ho^ywell parish, on
this side, is that of Coleshill; COLESHILL.
which gives name to a hundred, and was so called from its abundance of foss^l
fuel. This place had at the Conquest four villeyns, two boors, and a Radman.
This last seems to have been the same with the Rod or Rad-knights, who, by the
tenure of their lands, were bound to ride with or for their lord, as often as
his affairs required.

AFTER crossing a small brook, enter the town of FLINT: FLINT.
a place laid out with great regularity; but the streets far from being
completed. The removal of the greater and the lesser sessions, and its want of
trade, will be farther checks to its improvement. This town gave name to the
county, which, with that of Caernarvon, Merioneth, and Anglesey, composed the
four ancient North Welsh shires, formed by Edward I. immediately after the
conquest of our principality. I cannot assign any derivation of the word: our
county is totally destitute of the fossil usually so called. I can only remark,
that it is purely Saxon; and, notwithstanding it is not mentioned in the
Doomsday book, was called so before the Conquest.

THIS place also seems to me to have been the same with what was named Colsul
or Coleshill. I can find no other site for the chapel of Colsul, granted by
David ap Llewelyn to the abbey of Basingwerk. The present Flint probably went at
this period under both names. There is no trace of any chapel in the
neighborhood excepting this; nor any other place of consequence enough to tempt
our princes to live at. It was called in the Doomsday book Coleselt; and was
possessed by Robert of Rudland. Edwin held it from him, and as a freeman. Here
was one hide of land taxable.

THE whole place appears to have been founded in times of danger; and every
provision made against an attack from a people recently subdued, and who had
submitted reluctantly to a foreign yoke. The town is formed on the principle of
a Roman encampment, being rectangular, and surrounded with a vast ditch and two
great ramparts, with the four regular portae, as usual with that military
nation. I shall hereafter give a conjecture of the probability of its having
been a Roman station.

THE public buildings within this precinct are the church, the town hall, and
the jail; not one of which is any ornament to this little capital. The church,
or rather chapel, is dedicated to St. Mary; and is only a perpetual curacy
under Northop. I imagine this to have been the capella de Colsul Dugdale
Monast. I. 720.
, belonging to the abbey of Basingwerk, mentioned in the charter of David ap
Llewelyn; at lest, I can trace no other. Flint, in that time, was probably
comprehended under the name of Colsul.

THE castle stands on a low freestone rock that juts into the sands, a little
north-east of the town; and was once joined to it by a bridge which led to the
outwork, called the Barbican; a square tower, with a gateway, now entirely
demolished. Within was a court surrounded with a ditch faced with a wall, that
joined by means of a drawbridge to the main fortress; whose entrance, for
better security, was little more than a postern.

THE castle is a square building, with a large round tower at three of the
corners, and a fourth a little disjoined from the other, and much larger than
the rest. This is called the double tower.

FLINT CASTLE


It had been joined to the castle by a drawbridge, and is of great thickness.
It has a circular gallery beneath, vaulted, with four arched openings into a
central area, a little more than twenty-two feet in diameter. In one part, the
gallery is suddenly lowered, and goes sloping toward the castle; and then
rising upwards, makes a sort of communication with an upper gallery.

THIS was the Keep, or strong part of the castle, and the same that the French
call le Dongeon; to which, as Froissart informs us, the unfortunate Richard II.
retired, as the place of greatest security, when he was taken by Bolingbroke.

THE channel of the Dee at present is at some distance from the walls; but
formerly flowed beneath. There are still in some parts rings, to which ships
were moored.

THE founder of this castle is uncertain. Cambden attributes it to Henry II.
and his noble hisstorian Lord Lyttelton.
is of the same opinion. After his escape at Euloe, it is possible that he
might have begun a fortress here for security in future times; that he might
have left it incomplete; and that it was finished by Edward I. The rolls of the
last reign mention the place several times.

IN the year 1277, there was an order for proclaming a market and fair to be
held at Flint; and the same was afterward done through Cheshire, and the
cantreds of Wales.

IN 1280, appears an order for the custody of the gate of the castle of Flint.
Perhaps this might have been the year in which it was first garrisoned.

IN 1283, the town received its first charter; was made a free borough; and the
mayor sworn faithfully to preserve its liberties. This is dated at Flint on the
8th of September: it was confirmed again in the 2d and 3d years of Philip and
Mary, and afterward in the 12th of William III.

IN 1283, the burgesses also received a grant from Edward, of timber out of the
woods of Northop, Ledebroke the greater and lesser, Keldreston, Wolsynton,
Weper, and Sutton, in order to smelt their lead ore; and at the same time a
right of pasturage in the same woods.

IN 1290, there is an order for superintending the works of this castle, and
those of Rudland and Chester; places of the first importance, on the borders of
a new-conquered country Rotuli Walliae, 98
.

THE first great event that occurs to me respecting this fortress is in the
year 1280, when the Welsh, wearied with the reiteration of oppression, as a
signal of general insurrection, surprised the place 76.
; at the same time that David, brother of Llewelyn; took Hawarden; and Rees the
son of Malgon, and Griffith ap Meredeth ap Owen, seized the castle of
Aberystwyth Powel, 337.
.

HERE, in 1311, the infatuated son of our conqueror received from exile his
imperious favorite Piers Gaveston, who had landed at Caernarvon from Ireland
Stow, 214.
.

FROM this period I find nothing remarkable relating to this fortress, till the
year 1335, the 9th of Edward III. when appears an order to the Black Prince, as
earl of Chester, to take in safe custody the castle of Flint and Rudland, and
to furnish them with men and provisions Rotuli Scotiae, 165.
. Edward, in his 7th year, had by charter granted to his gallant son the
castles of Chester, Beeston, Rudland; and Flint, and all his lands there; and
also the cantred and lands of Englefield, with all their appertenances, to have
and to hold to him and his heirs, kings of England Dodridge, 125.
.

IN this dollorous castle III.
, as Halle styles it, was deposed the unfortunate monarch Richard II. To this
place he was inveigled by Henry Percy, earl of Northumberland, with the
assurance that Bolingbroke wished no more than to be restored to his own
property; and to give to the kingdom a parliament. Northumberland, with a small
train, first met Richard at Conway, then on his return from Ireland. The king
distrusted the earl; who, to remove all suspicion, went with him to mass, and
at the altar took an oath of fidelity. The king fell into the snare; proceeded
with the earl for some time, till he perceived, about the precipice of Penmain
Rhos, a large band of soldiers with the Percy banners. The king would have then
retired; but Northumberland, catching hold of his bridle, forcibly directed his
course. The poor prince had just time to reproach him with his perjury, telling
him, that the God he had sworn upon that morning, would do him justice at the
day of judgment Carte. II. 634.
. He caused the king to dine at Rudland, and conveyed him that night to Flint.
The next morning, he was astonished with the sight, of a numerous army,
commanded by his rival, in full march along the sands: they soon surrounded the
castle. The prince descended from the Keep This place, in old writers, is
called the Dongeon, or Donjon: according to SKINNER, Turris mu^^ssima
pr^pagnaculi ad ultimum receptum; but the word being now entirely applied to
the miserable hole in which captives are confined, I shall still retain the
term Keep.
, to meet Bolingbroke; who fell on his knees, and for a short space assumed a
respectful appearance: but he soon stung off the mask; for, 'with a high sharp
voice,' say Stow, the duke badde bring forth the kings horses; and then two
little nagges, not worth forty franks, were brought forth; the king was set on
the one, and the earl of Salisbury on the other; and thus the duke brought the
king from Flint to Chester, where he was delivered to the duke of Glocester's
son, and to the earl of Arundel's son, that loved him but a little; for he
had put their fathers to death; who led him strait to the castle Stow's Annals,
322.
.

IF Froissart may be credited, Richard did not experience the pang of
ingratitude from man alone: by a strange infection, it seized the most faithful
of the brute creation; for his very dog deserted him, and fawned on his rival
Bolingbroke, as if he understood and predicted the misfortunes of his old
master, The story is so singular, that I shall relate it in the words of his
noble translator Sir John Bouchier, lord Berners Fol. cccxii.
; who, speaking of the transactions in Flint castle, says,

AND as it was enfourmed me, king Richard had a grayhounde called Mathe, who
always waited upon the king, and would know no man else. For when so ever
the king did ride, he that kept the grayhounde did let him lose, and he
would straight run to the king and fawn upon him, and leap with his fore
fete upon the kings shoulders. And as the king and the earl of Derby talked
together in the court, the grayhounde, who was wont to leap upon the king,
left the king and came to the earl of Derby, duke of Lancastre, and made to
him the same friendly countinaunce and chere as he was wont to do to the king.
The duke, who knew not the grayhounde, demanded of the king what the
grayhounde would do. Cosyn, quod the king, it is a great good token to you,
and an evyll sign to me. Sir, how know you that, quod the duke? I know it
well, quod the king. The grayhounde makes you chere this dave as king of
England, as ye shall be, and I shall be deposed: the grayhounde has this
knowledge naturallye: therefore take him to you; he will follow you and forsake
me. The duke understoode well those words, and cherysshed the grayhounde, who
would never after follow king Richard, but followed the duke of Lancastre.

IN the insurrection of Owen Glendwr, Henry prince of Wales procured from his
father a pardon for several of his tenants in these parts, who took up arms in
the cause of our valiant countryman Harlcian MSS. No 2099.
.

THERE is another gap in the history till the troubles of the last century;
when this county took an active part in support of royalty, ^wn castle was
garrisoned for the king, after having been repaired at the expense of Sir Roger
Mostyn knight, who was appointed governor. In 1643, it was closely besieged by
Sir William Brereton and Sir Thomas Middleton; and was defended by the governor
till all provisions, even to horses, failing, he then surrendered it upon
honorable terms.

'THIS colonel Mostyn,' says Whitelock, is my sister's son, a gentleman of good
parts and mettle; of a very ancient family, large possessions, and great
interest in that country; so that in twelve hours he raised fifteen hundred men
for the king Whitelock, 76.
.

I MAY add, that after a long imprisonment in the castle of Conway, toward the
conclusion of the war, his circumstances were so reduced, having spent sixty
thousand pounds in the service of the crown, he was obliged to desert his
family-seat, and live several years in an ordinary farm-house.

FLINT fell afterward into the hands of the loyalists; for, under the year
1646, I find in the same historian, that the garrison seemed inclinable to come
to a treaty. In November of the preceding year, it had received that of
Beeston; which, after a most gallant defense, capitulated, and was allowed to
march with all the honors of war to this place Rushworth 1. part iv. 136.
. But on the 29th of August, Flint castle was surrendered to major general
Mytton; and in 1647 was, with other Welsh castles, dismantled by order of the
house, directed to the general for that purpose Idem, Ibid. 456.
.

ON the restoration, it was resumed by the crown, among its other rights, in
which it still continues. The crown governs it by a constable, who is likewise
mayor of Flint. These offices are at present filled by my friend Owen Brereton,
esquire.

THE town, in conjunction with Caerwys, Rudland, Caergwrley, and Overton, sends
a member to parliament. The election is made by the inhabitants paying parochial
taxes; and the return made by the two bailiffs of Flint, appointed by the
mayor. The borough land of this town extends over the whole parish, and also
the township of Coleshill, in the parish of Holywell.

THE Welsh boroughs and counties received the privilege of representatives by
act of parliament of the 27th of Henry VIII.

THIS town, with the county, was an appendage to the earldom of Chester. The
following schedule gives us their revenues, as they stood in the 50th year of
Edward III.

L. s. d. The profits of the manor of Hope and Hopedale, 63 0 0 of the manor of
Eulo, and the coal-mines, 6 0 0 of the office of constable of Rudland, whereof
he was accountable, 8 14 0 the rent of the town of Flint, 56 0 0 of the town of
Coleshill, 4 7 10 of the town of Caerwis, 22 6 8 of Bagherge, 14 3 4 of Veyvoll
(Veynoll), 13 6 8 of Rudland, 72 9 2 of Mostyn, 15 6 8 of the office of
escheator of Englefield, 56 0 0 Carried over, L 331 14 4 Brought over, L 331 14
4 The Bloglot of the county of Flint, which consists of the profits of the
hundred courts within the said county, 72 11 9 The profits of the perquisites
of the session of Flint, 30 0 0 of the escheator of the said county, 8 0 0
Total, L 442 6 1

ABOUT a mile from the town, on the lower road to Chester, stood a cross, whose
pedestal I remember, which was called Atis-cross, ATIS-CROSS.
and the land around is still called Croes-ati. This probably was a place of
note; for, at the Conquest, it gave name to a very considerable hundred, at
that time considered as part of Cheshire. Exestan was another, now given to
Flintshire; which will be noticed in its place.

THERE is a tradition, that in very old times there stood a large town at this
place; and it is said the foundations of buildings have been frequently turned
up by the plough. But what is most remarkable, is the great quantities of
scoria of lead, bits of lead ore, and fragments of melted lead, discovered in
several spots here, and along the country, just above the shore, in the
adjoining parish of Northop. These have of late been discovered to contain such
quantities of lead, as to encourage the washers of ore to farm the spots. In
this tract, numbers of tons have been gotten within a small time, especially at
Pentre FFWRN-DAN, or the place of the fiery furnace; a name it was always known
by, and which evinces the antiquity of smelting in these parts; but this
etymology was never confirmed, till by means of these recent discoveries.

In page 42 I mentioned my suspicion, that the precinct of Flint town once
served to enclose a small Roman station: I am confirmed in my opinion, from the
multitudes of Roman coins, Fibulae, and variety of antique instruments, lately
discovered by the workmen in the old washes of this and the next parish; which
prove that the Romans made this their port for exporting the metal, after it
was fused from the ore of the adjacent mountains. Here might be placed a small
garrison to protect the ancient smelters, or to collect the duties, or to
receive the tribute of metal. Previous to the settlement of the Romans in
Britain, Strabo speaks Lib. iv. p. 307.
so slightly of our articles of commerce, as to say, they were not worth the
expense of one legion and a few horse. He died in the year 25, before our
country was scarcely known, except by the attempt of Caesar. But the trade,
both in his days, and those of that great geographer, was carried on merely by
exchange. The Britons worked their own mines of tin and lead; and in their room
received from the foreign merchants, earthen ware, salt, and works of brass
Idem, lib. iii. p. 265.
.

IN a small time after the Romans had carried their arms through our island,
they began to apply with vigor to the working of the mines. At first, the ore
of lead was got with ease: it offered itself on the surface. In Spain and Gaul,
much labor was required to dig it up; in Britain it was found near the common
soil Plinii, Hist. Not. xxxiv. c. 17.
; and in such quantities, that in Pliny's time (who died in the year 79) there
was a law (as there is at present in respect to black lead) limiting the annual
produce Pliny, lib. xxxiv. c. 17.
. Chance was the general detector of metallic riches in early times. The gold
mines of Galicia were discovered by the plough Justin lib. xliv. c. 3.
: those of India by the casting up of hillocks by the pismires Strabo, lib. ii.
p. 121. lib. xv. p. 1028.
: the silver mines of Spain by the casual burning of a wood Diod. Siculus, lib.
v. c. 2.
. Trivial accidents, even to this age, have been the cause of mighty mineral
discoveries. The great mine at Halkin was discovered by ditching: that at
Llangynnog in Montgomeryshire, by the slip of a woman ascending a hill, and
baring the vein with her feet. Many of the works that we suspect to have been
Roman are very shallow; generally in form of trenches, through which they
pursued the veins. They probably were discovered from slight causes. But as ore
grew more scarce, and avarice increased, the pursuit went as deep as the art or
powers of the time would permit. Imus in viscera ejus (Telluris) et in seeds
manium opes quearimus Plinii, lib. xxxiii. Proemium.
. We descend into the very bowels of the earth; and seek riches even in the
seat of departed spirits. The want of gunpowder was a great impediment.
Instead, we find that great fires were used; the rock intensely heated, and
cracks formed in it by the sudden infusion of water; Pliny says of vinegar Lib.
xxxiii. c. 4.
. The wedge or pick-ax Ibid.
was then insinuated into the apertures, and the stone or the ore forced out.
Miners often discover the marks of fire in ancient mines. I am in possession or
a little wedge, five inches and a quarter long, presented to me by Mr. Smedly
of Bagilt Hall, discovered in working the deep fissures of Dalar Goch rock in
the parish of Disert in this county. This little instrument affords a proof of
its antiquity, by being almost entirely incrusted with lead ore. It had
probably lain in the course of some subterraneous stream, which had brought
along with it the leaden particles, and deposited them on the iron.

PICK-AXES of an uncommon bulk, and very clumsy, have been discovered in the
bottom of the mineral trenches. These seem to have been the same with the
Fractaria of the Romans, pick-axes of enormous size, used by the miners in the
gold mines Pliny, lib. xxxiii. c. 4.
of Spain. Buckets of singular construction, and other things of uses unknown
at present, have been found among the ancient mines.

IN many respects the ancient methods of mining were similar to those in
present use. The laborers worked by stems, relieving each other at stated
times. They worked night and day, by the light of lamps. They drove levels, and
sunk shafts, propping up the ground as they went on. They pursued the veins by
forming drifts Ibid.
; and finally, whenever the mines were molested with water, they had pumps,
which flung up the water from the greatest depths they arrived at Diodorus
Siculus, lib. v. c. 2.
.

I HAVE mentioned above, DIVINING ROD
the casual detection of our mineral wealth. It will perhaps amuse the reader,
by informing him, that in this county, within my memory, recourse was had to
the virgula divinatoria, or divining rod; which, by powers sympathetic with the
latent ore, was to save the usual expenses of search, and to point out the very
spot where the treasures lay. A foreign adventurer, half knave half enthusiast,
made the trial; but it proved as unfortunately unsuccessful to himself, as to
his admirers. The instrument of the attempt was no more than a rod forked at
one end, to be cut in a planetary hour on SATURN'S day and hour; because SATURN
is the significator of lead. Jupiter, Venus, Sol, and Mercury, were also
concerned in the time of the operation. Jupiter, or Pars Fortunae, was to be in
Conjunction, Sextile, or Trine to the LORD of the ascendent or second; and the
better, if any reception happen; but BEWARE it be not by Square or Opposition;
for that spoils all Hoosons Miner's Dictionary, article virgula divinatoria.
. Thus cut, it is laid by for use on a heap of wheat or barley; and from the
rod of Moses, was also profanely called the Mosaical rod. This was to be held
by the forks in both hands; and carried over the grounds suspected to contain
the ore. It went unaffected over all the barren spots; but no sooner did it
impend over a vein, than it pressed strongly down, and seemed to feel the same
attraction as is between iron and the magnet. The sensible Agricola speaks of
this practice incidentally; and gives a long account of the process; but places
no kind of faith in it, assuring us, that the skilful miner should follow the
natural signs of the mineral veins, and despise the use of these enchanted
sticks. He traces their origin from imposture. The magicians of Pharaoh made
use of wands in their deception of the serpents: Minerva, by virtue of a wand,
turned the aged Ulysses into a young man; and again to his former state: Circe,
by the magical powers of a rod, changed his companions into beasts: And lastly,
Mercury, by the same means, impelled the watchful to sleep, and the sleepy to
wake Agricola, de Re Metallica, lib. ii. p. 26, 27.
. Let me now return to realities!

THE miners, in the earlier times of the Romans in Britain, seem to have been
the subdued natives. Galgacus encourages his soldiers to conquer or die, by
laying before them the dreadful consequences of a defeat; Tributa et METALLA,
et caeterae servientium panae. Tributes and mines, and all the dire penalties
of slavery. Agricola himself verifies the prophetic spirit of our brave
chieftain, by calling our mines the reward of victory. These were to be worked,
not by the conquerors, but by condemned criminals, by slaves Diodorus Siculus,
lib. v. c. 2. gives a melancholy account of these slaves; whose state can only
be paralleled by the poor Indians in the mines of Potost.
, and Britons newly subjugated. It is probable, that when the island was
entirely settled, this badge of slavery was taken away, and the miners were, as
before the arrival of the Romans, voluntary laborers.

WHEN the ore was got, it was cleansed according to the modern method, and
smelted in a furnace Plinii, lib. xxxiv. c. 16.
, and cast into forms very nearly resembling the common pigs of lead.

OF such, ROMAN PIGS OF LEAD
I have seen three, found in different parts of Britain: the one in Hints,
common, in the manor of Ralph Floyer esquire, in the county of Stafford, in the
year 1771. It was found under ground, at the depth of four feet. Its length is
twenty-two inches and a half; the weight a hundred and fifty-two pounds, about
two pounds heavier than our common pigs of lead. On the upper surface is a rim;
within that, in raised capitals, struck when the metal was hot, is this
inscription: IMP.x.VESP VIIxTxIMPx VxCOS. or Imperatore VESPASIANO Septimum
TITO Imperatore quintum Consule: which answers to the year 75 or 76.

ON one side is the word DECEA, and at a distance the letter G. An ingenious
Anonymous, in the Gentleman's Magazine of 1772, conjectures it to have been a
C, made by the superintendant of the mine, or furnace, to show either that the
pig had paid duty, or was of due weight, or of proper purity. For my part, I am
of opinion, that DECEA had once between it and the G, the letter N; which will
render it DECEANG, or de Ceangis, the place which produced the ore; but by some
accident that letter was defaced, and the G left seemingly unconnected. This
explanation will fling light on certain pieces of lead described by Cambden, to
be taken notice of a few lines lower.

THIS curious antiquity is in the cabinet of Mr. Green, apothecary in
Litchfield; whose collection merits the attention of the inquisitive traveller;
who may be assured of the most liberal reception from the worthy owner.

IN 1731, two pigs of the same kind, and of the same length, were discovered on
Hayshaw moor, in the manor of Dacre, in the west riding of Yorkshire, on the
estate of Sir John Ingleby of Ripley. One is preserved by the family: the other
was presented to the British Museum. These also have an imperial inscription on
the top; Imperatore CAESARE DOMITIANO AUGUSTO Consule Septimum. This was cast
in the year 87, and under the same regulation, The other pig, which I saw at
Ripley Hall, has the same inscription; and on one side the word Brig,
signifying that it came from the country of the Brigantes Vide tab. IX.
.

IN the time of Cambden, twenty pieces of lead, similar to the above, were
found near Halton in Cheshire; some inscribed, IMP. DOMIT. AUG. C. DE CEANG.;
others, IMP. VESP. VII. T. IMP. V. COSS. These have been supposed to
commemorate a victory over the Cangi; but it is evident that they were nothing
more than pigs of lead brought here for use, or for transportation: and I am
farther satisfied, that the ore which produced this lead was dug and smelted,
either in that part of Flintshire anciently called Tegangle, or the summer's
residence of the Cangi, or Ceangi; or from the residence of the same order of
people either in Derbyshire, or some neighboring county. This gives reason to
suspect, that these Cangi, during their long vacant time, might sometimes
engage in mineral concerns; and then the ore, when smelted, might receive the
mark of the people from whom it was received. The pig of lead in Mr. Green's
cabinet, certainly came from the Cangi of Derbyshire.

FROM the regulation mentioned by Pliny, and all these imperial inscriptions,
it is clear, that the public took the mineral concerns into its own hands; and
had their stamp-masters in proper places. I cannot pretend to fix the period of
the first establishment. If the inscription to Claudius Cambden, I. 83.
Horsely, 328.
, on a mass of lead found in Henry VIII.'s time, near Wokey Hole in
Somersetshire, be of the same kind with the former, it must have been within
the year 49, the time of his ninth tribuneship.

THE Romans found such plenty of silver in the Spanish mines, that for some
time they never thought it worth their labor to extract it from lead Strabo,
lib. iii. p. 221.
. In later times, they discovered an ore that contained silver, tin, and lead;
and these three metals were smelted from it. It appears, that the first product
was the tin; the second, the silver; and what Pliny calls Galaena, which was
left behind in the furnace, and seems to be the same with our litharge, and
being melted again, became lead, or, as the ancients called it (to distinguish
it from white lead or tin) black lead Plinii, lib. xxxiv. c. 16.
.

THE British name of lead is lost. The only word we have to express an ore is
mwyn; but the species is expressed by an adjunct, as mwyn aur, gold, mwyn plwm,
lead ore; both which were probably derived from the Latin. The Romans made use
of the word metallum to express ore, as well as the metal fused from it: the
word minera is a word of a barbarous age, and probably derived from our mwyn.

I SHALL finish this account of the Roman state of the lead concerns, with
observing, that they appeared to have been well versed in metallurgy, and to
have had their smelting-houses. The ruder Britons, before their conquest by the
Romans, had a very simple process. They placed the ore in a hole in the ground,
and mixed it with wood; which being fired, proved sufficient to melt the lead
out of the soft and kindly ores of this country; a small gutter communicated
with a second hole, into which the metal ran from the first. These artless
slag-hearths are very frequent in our county, discovered by the quantity of
scoria mixed with charcoal. Some of our modern smelters have endeavored to
extract the remaining part of the metal from these slags, but in vain; the
ancient smelters having so effectually done their business, as not to have left
behind sufficient to pay the expenses of a second operation: the most that
could be procured from a ton of slags, amounting only to about a hundred and
fifty pounds weight.

I CANNOT tell what use the Britons made of the metal, excepting as an article
of commerce. I must not dare to assent to the tale of the venerable Bede Lib.
i. c. 2. p. 42.
, who says, that the stakes driven into the Thames, to obstruct the passage of
Caesar, were wrapped round with lead. The project was useless, This expedient
of the Britons was temporary; the stakes did not require such a covering to
preserve them; and the metal of lead was surely very improper to point them
with.

I am of opinion, that there had been in our country a succession of founderies
of lead, from the time of the Romans to the present, at every period in which
the civil commotions would permit them to be carried on. The Saxons worked the
British mines as well as the Romans, and made frequent use of the lead in all
works of ecclesiastial magnificence. The cathedral of Lindisfarn Bid Hist,
lib, iii. c. 25. p. 131.
was roofed with lead by its bishop Eadberct, about the year 652; that of York
was covered with the same metal by its great prelate Wilfrid Eddii vit.
Wilfridi, in Gale iii. 59.
, in 669; and after that, Egelric, who was elected abbot of Crowland in 975,
roofed the infirmary and chapel of that famous abbey in a similar manner
Ingulphi Hist. apud Cambden. Script, post. Bedem. 888.
. I mention these circumstances merely to show, that the Saxons continued the
business of smelting in the different parts of our island. We are assured that
there have been, at different times, smelting-works for a century or two past
in the parishes of Flint and Hawarden; and at present there is one in use in
each of them.

I shall take this opportunity of mentioning incidentally the other minerals of
Greet Britain, taken notice of by the ancients, either as articles of trade or
matters of curiosity.

TIN was aot only the first metal in these islands which we read of; TIN
but also the greatest object of commerce; and which originally led to the
discovery of Great Britain by the Romans. The mercantile Phoenicians traded to
the Silley islands, the Cassiterides, or land of tin, from the port of Cadiz,
four hundred years before CHRIST. The Romans, for a considerable space, could
not discover the place from whence the former procured the precious, metal.
They attempted to detect the trade, by following the course of a Phoenician
vessel; but the master, faithful to the interest of his country, voluntarily
run his ship ashore in another, place; preferring the loss of all, rather than
suffer a foreign nation to become partakers of so profitable a secret. The
public immediately compensated his loss out of its treasury. This did but make
the Romans more eager after the discovery; and after many trials, succeeded.
Publius Crassus (father of Marcus Crassus the Triumvir) who was praetor, and
governed Spain for several years, landed in the Cassiterides, and found the
report of their riches verified Strabo, lib. iii. p. 265. to 309
.

As soon as the Romans made a conquest of the country, they formed in the tin
province camps and roads, still visible; and left behind vases, urns,
sepulchers, and money, that exhibit daily proofs of their having been a
stationary people in those parts Borlase, Antiq. Cornwall. p. 278.
; and that Dunmonium extended even to the Belerian promontory, or the
Land's-end; and was not, as some writers imagine, limited by the western parts
of Somersetshire.

IT is not to be imagined, that they could neglect a corner of our island,
productive of a metal so useful in mechanics as tin, and which it yielded in
such plenty, as to receive from that circumstance the name. So great was the
intercourse that foreign nations had with the inhabitants bordering on
Belerium, as to give them a greater scavoir vivre, and more extensive
hospitality, than was to be found in other parts of the island. They were
equally expert in working the mines, and preparing the ore, which lay in earthy
veins within the rocky strata. They melted and purified it, then cast it into
rows of cubes, and carried it to Ictis, the modern Isle of Wight: from thence
it was transported into Gaul; conveyed from the place, it was landed at, on
horses backs, a journey of thirty days, to the mouth of the Rhone, and then to
the Massylians, and the town of Narbon Diodorus Siculas, Ed. Wechel, 1604. pp.
209, 218.
.

WITH tin the Romans made mirrors; lined their vessels of brass to prevent its
deadly effects Plinii, lib. xxxiv. c. 17.
; made pewter, and from that a variety of domestic vessels; and, by the
combination of other metals, formed a substance that mimicked silver Ibid.
: so that a country, abundant in so useful an ore, would never be neglected by
these wise people.

DID not Caesar and Strabo agree in their account, COPPER
I should never have believed it was possible that the Britons could have
neglected their rich mines of copper, and have been obliged at first to have
imported that metal. Perhaps the ore was less accessible, and the art of fusion
unknown; for islands, from their very situation, must remain longer ignorant of
arts than continents; especially ours, which lay far to the west of the origin
of all science.

STRABO says, that they imported works of brass; but it is as certain, that
they afterward did themselves fabricate that metal into instruments. The
Celts, a British instrument, was made in this island. Numbers have been found
in Yorkshire and in Essex Borlase, Antiq. 265, 266.
, together with cinders, and lumps of melted metal; which evince the place of a
forge. We cannot ascertain the period when the Britons had the art of adding
the mixture of lead Plinii, lib. xxxiv. c. 9.
that is found combined with them; or whether they learned it from their
conquerors, who were fully possessed of the art of fusing this, as well as
other metals, is unknown. The Romans had their founderies of copper in our
island; and cast the metal into regular forms. A mass was found at Caer hn, the
ancient Conarium, four miles above Conway, which probably was smelted from the
ore of the Snowdon hills; where of late years much has been got. This mass is
in shape of a cake of beeswax; and on the upper part is a deep concave
impression, with the words SOCIO ROMAE; across these is impressed obliquely, in
lesser letters, Natsol. I cannot explain it, unless Not. stands for natio, the
people who paid this species of tribute; and sol. for solvit, that being the
stamp-master's mark. These cakes might be bought up by a merchant resident in
Britain, and consigned SOCIO ROMAE, to his partner at Rome. The weight of this
antiquity is forty-two pounds; the diameter of the upper part eleven inches;
the thickness in the middle two and three quarters Tab. ix. This curious
antiquity is preserved at Mostyn.
.

CALAMINE, CALAMINE.
the Cadmia of Pliny Lib. xxxiv. c. 10.
, and the stone- Cadmia of Strabo Lib, iii. 248.
, abounds in the mineral parts of this island. The Romans knew its uses in
making of brass; therefore cannot be supposed to have overlooked so necessary
an ingredient. The remains of the brass-founderies, discovered in our kingdom,
show, that they were acquainted with it. The knowledge of this mineral in
after-ages was long lost. Before the reign of Elizabeth, much was imported from
Sweden; but at that period it was discovered again in the Mendip hills; and,
fortunately, at the same time that the working of the copper mines in those of
Cumberland. was renewed. Our county abounds with it; but, till within these
sixty years, we were so ignorant of its value, as to mend our roads with it.

CAESAR and Strabo Caesar. Com. Strabo, lib. iv. p. 305.
allow that we had iron. IRON.
The first says that it was rare; far bits of it passed for money by weight. In
Strabo's days it was found in greater plenty; for he mentions it among the
articles of exportation. Immense beds of iron-cinders are to this day found in
the forest of Dean, the relics of the Romans; others in Monmouthshire;
another was discovered near Miskin, the seat of William Basset, Esquire beneath
which were found a coin of Antoninus Pius, and a piece of earthen ware
Archaelog. ii. 14.
; and finally, others in Yorkshire Yarranton's Improvements, 57. Leland, Itin.
i. 144. vi. 102. Cambden, ii. 722.
, also accompanied with coins: all which evince the frequency of
iron-founderies during the period of the Roman reign in Britain. These cinders
are not half exhausted of their metal; for the Romans knew only the weak powers
of the foot-blast. They are now worked over again, and are found to yield a
more kindly metal than what is produced from the ore. These beds are supposed
to be almost inexhaustible; a proof of the vast founderies of early times.

GOLD and silver are enumerated Strabo, lib. iv. p. 305.
among the products of Great Britain. GOLD
The Romans were acquainted with this; and our precious metals proved another
incentive to their ambition to effect our conquest. Agricola, in his oration to
his soldiers before the battle of the Grampian mountain, excites them to
victory, by reminding them of our riches, the reward or valor. Fert BRITANNIA,
aurum et argentum, et alia metalla pretium victoriae Vita Agr.
.

THESE metals have, in later times, been got in quantities sufficient to prove,
that they might, in earlier time, be an object worthy of conquest. In the
reigns of James IV. and V. vast wealth was procured in the Lead Hills, from the
gold collected from the sand washed from the mountain. In the reign of the
latter, not less than three hundred thousand pounds Sterling. In another place,
a piece of thirty ounces weight was found. Much was also obtained in the time
of the Regent Morton Tour in Scotland, ii. 130. iii, 414.
. The search is now given over; but still bits are found accidentally. Lord
Hopton, owner of the Lead Hills, is in possession of one that weighs an ounce
and a half.

GOLD is to this day found in Cornwall, mixed with tin and other substances
Borlase. Not. Hist. Cornwall, 213, 214.
. The largest piece that has been yet discovered, is equal in weight to three
guineas. It is probable that it was the Cornish gold which proved the lure to
the Romans; for it was impossible they or the Phoenicians could be ignorant of
it, who had such long commerce with the country, and who were acquainted with
the manner of obtaining it in other places. Pliny, speaking of tin, says, that
there is found in the gold mines of Spain and Portugal, a sort called Elutia,
(which a Cornish man would call stream tin) being washed from the vein by
water, and was gathered up in baskets along with the gold Lib. xxxiv. c. 16. To
prevent antiquaries being further misled about the Ampthill gold mine, I must
inform them, that it proved only a bed of mica curea; or, to speak like a
punster, turned out nothing but tal^.
.

STRABO and Tacitus agree, SILVER.
that we had mines of silver. In the reigns of Edward I. and III. there were
very considerable works at Combmartin in Devonshire Camb^en, i. 47.
: three hundred and thirty-seven miners, sent for out of Derbyshire, were
employed in them; and the produce was so great as to assist Edward the third to
carry on the war with France. In the beginning of this century, much native
silver was found on the estate of Sir John Erskine, in the county of Stirling;
but the vein was soon exhausted.

THE BRITONS were acquainted with the uses of gold and the art of coining
before the arrival of the Romans; witness the golden sickles of the Druids, the
coins found at Carnbre in Cornwall, and the coins of Cassivelaunus. They made
use of different sorts of metals; but mostly of gold, being the easiest fused,
and most capable of an impression. Doctor Borlase has preserved a series of
these very early coins, from the rudest and most unintelligible impressions, to
the period when the Britons made an attempt to form a face on their coins. All
these are unlettered; a proof of their antiquity, and of their having been
struck before their intercourse with the Romans. The first we know of, which is
inscribed, is that of Cassrvelaunus, cotemporary with Caesar. The next is of
Cunobeline, who had even been at Rome. As soon as the Britons became acquainted
with the Romans, they made an essay to imitate their manner of coining; they
put letters on them, elephants, and gryphons; things they were before
unacquainted with. They were not suffered to make any progress in the art; for
as soon as their conquest was effected, their coin was suppressed. The learned
have endeavored to trace these ancient moneys from the Phoenicians; but the
comparison would not hold. The Gauls alone had some pieces similar: nor is this
to be wondered at, since they and the Britons had a common origin, were
neighbors, and might as well agree in the few arts they had, as in religion and
language Borlase's Antiq. Cornwall, 242. tab. xix. tab. lxxxv.
.

I NOW return to the subjects which occassioned this digression; and to give
some account of the various antique instruments and coins found near Flint; and
accompany the same by the more expressive description, a print.

No 1. tab. viii. is a rich ornament of gold, in form of a button with a shank.
It is composed elegantly with twisted wire, and studded with little globular
bits of solid gold. This seems to have belonged to the bracelet or necklace (it
is uncertain which), whose fragment is represented at No 2. This is also
composed of gold links, with round beads of a rich blue glass placed between
every second link. Something similar to this is preserved by count Caylus,
which is entire, and appears to have been a necklace Tom. iii. 312.
.

No 3. is a cylindric fragment of glass, probably part of some ornament, being
of a rich blue color, and perforated as if it was designed to be strung. With
it was found a thick piece of seagreen glass, part of a vase. Glass was among
the earlier imports into Britain Strabo, 305.
, when the wild natives were as much captivated with toys as the Indians of
new-discovered countries are at present. At first they received these, and all
their other vitreous commodities, by means of the Phaenicians, whose capital,
Tire, was pre-eminent in that manufacture. The glain nadroedd, or snake-gems,
were at first obtained by way of exchange for the British exports. They were
originally made by the Britons of stone. I have such a one in my cabinet. I
have seen another in possession of the Reverend Mr. Hugh Davies, found in
Anglesea. The traders soon learned to imitate what was prized so high in our
island, in a more elegant material; and imported them as a most captivating
article of commerce; in the same manner as circum navigators often mimic, in
shewy brass, the utensils and weapons of Indian nations, in order to engage
their friendship.

No 4. is a small brazen head, with the back part affixed to iron. Perhaps this
was one of the Sigillaria, or little images sold at the fairs, and presented
usually to children Non cognoscis me? ego sum Policio, cui solebas sigillaria
afferre. SENICA, Epist. 12.
: and the fairs where these toys were sold went by the same name. A learned
friend also supposes these to be miniature likenesses, which friends presented
to each other as memorials.

No 5. is a Stylus, or instrument for writing on the ceratae tabellae, or waxen
tablets; which were made of thin leaves of lead, brass, or ivory, and covered
with a thin coat of wax. The pen, if I may call it so, was usually of brass;
one end pointed, in order to write; the other flatted, in order to efface what
was wrong, by smoothing or closing the wax. Horace gives every writer most
excellent advice, in alluding to this practice:

Saepe Stylum vertas, iterum quae digna legi sint,
Scripturns.
Often turn your style, when you intend to write
Things worthy to be read.
No; 6. is an instrument of very singular use: a narrow species of spoon,
destined to collect, at funerals, the tears of the relations of the deceased,
in order to deposit them in the little phials which were placed with the ashes
in the urn, memorials of their grief. Such are very frequently found: but the
custom is far higher than that of classical antiquity; for the PSALMIST, in
expressing his sorrows, alludes to it; THOU tellest my flittings; put my tears
into thy bottle.

No 7. is an instrument seemingly designed for the purpose of dressing the
wicks of lamps.

No 8. may possibly be destined for the same uses.

No 9. is a brazen bodkin.

No 10. is a fibula or brotche, gilt, and enameled with deep blue in front.

No 11. is a brotche, not unlike some used at present by the common
Highlanders; whose dress, in its genuine simplicity, seems to have been
borrowed from the Romans.

No 12. is also a species of button; but differs from the modern (as do all I
have seen) by having no shank: instead, was a tongue, similar to those of the
common fibulae. The front of this is enameled with deep blue.

No 13. is another, of a very different form. This has also lost its fibulae;
but the defect is very apparent.

No 14. is a forceps; an instrument much in vogue among the Romans, for
extirpating hairs. This was used for the same purpose as the Turkish fair do
the Rusma. The pincers here engraven are of great size and strength; perhaps
used by some robust coxcomb, such as Persius rallies so severely, in his fourth
satire, for his unbecoming effeminacy.

No 15. 15. seem to have been instruments of sacrifice. One end of each is
round, and of the form of an olive; and was intended for the use of the
aruspices, to insinuate under the entrails of the victim, and to lift them up
for the better inspection of the parts. The other extremity of the longer is
formed into a spoon, for the purpose of putting the frankincense into the
censer.

ACCORDING to the uncertainty that reigns respecting the uses of the ancient
instruments, I may hazard another conjecture, that they have been chirurgical
instruments. The rounded ends were the probes; the hollow end of the longer,
the spoon by which the balm was poured into the wound. The metal of which these
instruments were made, proves, as count Caylus remarks Recueil d'Antiquitez,
iv. 169.
,



that the Romans had no apprehensions of its dangerous qualities. It is
probable, that they had the art of tempering the metal so as to prevent the
noxious effects.

No 16. is a brass nail^. Antiquaries may rejoice that the Romans preferred
this metal to mouldering iron, which has preserved to them many a delicious
morsel.

No 17. tab. ix. is one of those Bullae, or amulets, called Ithyphallus, in
form of a heart, with a figure (in which decency was little consulted) on the
upper part. These were suspended from the necks of children, and originally
designed to preserve them from the effects of envy; afterward from all kinds
of evil Pueris turpicula res in collo quaedam suspenditur, ne quid obsit bonae
scaevae causa. VARRO de Ling. Lat. vi.
. I cannot help thinking, that the good nurses had another view, that of
attracting (in years of maturity) the affections of the fair toward their
little favorite.

Hunc optent generum Rex et Regina; puell^e
Hunc rapiant. Quicquid calcaverit hic, Rosa fiat.
Wherever he treads let there rise up a rose,
And the ladies die for him wherever he goes.
For it is well known, the obscene god, in all times, had his votaries among
both sexes.

THESE amulets also represented the god Fascinus, synonymous with that Deity.
Pliny Lib. xxviii, c. 4.
relates, that he was not only the guardian of infants, but of the emperors
themselves; that the very vestals worshipped him; and the victors placed him
(the physician of Envy) beneath their triumphal cars.

No 18. is a locket with a hole at one end, in order to suspend it round the
neck, or fasten it to the wrist. This, perhaps, was designed to hold a charm;
and the holes on one side intended that the contents should transpire, and
reach the object of fascination; whether of love; whether of ambition.

No 19. a key; which gives one no very high idea of the elegance of the Roman
locksmiths.

No 20. is one of a nicer form, and which served both for a ring and key. It
possibly was designed for the cabinet of a Roman lady or some Bellus homo.

No 21. two rings; one of brass, the other of silver wire.

No 22. a brazen weight belonging to a mason's levelling-instrument, answerable
to a modern plummet.

No 23. another of lead, belonging to a fishing-net.

No 24. the tongue of an ordinary fibula.

THESE are the subjects I thought most worthy of engraving: but there were
multitudes of other things found in the same place; but almost all of them so
mutilated or injured by time, as to be rendered quite unintelligible.



ON leaving Flint, FINE PROSPECT.
I took the road to Halkin; and immediately on quitting the town, began to
ascend the steep slope of the county, fertile, and enclosed to the very edge of
the mountain, which was parallel with the shore. The prospect improves the
whole way; and from the heights expands to the north-east and south, into an
almost boundless one. The estuary of the Dee appears beneath, with the city of
Chester at its extremity. The peninsula of Wiral, a naked contrast to our
country, limits the eastern side of our sea; and the western of the Mersey,
rich in the commerce of Leverpool; beyond which stretches the great county of
Lancashire, varying with plains and hills. The mountains of Yorkshire and
Derbyshire unite to bound the VALE ROYAL of England; and the rich and wooded
tract about Northop and Hawarden, with its neighboring mountains, bring relief
to the eye, tired with the contemplation of the far remote views.

THIS is but part of the magnificent terras formed by the public road, that is
continued from Hawarden to Clynnog in Caernarvonshire, varying continually with
matchless changes of scenery.

THE first place of any note which occurs in the parish of Halkin, HALKIN.
is a hamlet of a number of houses, called the Pen-tre, or hamlet; a name in
Wales common to all such assemblages of dwellings, where there is no church; to
distinguish it from Llan, where the place of devotion stands. This took its
rise in the present century, and was much increased by the concourse of miners,
on the discovery of a rich vein in the adjacent fields.

ALMOST contiguous, lies Halkin mountain; a vast tract, in the parish of the
same name, and in those of Northop, Skeiviog, and Holywell.

THE surface is common: the mineral the property of Lord Grosvenour, by virtue
of a grant, made in 1634, to his ancestor, Sir Richard Grosvenour knight, by
Charles I. of all the mines of lead or rakes of lead, within the hundreds of
Coleshill and Rudland Harleian MSS. No 2002. 9.
. These tracts were before set on leases for a certain term of years. Thus
James I. grants that term to Richard Gwynne, on payment of the annual
acknowlegement of sixty-six shillings and eight pence; and a new one was
granted in 1629, by a warrant from lord treasurer Weston, to Richard Grosvenour
Esquire Roger Grosvenour his son, and Mr. Thomas Gamul, for their joint lives,
paying the usual rent, and a fine of ten pounds Ibid.
.

I APPREHEND that this grant, and another similar, of the minerals in
Bromefield and Yale, made to the same gentleman, are the first alienations of
this nature from the crown; which, for many centuries after the Conquest,
assumed the entire claim of all mines and minerals, by virtue of the royal
prerogative. Sir John Pettus Fodinae Regales, from p, 11. to 19.
has preserved a series of grants, from the reign of Edward I. to that of Henry
VII. in which they empower different persons to scarch for ore. Some of them
are confined to particular counties, others to the kingdom in general: and the
only prohibition is that of working beneath castles or houses; in gardens or
meadows; the owners of which were to be indemnified in all damages they might
sustain. Richard II. is the first prince who makes a general allowance. In his
letters patent to Richard Wake, clerk, for searching for mines of gold and
silver in the county of Devon for ten years, the adventurer had power to dig
(paying damage to the owner of the ground) as well within liberties as without;
and to pay one-tenth of the profit to the Holy Church, and a ninth into the
exchequer.

THIS is not the first instance of the application of the tithe of ore to
religious uses: Edward I. directs the same proportion to be paid to the
parochial churches in Wales, out of the neighboring mines Rotull Wallia ( Sir
Joseph Ayloff's) 75.
. The abbey of Basingwork had also a revenue arising from the same source
Tanner's Notit. Monast. 711.
.

I CANNOT find that the owner of the ground, in case the mine was discovered in
private property, was permitted to have any share of the profit, till the fifth
of Henry VI. (1426); when the duke of Bedford, regent of France, received a ten
years leaf of all the mines of gold and silver in the kingdom of England,
paying to Holy Church a tenth, to the king a fifteenth, and to the lord of the
soil the twentieth part. This allotment, though final, is a proof of the
justice and moderation that guided the actions of the protector of Henry's
infant years.

THESE regal grants were for every species of metal, excepting iron; for gold
and silver, copper, tin and lead, and all other metals containing gold and
silver. These two were the great object; yet the grants do not preclude the
royal clame to the baser kinds.

DURING this reign, the art of refining, or the separation of metals from the
ore, was made the ground of an imposture common enough in after times. There
are not fewer than four instances of persons undertaking the transmutation of
the baser metals into pure gold and silver; each of whom received the royal
protection Rymer's Foedera, xi 68. 128. 240. 309. Henry IV. had passed an act,
that none shall use to multiply gold or silver, nor use the craft of
multiplication; and if any the same do, that he incur penalty of felony. This
was aimed at persons, who, under pretense of transmutation, counterfeited the
nobler metals. But afterward it was found a check on the metallurgic art; as
it extended even to the punishment of any ingenious refiner, who had discovered
the method of getting more gold and silver out of the baser kinds than was
known before, which occasioned the repeal of the act, in the first year of
William and Mary, c. 30.
, to prevent them from being interrupted in their operations: for certain
malevolent people supposed they used unlawful arts, i. e. the art magic. In a
supersticious age, this suspicion might have proved fatal to the projectors;
who wisely assumed the most religious term for their mystery, to obviate the
malice of their enemies. The metals were not to be transmuted, but
transubstantiated Ibid.
; for they had great reason to imagine, that the believers of the word in the
religious sense, would hardly contradict the feasibility of the project in the
temporal meaning. Besides, they were to act under the guise of piety; for the
adept

must be bomo frugi;
A pious, holy, and religious man,
One free from mortal sin, a very virgin Ben Jonson's Alchemist.
.
We hear nothing of the event of these undertakings; but imagine they ended
like all others of that nature. The bubble did not die with this weak prince;
for in 1476, we find that Edward IV. gave the same encouragement to one David
Beaupe and John Merchant, to have for four years facultatem et scientiam
philosophiae artificialem naturalem generationis a mercurio in aurum faciendo,
et simili modo a mercurio in argentum: the liberty of changing mercury into
gold and silver Rymer, xii. 28.
. We hear no more of these impostures till the reigns of Elizabeth and James I.
when they were most successfully revived Vide Life of Doctor Dee, Ben Jonson's
Alchemist, etc.
.

EDWARD continued the mineral grants to several great men; among others to the
earl of Warwick, the earl of Northumberland, and his brother Richard earl of
Gloucester. The farm was now increased; they were to pay the king an eighth neat
profit, the lord of the soil the ninth, and the curate of the place the tenth.

IN the short and turbulent reign of Richard III. no attention was paid to
concerns of this kind; but his successor, Henry VII. in his very first year,
discovered his ruling passion, avarice, by immediately appointing Jasper duke
of Bedford, and several other persons of distinction, to be governors of all
his mines in England and in Wales, paying to the king the fifteenth Moses
Stringer, author of Opera Mineralia explicata, calls it the fifth, which suits
better the character of that monarch.
of the pure gold and silver, and to the lord of the soil the eleventh, as it
grows.

ELIZABETH was the first of our princes who laid the foundation for our mineral
success, and for all the vast manufactures that arose in consequence. I read,
that in 1452, Henry VI. Rymer, xi. 317.
, (possibly on discovery of the imposture of metallic transmutations) had sent
for, out of Hungary, Austria, and Bohemia, three experienced miners, and thirty
assistants, to work his mines; so unskilled were the English at that time. The
civil wars, which broke out immediately after, frustrated this wise measure.
Elizabeth resumed it, being too quick-sighted not to see into the defects and
wants of her kingdom. She not only adopted it, but improved on the plan. Our
knowledge of minerals was almost extinguished, and of course the manufactures
which depended on them. We imported our swords, our knives, stirrups, bits, and
even our pins, out of Germany, through the channel of the Netherlands. Our
works of brass, and even our wire, excepting a small quantity which was worked
by hand, were of foreign fabric. The first step taken by this politic
princess, was to forbid the importation of these and several other articles,
from parts beyond sea Statute 5th Elizabeth, c. 7.
: the next, was to invite into her kingdom foreign miners, foreign smelters,
and foreign artificers of metallic productions.

SHE next formed a corporation, under the title of THE SOCIETY FOR THE MINES
ROYAL. The first governor was William earl of Pembroke: several men of rank
were joined in the commission as assistants, and several citizens, and some
foreigners of known experience in these matters. She likewise framed the same
members into another corporation, which naturally depended on the former, viz.
the SOCIETY FOR THE MINERALS AND BATTERY WORKS. These corporations were founded
on May the 28th 1567.

SOME progress had been made, a few years before, for the procuring materials
for these new manufactures; for in 1563, she had granted the mines of eight
counties, besides those in Wales, to Daniel Houghsetter: in 1564, she made
another grant to Cornelius Devosse; and a third in the same year, more
comprehensive than all, to Christopher Shutz, of all mines, minerals, and
subterraneous treasures, (except copperas and alum) which shall be found in
all other parts of England (not mentioned in the former patent) or within the
English pale in Ireland, by the name of gold, silver, copper, tin, lead,
quicksilver, cadmian ore, or lapis calaminaris; and all manner of ewres or
oars, simple or pure, mixed or compounded for latten wire or steel, etc. To
each of these patentees an Englishman was joined.

IT is worth observing, that the crown, in most of these grants, lays absolute
clame to all mines whatsoever, under a notion that they are royal mines; yet
the prerogative could only be entitled to such which yielded gold and silver.
The origin of this pretense arose from the king's right of coinage, in order
that he might have the requisite materials; which would have confined him to
the two noble metals. But until the happy period arrived when our constitution
was established, and the royal and the private property justly distinguished,
the subject was too weak to assert his rightful clame. ELIZABETH herself was
too fond of the darling prerogative (even with all her boasted love to her
people) to resign this part. Her patent to William Humfrey and Christopher
Shutz is worded in the most unlimited manner; for it not only gave them power
to sink shafts wheresoever they pleased (gardens, etc. excepted), but to build
houses requisite to carry on the works, not only upon the royal demesnes, but
in the grounds of any of her subjects. The spirited Percies, in the person of
Thomas earl of Northumberland, first withstood this invasion of his right. He
contested with the crown the title to the copper mines in his manor of Keswick;
but the lawyers decided against him, alleging, that although the crown had a
power to grant away its manors, it had not the power to alienate the mineral,
being perfectly linked to the prerogative of the crown.

BUT, as usual, the gentlemen of the long robe had two opinions respecting this
point: some asserting, that if any gold or silver was found in the mines of
baser metal, the whole would belong to the king; which, in fact, was bestowing
all the mineral property on the crown, there being scarcely any base metal but
what holds some particles of the nobler: others again, in a future reign,
qualified this by saying, That although the gold or silver contained in the
base metal of a mine, in the hands of a subject, be of less value than the base
metal, yet if the gold or silver do countervail the charge of resining it, or
be of more worth than the base metal spent in resining it, THIS IS A ROYAL
MINE; and as well the base metal as the gold and silver in it, belong to the
prerogative of the crown This opinion was given in 1640, 1641, and subscribed
by Maynard, Glaw ville, and others, the first ^^vers of the time.
.

SUCH was the state of the royal clame; so discouraging to the industry of the
subject, till the great event of the REVOLUTION, when the crown, in the first
year of William and Mary, fully gave up all pretensions to the mines of copper,
tin, iron, and lead, notwithstanding gold or silver may be extracted from them
in any quantities. By a following act, this right was again confirmed; only the
crown reserved to itself a power of purchasing, within thirty days after
raising, all ores made merchantable, at the following rates: copper at 16 l.
per ton, tin at 40 l. lead at 9 l.; and in default of such payment, the owners
were at liberty to dispose of their ore as they pleased. Thus, as Mr. BLACKSTON
COMMENTARIES, 4 to, i. 294.
observes, the private owners were not discouraged from working mines, through
a fear that they may be clamed as royal; neither does the king depart from the
just rights of his revenue, since he may have all the precious metal contained
in the ore, paying no more for it than the value of the base metal is supposed
to be; to which base metal the land-owner is by reason and law entitled.

SOME account of the ores and fossils of the mineral tract, which gave rise to
this digression, will be given when I cross it again in the course of my
journey.

FROM Pentre Halkin, I pursued my journey along the Chester road: and pass by
the Llan. The church is dedicated to St. Mary; is a neat small edifice, lately
rebuilt, partly by a brief, partly by subscription. It stood on the site of a
church, mentioned in Doomsday book. At the Conquest, this tract bore the name
of Alchene, from which the present name is taken. Brunford, a township now in
the parish of Holywell, and a place called Inglecroft, at that time were joined
to it. Doomsday book says, that here was a church and a presbyter, and three
boors; a mill of five shillings annual value; and a wood half a league long,
and forty perches broad; the whole valued at ten shillings.

THE old British name of this place (still retained by the Welsh) is Lugan,
from a saint, known, I believe, only in the Welsh calendar.

ABOUT two or three miles farther, in a woody morass on the left hand, are the
foundations of an ancient pile, called Llys Edwin, or Llys Llan Eurgain,
originally the seat of Edwin ap Gronw, lord of Tegangle, about the year 1041.
It continued in the family till the death of a descendant of his, Howel
Gwynedd, who lost his life in the cause of Glendwr; when his forfeited estates
were bestowed by Henry IV. on one Bryan Saxton. His posterity possessed them
till the 17th of Henry VI. who granted them to Sir John Stanley, groom of the
bedchamber History of the house of Starley, 28.
. They afterward became the property of a younger branch of the Stanleys, and
remained in their possession in the last century. I find a Sir Edward Stanley
of Flint Collins's Peerage, ii. 453.
, married to a daughter of George lord Stanley, about the latter end of the
reign of Henry VII. who probably was owner of this place.

I MUST not pass unnoticed a strong British post, which soars above the road,
MOEL Y GAER.
about two miles to the right. It lies on the summit of a hill, and is
surrounded with a great fosse and dike of a circular form, with an entrance as
usual to such places; and a small artificial mount within the precinct; a
tribunal cespititium, from whence our ancient heroes might deliver their araith
or allocutio, to animate their followers against the invading strangers. This
post is called Moel y Gaer, or the hill of the fortress; a name common to
several others of similar use. This seems to have been an out post of the
Ordovices, in order to defend their country against the Roman invaders. We
shall, toward the end of the volume, have occasion to mention the chain of
posts along the Clwydian hills, from that next to the sea, to remote and
internal parts. Our ancestry disputed the possession of their country by
inches. Here they lodged their wives and children; to these places they drove
their cattle out of the low country: they established in each numerous
garrisons ready to sally forth and repel the foe; or to defend all that was
dear to them, should the invaders be hardy enough to attack them in their
intrenchments.

IN later times, this spot proved fatal to a valiant partizan of Owen Glendwr.
Howel Gwynedd (whom we lately mentioned) was surprised in a negligent hour,
within this post, and there beheaded.

NORTHOP, NORTHOP
a little town, lies next on the road. It bears the addition of North, to
distinguish it from the other. Hope. The British name is Llan Eurgain, from St.
Eurgen, daughter of Malgwyn Gwynedd, ap Caswallon Law-hir, ap Enion Yrth, ap
Cunedda Wledic, etc. who died in 586.

THE church is dedicated to St. Peter. The body is long and embattled: the
tower lofty and handsome. Within are three effigiated tombs; one of a fat
knight, whose name is lost, and figure much injured by time. Another of a short
warrior, completely armed, and in good preservation: on his shield is a cross
pattee, charged in the middle with a mullet between four others. The
inscription is thus, Hic jacet Ith. Vach. ap Bledd Vach. I suspect him to have
been a captain of Inglefield, mentioned in the pedigree of the Humphreyses of
Bodlwyddan, and said to have been interred here. The third is of a lady,
inscribed Llewc * * * *, and anno domini 1402. According to tradition, her name
was Lleuci Llwyd, a celebrated beauty of that period; perhaps the same who was
beloved by a noted bard, who coming to visit her after long absence, met with
the same shock as the Chevalier de Rance did; for each found their beloved in
her coffin. The bard fainted at the sight, revived, and composed an elegy on
her. The Chevalier retired from the world, and founded the abbey of La Trappe,
famous for its religious austerities.

BETWEEN the eighth and ninth stone, EULO CATSLE.
about a quarter of a mile out of the Chester road, are the ruins of Eulo
castle, placed on the edge of a deep wooded dingle. It is a small fortress,
consisting of two parts: an oblong tower, rounded at the side, and guarded on
the accessible places by a strong wall at some distance from it: an oblong
yard, with the remains of a circular tower at its extremity, forms the other
part. The towers are now finely overgrown with ivy, and command the view of
three wooded glens, deep and darksome, forming a most gloomy solitude.

TOMBS AT NORTHOP


IN the woods near this place, called to this day Coed Eulo, part of the flower
of the army detached by Henry II. in 1167, from his camp on Saltney, was
surprised and defeated by David and Conan, BATTLE.
the sons of Owen Gwynedd, sent by their father with a strong party from his
ramp near Basingwerk. They suffered the enemy to march along the streights of
the country, till their forces were entangled in the depth of woods, and the
steeps of the narrow valleys, so frequent in these parts. The attack was
sudden, fierce, and unexpected: the Daughter dreadful; and the pursuit carried
even to Henry's encampment Powel, 207.
. This proved but a prelude to the English of a second defeat. The king, with
an intent to repair the disgrace, marched forward with his whole army; and at
Coleshill, near Flint, BATTLE OF COLESHILL
suffered himself to be engaged in the same difficulties as his detachment
experienced before. His forces were again defeated; and Eustace Fitz John, a
baron first in rank, wealth, and abilities among the English; and Robert de
Courci, another great baron, with numbers of others, were slain. Henry de
Essex, hereditary standard bearer, and a man of approved valor, was seized with
a panic; and flinging down the standard, cried out, that the king was killed
Guil. Neubrig, lib. ii. c. 5. This is the author whom the Welsh call Gwillim
Bach. Brompton, 1048.
! The route would have been general, if the king had not valiantly rallied his
forces, and repulsed the Welsh: but in the end, he thought it prudent to
withdraw his army, and encamp in a secure station. It probably was on the
elevated ground of the township of Colesh^ll, at Gadlys, a name significant of
the circumstance, palatiumcastrense, or the royal headquarters. He afterward
attempted to cut off the retreat of Owen Gwynedd, by marching along the shore,
and getting between him and the mountains; but the wise prince, penetrating
into his views, retired to a plain near St. Asaph, still called CIL-OWEN, or
Owen's retreat; and from thence to a strong post, named Bryn y Pin, defended by
great Tamparts and ditches. This camp lies in the parish of St. George, on a
lofty rock above the church, and is now called Pen y Parc.

BRYN DYCHWELWCH Bryn, a hill; Dychwilweh, return.
, or the eminence on which Owen pronounced the order, RETREAT! by its name
preserves the memory of the circumstance. It lies over Pentre Bagilt, below
Gadlys, and is supposed to have been the spot from which he retired to Cil-Owen.

A CIRCUMSTANCE, consequential of this battle, proves, that the report of
Edgar's having extirpated the race of wolves out of the principality, was
erroneous. A young Welshman, killed in this battle, was discovered eight days
after, attended by his faithful dog, who remained by the corpse the whole time,
without food, and defended it from being the prey of birds and wolves Girald.
Cambr. Itin. lib. ii. c. 10. p. 873.
.

THERE is no sort of tradition about the founder of the castle of Eulo. Whether
it might not have been built by one of the lords of Tegangle, or whether it was
erected by Henry to prevent a similar disaster, by placing a garrison here, I
will pretend not to determine. It has been for centuries in ruins; for Leland
speaks of it as a ruinus castle or pile, belonging to Hoele, a gentleman of
Flyntshire, that by ancient accustume was wont to give the bag of the sylver
harp to the best harpir of North Walys, as by a privelege of his ancestors
Leland Itin. V. 56.
. The antiquary adds, 'that he dwellith at Penrine in Flyntshire.' We know of
no such place in the county; but suspect that the gentleman intended was Thomas
ap Richard ap Howel, lord of Mostyn, in whose family that privilege was long
invested; that gentleman having been cotemporary with Leland.

THE manor of Eulo was in the crown in the 26th of Henry VIII. who granted it
to Peter Stanley esquire, MANOR.
gentleman of his household, with the tolls of the market of Flint Harleian MSS.
No 1968. 10.
In the reign of queen Elizabeth, it was held by Edward Stanley, by payment of
20 l. 10 s. a year The same, No 1970. 7.
. At present it is in possession of John Davies esquire, of Llanerch.

WITHIN this lordship are very considerable potteries of coarse earthen-ware;
POTTERIES.
such as pans, jugs, great pots for butter, plates, dishes, ovens, flower-pots,
etc. There are fourteen works, which make annually between three and four
thousand pounds worth. The ware is mostly exported to Ireland, and the towns on
the Welsh coast; particularly to Swansey. There are besides six other works,
for the making of fire-bricks, few clays being better fitted for the purpose of
resisting the intense heat of the smelting-furnaces. These are made of
different sizes; and some of those which are called bearers weigh two hundred
pounds. Great quantities of tiles for barn-floors, and for rooms, are also made
here; and the annual sale of these two articles amounts to about twelve hundred
pounds.

THIS clay is of a deep ash color; is found in beds of a great thickness; and
is dug up in hard lumps, resembling a shaley rock; after which it is left for a
considerable time exposed to the air, in order to effect its dissolution. The
bricks made with it are set in the lead-furnaces with the unburnt clay, instead
of mortar.

I must not leave the parish of Northop without visiting the maritime parts,
which stretch along the channel of the Dee. We find there the names of certain
townships taken notice of in Doomsday book; Lead-brook, Normanized into
Lathroc, from the Anglo-Saxon, Laed, and Broca either from the quantity of lead
washed out of it, or from the smelting-works established on it. This township,
after the Conquest, was held by Robert of Rudland.

ULFMILTONE was another, now known by the name of Golftyn.

WEPRE, another township, was held by William de Malbedeng, from the church of
Chester. It is twice mentioned in Doomsday book; and is said to have had on it
a wood a league and a half long. In one place mention is made of two villeyns
and two boors: in another, of one villeyn and a radman; and that it had been
possessed by one Ernui, a freeman. Of late years, a very handsome pier has been
built by the river Dee company in this township, jutting into the channel, for
the protection of the ships bound to or from Chester, under which they may take
shelter in bad weather or adverse winds.

FROM hence I ascended to Hawarden, HAWARDEN.
a small town, flourishing under the auspices of its lord, Sir John Glynne
baronet. I shall speak first of the manor and castle. The last forms a most
picturesque object, soaring above the woods. This place, like most others in
our county, bears two names, Pennard halawg, perhaps corrupted from Pen y
Llwch, or the head land above the lake; Saltney, and the other subjacent
marshes having once been covered by the sea. The other name is Saxon, as we
find it written in Doomsday book, Haordine; at which time it was a lordship;
had a church, two Carucae or ploughlands, half of one belonging to the latter;
half an acre of meadow; a wood two leagues long and half a league broad. The
whole was valued at forty shillings; yet on all this were but four villeyns,
six boors, and four slaves: so low was the state of population.

IT is probable, ROMAN
that this place had been a British post, opposed to the country of the
Cornavii, and to the invading Romans. To the west of the church, in a field
adjoining to the road, is a mount called Truman's hill, within a piece of
ground which appears to have been squared, and nicely sloped. This evidently
had been a small camp, whose figure has been much obliterated by the frequency
of agriculture. It stood on the brow of the hill, and commanded a full view of
the country. Another mount, called Conna's. He, is to be seen near Broadlane
house. The Roast, an eminence (overlooking another flat) with fosses, and an
exploratory mount, lying in the parish of Gresford, was another; and at
Caer-Estyn, a fourth. We shall find occasion to speak more of these in the
course of our journey.

THE Saxons possessed themselves of every strong hold which the Britons or the
Romans had deserted. SAXON.
Some they retained, others they neglected, as the policy of the new invaders,
and the necessity of the situation, required. This, before the Conquest, was a
chief manor, and the capital one of the hundred of Atiscross. On the invasion
of William, it was found in the possession of the gallant Edwin, and probably
was one of the places of his residence. It was a cover to his Mercian dominions
against the Britons, the natural and inveterate enemies of the Saxon race.

ON the Conquest, NORMAN.
it was comprehended in the vast grant made to Hugh Lupus. It afterward
devolved to the barons of Mont-alto, or Mold, which they held by stewartship to
the earls of Chester, and made it their residence Cambden, ii. 826.
.

GENEALOGISTS Collin's Peerage, i. 48.
tell us, that Roger Fitz-valerine, son of one of the noble adventurers who
followed the fortunes of William the conqueror, possessed this castle; and
having frequent contests with the Welsh, often saved himself by retreating to
it; and from that circumstance it was called Howard's Den. But, with high
respect to all the blood of all the Howards, it does not appear that their name
was then known: with more probability does their historian say, that William,
the son of Fitz-vale-rine, received the addition of de Haward or Howard, from
the accident of being born in this place.

ON the extinction of the ancient earls of Chester, to prevent that honor from
being, according to the expression of the time, parcelled out among distaffs,
this, as well as the other fortresses, were resumed by the crown. CEDED TO
LLEWELYN AP GRYFFYDD.
In 1264, Llewelyn, prince of Wales, had a conference at this place Annals
Cestrenses, quoted by Carte, ii. 151.
with Simon de Montfort, the potent earl of Leicester, where they established
peace between Cheshire and Wales, in order to promote their respective designs;
and in the year following, on June the 22d, Montfort obliged his captive
monarch to make an absolute cession to the Welsh prince, not only of this
fortress Rymer, i. 814.
, but of the absolute sovereignty of Wales, and the homage of its barons,
heretofore paid to Henry. After the suppression of Leicester's rebellion,
Hawardin relapsed to the crown. RELAPSES TO THE CROWN.
I must observe, that in 1267, in the pacification brought about by the Pope's
legate Ottoboni, between Henry and Llewelyn, it seems as if the castle had been
destroyed; for, among other articles, Llewelyn agrees to restore to Robert de
Montalto, his lands in Hawarden, and restrains him from building a castle there
for thirty years Idem i. 845.
; probably it was destroyed by Llewelyn himself, who foresaw the impossibility
of his keeping a fortress fo near the English borders. The castle must soon
have been rebuilt; for I find in 1280 it was styled Castrum Regis.

THAT year was distinguished by the general insurrection of the Welsh, under
their prince Llewelyn and his brother David; the great effort of our gallant
countrymen to preserve their liberties and ancient mode of government. The
attempt was begun by David, at that time newly reconciled to his brother, on
March 22d, on Palm Sunday, in a stormy night, which favored his design.
S^E^^IZED BY DAVID AP GRYFFYDD.
He surprised this castle; put the garrison to the sword, and wounded and took
prisoner Roger de Clifford, justiciary of Chester. After the death of Llewelyn,
and the subjection of Wales, David suffered for this in a most severe and
distinguished manner; being the first in England who died as a traitor in the
way in use at this time. He was a prince of a most unamiable character, equally
perfidious to his brother, his country, and to Edward, his benefactor and
protector. In the writ for his trial (which was before the whole baronage of
England) Edward enumerates his kindnesses to him in this pathetic manner: Quem
susceperamus exulem, nutriveramus orphanum, ditaveramus de propriis terris
nostris, et sub alarm nostrarum chlamide foveravimus, ipsum inter majores
nostri palatii collocavimus Rymer, ii. 248.
. The last proved his greatest misfortune. He might have pleaded exemption from
the English jurisdiction, and flung a strong odium on the tyranny of the
conqueror, had he not accepted a barony, a seat among the English peers. He was
in the same situation as the duke of Hamilton in later times; who denying the
power of the court, was told that he was not tried as a Scotch peer, but as
earl of Cambridge, a peerage bestowed on him by his unfortunate master.

DAVID was condemned to four species of punishment; to be drawn by a horse to
the place of execution, as a traitor to the king who had made him a knight; to
be hanged for murdering Fulk Trigald, and other knights, in this castle; for
his sacrilege in committing those murders on Palm Sunday, his bowels were to be
burnt; and finally, his body was to be quartered, and hung in different parts
of the kingdom, because he had in different parts conspired the death of the
king Carte, ii. 195.
.

WE find nothing more of this place till the year 1327, the first of Edward
III. Dugdale, Baron. i. 527.
, when Robert, the last baron of Montalt, (for want of issue) passed this
manor, and his other great possessions, to Isabel the queen mother; but on her
disgrace, it fell again to the crown.

IN 1337, the king granted the stewartship of Chester, GRANTED TO THE EARL OF
SALISBURY.
with Hawarden, etc. to William Montacute earl of Salisbury; but as Isabel
retained a life-interest in the grant, he procured her release of it, for the
sum of six hundred marks. It continued in his family till the death of his
great nephew, John earl of Salisbury, who was beheaded by the townsmen of
Cirencester, after an unsuccessful insurrection, in 1400, in favor of Richard
II. his deposed master. Salisbury had before granted his estates in fee to
Thomas Mountague dean of Sarum, Lodowick de Clifford, John Venour, and Richard
Hertcombe, and their heirs: but after his attainder, by act of parliament 7th
Henry IV. they became forfeited to the king.

IN 1411 it was granted, 1411.
by patent from Henry IV. to his second son Thomas duke of Clarence; but in
1414, the 2d of Henry V. Thomas earl of Salisbury, son to John, petitioned for
annulling the former sentence: his suit was referred to another parliament, and
then dismissed. Henry then made to Clarence another grant, in which the former
was declared to be invalid. In this the advowson of the living is also given.

CLARENCE was slain at the battle of Baugy, 1420.
in 1420, and died without issue. Hawarden returned to Henry V. and from him to
his son Henry VI. who, in 1443, TO SIR THOMAS STANLEY.
granted it to Sir Thomas Stanley, comptroller of his household, and to the
heirs male of his body: but in 1450, it was resumed; and in the next year
granted, together with Mold, to Edward prince of Wales. On this occasion John
Hertcombe clamed Hawarden, as heir to the last survivor of the four feoffees:
he alleging that John earl of Salisbury was not possessed of Hawarden at the
time of his forfeiture; and on this plea obtained a privy seal to enquire into
it. An inquisition was taken; his plea was found to be good; and restitution
was made. This John Hertcombe levied a fine to Sir Richard Strangeways knight,
etc. and John Needham, to the use of John Needham and his heirs.

IN 1454, a fine was levied to Richard Nevill earl of Salisbury, and Alice his
wife (daughter to Thomas Montacute, the great earl of Salisbury) and Sir Thomas
Stanley knight, afterward lord Stanley He had married Elinor, daughter of
Richard earl of Warwick.
, to the use of Thomas Stanley, and the heirs male of his body; on condition,
that if Thomas Stanley do fell, or suffer discontinuance, or if he die without
issue male, it is lawful for the said Richard earl of Salisbury, or the heirs
of Alice his wife, to re-enter. On the death of Lord Stanley, the fee descended
to his son and heir Thomas, afterward earl of Derby; and after his decease, to
his second wife, Margaret countess of Richmond, and mother to Henry VII. That
monarch, in 1495, honored the place with a visit, and made some residence here
for the amusement of stag hunting: but his primary motive was to soothe the
earl her husband, after the ungrateful execution of his brother Sir William
Stanley.

ON the death of Margaret, Hawarden desended to Thomas earl of Derby, granson
to the late earl; and continued in his family till the execution of the gallant
James earl of Derby, in 1651: soon after his death, it was purchased from the
agents of sequestration, by sergeant Glynne. On the restoration, the Lords made
an order, on the 17th of July 1660, that the earl of Derby's. and several other
lords estates, which had been sold in the late usurpation, without their
consents, should be re-possessed by them without molestation Drake's Parlem.
Hist. xxii, 384.
. This induced Glynne to make an offer to the earl, of the surrender of
Hawarden, for a lease of three lives Account communicated to me by Sir John
Glynne.
. The proposal was either rejected, or not immediately accepted: the
consequence of which was, the loss of the whole to the Derby family. The Lords,
resentful of the indignities their order had experienced in the late troubles,
began with an attempt to obtain reparation to one of the greatest sufferers. In
the December of the same year, they sent down to the Commons a private bill,
for the restoring to Charles earl of Derby, all the manors, lands, etc. which
belonged to his late father. This was strongly opposed; and the bill was laid
aside, without Drake, xxiii. 50.
ever coming to a second reading Drake, xxiii. 53.
. The earl was then glad to compound with the sergeant for the property of this
place, and granted it to him and his heirs; in whom it still remains.

IT appears by these proceedings, as if the parliament was fearful of the
consequences of even an act of justice; for, during the long troubles, there
had been such vast change of property, effected by fuch variety of means, that
it was apprehended, that the enquiry into the causes, and the dispossession of
numbers who had quietly enjoyed such property from their fathers, might be
attended with the most inflammatory consequences. It is likewise probable, that
many of the members might be interested in the event; therefore, were
determined to stop at once any proceeding that might tend to affect the
fortunes of themselves or friends. Numbers of sales were made by the loyalists
themselves, under the influence of fear. They were content to receive a trifle
for the purchase, rather than lose the whole by violence; for there were very
few who had not incurred a praemunire under the ruling powers; which they were
glad to get clear of by a seemingly voluntary sale. When they were thus
disappointed in the hope of re-enjoyment of their fortunes, they laid the blame
on the king, and invented the calumny of his rejecting this bill, after it had
been passed unanimously by both houses.

DURING the civil wars, this cattle suffered the usual vicissitudes of fortune.
It was firft possessed by the parliament, and kept for its use till the year
1643, BESIEGED IN 1643.
at which time a cessation of arms being agreed to, on the part of the king,
with the Irish rebels, a number of the forces were drawn from Ireland, and
landed at Mostyn in this county, in the month of November, These were
immediately employed to reduce the castle of Hawarden. The garrison received by
a trumpet, a verbal summons; which gave occasion to the following letters
between lieutenant colonel Marrow, and John Warren and Alexander Elliot, the
commanders on the part of the parliament. I omit the immediate answer to the
summons, written in the religious strain affected by the party; which Marrow
replies to like a true Cavalier.

GENTLEMEN,
IT is not for to hear you preach that I am sent here; but in his majesty's
name to demand the castle for his majesty's use: as your allegiance binds you
to be true to him, and not to enveigle those innocent souls that are within
with you; so I desire your resolution, whether you will deliver the castle or
no?


The rejoinder from the castle was to this effect:

SIR,
WE have cause to suspect your disaffection to preaching, in regard we find you
thus employed. If there be innocent souls here, God will require their blood of
them that shed it. We can keep our allegiance and the castle too; and therefore
you may take your answer, as it was in English plain enough before: we can say
no more, but God'S will be done Rustworth II. part iii. 300.
.


THESE letters had at the time but little weight. Captain Thomas Sandford,
leader of the Firelocks, determined to fright them into submission by the
terror of his name, or persuade them, to terms by the powers or his pen; and
thus addresses the obstinate commandants:

GENTLEMEN,
I PRESUME you very well know, or have heard, of my condition and disposition;
and that I neither give nor take quarter. I am now with my Firelocks (who never
yet neglected opportunity to correct rebels) ready to use you as I have done
the Irish: but loath I am to spill my countrymen's blood; wherefore, by these I
advise you to your feilty and obedience toward his majesty; and show
yourselves faithful subjects, by delivering the castle into my hands for his
majesty's use; in so doing, you shall be received into mercy, etc. otherwise,
if you put me to the least trouble or loss of blood to force you, expect no
quarter for man, woman, or child. I hear you have some of our late Irish army
in your company: they very well know me; and that my Firelocks use not to
parley. Be not unadvised; but think of your liberty; for I vow all hopes of
relief are taken from you; and our intents are not to starve you, but to batter
and storm you, and then hang you all, and follow the rest of that rebellious
crew. I am no bread-and-cheese rogue, but, as ever, a loyalist, and will ever
be, while I can write or name

Nov. 28. 1643. THOMAS SANDFORD, Captain of Firelocks.
I EXPECT your speedy answer this Tuesday night, at Broad-Lane Hall, where I am
now, your near neighbor.

To the officer commanding in chief at Hawarden castle, and his concerts there.




ALL this eloquence would have been flung away, had not more forces on the side
of the king, and want of provisions on that of the garrison, co-operated with
this valiant epistle. So, as Rushworth says, after a fortnight's siege, and
much ink and little blood spilt, the castle being in want of provisions, was
surrendered to Sir Michael Earnley, on condition to march out with half arms
and two pair of colors, one flying, and the other furled; and to have a convoy
to Wem or Nantwyche.

THE royalists Kept possesson or it till after the surrender of Chester to Sir
William Brereton in 1645; AGAIN IN 1645.
when, on March 17th, O. S. it was taken by major general Mytton, after a
month's siege. At that time Sir William Neal was governor, who declined to give
it up till he had obtained his majesty's permission MS. at Mostyn
. On the 22d of December it was by vote of parliament ordered to be dismantled,
DISMANTLED.
with four other castles in this part of North Wales. Whitelock, 231.
These orders extended only to the rendering it untenable; but the farther
destruction was effected by the owner, Sir William Glynne, the first baronet of
the name, between the years 1665 and 1678.

THE remains are a fine circular tower or keep, DESCRIBED.
on the summit of a mount. This alone is pretty entire. Nothing except this,
and a few walls, and the foundations of some rooms, exist at present; which Sir
John Glynne has, with great pains, laid open by the removal of the rubbish. In
one place was discovered a long flight of steps, at the bottom of which was a
door, and formerly a drawbridge, which crossed a deep long chasm (nicely faced
with freestone) to another door leading to two or three small rooms. Probably
they were places of confinement, where prisoners might be lodged with the
utmost security, after pulling up the bridge over the deep chasm that
intervened between them and open day.

THE several parts of this fortress seem to have been built at different times.
It is surrounded with deep fosses, now filled with trees. In 1665, the timber
of the park and demesne was valued at five thousand pounds, and was sold in
that century; but the present owner will have the merit of restoring it
manyfold to the next, by the vast plantations he has made.

THE living is in the gift of the lord; who presents; RECTORY.
and the bishop of Chester inducts. The rector does all episcopal acts, except
those of ordination and confirmation; and has a peculiar exempt jurisdiction:
grants licenses, registers and proves wills; and has his court and his proctors.

THE living is at present eleven hundred pounds a year; and, in proportion as
the subjacent lands are cultivated, will experience a far greater improvement.

THE church is a plain but handsome building, kept in neat and decent repair.
The parsonage-house is new, and suitable to the revenue. The garden is very
prettily laid out, upon a high and commanding ground.

HAW^RDEN CASTLE


THE parish receives two hundred a year from the river Dee company. PAROCHIAL
REVENUE.
This was granted by act of parliament, in consideration or eight hundred acres
of land, belonging to Hawarden, enclosed on the north side of the river, for
the use of the adventurers in the navigation. This sum is to be paid to the
lord of the manor and other trustees; and is applicable to any uses which any
five (with the consent of the lord) shall agree on.

IN Broadlane, PICTURES.
the mansion house, built by the present baronet in 1752, are four portraits of
great merit, part of the collection of Sir Konelm Digby. They represent the
evangelists with their respective attributes; seemingly the production of
Valentine, a Ir^^^hman He died 1632. A gentleman well skilled in prints tells
me, that these four pictures were engraven by Rousselet.
, who studied the style of Carravaggio. These are in his best manner. The
attitudes are fine; and the lights and shadows most admirably disposed. They
are half lengths; a size that his great model excelled in.

AMONG the family portraits, are two of the chief justice Glyme, the able,
political lawyer of the reign of Charles I. and the succeeding usurpation. He
was of the house of Glynllivon in Caernarvonshire; which derives itself from
Cilmin-Troed-ddu, or Cilmin with the black foot, one of the fifteen tribes, and
cotemporary with, and nephew to, Merfyn Frych, prince of Wales in the year 818.

SIR JOHN GLYNNE was born at Glyn-llivon in the year 1602; CHIEF JUSTICE GLYNNE.
his father was Sir William Glynne knight; his mother a Griffith of Caernarvon.
His education was after the best mode. His school was that of the college at
Westminster; his academic learning was instilled into him at Hart-ball, Oxford;
and his knowledge of the law at Lincoln's End, where he became a bencher. His
abilities were immediately discovered by the popular party, by whose influence
he was made steward of Westminster, recorder of London, and twice elected
member for the former, in the two parlements of 1640. He was, next to Pym, the
most active manager against the earl of Strafford. The unfortunate peer
remarked, that Glynne and Maynard treated him like advocates; Palmer and
Whitelock like gentlemen; and yet omitted nothing material that could be urged
against him Whitelock, 49
. The author of Hudibras seems to catch at this part of the character of these
two great lawyers:

Did not the learned Glynne and Maynard,
To make good subjects traitors, strain hard?
IN the case of Strafford, and in that of the impeachment of the twelve
bishops, they acted on principle. This appears evident from the prosecution
they afterward underwent, for the noble stand they made against the ruin of
the constitution, planned, and afterward effected by the army. On September
the 8th 1647, they were expelled the house, committed to the Tower, and had a
charge of high treason brought against them Parliament. Hist. xvi. 294.512.
. Glynne soon determined to submit to the rising powers. In the next year, he
was restored to his place in the house; appointed one of the ten

THE JUSTICE GLYNNE


commissioners for carrying on the treaty with the king in the isle of Wight;
and voted by the house to be a sergeant at law in the new call it thought fit
to make. He, as well as the artful Whitelock, evaded all concern in trial of
the king: but afterward temporized fully with the powers in being. Cromwell
soon made him one of his council. In 1654, he was constituted chamberlain of
Chester: in the following year, was (on the refusal of the chief justice
Rolls) sent into the west with a commission to try colonel Penruddock, and the
other insurgents Athenae Oxon. ii. 386.
. Rolls lost his place for his scruples; and in his room the sergeant was
rewarded with the office of lord chief justice of the upper bench. He was
grateful to his patron; for, being appointed of the committee to receive the
protector's scruples about being made king, he urged the acceptance with the
utmost zeal. It is amusing to compare the change of sentiment, from the year
1648, when the kingly office was voted to be unnecessary, burdensome, and
dangerous, with the opinion of 1657, when the learned sergeant tells Cromwell,
that it is essential to the settlement of the nation Parliament Hist. xxi. 90.
. Notwithstanding the usurper did not dare to assume the name, he mimicked the
powers; and honored his advocate with calling him up by writ into his house of
peers; that motley assembly of the year 1657. The prudent lawyer maintained his
ground till the year of the restoration, when, by a masterpiece of cunning, he
published in octavo, the arguments he had used to prevale with his former
master to mount the throne, under the title of MONARCHY asserted to be the
best, the most ancient, and legal form of government. How flattering must this
have been to the rightful prince, to find the ancient mode acknowleged as most
eligible (even after the long abuse of it in his family) by one of the ablest
supporters of the protectorate?

WHETHER this recommended him to the new government, or whether he had made his
peace before, is not certain. He was received by Charles with distinguished
marks of favor, who not only knighted him, but bestowed on him the honor of
prime sergeant, and even created his eldest son a baronet. In the convention
parliament, he was elected for the county of Caernarvon; and was appointed one
of the committee for examining the acts passed during the late usurpation,
which were inconsistent with the present government; and how the many fines,
recoveries, etc. made in the late courts of law, might be confirmed and
rendered good. He had likewise a concern in the act of general pardon, and in
all others in which the assistance of an able lawyer was requisite Drake's
Parlem. Hist. xxii. 416.
.

He retired from the house in the following parliament; and lived till the year
1666, when he died in London, and was interred in his own vault, beneath the
altar of St. Margaret's church, Westminster

FROM Breadlane the land begins to slope toward the Dee. At the bottom,
between the fifth and sixth stone from Chester, lies Breughten, formerly the
property of the Ravenscrofts, and afterward that of the Hopes. At the Conquest
it was called Brochetune; and was held of Hugh L^pus, by Robert de Roelent, or
Rudland. Levenot, a freeman, possessed it before. Robert also had a manor here,
once held by a Saxon of the name of Ulmer.

CLOSE to the village of Breton, lies the large marsh of Saltney, which reaches
within about a mile of Chester. It is at present divided by a most excellent
road, by whose side runs a small canal, cut by Sir John Glynne, for the
conveyance of his coal into the Dee near the city. This tract was formerly
granted, by Robert lord of Mold, to the monks of Basingwerk, for pasturage; he
also gave them the same privilege in Hawarden, and the liberty of cutting
rushes for thatching their buildings Harleian MS. No 2099.9.
.

THE principal part of this common lies in Flintshire. The boundary is marked
by a stone near the east end. It extends considerably on both sides. From the
right flows the Leeches, a small brook, rising a little beyond Doddleston. That
place lies out of my rout; yet I mention it, as the place of interment of that
honest chancellor Egerton lord Ellesmere, who preferred it out of affection to
his mother, a native of this village.

ANOTHER, circumstance leads me to name this parish, humiliating as it is to a
Welshman; for at Balderton bridge our countrymen met with a cruel defeat from
Hugh Cyvelioc earl of Chester; who, by way of trophy, made a rampart of their
heads.

AT the extremity of Saltney, within a mile of Chester, the land rises
suddenly. On the left hand of the ascent are considerable hollows, with
correspondent elevations: one has the appearance of a round bastion; which
makes me conjecture, that they might have been works designed to command this
pass into the country of the Ordovices; for it points toward Varis, Conovium,
and Segontium.

CHESHIRE,
A part of the country of the Cornavii, CHESTER.
commences on the flat beneath this bank. The road is continued along the small
common of Over-leigh, and ends at Han-bridge, the suburbs of Chester, on this
side of the river, belonging to the parish of St. Mary.

THE access to the city is over a very narrow and dangerous bridge, of seven
irregular arches, rendered more inconvenient by the ancient gateways at each
end, formerly necessary enough, to prevent the inroads of my countrymen, who
often carried fire and sword to these suburbs; which were so frequently burnt,
as to be called by the Britons Tre-boeth, or the burnt town.

I SHALL begin my account of this respectable city, by declining the honor of
asserting it to have been of British foundation, notwithstanding I have the
authority of Ranulph the Monk, and of Henry Bradshaw, another religious of this
city.

The founder of this city, as faith Polychronicon,
Was Leon Gaure, a mighty strong giant;
Who builded caves and dungeons many a one,
No goodly building, ne proper, ne pleasant.
But king Leir, a Britain fine and valiant,
Was founder of Chester by pleasant building,
And was named Guer-leir by the king Brodshaw's Life of St. Werburg.
.
YET this legend does not err greatly from the right name, Caer Lleon, CAER
LLEON.
the camp of the legion. Caer Lleon, vawr ar ddyfr Dwy, the camp of the great
legion on the Dee, being the head quarters of the twentieth legion, styled also
Valeria and Victrix. This legion came into Britain before the year 61; for it
had share in the defeat of Boadicea by Suetonius. After this victory, the Roman
forces were led toward the borders of North Wales, probably into this county.
Afterward, by reason of the relaxed state of discipline, a wing had been cut
off by the Ordovices, just before the arrival of Agricola; but the quarters of
these troops at this period are not exactly known. It is probable that part at
lest were on the Deva; that he collected a few of his forces, and began his
march against the enemy from this place; and that, after his successful
expedition into Mona, MONA, etc.
he determined to six here a garrison, as the fittest place to bridle the
warlike people he was about to leave behind him. In consequence, he fixed part
of the legion here, and detachments in the neighboring posts, before he
ventured on the distant expedition to Scotland, into which he led part, as
appears from the inscriptions; which prove that a vexillatio of this legion was
concerned in building a portion of the Roman wall, In order to encourage the
troops he left behind, he formed here a colony; and the place was styled from
them, and from its situation, DIVANAS
Colonia Devana, as is proved by the coin of Septimus Geta, son of Severus,
which was thus inscribed:

COL. DEVANA leg. xx. VICTRIX. IT was also called simply Deva, AND DEVA.
from the river which washe^ one side;

The ancient hallowed DEE. THE form of the city evinces the origin to have been
Roman, FOURS CHIEF STREETS.
being in the figure of their camps; with four gates; four principal streets;
and variety of lesser, crossing the others at right angles, dividing the whole
into lesser squares. The walls, the precincts of the present city, mark the
limits of the ancient. No part of the old walls exist; but they stood, like the
modern, on the soft freestone rock, high above the circumjacent country, and
escarpe on every front.

THE structure of the four principal streets is without parallel. They run
direct from east to west, and north to south; and were excavated out of the
earth, and sunk many feet beneath the surface. EXCAVATED
The carriages are driven far below the level of the kitchens, on a line with
ranges or shops; over which, on each side of the streets, passengers walk from
end to end, secure from wet or heat, in galleries (or row, (...)
as they are called) purloined from the first floor of each house, open in
front and balustraded. The back-courts of all these houses are level with the
rows; but to go into any of these four streets, it is necessary to descend a
flight of several steps.

THESE rows appear to me to have been the same with the ancient vestibules; and
to have been a form of building preserved from the time that the city was
possessed by the Romans. They were built before the doors, midway between the
streets and the houses; and were the places where dependents waited for the
coming out of their patrons De signif. vocab. (...).
, and under which they might walk away the tedious minutes of expectation.
Plautus, in the third act of his Mostella, describes both their situation and
use:

Viden' vestibulum ante aedes, et ambulacrum ejusmodi? The shops beneath the
rows were the cryptae and apothecae, magazines for the various necessaries of
the owners of the Houses.

The streets were once considerably deeper, as is apparent from the shops,
whose floors lie far below the present pavement. In digging foundations for
houses, the Roman pavement is often discovered at the depth of four feet
beneath the modern. The lesser streets and allies, which run into the principal
streets, sloped to the bottoms of the latter, as is particularly visible in
were Bridge Street; but these are destiture of the galleries or rows.

IT is difficult to assign a reason for these hollowed ways. GREAT VAULTS,
An ancient historian mentions the existence, in his days, of certain vaults
and passages, of which not a trace, nor even the lest memory is left,
notwithstanding the most diligent search and enquiries have been made. In this
cite, says the author of the Polychronicen, ben ways under earth, with vowtes
and stone work wonderly wrought; three chambred works. Great stones I grave
with old men's names therein. There is also JULIUS CEZAR'S name wonderly in
stones grave, and other noble men's names also, with the writing about;
meaning the altars and monumental inscriptions: but he probably mistakes the
name of Julius Caesar for that of Julius Agricola; to whom, it is reasonable to
suppose, some grateful memorial was erected. Unless these hollowed streets were
formed by the void left after the destruction of these great vaults, I can no
more account for their formation, than for the place which those ancient
Souterrains occupied. NEW LO^T.
None have ever been discovered, by the frequent sinking of cellars for new
buildings on the site of the old; tradition has delivered no such accounts to
us; nor is their exit to be traced beneath the walls in any part of their
circumference. The only vaults now known, are of a middle age, and which
belonged either to the hotels of the great men, or to the religious houses
dispersed through the city.

OF the four gates of the city, EAST GATE, ROMAN.
one of them, the East gate, continued till of late years; of Roman
architecture, and consisted of two arches, much hid by a tower, erected over it
in the later days. A few years ago it was pulled down, on account of its
straitness and inconveniency, to give way to a magnificent gate, which rose in
its place by the munificence of lord Grosvenor. I remember the demolition of
the ancient structure; and on the taking down the more modern case of Norman
masonry, the Roman appeared full in view.

IT consisted of two arches, formed of vast stones, fronting the Eastgate
street and the Forest street: the pillar between them dividing the street
exactly in two. The accurate representation



of them by Mr. Wilkinson, of this city, will give a stronger idea of them than
words can convey; as also of the figure of the Roman soldier, placed between
the tops of the arches facing the Forest street.

THIS species of double gate was not unfrequent. The Porta esquilina
Montfaucon, III. part ii. p. 177.
, and the Port portese Nardini, Roma Anticha, p. 37.
at Rome, were of this kind. Flores, in his medals of the Roman colonies in
Spain P. 384. tab. xxi.xxii.xxiii.
, exhibits one on the coins of Merida, the ancient Emerita, particularly on
those of Augustus; which shows, that the colonists were proud of their gate;
and perhaps not without reason, as it appears to have been the work of the best
age. I must conclude, that the mode seems to have been derived from the Grecian
architecture; for at Athens stood a Dipylon, or double gate, now demolished As
I have been informed by my friend Mr. Stuart.
.

THE gate in question faced the great Watling street road, and near the place
where other military ways united. Through this was the greatest conflux of
people; which rendered the use of the double portal more requisite.

THE Roman bath beneath the Feathers Inn, HYPOCY
in Bridge street, is probably still entire; but the only part which can be
seen, by reason of the more modern superstructures, is the Hypocaust. This is
of a rectangular figure, supported by thirty-two pillars, two feet ten inches
and a half high, and about eighteen inches distant from each other. Upon each
is a tile eighteen inches square, as if designed for a capital; and over them a
perforated tile two feet square. Such are continued over all the pillars. Above
these are two layers; one of coarse mortar, mixed with small red gravel, about
three inches thick; and the other of finer materials, between four and five
inches thick: these seem to have been the floor of the room above. The pillars
stand on a mortar-floor, spread over the rock. On the south side, between the
middle pillars, is the vent for the smoke, about six inches square, which is at
present open to the height of sixteen inches. Here is also an antichamber,
exactly of the same extent with the Hypocaust, with an opening in the middle
into it. This is sunk near two feet below the level of the former, and is of
the same rectangular figure; so that both together are an exact square. This
was the room allotted for the slaves who attended to heat the place; the other
was the receptacle of the fuel designed to heat the room above, the concamerata
sudatio Vitruvius, lib. v. c. II.
, or sweating-chamber; where people were seated, either in niches, or on
benches placed one above the other, during the time of the operation. Such was
the object of this Hypocaust; for there were others of different forms, for the
purposes of heating the waters destined for the use of the bathers.

I MUST now descend toward the bridge, in search of the few further relics
of the ancient colonists. After passing through the gate, on the right, near
some skinners houses, is a small flight of steps, which lead to a large round
arch, seemingly of Roman workmanship. It is now filled with more modern
masonry, and a passage left through a small arch of a very eccentric form.
ANCIENT POSTERN.
On the left, within the very passage, is the appearance of another round arch,
now filled up. This postern is called the Ship-gate, or Hole in the Wall.

THIS seems originally designed for the common passage over the Dee, into the
country of the Ordovices, either by means of a boat at high water, or by
fording at low, the river here being remarkably shallow. What reduces this to a
certainty is, that the rock on the Hanbridge side is cut down, as if for the
convenience of travelers. And immediately beyond, in the field called Edgar's,
are the vestiges of a road pointing up the hill; ROMAN ROAD.
and which we shall have hereafter occasion to say, was continued toward
bonium, the present Bangor.

IN a front of a rock in the same field, and facing this relic of the Roman
road, is cut a rude figure of the Dea armigera, MINERVA with her bird and
altar. SCULPTURE OR MINERVA.
This probably was a sepulchral monument; for such were very usual on the sides
of highways; but time or wantonness has erased all inscription.

BEYOND this stood, past all memory, some ancient buildings, whose site is
marked by certain hollows; for the ground (probably over the vaults) gave way
and fell in within the remembrance of persons now alive. Tradition calls the
spot the site of the palace of Edgar. Nothing is now left, from which any
judgment can be formed, whether it had been a Roman building, as Doctor
Stukeley surmises; or Saxon, according to the present notion; or Norman,
according to Braun Civitates Ortis, iii. pl. 3. This work was published in 1576.
, who, in his ancient plan of this city, styles the ruins, then actually
existing, Ruinosa domus Comitis Cestriensis. Perhaps it might have been used
successively by every one; who added or improved according to their respective
national modes.

HAVING had occasion to mention the name of a departed antiquary, I think fit
to acknowledge my obligations for the many hints I have benefitted by, from the
travels of that great and lively genius; but at the same time lament, that I
must say, I often find him Plus beau que la VERITE. His rapid fancy led him too
frequently to paint things as he thought they ought to be, not what they really
were. In the subject before us, this assertion may be supported, by his giving
three arches to the ancient East gate, and hollow ways to every part of the
city; where search, has been made.

THE beautiful altar, ALTAR.
in possession of Mr. Dyson, and the soldier in the garden or Mr. Lawton, are
the only pieces of detached antiquities now ramaining in this city. The first
is of great elegance, and was erected by Flavius Longus, tribune of the
twentieth victorious legion, and his son Longinus, in honor of the emperors
(...) and Maximian. The father and son, who thus expressed their gratitude,
were of Samosata, a city of Syria On one side is the inscription, on the
opposite is a curtain with a festoon above. On one of the narrower sides is a
genius with a cornucopia; and on the other is a pot with a plant of the
supposed acanthus, elegantly leaved. On the summit is a head included in a
circular garland. I fogot to remark, that immediately over the inscription is a
globe overtopped with palm-leaves. If this is not a general compliment to their
victories, I should imagine it designed to express their particular successes
in Africa, of which the palm tree was a known emblem.

THIS was found in digging for a cellar near the Eastgate, on the ancient
pavement, which consisted of great stones. Around it were found the marks of
sacrifice; heads, horns, and bones of the ox, roe-buck, etc. and with them two
coins; one of Vespasian in brass, with his head, inscribed IMP. CAES. VESP.
AUG. COSS. III. and on the reverse, VICTORIA AUGUSTI S. C. and a winged Victory
standing. The other was of copper, inscribed round the head, of Constantius,
FL. VAL. CONSTANTIUS NOB. C. and on the other side, GENIO POPULI ROMANI;
alluding to a genius holding in one hand a sacrificing bowl, in the other a
cornucopia.

THE other antiquities discovered here are now dispersed; which obliges me to
have recourse to books, in order to place them in one point of view.

THE first is the noted altar discovered in 1653, ANOTHER.
at present preserved at Oxford. It is inscribed to Jupiter, with the British
epithet Tanarus, or the Thunderer, by the transposal of the letters r and n in
the word Taran. This appears to have been complimentary to the Britons, by
adopting the epithet in their language, instead of that of Tonans. The
inscription (approved most by Mr. Horsely Tab, 67. No iii.
) runs thus:

Jovi optimo maximo Tanaro
Titus Elupius Galeria
Praesens Guntia, Primipilus
Legionis vicessimae Valentis.
Victricis Commodo et Laterano
Consalibus votum solvit
Lubens merito.
THE word Guntic, in the learned Prideaux and Gale Gale's Comm. 53.
, is read Gunethae, as if derived from Gwinedd, one of the British names of
North Wales; over which they suppose Elupius had presided. This might account
for his preference of the word Tanaro, as highly flattering to the vanity of
those he governed.

THE next is a statue in possession of the late Reverend Mr. Prescot, STATUE or
MITHRAS.
with a Phrygian bonnet on his head, a little mantle cross his shoulders, and a
short jacket on his body. He is placed standing with a torch in his hands
declining. This is supposed to have been Mithras, or the sun; a deity borrowed
from the Persians, and much in vogue among the Romans in the second and third
century Horsely, Cumberland, 259.
. An inscription, DEO SOLI MITRAE, has been discovered in Cumberland. The
Phrygian bonnet marks him for a foreign deity. The declining torch shows the
funebrious occasion of this stone.

MR. HORSELY mentions another stone, discovered in digging a cellar in
Watergate street, in 1729. The inscription is so imperfect, that he
ingenuously confesses, that without the aid of fancy, it cannot be made out.

A FEW bricks, with the number of the legion stationed here, fill the list of
the Roman antiquities of the place. I say nothing of the inscription DEAE
NYMPHAE BRIGANTES, preserved by Mr. Gale, it being justly disputed whether it
belonged to this place.

I MUST not omit the most valuable memorial which the Romans left,
CHEESE-MAKING.
in a particular manner, to this county; the art of cheese-making: for we are
expressly told, that the Britons were ignorant of it till the arrival of the
Romans. The Cestrians have improved so highly in this article, as to excel all
countries, not excepting that of Italy, the land of their ancient masters.

THE twentieth legion was recalled from Britain before the writing of the
Notitia, THE LEGION QUITS THIS STATION
it not being mentioned in that work, which was composed Horsely, 473.
about the year 445. It is supposed also to have been drawn from Chester before
the retreat of the Romans from this island, its name being found at Bath among
some of the latest inscriptions we have Idem, 85.
. The city must not at that period be supposed to be totally deserted; it
remained occupied by the descendants of the legionaries, who partook of the
same privileges, and were probably a numerous body. Numbers likewise, who had
married with the native islanders, and embraced civil employs, in all
likelihood stayed behind after the final abdication of Britain by the legions
in 448. After this, the city fell under the government of the Britons, till
their conquest was entirely effected by the new invaders the Saxons.

BRITAIN, SAXON PERIOD.
now left defenseless, quickly experienced all the calamities that could be
inflicted on it from a oreign and barbarous people. While Hengist and Horsa
poured in their troop^ upon the south, another set of Banaitli landed in Wales,
from their settlements in the Orcades and the north of ^^tland. These with
their allies the Picts, were defeated near Mold, by the Christian Britons.
headed by St. Germanus. I mention this out of course, merely to show, that the
probable rest that Deva enjoyed for another century, was owing to this victory,
which, obtained seemingly in a miraculous manner, discouraged for a long space
any new attempts.

THE fate of this city was at length decided in 607 Sax. Chren. 25.
, ETHELFRID, 607.
when Ethelfrid king of Northumbria resolved to add this rich tract to his
dominions. He was opposed by Brochmail Yscithroc king of Pa^^is; who collected
hastily a body of men, probably depending on the intervention of Heaven, as in
the case of the victoria allelutanca; BATTLE OF CHESTER.
for that end, he called to his aid one thousand two hundred religious from the
great convent of Banger. and posted them on a hill in order that he might
benefit by the^ prayers. Ethelfrid fell in with this pious corpse, and, finding
what their business was Bid, Hist. ii. c a.
, put them to the sword without mercy. He made an easy conquest of Brochmail,
who, as the Saxon chronicle P. (...)
informs us, escaped with about fifty men. It appears that Eth^^^^d, after
pillaging the city, left it to the former owners, and contented himself with
the territory, till it was wrest^l (...) his kingdom by that of Merita.

WE are left unacquainted with the history of this city for a long period. The
Britons seem to have continued in possession of it, and it was considered to be
the capital city of Venedotia, or North Wales, till it was finally wrested out
of their hands by Egbert, EGBERT, 828.
about the year 828, during the reign of the British prince Mervyn and his wife
Esylht Powel, 27.
; which contracted the limits of Wales, during the remainder of its independent
existence.

IN a few years after it underwent a heavy calamity from the Danes. THE DANES
WINTER HERE, 895.
These pirates, the scourge of the kingdom, meeting with a severe defeat by
Alfred the Great, retreated before him; and in their slight collecting vast
numbers of their countrymen, committed the care of their wives, their ships,
and their booty, to the East Angles, marched night and day to secure quarters
in the west. They seized on Legaceaster before the king could overtake them. He
besieged them about two days, destroyed all the cattle he could find about the
town, partly burnt, and partly caused the standing corn to be destroyed by his
cavalry, and slew all the Danes whom he found without the walls Sax. Chr. 102.
Flores Hist. anno 908. p. 269.
. These invaders kept possession of the town part of the winter; but, compelled
by famine, evacuated it the beginning of 895, EVACUATE THE PLACE
and took their course through North Wales; which the same cause obliged them
suddenly to quit.

AFTER the evacuation of the city by the Danes, it continued in ruins till the
year 907 or 908; when the Saxon Chronicle, and all our ancient historians,
agree, that it was restored by the celebrated Ethelfleda Ranulf. Higden in
Gale, iii. 260.
.

THIS lady is so frequently mentioned in the Mercian history, HER HISTORY.
that it will not be impertinent to give a brief account of her. She was the
undegenerate daughter of the great Alfred, and the wife of Ethelred earl of
Mercia, under his brother-in-law Edward king of England. On the birth of her
first child P^^^ (...) s^^^lam primam difficultatem porpessa tanta indignatione
carnalem cencut^ (...), at run^^am d^^^p^ad viri (...) ^rum rediens, se
caelebita Cississimo conti^^. I (...)
, she separated herself from her husband, and for the rest of her days, like an
Imazen of old, determined on a life of chastity, and devoted herself to deeds
of arms. She kept on the best terms with her husband: they united in all acts
of munificence and piety; restored cities founded abbeys, and removed to more
suitable places the bones of long-departed saints.

AFTER the death of her husband, in 912, she assumed the government of the
Mervan earldom, and the command of the army. She became so celebrated for her
valor, that the effe^inate titles of Lady or Queen were thought unworthy of
her. she received in addition those of LORD and KING.

O ELFLEDA potens, O terror virgo virorum
Victrix naturae, nomine digna viri
Tu quo splendidior fieres, natura puellam,
Te probitas fecit nomen habere viri.
Te mutare decet, sed selum nomine sexus,
Tu Regina potens, Rexque trophaea parans,
Nec jam Caesarei tantum meruere triumphi,
Caesare splendidior virgo virago vale H^^, (...), lib. v. p. 354.

ELFLEDA, terror of mankind!
Nature, for ever unconfined,
Stamped thee in woman's tender frame,
Though worthy of a hero's name.
Thee, thee alone, the Muse shall sing,
Dread EMPRESS and victorious KING!
Even Caesar's conquests were outdone
By thee, illustrious Amazon!
R. W. THE heroine appears well to have merited this eulogium. Her abilities
and activity were perpetually exerted in the service of her country. She
erected a castle at Sceargate; another at Briege, the modern Bridgenorth; a
third at Tamweorthige, or Tamworth; a fourth at Staefford; a fifth at
Eadesbyrig, now the chamber in the forest in Cheshire; a fifth at Waeringwic,
or Warwick; a sixth at Cyricbyrig, or Chirbury; a seventh at Weardbyrig, or
Wedsburrow, in Staffordshire; and an eighth at Rumcof, or Runcorn, in Cheshire.
She took Brecenanmere, or Brecknock, and made its queen prisoner: she stormed
Deoraby, or Derby; but lost sour Thanes within the place: and finally, she
restored the city of Legerceaster, after its desolation by the barbarians;
rebuilt the walls; and, as some pretend, enlarged the city so greatly as to
include the castle, which before stood without the ancient precincts. Death put
an end to her glorious course, DEATH.
at Tamworth Sax. Chr. 109.
, in the summer of 922, from whence her body was translated to Gloucester. Her
loss was regretted by the whole kingdom, and by none so sensibly felt as by her
brother Edward; for she was as useful to that wise prince in the cabinet as in
the field.

EDGAR made this port one of the stations in his annual circumnavigation of his
dominions. EDGAR, 973.
The year 973 is noted for the league he made here with six petty kings; who
engaged to assist him by sea and by land in all his undertakings. This is the
fact, as related by the Saxon Chronicle P. 122. Henry Huntindon, 356.
. The same is mentioned, perhaps copied from the former, by Henry of
Huntingdon; but Higden, the monk of St. Werburg, to do greater honor to his
native city, makes the number of Reguli eight; and adds, that, in token of
superiority, Edgar, one day entering his barge, assumed the helm, and made his
eight tributaries row him from the palace, which stood in the field which still
bears his name, up the Dee, to the church of St. John, and from thence back to
his palace Polychron. in Gale, iii. 267.
.

IN the following century, the invasions of the Danes were conducted with so
much policy as to induce the factious and traitorous nobility of England to
rise and favor their designs. Edmund, EDMUND IRONSIDES.
surnamed Ironside, took arms to relieve his distressed country, and carried
the war into the northern counties, among which lay the principal partisans of
the invaders: whose country he ravaged, in resentment of their treason. This
city is mentioned among those which suffered. Edmund, by the perfidiousness of
his own people, was constrained to leave both the Mercian and Northumbrian
kingdoms in possession of Canute; CANUTE, 1016.
who, in the famous partition of England between these rival princes, in 1016,
retained those parts for his own share.

ON the restoring of the Saxon line, it reverted, with the rest of the Mercian
province, to its old masters. Leofric, a munificent nobleman, was at that time
governor of Mercia, and earl of Chester. These earls were not created, but
merely official. He died 1057, 1057.
and was succeeded by his son Alfgar or Algar, a turbulent nobleman; who
engaging in rebellion, aided by the Welsh prince Gryffydd ap Lleweln, was twice
deprived of his earldom, and was once pardoned. After his second deprivation,
he obtained again the province by dint of arms, assisted by Gryffyd and a
Norwegian fleet. He died soon after, and was interred in Coventry, where the
earls of Mercia had their principal seat.

HIS eldest son Edwin succeeded; NORMAN CONQUEST, 1066
in whom ended the race of earls of Chester of Saxon blood. After the battle of
Hastings, he sled, with his brother Morkar earl of Northumberland, to London,
with a view of the crown, vacant by the death of Harold. Being disappointed in
his hopes, he took his sister Algytha, widow to the slain monarch, and sent her
to Chester; and endeavored to escape to Malcolm king of Scotland, but was
intercepted by the way and slain.

ENGLAND now experienced a total change of masters. The conqueror, in order at
once to secure his new dominions, and to reward his followers, bestowed on them
the lands of the noble Saxons. He wisely divided the provinces, which had
hitherto been ruled by a few great men, into lesser portions; and by this means
broke the power which before often braved the throne. Mercia, heretofore under
the government of a duke or earl, POST-CONQUEST EARLS OF CHESTER
and ruled by what was called, in the Saxon phrase, the Merchenlege, received
in many cases a distinct master. Cheshire fell to the share of Gherbod, a
valiant Fleming. By misfortune he fell into the hands of his enemies (being
called into Flanders) soon after he had taken possession of his new
territories, and by reason of a long captivity was obliged to resign them to
another. The Conqueror, in his place, appointed Hugh de Aurange, better known
by the name of Hugh Lupus; the first Norman earl of Chester who ever possessed
the county. To him he delegated a fullness of power; made his a county palatine,
and gave it such a sovereign jurisdiction, that the ancient earls kept their
own parlements; and had their own courts of law, in which any offense against
the dignity of the sword of Chester was as cognizable here, as the like offense
would have been at Westminster against the dignity of the royal crown; for
William allowed Lupus to hold this county tam libere ad gladium, sicut ipse REX
tenebat Angliam ^d coronam. The sword by which he was invested with this
dignity is still to be seen in the Museum, inscribed Hugo comes Cestriae.
Another inferior office was also held by the earls, by virtue of this sword;
that of sword bearer of England at the times of coronation Leicester, 105.
.

LUP^S instantly took possession of his dominions. It is probable that he was
invested in them by William himself; for we find the Conqueror at Chester in
person in 1069, where he repelled the Welsh, and finally reduced the Mercian
province, which appears to have been in arms to this period Ordericus vitalis,
lib. iv. p. 516.
. At the same time restored the walls and built the castle; the former having
either fallen into decay since the days of Ethelfreda, or were not thought
sufficiently strong for the exigencies of the times.

As soon as Lupus was firmly established, he began to exert his regal
prerogatives. He formed his parliament by the creation of eight barons, viz.
Nigel baron of Halton; Robert, of Montalt; William Malbedeng baron of Nantwich;
Vernon, of Shipbrook; Fitzhugh, of Malpas; Hamon de Massy Venables, of
Kinderton; and Nicholas, of Stockport. These were to assist the earl with their
advice: Ego comes HUGO et mei BARONS, was the form of his writs. They were
obliged to pay him attendance, and to repair to his court to give it the
greater dignity. They were bound, in time of war with Wales, to find for every
knight's-fee a horse with caparison and furniture, or two without furniture, in
the division of Cheshire. Their knights and freeholders were to have corselets
and habergeons, and were to defend their lands with their own bodies. Every
baron had also four esquires; every esquire one gentleman; and every gentleman
one valet Erdeswicke's MSS. quoted by Doctor Gower, p. 22.
. Each of these barons had also their free courts of all pleas and suits, and
all plaints, except what belonged to the earl's sword. They had besides power
of life and death. The last instance of the exertion of this power was in the
person of Hugh Stringer, who was tried for murder in the baron of Kinderton's
court, and executed in 1597 Doctor Gower's materials, etc. p. 22.
.

THE earls had their chamberlain, which supplied the place of chancellor; an
office continued to this day. The first we know of was Philippus Camerarius,
who took his name from his office, in the time of Randle Gernouns earl of
Chester. Here is a baron of the exchequer, and other officers conformable to
those of the crown at Westminster: also justices, before whom the causes which
of their nature should otherwise belong respectively to the courts of
king's bench and common pleas, are triable Leicester, 152.
.

IN imitation of regal power, the earls appointed a high constable of Cheshire,
correspondent to the high constable of England; which was held in fee by the
baron of Halton, who by virtue of this office took place of the other barons;
and the baron of Montalt had precedence (after him) by virtue of his office in
fee, of high steward.

ROBERT DE ROTHELENT was another baron, who was commander in chief of the
forces in Cheshire, and prime governor of the county under his cousin Hugh
Lupus. As his office and rank dropped with him, he is not reckoned among the
barons. Probably the office was found unnecessary, and clashing with the
priveleges of the high constable.

THIS species of government continued from the Conquest till the reign of Henry
III. a period of about 174 years; when, in 1237, on the death of John Scot (the
seventh earl of the Norman line) without issue male, Henry took the earldom
into his own hands, and gave the daughters of the late earl other lands in
lieu; unwilling, as we said, that so great an inheritance should be parcelled
out among distaffs. THE EARLDOM RESUMED BY THE CROWN.
The king bestowed the county on his son Edward, who did not assume the title;
which he afterward bestowed on his son Edward of Caernarvon, first English
prince of Wales.

AFTER the resumption of the earldom by the crown, the government of the city
assumed a new form; for in the year 1242, the 26th of Henry III. it appears to
have first been under the directions of a mayor and sheriffs. The mayor seems
to have been the substitute for the constable; an office which, during the
period of the Norman earls, was, under them, supreme in all matters military
and civil, in both city and county. The sheriffs seem to have been a new name
for bailiffs, who acted under the former Vale royal, 161.
.

AFTER giving a general idea of the state of this place and county to the time
of Henry III. I shall return to the time of Hugh Lupus, and give, to the best
of my power, a brief chronological account of its history; leaving the
ecclesiastical part to be treated apart.

IN the days of that potent earl, and probably long before he was possessed of
this city, it enjoyed by prescription diverse priveleges. GUILD MIRCATORY.
It had a guild mercatory Ibid. 157.
, analogous to a modern corporation; so that no person who was not of that
society could exercise any trade or carry on any commerce within its precinct.
Such was the state in which the Normans found it; which the earls afterward
confirmed under their seals.

Two overseers, selected out of the most respectable citizens, were appointed
to maintain the rights of this guild. They received, for the use of the city,
all the customs paid by strangers, unless at the fairs, which in those days
were said to have been held three times in the year. These officers were
probably of the same nature as the deans of guild in Scotland. It appears also
from the Doomsday book, that here was a supreme officer, called the Prapesitus
Regis, or provost, who had the care both of the civil and commercial interests.

IT is difficult to say at this time what were the articles of exportation,
excepting slaves and horses. EXPORTS. SLAVES.
The first barbarous traffic was carried on by the Saxons to a great height.
The description of the mart is an exact picture of the negro commerce THERE is
a town called Brichstou (Bristol) opposite to Ireland, and extremely convenient
for trading with that country. Wulfstan induced them to drop a barbarous
custom, which neither the love of God nor the king could prevale on them to lay
aside. This was the mart for slaves, collected from all parts of England; and
particularly young women, whom they took care to provide with a pregnancy, in
order to enhance their value. It was a most moving sight to see, in the public
markets, rows of young people of both sexes tied together with ropes; of great
beauty, and in the flower of their youth, daily prossituted, daily sold.
Execrable fact! wretched disgrace! Men, unmindful even of the affection of the
brute creation! delivering into slavery their relations, and even their very
offspring. Vita S. Wulfstan, in Anglia Sacra, ii. 258. Wulsstan was bishop of
Worcester, and died in 1095.
at present; so little have we emerged from barbarism in that instance.

HORSES were another article; HORSES, HIDES, etc.
but their exportation was prohibited, excepting they were designed for
presents, by a law of Athelstan. But these, as well as several others, such as
metals, hides, dogs, and chalk, were probably still exported, as in the times
of the Romans. Chester was, admirably situated for supplying all these
articles, excepting the last. The frequent wars carried on with the Welsh,
furnished them with slaves; if those were wanting, their neighbors of the
Northumbrian kingdom were ready to dispose of their nearest relations Willielm.
Malmesh. in script. post, Bedam, p. 17.
. The rich plains of Cheshire furnished horns and hides; and the Cambrian
mines, lead and copper.

CHEESE must not be omitted, CHEESE.
as a most important article; for the Britons made so great a progress in the
arts of the dairy, that even under the Roman reign there was great exportation
of cheeses for the use of the Roman armies; in which this county doubtlessly
had the greatest share.

THE imports were the spices and other luxuries of the east, IMPORTS.
procured either from Venice, or afterward from the cities of Pisa and Amalphi
Anderson, i. 58, 59.
, the magazines of the precious Asiatic commodities.

CLOTH was brought from Flanders, and linen from Germany Idem, 52.
CLOTH. LINEN. RELICS.
; relics and ecclesiastical finery from Italy Bedae Hist. Abb. Weremouth,
295, 297.
, the staple of superstition. Rich armor was another considerable article; for
war and religion created in these ages the most important commerce of the
state. The warriors and the sainted images were the beaux of the time; the
crimes of the former were supposed to be readily expiated by prostration to the
latter; and acceptance was announced by the priest in proportion to the value
of the offering.

FRANCE and Spain supplied them with wine; WIX^.
and the discovery made toward the north by Ohthere, under the directions of
Alfred, FURS
gave us furs, whale-bone, feathers, walruses teeth, and other articles from
that cold region Translation of Orofius, by the honoarable DAINES BARRINGTON,
9, 12, 13.
. Martins skins are twice mentioned in the Doomsday book, among the imports of
Chester. Ireland might also supply them with furs, and several other
commodities; this being the channel of communication on that side of the
kingdom, and the great mart for the Irish commodities. A sensible but uncouth
poem, about the year 1430, published in Hakluyt, i. 199, gives us a list of its
articles of commerce.

Hides and fish, salmon, hake, herringe,
Irish wool, and linen cloth, faldinge,
And marterns good be her marchandie,
Hertes hides and other of venerie.
Skins of otter, squirrel, and Irish hare
Of sheep, lamb, and fox, is her chaffare,
Felles of kiddes, and conies great plenty.
It is certain that Chester had long been a celebrated port. It appears to have
been a station for the Saxon navy; and frequently the seat of the court of the
Mercian kingdom, both during the Heptarchy, and after it became a province at
the general union under Egbert.

THE state of this city, in the time of Edward the Confessor, and at the
Conquest, must be collected from the famous survey the Doomsday book.

IT appears, that in the time of the Saxon monarch here were four hundred and
thirty-one houses which were taxable, besides fifty-six that belonged to the
bishop: that it yielded ten marks of silver and a half; two parts to the king,
and the third to the earl: that whenever the king came in person, he clamed
from every plough-land two hundred hesthas, one cuna of ale, and one rusca of
butter Hestha is supposed to be a capon; cuna and brewing tub or vat. I do not
find rusca explained.
: that if any persons made bad ale, they were either to sit in a chair full of
dung, or pay four shilings: that there were twelve judges in the city, and
seven mint-masters: that whenever repairs were wanting for the walls or the
bridge, notice was given for one man out of every hide-land in the county to
appear; and in case of absence, he was fined forty shillings, to be divided
between the king and the earl: and that the city was so depopulated at the time
that Hugh Lupus took possession, that there were two hundred and five houses
fewer than in the time of the Confessor.

IT is probable that the city soon emerged from its calamities, and felt a
considerable increase under its new masters, a more polished race; for the
Normans affected as much elegance in their dress and their buildings, as they
did temperance in their meat and drink. The example of a magnificent warrior,
such as the new earl, was quickly copied. His court, and that of his
successors, rendered it the most considerable place in these parts.

ACCORDING to Lucian Quoted by Cambden i. 672.
, a jolly monk who flourished about the time of the Conquest, its commerce was
very considerable. He speaks of the ships coming from Gascoign, Spain, Ireland,
and Germany, who, by GOD'S assistance, and by the labor and conduct of
mariners, repair hither and supply them with all sorts of commodities; so that
being comforted with the favor of GOD in all things, we drink wine
plentifully; for those countries have abundance of vineyards.

HERE, 1159
in 1159, Henry II. and Malcolm the IVth of Scotland had their interview; and
the important cession was made to Henry by the latter, of the three counties of
Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmoreland, formerly wrested from the English
crown Fordun, i. 449.
.

BALDWIN, archbishop of Canterbury, 1188
in 1188, visited this place, in his road from Wales, where his zeal led him to
recommend the Croisade to the mountaneers, assisted by the eloquent and vain
Giraldus. All the historian takes notice of in this respectable city is, that
Constance countess of Chester kept a herd of milch hinds, made cheeses of their
milk, and presented three to the archbishop: that he saw an animal, a compound
of an ox and a stag; a woman born without arms, who could sew as well with her
feet as others of her sex did with their fingers; and finally, that he heard of
a litter of whelps begotten by a monkey Itin. Cambr. c. xi. p. 87.
. As Giraldus was a great dealer in presages, it is wondrous he made no use of
all these portents: probably no signal event happened in these parts in his
days, to which they could be applied.

THE next remarkable occurrences were the ravages of Llewelyn ap Gryffydd, 1255.
prince of Wales, who carried fire and sword to the very gates of Chester, and
destroyed every thing around on both sides of the river; provoked by the cruel
injuries his subjects sustained from Geffrey Langley, lieutenant of the county
under prince Edward Walstngham, p. 467; who places this event in 1255.
.

THIS city seems to have been a constant rendezvous of troops, and place
d'armes for every expedition on this side of the kingdom, from the times of the
Normans to the conquest of Ireland by William III. In 1257, Henry III. summons
his nobility Rymer, i. 635.
to attend with their vassals at Chester on a certain day, in order to invade
Wales, and revenge the inroads of the Welsh; and the bishops Idem, 636.
were at the same time required to appear there on the same occasion.

EDWARD I. in 1275, 1275.
appointed this city as the place of receiving the homage of Llewelyn; to which
that high-spirited prince deelining to submit Powel, 333. Rymer, ii. 53.68.
, brought on the war, which concluded with the destruction of him and his
principality.

AND in this city was received, 1300.
in 1300, the final acknowlegement of the Welsh to the sovereignty of England,
by Edward of Caernarvon prince of Wales, when the freeholders of the country
did homage and fealty for their respective lands Powel, 382.
.

RICHARD II. 1397.
visited the capital of his favorite and loyal county; and did it the
distinguished honor of converting it into a principality, and annexing to it
the castle of Holt, the lordship of Bromefield and Yale, Chirkland, and several
other places in Wales and on the borders. But Henry IV. in his fourth year,
rescinded an act that incroached so much on the dignity of his son as prince of
Wales Statutes at large, 21 Rich. II. c. 9.
.

HENRY IV. in 1399, 1399.
seized the city and castle, in his way to Flint against his ill-fated monarch
Richard II. and on his return secured him for one night in the fortress; and
barbarously put to death Sir Perkin a Legh, and other gentlemen, whom he took
with their unfortunate master.

DURING the insurrection of Glendwr, this city was made a rendezvous of the
royal forces, and a place d'armes. It does not appear that our countryman ever
made any attempt on it, notwithstanding numbers of the gentry of this gallant
county favored his cause Rymer viii. 333.
. But the country was unhappily divided; and continued so during the civil wars
that raged between the houses of York and Lancaster. The spirited Margaret, in
order to keep up the interest of her party, made a progress into the county in
1455, and visited this city Fale-royal, 185.
. 1455.
In 1459, 1459.
soon before the battle of Bloreheath, she made another, and took with her the
Meek Usurper, her husband Henry VI. and her son Edward. She kept a public table
wherever she went; and bestowed on the Cheshire gentlemen, that espoused her
cause, little silver swans, the badge of the young prince, as the cognizance of
the Lancastrians Speed's Hist, 858.
. She appointed James lord Audley to command the Cheshire forces. Michael
Drayton gives an animated description of the effects of civil discord on this
occasion: he acquaints us that Audley

So labored, till that he had brought
That t'half of one house against the other fought.
So that two men arising from one bed
Falling to talk, from one another fly;
This wears a white rose, and that wears a red;
And this a YORK, that LANCASTER does cry:
HE wished to see that AUDLEY well had sped;
He prays again to prosper SAL'SBURY.
AND for their farewell, when their leaves they take,
THEY their sharp swords at one another shake The Miseries of Queen Margaret,
part iv.
.
DANIEL KING tells us, that Edward prince of Wales, son to Edward IV. came to
Chester before Christmas 1475, 1475.
and was immediately conveyed to the castle with great triumph. Edward must
have designed this only as a compliment to his friends in these parts, his son
being at this time a child of four years of age. Such marks of royal favor were
not unfrequent. Henry VII. and his queen came here in 1493; 1493.
and Henry sent his son Arthur to visit the place in 1497. 1497.


THIS city had also its share in the calamitous distempers of the times. In
1506, 1506.
it was visited by that endemic disorder the sweating-sickness, which
destroyed, in three days, ninety-one householders. The remark, of this
destroying-angel's respect to the female sex, was verified here; for only four
perished.

IN 1517, 1517.
it was followed by the pestilence, when such numbers died, and such numbers
fled, that the streets of the city were overgrown with grass.

IT appears that the citizens of Chester were not less celebrated for their
dramatic performances than those of Coventry Dugdale, i. 249.
. 1529.
They exhibited two species; one formed upon moral romance, the other on
scriptural history. In this year they enacted at the high-cross the play of
Robert king of Cicyle, or Robert le Dia^^^ borrowed from the French morality of
that name.

Here i^ of king Robert of Cicyle,
Hou pride did him beguile Mr. WARTON'S Hist. Poetry, i. 1^4 Daniel King calls
it the play of Robert Cecill.
.
ROBERT, like another Nebuchadnezzar, thought himself beyond the power of any
being, divine or human. Heaven, in order to humble him, causes a deep sleep to
fall on him in church: when the congregation is dismissed, an angel assumes his
form, and deceives his attendants, who follow the angelic king into the palace,
where he takes Robert's place. Robert awakes; runs to his palace; is disowned;
seized as an impostor, and at last appointed fool of the hall to the new king;
and,

Clothed in lodly Loathsome.
garnement
With ffoxes tails money about
Men mihte him known in the route.
After a very long and ignominious penance, the angel finds Robert effectually
cured of his presumption, quits his mission, and restores the poor king to his
throne.

THE year 1532 reminds me of the religious dramas being performed in this city.
1532. WHITSON PLAYS.
These are the famous interludes known by the name of Mysteries, originally
composed in the years 1327 and 1328, by Randal Higgenet, a monk of Chester
abbey, as this prologue acquaints us.

Reverend lords and ladies all,
That at this time assembled be;
By this messauge understond you shall,
That some times there was mayor of this city
Sir John Arnway. knight; who most worthilye
Contented himself to set out in play
The devise of one Dane Rondall, moonke of Chester abbey.
RONDAL, it seems, first composed these Mysteries in Latin and took true pains
to obtain leave to exhibit them in an English dress, having made three journies
to Rome for his Holiness's permission Harleian MSS. 2124.
. Others again were the labors of Sir Henry Frances, another monk, as appears
by the proclamation for the Whitson plays in this year, made by the clerk of
the Pentice, setting forth, that in

Oulde time, not only for the augmentation and increes of the holy and
catholic faith, and to exort the minds of the common people to good devotion
and wholesome doctrine, but also for the comonwelth of this city, a play and
declaration of diverse stories of the Bible, beginning with the creacion, and
fall of Lucifer, and ending with the general judgment of the world, to be
declared and played in the Whitsonne week, was devised and made by Sir Henry
Frances, sometime moonke there; who gat of Clement, then bushop of Rome, 1000
days or pardon, and of the bushop of Chester at that time, 40 days of pardon,
to every person resorting in peaceable manner to hear the said plays; which
were insituted to the honor of God by John Arnway, then major of Chester, his
brethren and whole cominalty thereof; to be brought forth, declared, and
played, at the cost and charges of the craftesmen and occupations of the said
city, etc. etc. Harleian. MSS. 2013.
. THESE plays had probably been dropped for a considerable time; which occasioned
the proclamation, in the reign of that pageant-loving prince Henry VIII.
Forty-three years had elapsed since the last performance of this nature, when
the Assumption of our Lady was played before his brother Arthur, at the
abbygates of this city.

THESE Mysteries were the rude origin of the English theater. Our drama, as the
very ingenious Mr. Warton remarks, was in early times confined entirely to
religious subjects; and these plays were nothing more than an appendage to the
specious and mechanical devotion of the age History of English Poetry, i, 237.
. I refer the reader to that gentleman's amusing history of the rise and
progress of these performances; and confine myself to a few specimens of the
gross and ridiculous exhibitions of the times; when the audience listened with
the fullest admiration and devotion to what would at present fill a theater
with laughter from the gay, at the absurdity, or scandalize the serious part,
with the (unintentional) impiety. I shall only premise, that the scene of
action was the church, in defiance of the fulminations of the furious Bonner,
and the pious G^indal.

THESE plays were twenty-five in number. They were performed for above three
centuries, to the staring audience; who received the unvaried subject with the
same annual pleasure as the Romans did the farces in their days of honest
simplicity.

Tandemque redit ad pulpita notum
Exodium, cum personae pallentis hiatum
In gremio matris sormidat rusticus infans.
Juv. Sat. iii. The same rude song returns upon the crowd,
And by tradition is for wit allowed.
The mimic yearly gives the same delights,
And in the mother's arms the clownish infant frights.
DRYDEN. They do not appear to us in the words of the original deviser: but,
the language and the poetry being grown obsolete, they were altered to that of
the time, for the performance of the year 1600, and were acted by the craftsmen
of the twenty-five companies, who were all dressed in suitable habits.

1. THE Tanners performed the play or pageant of the Fall of Lucifer; and in
the course of the prologue are thus instructed:

NOW, you worshippfull Tanners, that of custom old
The fall of Lucifer did set out:
Some writers a warrante, your matter therefore be should
Craftelye to play the same to all the rowtte;
Your author his auther has: your show let it be
Good speech, syne players, with apparrill comelye.
SHAKESPEARE certainly formed his personae dramatis of mechanics, his Quinees,
Snugs, Snouts, and Starvelings, in the Midsummer-Night's Dream, from performers
of this kind.

2. THE Drapiers enacted the Creation of the World. Adam and Eve appeared
literally naked, and were not ashamed, till after the fall, when they proposed,
according to the stage-direction, to make themselves subligacula a foliis,
quibus tegamus pudenda, and made their appearance with an apron of fig leaves,
sticking religiously to the account given in the third chapter of Genesis.

3. THE Water leaders and drawers of the Dee, took, with great propriety, the
History of the Deluge; which being handled in a very diverting manner, I shall
transcribe as a pattern of the rest. Their prologue tells them, that Noe shall
go into the arc, with all his femylye, his wife except. After the long
catalogue of birds, beasts, etc. which are supposed to have entered the vessel,
Noah thus calls to his spouse:

NOYE This is copied from the MS. in the B^dlcian Library.
.
Wife, come in, why stands thou there?
Thou art ever froward, that sure I swear;
Come in on God's half, time it were,
For fear lest that we drown.
NOYES Wief.
You Sir, set up your sail,
And row forth with evil hayle;
For, withouten land fail,
I will not out of this grove.
But I have my gossopes evry each one.
One foot further I will not gone;
They shall not drown, by Saint John,
And I may save there lyves.
They loved me full well by Christ;
But thou will let them into thie chest,
Ellis row forth may when thou list,
And get thee another wief.
NOYE.
Sem, son, now thie mother is war o woe,
By God faith another I do not know.
SEM.
Father, I shall fetch her in, I trow
Withouten any fail.
Mother, my father after thee sends,
And biddes thee into yonder ship wends;
Look upe and see the winds,
For we been ready to sail.
NOYE'S Wief.
Son, go again to him, and say,
I will not come therein to day.
NOYE.
Come in, wief, in twenty devil way,
Or allis stand there without.
CHAM.
Shall we all setch her in?
NOYE.
Yea, sons, in Christ's blessing and mine,
I would ye hied yea be time;
For of this flood I stand in doubt.
THE GOOD GOSSOPES.
The flood comes fleeting in apace,
One every side it spredeth full fare;
For fear of drowning I am aghast.
Good gessopes, let us draw near,
And let us drink are we depart;
For often times we have done so:
For at a draught thou drinks a quart,
And so will I do or I go.
Here is a pottell, full of malmesay good and strong;
It will rejoice both heart and tongue;
Though Noy think us never so long,
Yet we will drink a tyte.
JAPHET.
Mother, we pray you altogether;
For we are here your own children;
Come into the ship for fear of the wedder,
For his love that you bought.
NOYES Wief.
That I will not far all your call,
But I have my gossopes all.
SEM.
In faith, mother, yet you shall,
Whether you will or among.
NOE.
Well me wief into this boat.
NOE'S Wife.
Have you that for thie note. [Gives Noah a box in the car.]
NOE.
A ha, Mary! this is whote:
It is good for to be still.
A, children! methink my boat remeves;
Our tarrying here heughly me greves:
On the land the water spreads:
GOD do as he will.
4. THE Barbers and Wax-chandlers told how Abraham returned from the slaughter
of the four kings, etc.

5. THE Cappers and Linen-drapers took up the story of Balaam and his ass; and
make the prophet accost his beast in terms too low and ludicrous to be
repeated. This animal had far greater respect paid it in a neighboring kingdom;
for feasts were held in honor of it. The sesta asinaria, or feasts of asses,
were celebrated in France in the beginning of the fifteenth century Memoires,
etc. de la Fcte des Foux, 14. See also more of it in Mr. Warton's History of
Poetry, i. 246.
; when the beast, covered with a cope, was introduced into church, attended by
the clergy, and saluted with the following hymn:

Orientis partibus
Adventavit asinus
Pulcher et fortissimus
Sarcinis aptissimus.
He, fire Ane, he.
Hie in Collibus sicsen
Enutritus sub Ruben
Transsit per Jordanem,
Saliit in Bethleem.
He, fire Ane, he.
Saltu vincit hinnulos
Dagmas et capreolos,
Super Dromedarios
Velox Madianeos.
He, fire Ane, he.
Aurum de Arabia,
Thus et myrrham de Saba
Tulit in ecclesia
Virtus asinaria.
He, fire Ane, he.
Dum trahit vehicula
Multa cum sarcinula,
Illius mandibula,
Dura terit pabula.
He, fire Ane, he.
Amen dicas, Asine,
Jam satur ex gramine,
Amen, amen, itera,
Aspernare vetera,
He, fire Ane, he.
Cum aristis hordeum
Comedit et carduum
Triticum a palea
Segregat in area.
He, fire Ane, he.
6. THE Wrights and Slaters rehearsed the Beirth of Christ. 7. The Painters and
Glaziers, the Appearance of the Angels to the Shepherds. 8. The Vintners, the
Departure of the Wise men, or three Kings of the east, in search of our
Savior. 9. The Mercers, the Offerings of the three Kings. 10. The Goldsmiths
the Murder of the Innocents; and give a curious dialogue between the soldiers
and the women. 11. The Blacksmiths show how Christ disputed with the doctors in
the temple. 12. The Butchers, how he was led by the Spirit into the wilderness.
13. The Glovers tell of the death of Lazarus. 14. The Corvisors, of Jesus and
the Lepers. 15. The Bakers, of the last Supper. 16. The Fletchers, Bowyers,
Coopers, and Stringers, chose the History of the Passion. 17. The Ironmongers,
the Crucifixion. 18. The Cooks relate the descent of Christ into Hell, and what
he did there; which concludes with our Savior redeeming out of Purgatory all
the saints, and leaving behind only one poor woman (probably a real character
at the composition of this curious drama) whose crimes she confesses in a long
speech:

Some time I was a tavernere,
A gentel gossepp, and a tapstere
Of wine and ale a trusty brewer,
Which woo has me bewrought.
Of cannes I keep no true measure;
My cups I sold at my pleasure,
Deceavinge many a creature,
Though my ale were naught.
She is then welcomed by the devils; which closes the piece, and all I shall
relate of those heaps of absurdities.

THE city had, 1542 PUBLIC STEWS.
till this time, been indulged with public stews or brothels, which, for some
centuries, were permitted by legislative authority, and regulated by wholesome
laws, ordained by the commons, and confirmed by the king and lords. hose of
Southwark were attended to in a particular manner in 1161, the 8th of Henry II.
One article affords reason to believe, that a certain disease had a much
earlier date than the siege of Naples; for it prohibits the stew-holders from
keeping any woman that has the perilous infirmity of burning Stow's Hist.
London, II. book iv. 7.
. Their houses were distinguished by having the fronts whitewashed, by having
signs, not hung out, but painted against the walls. Among the signs, I observe
the singular one of the cardinal's hat. Notwithstanding the keepers were
protected in their profession, they were reckoned infamous, were not to be
impannelled on any juries, or allowed to hold a tavern Drake's Parlem. Hist.
ii. 233.
. The women that frequented them were forbidden the rites of the church, as
long as they exercised their profession, and were excluded from Christian
burial, if they were not reconciled before their death. Henry VIII. suppressed
the Surry houses in 1537; those in this city in 1542.

THIS year was distinguished by one of the cruel deeds that marked the reign of
the bigoted Mary; 1554.
the burning of George Marsh, for his adherence to the Protestant faith. I have
often been informed by the worthy Doctor William Cooper, that when Marsh was
brought to Boughton, the place of execution, by the sheriffs Amory and Cooper,
the last, an ancestor of the Doctor; favoring the religion of the sufferer,
attempted his rescue; but being overpowered by his brother-officer, was obliged
to fly till better times, when he returned, and discharged the office of mayor
in 1561.

FESTIVE times now took place again, 1564.
probably in compliment to the taste of the glorious but romantic Queen
Elizabeth. In the year 1564, upon the Sunday after Midsummer, in the mayoralty
of Sir Lawrence Smith, the history of Aenecs and queen Dido was played on the
Reed's-eye, set forth by William Croston, gent. and Mr. Man; on which triumph
was made two forts, and shipping on the water, besides many horsemen well armed
and appointed. The forts and shipping seem to have been pageants, to carry on
some deeds of chivalry. We hear of the ship Fame, laden with good Renown,
among the pageantries of Henry Holinshed, 809.
; and the Fortress of Beauty, assailed by virtuous Desire, among those of
Elizabeth The same, 1317.
. The assailants battered it with nosegays; and the besieged discharged against
them cannons filled with sweet powder, or odoriferous waters.

DURING Sir Lawrence's mayoralty, we have an account of another spectacle, an
annual one, upon the watch of the even of St. John the Baptist, for Sir
Lawrence and the aldermen and common council, contract with two painters to
have in readiness, with all furniture thereto belonging, viz. four giants, one
unicorne, one dromedarye, one luce, one camel, one ass, one dragon, six
hobbye horses, and sixteen naked boys; and the same being in readiness, shall
bear or carry, or cause to be borne and carried, duringe the watch, from
place to place, according as the same have been used, etc. Harlcian MSS. No
1968. 9.
I am at a loss to guess the end of this preparation: but find that it was
suppressed during the mayoralty of 1599.

THE virtue of Edward Dutton, 1604.
mayor or the city in 1604, must not pass unnoticed. This worthy magistrate,
like Marseilles' good bishop, kept his station during the whole time of a
dreadful pestilence;

When nature sickened, and each gale was death. HIS house was infected, and
some of his children and servants died. The court of exchequer was removed to
Tarvin; the (...) assizes were held at Namptwich; and the fairs ceased during
this sad visitation.

IN this year the city was honored with the presence of James I. where he was
received with a magnificence that did honor to the place. (...)
The mayor. Edward Button, presented his majesty with a fair standing cup, with
a cover double gilt, and in it a hundred jacobins or gold. He also delivered
the city's sword to the king, who returning it, the mayor bore it before him on
horseback. His worship was offered the honor of knighthood, but declined it.
The city did not confine its munificence to crowned heads; I find, that in
1583, Robert earl of Leicester, chamberlain of the county palatine, met with a
most honorable reception; was received at the high-cross by the whole
corporation, entertained by the mayor, and presented with a cup containing
forty angels. The unfortunate earl of Essex, in 1598, in his way to Ireland,
was still more distinguished. He was presented with the like sum; but in a cup
of the same kind as that which was afterward presented to James.

FROM 1617, I discover nothing very particular for a considerable space; till
the city was involved in the calamities of a siege in 1^45-6, in consequence of
its unshaken loyalty to Charles I. At the beginning of the civil war, immediate
attention was paid to this important city, by the royal party. The
fortifications were put into the best repair, and outworks extended from the
alcove on the north part of the walls, to the brink of the river near Boughton;
and in consequence, numbers of houses were pulled down, to prevent them from
giving shelter to the enemy. The first attempt made on the place by the
parliament army was on the 20th of July 1643, when Sir William Brereton gave a
violent assault on the works; but met with a repulse. In the same year he sent
a summons to Sir Abraham Shipman, then governor, to surrender: the gallant
commander bid him come and win it and wear it.

AFTER the repulse of Lord Biron before Namptwich, the county of Chester was
almost entirely in the hands of Sir William Brereton, and the city suffered
from that time a sort of blockade, from the quarters the enemy possessed in the
neighborhood, even as near as the village of Christleton. Sallies and
excursions were frequently made; and, according to the diary of the siege with
advantage to the loyalists.

ON September the 19th 1645, the parliament gained an advantage irrecoverable by
the besieged. Colonel Jones and adjutant-general Lothian, who were employed in
the reduction of Beeston castle, drew from before that place, in a secret
manner, a large body of forces, and in the night stormed the outworks, and made
themselves masters of every thing, even to the city walls. His majesty,
immediately after this misfortune, passed through Wales, and got into the city,
in hopes of animating the garrison, and was lodged at Sir Francis Gamul's, near
the bridge. He arrived only time enough to be a spectator, from the leads of
the Phoenix tower, of the fatal battle on Rowton heath, on September 24; when
his forces, under Sir Marmaduke Langdale, then on their march to raise the
siege, after a well-disputed action, sunk under the superior fortune of general
Pointz.

THE king continued that night in Chester; and on quitting it the next day,
gave orders to the governor, lord Biron, that in case there was no appearance
of relief within eight days, he was to treat of a surrender. The king took the
route of Den-high, attended to that town by the three respectable citizens, Sir
Francis Gamul, alderman Cooper, and captain Thropp. The siege was continued
with the utmost vigor by Sir William Brereton; notwithstanding which, the
gallant garrison held out for twenty weeks, beyond the expectation of every
body: and, after having been reduced to live on horses, dogs, and cats,
yielded, on the 3d of February 1645-6, on terms that did honor to the spirit of
the besieged. The city was evacuated by the royalists; and received from the
parliament, as governor, colonel Jones. But the miseries of the citizens did not
terminate with the siege: a dreadful pestilence broke out in 1647: two thousand
inhabitants perished, and the city became almost a desert.

IN order to give a further history of the military, BRIDGE.
civil, and ecclesiastical architecture of this ancient city, I return to the
bridge. This passage was prior to the Conquest; at which period it seems to
have been either destroyed, or found to be so much out of repair, that I find
in Doomsday book an order for the provost to summon one man from each hide of
land in the county, in order to re-build the bridge and the walls; and, in case
of neglect of appearance, the lord of the person so summoned was to forfeit to
the king and earl forty shillings.

ACCORDING to a MS. quoted by Mr. Gross, it was begun by the great restorer of
the city, Ethelfieda, and after her death completed by her brother Edward.
Before that time, the passage was by a ferry that plied between the postern,
called the Ship-gate, and Edgar's field. It does not appear to me that any part
of the Saxon bridge remains; so frequently has it been repaired since that
distant period.

BENEATH the arch next to the city, CAUSEWAY AND MILLS.
is a current, which, by means of a great dam or causeway that crosses the
river obliquely, supplies the city mills with water. These mills and the
causeway were originally founded by Hugh Lupus Harleian MSS. 2082. 10. 2003.
41. 43.
, and retained by his successors, and afterward by the earls of Chester of the
royal line. I find them often leased by the crown; Edward the black prince, in
particular, in 1355, grants them, the fishing, suit, court, and calsey, for
three years, to Robert of Bredone, parson of St. Peter of Chester, and others,
at the annual rent of 190 l. Idem, 2081. 21.
. This rent was very considerable in those days; and arose from the obligation
every inhabitant of the city then lay under to grind at these mills, excepting
the tenants of the abbot and monks of St. Werburgh, and, in after times, those
of the dean and chapter, inhabiting without the North-gate, who had a mill of
their own at Bachpool.

I MUST not omit, that a grant of these mills for life was the reward of valor
to my countryman Sir Howel y Fwyall, for his bravery in taking prisoner John
king of France, in the battle of Poitiers. This grant was also made by the
black prince, who not only knighted Howel, but allowed a mess of meat to be
served before his battle ax, in memory of the good use he made of it in that
day; from which he acquired the name of Fwyall, or Howei or the ax Hist. Gwedir
family. Fifteen tribes of N.Wales.
.

ON each side of the Bridge-gate are two rounders: BRIDGE-GATE.
over it are the three feathers, the arms of the princes of Wales. Those were
first assumed by the BLACK PRINCE after the battle of Cresh, in 1346: our
historians assert, that they were the three ostrich-feathers which the king of
Bohemia bore that day in his coronet; and that he was slain by Edward, who
seizing on the crest, bore from that time both the feathers and the motto I^b
dien, I serve. I am unwilling to sully the honor of our gallant prince, by
supposing that he would stain his sword in so unequal an encounter. The king
was blind with age; and, finding the battle go against his allies, was led, by
his own orders, into the rage of the combat, determined to die in the cause of
France. Our brave prince, probably, might assume this royal cognizance in
memory of the glorious day, and add to it his own motto, Ic dien, the old
English for I serve allusive to the Scriptural verse, The heir while he is a
child differs not from a servant Cambden's Remains, 344.
, an imprese extremely suitable to the characteristic modesty and filial piety
of this prince.

THIS and the other city gates were placed under the protection of certain
great men, who held lands within the county palatine. The earl of Shrewshury
had the care of the Bridge-gate; the earl of Oxford, of the Eastgate; the earl
of Derby, of the Watergate. But the North-gate, belonging peculiarly to the
city, was entrusted only to its chief magistrates. Tolls were exacted at
entrance, from all strangers, for the support of the guard; and,
notwithstanding the cause has long since ceased, are still demanded at the
Bridge-gate.

ABOVE the gate is a lofty octagonal tower, WATERWORKS.
begun in 1600, by permission of the corporation, by John Tyrer of this city,
containing the works which for a long time raised water out of the Dee to a
cistern in the top, whence it was conveyed in pipes to almost all parts of the
city. Possibly these did not answer their purpose effectually; for in 1622,
Tyrer had a new grant of a tower erected for a water-work and a well-place, ten
feet square, near Spittle Boughton, with full powers for the conveyance of the
water to the cistern or conduit near the high-cross. This work (which was first
begun by the black friars in the time of Edward I. De aquaeductu per ipsos (the
black friars) faciendo a font prope furcas. Vide Tanner, 65.
) fell to decay. In 1692, the works undertaken by Tyrer being found to be
ruinous and useless, John Hopkins and John Hadley, by the encouragement of the
corporation, began new works for supplying the city with water from the river
Dee: for this purpose, they purchased the grant made to Tyrer, and also one of
the corn-mills, for the convenience of placing their engine. The city confirmed
to them all the powers formerly vested in Tyrer, and particularly that of
setting up a cistern opposite to the abbey court, as a constant receptacle for
fresh water.

NEAR the Bridge-gate is one ascent to the city walls; WALLS.
which are the only entire specimen of ancient fortification now in Great
Britain. They are a mile and three quarters, and a hundred and one yards in
circumference; and, being the principal walk of the inhabitants, are kept in
excellent repair, by certain imposts, MURRACE
called murage duties, collected at the custom-house, upon all goods and
merchandise brought into the port of Chester from parts beyond the seas,
belonging to persons not freemen of the city. The Irish linen adds considerably
to the fund, being nearly two-thirds of the whole: the duty on this article is
two pence on every hundred yards. The annual receipt of the different duties,
on the average of the last seven years, is about 1^0 l.. An officer, called a
murenger, is chosen out of the body of the aldermen, to inspect the repairs;
generally an old member, to whom the duty affords amusement and health. This
fund is now permanent: in old times, the murage was only occasional. Thus, in
the 14th of Edward II. there was a grant for two years of a halfpenny for
every cranock of corn; and a farthing of ale, meal, and malt; and for
commodities not expressed in the grant, a farthing out of every two
shillings-worth.

I CANNOT discover any vestige of the original walls, such as those which are
said to have been restored by the warlike Ethelfleda. I would not willingly
detract from the lady's merit; but I must deny her that of being the foundress
of the fortifications, and of enlarging the city beyond the Roman precincts.
The form at present is so entirely Roman, that any addition she could make
would have destroyed the peculiar figure that wise people always preserved in
their stations or castrametations, wheresoever the nature of the ground would
permit. The antiquities which distinguish their residence are not found
confined to any one quarter: they are met in digging on every side within the
walls.

THE military architecture is still entirely on the Roman plan; it is probable,
that after their retreat it fell into ruin, in the impoverished, turbulent, and
barbarous ages that succeeded, yet never was so totally demolished, but that it
might still yield a defense to the possessors. We find it wrested out of the
hands of the Britons by Egbert, in 828: we again see it possessed by the Danes
in 895, and besieged by Alfred, who slew all the banditti whom he found without
the walls; and, lastly, we find it taken by Ethelfleda, by the voluntary
surrender of the garrison. All this proves a continuance of the fortifications,
probably ruinous, and wanting that restoration which they found from that
illustrious woman.

WE see the Roman mode of fortification preserved to this day, exactly on the
ancient plan. From each side of the gates projects a propugnaculum Vegetius,
lib. iv. c. 4.
or bastion, in order to annoy the enemy who attempted to enter; and between
them, in the very entrance, was the cataracta or portcullis, ready to be dropped
in case they forced the gates, so that part of them might be caught within the
walls, and the rest excluded. Should it happen that they set the gates on fire,
there were holes above, in order to pour down water to extinguish the flames.

THE walls are in many parts, especially on the north and cast sides, guarded
by towers, placed so as not to be beyond bow-shot of one another, in order that
the archers might reach the enemy who attempted to attack the intervals
Intervalla autem turrium ita sunt facienda ut ne longius sit alia ab alia
sagittae intermissione, etc, Vitruvius, lib. i. c. 5.
. They also are mostly of a round form, as was recommended by the Roman
architects, in order the better to elude the force of battering rams Turres
itaque rotundae aut polygoniae sunt faciendae, quadratas enim machinae celerius
dissipant, etc. Ibid. Turres sunt projiciendae in exteriorem partem, uti cum ad
murum hostis impetu velit appropinquare, a turribus, etc. Ibid.
.

THE thickness of the walls answer to the breadth prescribed by Vitruvius. Only
two persons can walk abreast, excepting where the ground adjacent gives a
larger expanse. The great architect directs, that they should be of such a
breadth, that two armed men may pass each other without any impediment.

THE city to this time enjoys the four gates; answerable to the principalis
dextra and sinistra, praetoria and decumana. The Eastgate, one of the
principales, existed within my memory.

MY walk leads me beneath the castle, to another of the principales, the
present Watergate, that opens toward the waterside, and near which the Dee in
former times flowed.

AT the extreme angle of the city, beyond this gate, is a salient tower,
exactly round, WATER-TOWER.
unless where interrupted by a small squared projection at the entrance. This
tower is joined to the walls by a deep open gallery, embattled on each side,
beneath is a large arch for the passage of the tide, before the late
enclosures, which also are within my remembrance. This tower is at present
called the Water-tower. It jutted into the ancient channel or the river, where
the ships lay, which fastened their cables to its sides by the great iron rings
infixed in the stone. This tower was formerly called the new; yet was founded
in 1320; for there exists a contract for that purpose, between the mayor and
citizens of Chester and one John de Helpston, mason, for building quandam
turrem rotundum, etc. a round tower of the thickness of ten yards and a half,
with a cavity within; twenty-four yards high, and so strong as to be
defensible; and all this for the sum of one hundred pounds Harleian MSS. No
2046. 10.
.

THE next remarkable outlet is the North-gate, beyond which is a large suburb.

THE Phoenix tower stands on the angle of the walls beyond this gate. The
present tower was built in 1613, and was used by six of the companies of the
city as a chamber for business. It took its name from the fabulous bird, the
crest of the painter-stainers company, which was placed in front.

THE Eastgate is the next entrance. EASTGATE.
Here stood a lofty square tower, with many apartments, erected (according to
tradition) by Edward III. This had been a Porta principalis, was the grand
entrance into the town, and was the termination of the great Watling-street
road, which crossed the island from Dover, and was the great road from that
port to this place. In 1769, this gate, being found too narrow and
inconvenient, was pulled down, and a magnificent arch arose in its room, at the
sole expense of Richard lord Grosvenour. Beyond this is a vast suburb, called
the Forest-street; whose lower part was defended by a gate, demolished as a
nuisance within these few years.

AFTER passing the Eastgate, the traveller will observe, without the walls, a
vast fosse cut through the live rock, now a common road to the water; but which
appears to me to have been a work of the Romans, as a defense on this side, and
which continues the rectangular shape of the station.

THE views from the several parts of the walls are extremely elegant.
FINE-VIEWS.
The mountains of Flintshire and Denbighshire, the hills of Broxton, and the
insulated rock of Beeston, form the ruder part of the scenery, a rich flat
gives a softer view; and the prospect up the river toward Boughton recalls, in
some degree, the idea of the Thames and Richmond-bill.

ON the Conquest, as has been before related, the king visited this city in
person, and restored the fortifications, It is probable that he only repaired
the walls, but that he entirely rebuilt the castle Ordericus Vitalis, 516.
on the Norman model, and enlarged it far beyond the dimensions of that of the
Saxons, which occupied the summit of the mount or little hill on which the
fortress stands. That part is artificial, in order to give a great elevation,
as was customary in the Saxon keeps; and the portion so flung up appears here
to have been a mixture of stones and exceedingly hard clay.

THE castle is composed of two parts, an upper and a lower: each with a strong
gate, CASTLE.
defended by a round bastion on each side, with a ditch, and formerly with
draw-bridges. Within the precincts of the upper Ballium are to be seen some
towers of Norman architecture, square, with square projections at each corner,
very slightly salient. The handsomest is that called Julius Caesar's. Its
entrance is through a large Gothic door, probably of later workmanship. The
lowest room has a vaulted roof, strengthened with ordinary square couples. The
upper had been a chapel, as appears by the holy water pot, and some figures,
almost obsolete, painted on the walls. Its dimensions are nineteen feet four
inches, by sixteen six, the height also sixteen feet six. The roof is vaulted;
but the couples, which are rounded, slender, and elegant, run down the walls,
and rest on the cornuted capitals of five short but beautiful round pillars, in
the same style with those in the chapter house of the cathedral; probably the
work of the same architect. The arsenal, some batteries, and certain habitable
buildings, occupy the remaining part.

ON the sides of the lower court stands the noble room called Hugh Lupus's
hall, LUPUS'S HALL.
in which the courts of justice for the county are held. The length is very
near ninety-nine feet; the breadth forty-five; the height very aweful, and
worthy the state-apartment of a great baron. The roof supported by woodwork, in
a bold style, carved; and placed on the sides, resting on stout brackets.

THIS magnificent building probably retains its original dimensions. The
character of the first Norman earl required a hall suited to the greatness of
his hospitality; which was confined to no bounds. 'He was,' says Ordericus Lib,
iv. p 522.
, not only liberal, but prosuse. He did not carry a family with him, but an
army. He kept no account of receipts or disbursements. He was perpetually
wasting his estates: and was much fonder of falconers and huntsmen, than of
cultivators of the land and holy men: and by his gluttony he grew so
excessively fat, that he could hardly crawl about.

ADJOINING to the end of this great hall is the court of exchequer, EXCHEQUER
or the chancery of the county palatine of Chester. The earl of Cholmondely is
the present chamberlain; Sir Richard Perrin, my worthy countryman, sits and
discharges the office of vice-chamberlain. In respect to matters of equity, he
here acts as lord chancellor. The chamberlain was one of the ancient earl's
great officers, and had a fee of twenty-two pounds a year. This very building
is said to have been the parlementhouse of the little kings of the palatinate.
It savors of antiquity in the architecture; and within are a number of seats
described by Gothic arches and neat pillars; at the upper end are two; one for
the earl, the other for the abbot. The eight others were allotted to his eight
barons, [and occupy one side of the room.

UNDER the vice-chamberlain is a baron, who holds a weekly court, in which
appearances are entered for bringing causes to a trial. Writs and subpoenas are
also here made out, as well for the great sessions for this county, as for
those of the county of Flint. Here is, besides, an examiner; and a seal-keeper,
who has the charge of the records.

THE judges have lodgings within the castle, during their circuit, by ancient
custom. These are furnished by the sheriffs of the city. The sheriffs of the
county take care of their horses; but are allowed the expenses when they bring
in their accounts at the audit.

THE county jail for felons and debtors is the last place to be described. JAIL
I can do little more than confirm the account of it by the humane Howard.
Their day-confinement is in a little yard, surrounded on all sides by lofty
buildings, impervious to the air, excepting from above, and ever unvisited by
the purifying rays of the sun. Their nocturnal apartments are in cells seven
feet and a half by three and a half; ranged on one side of a subterraneous
dungeon; in each of which are often lodged three or four persons. The whole is
rendered more (wholesomely) horrible, by being pitched over three or four times
in the year. The scanty air of their straight prison-yard is to travel through
three passages to arrive at them: through the window of an adjacent room;
through a grate in the floor of the said room into the dungeon; and finally,
through the dungeon, through a little grate above the door of each of their
kennels. In such places as these are the innocent and the guilty permitted to
be lodged, till the law decides their fate. I am sure the humane keeper, Mr.
Thomas, must feel many a pang at the necessary discharge of his duty. Mr.
HOWARD compares the place to the black-hole at Calcutta. The view I had of it,
assisted to raise the idea of a much worse prison where

No light, but rather darkness visible,
Served only to discover sights of woe.
The constable of the castle holds his place for life; is properly the keeper
of the prison; but appoints a deputy. He is accountable for all prisoners and
debtors, and answerable for their escapes.

WITHIN the walls of this fortress, was an instance of a felon suffering prison
forte et dure, for standing mute on his trial, till he died of hunger. PRISON
FORTE IT DURE.
One Adam, son of John, of the Woodhouses, was, in 1310, the 4th of Edward II.
committed for burning his own houses, and carrying away the goods. He stood
mute; a jury, as usual, was empanelled, who decided, that he could speak if he
pleased. On this he was committed ad dietam; and afterward John le Morgan,
constable of the castle, testified, that the aforesaid Adam was dead ad dietam
Harleian MSS, No 2079. 63.
. This was the origin of the punishment of pressing to death, or the peine
forte et dure, which seems a sort of merciful hastening of death; for it must
have been much more horrible, as well as tedious, in the manner prescribed by
the law of the first Edward, in whose reign it originated. The words of the
statute are, Qe les felouns ecriez et que sont apertement de male fame, et ne
se voillent mettre en enqueste des felonies qe lem lui met devant justices a
la suite le Roy, soient mys en la prison fort et dure, etc.

THE term ad dietam was ironical, expressive of the sad sustenance the sufferer
was allowed; viz. on the first day, three morsels of the worst bread; on the
second, three draughts of water out of the next puddle: and this was to be
alternately his daily diet till he died.

MR. RYMER records a strange instance of a woman at Nottingham, who underwent
this punishment, and lived forty days without meat or drink. This happened in
1357, in the reign of Edward III. who, ad laudem Dei et gloriosae virginis
MARLAe matris suae, unde dictum miraculum processit, at creditur The woman's
name was Caecilia, indicted for the murder of her husband, John de Rygeway,
Rymer's Foedera, vi. 13.
, granted the sufferer a free pardon. After mentioning, that it is probable
that the miracle was a little assisted by natural means, I must observe, that,
according to this instance, the condemned were, in some cases, absolutely
denied any species of food; in others, it seems probable, from the name of the
punishment of Adam, that they sometimes were allowed that wretched diet which
was continued when the punishment changed into the peine dure et forte.

THERE is a singularity in the manner of the treatment of the prisoners who are
released by capital punishment out of their dreadful cells, which merits
mention. They are delivered by the constable or his deputy, at a stone called
Glover's-stone, about ninety yards distant from the outward gate, into the
hands of the sheriffs of the city; who receive them at that stone, which is the
extreme limit of the castle precincts, and from thence convey them to the place
of execution, which they also have the charge of. This custom is not accounted
for, any more than by tradition, that a felon was formerly rescued in his way
to the gallows by the citizens of Chester, and perhaps by the connivance of the
magistrates, who are supposed to have had the disagreeable duty inflicted on
them of executing all criminals, whether they are of the county or the city.

THE city was separated from the castle, and made a county of itself, by the
charter of Henry VII: the castle was left as an appertance to the shire; and
has the small outlet of a little street called Glover's-stone, GLOVER'S STONE.
which is also independent of the city; and in which non-freemen may set up any
trade unmolested by the corporation.

THE castle has a governor, lieutenant governor, and constable; and is
garrisoned by two companies of invalids.

THE civil government and architecture is next to be taken notice of. I have,
in my account of Saxon and Norman CHESTER, given a brief relation of the
government of the city in those periods. I shall at present only mention the
principal charters; and flatter myself, that the reader will excuse my brevity,
not only as it is beyond the power of the traveling topographer to collect the
same materials as the resident; but because his curiosity will, it is to be
hoped, soon be satisfied by the publication of the history of this city by the
Reverend Doctor GOWER, which will amply supply all my deficiencies.

THE first royal charter which this city was honored with is that of Henry III;
CHARTERS.
who confirms all the priveleges bestowed on them by the Norman earls, and, I
imagine, first flung the government into the form of a regular corporation; for
he grants and confirms to them, that none shall buy or sell merchandise in the
city except citizens, unless it be in the fairs, under the penalty of ten
pounds.

EDWARD I. gave the city of Chester, with the appertenances, and all the
liberties and priveleges, to its citizens and their heirs, to be holden of him
and his heirs for ever, paying annually 100 l; he also granted them the
election of a coroner, and pleas of the crown; and that they should have sock
Sock, he who is invested with this, has power to hold courts within his own
lands. SACK, power of deciding complaints and quarrels, and applying to his own
use the fines resulting from such decisions within his own territory. TOLL,
needs no explanation. THEME, the right to dispose of all his bondsmen, their
children, and goods. INEANGTHEFE, the power of apprehending, in his own lands,
thieves, whether they be his own people or those of another lord. OUTFANGTHEFE,
is the power of seizing, in any person's land, a vassal of his own, who has
committed a robbery within his jurisdiction, and bringing him to trial to his
own court. Vide Skene, de verb, signific. and So^n^r's Gloss.
, sack, toll, theme, infangthefe, outfangthefe, and freedom throughout all the
land and dominion, of toll, passage, etc.

EDWARD III. confirmed the past grants, and added another, of all the vacant
lands within the liberty of the city, with leave for the citizens to build on
such vacant spots.

EDWARD the black prince prescribed by particular names the boundaries of the
city, beginning at the Iron-bridge, and from thence to Saltney, the Port-pool,
Flukersbrook, Boughton, etc.

RICHARD II. was particularly kind to his favorite city. In consideration of
some distresses it had undergone, he released them from the payment of
seventy-three pounds ten shillings and eight-pence arrears of rent due to the
crown: he gave them the profits of the ferry toward the re-building and
repairing of Dee bridge: he made them two grants of the murage, the first for
four years, the second for five, for the repairs of the walls. But in the 22d
year of his reign, for the furtherance of justice in the same city, and better
execution thereof, he grants unto his subjects, majors, sheriffs, and
commonalty of the said city, to hold their courts; and limited what processes
they might award in, actions, personal felonies, appeals, processes of
utlagary, as at common law. Granted under the seal of the principality of
Chester, at Chester, May 2, 1398 King, ii. 159
. This seems to have been found necessary, in order to strengthen the civil
policy of this place, which had four years before been greatly insulted by a
dreadful riot in the abbey by Sir Baldwyne of Radyngstone, supported by Sir John
of Stanley with eight hundred men. A sheriff was killed, and many other
excesses committed Harleian MSS. No 2057. 34.
.

AFTER the revolution which happened in 1399, the mayor and citizens continued
to favor the cause of their deposed master; and after his death, gave all the
assistance in their power to Harry Percy. On his defeat, they obtained the
royal pardon; and in order to conciliate their affections, young Henry prince
of Wales, and earl of Chester, confirmed all their former charters and
priveleges; and afterward granted to them the profits of murage and bridge
tower, where tolls were collected, durante been placito.

IN a confirmation of the former charters by Henry VI. we learn the former
concourse of strangers; the greatness of the commerce of Chester, by reason of
the goodness of its port; and the great trade carried on in provisions into and
out of Wales. It farther recites the melancholy change of affairs; the conflux
of foreign merchants being put a stop to by the choking of the creek with
sands; and the intercourse with Wales destroyed, since the insurrection of Owen
Glendwr: which considerations moved the king to remit ten pounds of the ancient
fee-farm rent.

THE provisions alluded to were probably cheeses, on the part of the citizens
of Chester; and perhaps wines, spices, and other foreign luxuries; for which
they might receive in exchange from the Welsh, cattle of different kinds.

HENRY VII. MEMBERS.
in 1506, in consideration of farther distresses of the city, not only remitted
eighty pounds of its annual rent; but granted it a new charter, by which he
separated it from the county, and granted it several of the most valuable
priveleges which it still enjoys: but being a county palatine, and in the time
of Edward I. vested in the crown, never received summons, either for county or
city, to return members to parliament, till the reign of Henry VIII. when the
county, in 1543, was empowered to send two knights, and the city two citizens.
The electors of the last are the freemen of the city; the returning-officers
the sheriffs.

THE corporation consists of a mayor, CORPORATION.
recorder, two sheriff s, twenty-four aldermen, and forty common council. Here
are beside two annual officers, called leave-lookers, whose business was to
prevent all persons who are not free of the city from exercising any trade, or
exposing to sale any wares or merchandise within the liberties. They were
accustomed to go round the city in order to preserve these its privileges; and
sometimes were used to take small sums, called leave-lookerage, for leave for
non-freemen to sell wares by retail; but at present the yeoman of the Pentise
discharges this office, and returns the names of such persons who are found to
offend, in order that actions might be brought against them. We find, as early
as 1297, that similar officers were elected, under the name of custos guild
mercator; and who discharged the same function King, ii. 167.
.

THE places where the mayor and other officers of the corporation assemble for
the dispatch of business, PEXTISE.
or administration of justice, are two; the first is the Pentise, an ancient
building in the center of the city, near the junction of the four principal
streets. Mention is made of the north-side having been builded in 1497. Here
all business within the cognizance of a justice of the peace is transacted; the
aldermen that have past the chair being empowered to act as long as they wear
the gown. Here also the sheriffs, assisted by the recorder, sit and determine
civil causes.

I IMAGINE that this building, PRAETORIUM.
St. Peter's church, and a few houses to the north and west, occupy the site of
the Roman Praetorium; for they not only fill the very situation of that part of
the old castrametations, but account for the discontinuance of the Bridge
street, which ceases opposite to these edifices. This also is the cause why the
nearer part of the North-gate street is thrown out of its course, and falls
into the Eastgate street, many yards beyond the mouth of the Bridge street;
for the lower part of the North-gate street, where the exchange and shambles
stand. points directly toward the former; but is interrupted by the space
occupied by these buildings. The limit of the Praetorium on the east, was the
narrow portion of North-gate street; on the south, part of the present Bridge,
Eastgate, and Watergate streets; on the west Goss lane; and on the north, the
space now occupied by the fish-market. The praetorium, with its attendants,
demanded no small space; for, besides the spot possessed by the general, were
the apartments of the imperatoris contubernales, or the young nobility
immediately under his care; the augurale, where prayers, sacrifices, and other
religious rites were performed, which might have stood on the site of the
modern church; and the general might have had his tribunal on the very spot
where the worshipful corporation at present sit for the redress of grievances.

THE courts of justice are held in the common hall, EXCHANGE.
a large and commodious room over the exchange, adorned with the portraits of
several popular persons: among them is a full-length of Sir William Williams,
recorder of this city, speaker of the house of commons in the reign of Charles
II. and solicitor-general in that of his successor. In this place are held a
crown-mote court, portmote court, and court of sessions. The mayor, assisted by
the recorder, is judge of the crownmote court. He has jurisdiction in all
criminal causes, treason only excepted. He is also judge of the portmote court,
with the same assistant. This court holds plea in all actions real, personal,
and mixed. In the court of sessions, the aldermen above the chair try
petty-larcenies, and determine upon inferior offenses. In this place, the body
corporate hold their assemblies for making bye-laws for the government of the
city; for managing the public buildings and directing the charities; and
finally, the city elections of magistrates, as well as members, are made in
this court.

THE only remains of any hotel, and that of no ancient date, stood in Old
Common-ball lane; which, when entire, surrounded a square, and communicated
with Watergate street. It was founded by Sir Thomas Egerton, chamberlain of
Chester, afterward lord chancellor of England, and designed by him for a
dwelling house. The small remainder, which faced the lane, and was occupied by
a poor family, on the 5th of November 1772, was the scene of a dreadful
calamity. The first floor was engaged by a puppet-show man; and at the moment
he was exhibiting to a very full audience, by some unknown accident 800 pounds
weight of gunpowder, which was lodged in a warehouse beneath, took fire, and
blew up three stories. Twenty-three people perished, and eighty-three were much
burnt, bruised, and received broken and dislocated limbs; of which number only
three died, and those with locked jaws. The remedy found most efficacious for
the burnt, was Goulard's extract of lead.

THE external effects of this explosion were these: the windows and broken
glass of several of the neighboring houses fell outward; from which it
appears, that they were not broken by the shock of the gunpowder, but by the
pressure of the air within the apartments, which rushed out into the vacuum
occasioned by the explosion. A similar phenomenon has been remarked from an
explosion from the inflammable vapor of a mine, when the neighboring trees fell
toward the blast. Howsoever, where the force of the powder was confined by
narrow passages, its centrifugal effect took place; for two boys, walking along
the rows in Watergate street, opposite to a passage leading to the building,
were blown, one against the rails, the other into the street; and the roof of a
house was blown off, opposite a passage into Common Hall lane.

IT is much to be wished, that the easy magistracy of this city would, from
this dire accident, take into consideration the safety of the whole, in
preference to the convenience of a few lazy individuals; and either compel them
to keep by them only the legal quantity, or at their session appoint proper
places for lodging gunpowder. This is the second tremendous warning of the same
nature which the city has been visited with. On the first of April 1726, the
shop of Mr. Thomas Murray in Bridge street, and the house, were blown up; and
himself and a young gentleman killed. Notwithstanding this double admonition, I
fear its attention still continues lethargic.

THE surviving sufferers of this calamity were relieved 630 l. was also
immediately collected from the humane inhabitants of the city, to be
distributed among these miserable maimed objects.
in the well-regulated infirmary established here, and supported by the
voluntary contributions from the city, county, and neighboring parts of Wales.
It is a handsome building, in an airy situation, and detached from the streets.
This charity was founded in 1756, and originated from a bequest of 300 l. left
by Dr. Stratford, commissary of Richmond, toward the commencing of a public
hospital in this city. Subscriptions were circulated, and a sum equal to the
design soon raised. Before the present building could be ready for the
reception of patients, a temporary infirmary was prepared for them, in 1756, in
Northgate street. The new infirmary was opened on the 17th of March 1761; and
has been supported with a spirit that does honor to the environs; which has
enabled the managers to receive, since its institution, not fewer than thirteen
thousand six hundred and thirty-six objects of relief. The portrait of the
founder is placed in the council-room of the infirmary; a three-quarters piece,
sitting, in a long wig and civilian's gown.

I SHALL now take a short view of the ecclesiastical state of this ancient
city. It is necessary first to observe, that the Mercian kingdom was divided
into five bishoprics; Lichfield, Chester, Worcester, Lydnecester, and
Dorchester; which last was afterward removed to Lincoln. Lichfield was made,
about the year 785, metropolitan, by order of Offa, and afterward, for a long
space, incorporated into itself its suffragan, Chester. How greatly the last
flourished is evident from an account of its annual payment to the pope in very
early times; for, when Lichfield paid only three thousand florins, our see
advanced five thousand. No wonder that its jealousy should be excited! Very
little is known of the state of this church in the Saxon period. Let it suffice
to say, that a bishop of Lichfield, of the name of Peter, in the year 1075,
removed his episcopal seat to Chester; and during his life made use of the
church of St. John's for his cathedral. This translation was of very short
date; for his successor established himself in the former diocese, and Chester
continued without a bishop till the dissolution of monasteries; when, in 1541,
Henry VIII. restored it to its former honor, by creating it one of the six
Westminster, Oxford, Bristol, Gloucester, Peterborough, and Chester. The first was
suppressed in the reign of queen Mary.
new sees formed on that great event; and converted the church of the late abbey
of St. Werburgh into the cathedral.

THE first of the new bishops was John Bird, a Carmelite, and provincial of the
order; a man subservient to the court; who, by preaching against the pope's
supremacy, so recommended himself to the king as to obtain the bishopric of
Bangor; from whence he was removed to Chester, as a fit person to suit the
rapacity of the times. In 1546, he granted away the whole of the manors and
demesnes of the sea, and, accepting impropriation instead of them, left his
successors not a single acre, excepting that on which the palace stands, and
the court before it; another house, adjacent; a little orchard called the
Woodyard; two houses near St. John's church; and a few small tenements in the
city of York. Notwithstanding the sum he amassed, he was found, at the
accession of Mary, in debt to the crown 1087 l. 18 s. for tenths and subsidies;
a vast sum for the times! His interest with bishop Bonner still would have
saved him, had he not committed (in those days) the heinous crime of matrimony,
for which he was deprived in 1554.

HE left his diocese one of the lest in value, yet greatest: in extent, of any
in England; for it reaches from Hawarden in Flintshire, to the river Derwent in
Cumberland: comprehending the entire counties of Cheshire and Lancashire; part
of Westmoreland, Cumberland, and Richmondshire in Yorkshire; the chapelties of
Holt and Iscoed; the churches of Hawarden, Hanmer, Bangor, Worthenhury, and the
chapelry of Orton Maddoc, in the adjacent parts or Wales.

THE abbey, ABBEY.
out of which this see was formed, was of great antiquity. History relates,
that it had been originally a nunnery, founded about the year 660, by
Wulpherus, king of the Mercians, in favor of his daughter's indisposition to a
married life. This was the celebrated St. Werburgh, who took the veil after
living immaculate for three years with her husband Ceolredus, after the example
of her aunt, the great Ethelreda; who cohabited for three years with no less
purity with her first spouse Tonberctus, and for twelve with her second, the
pious prince Egfrid. St. Werburgh presided over several Mercian monasteries,
died at Tricengham, and by her own order was interred at Heanburge; but on the
approach of the Danes, in 875, her body was conveyed to Chester, as a place of
security from the insults of those pagans Hiden in Gale, iii. 240.
.

IT is uncertain how long this community existed. It probably was ruined by the
ravages of the barbarians in 895, and finally suppressed; for we are told Ibid.
, that from the reign of king Athelstan, in 925, to the coming of the Normans,
a set of canons secular were established in the place of the nuns. This pious
deed was that of Ethelsleda; who restored the buildings; which afterward were
repaired by earl Leofric, husband to the famous Godiva. The house was richly
endowed by the kings Edmund and Edgar, and by Leofric. Edgar's charter begins
in a strain equally pious and sublime Dugdale, Monast. i. 200.
.

ON the accession of Hugh Lupus to this earldom, he suppressed the canons
secular, and established in their place a colony of his countrymen,
Benedictines, from Bec in Normandy; for probably he did not care to trust his
salvation to the prayers of the Saxon religious. It is said, that this piece of
piety was owing to a fit of illness which the earl was seized with; when he
took the usual way in those days of soothing a troubled conscience. Anselm,
abbot of Bec, and afterward archbishop of Canterbury, regulated the new
foundation; and appointed his chaplain Richard to be the first abbot. Lupus and
his successors were very liberal in their endowments Idem, 985, etc.
; and the place flourished till its dissolution; which was effected by the
surrender of the last abbot, Thomas Clerk; who received in reward the office of
the new deanery, which he enjoyed only six weeks. The revenues of this great
abbey were, according to Dugdale, 1003 l. 5 s. II d. to Speed, 1073 l. 17 s. 7 d.

ACCORDING to a survey of this abbey, preserved in the Harleian collection, its
extent was very considerable; surrounding the present square, and covering
several parts of the adjacent ground. The old abby-court is adorned on two
sides by very handsome modern houses, built between the years 1750 and 1754, on
leases granted by the dean and chapter. Another side is filled by the new
palace; an elegant pile, which rose under the auspices of that munificent and
hospitable prelate Edmund Keen, present bishop of Ely. Its place was before
occupied by the house of the ancient abbots.

THE old gate is yet standing: is a plain but noble entrance; and consists,
toward the street, of two Gothic arches included within a round one, of great
diameter; and which appears to have been of far older date. One side was the
porter's lodge; on the other, a place called St. Thomas's court. A chapel,
dedicated to the same saint, stood where the present deanery is; and, from its
ancient appearance, seems to have been externally the same building.

THE cloisters are entire; but consist only of three walks, the court extending
on one side quite to the church. By the different arms on the roof, it appears
to have been repaired at several times, from the time of Edward III. to that of
W^^sey whose arms, with those of the sea of York, with the cardinal's cap, are
also to be seen here.

ON one side stood the fratry; SCHOOL
a vast room, which is used as a free school, founded by Henry VIII. in the
36th year of his reign, for twenty-four boys, who are appointed by the dean and
chapter: they may continue there four years, if their conduct be regular; but
the dean has power to grant a year of grace. No boy (unless he be a choirister)
ought to be chosen before he is nine years old, or after he is fifteen. Two
masters are appointed for their instruction, a chief and an under master;
elected by the dean and chapter.

IN a corner of the east side of the cloister, is a passage and stairs to the
dormitory; and the ancient priests cellars and kitchen. On the same side is a
passage, formerly called the Maidens aile,



which leads to the little abby-court, a part of the ancient building belonging
to the prebends.

THE beautiful edifice, CHAPTER HOUSE.
the chapter house, stands in the same walk, of the cloister. The vestibule is
arched, supported by four columns, each surrounded with eight slender pilasters
without capitals, which converge near the top of the column, and spread over
the roof. The dimensions of this room are thirty-three feet four inches, by
twenty-seven four; the height twelve feet nine. On the sides is a stone-feat
for the attendants on the business of the chapter.

THE chapter house is fifty feet long, twenty-six feet broad, end thirty-five
feet high; at the upper end is a window, consisting of five lancet-shaped
divisions; and on each side is another of three. At the height of eight feet
and a half from the floor, a narrow gallery runs along three parts of the room,
divided from the windows by a triplet of most elegant, lofty, slender pillars.
The roof is of stone; the springs of the arches which secure it, are supported
by neat pilasters with palmy capitals.

THE modern book-cases deform the lower parts of the room, as high as the
bottoms of the windows. The walls, 1 conjecture, had been ornamented with
pilasters, and had a stone-seat like that of the vestibule. The entrance, both
from the cloisters and between the vestibule and the chapter house, are Gothic;
but apparently of a later species of architecture than either of those rooms.

THE chapter house was built, in all probability, in the time of Rendle the
first, earl of Chesler, who died in 1128, after enjoying his earldom eight
years. The great earl, Hugh Lupus uncle to Randle, had been interred in the
churchyard of the abbey: the first care of the nephew was to remove the body
into this building Leicester's Hist. Antiq. 127.
, as the most honorable place; a respect which would certainly have been paid
to it, had this edifice existed at the time of his death. Here his remains
continued unmolested till the year 1724, when, in digging within the
chapter house, they were found in a stone coffin, wrapped in leather, with a
cross on the breast; and at the head of the coffin a stone in shape of a T,
with the wolf's head, the allusion to his name, engraven on it. Other coffins
were discovered beneath the two rooms, of earls, their countesses, or of
abbots; but the great leveller death had reduced them to dust indistinguishable.

THE earls who were interred here, were Hugh, who died in 1101; Randle the
first, or de Meschina, in 1128; Randle the second, or de Gernouns, who was
poisoned in 1155, by William Peverel; Hugh Cyvelioc, who died at Leek in 1181;
Randle the third, or de Blundeville, who died at Wallingford in 1232, where his
bowels were interred; his heart was buried at the abbey of Dieulacres in
Staffordshire, and his body transported to Chester: finally, John Scot, who, in
1237, underwent the same fate as Randle the second. So that every earl of the
Norman line were deposited here, excepting Richard, who perished by shipwreck;
in 1120 The particulars of the deaths of this illustriou. line may be seen is
LEICESTER: or in DUGDALE'S Baronage, i. 32, etc.
.



OF the abbots, Geofry, who died in 1208, and six others, were buried in the
chapter house or its vestibule Willis's Cathedrals, i. 323.
.

THE church bounds the north side of the cloisters. The lower part of the wall
has a row of arches, now filled up, and savors more of antiquity than any other
part, This, and a portion of the north-transepts, are the oldest parts of the
present building; but there is no part left at present that can boast of a
remote date. All the labors of the Saxons, and almost all of those of its
re-founder Hugh Lupus, are now lost. The abbot, Simon Ripley, who was elected
in 1485, finished the middle aile and the tower. The body is supported by six
sharp-pointed arches. The columns are thick, surrounded by pilasters with small
rounded capitals. Above is a gallery, with a neat stone balustrade in the parts
where it is entire, and a row of large and broad, pointed windows; which is the
general style.

THE present cathedral appears to have been built (excepting the slight
fragments just mentioned) in the reigns of Henry VI. VII. and VIII; but
principally in that of the two last. The beautiful west end was begun in 1508,
and the first stone laid with much ceremony. The window over the door is filled
with beautiful tracery; and the door-case enriched with figures and other
sculpture. The descent into the church is down a multitude of steps; so there
is reason to suspect, that the present was on the foundation of the ancient
church; which had been on a level with the old streets, which we know are many
feet higher than they were originally, by the accession of rubbish, and other
adventitious matter.

THE center beneath the great tower is greatly injured by a modern bell-loft,
which conceals a crown-work of stone, that would have a good effect was the
loft destroyed.

FROM the springs of arches that appear in the walls of the n^^e and its ailes,
it appears as if the architect had intended to have vaulted them, in the manner
in which St. Mary's chapel and the choiral ailes are done.

THE choir is very neat; and the Gothic tabernacle-work over the stalls carved
in a light and elegant manner. The arches in the galleries are divided by
pretty slender pillars; and perhaps were of a date prior to the body of the
church; probably the work of abbot Oldham, who was a benefactor, and had a
concern in the building.

IN the chancel are four stone-stalls for the officiating priests; with carved
Gothic work above; a recess or two for the preserving either the relics or
the sacred utensils. About the walls are dispersed the monuments of several
bishops and churchmen; but none of any magnificence; and one of Sir William
Manwaring, a gallant young man, who sell in the defense of the city during its
long siege.

THE bishop's throne stands on a stone base, as remarkable for its sculpture as
its original use. Its form is an oblong square; and each side most richly
ornamented with Gothic carving, arches, and pinnacles. Around the upper part is
a range of little images, designed to represent the kings and saints of the
Mercian kingdom. Each held in one hand a scroll with the name inscribed.
Fanatic ignorance mutilated many of the labels, as well as the figures; but the
last were restored about the year 1748; but the workman, by an unlucky mistake,
has placed female heads on male shoulders, and given manly faces to the bodies
of the fair-sex. At first, there were thirty-four figures: four are lost; the
remainder are faithfully described, and the history of each monarch and saint
accurately given, in a little pamphlet, published in 1749, by the worthy Doctor
William Cooper, who dedicated the profits for the use of the bluecoat hospital
in this city. I beg leave to dissent from the notion of this having been the
shrine of St. Werbugh, ST. WERBURCH'S SHRINE
as it is popularly called. It certainly was nothing more than the pedestal on
which the real shrine, or, as the French call it, la chasse, stood, which
contained the sacred relics. These are made of gold, silver, vermeil, i. e,
silver gilt, or some precious materials, and often enriched with gems of great
value. They are of different forms, such as churches, cabinets, etc. and,
should the relic be a head, or limb, the chasse is made conformable to the
shape of the part. These are seated usually conspicuous on an elevated place;
and are always moveable, in order that they may be carried in procession,
either in honor of the saint, or to divert some great calamity. Thus, in 1180,
the shrine of St. Werburgh was brought out to stop the rage of a fire in the
city, which for a long time was invincible by every other means; but the
approach of the holy remains instantly proved their sanctity, by putting an end
to its furious desolation.

BEFORE I take leave of this part of the church, ASSASSINATION.
I must mention an impious outrage committed at the high altar in 1492, by a
gentleman of Wales, who wounded almost to death one Patrick Filling, I suppose
the officiating priest. The church, as usual, was immediately suspended, till a
lustration in order to purify it from the foul stain was performed. The abbey
was reconciled on St. Werburgh's day; the parish church on that of St. Oswald
King, ii. 189.
.

AN impiety of this kind was committed in the church of Notre Dame at Paris, in
1670 Felibica Hist. Paris, ii, 1500. Pieces Justif. iii. 212.
. The priest died of his wound; and expiation was made by order of the
archbishop: public prayers were offered up for forty hours in all the churches;
processions made; a fast of three days appointed. The whole terminated by a
general ( reparation) satisfaction of the injury by a grand procession, in
which the whole parliament assisted. The streets were covered with tapestry, and
the avenues barred up with the chains to keep off the mob; and thus the place
was restored to the discharge of the sacred offices.

IT is with a kind of horror I read in the zealous Fox, of an outrage of this
sort committed in our own kingdom, in the reign of queen Mary Martyrs., iii.
. The enthusiast was taken, and punished by the striking off the criminal hand,
and by being burnt: yet the historian gives him a place among the more
well-meaning sufferers of that barbarous period.

BEHIND the choir is St. Mary's chapel; and on each side is an aile. The
monuments in these parts are in no wise remarkable. In its north-aile is a tomb
with a flowery cross, that of an abbot; and another of an altar-form, ascribed
to Henry IV. emperor of Germany, who, according to a legendary tale, was said
to have escaped from his troubles, and to have resided in Godstall lane, in
this city; to have died there; and to have been interred in the abbey. It is
very uncertain whether this great but cal^mitous prince was ever in our
kingdom; but it is very certain be finished his days at Liege Modern Univ,
Hist, xxxix. 95.
, in 1106, and was magnificently interred in the cathedral of that city.

The transepts are of unequal lengths. The north is very large. dedicated to
St. Oswald, and is the parish church of that name. This is said to have stood
on the first church of St. Peter and St. Paul; which was afterward changed to
that of the Holy Trinity, and finally, to the name it now bears. On the
rebuilding of the church, this aile was designedly enlarged, and allotted by
the monks to the neighboring inhabitants, who were for the most part their
servants or tenants. At first, the religious wished to have the whole to
themselves, and on that account built, at a distance from this aile, a chapel
called St. Nicholas's, and endowed it with a vicarage, for the use of the
laity; but afterward, at the request. of the inhabitants, and by composition
between the mayor and abbot, about the year 1488, they were restored to the use
of the church of St. Oswald, which they still retain King, ii. 39. 196.
.

THE chapel falling into disuse, was purchased by the citizens, and converted
into their common hall for dispatch of business It is probable that there had
been a more ancient common hall; a lane in this city still retains the name of
Old Common Hall lane.
. In later times, since the building of the exchange, it has been converted
into a magazine for wool; into a carrier's warehouse; and part into a theater,
acting under parlementary license.

THIS abbey afforded only a temporary sanctuary to the proshgate. The privelege
which Hugh Lupus granted is particular: he ordered, that no thief or other
malefactor, that attended the fair held at the feast of St. Werburgh, should be
attached, unless he committed some new offense there Leicester, 119.
. This, says King, drew a vast: concourse of loose people together at that
season, and proved of singular advantage to Randle the third, earl of Chester;
who, in being surrounded in the castle of Rudland by a numerous army of Welsh,
and in great danger, sent for relief to his general, Roger Lacy, at that time
attending the midsummer-fair. Lacy instantly collected a body of minstrels,
fiddlers, and idle people, who were assembled here on account of this
privelege; marched with them into Wales, and relieved the earl from his
distress. Randle, on his return, immediately rewarded Lacy with a full power
over all the instruments of his preservation, megisterium omnium lecatorum et
meretricam totius CESTRESHIRE. By this grant he was empowered to require the
attendance of all the minstrels and musicians of the county on the anniversary
of the exploit. They were to play before him and his heirs for ever, in a
procession to the church of St. John; and, after divine service, to the place
where he kept his court. The minstrels were there examined concerning their
lives and conversation; whether any of them played without annual license from
their lord, or whether they had heard any words among their fellows tending to
his dishonor. These priveleges were afterward devolved by John, son of Roger
de Lacy, to Hugh de Dutton and his heirs. The procession and courts were held
by their steward within my memory; but the custom is now dropped. I find also,
that Dutton and his heirs clamed at the feast from the minstrels, quatuor
lagenas vini et unam lancem, four bottles of wine, and one lance; and at the
same time a fee of four pence halfpenny: and from every Meretrix in Cheshire,
and in the city of Chester, officium suum exercente, four pence Leicester, 142
.

THE other religious houses in this city were, CARMELITES.
the Carmelites, or White friars, who had a convent in that part of St.
Martin's parish still called White-friers lane: part of Mr. Marsden's house is
formed of the remains. The church, as appears by Braun's view of this city in
1581, stood a little west of it.

BY the charter of Roger Lacy to the abbey of Norton, it appears, that there was
a monastery in the parish of St. Michael Dugdale Monast ii. 185.
which he grants to the canons of the former. We are left ignorant of the order
it was of.

IN Trinity parish stood a house of Franciscan or Gray friars, which bishop
Tanner conjectures might have been as ancient as the time of Henry III. The
site was granted to one John Cokke. I imagine that this stood in the Yatch
field, near the place occupied by the new linnen-hall. By Speed's plan of
Chester, it appears that there was a church there in his time; and to this day
painted tiles and painted glass, relics of ecclesiastical sinery, are still
dug up.

IN the parish of St. Martin's Rather is that of Trinity; 9 s. 2 d. is paid at
the audit for the site of it.
was a monastery of preaching or Black friars, said by Speed to have been
founded by a bishop of Chester, meaning (as Tanner observes) of Lichfield.
This, as well as the other religious house in this parish, was granted to the
same John Cokke. Part of this house, and its fine vaults, are occupied by Hanry
Hesketh esquire.

ST. JOHN'S, ST. JOHN'S.
which lies without the walls on the east side of the city, was once a
collegiate church, reputed to have been founded by king Ethelred in 689, on
being admonished by a vision to build it on the spot where he should find a
white hind. After the ruin of the city by the Danes, the church was restored by
his namesake, earl of Mercia, in 906; and was in the next century repaired and
endowed by earl Leofric. A monastery was also founded here; for historians
record, that king Edgar was rowed from his palace to the monastery of St. John.
The Doomsday book also mentions the monastery of St. Mary, near the same
church. This, besides, was the cathedral during the short time the sea was
removed from Lichfield by bishop Peter. In an old plan of it appears a house
called the bishop's.

AT the dissolution, here was found a dean and seven prebendaries or canons (in
the collation of the bishop of Lichfield); seven vicars, two clerks, four
choiristers, sextons, and other servants; most of whose houses are
distinguished in the same plan. Their yearly revenue, after reprisals, was only
27 l. 17 s. 4 d. The site of the college, and some part of the buildings, were
granted by queen Elizabeth to John Fortescue Tanner, 59.
.

ON the east side of the churchyard stood the chapel of St. Anne, belonging to
the brethren and sisters of the fraternity of St. Anne Harleian MSS. No 1994.
69.
. This in later days was called Cholmondly hall; but is now totally demolished.

ST. JOHN'S, when entire, was a magnificent pile. The tower once stood in the
center; but falling down in 1574, was never rebuilt. The chancel was probably
demolished at the same time; but at that end are some fine arches, and other
remains of ancient chapels. Withinside are curious specimens of the clumsy
strength of Saxon architecture, in the massy columns and round arches which
support the body. The tower is now placed at the west end; and has on one side
the legend, represented by the figure of a man and a hind.

ON the south side of the churchyard, impending over a high cliff, supposed to
be the Radeclive of the Doomsday book, is a small ancient building, probably a
chapel, called the Anchoritage, placed over the retreat of some holy hermits.
This might have been their place of sepulture; for in the live rock were found
two bodies deposited in coffin-shaped cavities. This might have been the place,
where legend says that Harold, the last Saxon king, ended his days; for it was
long believed by the English, that he escaped from the battle of Hastings, and
finished his life in retirement.

DOCTOR TANNER supposes, that the convent of Benedictine nuns, dedicated to St.
Mary, originated either from the monastery of St. John, or was a relic of one
of the old nunneries belonging to St. Werburgh. This, perhaps, may have been
the case; for, from a charter preserved by Dugdale, it appears, that Ranale the
second, earl of Chester, had obtained for the nuns of Chester, certain crofts
from Hugh Fitzoliver, for them to build a church and convent on; which implies
that there had been nuns in the city previous to his grant Sciatis me dedisse,
et in perpetuam elemosynam concepisse D^o et sanctae Mariae et MONIALIBUS
Cestriae, etc. Monasticon, i. 507.
. I find also, that Edward the black prince had been a benefactor; for there is
mention of a charter of his to the nuns, granted in the 32d of his father's
reign Herleian MSS. No 2057. 36.
. This was suppressed (with the other religious houses) in 1537. At that time
Elizabeth Grosvenour was prioress, who made a surrender of the house, and had a
pension for life of twenty pounds; and eleven of the sisters had also pensions,
from 4 l. to 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. each. The site was granted, in the 33d of Henry
VIII. to the Urian Breretons, senior and junior. The revenues were, according
to Dugdale, 66 l. 18. s. 4 d.; to Speed 99 l. 16 s. 2 d. I have a ground-plot
of this nunnery; by which it appears to have been a compact but small building.
The church was twenty-two yards long and fifteen broad; and supported in the
middle by a row of pillars. The chapel was nine yards by four three-quarters;
the cloisters thirty yards by twenty-one. It stood in the nursery-garden on the
west side of the city, still called the Nun's garden; where vestiges of the
walls and arches are yet remaining.

WITHOUT the North-gate stood a hospital dedicated to St. John the Baptist, and
formerly a sanctuary, and endowed with great priveleges. The mastership was
granted by Edward II. to the prior of Berkinhead and his successors; but
afterward disposed of by the crown to secular clergy. The house, at the
dissolution, consisted of a chaplain and six poor brethren, whose income, after
reprisals, was 13 l. 7 s. 10 d Tanner, 64.
. Mention is made by bishop Tanner 65.
of the liberties of the hospital of St. Giles being confirmed by Edward III. I
am told, that a fragment, supposed to be part of this charity, is to be seen in
the Forest street.

THE last ancient hospital was instituted for lepers, in the suburbs of
Boughton, about the beginning of Edward II.'s reign; I think, opposite to the
place of excution: the burying-ground is still made use of by the parish of St.
Oswald.

THE number of parishes are nine. None of the churches are remarkable,
excepting those of St. Peter's and Trinity; which are distinguished by their
handsome spires. The first was finished in 1489; when the parson and others
signalized themselves by eating part of a goose on it, and flinging the rest
into the four streets King, i. 76.
.

THE number of inhabitants, including the suburbs of Boughton and Hanbridge,
are estimated to be fourteen thousand seven hundred and thirteen. The houses
are almost entirely situated in a dry sand-stone rock. Whether it be owing to
that, the clearness of the air, and the purity of the water, it is certain that
the proportion of death among the inhabitants is only as one to thirty-one:
whereas I am informed, by my worthy friend Doctor Haggarth of this city, that
in Leeds, one in twenty-one; in Northampton and Shrewsbury, one in twenty-six;
and in London, one in twenty and three-fourths, annually pay the great tribute
of nature.

I DO not recollect any thing remarkable on the outside of the walls which has
been unnoticed, unless it be the Rood-eye, and the adjacent places. The Dee,
after quitting the contracted pass at the bridge, flows beneath an incurvated
clayey cliff; and washes on the right a fine and extensive meadow, long since
protected against its ravages by a lofty dike. I imagine, that it lay open to
the tides till about the year 1587, when the corporation (to whom it belongs)
demised to one Thomas Lyneal, servant to Sir Francis Walsingham, this pasture
for the term of twenty-one years, together with as much land as he could gain
to it from the sea. He was also to make at his own costs a quay for boats and
barks to unload at full sea, near the watergate; for which he was at first to
have two pence for every vessel passing by with any lading; but after that, the
sum was increased to four pence: and Lyneal was to pay an annual rent of 20 l.
to the city. At first he met with some obstructions: Sir Francis therefore
interfered, in order that his servant might proceed without further
interruption Harleian MSS. No 2082. 31. 34.
.

THE name of this spot is taken from eye, its watery situation, and rood, the
cross which stood there, whose base is still to be seen. On this place the
lusty youth, in former days, exercised themselves in manly sports of the age;
in archery, running, leaping, and wrestling; in mock-fights, and gallant and
romantic triumphs. From the hints dropped by Daniel King, I imagine them to have
been of the same nature with those practiced by the young men of the
metropolis, described by Fitz-Stephen, a writer cotemporary with Henry II. The
lay sons of the citizens rush out of the gates in shoals, furnished with lances
and shields; the younger sort with javelins pointed, but disarmed of their
steel; they ape the feats of war, and act the sham-fight. Part took the field
well mounted. The generous coursers neigh and champ the bit. At length, when
the course begins, and the youthful combatants are divided into classes or
parties, one body retreats, and another pursues without being able to overtake
them; while, in another quarter, the pursuers overtake the foe, unhorse them,
and pass them many a length. The elders of the city and the fathers of the
parties, and the rich and the wealthy, come into the field on horseback to
behold the exercises Vide Fitz-Stephen's Deser, Lend, translated by an
Antiquary, 1772, 46, 7, 8.
. One would imagine, by what follows, the ancient historian was describing the
sports of Ascanius and his youthful train on the plains of Sicily:

Postquam omnem laeti consessum, oculosque suoram
Lustravere in equis, etc.
Now round the ring, before their fathers, ride
The boys, in all their military pride;
Till the loud lash resounding from afar
Gave the glad signal of the mimic war;
Strait, in three bands distinct, they break away,
Divide in order, and their ranks display:
Swift at the summons they return, and throw
At once their hostile lances at the foe:
Then take a new excursion on the plain;
Round within round, an endless course maintain;
And now advance, and now retreat again;
With well-dissembled rage their rivals dare,
And please the crowd with images of war.
Alternate now they turn their backs in flight,
Now dart their lances, and renew the fight;
Then in a moment from the combat cease,
Rejoin their scattered bands, and move in peace.
PIT. A STANDARD was the prize of emulation in the sports celebrated on the
Rood-eye Which was won in 1578 by sheriff Montford, on Shrove-Tuesday.
: but in the year 1609 the amusements took a new form; and under the reign of
the peaceful James, the youthful cavaliers laid aside their mimic war, and
began that species of horsemanship which the romantic philosopher, lord
Herbert, thought unworthy of a man of honor; "for," says he, 'the exercise I do
not approve, is the running of horses, there 'being much cheating in that kind.

THE first prizes we hear of, after the suppression of the triumph, were a bell
and bowl, to be run for on St. George's day; which were provided in 1609 by Mr.
Robert Amery, formerly sheriff of the city, and were brought down to the
Rood-eye with great solemnity. This seems to have been the origin of the plate
given by the city, and annually run for on the same day, to the present time. A
bell was a common prize: a little golden bell was the reward of victory in
1607, at the races near York; whence came the proverb for success of any kind,
to bear the bell.

AT one end of the Rood-eye stands the House of Industry; POOR-HOUSE.
a large and useful building, founded in 1757, by money raised by the city on
life-annuities, for several improvements within its liberties. Here the poor
are provided for in a fit manner, and to the great ease of the parishes; who
are relieved from the burden of a numerous poor, who were too idle to work, and
too proud to enter into this comfortable Asylum. Those of the parish of
Hawarden are also sent here, by virtue of an agreement made between the
governors of this charity and the overseers of the poor of that parish. The
inmates contribute, by some coarse linen manufactures, toward their support.

A LITTLE beyond this building are the quays, QUAYS.
cranes, warehouses, and other requisites for carrying on the naval trade of
this city. These are opposite to the Watergate, and have been much improved of
late years; and the intervening space has not long since been filled with a
neat street. Ships of 350 tons burden can now reach the quays, where the
spring-tides rise at a medium fifteen feet: the neap-tides, eight. In the year
1674, this port was in so deplorable a state, and so choked with sands, that a
vessel of twenty tons could not arrive here; but the ships were obliged to lie
under Neston, ten miles distant; which gave rise to the assemblage of houses
called Parkgate, built on the shore beneath that town. A quay, called the New
quay, (now in ruins) was erected near this place in the beginning Harleaan MSS.
No 2003. 39.
of the last century, for the convenience of loading and unloading the vessels
trading with Chester; and the goods were carried to and from the city by land.
The misfortune of the port of Chester at length gave rise to the prosperity of
Leverpool, about this time a very inconsiderable place. It now began to
discover its own advantages of situation; and quickly emerged from its
despicable state to its present flourishing condition.

IN 1674, New Cut.
some friend to the former prevaled on Mr. Andrew Yarranton, a gentleman
extremely conversant in the commercial advantages of this island, to make a
survey of the river Dee and its estuary. He drew a plan, formed the project of
a new channel, a scheme for recovering from the sea a large tract of land, and
restoring the ancient navigation even to the present quays: and this he got to
be presented to the duke of York, the patron, at that time, of all useful
undertakings. He also suggested the idea of a canal from the collieries at
Aston near Hawarden; which was to drop into this new channel, and facilitate
the carriage of coal up to the city Mr. Andrew Yarranton's England's
Improvements by sea and land, etc. to, London, 1677. His plan for that of the
Dee, is at p. 192.
. Future times had the advantage of his inventive genius. Both plans were
brought into execution without any great deviation from Mr. Yarranton's
project. His new cut was to end opposite to Flint; the present opens opposite
to Wepra, on this side of Flint. Sir John Glynne's little canal approaches the
Dee, about two miles below the city, Mr. Yarranton's coal canal was to fall
into the Dee near to Flint.

AN act of parliament was obtained for the recovering and preserving the
navigation of the river, for settling the duties on ships, and for the
establishing two ferries for the convenience of travelers into the county of
Flint. Other acts were passed in the years 1732, 1740, 43, 1752; and the works
were begun with vigor. The project was carried on by subscription; and the
adventurers were to be rewarded by the lands they were empowered to gain on
both sides, from the white sands or the sea from Chester; and between the
county of Cheshire, on the north-side, and the county of Flint on the
fouth-side; being sands, soil, and ground not bearing grass. Party contests at
first filled the subscriptions: zeal for the house of Hanover was at that time
mixed, in this city, with zeal for its commercial interest; but in a little
time it was discovered to be the madness of many, but the gain of few. The
expenses proved enormous; multitudes were obliged to sell out at above ninety
per cent. loss; and, their shares being bought by persons of more wealth and
foresight, at length the plan was brought to a considerable degree of utility;
and a sine canal formed, guarded by vast banks, in which the river is consined
for the space of ten miles; along which ships of three hundred and fifty tons
burden may safely be brought up to the quays. Much land has been gained from
the sea; and good farms now appear in places not long since possessed by the
unruly element.

I REMEMBER an almost useless tide flowing about the water-tower, the ancient
channel of the Dee flowing under Blacon point; and the access to the county of
Flint, on this side, open only at the recess of tides, and annually occasioning
the loss of multitudes of lives. Two ferries are established at fit places. The
lower is the proper passage for travelers by Holyhead into the kingdom of
Ireland; and calls aloud for the aid of a turnpike, to render it at all times
pervious; or the road may be continued to Saltney, along the flat, so as to
fall into the other turnpike on the marsh.

I SHALL now take a short view of the trade of this city, TRADE.
as it stood in the years 1771 and 1776. I bring the last into sight, in order
to show how far this port has been affected by the commotions of our American
subjects; and oppose it to the commerce of 1771, when it appears to have been
in its meridian, since the restoration of the channel. In that year were
entered inwards

297 coasting-vessels; 19 of which were laden with groceries, and other goods
from London.

526 coast ships outward; of these 23 came from the port of London, and were
laden here with lead, iron cannon, two thousand tons of cheese, and other goods.

IN the same year, 95 vessels were entered inwards from foreign parts; and 216
entered inwards from Ireland, Portugal, Spain, Italy, and America.

FROM Norway and the Baltic, are imported timber, flax, tallow, hemp, iron, and
deals.

FROM Leghorn, large quantities of kid and lamb skins; which are manufactured
by the glovers, after being dressed here. This, in fact, is the only
manufacture which the city can boast of. I find, that in the reigns of queen
Elizabeth, James I. and the beginning of that of Charles I. here was a vast
trade in calves skins. In the first of those monopolizing times, the queen
grants one Arthur Balsano a license to export 6000 dickers of leather of calves
skins, ten dozens to every dicker, for seven years, paying five shillings per
dicker. James I. granted to James Maxwel Esquire a license to export 18,000
dickers, for the same duty, and for twenty-one years; and this was afterward
confirmed to him by Charles I Harleian MSS. No 2004. 4, 5, 16.
. This Maxwel was one of the grooms of the bedchamber to his majesty; and in
the preceding reign, by a piece of insolence to a gentleman of the inns of
court, brought on him the resentment of the English; and was obliged to atone
for it by making due submission. The first grant might be made to him by James,
to make amends for the mortifications he had undergone.

FROM Spain and Portugal are imported great quantities of cork, fruit, oil of
olives, nuts, Barilla ashes, and raisins; and several hundred tons of wine from
Portugal; which last form the greatest foreign import of this city.

WHILE the trade with America was open, fish and oil were brought from
Newfoundland; and a small trade was carried on with Caroling.

THE exports this year were upwards of 6000 chaldrons of coal from the Cheshire
and Flintshire collieries (which lie within this port); 1000 tons of lead; 300
of lead ore; 300 of oak bark; all these to foreign parts. Besides 3470 tons of
lead, and 431 of lead ore, sent coastways; that is, to the ports of London and
Leverpool, vae! nimium vicina! for the purpose of re-exportation.

IN 1776, 208 coasting-vessels were entered inwards, and 619 outward.

166 ships entered inwards from foreign parts, including those trading between
Dublin and Parkgate; and 131 outward. The following table will show the
division of the commerce.

Inwards. Outward. America, 2 5 France, 11 Flanders, 1 Holland, 1 Ireland, 140
104 Isle of Man, 3 4 Portugal, 3 3 Spain, 4 Italy, 3 1 Norway, Russia, and
Prussia, 10 1

2877 chaldrons of coal, 1184 tons of lead, and 168 of lead ore, were sent
abroad; but so exhausted are our oak-trees, that only 18 tons of bark were
shipped. 2813 tons of lead, and 431 of lead ore, were sent coastways.

FROM the table of entries it appears, that the great trade of this city is
with Ireland; which receives annnally from hence ^^ a magazine) large
quantities of hops, woollen cloths, worsted stuffs, hosiery, fustians,
Manchester goods, cheese, wrought-iron, iron great guns, hardware, bound and
unbound books, carpets, flint-glass, wrought silks, and great quantities of
foreign goods sent from London by land, and shipped from this port.

IN return, it imports from Ireland, at the Midsummer and Michaelmas fairs,
upwards of 1000 boxes and packs of linen cloth, containing 25,000 pieces at
lest: besides 300 boxes or packs imported into Leverpool, and sent across the
Mersey to Ince, from whence they are conveyed in carts to Chester. These form
all together a million of yards each fair. This trade began no longer ago than
the year 1736, in which 449, 654. yards were imported. The importations
continually increased till the last year of the late war; from which period it
has been on a par.

IRELAND also sends considerable quantities of lamb-skins, wool, linen and
bay-yarn, tallow, hides, butter, feathers, and quills, ox bones and hoofs,
glue, sheep and cat guts; calve-velves, provisions, and live cattle.

THE number of ships belonging to this port show the uncommercial genius of its
inhabitants; there being only twenty-two in the foreign trade, containing in
all 1449 tons, and 169 men: and 13 in the coast-trade, whose tonnage is 680
tons, and number of men 58: yet the port extends, on the Cheshire side of the
estuary, as far as the end of Wiral; and on the Flintshire, to the Ver-ryd, or
the mouth of the Clwyd.

THERE was lately a very fair prospect of adding much to the trade of the city,
by an i^land navigation, CANAL.
which was begun with great spirit a few years ago. It was to run through the
county beneath Beeston castle, and to terminate near Middlewich. Another branch
was to extend to Namptwich. One mouth opens into the Dee, below the
water-tower. A fine basin is formed, into which the boats are to descend, by
means of five successive locks, beneath the northern walls of the city, cut in
the live rock. A few miles of this design are completed: but, by an unhappy
miscalculation of expense, and by unforeseen difficulties occurring in the
execution, such enormous charges were incurred, as to put a stop for the
present to all proceedings. The other branch, which was to extend toward
Middlewich, was to end within a limited distance from the great canal between
the Trent and Mersey navigation. The great objects were the salt and cheese
trade; and coal for the supply of the interior parts of Cheshire, from the vast
collieries in Staffordshire. Share also in the exportation of hard-ware,
earthen-ware, and all the manufactures of the internal part of the kingdom
within its reach, might have been reasonably expected.

THE idea of a canal along the dead flat between Chester and Ince has been long
since conceived, by persons very conversant in the nature of the trade of this
city. One mouth might have opened into the Dee in the place of the present;
another near Ince, which would create a ready intercourse with Leverpool, the
Weever, and the salt-works and great dairies on that river; with Warrington,
and with the flourishing town of Manchester, and a numerous set of places
within reach of the Mersey, and of the canal belonging to that useful Peer, the
duke of Bridgewater, to which the greatest of our inland navigations is
connected. This little cut the city might, and still may, enjoy unenvied,
unrivalled; and, what is a material consideration, the distance is trifling
(seven miles According to Burdet's map.
); the expenses small, and the profits to the undertakers great.

ON leaving the city, I repassed Hanbridge; and at the may pole took the
left hand road, which is a continuation of the Roman road from the river. The
strait direction is the only proof of its antiquity, till it falls into the
fields on the left, where its tract is often distinguishable by certain ridges
or elevated spots. The farmer also, in digging, often falls on adventitious
matters; such as gravel, and remains of pavements. It points toward Eccleston,
near which are the relics of a mount; the site, perhaps, of a small castlet.
It passes through Eaton park, and crosses the Dee at Oldford.

THE village of Eccleston is prettily seated near the Dee, ECCLESTON.
and commands a view of the towers and spires of Chester rising above the
wooded banks. The most extensive prospect is from a bench on Eccleston hill, on
the road-side; which takes in the vast environs of Wales, Cheshire, and part of
Shropshire, forming a n admirable composition of rich cultivation, bounded by
hills of various forms.

ECCLESTON retains the same name which it had at the Conquest. It was held at
that time by Gilbert de Venables, from Hag^ Lupus; before that event, by Edwin
a freeman. On the demesne land were two servants, four villeyns, and a boor, a
boat and a net. Part of the place afterward fell to the Vernors of Kinderlen;
and finally, by a late purchase, was added by the family of the Grosvenours to
their ancient property in this parish. The church is a rectory dedicated to St.
Mary.

A LITTLE farther is Eaton, EATOS.
or the hamlet on the water; a name the most common of any in England. At the
Conquest, here was a fishery, which employed six fishermen, and yielded a
thousand salmon. This fishery has long since ceased; but during its existence,
the minister of Eccleston clamed the twentieth fish. The seat of the ancient
family of the Gresvenours lies in this township; a brick house, built about the
latter end of the last century. The Gresvenours came in with the Conqueror, and
took their name from the office they held in the Norman court, that of grand
huntsman. Their first settlement in this county was, Over Lostock, bestowed by
Hugh Lupus on his great nephew Robert le Gresvenour. In 1234, Richard le
Grosvenour purchased and fixed his seat at Hulme: but in the reign of Henry VI.
by the marriage of Rawlin or Ralph Gresvenour with Jean daughter of John Eaton
of Eaton, Esquire it was transferred to this place While chivalry was the passion
of the times, few families shon in so distinguished a manner: none showed equal
spirit in vindicating their right to their honors. Witness the famous cause
between Sir Robert le Gresvenour with Sir Richard le Scrope, plaintiff, about a
coat of arms, (...) one land, or; tried before the high constable and high
marshal of England, in the reign ^ Richard II. and lasted three years. Kings,
princes of the blood and most of the (...) bore witness in this important
affair. The sentence was conciliating, that both parties should bear the same
arms; but the G^OSV^^OURS, a^^ une lendure d(...) (...) to the king. The
judgment: confirmed: the choice is left to the defendant, either to use the
bordure, or to bear the arms of their relations, the ancient earls of Chester,
azure a gerb d'or. He rejected the mortifying distinction, and chose the gerb;
which is the family coat to this day.

CROSS the the Dee at Eaton-boat, OLDFORD.
leaving on the right Oldford bridge; a neat structure, forming another
communication between the two parts of the hundred of Broxton; which, at the
time of the Conquest, bore the name of Dudestan hundred.

AFTER riding along a dirty flat country, FARN.
reach Farn or Farndon; a small town on the Dee, called in Doomsday book
Ferenton. The church was burnt by the parliament army in 1645, during the siege
of Holt castle; and rebuilt after the cessation of the war. In one window,
over the pew of the respectable family of Barnston, is some very beautiful
painted glass, of a commander in his tent, with a truncheon in his hand,
surrounded with the military instruments in use during the reign of Charles I.
Around these are sixteen elegant figures of different ranks of soldiery, as low
as the drummer, with their respective badges. Over the heads of the officers
are coats of arms: over that of the commander are those of Gamul; and seem
intended to preserve the memory of Sir Francis Gamul baronet, the active mayor
of Chester during the civil wars. Over the heads of three others are the arms
of the Grosvenours, the Mainwarings, and the Barndistons; three loyalists, who
served in the same cause: Roger Grosvenour; Sir William Mainwaring, who was
slain in defense of Chester; and William Barndiston of Chirton, Esquire who died in
1664.

THIS town is separated from DENBIGHSHIRE bY an ancient stone bridge of ten
arches, with the vestiges of a guardhouse in the middle; the date, 1345, was
preserved, till very lately, on a stone over the arch called the Lady's arch.
HOLT.
HOLT, another small town, stands on an eminence on the Welsh side, an ancient
borough and corporation, consisting of a mayor, two bailiffs, and a coroner.
The inhabitants, with those of Ruthin and Denbigh, enjoy the privelege of
contributing toward sending, a burgess to parliament This town was incorporated
by charter, granted by Thomas earl of Arundel, dated from his castle of Lions
1410. The grant is very partial, CHARTER.
running in this form, To the burgesses of our town, and to their heirs and
successors, being ENGLISHMEN. This might arise from the hatred of the lord
marchers to the Welsh, on account of the insurrection of Glyndwr, at that time
scarcely suppressed. This instilled into the inhabitants a spirit, retained,
perhaps, to this moment; for within these few years they were the most
irascible and pugnacious of all the neighborhood. This town is in the parish of
Gresford, but in the diocese of Chester. It is the only appertenance remaining
on this side of the Dee, of the vast grant made by Edward the Confessor to that
see, of all the land on the other side of the river; which he first gave and
then took from our prince Gryssydd ap Llewelyr Doomsday Book in Le^^ster, 42^.
. The church is a very handsome building; yet no more than a chapel to the
former. On the font are the arms of the Warrens; in a window, those of the
Stanlies, former owners of the place.

THE poor relics of the castle are seated close to the river; and are
insulated by a vast fosse cut through a deep bed of soft red stone; CASTLE.
which seems originally to have been thus quarried for the building of the
castle. This fortress consisted of five bastions, and the work cut into that
form, to serve as a base to as many towers. An ancient survey I met with in the
Museum, among the Harleian MSS. taken in 1620 by John Norden, when it was
entire, will give a true idea of this curious structure. It had been defended
in three parts by the great chasm formed by the quarry; on the fourth by the
Dee, into which jutted a great quay, still to be seen in very dry seasons; for
it has long since been covered by the encroachment of the river.

ORIGINALLY this place had been a small out-post to Deva. Slopes, and other now
almost obsolete works, may be seen near the castle, and on the opposite side of
the water: and coins have been found here, that put the matter out of doubt. I
have seen some of Antoninus, Galienus, Constantinus, and Constantius. I
conjecture that the Roman name had been Castra Legionis, and the Welsh, Castle
Llcon, or the castle of the legion; because it was garrisoned by a detachment
of the legion stationed at Chester. The English borderers might easily mistake
Lleon for the plural of Llew, which signifies a lion, and so call it the castle
of Lions; as we find it styled when it came into possession of earl Warren and
his successors.

THIS country formed part of Powysland; POWYSLAND.
which, when entire, reached in a straight line from Broxton hills in Cheshire,
southerly to Pengwern Powys, or Shrewsbury, including a large tract in both
these counties; from thence through the eastern limits of Montgomeryshire,
comprehending all that county, part of Radnorshire and Breeknockshire; then
turning northward, included the ^wmmwds of Mowddwy, Edeyrnion, and Glyndyfrdwy,
Merionyddshire, and (circuiting part of Denbighshire) comes along part of the
Clwydian hills, to the summit of Moel-samma, including all Denbighshire,
excepting those parts which at present constitute the lordships of Denbigh and
Ruthin; from hence, taking ^ south-easterly direction to Broxton hills, asserts
its right to M^^^^dale, Hopedale, and Maeler in Hintshire. I have before taken
notice, that Offa's encroachment was but temporary, and of short duration. I
must farther observe, that in the articles of pacification Powel's notes on
Girald. Itin. Cambr. lib. ii. c. II.
between Henry III. and our last prince Lle^^^^. the limits of the principality
experienced but a very small d^minution from what it was in Offa's time, when
it was agreed, that the Dee should be the boundary from Wirral to Castra^
L^^num, or Holt; and from thence a direct line to Pengwern Powys.

IT was, perhaps, of much greater extent under the reign of Brochwel Ysgythrog,
who was defeated by the Saxons at the battle of Chester. After this event, the
borders became a scene of rapine; the Welsh and the Mercians alternately making
the the most terrible inroads ino each other's dominions BID Hist. H^. ii. c.
z. p. 80. Sax. Cir. 25.
, till the time of Offa; who passing the Severn with a mighty force, expelled
the Britons from their fruitful seats on the plains, and reduced the kingdom of
Powys to the western side of the celebrated ditch still known by his name. The
princes of Pows were then constrained to quit their ancient residence at
Pengwern, or Shrewsbury, and remove it to one not less fertile, to Mathraval,
in the beautiful vale of Meivod. From this period, their kingdom was called
indifferently, that of Powys, or of Mathraval. The plains of Shropshire became
a confirmed part of the Mercian kingdom. The trans-sabrine portion of
Gloucestershire and Worcestershire, and the county of Hereford, submitted to
the yoke; but, after some time, the tract which forms the country above
Croes-oswallt or Oswestry, and the two Maelors, Gymraeg or the present
Bromsield, and Saesneg or the present Flintshire Maclor, with many other
Cwmmwds, relapsed to its natural masters. Such was its state till 843, the
reign of RODERIC THE GREAT prince of all Wales; who, in his mother's right,
possessed North Wales; in that of his wife, South Wales; and by that of his
gran-mother Nest, sister and heiress to Congen ap Cadell king of Powys, he
added Powysland to his dominions Powel, 35.
. He, according to the destructive custom of gavel-kind, divided his
principality among his children; to Anarawd he gave NORTH WALES; to Cadell,
SOUTH WALES; to Mervyn POWYSLAND. Each wore a Talaith or diadem of gold, beset
with preclous stones; whence they were styled Y^^ Tywy^^g Taleithing, or the
three crowned princes.

AFTER the death of Mervyn, Cadell usurped the portion of his brother. His
eldest son, Howel Dda, or the Good, in 940, again united all Wales into one
government. He left four sons, who divided South Wales and Powys between them;
while North Wales was assumed, in 948, by Jevaf and Jago, sons to his
predecessor Edwal Voel. The confusion that ensued on this occasion, prevents me
from saying any thing with certainty, till Bleddyn ap Cynvyn, who ruled Wales
at the time of the Conquest, reunited the kingdoms of North Wales and Powys.
The succession to the principality passed away from his children; but Powysland
devolved to his sons; which came at length entire to Meredith, the eldest born,
after the contentions and slaughter usual after such partitions Powel, notes
upon Girald. Itin. Cambr. lib. ii. c. 12.
.

MEREDITH made the division which finally destroyed the power of this once
potent kingdom. To his eldest son Madoc, he gave the part which bore afterward
the name of Powys Vadog: to Gryssydd, the portion which was called Gwenwynwyn
Powel, 211.
.

I LEAVE to a future disquisition, the account of the remaining parts of
Powysland. I shall only trace the succession of the first, which belongs more
particularly to my subject. POWYS VADOG consisted, according to the division of
the times, of five Cantress or hundred townships; and these were subdivided
into fifteen Cwmmwds.

CANTREF Y BARWN,
Dinmael Llangwm Dinmael, Cirregy Druidion, etc.
, Denbighshire. Edeyrnion, Merionethshire. Glyndyfrdwy, Ibid.
CANTREF Y RHIW,
Yale, or Jal, Denbighshire. Ystrad Alun, or Mold, Flintshire. Hope, Ibid.
CANTREF UWCHNANT,
Merffordd, in Flintshire. Maelor Gymraeg, or Bromfield, Denbighshire. Maelor
Saesneg, Flintshire.
CANTREF TREFRED,
Croes-vaen, and Trefy Waun, or Chirk, in Denbighshire. Croes-oswallt, or
Oswestry, Shropshire.
CANTREF RHAIADR,
Mochnant-is-Rhaiadr, Denbighshire. Kynllaeth, etc. Denbighshire. Nan-heudwy,
Denbighshire. Whittington, Shropshire.
Madoc married Susanna, daughter of Gryffydd ap Conan prince of North Wales, by
whom he had two sons; Gryffydd Maelor, and Owen ap Madoc. To the first he gave
the two Maelors, Yale, Hopedale, and Nan-heudwy, and Mochnant is Rhaiadr, etc.:
to Owen, the land of Mechain Is-coed: and, to his natural son Owen Brogyntyn, a
young man of great merit, Edeyrnion and Dinmael Powel, 211.
. Gryffydd married Angharad, the daughter of Owen Gwynedd, and had one son
named Madoc, in whom the inheritance remained entire.

WE now hasten to the end of the line. Madoc had only one son, Gryffydd,
commonly called lord of Dinas Bran, because he made that fortress his chief
residence. He unfortunately became enamoured of Emma, an English lady, daughter
of James lord Audley; who, alienating his affections from his country, made him
one instrument of its subjection, and of the destruction of his own family. He
took part with Henry III. and Edward I. against his natural prince. The
resentment of his countrymen was raised against him; and he was obliged to
confine himself in his castle of Dinas Bran, where probably grief and shame put
an end to his life. He left four children under age, Madoc, Llewelyn, Gryffydd,
and Owen. EDWARD I. gave the guardianship of Madoc, the eldest (who was to have
for his share the lordship of Bromfield and Yale, the castle of Dinas Bran, and
the reversion of Maelor Saesneg, after the death of his mother) to John earl
Warren; and of Llewelyn (who was to possess the lordships of Chirk and
Nan-heudwy) to Roger Mortimer, son of lord Mortimer, of Wigmore. These lords
soon conspired to free themselves from their charge, and possess themselves of
their estates: and accordingly caused the poor children to be drowned under
Holt-bridge. This I discovered in a manuscript, communicated to me by the
Reverend Mr. PRICE, keeper of the Bodleian library. Before that, the manner of
their deaths was current in the country, under the fable of two young fairies,
who had been destroyed in that manner, and in the same place; but the
foundation of the tale was, till very lately, totally lost.

HAVING now brought the succession to the required period, I shall only say,
that Gryffydd, the third son, was suffered to enjoy his portion of Glyndyfrdwy;
from whom sprung OWEN, the great revenger of the wrongs of his family: and the
fourth son, Owen, received for his share, Cynllaeth. This afterward devolved
to Gryffydd, father of Glyndwr.

THE barbarity of the two guardians, so far from being punished by their
master, was rewarded. Warren had the grant of Dinas Bran and all Bromfield
confirmed to him, dated from Rudland, October 7th, 1281 AYLOFF's Rotuli
Walliae, 81.
; Mortimer that of Chirk. The former began immediately to secure his ill-gotten
possessions by building Holt Castle; but dying, left the finishing of it to his
son William. Before this grant, a family of the name of Holt, held this place;
I suppose under its lord paramount. These estates continued in the family till
1347, when, on the death of John earl Warren, they devolved to Edward Fitzalan
earl of Arundel, in right of his wife Alice, sister to the former. Warren had
been divorced from his wife Joan de Baars, and had obtained from Edward II. a
grant of his Welsh estates, and others in Surrey and Sussex, in favor of John
and Thomas, sons of his by Maud de Nereford, to whom he had been contracted
before his marriage with Joan. These children, probably, died without issue;
the estates reverting, as he had in such a case provided, to his own right
heirs Dugdale Baron. i. 82.
.

THEY continued with the Fitzalans during three generations. Richard II.
probably seized on them after the execution of Richard earl of Arundel; for we
find that unhappy prince had lodged in Holt Castle, during his Irish
expedition, jewels to the value of two hundred thousand marks, and a hundred
thousand marks in coin Holinshed.
; which, with the fortress, were delivered to Bolingbroke, previous to the
deposal of Richard. Thomas, the son of Richard, was restored in blood in the
following reign. He died in 1416, without issue; and his unsettled estates fell
to his sissters, Elizabeth, who had married Thomas Mowbray duke of Norfolk, but
then wife to Sir Gerard Useflect; and Joan, who had married William B^auchamp
lord of Abergavenny. This occasioned a further division of these estates.
Joan's share fell again, by a daughter, to Nevil lord Abergavenny; after which,
I lose fight of the succession till the reign of Henry VII. when that prince
made a grant of them to Sir William Stanley. On his execution, Henry not only
resumed the lordship, but seized on his vast effects; and found in Holt Castle,
in money and plate, forty thousand marks, besides jewels, household goods, and
cattle on his ground Leicester, 371.
.

HENRY VIII. bestowed this lordship on his natural son Henry Fitzroy duke of
Richmond; and had possession given him at its capital of Holt, in 1534, by the
duke of Norfolk and others King, ii, 195.
. He enjoyed his honor but a short time, dying at the age of seventeen, in the
year 1536.

IN the following reign, I find it in possession of Thomas Seymour lord
admiral, and turbulent brother to the protector Somerset. He made the fortress
at Holt subservient to his ambitious designs; and formed there a great magazine
of warlike stores Dugdale Baron, ii. 368.
. His deserved but illegal execution again flung Bromfield into possession of
the crown.

(...) CASTLE


THE great earl of Leicester was in possession of Chirk; and, probably, of the
whole lordship of Bromfield.

IN 1643, Holt Castle was in the hands of the crown; but in that year was
feized for the use of the parliament, by Sir William Brereton and Sir Thomas
Middhton Whitelock, 77. Idem, 192. 201.
. The royalists recovered the possession. In February 1645-6, it was closely
besieged by major general Mytton Drake Parlem, Hist. xiv. 356.
, and vigorously defended by the governor, Sir Richard Lloyd of Ecclusham near
Wrexham, till the beginning of April, when it was surrendered on articles; the
governor having permission to go beyond sea, with three hundred pounds; and his
lady, to enjoy his lands, being three hundred pounds a year Whitelock, 231.
Immediately after the parliament got possession, it was ordered to be
demolished.

THE lordship is at present in the crown, under the direction of the steward of
Bromfield and Yale; an office in his majesty's disposal: but a grant of the
minerals (the far more valuable part) was made to the Grosvenour family in the
reign of Charles I. subject to the annual payment of twenty shillings. An
attempt was made by king William to alienate these important domains in favor
of the earl of Portland, and his heirs for ever; but on a vigorous
representation of the illegality, but particularly on the noble speech British
Biogr. vii. app. 141.
of Robert Price Esquire afterward baron of the exchequer, his majesty thought fit
to withdraw the grant already made out in the treasury. The whole rents at that
time resulting to the crown, amounted only to a thousand a year, besides mises,
reliefs, and other contingent profits. The mise was, in Wales, a customary
present made to the prince on his accession, in old times, in cattle; but after
its conquest, changed into money. It amounted to about five thousand pounds. It
was paid thrice in the time of James I, first, at his coming to the crown;
secondly, on the creation of his son Henry prince of Wales; thirdly, on the
creation of Charles.

ON leaving Holt, I returned over the bridge; and, passing along a portion of
CHESHIRE, in a flat country, with a pleasing view of the Broxton hills on the
left, I reached the site of Shocklach castle. This, with great part of the
ancient hundred of Dudestan, was held after the Conquest by Robert Fitzbugh,
from Hugh Lupus. It belonged to the barony of Malpas; but on the division of
it, one part came to John de Sutton baron of Dudley, the other to Urien de
Sancto Petro. What is remarkable, it was held of queen Elizabeth, as of her
manor of East Greenwich. Nothing, excepting a fosse, marks the place of this
fortress. On the opposite side of the road is a vast mount, probably of far
greater antiquity than the castle; and exploratory, commanding a great view
around. By the name of Stretton, a neighboring place, I conjecture that a Roman
road went this way; but my time did not permit me to search after it.

AT a small distance from Shocklach castle, I entered Maelor Saesneg, a hundred
of FLINTSHIRE, disjoined from the rest of the county. At the time of the making
of the, Doomsday book, the lands about Worthenbury, Overton, and Bettisfield or
the present parish of Hanmer, belonged to the hundred of Dudestan. But long
before the forming of the new hundreds, which, according to Sir Peter
Leicester, did not happen much later than the reign of Edward III. it is
certain these places reverted to the descendants of the princes of Powis. it
seems as if it acquired the name of Saesneg, from its having been the jointure
of Emma, widow of Gryffydd ap Madoc, who was an Englishwoman. It consists of
these parishes; Worthenbury, Bangor, Hanmer, and the chapelry of Overton, on
this side of the Dee, of Erbistock on the other side, opposite to Overton; and
of Hope in the other portion of the county of Flint Parts in other parishes
are, Is-coed in Melpas, Penley in Ellesmere, and Bodidris in Llanarmon.
. Part only of Erbistock is in Flintshire; the rest in Denbighshire. Besides
these parishes, are several spots that belong to this hundred, insulated by the
last county, which form nearly a connection between this and the other part of
the hundred. The chain is supposed to have been once entire; but as many of the
links were osten fields, which (by reason of their smallness) were neglected,
and lost. One of the townships of Dutton, in Holt parish, is known to have
belonged to this hundred; as that of Abenbury Vechan, in that of Wrexham, does
at present. Osley and Mereford, the last in the parish of Gresford, were, by
the 33d of Henry VIII. added to Flintshire, and assist to continue the chain
toward Hope, the distant portion of this hundred. These were but recently made
parts of Flintshire, in comparison of the rest of Maelor Saesneg; which was
declared to constitute part of the county by Edward I. in the Statutum Walliae.

THE lordship or superiority of the hundred was granted (I believe) by Henry
IV. to Sir John Stanley knight, and continued in his family till the 41st of
Elizabeth; when William earl of Derby devised it to Sir Randle Brerelon; and it
has since devolved to Sir Walden Hanmer baronet, and Philip Lloyd Fletcher
esquire.

THIS part of Flintshire is under the same government as the rest; excepting
the obligation of attending the county courts, which is dispensed with by
reason of its distance from the towns where they are held. It has also a
coroner of its own; but eligible by the county at large.

THE limit between this part of the hundred and Cheshire is Flannen Brook:
about a mile beyond is the village and church of Worthenbury; the last, a new
and neat brick building, dedicated to St. Deiniol; a rectory taken out of
Bangor, and made a separate parish by an act of the second of William and Mary,
in the presentation of the family of Emral. The name in the Doomsday book is
Hurdingberie; before the Conquest held by earl Edwin.

I TOOK my quarters at Broughton; BROUCHTON.
a venerable wooden house, in possession of my respected kinsman Peter Davies
Esquire in right of his lady, eldest sister to the late Broughton (...) Esquire. The
Whiteballs were originally of Staff^rashire; but settled here in 1663, by
virtue of a marriage between Rowland Whitehall and Elizabeth daughter of John
Brouglton. The Broughtons derived themselves from the great Weish stock Tudor
Trovor, earl of Hereford, and assumed their name from this place, in the reign
of Henry VII.

AT the back of this house In the preceding page, THREAP WOOD
line 21 instead of eldest sister, read surviving sister.
lies the noted common of Threapwood, from time immemorial a place of refuge
for the frail fair, who make here a transient abode, clandestinely to be freed
from the consequences of illicit love. Numbers of houses are scattered over the
common for their reception. This tract, till of late years, had the ill-fortune
to be extra-parochial: at first, either because it was in the hands of
irreligious or careless owners, or was situated in forest or desert places
Blackstone, 4 to, i. 113.
, it never was united to any parish. The inhabitants, therefore, considered
themselves as beyond the reach of law, resisted all government; and even
opposed the excise laws, till they were forced to submit, but not without
bloodshed on the occasion. The very name of the place speaks the manners of the
dwellers, Threap-wood, derived from the Anglo-Saxon Threapian, to threap (a
word still in use); signifying to persist in a fact or argument, be it right or
wrong. It is seated between the parishes of Malpas, Hanmer, and Worthenbury;
but belonged to none, till it was, by the late militia acts, decreed to be in
the last. Still doubts arise about execution of several laws within this
precinct. It is to be hoped, that legislature will take an opportunity of
rendering the magisterial power as valid here as in other places; especially
when it is to be considered, that there are to the amount of two hundred and
sixty-seven inhabitants, who want instruction in the doctrine of universal
submission to law.

FROM Broughton I made an excursion to Hanmer, HANMER.
distant about five or six miles: passed over part of Threap-wood; and observed
in the inclosares; some venerable oaks, the remains of the ancient forest.
Cross Sarn-bridge, over the Wich-brook, which rises about two miles above, in
part of the parish of Malpas, but in the county of Flint, near the Wiches;
where are brine-springs and salt-works. Reach a house called Willington-cross.
The country, which hitherto had been uncommonly wet and dirty, now changes to a
sandy soil, and becomes broken into small risings. The part about the little
town of Hanmer is extremely beautiful; varied with a lake of fifty acres,
bounded on all sides with small cultivated eminences, embellished with woods.
The town, church, and the chief seat of the family of the Hanmers, a modern
brick house, adorn one part; and on the opposite side of the water, on the sire
of the old house of Greddington, another seat is projected by that eminent
lawyer, Lloyd Kenyon, esquire.

THE church is a very handsome embattled building, CHURCH.
of the reign of Henry VII. in whose time numbers of churches were rebuilt
alter the long desolation of civil war. The roof is of wood: that of the Fe^^s
chapel, and of the north aile, are divided in small squares, and carved in a
most elegant style. In the windows of the former was some painted glass, with
dates, expressing the time of its being made, at the cost of the Hanmers; who
(...) the presentation of the vicarage granted to them by the abbey of Heg^^^^,
near Shrewsbury, in 1424.

IN the Hanmer chapel are two mural monuments, in memory of two most
distinguished personages, with inscription in elegant Latin. One to Sir Thomas
Hanmer, baronet, knight of the shire for the county of Flint, who died in 1678:
the other commemorates a speaker of the house of commons in the latter part of
the reign of queen Anne, the noted Sir PLAN OF HAWARDEN CASTLE.
Thomas Hanmer He died May 7th 1746.
, editor of the magnificent edition of Shakespeare.

ABOUT two miles farther is Bettissield; BETTISFIELD.
an old brick house belonging to the same family. I observed here a head of the
late Sir Thomas Hanmer, by Kneller, in a long wig and cravat; an elegant figure
of a lady Hanmer, with a forehead-cloth, in an elegant white undress, studying
Gerard's herbal; and a small portrait of a lady Warner, a la magdalene, LADY
WARNER.
with long disheveled hair, and a scull in her hand. She was a daughter of the
house, and wife to a Sir John Warner; who, not content with quitting the
religion of their parents, determined to quit the kingdom, and embrace the
monastic life. Their friends applied to the king ( Charles II.) to divert them
from their resolution. His majesty, with his wicked wit, told them, that if Sir
John had a mind to make himself one of God Almighty's fools, they must have,
patience. Sir John became a Jesuit, and assumed the name of brother Clare; she
a poor Clare, of which order she performed the noviciateship with mavelous
obedience! I am black, but comely, was the text of a preacher, one day
exhorting her (in what is called a clothing sermon) to humility; expressing,
that she must make herself black (alluding to the habit) in the eyes of the
world, to become more fair in the sight of the LORD. The abbess on this said to
the poor novice, You also, SISTER CLARE, must black yourself. On which she went
instantly into the kitchen, where she blacked her face and hands with the soot
of the chimney; and thus became an instructive example to the admiring sisters
Vide Life of Lady Warner, p. 108. London 1696.
!

BETTISFIELD has for centuries belonged to the Hanmers. Before the battle of,
(...), a division of their estates was made. Jenkin Hanmer, the brother-in-law
to the great Glynd^r, divided his estates among his four sons. He gave Hanmer,
and his lands at Llwyn Derw or Ockenlolt, obtained with his first wife
Margaret, daughter of Davydd ap Bleddyn Vychan, to their son Gryfsydd. By his
second marriage, with Eva daughter to Davydd ap Grono ap Jerwerth of Llai, he
had John, Edward, and Richard. To John he gave Halghton (a house;e in this
neighborhood) and Llai; to Edward, lands in Fenns, a place likewise not remote;
and to Richard, lands in Betisfield. Jenkin soon after fell, valiantly.
fighting, in the field rear Slrewstury, against the usurper B^^^breke. John
departed from the principles of his father, and embraced the side of the house
of Lancaster, in the reign of Henry VI. John Mowbray duke of Norfolk, and Gray
lord (...), carried fire and sword through his esates in 1463, and burns his
house at Halghton; which induced him, the year following to make his submission
to the victorious Edward Salastary Pedigrce.
.

ALL these estates, excepting Halghton, are now united, and in possession of
Sir Walden Hanmer baronet.

ON leaving Broughton, I took the road toward Banger. On the right lies Emral
Hall, the seat of the Pul^ston; a family seteled here in the time of Edward I.
but took their name from Puleydon, a township in Shropshtre. The first who
possessed the place was Roger, a favorite officer of the king; who, after the
conquest of. Wales, appointed him collector of the taxes raised toward the
support of the war against France; but the Welsh, unused to these levies,
seized on de Pulesdon and hanged him Powel, 380.
. His son Richard was appointed, by the same prince, sheriff of Caernarvon,
with a salary of forty pounds, and all arrears AYLOFF's Rot. Walli^, 101.
. His son, another Richard, held, in the 7th or Edward II. lands in the parish
of Worthenbury, by certain serviccs, and per ammabrogium, or a pecuniary
acknowlegement paid by tenants to the king, or vassals to their lord, for the
liberty of marrying, or not marrying. Thus Gilbert de Maisuil gave ten marks of
silver to Henry III. for leave to take a wife; and Cecily, widow of Hugh
Povere, that she might marry whom she pleased Madox. Antiq. Excheq. i. 465. 6.
, It is strange that this servile custom should be retained so long. It is
pretended, that the Amobyr among the Welsh, the Lyre-wite among the Semons, and
the Marcheta mulierum among the Scots, were fines paid by the vassal to the
superior, to buy off his right to the first night's lodging with the bride of
the person who held from him: but I believe there never was any European nation
(in the periods this custom was pretended to exist) so barbarous as to admit
it. It is true, that the power above cited was introduced into England by the
Normans, out of their own country. AMORYR.
The Amoryr, or rather Gobr merob, was a Eritish custom of great antiquity,
paid other for violating the chaslity of a virgin; or for a marriage of a
vassal Leges Walli^^, 92. and Glossar. 554.
, and signifies the price of a virgin. The Welsh laws, so far from encouraging
adultery. checked, by severe sines, even unbecoming liberties Leges Wallica, 78.
. The Amolyr was intended as a preservative against lewdness. If a virgin was
deflowered, the seducer, or, in his stead, her father, paid the fine. If she
married, he also paid the fine. There is one species so singular as to merit
mention: if a wife proved unfaithful to her husband's bed, the poor cuckold was
obliged to pay his superior five shillings as long as he did cydgysgu, (...)
sleep with her; but if he forbore cohabiting with her, and she cydgysgu'd with
her gallant, the fine fell on the offending fair.

THE Saxons had their Lyre-wyte or Lecher-wyte, LYRE-WYTE.
for the same end that the Welsh had their Amobyr. The crime is mentioned often
in the Saxon laws Leges Saxon. 40. 132.
: once, with a cruel penalty denounced against the offender; and a second time,
with a strong dehortation from the commission. In general, the crime was
expiated by money, according to the degree of the person injured. The (...) at
this time commute, in certain degrees of offense; but oftener punish it with
burning, and other excruciating deaths Gentoo Laws, 268, etc.
.

CONTINUE my journey to Bangor, BANGOR.
seated on the banks of the Dee; which is here bounded on both sides by rich
meadows. The church has been built at different times; but no part very
ancient. It is a rectory, dedicated to St. Dinoth abbot of Bancornaburg or
Bangor, in the days of St. Augustine. It is in the gift of Philip Lloyd
Fletcher Esquire. This place is celebrated for being the site of the most ancient
British monastery, or rather seminary, which contained two thousand four
hundred monks; who, dividing themselves into seven bands, passed their time
alternately in prayer and labor BEDAE Hist. Eccles. lib. ii. c. 2. p. 80.
; or, as another writer Cambden, i. 663.
says, a hundred (by turns) passed one hour in devotion; so that the whole
twenty-four hours were employed in sacred duties. This pious community was
dispersed, after the slaughter of their brethren at the battle of Chester, and
their house overthrown. William the monk, and librarian of Malmsbury,
cotemporary with king Stephen, speaks of the remains in his days; saying that
no place could show greater remains of half-demolished churches, and multitudes
of other ruins that were to be seen in his time Script. post. BEDAM, 294.
. Mention is made of two gates of the precincts, that were a mile distant, with
the Dee running between them; one was called Porth Clais, the other Porth Wgan.
The name of the first is retained in that of a place called Clai; of the other
in a house called Hogan. The precincts must have been large, as the monks
maintained themselves by the labor of their own hands. The simple and unlearned
provided meat and clothing for the learned, and distributed to the poor all
superfluities. It sent forth many thousands of religious; and its same would
have been immaculate, had it not produced the celebrated Pelagius, about the
year 400, the same who is usually stigmatized by the name of the arch-heretic.
Two of his tenets, perhaps, in these days, may give him many proselytes: That
good works were meritorious; and that unbaptized infants ran no hazard of
damnation.

THE monks of this community, in common with all the British clergy, were
strenuous opposers of the usurpation of the church of Rome. Seven bishops, and
a great number of learned men, were deputed from Bangor to meet the famous
missionary Augustine the monk; when he insisted on their concurrence with his
demands, with such insolence, that they left him, determined to maintain the
original rites of their own church; which remained pure, and independent of all
foreign prelates, for many centuries after that period. Augustine threatened
the Britons with the resentment cf the Saxons. How far he instigated Edi^fred
in his invasion does not appear; but, if BID may be depended on, the massacre
of the monks almost immediately followed his menaces BEDAE Hist. Eccles. lib.
ii. c. 2. p. 80.
.

I COULD discover no remains of this once noted place; but was informed, that
squared stones have been often ploughed up in a field called the Stanyards;
probably the site of some of the ancient buildings.

THIS place had been also the site of the supposed Bo^ium or Bovium, a Roman
station. Leland says, that in his time Roman money was found there. I could
find neither coins or inscriptions, or any thing of higher antiquity than four
stone coffin-lids, engraven in the annexed plate, and an ancient cross; all dug
up in the churchyard. No 1. has on it the arms of the earls Warren: 2. the
same, quartered with arms unknown to me: 3. is inscribed Hic jacet ITHEL
CADWGAY:

COFFIN LIDS found at BANGOR.


the 4th, inscribed Hic jacet WILLIAM LE FRENS; probably a person of Norman
extraction. I find the name in Sir Peter Leicester's Cheshire 275.
: one Hugh de Frenos, who married Alice, daughter of Lacy earl of Lincoln, and
widow of Thomas earl of Lancaster, beheaded 1321. The cross is far the most
ancient. The ingenious herald, Mr. Wilkinson, imagines, that the gryphon and
the lion (which are both ancient British arms) looking toward the cross, may
signify the early embracing of Christianity by the nations of our island.

THE ancient British boats, the vitilia navigia of Pliny; the modern coracles;
are much in use in these parts for the purposes of salmon-fishing. They have
now lost the cause of their name, being no longer covered with coria or hides,
but with strong pitched canvas. They hold only a single person, who uses a
paddle with great dexterity Water-races are often performed here in these
slight vessels. On Michacl^^^ day next, a regatta of great magnificence is to
be exhibited by them above Bangor Bridge.
. The Britons had them of large size, and even made short voyages in them,
according to the accounts we receive from Lucan.

THE bridge is a beautiful light structure, and consists of five arches. A
learned schoolmaster, in the following inscription, has commemorated the time
of its reparation.

MVND. 5607. DENB. CC. CONCIT. REPARAT. AN. CHRIST. 1658. SVMP. E COMMIT. LIB.
M. A. HEGYR. 1036. FLINT. C. ON crossing the Dee, EYTON.
entered into Denbighshire again; and, turning short to the left, after two
miles riding, visited Eyton, the seat of Kenrick Eyton Esquire. This house was head
of a numerous race of gentry, that took their name from the place, so called
from its situation. The Dee rolls beneath, and forms a long and solemn reach,
overshadowed by hanging woods. At Overton bridge, which lies about a mile
beyond Eyton, the channel is contracted, and the stream flows picturesquely
between lofty banks, admirably described by the inimitable pencil of Mr.
SAND^Y. This bridge consists of two neat arches, and was first built of stone
by the munificence of Gwenhwyvar, daughter of Jerwerth Ddu of Pengwern, near
Llangollen; a maiden lady who resided at Eyton with her sister Margaret, who
was married to Madoc ap Evan Eyton Eyton Pidigree.
.

OVERTON, OVERTON.
or Overton Madoc, the Ovreton of the Doomsday book, is a pleasant village,
seated on a high bank, about a mile beyond the bridge, above a rich meadowy
flat of a semicircular form, varied by the Dee, and bounded in front with
fertile and wooded slopes; while the lofty and naked mountains soar beyond, and
close the scene.

THIS place was called, at the time of the Conquest, Ovretone; had then a Saxon
owner; but was granted to Robert Fitzbugh. I find in 1278, or the 7th of Edward
I. that it was in possession of Robert de Crevecoeur, who obtained for it a
weekly market on a Wednesday Dugdale Baron. i. 592.
. In the 21st of the same reign, the king directed Reginald de Gray, justice of
Chester, to go personally to Overton, and there to assign to the burgesses, or
such as would become inhabitants, competent land, within the demesnes of
Overton castle and wood, to build them burgages with Har^ian MSS. No 2074. 45.
. Such encouragement did this wise prince give to population, to secure the
frontiers of his new conquest. In 1331, or the 5th of Edward III. it was
granted, with other lands in this Maelor, to Eubule le Strange, baron of
Knockyn Dugdale Baron. i. 668.
.

THERE are no relics of the castle; which stood in a field still called
Castlefield, fronting the Dee. Tradition says, that it had been the residence
of Madoc ap Meredydd prince of Powys and lord of Overton; from which the place
received the addition of Madoc.

THE church is a handsome building; and the churchyard reckoned among the
wonders of Wales, on account of its handsome yew-trees. The place is only a
curacy, in the parish of Bangor, in the diocese of Chester.

OVERTON is one of the contributory boroughs which send a member for that of
Flint; which is done by the inhabitants of Overton-foreign and Knolton, paying
scot and lot. This right had been settled in the years 1728 and 1737; but a
doubt arising, whether payment of taxes by the landlord was sufficient, in
1741, it was determined by parliament in the negative. Hanmer, and several other
places, laid in a clame to vote; but it was rejected by the commons in the
beginning of this century.

GWERNHAILED, GWERNHAILED.
the seat of Mr. Fletcher, in this parish, must not pass unnoticed. Few places
command so rich a view; and few have been more judiciously improved. It stands
on the lofty brow that skirts the country. Beneath runs the Dee; bounded on the
opposite side by most beautiful meadows and varied in the distance with numbers
of hills; among which those of Caer-gwrle form a most noble and conspicuous
mass.

IN this neighborhood I visited the fine collection of birds at Bryn y p^s,
BRYNY PYS.
the seat of Richard Parry Price Esquire. NEW VULTURE.
Among other^ were a pair of vultures; which I take the liberty of mentioning
in this place, as being an undescribed species. They were the smallest of the
genus, not above half as big again as the kite. Their bill whitish, long, and
but little hooked; cere bluish; orbits naked and flesh-colored; irides
straw-colored; head and neck, contrary to the character of the genus, clothed
with feathers; craw pendulous; head, neck, back, breast, belly, and lesser
coverts of the wings, of a pure white; greater coverts, and primaries, black,
the last tipped with white; the lower part of the tail black; the end white; legs
dirty white, roughened with scales.

INHABIT Angola. Were very restless and querulous; and much more active than is
usual with this sluggish race. They are now dead; but their exuviae, stuffed so
as to mimic life, are placed in the matchless Museum of ASHTON LEVER Esquire which
is f^r the most instructive and elegant of any in Europe; and from which the
mere admirer will receive equal pleasure with the profoundest connoisseur.



I MUST not leave this neighborhood without observing that the little owl Brit.
Zool. i. No 70.
, that rare English species, has been shot in some adjacent woods. It is very
frequent abroad; where they collect in autumn and the spring in great flocks,
in order to migrate in search of field-mice. Childrey, in his Britannia
Baconica Pp. 14. 100.
mentions two instances of armies of strange painted owls, that came in 1580,
and in 1648, into Essex, and waged war against the multiludes of mice in those
times destroying the country: but whether they were owls of this species I
cannot determine. I am assured by Mr. STUART, that this kind visits Attica in
vast flocks every spring, and breeds there. It is no wonder that the Athenian
goddess should have this bird as her concomitant, being so very common there.
It is very frequently expressed on the Athenian coins and sculptures; and I
have seen it placed on the hand of a statue of hers, in the noble collection
belonging to William Weddel Esquire at Newby in Yorkshire.

WITHIN a small distance from Overton, I entered the county of SALOP or
SHROPSHIRE, at Trench-lane, once infamous for its depth and badness. This
county was peopled by the Cornavii; and, till the time of Offa, was divided
between the princes of Powys and the Mercian kingdom: but Offa, after his
expulsion of the Welsh from their ancient seat of Pengwern or Shrewsbury, added
their part to his dominions. At the Conquest, it was possessed by the brave
Edwin, the last earl of Mercia. On his death, it was bestowed by the Conqueror
on Roger de Montgomery, a potent Norman, the first earl of Arundel and
Shrewsbury.

THE country, ELLESMERE.
for the greatest part of the way to Ellesmere, is flat, dirty, and unpleasing.
On the approach to the town, becomes more agreeable; and about it, breaks into
most beautiful risings, fertile, and finely wooded; the bottoms are indeed
destitute of rivers; but frequently filled with little lakes, called here
meres, elegantly bordered by the cultivated hills. It is singular that none of
them are the parents of streams; their increase from rains and springs, and
their loss by exhalations, keep such equal pace!

ELLESMERE is a town seated on a lake of a hundred and one acres in dimensions;
and whose greatest depth is twenty-six yards; well stocked with fish.

THE environs have two advantages superior to the other lakes. A good town
borders on one side: the fine park of Ockle, or Ottley, is a great ornament to
another. The property of the water is in the duke of Bridgewater.

THE town is of Saxon origin, and takes its name from the water; which was
called Aelsmere, or the greatest mere, being the chief in this part of the
county. The place has little to boast of except its situation. The principal
trade is that of malt; the barley of the neighborhood being remarkably good.

THE castle stood on a vast artificial mount on a rising ground, CASTLE.
with three great ditches on the more accessible side. At present not a vestige
is to be seen; the top being formed into a bowling-green, that may vie with any
in England for the elegance and extent of inland prospect; of the lake beneath;
of the rich country and woods surrounding the town. At a distance, Chester and
the Broxton hills; Wrexham and the Caergwrle mountains; Castle Dinas Bran, and
the Berwyn alps; and some of those of Merionethshire; Llanymynach hill, the
Breyddin, Pimhill, Cleehill, and the noted Wrekin.

I CANNOT trace the founder of the castle, nor yet the time of its destruction.
The place was possessed, as I before said, by Edwin immediately before the
Conquest; and on that event, by Roger de Montgomery.

IN 1177, it was transferred to a prince of North Wales. Henry II. in that
year, assembled a council at Oxford, and, among other regulations for the
security of the kingdom, bestowed on David ap Owen his natural sister Emma,
with the lordship of Ellesmere as a portion. This the politic monarch did, in
hopes of retaining the affections of David, and to prevent a breach with the
Welsh; who gave him such great disturbance, and so often baffled his greatest
endeavors to subdue them during the reign of Owen Gwynedd father to David. This
alliance answered his purpose; for the English remained unmolested during the
life of that prince.

AFTER his decease, Robert Lupus held, by his bailiff, this manor.

AFTER this, it came a second time into the hands of a prince of Wales. King
John, by grant dated from Dover, April 16th 1204, bestowed it, with Joan, his
natural child by Agatha daughter of Robert Ferrers earl of Derby, on Llewelyn
ap Jorwerth. It is probable that John hoped, by means of his son-in-law, to
terrify the lord marchers into obedience: but the unfortunate monarch reaped no
benefit from the alliance. Joan proved unfaithful to our prince's bed; who
hanged William de Breos, author of his disgrace, and turned his arms against
the English. This induced John to divest Llewelyn of the government of so
important a fortress as a frontier castle; for, by a writ dated from Warwick,
in the tenth year of his reign, he orders the governnor, Bartholomew Turol, to
deliver it instantly to William earl of Salusbury and Thomas of Endinton. But
still left the revenues of the lands to his daughter.

IN the fourth or Henry III. or the year 1219, Roger L'Estrange yielded to the
king the manors of Colmere and Hampton; but received them again, together with
the hundred of Ellesmere and its castle; but for life only.

In 1236, or the 21st of the same monarch, it appears that John L'Estrange was
governor of the castle. Four years after this, Henry determined no longer to
leave a place of this consequence in the hands of the Welsh. Accordingly, we
find him obliging David ap Llewelyn to make a formal renunciation of this
territory, which he cedes for ever. The treaty was dated from Alnet on the
Elwy, on the feast of the decollation of St. John the Baptist, in 1240.

IN 1252, the 37th of Henry III. the manor and castle of Ellsmere were
committed to John de Gray, paying an annual fine of ten shillings.

IN the 43d year, or 1258, Peter de Montfort was governor of the castle. In the
51st, the manor, castle, and hundred were granted to Hamon L'Estrange and his
(...), with a provision

HALSTON


out of the escheat of the manor, castle, and hundred, of a hundred pounds a
year. This nobleman took a large share in the barons wars; was excommunicated
for his insolence by the archbishop of Canterbury; but returning to his
allegiance, was employed in places of trust, which he discharged with the
utmost fidelity. It is said that he purchased the manors of Coalmere and
Hampton from Peter de Montfort, which he left to his brother Sir Roger
L'Estrange. Edward I. in the fourth year of his reign, on the surrender of the
grant of Hamon (which was to him and his heirs) confirmed it anew, on condition
he would receive the castle and hundred of Ellesmere for life, and the
remainder to the king in fee. This Roger, by the king's warrant, granted
several parcels of the manor to different persons: and about the same time, the
wastes and commons were enclosed and converted into freeholds.

In 1320, Edward II. on the insurrection of the earl of Lancaster, appointed
Oliver de Ingehan governor of the castle. Edward III. in 1329, after causing
the encroachments made on this manor to be reduced, bestowed the castle, and
the hamlets of Colmere and Hampton, on Sir Eubule L'Estrange, younger son of
baron L'Estrange of Knockin. They continued in his line till 1477, the 17th of
Edward IV; when, by the marriage of Joan, daughter of the last male heir, with
George Stanley, eldest son to Thomas first earl of Derby, they were conveyed to
that great house, which was possessed of them till 1549, the 42d of Elizabeth;
when William earl of Derby had license from the queen to alienate them; which
he did, to Richard Spencer and Edward Savage; and they, to Sir Thomas Egerton
keeper of the great seal, and afterward chancellor of England and baron of
Ellesmere. It is now in possession of his descendant, the duke of Bridgewater,
who has vast property about the town; but no seat, except a very mean one,
called Birch.

THE church anciently belonged to the knights of St. John of Jerusalem. It was
granted to them by Llewelyn; and Edward III. confirmed to their prior the
donation. The vicarage is in the gift of the duke of Bridgewater. The chapels
of Cockshute, Dudleston, and Penley, are dependent on it.

IN the church is an alabaster figure of Sir Francis Kynaston of Ottley; and
another of his lady, much mutilated. He died in 1590. The venerable house to
which this knight belonged, was one of the most ancient freeholds now in the
parish; being found to have been the property of e Kynastons in 1308, the 2d of
Edward II. It has been distinguished by many eminent persons; particularly
another Sir Francis, esquire of the body to Charles I. famous for his Latin
translation of the Loves of Troilus and Cressida, from the English of Chaucer.

From Ellesmere I continued my journey toward Oswestry. From an eminence
called the Perthy, have a most extensive view of the flat part of the county,
bounded by the hills of Denbighshire, Montgomeryshire, and Shropshire. Amidst
them appear the vast gaps, through which the Severn and the Dee rush upon the
plains out of their mountanous confinement. This tract is intermixed with
woods, fertile land, and moors of great extent. After a ride of two or three
miles along the flat, reach HALSTON, the seat of the Myttons, HALSTON.
my maternal ancestry; a good house, built about the year 1690, with the
advantage of wood and water, managed with excellent taste by my worthy cousin
John Mytton Esquire. The house is situated on an elevated plot of ground, which
rises out of an extensive flat, great part of which was subject to frequent
floods; an inconvenience which has since been removed by the present owner, at
the expense of much trouble and money, in draining considerable tracts of low
ground; whereby the neighborhood is rendered more healthy and pleasant. This
flat, being well dotted with trees, agreeably foreshortens the prospect, till
it is bounded by the magnificent scenery of the surrounding hills, which
distinctly form, in various shapes, many pleasing points of view. A very
extensive wood flanks each side of the house, which is bounded by a fine piece
of water, made by extending the banks of the river Perry, and by conveying a
branch of it through the lower parts of the wood, enclosing several islands,
whose shores are shaded by very large full-grown oaks; which all together forms
one of the most pleasing artificial pieces of water that is to be met with. The
rest of the grounds are watered with the river Perry; a stream which used to
abound with excellent pike, perch, trout, dace, gudgeons, cray-fish, and eels,
till modern luxury gave an additional spur to the dexterity of poachers; a
grievance complained of, though encouraged, in this as well as in most rivers
in the kingdom. The Perry rises in the hills, in the parish of Syllatyn, and
passes through several moors to the village of Ryton, and afterward falls into
the Severn a little below Montford bridge.

AT this place was born the famous general Mytton, GENERAL MYTTON.
who commanded the parliament forces in Charles I.'s civil wars; by whose
military prowess most of the castles in North Wales were subdued; but finding
that Cromwell and his party had farther designs than the mere defense of
liberty (the cause in which he engaged) resigned his command and retired.

HERE is a well-chosen library, and a good collection of pictures: amongst
which are some very capital; particularly, Jacob, and his son Reuben showing
Josepb's bloody shirt, by Guer^^^; a head, by Raphael; St. Peter, by Guido;
king David, by Dominichino. Mr. Mytton is in possession of a carving, much
resembling that mentioned by Mr. WALPOLE, in his Anecdotes of Painting, ii. 42.
It is the portrait of Charles I. full-faced, cut on a peach-stone: above is a
crown. His face and clothes, which are the Vandyck dress, are painted. On the
reverse is an eagle transfixed with an arrow; and around it this motto, I
feathered this arrow. The whole is most admirably executed; and is set in gold
with a crystal on each side. It probably was the work of Nicholas Briot, a
great graver of the mint in the time of Charles I.
. Mr. William Mytton's curious manuscripts of the Shropshire antiquities are
preserved here; a work which he had been many years engaged in with
indefatigable attention, but, unfortunately for the public, died before he
could complete his design. To his labors I owe frequent obligations in this
part of the work.

IN Saxon times, ANCIENT OWNERS.
the lordship of Halston belonged to Edric. At that time there were on it two
Welshmen and one Frenchman. After the Conquest, it became the property of
Guarine, sheriff of Shropshire, ancestor to the Fitzalans earls of Arundel, by
marriage with a Mellet Peverel, who received this as part of her fortune.
Afterward, it became a commandery belonging to the knights of St. John of
Jerusalem, bestowed on them by some of the Filzalans. In the 26th of Henry
VIII. it was valued at 160 l. 14 s. 10 d. a year Tanner, 457.
.

AT the dissolution, Henry VIII. empowered, by his letters patent, John Sewster
Esquire to dispose of this manor to Alan Horde, who did homage for it; and
afterward exchanged it for other lands, with Edward Mytton of Habberley; which
alienation was confirmed afterward by queen Elizabeth.

THE chapel is a donative, without any other revenue than what the owner is
pleased to allow his chaplain; and is of exempt jurisdiction.

THE name imports something of sanctity, signifying the Holy Stone. Probably a
cross or stone, the object of superstition, might once have stood here; but
that and its legend are quite lost. That it had been a sanctuary is evident. In
the reign of Richard I. Meyric Llwyd, descended from Hedd Molwynog, one of the
fifteen tribes of North Wales, indignant at certain injuries done his country,
by the introduction of new laws and new customs, seized several of the king's
officers appointed to see them executed, and slew some, and hung others. He
fled the rage of his enemies, and took refuge at this place Davies's display of
heraldry, 45.
.

AT a mile's distance from Halston, WHITTINGTON.
I reached Whittington; a village of ninety-four families, seated in a parish
of the same name. The number of families in the whole amounts to two hundred
and seventy-five. The population has of late increased pretty much. The
addition to the numbers in the parish have chiefly been confined to the
village, owing to the several houses built for the convenience of laborers, by
the family of the Mytton^ which evinces the duty and utility of rural residence
in our gentry, by promoting population, and cherishing the industrious poor.

MR. LLOYD, in his Archaeologia P. 260.
, imagines this place might have been celebrated under the name of Drev Wen, or
the Where Town, by Llowarch Hen, a noble bard of the race of the Cumbrian
Britons, who flourished in the year 590. Here, says he, was slain Condolanus, a
chieftain of his country, in an attempt to expel a set of Irish invaders:

Y Drev Wen ym mron y coed:
Yseu you y hevras erioed:
Ar wyneb y gwelht y gwaed.
Y Drev Wen in yd hymyr
Y hevras y glass vyvyr
Y gwaed y dan draed y gwr.
Some part of this is too obsolete to be translated. It expresses in general
the rage of a battle; and that the grass under the feet of the warriors was
stained with blood.

OUR bards also make this place the property of Tudor Trevor, a British
nobleman who lived in the year 924, and in right of his mother Rhiengar
grandaughter and heiress of Caradoc-Freichfras, slain by the Saxons in the
battle of Ruddlan Powel, 20. Collins's Baronetis, iii. 129,
, in 795) earl of Hereford; and in the right of his father Ynyr ap Cadvarch,
lord of both Maelors, Chirk, Whittington, and Oswestry, Ewias, and Urchenfield.

AFTER the Conquest, it was held by Roger earl of Shrewsbury. It is called in
the Doomsday book Wititone. It had at that time eight berewicks or corn-farms;
twelve bovarii or oxstalls; and a league of wood. The mill yielded five
shillings, and the Welsh residents there paid twenty shillings.

ON the forfeiture of the cruel Robert earl of Shrewsbury, it was bestowed on
William, a sister's son of Pain Peverel, lord of Whittington; and by the
marriage of his second daughter Mellet, with Guarine de Mets, a noble
Lorrainer, it became his property, about the year 1083, The deeds of arms, and
feats of chivalry, made their progeny the admiration of the times, and the
subject of high-flown romance. Guarine, then lord of Abberbury, and sheriff of
the county, hears of the resolution of Mellet to marry no one but the knight of
most distinguished prowess. The emulous youths were to assemble at Peverel's
place, or the castle in the Peak, there to approve their worth. Our knight
appears among the rest, with his sylver shield, and a proud pecok upon his
beualme creste; overthrows his rivals; carries off the fair prize; and receives
the lordship of Whittington as her dower. His posterity assumed the name of
Fitz-warine; continued lords of this place for near four hundred years; and
every heir, for nine descents, preserved the Christian name of Fulk.

THIS warlike race, and their warlike neighbors the Welssh, had perpetual
feuds: their spirits were too congenial to enjoy peace. Guarine and the prince
of Wales instantly attacked each other. The son of Conan had the advantage
Dugdale Baron. i. 4431.
, and carried destruction through all the borders. Guarine died in the reign of
(...) and left behind him a son, the first Fulk Fitz-warine, one of the great
glories of his race, who shone pre-eminent in the (...) line.

LOVE was the first inducement, in the days of chivalry, to great actions in
youthful breasts. Fulk becomes enamour^^ with Hawise, the daughter of his
guardian Joos. At her request he relieves the father from most eminent danger;
and recent her hand in reward.

To him was entrusted by Henry I. the care of the march^ about the year 1122;
from which he was styled Fulco (...), or the lieutenant. It was not long before
he found employ for (...) sword. The brave Gryffydd ap Conan carried his arms
(...) the borders; had a personal engagement with our hero; ^^^^ed a wound in
his shoulder, and was obliged to seek safety flight; but the victor did not
escape unhurt Dugdale Baron. i. 443.
. In future enterprises he was less fortunate: the British prince wrested from
him the lordship and castle of Whittington; which, by a suceeding treaty with
Henry II. in the second year of his reign Owen Gwynedd thought proper to
retain; and Fulk was (...) pensated by a grant of the honor of Alston in
Gwyneddshire. He died in an advanced age, and was buried at Abberbury.

I MUST not forget, that it is related of this Fulk, that being at the play of
chess with John, second son to Henry II. he received from him a blow with the
board, which he returned with such violence, as almost to demolish the young
prince.

THE succeeding Fulk did not degenerate from his ancestors. He rendered himself
so renowned in the wars abroad, that a French romance was composed on the
actions of himself and progenitors; and translated into English, under the
title of the Gestes of GUARINE and his sons Much of it is preserved in the
first volume of Leland's Collectanea, p. 230.
. It consists, as in the case of most writings of this nature, of a mixture of
some truth with much fiction.

To him was restored the castle of Whittington and its dependencies, after
satisfaction had been made by king John to Wrenoc and Wennen, the sons of
Meyric, on whom the prince of Wales had bestowed it in the reign of Henry II.
Wrenoc received certain lands in the neighborhood, which he was to hold by the
service of being the king's Latimer, or interpreter, in these parts, between
the Welsh and the English Blunt's ancient tenures, 17.
. Fulk, notwithstanding this, fell afterward from his allegiance to John; and
was excommunicated by name Rymer.
for his defection from that monarch: but his sufferings were in the cause of
liberty; for he was among the glorious band who obtained from John the charter
so highly prized by every true Briton.

IT appears that he did not neglect, in the following reign, to obtain a
confirmation of these estates, and to secure them to all posterity. He obtained
in 1219 from Henry III. a grant of Whittington to him and his heirs; for which
he gave the king two hundred and sixty-two pounds, and two coursers. He also
procured the liberty of a market here on a Wednesday, and a

fair on St. Luke's day; for which he presented his majesty with a palfrey.
FAIRS.
The first is lost. There are still considerable fairs or shows of cattle on
the last Thursdays in April, July, and September.

FROM another favor bestowed on him by the same monarch, in the year 1220, it
appears, that probably the castle of Whittington had been dismantled by the
Welsh; for Henry gives permission to this Fulk to fortify it. The memory of
this is still preserved in a room in the gateway, by the figure of a knight on
horseback coarsely painted on the wall, with the following lines, now almost
obliterated, placed beneath:

This was Sir Foulk Fitz-warren, late a great and valiant knight,
Who kept the Britons still in awe, and oftimes put to flight.
He of this castle owner was, and held it by command
Of Henry, late surnamed the third, then king of all this land.
His grandfather, a Lorrainer, by fame was much befriended,
Who Peverley's daur took to wife, from this Foul^ descended.
His ancient feats of chivalry in annals are recorded,
Our king of England afterward him baron made, and lorded.
DUGDALE informs us, that this baron was drowned in a river at the battle of
Jews, fighting in behalf of the king; but Mr. Mytton reasonably supposes, that
it must have been his son who appeared in the field that day: for, from the
time that this Fulk was appointed lieutenant of the marches by Richard I. to
that of the battle, seventy-five years had elapsed; so it is probable that he
was dead, or at lest unable to act the warrior. His son, therefore, must have
been the person who fell in that fatal action; followed by a body of hardy
soldiers, raised in these marches, inured to war by their frequent conflicts
with the Welsh.

IMMEDIATELY on the defeat, the rebel victor, Montfort earl of Leicester,
appointed Peter de Montfort, a creature of his own, governor of this castle;
and soon after, making use of the captive monarch's power against himself,
obliged him Rymer, i. 814.
to resign to Llewelyn ap Gryffydd prince of Wales, the hundred of Ellesmere,
several of the border castles, and among others that of Whittington and its
appertenances. This writ was dated from Hereford, June 22d 1265. Henry also
ceded to him the sovereignty of Wales, and homage of all the Welsh barons, and
the lord of Whittington. These grants were afterward confirmed to him by
Henry, with the homage of the neighboring counties (which were usually paid to
princes ancestors) in consideration of 30,000 marks paid by Llewelyn.

IN 1281, Fulk attended Edward I. in his expedition against the Welsh; and was
rewarded by the grant of free warren on his lands in this manor.

IN 1300, he had a feud with his potent neighbor Richard earl of Arundel; but
it was prevented by the interference of the king.

HE died in the reign of Edward II. His son was at that time in France, in his
majesty's service; whose lady, Alionora, had livery of the manor till her
husband could return to do homage.

IN 1329, or the 3d of Edward III. the new earl was accused by Edmund earl of
Kent, uncle to the king, of raising seditious reports, that Edward II. was
still alive; and endeavoring to excite a rebellion. For this offense his
castle of Whittington was seized; but, by the intercession of his peers,
restored to him the following year.

IN the insurrection of Owen Glyndwr, the vassals favored his cause: but their
lord obtained a pardon for them from Henry IV.

IN 1420, the 8th of Henry V. this illustrious race became extinct in the male
line; the last Fulk dying in his nonage, leaving Elizabeth, his only sister,
heiress to his estates. She married Richard Haukford Esquire who dying in 1430, the
9th of Henry VI. left an only daughter Thomasine. She married Sir William
Bourchier, created, on that account, lord Fitz-warine. A descendant of his,
John earl of Bath, exchanged this manor with Henry VIII. for other lands.
Edward VI. granted it to Henry Gray duke of Suffolk: and Mary, on his
attainder, bestowed it on Henry last earl of Arundel of the name of Fitz-alan.
It was by him mortgaged to one William Albany, and other citizens of London.
The last released their title to Albany, who foreclosed the estate. His great
grandaughter, and sole heiress, married Thomas Lloyd of Aston, Esquire in this
county.

THE castle stands on a flat: the gateway, CASTLE.
and the ruins of two vast round towers, with cruciform slips by way of
windows, still remain; and the bare vestiges of two others may yet be traced.
It had been surrounded by a moat, and several vast ditches, which comprehended
several other works. The moat was filled by a rivulet that rises near Pentre
Pant, in the parish of Selatyn. On entering this parish, it is lost for near a
mile, and emerges in the fields on the back of the castle.

IT is probable, that this was a place of defense from the time of its earliest
possessors. No place on the borders of unfriendly nations could possibly remain
unfortified; but the architect of the castle whose ruins we now contemplate,
was certainly the great Fitz-warine, granson of Guarine, founder of the family.
These were among the greatest of the barons called Lord marchers of Wales; of
whose origin an ample account will be given in the appendix.

THE steward of the manor holds annually a court leet and court baron in a room
in the castle; STEWARD.
to which the inhabitants are summoned, and fined one penny each for
non-attendance. Chief-rents are paid to the lord; and a heriot of the best
beast is clamed at the death of most of the freeholders within the lordship.

THE church, CHURCH.
dedicated to St. John the Baptist, is a rectory, valued in the king's books at
25 l. 4 s. It is a small building, supposed to have been originally designed as
the chapel to the castle, and made out of the refuse materials of that fortress
by its founder. According to the tradition of the place, he was buried in the
porch, it being an act of devotion, in those days, for all persons, on their
entrance into churches or religious houses, to pray for the souls of the
founders and benefactors. Fulk Fitz-warine, seventh of the name, who had the
greatest revenue of any of the family, by will, dated the 15th of Richard II.
directed that his body should be buried in the chancel. The largest part of his
estates were in other counties; but he gave this place the preference, as the
ancient seat of the family.

IN the year 1630, a commission was issued from the council in the marches of
Wales, to John Trevor and Richard Lloyd, gentlemen, to make a terrier of the
glebe-land, and to return an inventory of the furniture belonging to it; among
which were found three pair of armor, furnished with two pikes and two
head-pieces. These seem to have been designed for the use of the rector, for
the defense of the castle, in case of any sudden inroad of the Welsh.

AFTER leaving the village, in the road toward Oswestry, I observed on the
right Tre-newydd, a seat of Watkin Williams Esquire in right of his mother, heiress
of the place. Her granfather, Edward Lloyd Esquire who died in 1715, was eminent
for his learning, and had prepared materials for the history of this his native
country. Continue my journey to OSWESTRY, a considerable town, about two miles
distant from Whittingtion; OSWESTRY.
a place celebrated in Saxon history and legendary piety. On this spot, on
August 5th 642 Sax, Chron. 31.
, was fought the battle between the Christian Oswald, king of the
Northumbrians, and the Pagan Penda, king of the Mercians. Oswald was defeated,
and lost his life. The barbarian victor cut the body of the slain prince into
pieces, and stuck them on stakes dispersed over the field, as so many trophies;
or, according to the ancient verses that relate the legend, his head and hands
only were thus exposed:

Cujus et abscissum caput abscissosque lacertos,
Et tribus affixos palis pendere cruentos
Penda jubet: per quod reliquis exempla relinquat
Terroris manefesta sui, Regemque beatum
Esse probet miserum: sed causam fallit utramque,
Ultor enim fratris minime timet Oswius illum
Immo timere facit. Nee rex miser, immo beatus
Est, qui font boni fruitur semel, et sine fine.
'Three crosses, raised at Penda's dire commands,
'Bore Oswald's royal head and mangled hands:
'To stand a sad example to the rest,
'And prove him wretched who is ever blessed.
'Vain policy! for what the victor got
'Prov'd to the vanquished king the happier lot:
'For now the martyred saint in glory views
'How Oswy with success the war renews:
'And Penda scarcely can support his throne,
'Whilst Oswald wears a never-failing crown.'
IT is probable that the Britons bestowed on the spot where the battle was
fought, the name of Maes her, or the long field, or combat, from the obstinacy
of the conflict. The Saxons, for a considerable time, retained the name of the
place where the action was fought, with the addition of their own vernacular
word feld, or selth, a field; as maserfeld, maserfelth, and corruptly, masafeld.

Campus Mesafeld sanctorum canduit Ossa Henry of Huntingd^n, lib. iii. p. 331.
.
The bones of saints at Mesafeld were bleach'd.
IN after-days, the name became entirely Saxon; and from the fate of the king
was styled Oswald's tree; now Oswestry; and by the Welsh rendered
Croes-oswallt. Before this event, and for a long space beyond, this tract was
the property of the Britons; till it was. conquered by Offa, and brought within
the verge of his famous ditch.

A PRINCE so dear to the church as Oswald, and so attached to the professors of
the monastic life, received every posthumo^ honor that they could bestow. He
was raised to the rank of ^ saint; and his sanctity confirmed by numberless
miracles. (...) relics (which were removed the year following by Osw^^ we^^
efficacious in all disorders incident to man or beast. The (...) spot on which
his pious corpse had lain, imparted its virtue ^^ the mere contact: MIRACLE.
the horse of a traveller, wearied by exc^^ of labor, stopped here, lay down,
and, rolling about in agony, luckily tumbled on the place where Oswald fell. No
sooner had he touched the ground, than he sprung up in full vigor. His master,
a man of great sagacity! marked the spot; mounted his nag, and soon reached his
inn. There he found a young woman ill of the palsy. He told the adventure of
his horse; persuaded her friends to try the same remedy; caused her to be
transported there; and she instantly found the same benefit B^de Hist. Eccles.
lib. iii. c. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. are all replete with (...) of this kind.
.

A CHURCH arose on the place of martyrdom, CHURCH.
dedicated to the saint. A monastery was founded, which bore the name of
Blan^-minster, Candida ecclesia album monasterium, and White-minster. It is
very singular, that no evidences exist, either of the time of the foundation or
of the dissolution. The last must have happened in Saxon days; for, immediately
after the Conquest, the church of St. Oswald was bestowed on the abbey of
Shrewsbury. Bishop Tanner doubts whether there ever was a monastery here
Monasticon, 445.
: but the authority of Leland puts this much out of the question -- that there
once stood here some sort of religious foundation; for he expressly says, that
the cloisters, with tombs of the monks, remained in the memory of man Itin. v.
39.
. I am inclined to think it to have been collegiate; a species of establishment
very frequent in places of martyrdoms or of assassinations, reverential or
expiatory, according to the nature of the event. Something of this kind existed
here toward the (...) end of the reign of Henry II; for Reinerus bishop of St.
(...) (who had a house near the place) alienated all the tithes of (...) and
corn of this church and its chapels. These served to maintain twelve priests;
but Re^^er bestowed the revenues on the monks of Shrewshury; and by the papal
authority expelled the ancient seculars Powel's note on G^^ald. Ca^^br, Itin,
877. Goodwin de.Praesul. Angl. 657.
. I must remark, that most of them had lawful wives; for the Welsh clergy, for
a long time, resisted the imposition of the church of Rome in the article of
celibacy, as well as several others.

GIRALDUS CAMBRENSIS attended the archbishop of Cantenbury to this place, in
order to incite people to take arms for the purposed Crusade. It is singular,
that he mentions as little of G^rala. Ca^^^. (...).
as he does of (...). He says he went from Chester toward Album Monasterium,
where he was met by Gryffydd ap Med^^, and (...), and several other Welshmen of
distinction. Some undertook the romantic war; and, according to custom, were
make^ with the sign of the cross by Rei^er. When that business (...) over, they
entered the town. of (...), and were most magnificently entertained by the
young earl of earl of Arunded, after the (...) fashion; which G^raldus seems to
think savored too much of laxury.

SOME writers entertain doubts, whether this place was the Al^^m Monasterium
visited by Giraldus; and endeavor to fix it (...) W^lu^^^^ch; but those may be
easily removed; when it is certain that it was in Pow^s^and, a pretension that
the other has (...) clame to: besides, Osw^s^try and (...) are mentioned as
distinct places in the Rot^^ Wa^^ae. (...).
R^^^h, the third earl (...) Ch^^ter, took the (...) of Blo^^^^^^, from being
born at the place; and John (...) dates from Alla^ Monosterium. In 12^1, a
grant of certain lands, which he had made to the ^ee of St. A^^^^ G^dwi^'s
catalogue of English bishops (...) 1015.
.

AT Present, OSWALD'S WELL.
there is not a relic of any old building excepting of the ruins of a chapel
over a remarkably fine (...) that still bears the name of the saint: and near
the church is ^ spot moated round, whose house is now quite unknown.

I MUST add, CAE-NET.
that near the town is a field called Cae-nes, or Heaven-field, which some have
imagined to have been the place of his martyrdom. His life and death has given
two places that title; for the Saxon Heafenseld in Northumberland has the same
meaning; and received it on account of the victory he obtained there over the
Cumbrian prince; Oswald attributing his success solely to the intervention of
Heaven.

THE present church is of no great antiquity; CHURCH.
is spacious, and has a handsome plain tower. We learn from a monument in
memory of Mr. Hugh Y^^, that the old church was demolished in 1616. I suppose
that the present immediately rose on the ruins. It stands quite out of the
town, in a suburb without the Newgate; is a vicarage, under the patronage of
the earl of Powys, who is also lord of this extensive manor. Part of this
parish still use the Welsh language; for which reason, divine service is in a
certain proportion read by the minister.

THE town was fortified with a wall and four gates. WALLS AND GATES
That called the Black-gate is demolished; the Newgate, the Willow-gate, and
the Beatrice-gate, still remain. The last is a handsome building, with a
guard-room on both sides; and over it the arms of the ^^^-ala^s, a lion
rampant. It probably was built by Thomas earl of Arundel, in the beginning of
the reign of Henry IV. who bestowed the name on it in honor of his wife
Beatrix, natural daughter to the king of Portugal.

OVER the Newgate is the figure of a horse in full speed, with an oaken bough
in his mouth. There is a conjecture, but I will not pretend to say how well
warranted, that it alluded to the g^^^^ous breed of horses which Po^ysland of
which this was part was (...) for, ^^^ived from foam tine Spanish stallions,
intro^^^ by ^word B^^sme earl of ^^^ews^ury.

(...) were beg^n in the year 1277, or the sixth or Edward I. who granted a
^^^rage or ^o^l on the inhabitants of the county, (...) for six years; in which
time it may be supposed they (...). They were about a mile in compass, and had
(...) on the outsde, capable of being filled with water from the neighboring
^^^^l^ts.

THERE are only a few fragments of the castle remaining. CASTLE.
It stood on an artificial mount, with a great fosse, extending to the
Beatrice-gate on one side, and on the other to the Willow-gate. Our Welsh
historians attribute the foundation to Mad^^ ap Mer^^^^ ap B^^^^yn prince of
Pow^s, in 1148 p^^^^, 201.
. Leland Itin. v. 39.
gives some color to this, by sayins, that in his time there was a tower called
(...); but the L^^sh records place it in possession of A^^^ a noble N^^^an, who
received it immediately from (...) the Conqueror, on his accession. This A^^n
was the stock of the Fitz-ala^ earls of A^^n^el; a potent race, that flourished
(with fewer checks than usual with greatness) for near five hundred years.

SIR WILLIAM DU^^^LE Baronage.
says, that there was a castle at (...) at the time of the Conquest; which I
think pre^^^^e. The artificial mount on which it was placed indica^^ to have
been earlier than the N^rman aer^. The Brit^ns and the (...) gave their
fortresses this species of elevation. The Norm^n bulk on the f^m and natural
so^l or rock; but often made use of these mounts, wnich they found to have been
the site of a Saxon castle. I believe this to have been the case with that in
question. A Fitz-alan repaired or rebuilt, and added to that which he met with
here: a tower also (as is not unfrequent) might receive the name of M^dor,
complimentary either to the son of Meredydd, or some other great man of the
same title.

THIS castle was the residence of the Norm^n owners, and had been completely
finished. I had its (...) or yard, which comprehended that part or the town
still called the Bail^y head: its Barbican or outer-gate, where the maimed and
blind were commonly relieved; a mount on the outside of the great ditch was the
site of this building; and, from the use, bears to this day the name of
Cripple-gate. Lastly, it had its chapel, placed at a little distance, dedicated
to St. Nicholas, and was in the gift of the earls of Arundel.

I WILL not tire the reader with a dry list of successors to this place, or the
guardians of such who were under age. I will only observe, that after the
execution of Edmund earl of Aru^del, on the reign of Edward II. his queen, to
show her predilection to her gentle Mortimer, obtained the possession of it for
that favorite.

THE town was favored with considerable priveleges from its ^^^als. Its first
charter, from its brevity called by the Welsh (...) Gw^^a, or the short charter
Harl^ian MSS. No 1881. 6.
, was granted by William earl (...), in the reign of Henry II. SHARTA^ G^T
(...).
I must observe here, that ^^ ^^parted to the burgesses the same priveleges
with (...) of (...) ^ury.

THE same William, in a scutage made in kins; John's ti^^ was not to do ward at
any place but Blanc-minster, for the knights fees held by him: nor to furnish
more than ten soldier^, horse, or foot, within the county of Salop; nor more
than five out of it.

HIS son John took part with the barons against king J^^^ who in revenge
marched to Oswestry in 1216 Wy^^'s Hist. Wales, ^42.
, and reduced the town to ashes. On the death of that prince, he was reconciled
to his successor, Henry III. FAIR.
and in 1227, obtained for his m^nor of Blanc-minster the grant of a fair, upon
the eve, the day, and the day after the feast of St. Andrew. He also make the
bailliffs clerks of the market, with power to imprison (...) persons who used
fraudulent ways in buying or selling; (...) which they paid the consideration
of twenty marks. These people frequently abused their power: it is therefore no
wonder that so many of the grievances which the Welsh so much complained of to
Edward I. should originate from this place Powel, 362.
.

IN 1233, this unfortunate town experienced a second destruction, being again
burnt by Llewelyn ap J^rwerth prince of Wales Idem, 288.
. Provision was now made against future insults; for, in the next reign, that
of Edward I. the town was surrounded with walls. This happened when that
politic monarch meditated the conq^^^ of Wales; therefore thought proper to
secure this town, (...) of the keys of the country, with proper defense.

IN 1^18, the reign of his unfortunate son, Edmund earl of Arundel was
commanded to raise two hundred foot-^^^^ diers out of Colne and this
neighborhood, to repel the Scots.

IN 1331, Edward III. granted another fair to this town; and in 1346, directed
Edmund Fitz-alan to raise two hundred of his vassals from Clun and Oswestry, to
attend him in the French wars.

IN 1397, Richard earl of Arundel being attainted and executed, the king,
Richard II. seized all his lands and manors, and granted them to William le
Serope earl of Wiltshire, one of his favorites. FIRST ROYAL CHARTER.
He also granted to the town the first royal charter, incorporating it by the
name of the bailiffs and burgesses of OSWESTRY infra Palatinatum CESTRIAE in
marchid inter ANGLIAM ^t WALLIAM. This was also founded upon the conssitution
of that of Shrewsbury. They were exempted throughout the kingdom (the liberty
of the city of London excepted) de Theolonio, Lastugie, Passagio, Pontagio,
Stallagio de L^ne, et de Danegeldis, et S^y^it, et omnibus allis
consuetudinibus et exactionibus.

ITS new lord, the earl of Wiltshire, fell a victim to the popular fury, THOMAS
EARL OF ARUNDEL.
on the deposal of his royal master; and Thomas the son of the attainted earl,
restored in blood. He proved a great benefactor to the corporation: he gave it
a release, in 1406, from a hundred pounds that they were indebted to him, in
consideration of the distresses the town suffered during the insurrection of
Glyndwr. He also obtained a pardon from the king for his vassals in Chirk,
^r^^field, and this manor, for the share they took in that commotion.

IN the same year with the release, he granted a most extensive charter to the
town, containing many matters that show the customs of the times; and merits,
on that account, a detail of some of the particulars. To began with a most
essential one; HIS CHARTER.
Neither the lord or his heirs should confiscate or seize the effects of
persons dying with or without will in the corporation: THAT no burgess should
be compelled to be the ^o^d's receiver-general; but only collector of the
issues arising within the borough: THAT the burgesses should be discharged from
all fees demanded by the constable of the castle, or any (...) his menial
servants, for any felonies or trespasses committed out of the same liberties,
when brought to the prison of the castle; saving, that the constable might
receive one penny a^ his own election, from every mansion house in the town;
and a farthing of every cottage on the feast of St. Stephen annually THAT the
burgesses should be freed for the future from (...) excise of ale brewed and
sold in the town, which had been hitherto payable, at the rate of seven pence
for every Br^^^ cervi^^^ exposed to sale: THAT they were to be freed from the
duty of Amobr or Lyrewite Vide page 221.
: THAT whoever lived in the house of a burgess, and happened to die there, the
burgess was to have a herlot after his decease; in the same manner as the
(...), or freeholders residing on the lands of the lord in the hundred of
Oswestry: THAT no Shrewsbury ale should be sold in the town without license,
while any ale brewed in the town was to be had, under the penalty of six
shillings and eight pence: THAT none of the inhabitants of the lord^hips of
Oswestry, Mel^erl^y, Kinards^ey, Egerley, Ruyton and the eleven towns Old
Ruyton, Cotton, Shelvoke, Shottaton, Wykey, Eardeston, Tedsmere, Rednall,
Haughton, Sutton, and Felton; which form a manor in Oswestry hundred.
, should drive or carry any cattle, corn, or victuals, or other wares, to any
foreign fair or market, before the same had been first exposed to sale in the
town of Oswestry, under the penalty of six shillings and eight pence: THAT none
of the lord's tenants should be compelled to pay the redditus advocarii for the
security of the cas;tle, etc. etc.

UNTIL the time of the abovementioned charter, GUARD AT THE GATES.
the lord's Welsh tenants of the hundred of Oswestry were accustomed by their
tenure to keep watch and ward for three days and three nights at the four gates
of the town, during the fairs of St. Andrew and St. Oswald, with a certain
number of men called Kaies^ but these treacherously, with others, ravaged and
plundered the place. On this the tenants were compelled to pay a sum of money
as wages to a sufficient number of Englishmen, as the burgesses should think
convenient, for the custody of the four gates; and the Welshmen were for ever
to be discharged from that duty.

THE vassals of the earls of Arundel in these parts were of a mixed nature;
either descendants of the Norman followers of their ancestor Alan, or of the
native Welsh, who were most numerous, and bore an hereditary dislike to their
co-tenants of foreign stock. The welsh part was called walcheria, and lay in
the upper part of the manor.

THIS charter of earl Thomas was confirmed by his several successors, to the
time of Henry VIII. Charles II. granted another; in which a mayor, twelve
aldermen, fifteen common council, a high-steward, and recorder, compose the
body corporate.

ABOUT a mile from Oswestry, in the parish of Sellatyn, lies a fine military
post, on an insulated eminence of an oblong form, which has been fortified with
much art. The top is an extensive area, containing fifteen acres, three roods,
and eight perches, of fertile ground, surrounded with two ramparts and fosses
of great heighths and depths. At a distance from these, at the foot of the
hill, is another deep fosse, which surrounds the whole, and ends (as do the two
others) at the two entrances; which are placed diagonally opposite to each
other. On the slope of the hill, on both sides of one entrance, are a range of
deep oblong trenches, running transversely between the second ditch and
another, which seems to be designed for their immediate protection; for the
first extends no farther than these trenches; the other, to no great distance
beyond them.

THIS place is called Old Oswerstry, OLD OSWESTRY.
H^n Ddinas, and anciently Caer Ogyrfan, from Ogyrfan a hero co-existent with
Arthur. There is no certainty of the origin of it: some ascribe it to Oswald or
to Penda, and imagine that it was possessed, before the battle of Maserfeld, by
one of those princes. Others think it to have been the work of the ancient
Britons; to which opinion I incline. The strength, and the labor in forming it,
evince that it was not a sudden operation, like that of a camp. Its
construction, even to the oblong trenches, is British; for example, that of
Bryn y Clawddiau, on the Clwydian hills, which divide Flintshire from the vale
of Clwyd, is a similar work.

A GREAT dike and fosse, WAT'S DIKE.
called Wat's, is continued from each side of this post. This work is little
known, notwithstanding it is equal in depth, though not in extent, to that of
Offa. We shall here trace the course of each. Wat's can only be discovered on
the southern part to Maeshury mill, in Oswestry parish, where it is lost in a
morassy ground: from thence it takes a northern direction to Hen-ddinas, and by
Pentre'r Clawdd to Gobowen, the site of a small fort, in the parish of
Whittington: then crosses Prys Henlle common, into the parish of St. Martin,
near which is a mount called Bryn y Castle: crosses the Ceiriog between
Brynkinallt and Pont y Blew forge, and the DEE below Nant y Bela; from whence
it passes through Wynn-stay park, by another Pentre'r Clawdd, or township on
the ditch, to Erddig, the seat of Philip York Esquire where there was another
strong fort on its course: from Erddig it goes above Wrexham, near Melin
Puleston, by Dolydd, Maesgwyn, Rhos-ddu, Croes-oneiras, Mr. Shakerley's
Gwersyllt; crosses the Alun, and through the township of Llai, to Rhydin, in
the county of FLINT; above which is Caer-estyn, a British post: from hence it
runs by Hope church, along the side of Molesdale, which it quits toward the
lower part, and turns to Mynydd Sychdyn, Monachlog near Northop, by Northop
mills, Bryn* moel, Coed y Llys, Nant y Flint, Cefn y Coed, through the Strand
fields, near Holywell, to its termination below the abbey of Basingwerk. I have
been thus minute in giving its course, because it is so often confounded with
OFFA'S ditch, which attends the former at unequal distances, from five hundred
yards to three miles, till the latter is totally lost.

OFFA'S ditch extended from the river Wye, OFFA'S DIKE.
along the counties of Hercford and Radnor, into that of Montgomery, where I
shall take it up at its entrance into NORTH WALES, at Pwll y Piod, an alehouse
on the road between Bishop's-castle and Newtown; from thence passes northward,
near Mellington-hall, near which is an ^ncampment called Caer-din, by Brompton
mill, where there is a mount; Linor park near Montgomery, Forden heath,
Nant-cribba, at the foot of an ancient fortress, Layton-hall, and Buttington
church. Here it is lost for five miles; the channel of the Severn. probably
serving for that space as a continuation of this famous boundary; which, just
below the conflux of the Bele and the Severn, appears again, and passes by the
churches of Llandysi^^ and Llanymynech, to the edge of the vast precipitous
limestone-rock in the last parish: from this place it runs by Tref y Clawdd,
over the horse-course on Cefn y Bwch, above Oswestry, then above Sellatyn; from
whence it descends to the Ceiriog, and thence to Glyn, where there is a large
breach, supposed to be the place of interment of the English who fell in the
battle of Cregen, hereafter to be mentioned: it then goes by Chirk-castle; and,
below Cefn y Wern, crosses the Dee, and the Rhiwabon. road near Plaas Madoc,
forms part of the turnpike-road to Wrexham, to Pentre Bychan, where there is a
mount; then by Plas Bower to Adwy'r Clawdd, near Minera; by Brumbo, crosses
Cegidog river, and through a little valley on the south side of Bryn Yorkyn
mountain to Coed Talwrn and Cae-deon, a farm near Treyddin chapel, in the
parish of Mold (pointing toward the Clwydian hills); beyond which there can no
farther traces be discovered.

No reason appears why its course was not continued from sea to sea. It seems
probable that Offa imagined that the Clwydian hills, and the deep valley that
lies on this side at their base, would serve as a continuance of his
prohibitory line: he had carried his arms over most part of Flintshire, and
vainly imagined, that his labors would restrain the Cambrian inroads in one
part, and his orders prevent any incursions beyond these natural limits, which
he had decreed should be the boundaries of his new conquests. The weakness of
this great work appeared on the death of Offa: the Welsh, with irresistible
fury, despised his toils, and carried their ravages far and wide on the English
marches. Superior force often repelled our countrymen. Sanguinary laws were
made by the victorious Harold against any that should transgress the limits
prescribed by Offa. The Welshman that was found in arms on the Saxon side of
the ditch, was to lose his right hand Leland Collect. iii. 230. Joannes
Sarishuriensis, as quoted by Camden, 698.
.

IT is observable, that in all parts the ditch is on the Welsh side; and that
there are numbers of small artificial mounts, the sites of small forts, in many
places along its course. These were garrisoned, and seem intended for the same
purposes as the towers in the famous Chinese wall, to watch the motions of
their neighbors, and to repel the hostile incursions.

IT is remarkable, that Wat's dike should have been overlooked or confounded
with that of Offa, by all writers, except by Thomas Churchyard the poet Vide
Churchyard's Worthiness of Wales, originally printed in 1587; reprinted by
Thomas Evans 1776.
, who assigns the object of the work: that the space intervening between the
two was free ground, where the Britons and Saxons might meet with safety for
all commercial purposes.

From Oswestry I took the road to Sellatyn, SELLATYN.
a parish containing about six hundred inhabitants. Its register commences in
1557; was fortunately saved from the great wreck of such records by Mr.
Wilding, an Oliverian rector in the civil wars. It appears from it, that the
state of population in the first and the last twenty years was as follows:

First. Last. Increase. Baptisms, 258 410 152 Weddings, 29 98 69 Funerals, 189
257 68

THIS happy disproportion of increase between births and burials, seems to
arise from the hilly situation of the parish; which slopes down to the moory
flats of those of Oswestry and Whittington, without partaking the lest of their
nature. The improvements in agriculture contribute much to retain numbers of
the inhabitants, by finding them a wholesome and innocent employ: the want of
which exiles multitudes, in many places, to the vice and disease of great
cities.

THE first house I visited is Porkington, PORKINGTON.
the seat of Robert Godolphin Owen Esquire. This place takes its name from a
singular entrenchment in a neighboring field, called Castle Brogyntyn, a fort
belonging to Owen Brogyntyn, a natural son to Owen Mad^^ap Meredydd prince of
Powis Vadog Powel 212
. It is of a circular form, surrounded with a vast earthen dike, and a deep
fosse. It appears, SIR JOHN OWEN KNT.
by an old drawing in Mr. Mytton's collection, to have had two entrances,
pretty close to each other, projecting a little from the sides, and diverging;
the end of each guarded by a semi-lunar curtain. These are now destroyed. The
whole parish consists of a single township, which also bears the same title
with the mansion.

THE name of the house was soon altered to one very nearly resembling the
present. In 1218, Henry III. in an address to Llewelyn prince of Wales, informs
him, that among others, Bleddyn Filius Oeni de PORKINTON Rymer, i. 227
had performed to his majesty the service he owed.

I MUST now make a very long transition from this period to that which produced
another distinguished personage of this family. SIR JOHN OWEN.
Here is preserved the portrait of Sir John Owen knight, of Clenneney in
Caernarvonshire; a gallant officer, and strenuous supporter of the cause of
Charles I. He greatly signalized himself at the siege of Bristol, when it was
taken by prince Rupert, and was desperately wounded in the attack. Congenial
qualities recommended him to his highness; who, superseding the appointment of
archbishop Williams to the government of Conway castle, in 1645, constituted
Sir John commander in his place. This fortress was soon given up to general
Mytton, by the contrivance of the prelate, and the power of his friends: and
the knight retired to his seat in the distant parts of the county. In 1648, he
rose in arms to make a last effort in behalf of his fallen master, probably in
concert with the royalists in Kent and Essex. He was soon attacked by William
Lloyd, sheriff of the county, whom he defeated, wounded, and made prisoner. He
then laid siege to Caernarvon; but hearing that certain of the parliament
forces, under the colonels Carter and Twisleton, were on their march to attack
him, he hastened to meet them, and took the sheriff with him on a litter. He
met with his enemies near Llandegai: a furious recontre ensued, in which Sir
John had at first the advantage; but falling in with their reserve, fortune
declared against him: in a personal contest with a captain Tailor, he was
pulled off his horse, and made prisoner; and his troops, disheartened by the
loss of their commander, took to flight. The sheriff died the same day. The
victory was esteemed of that consequence, that captain Tailor, who was the
messenger of the news to the parliament, received a reward of two hundred pounds
out of Sir John's estate Rushworth, ii. part iv. 1146.
.

SIR JOHN was conveyed to Windsor castle, where he found four noblemen under
confinement for the same cause. On the 10th of November, a vote past for his
banishment, and that of the lords Goring, Loughborough, Capel, the earl of
Holland, and major general Langhern Whitelock, 348.
; but after the execution of their royal master, sanguinary measures took
place. The duke of Hamilton, the earl of Holland, and the lords Goring and
Capel, were put upon their trials. Sir John showed a spirit worthy of his
country. He told his judges, that he was a plain gentleman of Wales, who had
been always taught to obey the king; that he had served him honestly during the
war; and, finding many honest men endeavored to raise forces, whereby he might
get him out of prison, he did the like; and concluded like a man who did not
much care what they resolved concerning him. In the end he was condemned to
lose his head; for which, with a humorous intrepidity, he made the court a low
reverence, and gave his humble thanks. A by-stander asked what he meant: he
replied aloud, It was a great honor to a poor gentleman of Wales to lose his
head with such noble lords; for by G --, he was afraid they would have hanged
him.

SIR JOHN, by mere good-fortune, was disappointed of the honor he was flattered
with; being, as his epitaph says, Famae plus quam vitae sollicito. He neither
solicited for a pardon, nor was any petition offered to parliament in his favor;
which was strongly importuned in behalf of his fellow prisoners. Ireton proved
his advocate, and told the house, That there was one person for whom no one
spoke a word; and therefore requested, that he might be saved by the sole
motive and goodness of the house. In consequence, mercy was extended to him;
and, after a few months imprisonment, he was, on his petition, set at liberty.
He retired again into his country, where he died in 1666; and was interred in
the church of Penmorva in Caernarvonshire, where a small monument preserves the
following epitaph.

M. S. JOHANNIS OWEN de Clenneney in Co. Carnarvon militis, viri in patriam
amoris ardentissimi:

in regem (beatissimum martyrem CAROLUM Ium)
indubitatae fidelitatis clari;
qui ad sacrosanctam majestatem a perduellionum
rabie eripiendam, summa pericula, lubentisse obivit,
Hostium copias non semel fudit, ac fregit;
religionem vindicavit:
Donec, infelici sort in perditissimorum hominum manus,
Regali jam sanguine imbutas,
inciderit Dux praestantissimus:
Unde supplex sese obsessum redimerat
nisi quod Heroi consummatissimo
Famae plus, quam vitae sollicito, tale (...) displicuit.
collo igitur imperterrite oblato,
securis aciem retudit divina vis;
volucrisque fati tardavit alas, donec senex laetissimus
CAROLUM 2dum et sibi et suis restitutum viderat.
Ao. Doni. 1666. et Aetatis suae 66. placide expiravit.

FROM Porkington, SELLATYN CHURCH.
I ascended to the parish church. The legend of the foundation is, that a noble
Briton being engaged in the chase, found in a thicket on this spot a white
hind; which determined him (after the example of Ethelred king of the Mercians,
in the instance of St. John's church Chester) to dedicate it to sacred uses. He
accordingly translated to this place the ancient church, which, tradition says,
stood before on a spot still called Bryn hen Eglwys, or the hill of the old
church.

THAT high-church meteor, DOCTOR SACHEVEREL.
that party-tool, Doctor Sacheverel, was, in 1709, presented to this living;
not so much on account of its value, as to give him a pretense of making a
progress through a long extent of the kingdom; and of trying the inclinations
of the people in the rich and populous counties he was to pass through. He was
met on the confines of this by 5000 horsemen, among which were the first
fortunes of Shropshire. He met with respect, in every town, little short of
adoration. The crowd in Oswestry was so great, that a good old woman could see
only a small part of the holy man; yet consoled herself with having a sight of
his ever-blessed wig as he rode along.

FROM hence I hastened toward Chirk castle, keeping a lower road between the
two dikes. On approaching the village of Chirk, is a very deep valley,
consisting of fertile meadows, watered by the brook Ceiriog, and finely bounded
by lofty wooded banks. On the very verge of that next to Chirk, stands an
artificial mount; and, I think, the vestige of another, on the other side of
the road which goes between them. These were exploratory, and probably designed
also for defense; and might have had on them a small fort for the protection of
the pass. I imagine these mounts to have been Saxon, and coeval with the great
labor of Offa, which runs at a small distance from them.

IN this deep valley, BATTLE OF CROGEN.
which winds along the foot of the vast Berwyn mountains, was a bloody conflict
between part of the forces of Henry II. and the Welsh, in 1165. Henry had
determined once more to attempt the subjection of Wales, and to revenge the
ravages carried through the borders by its gallant prince Owen Gwynedd; for
that end, he assembled a vast army at Oswestry. Owen, on the contrary,
collected all his chieftains, with their dependants, at Corwen. The king,
hearing that his antagonist ^ so near, resolved to bring the matter to a speedy
decision. He marched toward him; and in this valley, finding himself entangled
in impenetrable woods, and recollecting his illfortune among the forests of
Eulo, directed his vanguard to make the passage clear, by cutting down the
trees, in order to secure himself from ambuscade. The pikemen, and flower of
his army, were posted to cover the workmen. The spirit of the common soldiers
of the Welsh army grew indignant at this attempt; and, without the knowledge of
their officers, fell with unspeakable fury on these troops. The contest was
violent; numbers of brave men perished; in the end, the Welsh retired to
Corwen. Henry gained the summit of the Berwyn; but was so distressed by
dreadful rains, and by the activity and prudence of Owen, who cut him off from
all supplies, that he was obliged to return ingloriously, with great loss of
men and equipage Powel, 221.
.

THIS conflict is sometimes called the battle of Corwen; but with more
propriety that of Crogen: for it happened beneath Castelh Crogen, the present
Chirk castle; and the place is still called Adwy'r Beddau, or the pass of the
graves of the men who were slain here.

THE church of Chirk is dedicated to St. Mary; CHURCH OF CHIRK.
and was formerly an impropriation belonging to the abbey of Valle Crucis.

Within is a profusion of marble, cut into human forms, memorial of the later
lords of the place, or their ladies. MONUMENTS.
The best is a bust of Sir Thomas Middleton, with a peaked beard, long hair;
armed: and by him is another of his lady, a Napier of (...). Sir Thomas was a
successful and active commander on the side of the parliament during the civil
wars. Toward the end of his life, he found that he had undesignedly
established a more intolerable tyranny than that which he had formerly opposed.
In 1659, he took arms, in conjunction with Sir George Booth, in order to
restore the ancient constitution. Sir George was defeated by the vigilant
Lambert; and Sir Thomas forced to take refuge in his castle, where, after two
or three days show of defense, he was constrained to surrender on such
conditions as the conqueror was pleased to dictate.

THE other monuments are composed of large and very ill-executed figures of
lady Middleton, wife to Sir Thomas Middleton baronet, son of the former. She
was daughter of Sir Thomas Willraham of Woodhey; and died at the early age of
twenty-two, in the year 1675.

SIR RICHARD MIDDLETON, and his lady, Frances daughter of Sir Thomas Whitmore
of Buildas. He died in 1716; she in 1694. At their feet lies their son Sir
William, who survived his father only two years, dying at the age of
twenty-four.

ON a small mural monument, is an elegant epitaph on Doctor Walter Balcanqual,
a Scotch divine of distinguished character. In 1617, he was appointed master of
the Savoy hospital, which he soon resigned in favor of the able but desultory
Marc Antonio di Dominis, archbishop of Spalato, in reward for his conversion to
Protestantism. In 1618, he was sent to represent his country in the famous
synod of Dort. He was promoted to the deanery of Rochester; and, in 1639, to
that of Durham; but by his great loyalty, having rendered himself hated by his
countrymen, was, in 1645, obliged to take refuge in Chirk castle; but, sinking
under the fatigue of the journey, and severity of the weather, died on
Christmas Day. The epitaph was composed by Dr. Pearson bishop of Chester, at
the request of Sir Thomas Middleton, by whom the monument was erected.

THE castle lies about a mile from the village, CASTLE.
in the course of Offa's dike, on the summit of a lofty hill, projecting from
the great mass of the Berwyn mountains. Before the foundation of the present
castle, stood another, called Castle Crogen; and the territory around bore the
name of Tref y Waun, the property of the lords of Dinas Bran. It continued in
their possession till the death of Gryffydd ap Madoc, a strenuous partizan of
Henry III. and Edward I. Edward, on the decease of Gryffydd, rewarded two of
his favorites with the guardianship of the two eldest-sons of Gryffydd: Madoc,
to John earl Warren; and Llewelyn to Roger Mortimer, son of Roger baron of
Wigmore: who, as before related, quickly dispatched the unhappy youths, and
possessed themselves of their fortunes. Earl Warren seized on the lordships of
Bromfield and Yale; Mortimer on those of the present Chirk and Nan-heudwy. He
became the founder of the castle. It continued in his family but a short time,
being sold by his grandson John, to Richard Fitz-alan earl of Arundel. The
Fitz-alans possessed it for three generations; after which it passed to Thomas
Mowbray duke of Norfolk, and justice of North Wales, Chester, and Flint, in
right of his wife Elizabeth, elder sister to Thomas earl of Arundel. On

CHIRK CASTLE.


the disgrace and exile of Mowbray, in 1397, it probably was resumed by the
crown; and granted again to William Beauchamp lord of Abergavenny, who married
the other sister; and by the marriage of his granddaughter, sole heiress of
Richard Beauchamp earl of Worcester, with Edward Nevil (afterward lord
Abergavenny) was conveyed into that family, in the reign of Henry VI Powel 213.
.

THE next possessor which occurs to me, is the unfortunate Sir William Stanley,
who, as Leland says, 'repayred it well.' After his ungrateful execution, it
became forfeited to his rapacious master; and, as I conjecture, was bestowed,
in 1534, along with Holt Castle (another of Sir William's castles) by Henry
VIII. on his natural son Henry Fitz-roy duke of Richmond and Somerset King's
Vale-royal, 195.
. By his early death, it reverted again to the crown.

IN the following reign, I imagine it to have been granted to Thomas lord
Seymour, brother to the protector Somerset; for I find him in possession of
Holt Dugdale Baron. ii. 368.
, to which it was an appendage.

ELIZABETH granted it, with the same lordships, to her worthless favorite
Dudley earl of Leicester. On his death, Chirk Castle became the property of
lord St. John of Bletso; whose son, in 1595, sold it to Sir Thomas Middleton
knight, mayor of London in 1614.

THIS exalted pile has much to boast of in its vast view into seventeen
counties; a most elegant and varied extent! The castle is square, and has five
rounders uncommonly clumsy and heavy. Lord Clarendon and others speak of the
entire demolition of this fortress after its reddition to Lambert. Only one
side, with three towers, were pulled down, which Sir Thomas Middleton lived to
re-build in one year.

THE chief apartments are a saloon, fifty-six feet by twenty-seven; and a
drawing room within: a gallery, a hundred feet by twenty-two, filled with
portraits. Among them are those of the duke of Ormond, and his son lord Ossory;
the most virtuous characters, and the greatest ornaments of the vicious age of
Charles II. admired, revered, unimitated. Ossory died before his father; who
bore his loss with the firmness of a Roman, founded on the certain hopes of a
Christian. I can scarcely say whether he passed a finer eulogy on his son, or
satyr on the times, by declaring, he would not change his dead son for any
living one in EUROPE.

LORD keeper Sir Orlando Bridgeman, keeper of the great seals, in his robes,
and with lank hair. He presided over two courts of justice with the most
amiable character; and lost the seals for his refusal, in 1672, to affix them
to the king's insidious declaration of liberty of conscience.

LADY BRIDGEMAN, second wife to Sir Orlando, and mother to Charlotte wife to
Sir Thomas Middleton.

SIR THOMAS MIDDLETON in armor; grey-beard, and long black hair. The same
gentleman who is mentioned in the account of the tombs.

HIS daughter, countess of Warwick, dowager to Edward Rich earl of Warwick, and
afterward wife to Mr. Addison, and the reputed cause of his intemperance.

THE usual appertenance to ancient castles, the dungeon, must not be forgotten.
The descent is by forty-two steps; but, according to the laudable usage of its
present lord, the captives endure but a short and easy confinement; and even
that passes imperceptibly, amidst the good cheer and generous liquors bestowed
on them by the kind warder, to whose custody they are committed.

RE-PASSING through the castle-gate, BARBAROUS CUSTOM.
I recollect a barbarous privelege, retained longer in this country than in any
other part of Britain, that of exempting from capital punishment even the most
atrocious assassin, by payment of a certain fine. This was practiced by the
lord marchers of these parts in the fifteenth century; and continued in Mowddwy
in Merionethshire till it was abolished in the 27th of Henry VIII Gwydir
family, 107.
.

THIS custom was derived from the ancient Germans, who accepted a fine of
cattle as a compensation for murder; which satisfied the relations, and was not
detrimental to the public, which could not fail being injured by the extension
of private revenge Tacitus de mor. Germ. c. z.
.

THE Saxons continued this custom under the name of Were-geld; WERE-GELD.
and accordingly set a price on every rank, from the king to the peasant
Wilkin's Leges Sax. 71.
. The head of the king was valued at thirty thousand thrymses, or 4,500 l.;
half to be paid to his relations, and half to the kingdom for the loss it had
sustained: that of a countryman was esteemed at two hundred and sixty-six, or
39 l. 18 s.

THE Were-geld of a Welshman was very low; for, unless he had property enough
to be taxed for the king's use, his life was not reckoned of higher price than
seventy thrymses, or ten guineas. The money or fine was distributed, as in the
time of the ancient Germans, among the relations of the deceased; and
oftentimes part went to the lord of the soil, as compensation for his loss.

THE Welsh had in like manner their Galanas and Gwerth, GWERTH.
of the same nature with the former; but our fine was usually paid in cattle,
the wealth of the country.

BUT the Gwerth was not only a compensation for murder or homicide; but for all
species of injuries. To cuckold the prince was expiated at a very high rate
Leges Wallica, 199.
; the offender was fined in a gold cup and cover, as broad as his majesty's
face, and as thick as a ploughman's nail who had ploughed nine years; and a rod
of gold as tall as the king, and as thick as his little finger; a hundred cows
for every cantref he ruled over, with a white bull with different colored ears
to every hundred cows.

THE recompense to a virgin who had been seduced is very singular: on complaint
made that she was deserted by her lover, it was ordered by the court, that she
was to lay hold of the tail of a bull three years old, introduced through a
wicker-door, and shaven, and well-greased. Two men were to goad the beast: if
she could by dint of strength retain the bull, she was to have it by way of
satisfaction; if not, she got nothing but the grease that remained in her hands
The same, 82.
. I fear by this, and other penalties for the same offense, that the crime was
not held by my countrymen to be of a very deep dye.

WELSH, SAXONS, and NORMANS, had each their pecuniary atonements for lesser
injuries. A Welshman, for the loss of his finger, received one cow and twenty
pence; of his nose, six oxen and a hundred and twenty pence; and for being
pulled by the hair, a penny for every finger, and twopence for the thumb, the
instruments of the insult Leges Wallicae, 278.
. The Saxons had similar fines Wilkin's Leges Saxon. 44.
and the Normans, like persons of nice honor, provided a penalty of five sous
for a lug by the nose, and ten pour un coup au derriere MS. notes to my copy of
Les Coustumes de Normandy.
.

THE Scotch had also similar compensations for homicides and injuries; which,
in their old laws, passed under the name of Cro, Galnes, and Kelchyn Regiam
majestatem, 74.
: and lastly, the Irish had their Eric, or satisfaction for blood Davies, Hist.
Ireland, 109.
. In fact, it prevaled over all parts of Europe, with variations conformable to
the several complections of the country.

I CANNOT but relate the occasion of this digression. Two villains, who had
committed a most horrid murder They had killed a poor parson, at the
instigation of their chieftain, because his wife had preferred the nursing
another great man's child to his.
in the remote of parts Wales, had fled into this neighborhood for protection,
about the latter end of the fifteenth century. Two families at that time
divided the country with their feuds; the Kyffins and the Trevors: who were
ready at any time to receive under their protection, any banditti that were
recommended to them by their remote friends, when their villainies rendered it
unsafe for them to remain at home. The Trevors at this time gave asylum to
these murderers. The friends of the person they had slain wished for revenge:
being at that time in league with the Kyffins, a plot was laid to surprise the
assassins. Jevan ap Meredeth, a gentleman of Caernarvonshire, who was most
anxious to obtain redress for the injury, came over with six men, and was
directed to keep himself concealed, least the Trevors should be alarmed, and
frustrate his design. He accordingly kept within all day, and watched all
night: at length the villains fell into his hands. The Trevors instantly
pursued him; when he was told by the Kyffins, that if he was overtaken, and the
offenders rescued, he would lose his revenge; for, according to the custom of
the country, they would be carried before the gate of Chirk-castle, and be
instantly cleared, on the payment of five pounds. This determined Jevan to
order his followers to strike off their heads on the spot. One of them executed
his order but faintly; when the criminal told him, that if he had his neck
under his sword, he would make it take a better edge Gwydir family, 107.
.

I WISH the cause had been better, that applause might have been given to this
contempt of death; but such assassins as these could scarcely be animated with
the prospect of immortality; which made their remote ancestors, inspired by the
Druid songs, think it disgraceful to preserve a life that was so soon to return.

THE same consideration influenced the ancient Danes; a warrior fell
Bartholinus de Contempt. mortis. p. 5.
, laughed, and died. Thus was the end of the Scandinavian hero, Agnerus.

Hercule nemo illo visus mihi fortior unquam;
Semivigil subsedit enim cubitoque reclinis
Ridendo excepit lethum, mortemque cachinno
Sprevit: et Elysium gaudens successit in orbem.
Magna viri virtus, quae risu calluit uno
Supremam celare necem, summumque dolorem
Corporis ac mentis laeto compescere vultu!
SAXO GRAMM. p. 36. l. 29. Never did I yet such fortitude behold!
By the stern king of terrors uncontrol'd
The hero fell. Upon his arm reclined,
With laughing ecstasy his breath resigned.
The Elysian fields just opening to his view,
To Odin's hall with eager haste he flew:
With joy, with triumph, he resigned his breath,
And smiled away the agonies of death.
R. W. ON leaving the castle, CEFN UCHA.
I ascended the front of Cefn Ucha, amidst the magnificent and flourishing
plantations that arise under the direction of the present owner. This lofty
hill extends toward Llangollen, and affords a prospect uncommonly great. The
distant view is boundless. One side impends over a most beautiful valley,
watered by the Dee; diversified with groves, and bounded toward the end by
barren and naked rocks, tier above tier.

DESCEND toward Llangollen, seated on the river, environed by lofty mountains.
On gaining the bottom, I made a little deviation to the left, PENGWERN.
to visit Pengwern, or Llys Pengwern, a seat of Tudor Trevor earl of Hereford
about the year 924, TUDOR TREVOR.
and of his second son Lluddocca, from whom the Mostyns are lineally descended.
It is still possessed by Sir Roger, the Pen Cenedl of his name.

LITTLE remains of the old house, excepting a narrow, vaulted room, whose roof
is formed or nine strong ribs of stone, covered with narrow flags laid over
them like planks. The room above seems to have been covered in the same manner.
The family resided here for about four hundred years, till its acquisition of
Mostyn, by the marriage of the heiress, as before related.

LLANGOLLEN is a small and poor town, LLANGOLLEN.
seated in a most romantic spot, near a pretty common watered by the Dee,
which, emblematic of its country, runs with great passion through the valley.
The mountains soar to a great height above their wooded bases; and one, whose
summit is crowned with the ancient castle Bran, is uncommonly grand.

I KNOW no place in North Wales, where the refined lover of picturesque scenes,
the sentimental, or the romantic, can give a fuller indulgence to his
inclination. No place abounds more with various rides or solemn walks. From
this central spot, he may (as I have done) visit the seat of Owen Glyndwr, and
the fine valleys of the Dee, to its source, beyond the great Llyntegid: or pass
the mountains to the fertile vale of Clwyd; or make the tour of Wrexham; or
visit the places which I have just left.

M. Griffith del. CASTLE D


W. Matt^ ^^ulp. ^NAS BRAN.


AMONG the walks on the banks of the Dee, the venerable remains of the
neighboring abbey, and the arduous ascent of Castle Dinas Bran, are so
engaging, that I believe no traveller of taste will think a repetition of them
tedious.

THE church of Llangollen is dedicated to St. Collen ap Gwynnawg, CHURCH.
ap Clydawg, ap Cowrda, ap Caradog Freichfras, ap Llyr Merim, ap Einion Yrth,
ap Cunedda Wledig, by Ethni Wyddeles, daughter to Matholwch lord of Cwl in the
kingdom of Ireland; which saint was buried here; and has left behind him a
legend worthy of the Alcoran itself.

THE bridge, BRIDGE.
which was founded by the first John Trevor bishop of St. Asaph Willis's St.
Asaph, 52. 285.
, who died in 1357, is one of the Tri Thlws Cymru, or three beauties of Wales:
but more remarkable for its situation than structure. It consists of five
arches; whose widest does not exceed twenty-eight feet in diameter. The river
usually runs under only one; where it has formed a black chasm of vast depth,
into which the water pours with great fury, from a high broken ledge, formed in
the smooth and solid rock, which composes the whole bed of the river. The view
through the arches, either upwards or downwards, is extremely picturesque.

NEAR the foot of the bridge, opposite to the town, CASTLE DINAS BRAN.
begins the ascent to Castle Dinas Bran, whose remains nearly cover the summit
of a vast conoid hill, steeply sloped on every side. The form is oblong: the
materials the coarse stone of the country, with here and there a few freestone
moldings. The side, which is less steep, defended by deep trenches, cut through
the solid rock. This was one of our primitive Welsh castles. The founder is
unknown. I dare not attribute its origin and name to Brennus king of the Gauls,
who besieged the capitol; and is fabled to have come into these parts to fight
with his brother Belinus: nor yet do I derive it from Bryn, a hill, nor Bran, a
crow; but from the mountain river Bran, that runs down its side.

IT had been the chief seat of the lords of Jal or Yale; and probably was
founded by one of them. In the reign of Henry III. it was the retreat of
Gryffydd ap Madog, who traitorously siding with the English against his
countrymen, was obliged to secure himself in this aerial fastness.

ON the death of Gryffydd, Edward I. ungratefully bestowed on John earl Warren,
the wardship of the eldest son of his old partizan; as he did that of the
second on Roger Mortimer. Both the guardians understood the meaning of the
favor; and accordingly made away with the poor children, and received full
possession of their estates Rotuli Walliae, 81.
, as before related. From the Warrens it passed by marriage to the Fitzalans,
and followed the succession of the lords of Bromfield.

THE time of its ruin is unknown. Leland speaks of it as a demolished place;
and adds, that an eagle built annually in the neighboring rocks; that a person
was wont to be lowered down in a basket to take the young; and was obliged to
have another basket over his head, to save him from the fury of the old birds.

IN 1390, MYFANWY VECHAN.
this castle was inhabited by a celebrated beauty, descended from the house of
Tudor Trevor, and whose father probably held the castle under the earls of
Arundel. The name of the lady was Myfanwy Vechan; she made a conquest of Howel
ap Einion Lygliw, a celebrated bard, who composed the following ode, addressed
to her; which an ingenious friend was pleased to favor me with in an English
dress.

NEUD wife ddihunwyf, hoen Creirwy hoywdeg, A'm hudodd, etc.

Sorrowing I strike the plaintive string;
Deign, cruel maid, to hear me sing;
And let my song thy pride control,
Divine inchantress of my soul!
Sure Creirwy's charms must yield to thine,
And Garwy's This knight and lady seem to have been the same with Sir Gareth
and Damoysell Lynet, celebrated in the viith book of the Storye of the most
worthy king Arthur, Sir Gareth loved and was beloved by the fair Lyones,
sister to Lynet. Their passion exceeded the bounds of discretion; but Lynet, to
save their honor, by enchantment prevents their loves, till they are joined
together in holy matrimony.
sufferings to mine.
Far from Myfanwy's marble towers,
I pass my solitary hours.
O thou that shinest like the sky,
Behold thy faithful Howel die!
In golden verse, in flowery lays,
Sweetly I sang Myfanwy's praise;
Still the disdainful, haughty fair,
Laughs at my pain, and my despair.
What though thine eyes, as black as sloes,
Vie with the arches of thy brows;
Must thy desponding lover die,
Slain by the glances of thine eye?
Pensive, as Trystan Trystan was another famous knight. His sorrow seems to
have arose from his being deserted by a lady, who, as the history relates,
forsook him for Sir Bleoberys.
, did I speed
To Bran, upon a stately steed:
Fondly I gaze; but hard's my doom,
Oh fairer than the cherry's bloom!
Thus at a distance to behold
Whom my fond arms would fain enfold.
How swift, on Alban A Scotch horse.
steed, I flew,
Thy dazzling countenance to view!
Though hard the steep ascent to gain,
Thy smiles were harder to obtain,
Thy peerless beauties to declare
Was still thy zealous lover's care,
O fairer thou, and colder too,
Than new-fall'n snow on Aren's Two lofty mountains in Merionethshire. This
poem is taken from the collection formed by the learned and ingenious Mr. Evan
Evans.
brow!
O, lovely flower of Trevor's race,
Let not a cruel heart disgrace
The beauties of that heavenly face!
Thou art my daily thought; each night
Presents Myfanwy to my sight;
And death alone can draw the dart
Which love has fixed in my heart.
Ah! can thou, with ungentle eye,
Behold thy faithful Howel die?
For thee my verse shall ever run,
Bright rival of the midday sun!
Should thou demand thy lover's eyes,
Gladly to thee I Would sacrifice
My useless sight, that only shows
The cruel author of its woes,
Refulgent in her golden bower,
As morning in her eastern tower,
Thy name, the echoing valleys round,
Thy name, a thousand hills resound,
Myfanwy Vechan, maid divine!
No name's so musical as thine;
And every bard with rapture hung
On the soft music of my song.
For thee I languish, pine, and rave,
White as Dwrdwy's curling wave.
Alas! no words can speak my pain,
While thus I love, but love in vain!
Wisdom, and Reason, what are they,
What all the charms of Poesy,
Against the fury of thy darts,
Thou vanquisher of human hearts?
When first I saw thee, princely maid!
In scarlet robes of state arrayed,
Thy beauties set my soul on fire,
And every motion fanned desire:
The more on thy sweet form I gazed,
The more my frantic passion blazed.
Not half so fine the spider's thread,
That glitters on the dewy mead,
As the bright ringlets of thy hair,
Thou beauteous object of my care!
But ah! my sighs, my tears are vain;
The cruel maid insults my pain!
And can thou, without pity, see
The victim of thy cruelty --
Pale with despair, and robbed of sleep,
Whose only business is to weep? --
Behold thy bard, thy poet, languish?
Oh! ease thy bard's, thy poet's, anguish;
And for Heaven's sake, some pity show,
Ere to the shades of night I go!
O, fairer than the flowers adorning
The hawthorn in a summer's morning!
While life remains, I still will sing
Thy praise, and make the mountains ring
With fair Myfanwy's tuneful name;
And from misfortune purchase fame.
Nor even to die shall I repine,
So Howel's name may live with thine,
R. W.

AFTER a short repose, RHIWABON.
on my descent from the castle, I made an excursion to Rhiwabon, a few miles
from Llangollen. For some time the ride was along the sides of the Dee, which
watered a beautiful narrow vale. The hills at length approximate so nearly, as
only to leave room for a most picturesque passage, shaded with trees. Cross a
bridge called the New bridge, and ascend for some space, leaving on the left
considerable pits both of coal and canal: reach the village of Rhiwabon, which
takes its name from the Avon, or little river on which it lies.

THE church is dedicated to St. Mary. CHURCH.
It has been lately fitted up in a very neat manner by Sir Watkin Williams
Wynn, who bestowed on it an organ, and a small font; the last, on occasion of
the christening of his eldest son in 1772: is of white marble, supported by a
tripod of distinguished elegance.

THE monument to his first wife, MONUMENTS.
lady Harriet Somerset, is in fine taste. The figure of Hope reclines on an
urn, and is attended with her usual emblem of an anchor. A serpent with its
tail in its mouth, expressive of eternity, includes the inscription on one side
of the pedestal.

As a contrast to this excellent performance of Mr. Nollikin, is placed against
the wall a great monument of Henry Wynn Esquire tenth son of Sir John Wynn of
Gwydir, who died in 1671. His attitude is that of a fanatical preacher; and his
dress a full-buttoned coat, short skirts, and square shoes; a most unhappy
subject for the sculptor. On one side kneels Sir John Wynn of Wynn-stay,
baronet; and on the other, Jane his wife, daughter to Eyton Evans, by whom he
acquired the estate. He died at the age of ninety-one, in 1718; and left his
fortune to the late Sir W. W. Wynn. He is represented blind: this accident (in
his extreme age) is mentioned in his epitaph as a benefit, since his inward
perceptions were improved by this bodily defect. It reminds me of two lines of
Waller, in which the same idea is much better expressed:

The soul's dark cottage battered and decayed
Lets in new light, through chinks which time has made.
IN the same chapel is an ancient tomb, of the altar fashion, with monkish
pleureurs on the sides, and angels holding shields of now defaced arms. On the
top are recumbent two figures; an armed man with a collar of SS. and a lady
lying on a cloak: at their feet a lion with a monk sitting on it, with his head
reclined on one hand.

AROUND the edges of the tomb is this inscription:

Orate pro anima Johannis ap Elis Eyton, armigeri qui obiit vicessimo octavo
die menfis Septembris anno Domini 1526; et pro anima Elizabeth. Calfley uxoris
ejus, quae obiit xi. die menfis Junii anno Domini 1524; quorum animabus
propicietur Deus. Amen.

THIS gentleman joined Henry VII. before the battle of Bosworth; and for his
good services had considerable grants of land in these parts. He was of the
house of Eyton beforementioned. His grandfather was twice married to the same
lady; who, on some pretense of consanguinity, had been divorced from him after
bearing him a son of the name of Ellis: but, obtaining a dispensation, they
were reunited in form. After the second marriage, were born other children. A
division of the estates was then made: Rhiwabon and Watstay fell to the share
of Ellis; and Eyton to John, the first of the second brood Eyten Pedigree.
.

ON the other side of the altar is a noble monument to the late Sir Watkin
Williams Wynn, whose virtues are still fresh in the minds of his countrymen. A
fall from his horse, on September 26th 1749, deprived the world of a useful
citizen. Rysbrack has preserved his figure in a graceful attitude. The late
Doctor King of St. Mary-hall thus expressed the qualities of his mind:

ADSERTORI LIBERTATIS PUBLICAE. H. S. E. WATKIN WILLIAMS WYNN Baronettus.
Qui ab illustri Britannorum veterum stirpe oriundus, majoribus suis se
dignissimum semper praebuit, et non modo nomine, sed virtute et fide hominem
vere Britannum. Admodum juvenis in senatum electus confestim cunctis innotuit
gravitate et judicio: Postquam vero et ipse de republica coepit disputare, et
libertatis patrocinium ac defensionem suscipere, incredibilem animi
magnitudinem, atque ejus constantiam omnes ita suspexerunt, ut, cum senatus
princeps, tum patriae pater merito haberetur. Tam rectis studiis et ea
singulari bonitate fuit praeditus, ut non posset fieri, quin maximam sibi
gratiam et venerationem compararet vir innocentissimus, idemque prudentissimus
pater-familias, continentissimus maritus, benignissimus hospes, optimus
literarum patronus, et assiduus DEI et CHRISTIANAE veritatis cultor. Ad haec
quam suavis et jucundus fuit in convictu! Quanta fides ejus sermonibus! Qualis
in ore probitas et decor! Quae mensae reverentia! Quae in cultu moderatio! Quae
in omni vita modestia, elegantia, comitas, liberalitas! Talis tantique viri
immaturo interitu quam grave damnum fecit Britannia; quum cuncti qui ejus
virtutes cognoverint (cognovit penitus qui haec moerens scripsit) eo erepto,
miserorum omnium perfugium, bonorum omnium delicias, doctorum omnium
praesidium, Walliae suae decus et ornamentum, et clarissimum reipublicae lumen
ereptum et extinctum esse fateantur!

Obiit 260. die Septembris 1749. Aetatis suae 57mo.
THE park of Wynn-stay reaches to the village of Rhiwabon; and is most
advantageously situated. WYNN-STAY.
The grounds well-wooded; the views distinct and extremely elegant; especially
those toward the Berwyn mountains, and the august breach made into them beyond
Llangollen by the rapid Dee, through the country of the irregular and wild
GLYNDWR.

NANTY BELE, NANTY BELE.
or the Dingle of the Martin, lies about a mile from hence, and merits a visit
from every traveller. From a rock at its extremity, is a magnificent view of
the Dee, rolling awefully in a deep chasm fringed with woods; at last
terminating sullenly in a black and still pool. Toward the north is a great
view of the conic mountain, and the rude fortress of Dinas Bran, rising amidst
a fertile vale, and bounded by the barren Alps.

THE house has been built at various times. The most ancient is a gateway of
wood and plaster, dated 1616. On a wall within the court, is this excellent
distich, allusive to the name of the house; -- Wynn stay, or rest satisfied
with the good things Providence has so liberally showered on you.

Cui domus est victusque decens, cui patria dulcis
Sunt satis haec vitae, caetera cura, labor.
The former name of the place was Wat-stay, from its situation on the famous
dike; but was changed to the present by Sir John Wynn, out of respect to his
own name. It was originally called simply Rhiwabon, and had been the residence
of Madeg ap Gryffydd Maelor, founder of Vale Crucis Eyton Pedigroe.
.

THE new part was built by the late Sir Watkin; is of itself a good house; yet
was only part of a more extensive design. It is finished in that substantial
yet neat manner becoming the seat of an honest English country gentleman;
adapted to the reception of his worthy neighbors, who may experience his
hospitality without dread of spoiling the frippery ornaments, becoming only the
assembly-rooms of a townhouse, or the villa of a great city. The present owner
meditates the re-building of the old part; and, as he has already shown such
good judgment in a noble room, in which simplicity is joined with grandeur,
there is little doubt but he will preserve a style of local propriety
throughout the whole.

THE present set of pictures belonging to the house are portraits of the
families of Wynn and Williams. Here is a very fine three-quarters of the old
Sir John Wynn of Gwedir, in a high hat, and with a vast white beard, and in the
dress of the times of James I. I reserve further mention of him till I arrive
at his ancient seat.

HIS son, Sir John Wynn knight, is drawn half-length; a young man, with
whiskers and a peaked beard; dark hair; great flat ruff; black vest; white
girdle, stuck with points; a white flowered baldric. Sir John died on his
travels, at Lucca, and was succeeded by his brother Richard. A most exquisite
head of Sir Richard, by Vandyck, is preserved here. He was gentleman of the
privy-chamber to Charles I. when prince of Wales, and attended him in the
romantic journey he took into Spain, in 1623, to visit his designed bride. Sir
Richard drew up an admirable account of his travels, which is printed among
other scarce tracts, by Mr. Thomas Hearn. On the accession of Charles to the
throne, he was appointed treasurer to the queen; and, dying without issue, was
succeeded by his brother Owen.

A HALF-LENGTH of Henry Wynn Esquire another son of the old Sir John, and
representative of the county of Merioneth, in the last parliament of James I. He
is painted in black hair, a great (...)-over, and a letter in his hand. Here is
also a portrait of (...) brother, a captain of a man of war, in the same dress:
Both of them good performances.

HERE are, besides, several more modern portraits; such as of the two late
dukes of Beaufort in their robes. A composition, with Charles duke of Beaufort
leaning on the late Sir Watkin's shoulder, looking at the horse legacy. This
figure of Sir Watkin is the strongest resemblance of him of any.

TWO portraits of the late owner of this place, and his first lady, by Dahl.
His full wig and dress gives a very disadvantageous idea of him. The fashion is
equally the misfortune of the artist and his employer.

A THREE-quarters length of Sir John Wynn baronet, with a full wig and cravat.
The same whose monument we have before mentioned.

TWO very fine full-lengths of Charles II. and his queen, close this short list.

ON my return to Rhiwabon, I passed through the turnpike toward Wrexham. On
the road I digressed a little to the left, to visit a great Caer in this
parish, called the Garthen, GARTHEN.
i. e. Caer-ddm, seated on the summit of a hill commanding a most extensive
view a^^urd, of the fine and fertile country of Maelor Gymraeg, or Bromfield;
and part of Maelor Saesneg, or English Maelor, mostly flat and wooded. This
Caer contains about four acres of ground, protected in some parts by one, in
others with two very strong dikes and deep ditches. The inner dike is made of
loose stones, with a wall of vast thickness on the top. Within the area are
many vestiges of buildings, the habitations of the old possessors. It lies
between the Offa's and the Wat's dike. Part of the turnpike-road is formed for
a considerable way along the top of the first, which shows its prodigious
thickness.

I PURSUED the tract of Wat's dike to Erddig, ERDDIG.
the elegant seat of Philip York Esquire a place where nature has been lavish of
beauties, and improved by the excellent taste of the worthy owner. Two little
vales bound his lands, watered by a pretty stream, and bordered with hanging
woods. Along one side of the bank runs the dike; and at the end, between the
two vales, impending over them, are small but strong entrenchments. One
surrounds a work of a pentagon form; beyond which, at the very verge, is a
mount that seems to have been a dernier resort to the garrison, in case they
had been beaten out of the former. These compose what is called the Roman fort;
but there are neither coins or any thing else to confirm the conjecture of its
having been one. A fragment of wall cemented with mortar is all that remains of
this castelet.

WREXHAM lies at a small distance from this place. WREXHAM.
This town is the largest in North Wales, and the parish the most populous. It
appears by the ancient name to have been of Saxon origin; being called
Wrightesham. I can trace it no farther back than the time of the last earl
Warren, who had a grant of it Dugdale Baren. i. 82.
Leland speaks of it as a place where there were some merchants and good
buckler-makers Itin. v. 34.
. The parish is at this time noted for a manufactory of instruments of war; but
altered for those of offense, instead of defense. Near the place is a great
foundery for cannon, under the direction of Mr. Wilkinson, who supplies many
parts of Europe with this ratio ultima regum; and in the late war between
Russians and Turks, furnished both parties with this species of logic.

THE church of Wrexham is the glory, CHURCH.
not only of the place, but of North Wales; being a magnificent pile, erected
in the time of Henry VII. The date on the steeple is 1506. The inside of the
church is very spacious; and consists of a nave, two ailes, and a chancel.
Above the pillars is abundance of grotesque carving, in ridicule of the regular
clergy, and the female religious, abbesses and nuns; and over the arches of the
nave, are many of the arms of the old British and Saxon princes. TOMBS.
The tombs are numerous. The most ancient is of a knight all armed: at his feet
is a dog, and beyond that a dragon, whose tail terminates in a serpent's head.
On his shield is a lion rampant. Around is an inscription; but all I could make
out was Hic jacet * * * * * * * * * * ap Howel The letters are REH. (or R)
EVEHIRE.
. This had been dug up, and is now reared against the steeple.

THAT of Hugh Bellot vicar of Gresford, and afterward bishop of Bangor and of
Chester, is the next. He lies in his robes recumbent, near the altar. It was
his request to be interred in the parish where he died. His death happened at
Berse, near this town, in 1596. His funeral was celebrated at Chester, and his
body deposited here.

ALMOST opposite to the prelate is a magnificent monument, in memory of Mrs.
Mary Middleton, daughter of Sir Richard Middleton of Chirk castle She died
April 8th 1747, aged 59.
. She is represented rising out of her tomb in all the fullness of youth and
beauty. She died a very withered old woman; but I like the thought of the
sculptor, allusive to the sublime passage in the burial-service: The irumpet
shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be
changed. Above is a shattered pyramid, and, what might have been well excused,
the gross representation of the angelic beings founding the awakening call.

IN a corner of one aile is a small but elegant monument of the Reverend Mr.
Thomas Middleton, and his wife Arabella Hacker, by Roubiliac. Their faces are
in profile on a medallion, with a curtain lightly hanging on one side.

AMONG the epitaphs are some to every taste. That to a worthy usher, my
earliest instructor, in the school of this town, merits preservation.

Febr. 28, 1743. obiit

Rev. GULIEL. LEWIS,

Vir cruditus, affabilis et benevolus,

Qui nil turpe vel in se admisit

Vel fovit in aliis.

THAT in the churchyard, on Elibu Yale of Plas Gronow Esquire. expresses an
uncommon variety of fortune He was inferred July 22d, 1721. He bestowed on the
church the altar-piece, with the picture of the institution of the sacrament,
which he brought from Rome; also the picture of (...) David.
:

Born in America, in Europe bred,
In Africa traveled, and in Asia wed,
Where long he lived and thrived; at London dead.
Much good, some ill, he did; so hope all is even,
And that his soul through mercy's gone to heaven.
You that survive, and read, take care
For this most certain exit to prepare:
For only the actions of the just,
Smell sweet and blossom in the dust.
OF the following, the first is simple; the second, what the Spectator calls
light, but nervous; and the third informs you, that the deceased had lived, but
not that he died.

Here lies a churchwarden,
A choice flower in that garden,
Joseph Critchley by name,
Who lived in good fame:
Being gone to his rest,
Without doubt he is blessed.
Died 10th of March 1671/^.

Here lies interred beneath these stones,
The beard, the flesh, and eke the bones,
Of Wrexham clerk, old Daniel Jones.
1668.

Here lies John Shore,
I say no more,
Who was alive
In sixty-five.
October 9th.

ON the outside of the church is great variety of ludicrous and gross
sculpture. STEEPLE.
The steeple is a fine tower, richly ornamented on three sides with rows of
saints placed in rich gothic niches. Among them is St. Giles, the patron saint
of the church, with the hind which miraculously nourished him in the desert. At
each corner is a light turret with a winding staircase, twenty-four feet high:
the whole height of the steeple is a hundred and thirty-five feet.

Two casualties are recorded to have befallen this building. The steeple was
blown down on St. Catherine's day, 1331; and the church was burnt about the
year 1457. In order to rebuild it, an indulgence of forty days, for five years,
was granted to every contributor to so pious a work.

THE church is a vicarage, formerly an impropriation, belonging to the abbey of
Valle Crucis; but on a dispute between A^^n the second, bishop of St. Asaph,
was restored to the sea See the account of Valle Crucis, in the further
progress of this work.
. This great cure is assisted by two chapels; Minera, or Mwyn glawdd, the Mine
upon the ditch, from that of Offa running by it: this is a rich mineral tract,
in the mountanous part of the parish. The other chapel is that of Berse, or
Bersham, a recent foundation.

THE free school is endowed with ten pounds a year, paid by the mayor of
Chester, being the bequest of Valentine Broughton, alderman of that city, for
the instruction of twelve boys.

THE western part of this parish is hilly and mineral. MINES.
Part of the mines on the waste are the property of lord Grosvenour, and some
belong to the corporation of Chester. Brombrough, another township on the
heights, produces coal. In this place the inhabitants of Holt had, by the
charter granted to them in 1410, by Thomas earl of Arundel, the liberty of
digging for turf and coal. The far greater part of the parish is either flat,
or composed of gentle risings, extremely fertile and pleasant, inhabited by a
numerous gentry, who still preserve the character left of their predecessors,
by honest Churchyard, the simple swan of the reign of Elizabeth.

They are the joye and gladness of the poor,
That daily feed the hungry at their door:
In any soil where gentlemen are found,
Some house is kept, and bounty does abound.
FROM Wrexham I made an excursion to Gresford, and on my road called at Acton,
ACTON.
the seat of my good friend Ellis Young Esquire. This place was formerly the
property of the Jefferies, a race that, after running uncontaminated from an
ancient stock, had the disgrace of producing in the last century George
Jefferies, CHANCELLOR JEFFERIES.
chancellor of England; a man of first-rate abilities in his profession, but of
a heart subservient to the worst of actions. His portrait is a fine
full-length, in the robes of his office, painted by Sir Godfrey Kneller Here is
another fine full-length of his brother Sir Thomas, in a full wig and long
cloak, with the cross of some religious order.
. Charles II. sat to this great painter; who survived to draw George I. and to
receive from him the dignity of baronet. Jefferies was sixth son of John
Jefferies, and Margaret daughter to Sir Thomas Ireland of Beausey, near
Warrington. Here is preserved a good portrait of the old gentleman, in black,
sitting: it was drawn in the 82d year of his age, in 1690. George had the
common school education of the country, from which he was removed to that of
Westminster. He never had an academic education, but was placed immediately in
the inner temple, where he was chiefly supported by his grandmother.

HE was never regularly called to the bar. The accident of the plague in the
neighborhood of London first introduced him into his profession; for, in 1666,
he put on a law-gown, and pleading at the Kingston assizes, where few counsel
chose to attend, he from that time acted without any notice being taken of his
obtrusion. About this time, he made clandestine addresses to the daughter of a
wealthy merchant; in which he was assisted by a young lady, the daughter of a
clergyman. The affair was discovered, and the confidante turned out of doors.
Jefferies, with a generosity unknown to him in his prosperous days, took pity
and married her. She proved an excellent wife, and lived to see him lord chief
justice of England. On her death he married the widow of Mr. Jones of
Montgomeryshire, and daughter to Sir Thomas Blodworth.

HIS first preferment from the court was that of a Welsh judge. In 1680, he was
made chief justice of Chester. After this, he rose with great rapidity; and, as
is well known, fell as suddenly. His conduct, as chancellor, was upright and
able; as a politician, unrestrained by any principle; devoted to the worst
measures of an infatuated court. He was extremely given to the bottle; and paid
so little respect to his character, that one day having drank to excess with
the lord treasurer and others, they were going to strip, and get upon a
sign-post to drink the king's health, had not they been prevented Reresby's
Memoirs, 231.
. He died soon after his commitment, either from hard-drinking or a broken
heart, and so was preserved from the infamy of public execution.

GRESFORD or Croes-ffordd, the road of the cross, GRESFORD:
lies about two miles further. The church is seated on the brow of a lofty
eminence, over a beautiful little valley, whose end opens into the vast expanse
of the vale royal of Cheshire; and exhibits a view of uncommon elegance. CHURCH.
The church is extremely handsome; but less ornamented than that of Wrexham,
though built in the same reign. On the top of the tower are images of the
apostles. On one side, in a niche, is another of Henry VII. The neat reparation
of the inside, is owing to the direction and excellent judgment of the reverend
Mr. Newcome, the present vicar.

HERE are two ancient monuments: one, TOMBS.
much hid by a pew, a flat stone, with a shield and other sculpture. The arms
on the shield are three mullets on a bend. These show the deceased to have been
one of the later posterity of Ithel ap Ednyfed, whose father had the townships
of Gresford and Allington bestowed on him for services done to Bleddyn ap
Cynvyn, in the wars against the English. Ithel inherited also Lleprog Vawr,
Lleprog Vechan, and Trefnant in Englefield. Many of his offspring were buried
here.

IN the north aile is a tomb of a warrior armed in mail. On his shield is a
lion rampant; and round the verge, Hic jacet MADOC AP LLEWELIN AP GRUFF. He was
of Eyton, Erlisham, and Rhiwabon. He was buried on St. Mathias's day, 1331.

HERE are, THE TREVORS.
besides, some mural monuments of the Trevors of Trevalyn. The first is of John
Trevor Esquire placed in armor, in a reclining posture, with an inscription in
Welsh on a tablet, concealing half his body. It signifies, that he died in
London in June 1589; and that his son, Sir Richard, caused his bones to be
removed to this place.

SIR RICHARD erected his own monument in 1638, in the 80th year of his age,
representing himself in armor kneeling: and his wife Catherine, daughter of
Robert Puleston Esquire of Emral, by him. The inscription informs us, that it was
chiefly in memory of his lady, that he caused this memorial to be erected.
Salusbury Pedigree, iii. 6.
He served many years in the Irish wars; was governor of Newry, and the
counties of Down and Ardmagh; council of the marches, and vice admiral of North
Wales; and lived (as he tells us) to see his children's children's children.
There is another monument to his lady, who is placed kneeling with her five
daughters.

AT their neighboring seat of Trevalyn, is a singular portrait of Sir Richard,
dressed in black. Above hang his arms, with the words So then: beneath are some
medicines, and Now thus: allusive to his former and present state.

A^ the extremity of the lofty slope that impends over the plains, and affords
an almost boundless view to the north and north-east, THE ROFTS.
is a peninsulated field, called the Rofts, that formed, in old times, a strong
British post. It is defended by three strong dikes and fosses, cut across the
narrow isthmus that connects it to higher parts of the parish. On two sides it
is inaccessible by reason of the steepness of the declivity; and on the fourth,
which fronts Cheshire, and is of easier ascent, had been protected by two or
three other ditches, now almost levelled by the plough. In one corner of this
post is a vast exploratory mount. This seems to have been an important station;
an outguard to our country against invaders; which made an artificial elevation
quite necessary, in order to observe the motions of an enemy.

IT lies, I think, in the manor of Merford; which, with that of Horsley, was,
by act of parliament, in the reign of Henry VIII. ^^ng into the county of Flint;
but whether they extend to the parish of Hope in Flintshire, or are surrounded
by Denbighshire, I am uncertain.

FROM hence I returned by the same road to my quarters at Llangollen.

IN the morning I took a ride to view the country that lies to the south-west.
The road lay on the same side of the river with the town: I kept ascending a
hill clothed in many parts with birch. From the summit was a most elegant
view; one way, of the ancient castle on its conic hill, and the mural ranges of
the Glisseg rocks in various tiers behind. Beneath, on the other side,
LLANDYSILIO.
lies the house of Llandysilio, the seat of Thomas Jones Esquire in a pretty vale,
watered by the Dee, that winds along the bottom, after passing between two
rocky promontories, that barely give it a channel.

THE church is dedicated to St. Tysilio, CHURCH.
prince of Powys, son of Brochwel Ysgithrog, by Arddun Benasgell, or Arddun
with the winged head, daughter of St. Pabo post Prydain, or the pillar of
Britain. This parish is in the hundred of YALE; YALE.
which contains, besides those of Bryn Eglwys, Llandegla, Llanarmon, and
Llanverres.

AFTER a descent of no great length, enter MERIONETHSHIRE, into that portion
for ever to be distinguished in the Welsh annals, on account of the hero it
produced, who made such a figure in the beginning of the fifteenth century.
This tract was anciently a comot in the kingdom of Mathraval, or Powys; and
still retains its former title Glyn-dwrdwy, GLYN-DWRDWY.
or the valley of the Dee. It extends about seven miles in length; is narrow,
fertile in grass, bounded by lofty hills, often clothed with trees; and lies
in the parishes of Llangollen, Llandy^ilio, Llansantffraid, and Corwen.

THIS tract once belonged to the lords of Dinas Bran. After the murder of the
two eldest sons of Gryffydd ap Madoc the last lord, the earl Warren, who had
usurped the property of the eldest, appears to have been seized with remorse
for his crime; and, instead of removing the other object of his fear, as a
Machiavelian politician would have done, procured from Edward I. a grant of
this tract to Gryffydd Vychan, third brother to the unhappy youth, dated from
Rudland the 12th of February 1282 Rotuli Walliae, 87.
.

OWEN was fourth in descent from this nobleman. O. GLYNDWR, HIS DESCENT.
His father's name was Gryffydd Vychan; his mother's, Elena, of royal blood,
and from whom he afterward clamed the throne of Wales. She was eldest daughter
of Thomas ap Llewelyn ap Owen, by his wife Elinor Goch, or Elinor the red,
daughter and heiress to Catherine, one of the daughters of Llewelyn last prince
of Wales, and wife to Philip ap Ivor of Iscoed. She probably was married before
the death of her father, otherwise the jealousy of Edward, about the succession
to the principality, would have made her share the fate of her sister
Gwenllian; who, perforce, took the veil in the convent of Shaftesbury.

WRITERS vary in the account of the day of the birth of Glyndwr. BIRTH.
One manuscript fixes it on the 28th of May 1354: that preserved by Lewis Owen,
places the event five years earlier; for the year 1349, says he, was
distinguished by the first appearance of the pestilence in Wales, and by the
birth of Owen Glyndwr.

HEROES are often introduced into the world by some strange phoenomenon, OMENS.
that presages their future celebrity, or the happiness or misery they were to
bring upon their country; but it is probable that their course is finished,
before superstition invents the tale, and adopts it to their actions. Holinshed
relates one on this occasion, correspondent to a blemish we could wish to clear
the character of our countryman from. His cruelty was foretold at his nativity,
by the mavelous accident of his father's horses being found standing that
night in the stables up to their bellies in blood. Shakespeare omits this
circumstance; but, in his spirited character of Owen, puts these beautiful
lines into his mouth, finely descriptive of the vainglory and superstition of
the old British chieftain.

At my birth
The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes;
The goats ran from the mountains, and the herds
Were strangely clamorous in the frighted fields:
These signs have marked me extraordinary,
And all the courses of my life do show,
I am not in the roll of common men.
HIS bard, Jolo Goch, gives him incense of a far superior kind: and I fear the
poet's ardor to celebrate his patron, carried him to the borders of blasphemy;
for, in his Cowydd y Seren, or Poem of the star, he describes three that
appeared to mark three great events; for, to the star which foretold the birth
of our SAVIOR, he adds another which presaged that of Arthur; and a third
which marked the great deeds of Glyndwr, in 1402, the meridian of his glory
Cowydd y Seren, a Ymddangoses mis mawrth, B. A. 1402.
.

HE appears to have had a liberal education. His ambition overcame the
prejudices of his country against the English; and determined him to seek
preferment among them. He entered himself in the inns of court, and studied
there, till he became a barrister. It is probable, that he quitted his
profession; for we find, that he was appointed scutiger, or squire of the body
to Richard II. whose fortunes he followed to the last; was taken with him in
Flint castle; and, when the king's household was dissolved, retired, with full
resentment of his sovereign's wrongs, to his patrimony in Wales. I judge that
he was knighted before the deposal of his master; for I find him among the
witnesses in the celebrated cause between Sir Richard le Scrope and Sir Ro^^^
le Grosvenour, about a coat of arms, under the title of Sir (...) de Glendore.
His brother also appears there by the name of Tudor de Glendore. This cause
lasted three years, and ended in 1389 Collins's Peerage, vii. 507.
.

JOLO GOCH, HIS HOUSE.
the celebrated poet of this period, resided here for some time. He came on a
pressing invitation from Owen; who, knowing the mighty influence of this order
of men over the ancient Britons, made his house, as Jolo says, a sanctuary for
bards. He made them the instruments of his future operations, and to prepare
the minds of the people against the time of his intended insurrection. From
Jolo I borrow the description of the seat of the chieftain, when it was in full
splendour. He compares it, in point of magnificence, to Westminster abbey; and
informs us, that it had a gate house, and was surrounded with a moat.

THAT within were nine halls, each furnished with a wardrobe; I imagine, filled
with the clothes of his retainers, according to the custom of those days.

NEAR the house, on a verdant bank, was a wooden house, supported on posts, and
covered with tiles. It contained four apartments, each subdivided into two,
designed to lodge the guests.

HERE was a church in form of a cross, with several chapels.

THE seat was surrounded with every convenience for good living; and every
support to hospitality: a park, warren, and pigeon-house; a mill, orchard, and
vineyard; and fish pond, filled with pike and gwyniads. The last introduced
from the lake at Bala.

A HERONRY, which was a concomitant to the seat of every great man, supplied
him and his guests with game for the sport of falconry.

A PLACE still remains, that retains the name of his park. It extends about a
mile or two beyond the site of his house, on the left hand of the valley.

THE vestiges of the house are small. The moat is very apparent: the
measurement of the area it enclosed, is forty-six paces by twenty-six. There is
the appearance of a wall on the outside, which was continued to the top of a
great mount, on which stood the wooden house. On the other side, but at a
greater distance, I had passed by another mount of the same kind, called
Hendom; which probably might have had formerly a building similar to that
described by the bard. This, perhaps, was the station of a guard, to prevent
surprise or insult from the English side. He had much to apprehend from the
neighboring fortress of Dinas Bran, and its appendages, possessed by the earl
of Arundel, a strenuous supporter of the house of Lancaster.

THE bard speaks feelingly of the wine, the ale, the braget, and the white
bread; nor does he forget the kitchen, nor the important officer the cook;
whose life (when in the royal service) was estimated by our laws at a hundred
and twenty-six cows Leges Wallicae.
. Such was the hospitality of this house, that the place of porter was useless;
nor were locks or bolts known. To sum up all, no one could be hungry or dry in
Sycharth, the name of the place.

THE bard pays all due praise to the lady of the house, and her offspring.

A Gwraig orau o'r gwragedd, WIFE.

Gwynn y myd, o'i Gwin a'i medd.
Merch eglur, Llin marchawglyw,
Urddol, hael, o reiol ryw.
A'i blant, a ddeuant bob ddau
Nythod teg o bennaethau!
HIS wife, the best of wives!
Happy am I in her wine and metheglin.
Eminent woman of a knightly family.
Honorable, beneficent, noble.
His children come in pairs;
A beautiful nest of chieftains.
THE lady whom he thus celebrates, was Margaret daughter of Sir David Hanmer of
Hanmer, in the county of Flint, one of the justices of the king's bench, by
appointment of Richard II. in 1383, and knighted by him in 1387 Collins's
Baronet. 1720. ii. p. 235.
. Her nuptials were previous to her father's promotion; for it is certain that
some of the daughters were married, and his sons grown to men's estate, before
Glyndwr appeared in arms in the year 1400. CHILDREN.
They followed him into the field, and commanded under him. It is probable that
most of them fell gloriously in battle. Mr. Brown Willis, indeed, says, that on
their father's death they fled into Ireland; that one of them settled in
Dublin, and took the name of Baulf Hist. of St. Asaph; Cathedral, 61.
, or the strong; and was ancestor to a reputable family in that city.

HE matched his daughters into considerable families.

HIS eldest, Isabel, to Adam or Adda ap Jorwerth Ddu.

HIS second, Elizabeth, or as some say Alicia, was married to Sir John
Scudamore of Ewyas, and Holm-Lacy, in the county of Hereford.

JONET, to John Crofts of Croft Castle, in the same county.

LORD GRAY of Ruthyn took, through necessity, Jane, after he was made prisoner
by her father, who forced him into the alliance.

HIS youngest daughter, Margaret, was married to Roger Monnington of
Monnington, in the county of Hereford, toward the borders of Brecknockshire.
The estate still continues in the name and family. I have had the pleasure of
seeing at my house two ladies, owners of the place, direct descendants from the
daughter of Glyndwr.

HIS illegitimate issue were, his son Jevan; a daughter, married into the house
of Gwernan; another, named Myfanwy, to Llewelyn ap Adda of Trefor; and
Gwenllian, to Philip ap Rys of St. Harmon in Radnorshire.

LEWIS GLYN COTHI, a bard of the time of Henry VI. speaks in high terms of her
father Glyndwr:

Ei Thad oedd dwysawg eadarn,
A holl Gymru fu'n ei farn.
'Her father was a potent prince. All Wales was in his council.'

I MUST not omit notice of a mistake of the English historians, who mention the
marriage of another daughter of Glyndwr to Edmund earl of March. This, they
assert, was also effected by force, after the earl became his prisoner: but it
does not appear that he ever was Glyndwr's captive; or that March had any other
wife than Anne, daughter to Edmund earl of Stafford; besides, the Welsh
histories are totally silent on that head.

SUCH was the state of the domestic affairs of Glyndwr at the change of
government in 1399. His resentment against the usurper was whetted by wrongs
public and private: by the murder of the unhappy Richard, to whom he was
strongly attached by being a personal favorite; and by the strong partiality
the Welsh had for their late king.

IN the very first year or the new reign, he experienced the frowns of the
court. OPPRESSED BY LORD GRAY.
Reginald lord Gray of Ruthyn, taking advantage of the deposal of Richard,
instantly seized on a certain common, called Croeseu, which Glyndwr, in a
former reign, had recovered from him by course of law. Owen fought justice
without having recourse to violence: he laid his case before parliament; but his
suit was dismissed without redress.

THIS insult was aggravated by another injury. When Henry went on his
expedition against the Scots, Owen was to have been summoned, among other
barons, to attend the king with his vassals. The writ for that purpose was
delivered to Reginald Visa Ricardi, ii. 171.
, who designedly neglected to deliver it till the time was nearly elapsed, and
it became impossible for him to obey. Regineld returned to the king, and
misrepresented the absence of O^^n as an act of wilful disobedience; and, by
this piece of treachery, took possession of all his land; and on this, under
pretense of forfeiture, invaded such parts of Glyndwr's estates as lay adjacent
to his own.

THE danger of driving into desperate measures a person of his interest,
spirit, and abilities, was foreseen by John Trevor bishop of St. Asaph, who
advised more temperate proceedings; that Owen was by no means a despicable
enemy; and that the W^lsh would certainly be provoked into a general
insurrection. His advice was rejected, and he was told there could be no fear
about such a barefooted rabble Leland's Collect. i. 310.
.

IT does not appear that Glyndwr, till this period, had any settled design of
flinging off the English yoke. Ambition now came in, and joined with his
revenge. ASSERTS HIS CLAME TO WALES.
He revolved in his mind his own genealogy: he derived himself from the ancient
race of British princes; and, apparently laying aside all sense of private
wrong, made open clame to the throne of Wales. To encourage his countrymen,
strongly attached to the prophecies of ancient times, he reminded them of those
of Merlin and other sages. His bards set before them the great qualities of
their leader; and taught them to expect from his valor and conduct, the freedom
of ancient Britons from the galling weight of the Saxon yoke. His chief bard,
Gryffydd Llwyd, after regretting his absence, chaunts his praise, and predicts
the success of the war. The Cowydd, or poem, begins thus in the original:

Eryr digris afrised
OWAIN, etc.
THE reader will receive it agreeably paraphrased by a bard of 1773.

1.
CAMBRIA'S princely eagle, hail!
Of Gryffydd Vychan's noble blood!
Thy high renown shall never fail,
Owain Glyndwr, great and good!
Lord of Dwrdwy's fertile vale,
Warlike, highborn Owain, hail!
Dwrdwy, whose wide-spreading streams,
Reflecting Cynthia's midnight beams,
Whilom led me to thy bower;
Alas! in an unguarded hour!
For high in blood, with British beverage hot,
My awful distance I forgot;
But soon my generous chief forgave
The rude presumption of his slave.
2.
But leave me not, illustrious lord!
Thy peaceful bower, and hospitable board,
Are ill exchanged for scenes of war,
Though Henry calls thee from afar.
My prayers, my tears were vain;
He flew like lightning to the hostile plain.
While with remorse, regret, and woe,
I saw the god-like hero go;
I saw, with aching heart,
The golden beam depart.
His glorious image in my mind
Was all that Owain left behind.
Wild with despair, and woe-begone,
Thy faithful bard is left alone,
To sigh, to weep, to groan!
3.
Thy sweet remembrance, ever dear,
Thy name, still ushered by a tear,
My inward anguish speak;
How could thou, cruel Owain, go,
And leave the bitter streams to flow
Down Gryffydd's surrow'd cheek?
I heard (who has not heard thy fame?)
With ecstasy I heard thy name
Loud echoed by the trump of war,
Which spoke thee brave, and void of fear;
Yet of a gentle heart possessed,
That bled within thy generous breast,
Wide over the sanguine plain to see
The haveck of hostility.
4.
Still with good omens may thou fight.
And do thy injured country right!
Like great P^^dragon The omen alluded to was a star and fiery dragon; which,
according to the interpretation of M^^l^^, predicted the reign of U^^^E^,
afterward surram d Pen Dragon, from hwing (...) golden dragons to be ma^^ one
of which he pre^^^ted to the cathedral of (...) he carried along with him (...)
what is (...) likely wore by way of (...). His son A^^^^ the (...). (...) of
M^nm^^l, 254. 257. 283.
shall thou soar,
Who bade the din of battle roar,
What time his vengeful steel he drew
His brother's grandeur to renew,
And vindicate his wrongs;
His gallant actions still are told
By youthful bards, by Druids old,
And grateful Cambria's, songs.
5.
On sea, on land, thou still did brave
The dangerous cliff and rapid wave;
Like Urien, who subdued the knight,
And the fell dragon put to flight,
Yon moss-grown fount beside;
The grim, black warrior of the flood,
The dragon, gorged with human blood,
The water's scaly pride.
Before his sword the mighty fled:
But now he is numbered with the dead.
Oh! may his great example fire
My noble patron to aspire
To deeds like his! impetuous fly.
And bid the Saxon squadrons die:
So shall thy laureled bard rehearse
Thy praise, in never-dying verse;
Shall sing the prowess of thy sword,
Beloved and victorious lord!
6.
In future times thy honored name
Shall emulate brave Urien's same!
Surrounded by the numerous foe,
Well did thou deal the unequal blow.
How terrible thy ashen spear,
Which shook the bravest heart with fear,
Yon hostile towers beneath!
More horrid than the lightning's glance,
Flashed the red meteors from thy lance,
The harbinger of death.
Dire, and more dire, the conflict grew;
Thousands before thy presence flew;
While borne in thy triumphal car,
Majestic as the god of war,
Midst charging hosts unmoved you stood,
Or waded through a sea of blood.
7.
Immortal fame shall be thy meed,
Due to every glorious deed;
Which latest annals shall record,
Beloved and victorious lord!
Grace, wisdom, valor, all are thine,
Owain Glyndwrdwy divine!
Meet emblem of a two-edged sword,
Dreaded in war, in peace adored!
Steer thy swift ships to Albion's coast,
Pregnant with thy martial host.
Thy robes are white as driven snow,
And virtue smiles upon thy brow:
But terrible in war thou art,
And swift and certain is the dart
Thou hurlest at a Saxon's heart.
8.
Loud same has told thy gallant deeds;
In every word a Saxon bleeds.
Terror, and flight, together came,
Obedient to thy mighty name:
Death, in the van, with ample stride,
Hewed thee a passage deep and wide.
Stubborn as steel, thy nervous chest
With more than mortal strength's possessed;
And every excellence belongs
To the bright subject of our songs.
9.
Strike then your harps, ye Cambrian bards;
The song of triumph best rewards
An hero's toils. Let Henry weep
His warriors wrapped in everlasting sleep;
Success and victory are thine,
Owain Glyndwrdwy divine!
Dominion, honor, pleasure, praise,
Attend upon thy vigorous days!
And, when thy evening sun is set,
May grateful Cambria never forget
Thy noontide blaze; but on thy tomb
Never-fading laurels bloom!
He first appeared in arms in the summer of the year 1400 APPEARS IN ARMS
. He naturally directed his attack against the lands of his enemy lord Gray;
and immediately recovered what he had unjustly been dispossessed of, during the
absence of the former. As soon as the news reached Henry, he sent lord Talbot
and lord Gray to reduce him. They arrived with such speed, that they surrounded
his house before he had any notice; but he had the good fortune to escape into
the woods. He immediately raised a powerful band of men; and, after causing
himself to be proclaimed prince of Wales, on the 20th of September, surprised,
plundered, and burnt to the ground the town of Ruthyn, BURNS RUTHYN.
at the time a fair was held there. After which he retired to his fastnesses
among the mountains. One, I imagine to have been the great strength, surrounded
by a vast rampart of stones, near Corwen, called Caer Drewyn.

HENRY, FIRST MARCH OF HENRY AGAINST HIM.
determined to suppress this revolt in the beginning, marched in person against
Owen, and penetrated as far as the isle of Anglesea, putting to the sword all
that resisted. He plundered the convent of Llanvaes Leland's Collect. i. 311.
; slew some of the monks, and took the rest away with him; at length set them
at liberty, and made restitution to the monastery; but peopled it again with
English religious. The monks of Llanvaes had been Franciscans; an order who
were firm adherents to the late prince; and who, in general, were suspected of
promoting the insurrection of Glyndwr, and even of inviting him to invade
England. This occasioned a persecution of them, and several Ibid.
were executed on that account. Their intelligence with Glyndwr is very evident
from the favor he showed the order on the taking of Cardiff, in the year 1402;
when he burnt the whole town, excepting the street inhabited by the Franciscans
Idem, 313.
.

THE king returned without effecting any material action; for, on his approach,
Owen retired among the Snowdon hills Holinshed, 519.
.

THE proclamation for assembling the forces for this expedition, was dated on
the 19th of September, from Northampton, and addressed to the lieutenants of
Warwickshire, Leicester, and eight other counties; in which all persons capable
of bearing arms, within their jurisdiction, were directed to array themselves,
and be ready to march to such place as his majesty directed; who acquaints the
lieutenants, that he should lie at Coventry on his road to Wales the Monday
following Rymer's Foedera, viii. 159.
.

ON the same day he issued out an order to the bailifss and good people of
Shrewsbury, SHREWSBURY SECURED BY HENRY:
to take proper steps to secure that important place; and that they oblige all
the Welsh resident in the town, to give security for their loyal behavior; and
in case of refusal, to commit them to prison Idem, 160.
.

ON the eighth of November in the same year, WHO GRANTS OWEN'S ESTATES TO THE
EARL OF SOMERSET;
he made a grant of all the estates of Glyndwr, in North and South Wales, to
his brother John earl of Somerset Idem, 163.
; an act as weak as it was irritating: for Owen was so far from being in any
danger of being dispossessed of them, that at this very time he was growing
more powerful by the accession of new forces. It is remarkable, that his
revenue in money at this period did not exceed three hundred marks; which
showed that his rents in kind must have been very considerable.

BUT the last public act of this year was conciliating. AND OZERRS PARDON TO
THE WELSH.
The king made one endeavor to bring back the Welsh to their allegiance by
fair means; and for that end issued a proclamation, on the 30th of November,
offering to take under his protection all that would resort to the city of
Chester, and there make their submission to his son Henry prince of Wales;
PRINCE HENRY FIRST APPEARS.
after which they should be at liberty to return to their respective homes
Rymer, viii. 167.
. Henry was at that time but twelve years of age; so early was he initiated
into state affairs; so early appeared those sparks of genius, which shone
afterward with such brilliancy.

1401

THE first half of this year passed without any memorable action. OWEN AUGMENTS
HIS FORCES.
Owen was busied in augmenting his forces; he made considerable levies in
Wales; and received continual addition to his strength, by the great resort of
his countrymen of all orders, who had gone into England for the sake of
education, or to gain a livelihood by different occupations.

THE state of Henry's affairs, STATE OF HENEY'S AFFAIRS AT THIS TIME.
in respect to the European monarchs, the badness of his title to the crown of
England, and the repentance of several of the great men for their disloyalty to
their late prince, were circumstances highly in favor of Glyndwr.

CHARLES VI. of France, father-in-law to the unhappy Richard, prepared to
revenge his deposal and murder. The confusion of his own affairs, luckily for
Henry, prevented the resentment of the French monarch. He contented himself
with receiving back, his daughter Isabel, and her paraphernalia: and Henry
gladly renewed a truce with him for thirty years.

THE Scots taking advantage of his situation, threatened him with invasion.
This made it dangerous for him to engage in a distant war, and obliged him to
continue for a considerable time in the central parts of his dominion, to act
according to the necessity of events. In respect to the Welsh, he contented
himself with issuing out pardons Rymer, viii. 181, 182.
, (at the instance of prince Henry,) to all that had appeared in arms in the
counties of Caernarvon, Anglesey, and Flint, and the people of Denbigh and
Merioneth; HENRY OFFERS NEW PARDONS.
to the inhabitants of Chirkland, Bromfield, and Yale; to the hundred of
Oswestry; and to those of Ellesmere and Whittington; which I find were then
reckoned parts of Wales. Owen himleif, Rice ap Tudor, William ap Tudor, and all
such as were in actual custody, or such who should continue in arms, were
excepted. The first pardon was given out the 10th of May, the latest, the 5th
of June, and, as will appear, with some effect.

GLYNDWR's fortune and interest lay, as was before mentioned, both in North and
in South Wales. This summer he marched with a hundred and twenty men of arms,
and, with great policy, OWEN POSTS HIMSELF ON PLINLIMMON.
posted himself on Plinlimmon hill, a lofty mountain, the limits of
Cardiganshire and Montgomeryshire, admirably adapted for receiving succors
from his vassals and friends in each part of the principality. From hence his
followers made plundering excursions, and were the terror of all that declined
espousing his cause. The county of Montgomery suffered greatly. PLUNDERS
MONTGOMERY.
He sacked the capital town Leland Itin. v. 4.
, burnt the suburbs of Pool, and ravaged all the borders. He destroyed the abbey
of Comhere in Radnorshire; took the castle of Radnor, and caused the whole
garrison, to the number of threescore, BEHEADS SIXTY MEN.
to be beheaded on the brink of the castle-yard Ibid.
. The provocation to this piece of cruelty does not appear.

THE Flemings, inhabitants of Ross, Pembroke, and Cardiganshire, suffered so
greatly from Glyndwr, that they determined to attempt to remove so troublesome
a neighbor. SURPRISED;
They assembled a body of fifteen hundred men, and made so expeditious a march,
as to surround Owen and his forces, at a place called Mynydd Hyddgant, before
he had any notice of their approach. They hemmed him in on every side; and,
notwithstanding he could make no retreat without great disadvantage, he made a
long; and manful defense. At length, finding it impossible to subsist in that
place, he determined to cut a passage through the enemy, or perish in the
attempt. YET DEFEATS THE ENEMY.
He knew that neither he nor his men were to expect any mercy; so, actuated by
despair, they fell furiously on the Flemings, and, after a strong dispute,
flung them into great disorder; which Owen taking advantage of, redoubled his
attack, and at length put them to night, leaving two hundred of their party
dead on the spot.

THIS victory added greatly to the reputation of Glyndwr. Multitudes resorted
to his standard, and contributed to make him a most formidable enemy.

HENRY, alarmed at his successes, marched a second time in person. HENRY'S
SECOND MARCH.
He entered Wales with a great army about the beginning of June Vita R. II. 174.
, destroyed the abbey of Strathfleur in Cardiganshire, and ravaged the country;
but was obliged to make a disgraceful retreat, after his forces had suffered
greatly by famine, and the great fatigues they continually underwent.

THE monk of Evesham Vita R. ii. 174
relates an instance of paternal affection, much to the honor of our country. A
Welshman, having made a rash promise to the king to betray Glyndwr, refused
afterward to perform it; and, eagerly stretching out his neck to the headsman,
told him to strike, for that he had two sons at that time in the service of his
chieftain; therefore would on no account reveal his councils, which would prove
so penal to them.

IT is probable, CORRUPTS SOME OF OWEN'S FRIENDS.
that during this expedition Henry found means to corrupt the fidelity of
several of the friends of Glyndwr; for we find a free pardon granted to William
ap Tudor, (a gentleman who had been excepted in the pardon of last year) and to
thirty-one principal persons of the country. This is dated from Westminster on
the 8th of July Rymer, viii. 209.
.

THIS defection seemed to have very little effect on the spirit of Glyndwr. He
acquired new friends, and such addition of strength, that the king resolved to
go again in person against him. He issued out his orders to the lieutenants of
Devonshire, and one and twenty other counties, to repair with their forces to
Worcester Ibid, 225.
on the first of October. Our old historians are silent about the event of this
expedition; but Mr. Carte says, that it was unfortunate as the former. MAKES A
THIRD EXPEDITION.
Thus concluded the transactions of this year.

1402.

THIS year was ushered in with a comet, A COMET.
or blazing-star; which the bards interpreted as an omen favorable to the
cause of Glyndwr. It served to infuse spirit into the minds of a superstitious
people: the first success of their chieftain confirmed their belief, and gave
new vigor to their actions.

LORD GRAY was the first that felt the effects of Owen's power. That nobleman,
strongly attached to Henry, and impatient of the injuries which he and his
friends received from Glyndwr, raised a considerable army; encountered him; was
defeated, and made prisoner. OWEN DEFEATS LORD GRAY.
Historians differ about the scene of action. The Welsh lay it on the banks of
the Fyrnwy, in the county of Montgomery. The English say that it was in the
neighborhood of Ruthyn; and that Owen advancing toward the castle with a party
of men, drew his incautious rival into the field, where he fell into an ambush,
and was taken, and carried fast bound into confinement, amidst the savage
fastnesses of the Snowdon hills Vita Ricardi II. 178.
. This relation seems probable, not only as the castle of Ruthyn was the chief
seat of lord Gray, but a fortress of such strength as to baffle all attempts of
Glyndwr, in the infancy of his insurrection, without having recourse to
stratagem.

LORD GRAY remained for a long time in captivity, MAKES HIM PAY A GREAT RANSOM
nor did he gain his liberty till he paid to him the vast sum of ten thousand
marks. He was such a personal favorite with the king, who, pitying the severity
with which he was treated, and admiring the firmness with which he resisted the
offers of Glyndwr to make him swerve from his loyalty, that his majesty issued
out a special commission, dated the 10th of October in this year, empowering
Sir William de Roos, Sir Richard de Gray, Sir William de Willughby, Sir William
de Zouch, John Henry, William Vans, John Lee, John Longford, Thomas Pain, and
John Elnstow, to treat with Owen and his council about the ransom. It was
agreed to pay six thousand marks on the day of St. Martin Rymer, viii. 279.
following, and give, as hostages for the payment of the remainder, his eldest
son, and some other persons. And, in order to raise the money, Henry gave
license to Robert Braybrook Dagdale's Baron. i. 717.
bishop of London, and two others, feoffees of diverse lordships for lord Gray,
to sell the lordship of Herteleigh in Kent. He also absolved him for six years
from the forfeiture of two-thirds of the profits of his Irish estates, usually
exacted from such who were non-resident in that kingdom.

AFTER this he was set at liberty, and he and his tenants suffered to enjoy
their property without molestation. It is probable, that Owen engaged his
lordship to observe a neutrality, as another term of redemption. Lord Gray
seemed likewise to think it necessary to secure both his people and himself by
an alliance with Owen; for no sooner was he released, than he married Jane, AND
MARRY ONE OF HIS DAUGHTERS.
third daughter of the furious chieftain. He had no issue by this lady. The
match was probably compulsive; at best, political. Some of the English
historians pretend that he died in captivity: but that he obtained his liberty,
and long survived this treaty, is evident: for in 1409, he was ordered by Henry
to his estates, to repel the ravages his father-in-law made on the borders. He
even lived to serve in the French wars in the reign of Henry V. and his
successor, and died in the year 1440 Collins's Peerage, ii. 382.
.

OWEN, after securing this potent enemy, began to give a free rein to his
revenge; to punish such of his countrymen whom he considered as traitors to the
generous cause of freedom, by an unnatural adherence to the English, whose yoke
they had borne for such a length of time.

HE burnt the houses of Kevn y fan, and Cesail-gyfarch, belonging to Jevan ap
Meredyth, a partizan of the house of Lancaster; and to whom, and Meredyth ap
Hwlkin Llwyd of Glyn-l^ivon was entrusted (under an English captain) the castle
of Caernarvon. This place was so closely blocked up by the friends of Glyndwr,
that Jevan happening to die there at that time, it was found necessary to carry
his corpse by sea, in order to inter it in the parishchurch of Penmorva, on the
other side of the county Hist. Gwedir. 53.
.

HOWEL SELE of Nannau in Merionethshire, STORY OR HOWEL SELE.
first cousin to Owen, had a harder fate. He likewise was an adherent to the
house of Lancaster. Owen and this chieftain had been long at variance. I have
been informed, that the abbot of Kymmer, near Dolgellu, in hopes of reconciling
them, brought them together, and to all appearance effected his charitable
design. While they were walking out, Owen observed a do feeding, and told
Howel, who was reckoned the best archer of his days, that there was a fine mark
for him. Howel bent his bow, and, pretending to aim at the do, suddenly turned
and discharged the arrow full at the breast of Glyndwr, who fortunately had
armor beneath his clothes, so received no hurt. Enraged at this treachery, he
seized on Sole, burnt his house, and hurried him away from the place; nor could
ever any one learn how he was disposed of: till, forty years after, the
skeleton of a large man, such as Howel, was discovered in the hollow of a great
oak, in which Owen was supposed to have immured him in reward of his persidy.
The ruins of the old house are to be seen in Nannau park, a mere compost of
cinders and ashes.

IT must be observed, that when Owen was carrying him away, his relation
Gryffydd ap Gwyn, of Ganllwyd in Ardudwy, attempted his rescue, but was
defeated with the loss of numbers of his men, and of his houses of Berthlwyd
and Cesn Coch, which were burnt to ashes.

IT was about this period that Owen wreaked his revenge on the ecclesiastics
who had favored the cause of the English. BURNS ST. AS^PH AND BANGOR.
His conduct in this instance fe^rs indefensible, for he paid no regard to the
most sacred edifices, but sacrilegiously destroyed the cathedrals of Bangor and
St. Asaph, with the episcopal palace, and the canons houses belonging to the
last. He vented, in a particular manner, his resentment against the last; as
the bishop, John Trevor, received his preferment from Richard, OF BISHOP TREVOR.
yet was so disloyal as to pronounce against his unfortunate master the
sentence of deposition, in favor of the usurping Henry; and afterward to
accept an embassy to the court of Spain, to justify Bolingbroke's proceedings
to the reigning prince.

HENRY considered him as a sufferer in his cause; therefore gave power to the
bishops of Hereford, Voltorno, and Bangor, to suffer him to hold in commendam
the living of Meivod, with the chapels of Pool and Kegidva, or Guilsfield, in
order to support his dignity during the ravage of his diocese Rymer,
viii.222.246; the bishop of Voltorno probably acted as the pope's legate.
.

TREVOR returned to England about the time of the destruction of his cathedral.
Two years after this, he revolted from Henry, and joined with Glyndwr, to whom
he adhered the rest of his days. He appeared in arms with him in the year 1409
Rymer, viii. 588.
. In the year following, on the decline of Owen's affairs, he retired to Paris,
died, and was buried in the chapel of the infirmary of the abbey de St. Victoire
there; and the following epitaph inscribed to his memory: Hic jacet Reverendus
in CHRISTO Pater Jobannes Episcopus Asaphensis in Wallia, qui obiit A. D. 1410.
Die Veneris x mensis Aprilis; cujus anima feliciter requieseat in pace. Amen.

GLYNDWR was pleased to confirm Trevor in his see, OWEN CONFIRMS HIM IN HIS SEE;
on returning to his allegiance; but deposed from that of Bangor Willi^'s
Bangor, 84.
Richard Young, AND DEPOSES THE BISHOP OF BANGOR.
for his adherence to the usurper, and kept him in close confinement. Owen also
appointed in his room Llewelyn, or, as some call him, Lewis Bifort; whose name
is mentioned in 1406, among the chief of the inhabitants fined or outlawed on
account of Glyndwr's insurrection in the isle of Anglesey. He afterward joined
with the earl of Northumberland and lord Bardolph, and was taken prisoner in
the castle of Bramham Moor, in February 1407-8, when those two noblemen were
slain: but the bishop's life was spared, as he was found unarmed Goodwin, 618.
.

HENRY was alarmed at the successes of Glyndwr, and resolved to march in person
against him once more. He issued out w^ts Rymer, viii. 264.
to the lieutenants of Nottingham and Derby, and to those of thirty two other
counties, dated from the castle of B. (...), June 5th; in which he requires
them to assemble the forces of their respective jurisdictions, and to attend
him at Lichfield on the 7th of July, in order to suppress this dangerous revolt.

BEFORE the king could assemble his forces, news arrived of the great victory
which Glyndwr obtained, on the 22d of June, GAINS A GREAT VICTORY AT PILLETH.
over Sir Edmund Mortimer. Owen, after the defeat of lord Gray, pursued his
resentment against all the chieftains unfavorable to his designs; advanced with
his army toward Herefordshire, and the borders of South Wales; and carried
fire and sword through the lands of his opponents. None suffered so severely as
the vassals and tenants of Edward Mortimer earl of March, a child of ten years
of age, who, with his brother Roger, was in the custody of the king at that
time. Henry was very sensible of the just title this child had to the crown,
being desended from Lionel duke of Clarence, third son to Edward III. His title
had even been acknowleged in parliament. This increased his majesty's
apprehensions, and made him consider the misfortunes of that family the
strengthening of his own throne.

SIR EDMUND MORTIMER, uncle to this youth, unable any longer to bear the
depredations of Owen, collected a large body of his nephew's tenants and
retainers out of the county of Hereford, and the adjacent parts, particularly
from Melienydd in Radnorshire, and with these marched against the invader. A
bloody action ensued on Bryn-glas, a mountain near Pilleth, a little south-west
of Knighton, in Radnorshire. Victory declared in favor of our countryman. Some
writers assert, that the archers of Mortimer's army bent their bows against
their own party Stow, 327.
. Another says Vita Ricardi II. 178.
, that March's Welsh tenants took to flight at the first onset, and occasioned
the defeat. The loss chiefly fell on the people of Herefordshire. Eleven
hundred fell on the side of Mortimer. The shameful villainy used by the
Welshwomen toward the dead carcasses, says Holinshed, was such as honest ears
would be ashamed to hear, and continent toongs to speak thereof. The dead
bodies might not be buried, without great sums of money given for liberty to
conveie them away Holinshed, 520; who relates it from Walsingham. Those who
wish to read the horrid tale, may consult the last, p. 557. Camdeni Script.
Angl.
.

SHAKESPEARE flings a fine horror over this dreadful tale, in relating,

When, all athwart there came
A post from Wales laden with heavy news;
Whose worst was, that the noble Mortimir,
Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight
Against the irregular and wild Glendower,
Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken;
A thousand of his people butchered,
Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse,
Sach beastly, shameless transformation
By those Welshwomen done, as may not be,
Without much shame, re-told or spoken of.
I WISH I could exculpate my countrywomen from this heavy charge. It originates
from Thomas de Walsmgham, an historian who, it must be confessed, wrote within
forty years of this event. To his authority I beg leave to oppose that of
another ancient writer, who ascribes these barbarities to a follower of
Glyndwr, one Rees a Gyrch Vita Ricardi, 175.
. I flatter myself that this was the case; for, had it been otherwise, it would
have been totally unnecessary to discourage the English, by an express law
Statute 4th Henry IV. c. 34.
, from marrying with such furies as the Welshwomen were represented to have
been.

MANY historians pretend, that the young earl of March was present at this
defeat; was made prisoner; and, to ensure his allegiance, obliged to marry a
daughter of Glyndwr. But at this time he endured another species of confinement
at Windsor: his uncle commanded the forces of the family, TAKES PRISONER SIR
EDMUND MORTIMER
and lost his liberty in the battle. Great instances were made to Henry for
leave to ransom him; but the jealous king, rejoicing in the misfortunes of this
rival house, suffered him to continue in the power of his enemy; alleging, that
Sir Edmund had treacherously flung himself into the hands of Glyndwr.

AFTER this victory, Glyndwr received from all parts of Wales accession of
strength. Notwithstanding Henry was indifferent about the fate of the
Mortimers, his own safety now required him to act with vigor. The design of
assembling his army at Lichfield was laid aside. New writs were issued out,
dated the 31st of July. It was resolved to distract the Welsh by three
invasions from different quarters. The rendevous of the first army was to be at
Shrewshury, to be commanded by the king in person; the second at Hereford, to
be assembled by Edmund earl of Stafford, Richard earl of Warwick, and the lords
Gray, Alergavenny, Audeley, and Berkly; and the third, under the conduct of
prince Henry, at Chester. The forces were to be assembled at each place by the
27th of August Rymer, viii. 271.
.

OWEN, assured that these preparations could not take effect till a certain
time, gave loose to his resentment, in the beginning of August, against the
inhabitants of Glamorganshire, who had sided with the English. RAVAGES
GLAMORGANSHIRE.
He marched into that county, ravaged it on all parts; and, after burning the
bishop's castle and the archdeacon's house Willis's Llandaff, 30, 31.
at Llandaff, in the same inroad he likewise burnt Cardiff and Abergavenny; and
then returned to make head against the English.

THE Scots, at this time, took advantage of the commotions of the Welsh; and,
under the command of the great Douglas, invaded England with a body of twelve
or thirteen thousand men. It is almost certain, that they acted in concert with
Glyndwr. Both nations were united in a common hatred of the English. Both had
felt the weight of their power. The Scots meditated their inroad at the very
time that Henry had drawn his forces to the borders of Wales, and, as they
hoped, left the northern borders unguarded. Henry had intelligence, that it was
to take place on the assumption of the blessed Virgin, or the 15th of August;
and, in order to defeat it, directed the lieutenant of the county of Lincoln to
hasten toward the north, with all the men he could raise.

HENRY, HENRY'S FOURTH MARCH.
during this time, proceeded on his expedition against the Welsh. It does not
appear whether the army under his son, and that under the earl of Arundel (on
whom the command of the second army was bestowed) made separate diversions into
different parts of the country in his favor; or whether he united their forces
with his own. The event of his invasion was very unfortunate. Glyndwr, who had
too much prudence to hazard a battle against so superior an army, retired to
the fastnesses of the mountains; and drove away the cattle, and destroyed every
means the English had of subsistence. The season proved uncommonly bad; for the
very elements seem to have warred against them. UNSUCCESSFUL.
A continued course of storms and rains, with the continual watching against an
enemy ever hovering over them, and ready to take every occasion of falling on
them from the heights, wasted the army with sickness and fatigue; and obliged
the king once more to make a most inglorious retreat.

THE English, OWEN REPUTED A MAGICIAN.
willing to cover their shame, attributed the cause of their disgrace to the
incantations of the British chieftain; 'who,' as an old historian expresses,
through art magike (as was thought) caused such foul weather of winds,
tempest, rain, snow, and hail, to be raised for the annoiance of the king's
army, that the like had not been heard of. Perhaps Glyndwr, as well to infuse
terror into his foes, as to give his people a more exalted notion of him, might
politically insinuate his skill in spells and charms, that they might suppose
him aided by more than mortal power. This species of credulity was not only
strong at this time, but even continued to more enlightened days.

OWEN, by the mouth of Shakespeare, speaks thus of his intercourse with the
tribe of spints, and of his skill in the mystic arts of divination:

Where is he living, clipped in with the sea
That chides the banks of England, Wales, or Scotland,
Who calls me pupil, or has read to me?
And bring him out, that is but woman's son,
Can trace me in the tedious ways of art,
Or hold me pace in deep experiments.
I can call spirits from the vasty deep!
THE poet, on this occasion, plays finely with the warmth of Glyndwr; and draws
from him that characteristic spirit of our country, which is nobly prompt to
rise on the appearance, or sometimes even on the very apprehension of insult.

HENRY quickly received news from the north, that served to alleviate the ill
success of his invasion. The earl of Northumberland, and other northern barons,
had assembled their forces to oppose the Scots, then on their return home;
overtook them on Holyrood-day, or the 15th of September, BATTLE OF HOMELDON:
on Homeldon hill near Wooler, and gained over them a complete victory. Numbers
of the Scotch nobility were slain in the fight; and numbers taken, among whom
was their gallant commander Archibald earl or Douglas, styled by his countrymen
Tyneman, from the loss of men that attended him in all his conflicts.

THIS battle was productive of great events; and proved in the end the
destruction of the Percy family. It was usual for the prisoners to fall to the
share of the victors; and that each person who was fortunate or brave enough to
make a captive, should receive the reward of his valor, by having liberty to
ransom him, according to his rank or abilities. ITS CONSEQUENCES.
Henry Percy surnamed Hotspur, had himself, by the fortune of war, been made
prisoner by the Scots, and was redeemed according to the ancient custom of
arms. The victors at this time expected and clamed the same right; but Henry,
wishing to detain, as hostages for the peaceable conduct of the Scottish
nation, these illustrious captives, sent directions to the earl of
Northumberland, that he should by no means set them at liberty; but that he
should deliver them to him. Henry softened this demand by rewarding
Northumberland with a considerable grant of lands on the borders of Scotland
Rymer, viii. 289.
; and parliament even sent him a letter of thanks for his good services. THE
PERCIES DISCONTENTED;
Notwithstanding this, the Percies were greatly dissatisfied. Whether their
high spirit resented the invasion of the ancient title of victors to their
prisoners; or whether they were seized with remorse for their disloyalty to
their former master; or whether they were actuated by the ambition of becoming
independent; or whether all these causes might not cooperate, is not very
certain; yet, from this time, they formed their design of flinging off their
allegiance to Henry.

A GREAT discontent with his government at this period began to seize the
nation. The affection for the murdered Richard revived. So willing were the
people to imagine him still alive, that the many reports invented on that
subject were greedily swallowed; and a proneness to revolt almost generally
appeared.

THE first step taken by the Percies, was the release of the Scottish prisoners
without ransom. RELEASE THEIR PRISONERS.
This gained the heart of Douglas; who went home, raised a body of men, and
joined in the enterprise.

SIR EDMUND MORTIMER, GLYNDWR SETS MORTIMER AT LIBERTY.
from the time of his defeat, was treated with the utmost humanity and respect.
Glyndwr, politically determined to make use of this important prisoner as an
instrument of his ambition, reminded him of the right of his, house to the
crown of England, and flattered him with the hopes of restoring it to the
throne Vita Ricardi II. 179.
of his ancestors. The Percies, to whom he was allied, had made frequent
instances to Henry for his ransom, who, on false and injurious pretenses,
constantly refused attention to their request; notwithstanding, he never rested
till he had procured the enlargement of his favorite, lord Gray.

THE Percies now began to extend their views; and to form a confederacy that
promised fair to effect another revolution. They entered into an alliance with
Glyndwr; obtained the release of Mortimer; and, like the famous triumvirate of
Rome, determined to divide the empire between them.

THEIR place of meeting, CONSPIRACY OF THE PERCIES:
the Mutina of these heroes, was at the house of David Daron, or of Aberdaron,
dean of Bangor Willis's Bangor, 122.
, son of Evan ap Dafydd ap Gryffydd, descended from Caradoc ap Jestyn, a prince
of Wales. He was a man of interest and wealth; entered strongly into their
views; and in consequence, in the year 1406, was outlawed for his attachment to
them.

HERE the three chieftains formed the division of Britain. UNITE WITH GLYNDWR.
Sir Edmund Mortimer, in behalf of his nephew the earl of March, took all the
country from the Trent and Seven to the eastern and southern limits of the
island; Northumberland was to have all the counties north of the Trent; and
Glyndwr every thing that lay beyond the Severn westward.

IT was on this occasion that Owen, to animate his countrymen, called up the
ancient prophecy, which predicted the destruction of Henry, under the name of
the Moldwarp, cursed of GOD'S own mouth. Himself he styled the dragon; a name
he assumed in imitatation of Uther, whose victories over the Saxons were
foretold by the appearance of a star with a dragon beneath; which Uther used as
his badge; and on that account it became a favorite one with the Welsh. On
Percy he bestowed the title of lion, from the crest of the family; on Mortimer,
that of the wolf, probably from a similar reason. And these three were to
divide the realm between them.

GLYNDWR was now in the meridian of his glory. CONCENTION OF THE ESTATES OF
WALES.
He assembled the estates of Wales at Machynlleth, a town of Montgomeryshire:
he caused there his title to the principality to be acknowleged, and was
formally crowned.

AT this meeting he narrowly escaped assassination. DAVID GAM CONSPIRES AGAINST
OWEN.
Among the chieftains, who appeared to support his title, came a gentleman of
Brecknockshire, David Gam, or the one-eyed; a man, says Mr. Carte ii. 654.
, who held his estate of the honor of Hereford, who had long been in the
service of Bolingbrook, and was firmly attached to his interest.
Notwithstanding he had married a sister of Glyndwr, yet such a furious hatred
had he conceived to his cause, that he appeared at the assembly with the secret
and treacherous resolution of murdering his prince and brother-in-law. Carte
says, that he was instigated to it by Henry; but gives no authority for his
assertion. Party-zeal, or hopes of reward, probably determined him to so
nefarious a deed, He was a fit instrument for the purpose: a man of unshaken
courage; which was afterward put to the proof in the following reign, at the
battle of Azincourt. This was the gentleman who was sent to explore the numbers
of the enemy before the action; and who informed the king, that there were
enough to kill, enough to be taken prisoners, and enough to run away. In the
battle, David, his son-in-law Roger Vychan, and his relation Waltar Llwyd,
rescued the king, when environed with his foes. They saved his life at the
expense of their own, and fell with many mortal wounds. The king, after the
victory, approached the place where they lay weltering in their blood; and, in
the moment of death, bestowed on them the only reward of their valor which he
could confer in that sad time, the honor of knighthood.

BUT to return to the subject immediately under consideration. DETECTED
The plot of David against Glyndwr was discovered. He was arrested and
imprisoned; and would have met with his merited punishment, if he had not been
saved by the intercession of Owen's best friends and warmest partisans Wynne's
Hist. Wales, 321.
. He was pardoned on a solemn promise of attachment to the cause of Glyndwr and
his country. It appears, that our chieftain did not choose to rely on his
promise; but kept him in close confinement till the year 1412, as will appear
in the transaction of that period.

GLYNDWR, as usual, wreaked his vengeance on the lands and dependents of Dafydd
Gam; entered his country, and burnt his house; and, while it was burning,
calling one of David's tenants, spoke thus merrily to him in verse; which shows
the general turn of our people to the rhyming art:

O gweli di wr coch Came
In ymofyn y Gyrnigwen:
Dywed ei bod hi tan y lan
A nod y glo ar ei phen.
1403.

PREPARATIONS were made with great vigor by all parties. HOTSPUR MARCHES TO
SHREWSBURY.
Hotspur, leaving his father ill at Berwick, marched with his forces from the
north; and, passing through Cheshire, a county ever affectionate to Richard,
was joined there by a numerous party. Percy sent to Owen, to desire he would
meet him; but our countryman declined to comply: howsoever, numbers of the
Welsh joined Hotspur, and marched with him to Lichfield, carrying the stag, the
badge of the late king, as a party distinction. In that city he published his
reasons for taking arms against Henry, whom the family had so lately placed on
the throne Leland Collect. ii. 312.
. From hence he led his army toward Shrewshury; probably because he found
himself too weak to attack the usurper; for it seems as if his intention had
been to have met him on his march, had Glyndwr joined him with his whole force.
Glyndwr, on the other hand, had formed a considerable army in Wales; and Sir
Edmund Mortimer had raised the vassals of his nephew.

IN the month of March, Henry gave a strong proof of the high opinion he had of
his son Henry of Monmouth, afterward king of England, at this time only
fifteen years of age; for by writ, dated from Westminster the 7th of that
month, he appoints him his lieutenant for Wales Rymer, viii. 291.
and all the adjacent counties, with full powers to raise men, and to act
against the insurgents as he should think proper: to enquire into all treasons;
to examine who supplied the rebels with arms or provisions; and to grant pardon
to all who would lay down their arms, and give security for their peaceful
behavior.

HAVING thus provided, as he imagined, for the security of the borders of
England on the side of Wales, he began to consider of his march against the
Percies. But hearing that Glyndwr Idem, 304.
, by reason of want of provisions, was preparing to make an inroad into the
borders, issued orders from Westminster, dated June 12th, to the lieutenant of
Gloucestershire Idem, 314.
, to prepare to repel the invasion, with forces he should assemble for that
purpose. Henry then made a most expeditious march to Burton upon Trent, where
we find him on the 16th, on his way against the northern rebels Rymer.
. HENRY GOES TO MEET HIM.
Here he understood that Percy, with his army, had advanced toward Shrewshury,
and was preparing to effect a junction with the forces of Glyndwr and Mortimer.
He well knew the importance of preventing it from taking place; and directed
his march toward that town, as is said, by the advice of the earl of Dunbar, a
Scottish nobleman, who had espoused his cause. The dispatch with which the king
executed this resolution, saved his crown. Glyndwr, who had assembled his
forces at Oswestry, had sent off only his first division, amounting to four
thousand men, who behaved with spirit in the day of action Holinshed, 523.
; in which fell his brother-in-law Sir Jenkin Hanmer Collins's Baronets, ii.
236. ed. 1720.
. Henry prevented him from proceeding with the rest, by posting himself between
Glyndwr and Shrewsbury, and at the critical time that the northern rebels were
about to scale the walls. Percy quitted the attempt; and, after rejecting the
offer of peace, attacked the royal army at Battlefield, three miles from the
place. PERCY DEFBATED AND SLAIN.
He behaved with the spirit worthy of his name; fell valiantly, and with him
the hopes of his party. This action happened on the 21st of June. Glyndwr had
the mortification of being obliged to remain all the time inactive, at the head
of twelve thousand men, at Oswestry. GLYNDWR CONTINUES AT OSWESTRY.
The Welsh historians pass an unjust censure on him for his conduct on this
occasion, and blame him for what, it seems, he could not effect. His great
oversight appears to me to have been the neglect of attacking Henry immediately
after the battle, when the royal forces had sustained a vast loss, and were
overcome with fatigue; when his own followers, and the remains of the northern
troops, would have formed an army nearly double to that of the king; when
Northumberland, now recovered from his illness, was in full march toward him,
the army of Mortimer entire, that of the king constrained to go northward.
Glyndwr carried on a marauding war, and plundered the now defenseless marches.
The king returned successful from the north to the borders of Wales, determined
to chastise the insurgents; but was obliged to desist from his enterprise, for
want of money to pay his troops, and provisions to subsist them. He did propose
to remedy the first, by seizing on the superfluous wealth of the prelates; but
was prevented by the spirit of the archbishop of Canterbury, who boldly
declared, that none of his province should be spoiled on any account; which
frustrated Henry's intent on Glyndwr. The prelate was afterward better
advised, and made a grant of the tenth toward the king's necessary charges
Helinshed, 524.


NOTHING more was done this year than the securing the Welsh castles, HANRY
SECURES THE WELEN CASTLES.
and placing over them persons of known fidelity. The king dates his writ from
Worcester, the 8th of September; and, addressing it to Guy Mohun bishop of St.
David, at that time keeper of the privy seal, and treasurer of England, commits
to him the custody of the castle of Llangadyn; that of Llanyndovery to John
Touchet lord Audley; Laghern to Sir Henry le Scrope; Crickhowel to John
Pauncefort; Tretour to James Berkley; Ahergavenny and Harald Ewyas to Sir
William Beauchamp; Goderych to Sir Thomas Nevil de Furnivale; Erdesley to Sir
Nicholas Montgomery; Carleon and Usk to Sir Edward Charlton of Powys;
Caerph^^lli and Gwialacy to Constantia lady Despenser; Menerbere to Sir John
Cornwall; Pain Castle and Royl to Thomas earl of Warwick; Huntyngdon to Anne
countess of Stafford; Lynhales and Dorston to Sir Walter Fitz-Walter; Stepulton
to John Brian baron of Bursord; Brawpton to Brian de Brampton; and to Sir John
Chandos the castle of Snowdon Rymer, viii. 328.
.

THE last public act relating to the insurrections of die marches, was to
empower the prince of Wales to treat with certain Cheshire Idem, 333.
gentlemen about their fines, for appearing in arms in the battle of Shrowshury.

ON the 14th and 15th of the same month, he gives power to William Beauchamp to
pardon certain of the vassals on his lands of Abergavenny and Ewyas Harald, who
had appeared in arms in behalf of Glyndwr; and to the famous Sir John
Oldcastle, John ap Henry, and John Fairsord, clerk, to pardon the inhabitants
of Brecknock, Built, Cancresselly, Hay, Glynbough, and Dynas; to receive their
weapons; and to oblige them to take an oath of fidelity. In this the king only
secures their persons, but reserves to himself their forfeited lands, goods,
and chattels. The first is dated from Hereford; the other from Devenok Idem,
331. Idem.
.

1404.

NOTWITHSTANDING the French king had consented, CONDUCT OF THE FRENCH.
through the necessity of his own affairs, to a truce of thirty years with
Henry, yet he never could be brought to acknowledge his title to the crown. In
his treaties, Charles styles him only notre cousin d'Angleterre Idem.
, or Henry of Lancaster, or our adversary of England, or the successor of the
late king Richard Carte, ii. 656.
. There is all the appearance of a correspondence between Charles and the
English and Welsh insurgents in the last year; and that the expedition toward
Shrewshury, and an invasion of England by the French, were concerted, to
distract the attention of Henry. Their fleets hovered over our coasts under
other pretenses. They even landed in the isle of Wight, and did considerable
damage to the country.

AN open war was daily expected with France. The parliament took the safety of
the king's person into consideration. His household was regulated; and in
particular, it was ordered, that no Frenchman or Welshman should remain about
his majesty's person Parliamentary Hist. ii. 79.
.

THE wisdom of this provision soon became very apparent. GLYNDWR SENDS
AMBASSADORS TO CHARLES VII.
A league, offensive and defensive, was formed between Charles and Owen. Owen
sent his chancellor Griffith Young, doctor of laws, and his kinsman John
Hanmer, ambassadors to the French. Their appointment is dated from Dolgellu, in
a princely style: Datum apud Doleguelii, 10 die mensis Maii, MCCCC. quarto et
principalus nostri quarto; and begins, OWINUS Dei gratia princeps WALLIAe, etc.
Rymer, viii. 356.


CHARLES received them with open arms. The league was signed at Paris on the
14th of June. The persons that acted on the part of Charles were James Bourbon
earl of March, and John bishop of Carnot. LEAGUE CONCLUDED BETWEEN THEM.
Owen's ambassadors signed their part on the 14th of July, in the house of
Ferdinand de Corbey, chancellor of France; several prelates and persons of high
rank attending as witnesses Rymer, viii. 365, 366, 367.
. Glyndwr ratified this treaty on the 12th of. (...) 1405, from his castle of
Lampadarn Idem, 382.
.

THE affairs of Glyndwr bore so prosperous an aspect, that about this time
Trovor bishop of St. Asaph revolted from Henry, and joined with his countryman;
whether actuated by remorse for his dealings with his old master, or tempted by
the hopes of preferment under a new government, is not evident.

OWEN opened the campaign of this year with vigor. He laid waste the country of
his enemies; took several castles, GLYNDWR RETEATS BEFORE THE ENGLISH:
among others, those of Harlech and Aherystwyth. Some he dismantled, and others
he reserved, and garrisoned. He then directed his march into Montgomeryshire,
and fell in with an English army at Mynydd cwm du. They attacked him, slew many
of his men, and obliged him to retreat. He soon repaired this disgrace; for,
collecting his forces again, he pursued the victors with such expedition,
DEFEATS THEM.
that he overtook them at a place called Craig y Dorth, near Monmouth;
defeated, and pursued them to the very gates of every town or castle they had
fled to.

THE English historians mention the defeat of Glyndwr. They inform us, that the
English army was commanded by Richard Beauchamp earl of Warwick, who took the
banner of Glyndwr Dugdale's Baron, i, 243.
; but are silent in respect of the revenge that so immediately followed. The
king undertook nothing this year against Glyndwr. Beauchamp had large
possessions in the county of Monmouth, and found it requisite to raise his
vassals to preserve his country from desolation.

1405.

THIS year opened with an attempt of a very extraordinary nature; nothing less
than to free from their confinement the young earl of March and his brother,
ATTEMPTS TO STEAL AWAY THE EAR OF MARCH.
with the intent of setting up the title of the first first that of Henry, and
to involve the whole kingdom in his quarrel. There were many engaged in the
design. Wales was to have been his asylum, and Glyndwr his protector: such deep
intelligence had he with the dissaffected, even near the seat of the court.
March was kept in close custody at Windsor, a royal residence, amidst guards,
and secured by every precaution that a jealous usurper could invent.
Notwithstanding, a plot was laid. Constance lady Spencer, widow to lord
Spencer, and sister to the duke of York, contrived their deliverance. She
procured false keys, stole away the two youths, and was hastening with them
toward Wales, when they were seized and brought back. The lady was imprisoned.
A severer fate attended the poor smith that made the keys, who was beheaded,
after having both his hands chopped off Holinshed, 527.
.

FORTUNE now began to frown upon Glyndwr. The first experience he had of her
mutability was on the 11th of March: BATTLE OF USKE;
a body of his partisans, to the amount of eight thousand, had assembled out of
Glamorganshire, Uske, Netherwent, and Overwent. As usual, they began their
march with desolating the country; and burnt part of the town of Grosmont, in
the county of Monmouth. Henry prince of Wales was at that time at Heresord,
with the army entrusted to him by his father, ready to open the campaign. He
there received an account of the defeat of these malcontents, by a handful of
men commanded by Sir Gilbert Talbot, joined by Sir William Newport and Sir John
Greindre. He transmitted the account to his father, in a letter written in an
uncommon strain of piety and dutifulness, contradictory to the popular opinion
of his early licentiousness; for at that time he was only seventeen years of
age. He begins with imploring Heaven for its favor toward his father: Je
supply vraiement que DIEU vous montre graciousment pour vous son miracle on
toutes parties, loez soit il en toutes ses ocures. -- Il est bien voirs, que la
victoire n'est pas en le multitude de people mes en la puissance de DIEU.

IT seems that the Welsh forgot the ancient spirit of their country; and
yielded an easy victory to the enemy. Eight hundred or a thousand were stain.
No quarter was given on the occasion, except to one person, un grant chiefteyn
enter eulx. The humanity of young Henry appears to great advantage on this
affair. He tells his father, that he would have sent the prisoner to him, but
that he could not yet ride with any ease (I suppose on account of his wounds)
mes il ne poet chivacher uncore a son aise Rymer, viii. 390.
.

To repair this disaster, Glyndwr instantly sent one of his sons with another
army. They probably were reinforced by the fugitives from the last action. OF
PWLL MELYN.
Another battle was fought on the fifteenth of the same month, at Mynydd y Pwll
Melyn in Brecknockshire, again fatal to the cause of Owen. Fifteen hundred of
his men were slain or taken prisoners: among the last was his son; among the
first his brother Tudor, who resembled Glyndwr so greatly, that a report was
spread of his death, to the great dejection of his countrymen: but, on
examining the dead body, it was found to want a wart over the eye, which
distinguished our chieftain from his brother. According to Carte ii. 665.
, young Henry commanded at this battle.

HOLINSHED 528.
mentions another defeat which the Welsh sustained in the month of May, in
which Gryffydd Young, Owen''s chancellor, was made prisoner. I suspect that the
historian confounds this action with that near Grosmont; but that the
chancellor was the great chieftain there made prisoner, must be a mistake; for
we find him witness, the next year, to a pardon granted by Owen to one Jeven
Goch.

AFTER these defeats, all Glamorganshire submitted to the king, a few faithful
friends only excepted; who, on discovering that Owen was alive, fled and joined
him. It was at this time that he suffered those distresses which the English
attribute to the latter part of his life. During this dispersion of his
friends, he was obliged to seek protection from a few trusty partisans; and
often to conceal himself in caves and desert places. A cavern near the
seaside, in the parish of Llangelynin, in the county of Merioneth, is still
called Ogof Owain, in which he was secretly supported by Ednyfed ap Aaron, of
the tribe of Ednowain ap Bradwen.

THE bard Jolo Goch deplores his absence; and calls him home from different
parts of the globe, to re-possess himself of his principality. He in one place
supposes him to be at Rome, and entreats him to return laden with tokens from
St. Peter.

ABOUT this time the earl of Northumberland began another conspiracy; which was
detected, and several of his adherents were executed. Among others, one Sir
John Griffith, a Welsh knight; which makes it probable, that the earl and
Glyndwr still acted in concert. The king, by his activity, quickly frustrated
this plot; seized on the earl's castles, and obliged him to fly into Scotland
for protection. With him fled the bishops of St. Asaph and Bangor Ferdun.
Scotichronicon. ii, 441.
, and the abbot of Welbeck. The two first were probably placed by Glyndwr about
the earl, to consult the proper measures for the successful execution of their
designs.

HENRY then returned, HENRY MARCHRS AGAIN INTO WALES
and marched into Wales with an army of 37,000 men. The same ill-fortune
attended him in this as in former expeditions. The weather proved so bad, that
he was obliged to make a hasty retreat to Worcester, aggravated with the loss
of fifty of his carriages Walsingham, 566.
. Shakespeare makes our chieftain thus vaunt the frequent defeats of his
antagonist, even before the battle of Shrewshury:

Three times has Henry Bolingbreke made head
Against my power; thrice from the banks of Wye,
And sandy-bottom'd Severn, have I sent
Him bootless home, and weather-beaten bask.
NOTWITHSTANDING the ill success of the king, the affairs of Owen would, in all
probability, have found a sad change, had not, at this very period, his ally
Charles VI. FEENCH ASSIST OWEK.
sent him a most seasonable assistance; which, for a considerable time,
prolonged the war, and delayed his total ruin. A considerable armament was made
in the ports of France. It was planned by the duke of Orleans Histoire et regue
de Charles VI. tom. iv. 190.
, regent of France during the insanity of Charles. The invasion was to have
taken place the preceding year; and (as Rapin observes) seems to have been
intended to coincide with the insurrection of Scroope archbishop of York, and
other noblemen in the north. Their attempt proved fatal to them. But the sleet,
consisting of a hundred and forty ships, sailed from Breast the latter end of
June, with an army of twelve thousand (...). According to the historian of this
reign, Mademoiselle de Lassan Ibid.
, there were among them eight hundred men at arms, six hundred cross-bows, and
twelve hundred foot-soldiers, all chosen troops.

OUR historians say, that they were commanded by the Marechal de Montmorency;
but I cannot discover that any of that great houss was engaged in the
expedition. The fleet was under the command of Renaud de Try, lord of
Serisontaine, admiral of France; the land, forces under that of Jean de Rieux,
lord of Rieux and Rochsort, Marshal of France. Under him served Jean, or, as
Moreri calls him, Aubert de Hangest Sire de Hugueville, master or the
cross-bows; and who, by reason of the age and infirmities of Ricux, seems to
have been the acting general. According to the genius of the nation, the
officers made the most brilliant appearance; and Hugueville actually sold to
the church of Paris his fine estate of Agencourt near Mondidier, in order to
furnish himself with a magnificent equipage Histoire et regne de Charles VI.
tom. iv, 190.
.

THE sleet had a very favorable passage; but, by neglect of providing
sufficient quantity of fresh water, most of the horses perished. LANDIN WALES.
According to the best authority Rymer, viii. 406.
, the forces landed, under the command of Hugueville, in Milsord Haven. He
immediately marched toward Caermarthen, which he besieged and look by
capitulation. The garrison were suffered to depart, and had liberty to take
their effects with them Walsingham, 566.
.

HE declined making any attempt on Pembroke, by reason of the strength of the
castle; but sat down before Haversord-west: where the earl of Arundel made so
gallant a defense, that the French were obliged to raise the siege with
considerable loss. Glyndwr had, by this time, reached Tenbigh with ten thousand
men, where he was joined by Hugueville. As soon as the necessary preparations
were finished, they marched through Glamorganshire, reached Worcester, and
burnt the suburbs, and ravaged the country round Monstrelet.
.

As soon as Henry heard of the intended invasion, he issued out a proclamation
Rymer, viii.
, dated from Westminster, July 2d; in which he directs the lieutenants of
several counties to raise forces to repel the foe. Lord Berkley, and Henry Pay
admiral of the cinque ports, commanded at sea, and burnt, according to our
accounts, fifteen of the French ships as they lay at anchor in Milford Haven;
and afterward (joined by Sir Thomas Swinborn) took fourteen more in their
passage to Wales, laden with ammunition and provisions for the army Walsingbam,
566; who adds, that a marshal and seven captains were takes at the same time.
. Mademoiselle de LUSSAN takes notice of the first; but heartily confesses,
that the French were so terrified with the appearance of thirty sail of our
ships, that they themselves directed the destruction of these vessels.

IN the beginning of August, Henry received advice that the French were landed;
and again sends out a proclamation, dated from Pontesract, August 7th,
addressed to the lieutenant of the county of Hereford, with orders to raise
without delay his forces, and repair with them to the city of Hereford. It is
in this proclamation he expressly calls the French general, lord of Huguevilie.

HENRY marched in person to oppose an enemy now grown so very formidable; HENRY
MARCHES AGAISST THEM
but Hugueville, after plundering the country, on the king's approach, made a
sudden retreat, and posted himself on a high hill, about three leagues from
Worcester, with a deep valley between his and the royal army. Each endeavored
to bring the enemy to make the attack; and for eight days they respectively
presented themselves in order of battle, and so continued from morning till
night; but neither party ventured to descend from its advantageous situation.
During this time, there were several skirmishes. The loss on both sides was
about two hundred, besides numbers wounded. The French lost Patrouillart de
Try, lord of Mouci and Plessis, chamberlain to the king, and brother to the
admiral; a gallant officer, whose fate was much lamented by the army * Moreri;
who says he fell a the attack of Haversord-west
. There fell that day also the lord of Martelonne, and the lord of La Valle;
and, as Hall says, the bastard of Bourbon. Our historians seetn to exaggerate
their loss, adding to it that of five hundred other gentlemen; but Monstrelet
asserts, that on a review of the French troops, when they returned home, only
sixty were found missing.

THE camp that Owen is supposed to have possessed, is on Wobury hill, in the
parish of Whittley, exactly nine miles north-west of Worcester, It is
surrounded with a single fosse; and contains near twenty-seven acres. It
probably had been an ancient British post; but was extremely convenient for
Glyndwr, not only by reason of its strength, but, as Wales lay open to him, he
had it in his power to retreat among the mountains whenever he found it
necessary. I never had an opportunity of examining the nature of the ground,
and how far it suits the description given by Monstrelet; but the public will
have their curiosity amply gratified by the pen of my friend Dr. NASH, now
employed in forming the history of his native county.

HENRY acted the part of a prudent general, by cutting off the means of every
supply from the enemy; who, worn with famine and fatigue, in the midnight of
the eighth day decamped with the utmost secrecy, and retired into Wales
Monstrelet, 16. Hail, 19.
. Monstrelet makes the king quit his station first, and return the same night
to Worcester; and adds, that the French attacked him in his retreat, and took
from him eighteen wagons laden with provisions. Hall, on the contrary,
assures us, that Henry chased the enemy from hills to dales, from dales to
woddes, from woddes to marshes, and yet could never have them at any
advantage. A world it was to see his quotidiane removyng; his paynfull and
busy wanderyng, his troublesome and uncertayne abidyng, his continual mocion,
his daily peregrinacion in the desert felles and craggy mountains of that
barreine, unfertile, and depopulate country. In the end, the king, unable any
longer to subsi^^ his army in a country which Glyndwr had expressly destroyed
to dutress his enemy, was obliged to desist from his pursuit, and to return to
Wercester; and, as Hall owns, in his retreat, lost certain cariages laden with
vitayle, to his great displeasure, and to the great comfort of the Welsh.

I MUST enquire when Henry had leisure for so long and tedioas a campaign; TIME
OF THIS CAMPAIGN.
for I find him the 22d of August at Pontesrad, the 27th at Worcester, and the
4th of September at Heresord. In four days from that time, it appears he was at
Faxflete.

AT Beverley, the 13th of the same month. At Bishopthorp in the same county
from the 16th to the 21st; the next day at Cawoed. After which there is an
unaccounted gap of time, till he appears again at Worcester the 6th of October.
I am thus minute, to show that Henry possessed a strength of body equal to his
activity of mind; otherwise he never could have slown with that rapidity from
place to place, nor have guarded against enemies so remote as the Scots and
Welsh, at nearly the same period.

IT seems as if all his forces destined to oppose the last, were arrived at
their places of rendezvous before the 6th of October. Rymer, viii. 420.
From that time he was in all probability engaged in this expedition; Hall
assigning (among other reasons for the king's desisting from his enterprise)
the approach of winter, which rendered a campaign amidst the mountains highly
unsafe. Accordingly we find him at Dunstable, on his road to London, the 3d of
November Idem, 421.
, and at his palace at Westminster soon after Ibid.
.

THE French, after their slight, never made any farther attempt. Glyndwr placed
them in quarters, where they remained till they quitted the kingdom; when he
furnished the greater part with vessels to transport them to France. FRENCH
QUIT WALES
Fifteen hundred remained in Wales till the March following, when they were
carried home by a person styled by de Lussan, Le Begue de Volay De Lassan, iv.
195.


AFTER the defeat of Gryssydd son of Glyndwr, by Henry prince of Wales, that
youthful warrior undertook the siege of Llanbedr castle, in the county of
Cardigan. SIEGE OF LLANBEDR CASTLE.
After some time, the governor placed there by Glyndwr agreed to give it up, in
case it was not relieved between the 24th of October and the feast of All
Saints. He was to surrender it in good condition; not to injure the habitations
in the town, nor seize any ships that should be driven into the port by
distress of weather: that he should have free pardon, and have liberty, at the
end of the term, to depart with all his effects, and those of his friends. I
observe, among the instruments of war which were to be delivered up, were
canones, Anglice gunnes; which had been invented by the French about twenty-six
years before this period. He took the sacrament in witness of his sincerity,
and delivered hostages for the performance of his agreement. He probably relied
on the assistance of the French for relief. Henry apprehended the same. But, in
order to frustrate any attempts of that kind, he issued out a writ, dated from
Cawood the 22d of September, to the lieutenants of Devonshire, and of other
counties, to raise their forces, and to rendezvous at Evesham on the 10th of
October Rymer, viii. 419. 497.
. This caution took effect so far, as to oblige Rees ap Gryffydd ap Shenkin,
alias Rees ap Llewelyn, to agree to the terms proposed; but seemingly without
any design of preserving them; for, no sooner was the prince departed, than
Rees permitted Glyndwr to turn him and his garrison out, under pretense that
they had been guilty of treason in submitting without his consent Welsingham,
568. Holinshed, 553.
.

I MUST conclude the transactions of this year, with remarking the solicitude
of the lords and commons about the relief of the lord of Coitie, SIEGE OF
COITIE CASTLE BY GLYN^WR.
then besieged in the castle of the same name, seated near the river Ogmore in
Glamorganshire. Henry was little concerned about his fate; but several prelates
and persons of rank in both houses offered a loan, for the purpose of raising
forces for his rescue. At length it was agreed by king and parliament, that
those loans should be repaid out of the first payments of the subsidy at that
time granted Drake's Parliamentary History, ii. 85. This was a very
considerable fortress, as appears by Buck's view of it, vol. ii. No 398.
.

1406.

FROM the latter end of last year, the affairs of Glyndwr began to decline. He
had still strength sufficient to keep within his mountanous territories; but
was too weak to meditate any thing more than marauding invasions. FRENCH SEND
MORE FORCES
The French continued to give him some assistance. They sent a sleet of
thirty-eight sail. I imagine, from the small number, that they were wearied of
their ally; yet were willing to keep up, for their own interest, the spirit of
the insurgents. Eight of these ships, laden with men at arms, were taken; the
rest escaped in great confusion to Wales Walsingham, 566.
.

ABOUT this time Owen was considerably weakened by the defection of the
inhabitants of Ystrad Tywy.

THE presence of that brave and active prince Henry of Monmouth, who at the
express request of parliament Parliamentary Hist. ii. 93.
resided in some part of Wales, was no small check on the enterprizing temper
of Glyndwr, nor a less terror to the Welsh, who had felt the force of his arms.
At the same time, parliament, sensible of the folly of the premature grants
before made of the estates of the insurgents, entered on record, that no
heritages conquered from the Welsh, be given away till one quarter of an year
after Ibid.
: so precarious seemed the tenure, even in the declining state of our
chiestain. I may remark, that he still had strength enough to give protection
to the English fugitives. The great earl of Northumberland, and lord Bardels,
found here a hospitable asylum, after the S^^ts, to whom they had entrusted
themselves, meditated the giving of them up to Henry, in exchange for certain
prisoners. Sir David Fleming of Cumbernauld generously warned them of the
intentions of his countrymen; who in revenge took away his life Walsingham, 566.
.

BEFORE the expiration of this year, Henry made a grant in fee to Sir John
Tibetot, speaker of the house of commons, and father to the accomplished peer
John earl of Worcester, of the estates of Richard ap Gryffydd ap Vychan, in the
counties of Caermarthen and Cardigan, forfeited by his adherence to the party
of Glyndwr Parliamentary Hist, ii, 106.
.

GLYNDWR again was not behind hand in acts of regal power; GLYNDWR CRANTS A
PARDON.
for about this he grants a pardon to one John ap H^^d ap Jevan goch; anno
principatus nostri VI* datum apud Kevn Llanvair X die Jon per ipsum principem.
On the seal was the portrait of Owen seated in a chair, holding a scepter in
his right hand, and a globe in the left.

IT is observable, that among the witnesses are Gryffydd his eldest son, and
Gryffydd young his chancellor; both of whom, the English historians say, were
made prisoners, and sent to the Tower. As Henry showed no mercy to the
partisans of Owen, it is (...) probable that these two would have escaped his
rage, had (...) ever been in his power. The other two witnesses are Meredith,
another of his sons, and Rhys ap Tudur, and Gwillim ap ******.

NOTWITHSTANDING this ostentation of regal power, HIS AFFAIRS DECLINE.
the affairs of Glyndwr evidently declined. The garrisons placed in most of the
different fortresses of North Wales had kept the maritime parts from rising in
any numbers in his favor. In the island of Auglesca, he seems to have had a
very strong party. It does not appear that there ever was any battle in that
island. It is my opinion, that the partisans of Owen had passed the Menai, and,
while their zeal was warm, had joined his army; and, like the custom in all
feudal times, returned to their homes when wearied with the campaign, or
satiated with plunder.

BY the latter end of this year, they had submitted to the royal authority: for
I find, from a transcript of a manuscript found among the papers of the learned
EDWARD LLWYD of the Musaeum, this particular:

IN an inquisition taken at Beaumaris, upon Tuesday, the day next before the
feast of St. Martin the bishop, (which is the 11th of November) in the 8th year
of king Henry IV. anno Domini 1406, before Thomas Twkhwl, Philip de Mainwaring,
and Robert Paris the younger, commissioners, by virtue of a commission from
prince Henry, son and heir apparent of the king, prince of Wales, duke of
Acquitaine, Lancaster, and Cornwall, and earl of Chester, unto them, or any two
of them, directed, were indicted, presented, and fined, the several persons and
inhabitants of the isle of Anglesea, ANGLESEA FINED BY THE KING.
whose names are hereunder written, for being in arms and rebellion with Owen
Glyndysrdwy and others.

I REFER the reader for the particular of their names to the Appendix. I only
shall observe here the Cwmmwds, the numbers of persons fined in each, and the
sum total of them and the fines.

L. s. d. In Llivon 411 100 18 8 Menai 308 65 10 8 Talybalion 399 123 16 4
Twrkelyn 279 83 5 8 Malltracth 326 83 16 0 Tindaethvy 389 79 19 8 2112 537 7 0

I MUST observe, that the greatest of the fines is L. 8. 3 s. 4 d. and the
lest, 2 s. and that two priests are fined five pounds each, I suppose, for
misleading their flocks. Several persons are outlawed, and the goods of those
slain in battle forfeited to the king, according to the following valuation:

L. s. d. A horse 0 2 0 mare 0 1 4 cow 0 1 8 steer or heifer 0 1 0

L. s. d. A yearling calf 0 0 4 sheep 0 0 4 cronnach of wheat 0 3 4 ditto oats
0 2 0

1407.

HISTORY furnishes us with very few materials respecting the transactions of
this year. They were probably few and unimportant. Owen had lost the fortresses
of Llanbedr Near Aberystwyth is an old embattled house, (as I am informed)
called Ty Cries, reported to have been Glyndwr's.
(which was soon retaken) and that of Harlech. He was consined to the hills,
and seems never to have quitted his fastnesses but to make a praedatory war.
The earl or Northumberland and lord Bardols, about this time, apprehending that
Owen was too weak to protect them, quitted Wales, and soon after lost their
lives in a desperate effort to restore their cause, on Bramham-moor in
Yorkshire.

1408.

IN this year I discover nothing relative to the Welsh affairs, farther than a
due compliment paid to the prince of Wales by the commons; who, by their
speaker, desired the king to give public thanks to young Henry for his great
fatigue and good conduct in Wales; for which both king and prince returned
their compliments again to the commons Rymer, viii, 547.
.

1409.

IN this year Glyndwr again began to make head. MAKES HEAD AGAIN.
By himself, or his partisans, he made great devastations on the marches, and
in those parts of Wales that were well affected to the English government. The
estates of Edward de Charlion lord Powys suffered gre^^ly. Henry therefore
directs a write to (...) nobleman to raiss his sorces and supp^^s, in the most
(...), manner, this new disturbance, ^^^ded, as it appears, by (...) himself
and the bishop of St. (...). Lord Pouys (...) the same time instructed not to
quit the country, but to (...) all his castles garrisoned, and not to permit
any of his (...) to be deserted. This is dated from Westminister the (...) of
May Rymer, viii. 588.
.

LIKE orders were issued to Edward duke of York, Th^^s (...) of Arundel,
Richard earl of Warwick, Reginald lord Gray, ^xstantia lady Despenser, (who had
now made her peace with the crow^^ (...) Court, and William Beauchamp.

THIS activity proved fatal to Rhys Ddu and Philip (...), two of Owen's best
officers, whom he had sent into Sh(...), where they committed great excesses.
They were both made prisoners, sent to London, and executed. Caxton Cronycle of
England, 143.
relates, that Rhys was taken before the justices, condemned, and drawn on a
hurdle through the city to Tyburn, where he suffered the death of a traitor.
His quarters were sent to four other cities; his head placed on London bridge.

ON the 18th of November, in this year, Henry issued out an order to the
constable of Windsor castle, to deliver to Sir William List knight, marshal of
England, the following Welsh prisoners:

Howel ap Jevan ap Howell. Walther ap Jevan Vechan. Rys ap Jevan ap Rys. Jevan
Goch ap Morgan. David ap Tudor. Rys ap Meredyd. Madoc Bery. Jenkin Backer.
David ap Cad. Thomam Dayler Rymer, viii. 603. Rymer, viii. 611.
.
AFTER this follows a warrant to Sir William to receive them. I imagine, that
all these gentlemen were delivered to the marshal for execution; who, by his
commission, seems to have been expressly appointed for that purpose; certis de
causis ad ea omnia et singula quae ad officium Marescalli Angliae pertinent
exercenda per litteras nostras patentes quam diu nobis placuerit, duraturas
deputavimus.

TOWARD the latter end of the year, several of the officers of the lords
marchers, either through dislike to the war, or for the sake of preserving
their country from the fury of the Welsh, of their own authority formed a truce
with Glyndwr and his partisans. This only served to enable them to make their
inroads on other parts with more security. Many of the loyal borderers were
slain, and others plundered, in consequence of these agreements. Henry was
highly irritated, and immediately issued out writs Dated from Northampton, 23d
November.
to Thomas earl of Arundel, Sir Richard L'E-strange lord of Knockyn, Ellesmere,
and other borderirg manors, Edward Charlton lord Powys, and Reginald lord Gray
of Ruthyn, and to the deputy-lieutenant of Heresordshire, directing them to
cause all such illegal compacts to be rescinded, and Glyndwr and his adherents
to be pursued, and attacked with the utmost vigor.

FROM this period Owen never made any attempts worthy of historic notice.
Numbers of his followers deserted; which obliged him to confine himself to the
hills, and to act entirely on the defensive. Notwithstanding his power was
reduced, he was far from being subdued. The years 1410 and 1411 were passed
without any memorable actions. The English were content with the ease they
enjoyed by restraining the outrages of the mountaneers. Glyndwr maintained that
extensive tract that forms the Alps of our country, and kept his prisoners so
securely consined, that even Henry, in 1412, was under the necessity of
permitting (by writ Dated July 14th. Rymer, viii. 753.
) his esquire Llewelyn ap Hoel, father to the noted David Gam, to make use of
Sir John Tiptoste and William Botiller, to treat with Owen about the redemption
of his son, who was kept forti et dura prisona, or to endeavor to seize foam
of Glyndwr's friends to exchange for Gam. TREATY.
What the result of this affair was, does not appear. It serves, though, to
disprove the opinion, that David escaped to England after his infamous attempt
in 1402; for which, as is now evident, he suffered a most fevere, but merited
captivity of ten years, from which all the power of his English friends could
not release him.

THE prison where Owen confined his captives was not far from his house, THE
PRISON OF GLYNDWR.
in the parish of Llansanfraid Glyndwrdwy; and the place is to this day called
Carchardy Owen Glyndwrdwy. Some remains are still to be seen near the church,
which form part of a habitable house. It consists of a room thirteen feet
square, and ten and a half high. The sides consist of three horizontal beams,
with upright planks, not four inches asunder, mortised into them. In these are
grooves with holes in the bottom, as if there had been originally cross-bars,
or grates. The roof is exceedingly strong, composed of strong planks almost
contiguous. It seems as if there had been two stories; but the upper part at
present is evidently modern.

IT is singular, that the government did not take advantage of two Welshmen of
rank, whom they had this year in their power, and whom they might have made the
price of the liberty of their partizan. These were Rhys ap Tudur of Penmynydd
in Anglesea, and his brother. Perhaps they were taken after the treaty had its
effect; perhaps their crimes were too enormous for pardon: but whatsoever the
case was, they were both conveyed to Chester, and there put to death.

I MUST not omit, that in 1410, Henry prince of Wales gave a free pardon to
certain of his tenants in the comot of Coleshill, in the county of Flint
Harleian MSS. No 1999. 32.
, for the share they had in what was styled the rebellion of Glyndwr. That
county was much divided in those troubles. Howel Gwynedd, descended from Edwin
lord of Tegengle, a valiant gentleman, who sided with our chieftain, was in one
of tire preceding years surprised by his enemies from the town of Flint. He
probably was posted within the trenches of Moel y Gaer, in the parish of
Northop; on which he was without process, beheaded.

1413.

HENRY died in the beginning of this year; HENEY DIES.
and left his youthful successor so engaged in his preparations for the
conquest of France, as to lose ail thoughts of the entire subjection of his
British dominions. Glyndwr remained still inaccessible; but was so closely
guarded, as to cease to be tremendous. The W^sh who had submitted, now began to
indulge their revenge against such of the English who had slain, or otherwise
injured any of their relations or friends in the late war. This revenge was
taken by various kinds of distress and imprisonment, till they had cleared
themselves by compurgation, or made some satisfactory agreement. To remedy
this, Henry the Vth, in his first year, abolishes Statutes at Large,
Ruffhead's; ed. i. 484. Par un ASSACH solonc la custom de GALES dest a dire
par la serement de CCC bommes. See also Leges Wallicae, 188. and seq.
the Assach, or oath of 300 men, necessary, according to the custom of Wales,
to clear a person accused of any crime. ASSACH.
Before that, an Englishman was liable to continue in jail for life, as it
seems impossible for one of that hated nation to procure even a far less number
of compurgators than this strange law required for his acquittal. Henry made
the attempt penal, and the prosecutor liable to an imprisonment of two years,
to pay treble damages, and to pay beside, a fine and ransom before he could be
released.

THIS was the last of the many laws enacted against the Welsh on occasion of
this insurrection. SEVERE LAWS.
They were certainly very severe; yet, perhaps, no more than what any
government would have directed, against a people that had submitted to conquest
near a hundred and twenty years, and who were considered in no other light than
that of rebellious subjects.

ON the first insurrection, conciliatory methods were tried, and pardons
offered. After experience of the little effect these had on the minds of the
Welsh, every lenient step was laid aside, and laws of a very severe nature were
put in force against them.

THE first was in the year 1400. It was found expedient to prevent, as much as
possible, all intercourse between the Welsh and English. The first were
strongly attached to the cause of Richard; the last had many secret favorers of
that unhappy prince among them. There appeared much danger, if the former were
permitted to strengthen their interest in England: a coalition fatal to the new
government was apprehended. As a preventative, it was enacted: That no person
born on both sides of Welsh parents should purchase lands or tenements near any
of the cities or towns on the marches of Wales, on pain of forfeiting them to
the lord paramount where such estates lay: That no Welshman should be received
into any corporation town; or, if they had been settled in any such before,
they were to find security for their good and loyal behavior; they were to be
totally disqualified from any civil office, and never allowed to carry any
weapons.

IN case any Welshman refused to restore to any Englishman the cattle, horses,
or the like, (which he had forcibly taken) within seven days, the Englishman
was allowed to retaliate.

So little trust was there in justice from our countrymen, that it was enacted,
that no Englishman should be condemned at the suit of a Welshman, unless by
English justices, or English burgesses.

So greatly did the government apprehend the seduction of English loyalty by
the charms of our countrywomen, that the English were prohibited from marrying
with a Welshwoman, under the pain of being disqualified from holding any office
in Wales.

IN 1402, there is a very particular statute, intended to remedy the mischiefs
resulting from some customs peculiar to Wales. This directs, KYMHORTHA.
that null westour, rymour, minstrall, ne vagabond, soit aucunement sustenuz en
la terre de Gales, par fair kymorthas ou coillage sur le commune poeple
illoeqes. I cannot give a better translation, than that in the observations on
the ancient statutes, by my esteemed friend the honorable DAINES BARRINGTON;
which is to this purpose: THAT no host I beg leave to render the word westour
differently: it seems derived from the Welsh, gwestwr, which signifies a person
who kept a place of public entertainment; and such a place was very proper for
a rendezvous of this nature.
, rhymer, minstrel, or other vagabond, should presume to assemble or collect
together.

THE word kymhortha is mis-spelt from the Welsh cymmorth, or the plural
cymmorthau, assemblies of people to assist a neighbor in any work. Such are
very frequently in use at present. There are cymmorthan for spinning; for works
of husbandry; for coal-carriage. But at this time, these meetings were mere
pretenses; and their end was the collecting a sufficient number of able-bodied
men to make an insurrection. Of such a nature, in old times, were the
hunting-matches in Scotland. The legislature in that part of Great Britain
found the evils resulting from them, and at length suppressed them by a law.

BUT cymhorthau of our countrymen were at this period of a most tremendous
nature. They were composed of men the most dreaded by tyrants and usurpers; of
BARDS, who animated our nation, by recalling to mind the great exploits of our
ancestors, their struggles for liberty, their successful contests with the
Saxon and Norman race for upwards of eight centuries. They rehearsed the
cruelty of their antagonists, and did not forget the savage policy of the first
Edward to their proscribed brethren. They brought before their countrymen the
remembrance of ancient prophecies. They showed to them the hero Glyndwr,
descended from the ancient race of our princes; and pronounced, that in him was
to be expected the completion of every prediction of our oracular MERLIN. The
band of minstrels now struck up; the harp, the crwth, and the pipe, filled the
measure of enthusiasm which the others had begun to inspire. They rushed to
battle, fearless of events, like their great ancestry, moved by the Druids
songs; and scorned death, which conferred immortality in reward of their valor,
Inde ruendi
In ferrum men's prona viris, animaeque capaces
Mortis, et ignavum est rediturae parcere vitae.
LUCAN. Hence they no cares for this frail being feel.
But rush undaunted on the pointed steel:
Provoke approaching fate, and bravely scorn
To spare that life which must so soon return.
ROWS.

WE find that Glyndwr maintained his situation for two year; longer. In 1415,
his affairs bore so respectable an aspect, that the king condescended to enter
into a treaty with him; and for that purpose deputed, from the castle of
Porchester The writ is dated July 5th, Rymer, ix, 283.
, Sir G^ocrt Talbot, with full powers to negotiate with Owen, and even to offer
him and his followers a free pardon, in case they sliould request it. Some
writers say, that this grace was obtained by the mediation of David Holbech,
deputy steward of the lordships of Bromfield and Yale. DIATH OF OWEN.
The event of this affair does not appear. It is probable that it was
interrupted by the death of our hero, which happened on the 20th of September,
on the eve of St. Matthew, in the sixty-first year of his age, at the house of
one of his daughters; but whether that of his daughter Scudamore or Monnington,
is uncertain; but, according to the tradition of the county of Hereford, it may
be supposed to have been at that of the last. It is said, that he was buried in
the churchyard of Monnington; but there is no monument, or any memorial of the
spot that contains his remains.

BOTH the printed histories, and the manuscript accounts, represent his latter
end to have been very miserable; that he was dered from place to place in the
habit of a shepherd, in a l^^ VALLE CRUCIS ABBEY.
and forlorn condition; and was even forced to take shelter in caves and desert
places, from the fury of his enemies Rymir, ix. 330.
. This does not wear the face of probability; for, had his situation been so
deplorable, majesty would never have condescended to propose terms to such a
scourge as Glyndwr had been to his kingdom. This retreat, and the distresses he
underwent, were probably after the battle of Pwll Melyn in 1405, from which he
quickly emerged. Death alone deprived Owen of the glory of accepting an offered
accommodation. The treaty was renewed by the same minister, on the 24th of
February 1416, with Meredydd ap Owen, the son of Glyndwr; which it is to be
supposed took effect, and peace was restored to England, after an indecisive
struggle of more than fifteen years. Our chieftain died unsubdued; unfortunate
only in foreseeing a second subjugation of his country, after the loss of the
great supporter of its independency.

HAVING now collected every thing in my power relating to this celebrated
Briton, I return, by the same road, cross the Dee at Llangollen; and, after a
ride of about a mile, turn a little out of the road, in a fertile little vale,
to the abbey of

LLAN-EGWEST, ABBEY OF VALLE CRUCIS.
GLYN-EGWEST MONACHLOG, or DE VALLE CRUCIS, solemnly seated at the foot of the
mountains, on a small meadowy flat, watered by a pretty stream, and shaded with
hanging woods. This was a house of Cistertians, founded in the year 1200, by
Madoc ap Gryffydd Maelor, lord of Bromfield, and grandson by the mother's side
to Owen Gwynedd prince of Wales. I cannot discover any of the endowments,
further than half the tithes of Wrexham, bestowed on it by Reyner bishop of St.
Asaph, who died in 1224; and the other half, by his successor bishop Abraham,
in 1227. The following bishop, Howel ap Ednysved, presented it with the church
of Llangollen Goodwin, 657.
. The monks obtained besides the patronage of several other livings; such as
Wrexham, Rhiwabon, Chirk, Llausanfraid, and Llandegla; but their title to
these, as well as to Llangollen, was disputed by bishop Anian, commonly known
by the name of Y Brawd duo Nannau, or the black brother of Nanney, a Dominican,
consecrated in 1268 Idem, 658.
who brought his cause before the pope's delegates, the official of Canterbury,
and the abbot of Tallelechew, and obtained a decision in favor of him and his
successors; but as there was some doubt about the patronage of the church of
Llandegla, they allotted (in lieu of it) to the abbey a third of the tithes of
Bryn-Eglwys Ibid.
.

THE landed endowments were not inconsiderable. REVENUES.
In the year 1291, the abbot was found to have near the monastery, a grange,
with three ploughlands, a mill, and other conveniences, valued at -- L. 3 0 0

The granges of Bodhange, Tregam, Rudryn, and Baketon, set for -- 5 10 0

Also the dairy-farm of Nante, the grange of Nustroyz, Convenet, and
Grennychamt, set for -- 3 19 8

Also the grange of Wyrcessam, consisting of one ploughland and some pasture,
valued at -- 0 15 0 And thirty cows, at the expense of thirty shillings.

THE whole of his establishment was fourteen pounds fourteen shillings and
eight pence Willis's St. Asaph, 178.
. At the dissolution, the revenue of the house was found to be (according to
Dugdale) 188 l. per Annum. Speed makes it 214 l. 3 s. 5 d. The last abbot was
John Herne, who received an annuity of 23 l. on his surrender. This, and 10 l.
13 s. 4 d. in annuities to some surviving monks, were the only charges
remaining in 1553 Willis's Abbeys, ii. 312.
.

THIS place remained in the crown till the 9th of James I. who granted it to
Edward Wotton, afterward created lord Wotton. In 1654, we find a lady Margaret
Wotton, a recusant, to have been in possession; and that it was put under
sequestration by orders of the commissioners from the ruling powers.

THERE still remain the ruins of the church, CHURCH.
and part of the abbey: the last inhabited by a farmer. The church was built in
form of a cross, in different styles of architecture. The most ancient is that
of the east end, where the windows are in form of long and narrow slips,
pointed at top. The window at the west end is large, divided by stone tracery;
and above is a round window of elegant work. Above it is an inscription in
memory of the person who repaired or rebuilt this part: an honor frequently
paid to benefactors of this kind. It is in this form; AND. ADAM. DMS. Fecit Hoc
opus. Pace Beata quiescat. Amen. And just beneath, are the letters M. D...
probably part of the date; the rest being lost. We cannot ascertain the person
intended in this line. He was probably one of the house of Trevawr, in which
that name occurs more than once; as, Adam or Adda Vawr of Trevawr; and Adam or
Adda ap Jorwerth Ddu of Pengwern.

THE capitals of the pilasters within the church, are finished with elegant
foliage. In the north transept, is a cloister of two arches; an arch that once
contained a tomb; and near it a double benetoire, or holy water pot.

MUCH of the building is made of the coarse slaty stone of the country. The
door and window frames of fine freestone.

THE abbot's apartment was contiguous to the church. There opens from it a
small space, where he might stand to hear the holy offices performed below.

THE lower part of the abbey is vaulted, and supported by rows of low pillars;
now divided into different rooms. In front is a large window with curious stone
tracery, which reaches to the ground. Within seems to have stood a small
staircase, which led to the fratry, a paved room above the arches.

IN one of the present bed-chambers is a stone (now part of a chimney-piece)
carved with running foliage, with this imperfect inscription: Hie jacet....
ARVRVET. This is the only relic of any tomb; that of the founder, who was
buried here Powel, 255. 293.
, is no more: nor yet that of Gryffydd ap Madoc Maelor, lord of Dinas Bran;
who, after siding with the enemies of his country, in 1270 was deposited within
these walls Idem, 321. 327.
.

VALLE CRUCIS ABBEY.


PILLAR OF ELISEG.


ABOUT a quarter of a mile higher up the vale, PILLAR OF EAISEQ
in the hedge of a meadow, I met with the remainder of a round column, perhaps
one of the most ancient of any British inscribed pillar now existing.

IT was entire till the civil wars of the last century, when it was thrown down
and broken by some ignorant fanatics; who thought it had too much the
appearance of a cross, to be suffered to stand. It probably bore the name of
one; for the field it lies in is still called Llwyn-y-Groes, or the Grove of
the Cross, from the wood that surrounded it. It was erected at so early a
period, that there is nothing mavelous, if we should perceive a tincture of
the old idolatry, or at left of the primeval customs of our country, in the
mode of it when perfect.

THE pillar never had been a cross; notwithstanding folly and superstition
might, in later times, imagine it to have been one and have paid it the usual
honors. It was a memorial of the dead; an improvement on the rude columns of
Druidical times and cut into form, and surrounded with inscription. It is among
the first lettered stones that succeeded the Meini-hirion, MeiniGwr, and
Llcchau. It stood on a great tumulus; perhaps always environed with wood (as
the mount is at present) according to the custom of the most ancient times,
when standing. pillars were placed under every green tree Kings, ii. 17. See
the learned Rowlands, 52.
.

It is said that the stone, when complete, was twelve feet high. It is now
reduced to six feet eight. The remainder of the capital is eighteen inches
long. It stood infixed in a square pedestal, still lying in the mount; the
breadth of which is five feet three inches: the thickness eighteen inches.

THE beginning of the inscription gives us nearly the time of its erection:
Concenn filius Cateli, Catteli filius Brochmail, Brochmail filius Eliseg,
Eliseg filius Cnoillaine, Concenn itaque pronepos Eliseg edificavit hunc
lapidem proavo suo Eliseg.

THIS Concenn, or Congen, was the grandson of Brochmail Yscithroc, the same who
was defeated in 607 at the battle of Chester BID Hist. lib. ii. c. 2. p. 80.
. The letters on the stone were copied by Mr. Edward Llwyd: the inscription is
now illegible; but, from the copy taken by that great antiquary, the alphabet
nearly resembles one of those in use in the sixth century Vide Doctor MORTON'S
Table of Alphabeth.
.

ONE of the seats of Concenn and Eliseg was in this country. A township
adjacent to the column bears, from the last, the name of Eglwyseg; and the
picturesque tiers of rocks are called Gliseg for the same reason. The
habitation of this prince of Powys in these parts was probably Dinas Bran,
which lies at the head of the vale of Gliseg. Mr. Llwyd conjectures, that this
place took its name from the interment of Eliseg; by a similar instance in the
county of Caermarthen; where the place in which a monumental stone stands, is
called Pant y Polion, corruptly for Pant Pawlin, from Paulinus, the person it
was inscribed to:

Servator fidei patriaeque semper amator:
Hic PAULINUS jacet cultor pientissimus aequi Vide Appendix, Mr. Llwyd's Letter.
.
THERE are two ways from this pillar: the usual is along the vale, on an
excellent turnpike-road leading to Ruthyn; the other is adapted only for the
travel of the horsemen; but far the more preferable, on account of the romantic
views. I returned by Valle Crucis; and, after winding along a steep midway to
the old castle, descended, and after crossing the rill of the Bran, arrived in
the valley of Glisseg; VALLEY OF GLISSEG.
long and narrow, bounded on the right by the asbonishing precipices, divided
into numberless parallel strata of white limestone, often giving birth to vast
yew-trees: and on the left, by smooth and verdant hills, bordered by pretty
woods. One of the principal of the Glisseg rocks is honored with the name of
Craig-Arthur. That at the end of the vale is called Craig y Forwyn, or the
maiden's; is bold, precipitous, and terminates with a vast natural column.

THIS valley is chiefly inhabited (happily) by an independent race of warm and
wealthy yeomanry, undevoured as yet by the great men of the country.

IN order to get into the great road, I pursued a path up a steep ascent to the
left; and about midway visited a house noted for being the residence of one
Edward Davies, a low partizan. and plunderer on the side of the usurper during
the civil wars. He was best known in his own country by the title of Cneifiwr
Glass, CNEIPIWR GLASS.
or the Blue Shaver, from his rapacity, and the color of his clothes; and was
considered as a fit instrument of the tyranny of the times. In 1654, he was
appointed, by the commissioners for sequestration, steward of the court leet
within the manor of Valle Crucis, being recommended to the office by colonel
George Twisleton, The Cneifiwr seems to have not been over-true to his own
party, when his interest stood in the way. He was accustomed to take even the
royalists under his protection, on receiving a proper reward. He once concealed
Sir Evan Llwyd of Bodidris, at the time that a considerable sum was ordered for
his apprehension. He lodged him in a cellar below the parlor; then summoning
his people, ordered them, in a seeming rage, to sally out in quest of Sir Evan,
stamping with his foot, and declaring, that if the knight was above ground, he
would have him.

AFTER continuing an ascent for a little space longer, reach the pass called
Bwlch y Rhiw Velen, BWLCH Y RHIW VELEN.
and fall again into the great road. This place is distinguished by the deaths
of two of the sons of Llowarch Hen, LLOWARCH HEN.
the Cumbrian prince of the sixth century; who were slain in battle, and whose
loss the princely bard, their father, deplores in an elegy, of which these
lines are a fragment:

Bedh GUELL in y Rhiw Velen
Bedh SAWYL in Llan Gollen Lhwyd's Archzol. 259.
.
GUELL found a grave in Rhiw Velen,
SAWYL, in Llan Gollen.
LLOWARCH HEN left his country to expel the Saxons and Irish out of this part
of Britain. He leaves us ignorant of the event: all he acquaints us with is,
that he lost twelve sons in the generous attempt.

FROM the height above Rhiw Velen, is a very extensive prospect of the hundred
of Yale; hilly, fertile in grass, abundant in cattle; but in this part dreary,
and destitute of hedges and woods: banks, for the most part, supply the place
of the first; and brakes of the latter. After some descent, cross the Alyn,
Here a trifling rill (which, after running for some time, receives much
increase) waters the rich vales of Mold and Hope; and passes between the
picturesque banks from near Caergwrle to Gresford, where it goes through an
extensive flat, and falls into the Dee midway between Holt and Eaton Boat.
Leave, a little to the left, a place called Havod yr Abad, the site of one of
the country-seats of the abbot of Valle Crucis. Close to the roadside lies
Tommen y Rhodwydd, once a fortress known by the name of the castle of Yale
Powel, 201.
, built by Owen Gwynedd, about the year 1148 Powel, 201.
. This is the place Leland, mistakenly, calls a castle belonging to Owen
Glyndwr. It consists of a vast artificial mount, with another still loftier
near one end, the keep of the place. These are surrounded with a great fosse and
rampart; and have only a single entrance. At present, there are not the lest
relics of the superstructure: which was probably of wood; for we are told,
that this short-lived castelet was burnt nine years after its erection, by
Jorwerth Goch ap Meredydd Powel, 208.
.

IT is in this manner we must account for the total disappearance of many Welsh
castles, whose names are preserved in history; WOODEN CASTLES.
and whose vestiges we have sought for in vain. They were made of wood, as was
very customary with several ancient nations, and with others of later date. The
Persians, on the approach of the Spartans, secured themselves within their
wooden walls: and Caesar found great resistance from a tower in the Alpine
castle of Larignum, made of the timber of the Larix, or the Larch, which was
found to be incombustible Vitruvsius, lib. ii. c. 9. p. 35.
. In later times, the castle of Bamborough was built originally by Ida with
wood; the burgh of Murray was fortified by the Danes with the same material.
The people of the same county, in 1228, had castles of wood Annals Scotland,
149.
and, a century after these, more recent instances: William de Melton,
archbishop of York in 1317, fortified the mount in that city, called the Old
Bale, with planks eighteen inches thick.

WHENEVER we find an ancient fortress totally vanished, and we cannot account
for the disposal of the materials in the erecting of any neighboring buildings,
we must suppose that they had been constructed of wood; and that they had been
destroyed by fire, either flung into them by means of torches, or by veltae, or
vast masses of combustibles rolled against them by the force of numbers, as was
the practice of the ancient Scandinavians, described by Olaus Magnus.

FROM Tommen y Rhodwydd I crossed the country for about two miles to the
village of Llandegla, LLANDEGLA.
noted for its vast fairs for black cattle. The church is dedicated to St.
Tecla, virgin and martyr; who, after her conversion by St. Paul, suffered under
Nero at Iconium.

ABOUT two hundred yards from the church, in a quillet called Gwern Degla,
rises a small spring, with these letters cut on freestone: A. G (...): G. ST.
TECLAS'S WELL.
The water is under the tutelage of the saint; and to this day held to be
extremely beneficial in the Clwyf Tegla, St. Tecla's disease, or the
falling sickness. The patient washes his limbs in the well; makes an offering
into it of four pence; walks round it three times; and thrice repeats the
Lord's prayer. These ceremonies are never begun till after sunset, in order to
inspire the votaries with greater awe. If the afflicted be of the male-sex,
like Socrates, he makes an offering of a cock to his Aesculapius, or rather to
Tecla Hygeia; if of the fair-sex, a hen. The fowl is carried in a basket, first
round the well; after that into the churchyard; when the same orisons, and the
same circum-ambulations are performed round the church. The votary then enters
the church; gets under the communion table; lies down with the Bible under his
or her head; is covered with the carpet or cloth, and rests there till break of
day; departing after offering six pence, and leaving the fowl in the church. If
the bird dies, the cure is supposed to have been effected, and the disease
transferred to the devoted victim.

FROM hence I visited the house of Bodidris, BODIDRIS.
a large and ancient place, belonging to Evan Lloyd Vaughan Esquire of Corsygedol,
in right of his mother Margaret, daughter of Sir Evan Lloyd baronet, the last
male of the family: descended from ynyr ap Howel ap Moriddig ap Sandde Hardd;
who, by his valor at the battle of Corwen; in 1165, obtained from his prince
the honorable distinction in his arms of four bloody strokes, or, in the
heralds phrafe, paly of eight, or and gules. For, while he was talking to his
prince after the fight, with his left hand smeared with blood, he accidentally
drew it across his sword, and left on it the marks of his four fingers. The
prince observing this, ordered him to carry them on his shield; and at the same
time bestowed on him the township of Gelligynan in this neighborhood, as a more
substantial mark of his favor.

BODIDRIS takes its name from Idris, son of Llewelyn AURDORCHOG, or of the
goden torques, the ancient lord of Yale. It stands in two counties, Flintshire
and Denbighshire; the long table in the hall having an end in each.

FROM hence I continued my journey to Llanarmon, LLAMARMON
a village whose church is dedicated to St. Germanus bishop of Auxerre; who,
with St. Lupus, contributed to gain the famous Victoria Alleluiatica over the
Picts and Saxons near Mold. He was a most popular patron, and has numbers of
other churches in Wales under his protection. An image of an ecclesiastic,
still to be seen in the church-wall, is called his. In Leland's days, there was
a great resort of pilgrims, and large offerings at this place Leland's Itin. v.
35.
; and, probably, to this imaginary reseinblance of him.

IN the church is the tomb of a grandson of the bloody-fingered warrior above
mentioned, carrying on his shield the arms won by his ancestor, inscribed
around, Hic jacet Grusudd ap Lhewelyn ap Ynyr. At his feet lies a dog gnawing a
heap of intestines. The tradition of the country is, that he engaged in a
crusade, in which he lost his life by a wound in the abdomen; that his bowels
fell out, and were seized by a dog, as expressed by the sculptor. If he fell in
the romantic cause of the holy sepulcher, the artist must have forgot to have
placed him cross-legged, the monumental distinction of all such knights-errant.
The tomb is a chest cut out of one stone, in which his body was put, and sent
home. The lid is another stone, with his effigies carved out of it.

SEPULCHARAL tumuli are very frequent in this parish. TUMILI.
I was present at the opening of one, composed of loose stones and earth,
covered with a layer of soil about two feet thick, and over that a coat of
verdant turf. In the course of our search, were discovered, toward the middle
of the tumulus, several urns made of sunburned clay, of a reddish color on the
outside, black within, being stained with the ashes they contained. Each was
placed with the mouth downwards on a flat stone; above each was another, to
preserve them from being broken by the weight above. Mixed with the loose
stones, were numerous fragments of bones; such as parts of the thigh-bones, the
arm-bones, and even a scull. These had escaped the effects of the fire of the
funeral pile, and were deposited about the urns; which contained the residuum
of the corpse, that had been reduced to pure ashes.

I SHALL mention in the following pages the high antiquity of this custom; that
it was in use with the most polished nations, with the Greeks and with the
Romans, as well as with the most barbarous. The ancient Germans practiced this
rite, as appears from Tacitus De moribus German.
. The Druids observed the same, with the wild addition of whatsoever was of use
in this life, under the notion that they would be wanted by the deceased in the
world below; and in confirmation of this, arms, and many singular things, of
unknown use, are to this day discovered beneath the places of ancient sepulture
Mela, lib. iii. c. 2.
.

THE remote Sarmatae, and all the Scandinavian nations, agreed in the burning
of the dead; and the Danes distinguished by this, and the different funeral
ceremonies, three several epochs Wormii Mon. Danic. 40.
.

THE first, which was the same with that in question, was called Roisold and
Brende-tiide, or the age of burning.

THE second was styled Hoigold, and Hoielse-tiide, or the age of tumuli, or
hillocks. The corpse at this period was placed entire, with all the ornaments
which graced it during life. The bracelets, or arms, and even the horse of the
departed hero, were placed beneath the heap. Money, and all the rich property
of the deceased, used to be buried with him, from the persuasion that the soul
was immortal Pomponius Mela, lib. iii. c. 2.
and would stand in need of these things in the other life. Such was the notion
both of the Gauls and of the northern nations. Among the last, when pyracy was
esteemed honorable, these illustrious robbers directed that all their rich
plunder should be deposited with their remains Bartholinus Antiq. Dan. 438.
, in order to stimulate their offspring to support themselves, and the glory of
their name, by deeds of arms. Hence it is we hear of the vast riches discovered
in sepulchers, and of the frequent violation of the remains of the dead, in
expectation of treasures, even for centuries after this custom had ceased.

THE third age was called Christendoms-old, when the introduction of
Christianity put a stop to the former customs: for 'Christians,' as the learned
physician of Norwich observes, abhorred this species of obsequies; and though
they stickt not to give their bodies to be burnt in their lives, detested that
mode after death; affecting rather depositure than absumption, and properly
submitted unto the sentence of GOD, to return not unto ashes, but to dust again.

FROM the remarks of these able writers, we may learn the time of the abolition
of the custom of burning among the several nations; for it ceased with
paganism. It therefore fell first into disuse with the Britons; for it was for
some time retained by the Saxons after their conquest of this kingdom; but was
left off on their receiving the light of the gospel. The Danes retained the
custom of urn-burial the last of any: for of all the northern nations who had
any footing in these kingdoms, they were the latest who embraced the doctrines
of Christianity.

I CANNOT establish any criterion by which a judgment may be made of the people
to whom the different species of urns and tumuli belonged, whether they are
British, Roman, Saxon, or Danish.

SOME of the tumuli consist of heaps of naked stones, such as those in the isle
of Arran; in many parts of Scotland; and in some parts of Cornwall.

OTHERS are composed, like this of Llanarmon, with stones and earth, nicely
covered with earth and sod. Of these the base is in certain places level with
the ground, in others, surrounded with a trench: they were sometimes formed of
earth only. Others are of a conoid form, and some oblong; of which there is an
example in the neighborhood of Bryn y pys, called the Giant's Grave. Finally,
other places of ancient sepulture consisted only of a flat area, encompassed,
like the Druidical circles, with upright stones; and such were those of Ubbo,
and of king Harald, in Sweden Suecia Antiqua et Hodierna, tab, 315.
.

THE urns are also found placed in different manners, with the mouth resting
downwards upon a flat stone, secured by another above; or with the mouth
upwards, guarded in a like way.

VERY frequently the urns are discovered lodged in a square cell composed of
flags. Sometimes more than one of these cells are found beneath a carn or
tumulus. I have even met with, near Dupplin in Perthshire, not fewer than
seventeen, disposed in a circular form Tour in Scotland, iii-106.
. When numbers are found together, the tumulus was either a family-cemetery, or
might have contained the relics of a number of heroes who perished with glory
in the same cause: for such honors were paid only to the great and good.

THE urns found in these cells are usually surrounded with the fragments of
bones that had resisted the fire; for the friends of the deceased were
particularly careful to collect every particle; which they placed, with the
remains of the charcoal, about the urns, thinking the neglect the utmost
impiety, We have no certainty of the ceremonies used by the ancient Britons on
these mournful occasions; but, from many circumstances which we continually
discover in our tumuli, there appear many, analogous to those used in ancient
Greece and Rome.

THE Greeks first quenched the funeral pile with wine, and the companions or
relations of the departed performed the rest. Such was the ceremony at the
funeral of Patroclus.

Where yet the embers glow,
Wide over the pile the sable wine they throw,
And deep subsides the ashy heap below.
Next the white bones his sad companions place,
With tears collected in the golden vase.
The sacred relics to the tent they bore;
The urn a veil of linen covered over.
That done, they bid the sepulcher aspire,
And cast the deep foundations round the pyre;
High in the midst they heap the swelling bed
Of rising earth, memorial of the dead Iliad, lib. xxiii. L.
.
POPE. THE duty of collecting the bones and ashes fell to the next of kin.
Thus, Tibullus pathetically entreats death to spare him in a foreign land,
least he should want the tender offices of his nearest relations:

Me tenet ignotis aegrum Phaeacia, terris
Abstineas avidus, mors violenta, manus!
Abstineas, mors atra! precor, non hic mihi matter,
Quae legate in maestos ossa perusta sinus.
Non soror, Assyrios cineri quae dedat odores,
Et fleat effusis ante sepulcra comis.
DELIA non usquam Eigia, lib. i. el. 3.
!
Here In Ph^acia.
, languishing beneath a foreign sky.
An unknown victim to disease, I lie;
In pity, then, suspend thy lifted dart,
Thou tyrant, Death; nor pierce my throbbing heart:
No mother near me, her last debt to pay,
Collect my bones, my ashes bear away;
No sister over my funeral pile shall mourn,
Nor mix Assyrian incense in my urn:
Nor, Deita, thou, oh thou my soul's first care!
Shall with thy dear, dishevelled locks, be there.
R. W I BEG leave to add the account given by Virgil of the funereal rites of
Pallas Lib. xi. I. 184.
. We find in it many ceremonies that were used by the northern nations. Animals
of different species were burnt or deposited with the body. The spoils of war,
and weapons of various kinds, were placed on the pile; the bones and ashes were
collected together; and a heap of earth, or a tumulus, flung over them. Each of
these circumstances are continually discovered in our barrows. Horns, and other
relics of quadrupeds, weapons of brass and of stone, all placed under the
very same sort of tombs as are described by Homer and Virgil. Perhaps the other
ceremonies were not omitted; but we have no record that will warrant us to
assert that they were in all respects similar.

Jam pater Aeneas, etc.
The Tuscan chief and Trojan prince command,
To raise the funeral structures on the strand.
Then to the piles, as ancient rites ordain,
Their friends convey the relics of the slain.
From the black flames the sullen vapors rise,
And smoke in curling volumes to the skies.
The foot thrice compass the high-blazing pyres;
Thrice move the horse, in circles, round the fires.
Their tears, as loud they howl at every round,
Dim their bright arms, and trickle to the ground.
A peal of groans succeeds; and heaven rebounds
To the mixed cries, and trumpet's martial sounds.
Some, in the flames, the wheels and bridles throw,
The swords and helmets of the vanquishi'd foe:
Some, the known shields their brethren bore in vain,
And unsuccessful jav'lins of the slain.
Now round the piles the bellowing oxen bled,
And bristly swine: in honor of the dead,
The fields they drove, the fleecy flocks they slew,
And on the greedy flames the victims threw.
PIT. SINCE I am engaged in this funebrious subject, it will be fit to
observe, that a discovery of an entire skeleton, placed between flags of a
proportionable size, was made near this place. This, as well as others similar
in different parts of our islands, evinces that the ancient inhabitants did not
always commit their bodies to the fire: for, besides this instance, a skeleton
thus enclosed was found in one of the Orknies Letter from the Rev. Mr. Low of
Birsa
, and others in the shire of Murray; and with one of the last was found an urn
with ashes, and several pieces of charcoal Tour Scotl. 1769, q^arto ed.
which-shews, that each practice was in use in the same age.

FROM Llanarmon I continued my journey along the bad roads of that parish. The
country now grows more contracted, by the approximation of the hills. On one
side are the rocky ledges of limestone, in the township of Tre'r Yrys, rich in
lead-ore; and which is supposed to have taken its name from Gyrys, who made the
first collection of Welsh proverbs, known by the name of Mad-waith ben Gyrys o
Jal, or the good work of old Gyrys of Yale.

ON the left are the Clwydian hills, which divide this country from the vale of
Clwyd. These are cultivated pretty high; are free from rocks, covered with
heath.

THERE is a Bwlch, or pass through these hills, of a most remarkable name,
lying between the summits called Moel Eithinen, and Moel Fenlli, in this
parish. This is called Bwlch Agricla, or the pass of Agriccla; and, since there
is no other translation to be given of the welsh word, we may conjecture this
to have been his passage to Mona. That the Romans were in aftertimes resident
in these parts, is evident from the number of coins found in the neighborhood,
particularly in the parish of Llanverres, where abundance of Denarii have been
met with.

MOEL FENLLI, or Benlli's hill, is remarkable for having on it a strong British
post, guarded as usual by dikes and fosses. This probably was possessed by a
chieftain of that name; for Nennius C. xxx. xxxi
speaks of such a regulus of the country of Yale; but, as too usual with our
ancient historians, blends so ridiculous a legend with the mention of him, as
would destroy belief of his existence, did not the hill remain a possible
evidence. St. Germanus, says the abbot, designed to make this Benlli a visit;
but meeting with a most inhospitable reception, was kindly entertained by a
servant of the king in his humble cottage; who killed his only calf, dressed,
and placed it before the saint and his companions. This goodness met with its
reward; for lo! the next morning the identical calf was found alive and well
with its mother.

A LITTLE beyond this pass, entered the parish of Llanverres, rich in mineral.
Pass through the village, and by the church. The last is dedicated to St.
Berres (Britius) disciple of St. Martin the Hungarian, and his succesor in the
bishopric of Tours, the latter end of the fourth century. The church at this
time was rebuilding, chiefly by the bounty of Mrs. Catherine Jones of Clommendy.

THE east end of the old church was repaired in 1650, by Dr. John Davies, the
author of the Welsh-Latin dictionary, a most skilful antiquary; native of this
parish.

IN the course of my ride, cross the turnpike-road between Mold and Ruthyn;
which, after a long ascent, passes Bwlch Peny-Barras, a spot extremely worthy
of the traveller's attention, on account of the beautiful view over the vale of
Clwyd.

MY route this time led me eastward, along the great road, into the county of
FLINT.

THIS spot being confirmed to it by the event of a most expensive lawsuit, by
the court of exchequer, in 1763, between the Grosvenour family and the lords of
the manor of Mold: the first claming it as part of his mineral grant of the
hundred of Yale; the others affirming it to be part of the county of Flint, and
within the parish of Mold. The decision, which was in favor of the lords of
Mold, is recorded on an arch over a noted stone, called Carreg Carn March
Arthur; which was then adjudged to be the boundary of the parish of Mold in the
county of Flint, and of Llanverres in that of Denbigh.

I CONTINUED along the great road; and, within two miles of Mold, hung long
over the charming vale which opens with exquisite beauty from Vron, the seat of
the ingenious Richard Williams Esquire. Cambria here lays aside her majestic
air, and condescends to assume a gentler form, in order to render less violent
her approaching union with her English neighbor. It were to be wished she had
acted with more moderation, and not outshone it at a rate, the most partial
Saxon must allow it to have done.

THIS was anciently called Ystrad-Alun, or the Strath of the alun; a comot in
the cantref Y Rhiw: inhabited by a hardy race, at perpetual feud with the men
of Cheshire on one side, and the men of Yale on the other: for my countrymen
never suffered their active swords to rust; in default of Saxon, they would
take up with the blood of their Cambrian neighbors.

ON the first regulation of the Welsh counties by Henry VIII. this vale, then
called Molesdale, with the continuation of it which went under the name of
Hopesdale, were annexed to the county of Denbigh; but, in the 33d year of the
same monarch, were given to Flintsire.

ALMOST the whole is seen from this spot; a delicious composition of rich land
finely bounded by gentle risings, watered by Alun, and varied with a pretty
town and fine church in the middle; with numbers of seats, groves, and
well-cultivated farms. Among the former appears conspicuous, Leeswood, the
creation of the late Sir George Win, rising palace-like along a fine slope on
the south side of the vale, surrounded with woods and lawns; a sad Mausoleum of
fugacious wealth! The distant view is not less beautiful. The three fine
estuaries of the Dee, Weever, and Mersey, the hills of Cheshire, and the more
remote range of those of Shropshire, Staffordshire, Derbyshire, Yorkshire,
Lancashire, Westmoreland, and Cumberland, complete this beautiful scene.

FROM hence to the town of Mold is a pleasant ride. Mold consists principally
of one broad and handsome street on a gentle rising, in the midst of a small
but rich plain. The church is placed on an eminence; and is of the time of
Henry VIII. adorned with a very handsome steeple built of late years. Before
the Reformation, it belonged to the abbey of Bustlesham, or Bysham, in
Berkshire. The living is a vicarage, and has dependent on it the chapelries of
Nerquys and Treuddyn.

THE architecture of the church is of the gothic of that period, the windows
large, and their arches obtuse. Within and without, is a row of animals carved,
as usual at that period. The same may be observed on the old building over St.
Winifrede's well. The inside is extremely elegant; consists of a nave and two
ailes, supported by seven arches, whose pillars are much to be admired for
their lightness. They consist of four round pilasters, with the intermediate
space hollowed, and the capitals elegantly carved. Between the springs of every
arch is an angel holding a shield, on which are either the arms of benefactors,
or the instruments of the Passion. The arms of the Stanlies, who long possessed
this manor, are very frequent. Among the other sculptures, is the Veronica, or
face of our Savior impressed on a handkerchief given to him by a woman on his
way to the place of crucifixion. He took it, wiped his face, and returned it
with the miraculous impression. This precious relic is preserved in St.
Peter's at Rome, and the woman worshipped as a saint, under the name of the
Handkerchief; which at first was called the Vera Icon, or true image; but
becoming thus personified, received the title of St. Veronica. Beneath two
windows above the chancel, are carved in a rude manner, the nails, pincers, and
other tokens of the crucifixion.

AT the eastern ends of the two ailes are three gothic niches elegantly carved.
They formerly were filled with images, now destroyed. The two in the south aile
are almost hid with monuments. Among them is a very superb one in memory of
Robert Davies, Esquire of Llanerch, with his figure in a standing attitude, and
dressed in a Roman habit.

NEAR it is a mural monument of his ancestor, another Robert Davies, of
Gwysaney This gentleman died in 1666: the preceding, in May 1728.
, the paternal seat of the family, and the residence, before the acquisition of
Llanerch in the vale of Clwyd, by the marriage of this gentleman with Anne
daughter and heiress to Sir Peter Mutton knight.

NOT far from Mold stands Gwysaney; a most respectable old house, beautifully
situated. It was of strength sufficient to be garrisoned, in the time of the
civil wars; and was taken, on the 12th of April 1645, by Sir William Brereton
Whitelock, 142.
.

NEAR this is an ancient mural monument, MONUMENTS.
in memory of, Robert Warton, alias Parfew. He was first abbot of Bermondsey,
and elected to the sea of St. Asaph in 1536. He lived much at Denbigh and
Wrexham during his continuance in this see Willis's Bangor, 341. Cathedrals, i.
521. Athenae Oxon. i. 682.
and was removed to that of Hereford in 1554, where he died in 1557. He was
unjustly accused of impairing the revenues of this diocese: on the contrary, it
appears, that he had been a considerable benefactor to the churches of
Gresford, Wrexham, and Mold; which, probably, he found in an unfinished state.
He was interred at Hereford, under a handsome tomb with his effigies; but this
grateful memorial of his benevolence to the church of Mold was erected, as an
inscription beneath once informed, by one John ap Rys. Hoc opus factum fuerit,
per John ap Rys. Above are his arms in a shield, quartered with those of the sea of St. Asaph; and over them a label, inscribed, Robtus pmissione Divina
Epus ASSAV. An angel supports one end; a bishop the other.

THE epitaph on the reverend Doctor Win, composed by himself, several years
before his decease, merits publication.

WILLIAM WIN of Tower, D. D.

Some time fellow of All Souls College in Oxford, and rector of Llanvechan in
this diocese, departed this life aged He died March 3d 1776, aged 77. This,
now, fills these blanks.


In conformity to an ancient usage, from a proper regard to decency, and a
concern for the health of his fellow creatures, he was moved to give particular
directions for being buried in the adjoining churchyard, and not in the church.

And, as he scorned flattering of others while living, he has taken care to
prevent being flattered himself when dead, by causing this small memorial to be
set up in his lifetime.

GOD, be merciful to me a sinner! Heb DDUW, Heb ddim.

At the north-end of the town stands the mount, to which it owes the British
and Latin names, YR WYDDGRUG, and MONS ALTUS, the lofty or conspicuous mount.
This is partly natural, partly artificial. Our British ancestors, and
afterward the Saxons and Normans, taking advantage of so defencible an
eminence, cut it into form, and placed on it a castle. It is possible, that the
Romans might also have had some concern in it; for a beautiful gold coin of
Vespasian was found here; but this being the only proof of its having been
possessed by them, I shall not insist on it any farther than to urge the
probability; Mold being in the neighborhood of many of their mines, and of
places where much of their money has been found.

THE mount is now called the Bailey-hill, from the word Ballium, or
castle-yard. It appears to have been strongly fortified by great ditches,
notwithstanding its arduous ascent. It is divided into three parts: the lower
Ballium or yard; the upper; and the keep, or Donjon. The tops of the two first
are levelled by art; and all are separated by deep fosses. The keep was on a
part greatly and artificially elevated; and around its edges are a few stones,
the only relics of the fortress. On one side of the upper yard are found vast
quantities of bones, some human; others of animals, mostly domestic, such as of
oxen, sheep, horses, and hogs; and a few remnants of horns of stags and
roe-bucks.

THE summit of this hill commands a short but most exquisite view of the
circumjacent vale; and to the west, Moel famma rises with aweful pre-eminence
among the Clwydian hills.

THE first certain account I have of this place is in the reign of William
Rufus, when we find it in possession of Eustace Cruer Powel, 151.
, who then did homage for Mold and Hopedale; he, probably, having been the
person who had ravished them from the ancient owners.

IN the end of the reign of Henry I. or the beginning of that of Stephen,
Robert, called, from his residence at this place, de Montalto, high steward of
Chester, and one of the barons of the Norman earls, became owner of it. We are
informed, that the castle was at this time very strong; and that it had been
often besieged; but never taken, till the Welsh, no longer able to bear the
ravages of the garrison, attempted, in 1144, 1144.
the reduction of it, under the conduct of their gallant prince Owen Gwynedd.
The garrison, for a considerable time, defended the place with great courage;
but at length it was taken by storm; part of the defendants slain, the others
taken prisoners, and the fortress razed to the ground Idem, 199.
.

AFTER this it was again restored; for we find in the aerae Cambro-Britannicae
At the end of Llwya's Commentariolum, 157.
, 1198.
that it was taken, in the winter of 1198, by Llewelyn ap Jorwerth: and about
the year 1267 it was a third time besieged, taken, and demolished, by Gryffydd
ap Gwenwynwyn, lord of Powis.

THE gentry of Ystrad-alun or Molesdale were among the principal complainants
of wrongs done to them by Roger de Clifford, justiciary of Chester, and his
deputy Roger Scrochil, a little before our subjection by Edward I. They
alleged, that their lands were taken from them; that they were grievously and
unjustly fined on trivial occasions; and that, after paying a sum for exemption
from English laws, they were obliged to submit to a trial by jury, or by twelve
men, contrary to the usage of their country Powel, 356.
.

MUCH of the country was, in this reign, so covered with, woods, that Edward,
before his conquest of Wales, was obliged to cut a passage through them, in the
tract between Mold and a place then called Swerdewood; and to direct, that
nothing should be required for the damage done to the owners Rotuli Wallia, 75,
Anno 9 Edwardi I. Febr. 5. 128. We find a similar order in Rymer.
. I find he called in a number of cutters for this purpose; and in the next
year, not fewer than two hundred cutters and colliers (carbonarii) who were
summoned out of the forest of Dean, and the county of Hereford, under the
conduct of Gilbert de Clare earl of Gloucester.

IN the year 1322, Sir Gryffydd Llwyd, a valiant gentleman, who was knighted by
Edward I. on bringing the news of the birth of his son Edward of Caernarvon;
and who, after our conquest, adhered to the English, till he thought their yoke
intolerable; rose in arms, overrun all North Wales and the Marches; and, among
others, seized on this castle; but his attempt was unsuccessful, being defeated
and taken prisoner Powel, 383. Wynn, 313.
.

FROM this time we hear no more of it as a place of defense, Matthew Paris and
Dugdale M. Paris, 855. Dugdale Baron. i. 527.
confound it with Hawarden, and assert it to have been attacked or taken by
David, brother to the last Llewelyn. Mold continued in possession of the
posterity of Robert, 1302.
who did homage for it in 1302, at Chester, to Edward prince of Wales; 1327.
but in 1327, the last baron, in default of male issue, conveyed it to Isabel,
queen of Edward II. for life; and afterward to John of Eltham, younger brother
to Edward III; who died without issue, and his possessions reverted to the
crown.

I AM uncertain how long the crown reserved this lordship. I find it was
granted to the Stanley family, perhaps to Sir John Stanley, by Henry IV. at the
same time that he bestowed on him Hope and Hopedale. The earls of Derby
possessed it till the execution of earl James; after which, both the manor of
Hope and Mold were purchased by certain persons, who enjoyed them till the
Restoration: after that event, a reference was made by his majesty, in 1662, to
the lords, respecting the re-purchase of those manors by the earl of Derby; in
which it had been agreed by his lordship, to pay the parties, on the 26th of
March 1664, the sum of eleven thousand pounds, and to be put into full
possession of the manors. The lords imagined that every thing had been
adjusted; but the earl of Derby refusing to perform his part, the referrees
laid the affair before the king; who, on the 14th of June 1664, ordered that
the former purchasers should remain in quiet possession. The Derby family, by
some means, regained the lordship of Hope; but that of Mold is at present the
property of lady Vincent. The mineral advantages of the manor, which have, at
times, been very considerable, are equally, divided between her ladyship, the
Trevors, and Mr. Lloyd of Tyddyn.

FROM Mold, I took the west side of the vale; a tract filled with numbers of
gentlemen's seats of independent fortunes, as yet not caught and absorbed in
the gulphy vortex of our Leviathans. These are the remnants of the custom of
gavel-kind, so prevalent formerly in North Wales, and which have remained
unimproved by those accidents which, by time and chance, happen to many. I
digressed a little to the right, to see the magnificent gates of Leeswood, the
seat of the late Sir George Win baronet: and a little higher up to Tower,
TOWER.
to enjoy the witty, the lively and agreeable conversation of the reverend
Doctor William Win (now departed). This gentleman was one of those who kept
the patrimony derived from a long train of ancestors, without increase, yet
without impair. The house is small; but part of it is a true specimen of the
border-houses on the confines of England and Scotland: a square tower: of three
stories. In the lower, still remains a staple in the ceiling; a memorial of the
rudeness of the times. During the wars between the houses of York and
Lancaster, this place was inhabited by Reinallt ap Gryffydd ap Bleddyn, one of
the six gallant captains who defended Harlech castle on the part of Henry VI.
He and his people were in continual feud with the citizens of Chester. In 1465,
a considerable number of the latter came to Mold fair; a fray ensued between
the two parties; a dreadful slaughter was made on both sides: but Reinallt got
the victory; took prisoner Robert Bryne linen-draper, and mayor of Chester in
1461, whom he led to his tower, and hung on the staple in his great hall. An
attempt was made afterward to seize Reinallt; and two hundred tall men sallied
from Chester for that purpose. He retired from his house to a neighboring wood,
permitted part of his enemies to enter the building; then rushing from his
cover, fastened the door; and, setting fire to the place, burnt them without
mercy: he then attacked the rest, pursued them to the seaside, where those who
escaped the sword, perished in the channel. His actions were celebrated at the
time, in poems still extant; particularly by Lewis Glyn Cothi, in an Awdl A
Cywydd and an Awdl differ in these respects: the first consists of couplets
generally of seven syllables; the last of stan^as of different lengths of
meter; somewhat like a Pindaric ode.
, in praise of Reinallt. It seems Lewis had married a widow of Chester, against
the consent of the inhabitants; who spoiled him of all his effects. This
whetted the poet's satyr: Who summons the ministry of angels and of devils to
his assistance; and pours a profusion of curses on Caer Lleon and its people.
He wishes water to drown, fire to burn, and air to infect the hated place; and
that grass might grow in every part, except the sacred edifices, of this
habitation of the seven deadly sins.

THE TOWER, in old times, was called after the name of this hero. It was also
named Bryn-coed, from the wood that might have surrounded it. In the time of
Leland it was inhabited by John Wynn ap Robert.

I DESCENDED into my former road, and passed along the course of the Terrig, or
the violent; TERRIG.
at this time a trifling brook; but often of a tremendous swell and fury. On
quitting its channel, go by Leeswood, or Coed-Llai, the ancient seat of my
worthy relation Thomas Eyton esquire. The Davieses of Gwasaney, the Wynnes of
Tower; and this family, sprung from Kynrig Evell, or the Twin, son of Madoc ap
Meredydd prince of lower Powys Madoc died in 1160.
. He was styled lord of Eglwyseg; and had beside, for his portion, Molesdale,
and Treuddyn in the parish of Mold; which, by the custom of gavel kind, became
divided among his posterity; part of which, these families, his descendants,
still enjoy.

FARTHER on is Hartsheath, the house of Guillim Wardle esquire, descended, by
the female line, from the Lloyds of the same place. It is most beautifully
seated on a long rising, insulated by the vale, and finely wooded and
cultivated. The house stands on the southern extremity, and commands a most
elegant view of the valley, divided by the insulated rock of Caergwrle, soaring
out of the valley, and capped with a ruined castle.

A LITTLE further up the vale stands Plas-Teg; PLAS-TEG.
a singular house, belonging to the Trevors; but, for numbers of years,
occupied by farmers. The Trevors acquired it by the marriage of Robert Trevor
of Brynkinalt, with Katherine daughter of Llewelyn ap Ithel of the Mold and
Plas-teg. It is built with great regularity and simple grandeur. In the center
is a hall forty-three feet long by twenty-three. A spacious staircase; and
above, is a dining room of the same dimensions with the hall, and twelve feet
nine inches high. At each corner of the house is a square wing or tower,
consisting (as does the center) of five floors. In each is a room twenty-two
feet six, by nineteen six; and within each of these rooms a closet thirteen
feet seven inches square.

THIS house was built in 1610 by Sir John Trevor Epitaph in H^pe church.
, a second son of the branch of Trevalun. The design is attributed to Inigo
Jones; but I doubt the tradition. It wants both the Grecian-gothic ornaments of
his worse days, and the pure Grecian of his best.

FROM hence I pursued my journey to Caergwrle, CAERGWRLE.
a village on the banks of the Alun, in the parish of Hope or Estyn, whose form
speaks it to have been a Roman station, which appears very evident to the
antiquarian eye, from the summit of the adjacent rock, the site of the castle.
The precincts show themselves to have been rectangular, with one side formed by
the s^ope along the banks of the river. Here is yet preserved the ancient
disposition, in three broad streets, running parallel, and three narrower
intersecting them at right angles. It had been only a small place, an out-post
to Deva; but had the usual concomitants of Roman luxury. RO^^^.
In Camden's time (1606) a hy^^^^^ was discovered near the place five else
long, four broad, and half an ell high, cut out of the live rock. The s^oo^ was
of brick set in mortar: the roof supported by brick pillars; and consisted of
polished tiles, perforated; on these were laid certain brick tubes which
conveyed the heat to the room above. On some of those tiles were inbscribed
LEGIO XX Camden, ii. 828.
. which point out the founders. I have also been credibly informed, that Roman
bricks were found in the ruins of the old house of Hope, the seat of the family
of the same name. I have also heard, that large beds of iron cinders have been
discovered near Caer Estyn in this parish, the supposed works of the Romans.

BESIDES these proofs, here is the trace of a Roman road, pointing from the
village toward Mold, and is visible in two or three places; especially in the
fields on this side of Plas-teg. I think that part of the present road was a
portion of the Roman. An artificial mount stands close on its course. ROADS.
Another road points toward Hawarden; which increases my suspicion of that
having also been a Roman out-post. As the word street is generally a sign of a
Roman road, there might have been a third on the Wrexham side of Caergwrle; for
we find on that road, Croes y street passing over a place called Cesn y Bed,
or the hill of the grave, and leading to the castle. These roads were one way
into some of the mineral parts of Wales, where Roman money had been found.

MR. EDWARDS makes a happy conjecture respecting the etymology of the name of
this place. Caer Gawr Lle, or the camp of the Giant Legion, Lleon Gawr; for the
Britons bestowed that title on the twentieth legion, to imply its power; a turn
analogous to Victrix, giving it the strength of a giant This gave rise to the
fable of Chester having been built by Lleon Gawr, a mighty giant. See p. 106.
Mr. CAMDEN, by mistake, calls the legion Leon Vawr.
.

THIS place, in the division of Wales by Roderic the great, formed part of the
Cantref y Rhiw. When the Saxons made a conquest of our borders, they
comprehended it in their hundred called Exestan, and added it to the county of
Chester. We find in the Doomsday book, that Hope (which gives name to the
parish) was held at that period by one Gislebert; before by Edwevi^ a freeman.
In after times, this tract was known by the name of Hopedale. On the division
of Wales into counties by Edward I. it was annexed to Flintshire; was severed
from it, and added to Denbighshire by Henry VIII.; and in the same reign,
restored to the former county. It is a common notion in the country, that the
last was effected by the interest of the earl of Derby, in order to have his
Welsh estates in the same county; for at that time, the family was possessed of
Hawarden, Molesdale, and this manor; which had been granted, on January 1st
1401, by Henry IV. to Sir John Stanley. The family had at the same time, the
lordship of Maelor Saesneg, which was a portion of Flintshire since its first
being formed into a county. This manor of Hope is the only one possessed at
present in Wales by the earl of Derby.

THE castle of Caergwrle stood on the summit of a great rock, CASTLE.
precipitous on one side, and of steep ascent on the others. Some of the walls,
and part of a round tower still remain, sufficient to show, that its size was
never great. Close to it, on the accessible parts, it was protected by very
deep fosses cut through the rock. On the north-east side, there is a pretty
extensive area; and round its verge the vestiges of a rampart of earth and
stones, and a fosse, such as usual in the British posts: it may be therefore
supposed, that it had been possessed by the Britons in early times; and that it
served to defend, in conjunction with Caer Estyn, CAER ESTYN.
a British post of one rampart and ditch on the opposite side of the dale above
the village, the entrance through this pass into Wales. The vale almost closes
in this place, leaving only room enough for the Alun to flow through its
picturesque dingles, till it gains the open country near the church of Gresford.

I CANNOT trace the founder of this castle. FOUNDER.
It probably was one of the few Welsh fortresses that we have to boast of. Its
oblong form; its comparative deficiency of towers; and its general agreement in
structure, with others whole origin I am acquainted with, make me willing to
suppose it the work of our countrymen, after they had recovered possession of
this tract. In the reign of Owen Gwynedd, I find it part of the estates of
Gryffydd Maelor Powel, 211.
.

DAVID, brother to Llewelyn, last prince of Wales, held it from Edward I. David
made great complaints of the injurious treatment he met with from Roger de
Clifford, the justiciary of Chester, who cut down his woods about Hope; and
endeavored to dispossess him of his rights The same, 350.
. When David took up arms in defense of his brother, he left a garrison in this
castle; but in June 1282, it surrendered to the English monarch. As soon as it
came into his possession, he bestowed it, with all its appertenances, on his
beloved consort Eleonora AYLOFF'S Rot. Walliae, 87.
; from which it acquired the name of Queen Hope. The queen lodged here in her
way to Caernarvon, where her husband sent her to give the Welsh a ruler born
among them. Either at this time, or soon after, the castle was burnt by a
casual fire.

IN 1307, the first of Edward II. this castle and manor was granted to John de
Cromwell, JOHN DE CROMWELL.
on condition that he should repair the castle, then in a ruinous state: and in
1317, he was directed to raise fifty foot-soldiers for the wars in Scotland,
out of his lands in this country Dugdale Baron. 1. 44, 45. Rotuli Scotiae, 136.
. From his death, I find a gap in the succession, till the time they were given
to Sir John Stanley.

CAERGWRLE, with Hope, is a prescriptive borough, and, in conjunction with
Flint, etc. sends a member to parliament.

WEST of the castle, on a lofty hill, BRYN YORKYN.
is Bryn Yorkyn, the paternal seat of Ellis Young Esquire a descendant of the
fertile stock of the often mentioned Tudor Trevor. Jorwerth, the twelsth in
descent, marrying the daughter of William le Young of Croxton Sa^s^ury Pe.
digree, 36. b.
, called his children after their mother's name, which was continued by the
family.

LLEWELYN AP DAVYDD AP MEREDYDD, a descendant of Ynyr of Yale, had estates in
this parish, which were forfeited in the reign of Henry IV, for his adherence
to Owen Glyndwr, and bestowed on Jenkin Hope, great grandson of Hugh Hope of
Hawarden The same, p. 52. b. 67.
.

THE parish is divided by the Alun: the village and church of Hope lies about a
mile from the castle on the north side of the stream. CHURCH.
The church is dedicated to St. Cynfar. The monuments of note are, two to the
Trevors of Plas-teg; one, which is mural, to Sir John Trevor knight, founder of
that house, and secretary to the earl of Nottingham, victor over the invincible
armaaa, and comptroller of the navy in the reigns of Elizabeth and James I. He
died at his neighboring seat, in 1629, aged 67.

THE other is also mural; with two kneeling figures: the man in a gown and
ruff; the lady with a kerchief over her neck. This wants an inscription; but by
the arms appears to have belonged to a Trevor.

ABUNDANCE of limestone is burnt into lime on Caergwrle hill; a lofty mountain,
composed of that species of stone; from which a vast trade is carried into
Cheshire. ENTROCHI.
Near the top are found in loose earth, numbers of the bodies called entrochi,
of a curious and uncommon sort, with round protuberant joints. Fossilists
suppose them to have been parts of some species of arborescent sea-star, whose
branches bear a resemblance to these substances.

IN former times, millstones were cut out of the rock on which the castle
stands, which is composed of small pebbles lodged in grit.

ON Rhyddyn demesne, belonging to Sir John Glynne, adjoining to the Alun, are
two springs, strongly impregnated with salt; SALT SPRINGS.
to which, in dry weather, used to be a great resort of pigeons to pick up the
hardened particles. These were formerly resorted to, as a remedy in scorbutic
cases. The patients drank a quart or two in a day; and some boiled the water
till half was wasted, before they took it. The effect was, purging, griping,
and sickness at the stomach, which went off in a few days, and then produced a
good appetite. Dr. Short gives an instance of a woman in a deplorable situation
from a deep scurvy, who was perfectly restored by the use of these springs.

FROM the village of Hope, I returned on the north side of the valley;
re-passed Mold; and, about a mile west of the town, visited Maes-Garmon;
MAES-GARMON.
a spot that still retains the name of the saintly commander in the celebrated
battle, the Victoria Alleluictica, fought in 420, between the Britons, headed
by the bishops Germanus and Lupus, and a crowd of pagan Picts and Saxons, who
were carrying desolation through the country. This event happened in Easter
week, when the Christian army, wet with their recent baptism in the river Alun,
were led by their holy commanders against the pagan host. Germanus instructed
them to attend to the word he gave, and repeat it. Accordingly, he pronounced
that of ALLELUIA. His soldiers caught the sacred sound, and repeated it with
such ecstatic force, that the hills resounding with the cry, struck terror into
the enemy, who fled on all sides; numbers perished by the sword, and numbers in
the adjacent river Brit. Eccles. Antiquitates, 335. Paulus Diaconus, lib. xv.
c. 12. and BID, lib. i. c. 20. describe the action.
.

SUCH is the relation given by Constantius of Lions, who wrote the life of St.
Germanus, within thirty-two years after the death of the saint. It has been
objected by cavillers, that the Saxons were not at that time, possessed of
Britain. That may be admitted; but the learned USHER overthrows the objection,
by rightly observing, that those people had, long before, made temporary
invasions of our island, and committed great ravages in several parts; and
calls to witness Ammianus Marcellinus Lib. xxvi. c. 4.
: and to his authority, I may add, that the Romans found it necessary to have,
in the later times, a new officer to watch their motions, and repel their
invasions, a comes littoris SAXONICI per BRITANNIAS.

MAES-GARMON, the scene of this celebrated victory, lies near Rhual, the
pleasant seat of Thomas Griffith Esquire whose uncle, Nehemiah Griffith, erected a
column, with the following inscription, to perpetuate the memory of the spot.

Ad Annum CCCCXX Saxones Pictiq. Bellum adversus Britones junctis viribus
susciperunt In hac regione Hodieq. MAESGARMON appellata; cum in praelium
descenditur, Apostolicis Britonum Ducibus Germano et LUPO, CHRISTUS militabat
in Castris: ALLELUIA tertio repetitum exclamabant Hostile agmen terrore
prosternitur: Triumphant Hostibus fusis sine sanguine palma Fide, non Viribus
obtenta M. P. in VICTORIAE ALLELUIATICAE memoriam N. G. MDCCXXXVI.

FROM hence I proceeded toward Kilken; and saw in my way, Hesp-alun i. c. the
dry Alun.
; HESP-ALUN.
the place where the river Alun, like the sullen Mole or mourning Guadiana,
sinks under ground, and continues a subterraneous course for half a mile, and
then emerges to the day. About two miles distant from this place lies the
church or Kilken, beneath Moel Famm^, the highest division of the Clwydian
hills. CLWYDIAN HILLS.
These run in a chain from above Presta^yn on the estuary of the Dee, from
north to south as far as Moel Yr accre in Llanarmon parish; when they join the
Mountain Cefn du, extending to the parish of Gwyddelwern. These admit no
passage the whole way, excepting that of Bodvari, without climbing the steep
sides, and going through the bwlchs formed high up between the round heathy
heads that rise from the mass, more than two-thirds of the way to the summits;
and which form, from the west side of the vale of Clwyd, a most beautiful view,
especially in the season when it glows with the p^rple flowers of the heath. A
few birds, lovers of exalted situations, are still to be found here; a few
black and red grous have escaped the rage of shooters; and I have seen the
ringeuz^ about the lower parts. These hills are composed of a mixed soil, clay,
and gravel. The stone is of a shattery laminated nature, and bad for most
o^conomic uses. The sides abound in springs, which descend in small rills, to
the great benefit of the inhabitants of the rich slopes.

THE church of Kilken is remarkable for its carved roof; KILLEN CHURCH.
which is said to have been brought from the church at Basingwere abbey on the
dissolution: and thus to have fulfilled a prophecy of our Robin Ddu, who, when
he saw it put up by the monks, observed, it would do very well for a church
beneath Moel Famma.

IN this parish, on the side of the turnpike road, not far from Kilken hall, is
the noted Fsynnon Leinw, or the flowing well; FSYNNON LEINW.
a large oblong well with a double wall round it. This is taken notice of by
Camden for its flux and reflux; but the singularity has ceased since his time,
according to the best information I can receive.

NEAR this well, is Kilken hall, a seat of a branch of the Mastyns, now the
property of the reverend Mr. Edwards of Pentre, in Montgomeryshire, in right of
his wife, Charlotte Mostyn, heiress of the place.

THIS fountain lies in the vale of Nannerch; VALE OF NANNERCU.
which extends one way to Mold; and at the other joins with that of Bodvari,
the inlet into the vale of Clwyd. The Wheeler, a pretty stream, rises on the
east side; and after a short course, falls into the Clwyd. The house of
Penbedw, the seat of Watkin Williams Esquire is a great ornament to this little
valley. PENBEDW.
In this gentleman's library are some remains of the collection of Sir Kenelm
Digby, some curious illuminated books; and the superb pedigree Mention is made
of it in Wood's Athenae. Oxon. ii. 354. and the Brit. Blog. iii. 1313. By
permission of Mr. Williams, I caused several of the tombs to be copied; and
that of Lady Venetia Digby to be engraven in the Antiquary's Reportery.
of the Digby family, and its alliances, with all the arms and tombs that were
extant, painted in the most exquisite manner, at the expense of above a
thousand pounds; a vast sum at the time of the compilation, in the year 1634.

PENBEDW is seated in a manor of the same name, granted, in 1544, by Henry
VIII. and witnessed by queen Catherine Parr, to Peter (Pyers) ap Howel, alias
Peter Mostyn, of Wespre, in consideration of the payment of seventy-three
pounds in hand. The grant recites, that it had been parcel of the possessions
of the earl of Kent.

IN the meadows below the house, BRITISH POSTS.
is part of a druidical circle, and a small tumulus. On one of the summits of
the mountain, at a great height above the house, is a very strong British post,
with two ditches of prodigious depth, with suitable dikes on the accessible
sides: and on that which is inaccessible, is a smooth terras, levelled along
the hill, probably a place for exercising the possessors. This post is called
Moel ARTHUR, probably in honor of our celebrated prince. MOEL ARTHUR.
This is one of the chain of posts that defended the country of the Ordovices,
and their successors, against the inroads of invaders. They are far from being
peculiar to that nation; but were the common mode of defense throughout the
whole island. I conjecture that their origin was very early; but that they were
occasionally made use of in after times, even as low as that of Owen Glyndwr.
Almost all are rendered defensible in the same manner, by deep ditches and
high-banks, formed either of earth or of loose stones, with one, but generally
two entrances. In the description of that of Caractacus by Tacitus, their
formation is exactly shown: Tunc montibus arduis, et si qua clementer accedi
poterant, in modum. valli saxa praestruit Taciti Annals, lib. xii. c. 33.
. They are of no certain shape; but the precinct conforms to that of the hill.
THEIR USES.
They are generally destitute of water; which evinces, that they were not
intended as places of long abode, but merely temporary retreats for their
families, herds, and flocks on a sudden invasion. The fighting men kept the
field, while all that was dear or valuable, was committed to these asyla under
a proper garrison.

THEY are always placed within sight of one another; so that by fires, or other
signals, notice might be given of the approach of an enemy. FIRT, MOEL HIRADDIG.
The first that forms this chain is Moel Hiraddig, about two or three miles
from the sea, on a rocky hill, in the parish of Cwm. Possibly, prior to the
castle of Diserth, another post might have been on that rock; and in such case,
should be esteemed the first post, the guard of the shore, and the great
artificial mount above Newmarket, called Cop yr Gole^^i, or Mount of Light;
which may be seen from most of the others, might be the spot from whence the
signal might be given of the approach of the enemy by sea; whether they were
Saxons or plundering Scoti.

THE next to Moel Hiraddig, MOEL Y GAER.
is a Moel y Gaer, in the parish of Bodvari, above the entrance of the inlet
into the vale of Clwyd.

THE third are the vast entrenchments on Bryn y Cloddiau, or the hill of
ditches. BRYN Y CLODDIAU.
This is the largest we have; being a mile and a half in circuit, and defended
by single, double, triple, and even quadruple ditches, according to the
exigencies of the sides. In the fosse next to the area, are numbers of hollows,
as if designed for lodgments of men, or a particular guard.

MOEL ARTHUR is the next. Almost opposite to it, on Helkin mountain, MOEL Y
CRIO.
on the highest part, is Moel y Crio; a vast artificial mount, that seems to be
a middle post between this, and the Moel y Gaer in Northop parish; SECOND, MOEL
Y GAER.
but our ignorance in the art military of those days, prevents us from pointing
out the immediate use.

NEXT succeeds Meel Fenlli. MOEL FENLLI, AND THIRD, MOEL Y GAER.
Beneath that is another post, on a lesser hill which juts into the vale of
Clwyd, and is called by the common name of Moel y Gaer. These are all that seem
destined for the defense of this part of the country.

CAER-ESTYN, CAER ESTYN.
and the post opposite on Caergwrle rock, defended that front. Farther on was
Hawarden; and still farther, where the vale of Cheshire gains upon our country,
was that of the Rosts, in the parish of Gresford. I could give a long list of
these posts, perhaps as far as the Severn sea, in the country of the Silures,
and the Trans-s^brine parts of the Cornavii; but their suffice for the present
purpose. I shall endeavor (in Mr. ^^a^s's map) to point out the whole of these
fastnesses of our di^t^ant ancestors.

SOON after passing Penbedw, NANEERCH.
I reached Nannerch, a hamlet with a small church, noted for little but a
monument, in memory of Charlot^ Theophila Mostyn, wife to Richard Mostyn Esquire
former owner of Peabedw, and daughter and co-heiress (with her si^ter Magare^ta
Maria, who married Sir John Conway of Bediruddan, to John Digby, son of the
famous Sir Kenelm; by which means, several choice morsels of his collection
came into our country.

GRATITUDE to the worthy rector of this place, the reverend Mr. John Lloyd, for
the many informations I received from him, respecting the antiquities of our
country, urges me here to make my best acknowlegements. Few possess so large a
share of the knowledge of our language, and of our history; and few have been so
liberal in the communication.

THIS valley is a boundary of the mineral tract of our county. MINERAL TRACT.
I shall now take a kind of bird's eye view of the whole, which I surrounded,
beginning with the northern extremity. The highland part may be divided into
two. FIRST DIVISION.
The first is insulated by valley, plain, and sea. The farther point is Dalar
Goch, or the rock of Diserth, bounded by the rich, arable slats of Rudland; the
course is continued southward through the parishes of Cwm, Dimeirchion, and
Caerwys, bounded by the vale of Clwyd, and that of Bodvari. The parishes of
Ysgeiviog and Nannerch succeed, and after them a portion of Kilken, when this
mineral tract takes a turn above the parish of Mold at Rhos Esmor in that of
Northop; and then faces the east in the parishes of Halkin and Holywell, in
those of Whiteford, Llanasa, Gwaenyskar, and Meliden, and makes a point toward
the west, where it unites with the rock of Diserth.

THE second division is separated from the first by a deep depression of the
country between Rhos Esmor, SECOND DIVISION.
and the parish of Mold. There is even in the lower parts, on the west side, a
chain of mines. But the land rises again at Mold mountain, and the mineral
tract is continued through the parishes of Llanverres, the eastern sides of
Llanarmon, Llandegla, the Glisseg rocks, and Minera above Wrexham.

THE middle of the first division is entirely limestone, as is the western
side, from Dalar goch to Rhos Esmor: from thence, or on the eastern side the
strata alters. LIMESTONE.
Toward the skirts of the hills, CHERT.
it changes to that flinty substance called chert, more or less pure. SHALE.
Lower down it degenerates into shale of a black stone, soon dissoluble in the
air. So far lead-ore is found. Sy^ after this strata, freestone commences,
FREESTONE.
and coals are found, which continue to the shore, and under the sea, till they
appear on the opposite side in the peninsula of Wiral, and again beyond the
estuary of the Mersey.

THE same observations might be made on the strata in the second division.
Limestone beds are continued on the western. side beyond the Gliseg rocks, and
in their neighborhood on both sides of the Dee. The veins in Minera lie in an
impure gritty chert. The sudden change of Strata is very observable. The
transition may be immediately seen on each side of the narrow vale of Nannerch,
limestone forming the one, and the shattery slaty stone composing the other.

WAS I to continue my aerial speculation, I should see a discontinuance of the
limestone strata till they rose on the opposite side of the vale of Clwyd. My
eye would catch the most remote part on the northern side of Red Wharf-bay in
Anglesea, insulated far from any other. The great promontories of Llandudus and
Rhiwledin, or the greater and lesser Ormshead, the first (at times rich in
copper) would next appear. Penmaen Rhos, and the continued precipices along the
coast of Denbighshire, succeed in the nearer view, many of them productive of
lead ore. And, finally, the detatched rocks of Henllan beyond Denbigh, and Coed
Marchon beyond Ruthyn, which yield to the industrious farmer, by their
excellent lime, a manure more certainly productive of wealth, than the
precarious search after the deep-hid minerals.

THE limestone and the chert of our mineral tracts are of unknown depth;
neither their bottom, nor that of the fissars or veins which cross them, have
ever been discovered. DEPTH OF VEINS.
The ore of lead has been followed to the depth of a hundred and thirty, or a
hundred and forty yards, and then has ceased; but the unprofitable vein appears
below unclosed. Our mines, as I have shown before, have been worked from very
early times P. 51.
, but not without long interruptions. But as several of our veins have been
pursued for a hundred years past, the point may be affirmed of the depth to
which they bear ore in our country.

THE veins run either north and south, or east and west. THEIR COURSE.
But it is remarkable, that the lead ore got in the first, scarcely ever
produces a quantity of silver worth the refiner's labor. The ores of Mold
mountain, and Minera, yield scarcely any silver.

THE minerals of the tracts in question, are ore of lead, calamine, or Lapis
calaminaris; and a mineral, that answers the same purpose, called by the miners
black jack.

OUR ores of lead differ in quality. The lamellated, ORES OF LEAD: THEIR
PRODUCE OF LEAD.
or common kind, usually named potters ore, yields from fourteen to sixteen
hundred and a quarter of lead, from twenty hundred of the ore: but the last
produce is rare.

THE quantity of silver produced from our lead is also variable. OF SILVER.
The upper part of a vein of lead ore is always richest in silver; the bottom,
in lead. Our refiners will assay any lead that will yield ten ounces in the ton
of lead and upwards. The usual produce is fourteen ounces: sixteen have been
gotten; but acquisitions of that kind within this circuit are extremely
uncommon.

SOME years ago, a green lead ore was discovered in the silver rake on Halkin
mountain. GREEN LEAD-ORE.
Only a small quantity was found, which yielded about thirteen hundred and a
quarter from a tun of the ore. It was of a very stubborn quality, and resisted
the greatest powers of the blast furnace before it would yield any metal.

THE brown or whitish stoney species of ore called Caulk, BROWN, OR CAULK.
produce from five hundred and a quarter to eleven hundred of lead from the
ton. The smelters likewise get from what is called waste, or the hillocks,
which are the refuse of good ores, so mixed with clay, gravel, stone, or
calamine, as not to be separated but by fire, from ten to thirteen hundred of
lead per ton.

WE have had at different periods mines productive of vast wealth in several
parts of this tract. RICH MINES.
The richest vein was discovered about fifty years ago at Rowley's rake, or
Pant y Pwll dwr on Halkin mountain, continued with some interruption into a
small enclosure, the property of Sir George Win of Leeswood, and the freehold
of Mr. David Hughes; which, in less than thirty years, yielded to different
proprietors, adventurers, and smelters, above a million of money. The reader
will naturally expect to find in these parts a nation of Craesus's; but cito
parta, cito dilabuntur. It is at this time an undetermined question, whether
more wealth has been gotten out of the earth, or more lost in the search after
the prizes in this subterraneous lottery.

MUCH of the ore obtained in our country is smelted in the several furnaces
belonging to different companies: much also is exported in the form of ore. I
wished to be acquainted with the annual quantity smelted from those of the
country; but found, by reason of the ores imported from Scotland and other
parts, that the computation would be of insuperable difficulty. All the lead
and ore is exported from the port of Chester, a small quantity excepted,
consumed by the plumbers and other trades in the adjacent parts. I therefore
refer the reader to pages 196, 197, for the number of tuns sent from that port
in the years 1771, 1776. By the favor of Mr. Jken, collector, I am permitted to
say, that, from the year 1758 to Christmas 1777, the following quantities have
been entered in the custom-house, foreign and coast-ways.

Lead. 79533 Tons. 11 c. 2 qrs. 16 lb. --

Lead ore. 12840 T. 6 c. --

Litharge. 2767 T. 7 c.

I CANNOT ascertain the quantity of ounces of silver produced from our ores,
for the reasons just assigned. I can only say, that the company of a single
smelting-house, did obtain in the Year 1754 -- 12160. Oz. 1755 -- 1276. Oz.
1756 -- 7341. Oz. In 1774 -- 5693. Oz. 1775 -- 6704. Oz. 1776 -- 4347. Oz.


THE reader need not be told, that the former were the years of mineral plenty;
and such, which I must say, are seldom known. There are five other smelting
houses; but I believe none equalled this in the quality of silver. This
precious metal is chiefly bought by the artificers at Sheffield and Birmingham.

CALAMINE is found in great abundance in the veins of limestone and chert, in
the same manner as the ores of lead. Where there is plenty of the former, there
is little or none of the latter. The calamine is also entirely confined to the
eastern side of the country. About a thousand tons of this mineral is annually
exported. I have mentioned, in p. 62. how little it was known in Flintshire
till within these sixty years; and may here add, that we were indebted to John
Barrow, a native of Somersetshire, who being well acquainted with that mineral
in his own country, pointed out to us its uses.

CALAMINE assumes various shapes and colors. Green, yellow, red, and black,
often has a stony appearance, and often like the lattice work of bones. The
richest looks like beeswax; but that species is not common any more than the
curious crystallized specimens.

THE ores of Zink, called here black jack, are met with in our mines. We have
it in a metallic form of a bluish gray color; and again in form of the dark
semipellucid ambers. Cromsted calls the first ZINCUM ferro sulphurato
mineralisatum; the other ZINCUM calciforme cum ferro sulphuratum, No 1. a.

THESE were engrossed by patent by a Bristol company, and carried there to aid
the making of brass.

SPARS of different kinds are found in the limestone veins; particularly the
species called Iceland crystal, ICELAND CRYSTAL.
spatum islandicum This very able writer, in one instance credulous, says, that
twelve men were killed at once by one of these Daemones truculenti, in the mine
of ANNE-BER^. De anim subter. 491.
, the refracting spar, which represents objects seen through it double.

PETROLEUM, or rock-oil, is found sometimes in crevices of the mines; FAIRIES
BUTTER.
has an agreeable smell, and is esteemed serviceable in rheumatic cases, if
rubbed on the parts affected. The miners call it Ymenyn tylwyth teg, or the
fairies butter, belonging to the benign species; perhaps the same with those
(in superstitious days called knockers) which, by repeated strokes, KNOCKERS.
were believed to direct the miners to a rich vein. But, in fact, the noises
often heard in mines are always discovered to proceed from the dropping of
water. These daemones montani, as Agricola This very able writer, in one
instance credulous, says, that twelve men were killed at once by one of these
Daemones truculenti, in the mine of ANNE-BER^. De anim subter. 491.
calls them, never infest our mines, except in form of damps of both species,
the suffocating and the fire. The last is very frequent in the coal-pits, but
rare in the mines of lead, unless in those parts where the shale begins, or
stone attendant on coal. The first kills instantaneously, by its mephitic
vapor, and is a disaster common to neglected vaults, and draw-wells. The other
is inflammable, and burns and destroys in a dreadful manner, FIRE-DAMP.
as the colliers, through negligence, in not setting fire to the vapor before
it gets to a head, do often experience. The most tremendous instance was on
February 3d, 1675, in a coal-work at Mostyn, which I shall relate from the
Philosophical Transactions No 136. or Vol. ii. 378. Lowthorb's Abridgement. The
account was drawn up by Mr. Roger Mostyn.
; and so conclude the account of our mineral concerns.

The damp had been perceived for some time before, IN MOSTYN COLLIERY.
resembling fiery blades darting and crossing each other from both sides of the
pit. The usual methods were taken to free the pit from this evil. After a
cessation of work for three days, the steward thinking to fetch a compass about
from the eye of the pit that came from the day, and to bring wind by a secure
way along with him, that, if it burst again, it might be done without danger of
men's lives, went down, and took two men along with him, which served his turn
for this purpose. He was no sooner down, but the rest of the workmen that had
wrought there, disdaining to be left behind in such a time of danger, hasted
down after them; and one of them, more indiscreet than the rest, went headlong
with his candle over the eye of the damp-pit, at which the damp immediately
catched, and flew to and fro over all the hollows of the work, with a great
wind, and a continual fire; and, as it went, keeping a mighty great roaring
noise on all sides.

THE men, at first appearance of it, had most of them fallen upon their faces,
and hid themselves as well as they could, in the loose, slack, or small-coal,
and under the shelter of posts; yet, nevertheless, the damp returning out of
the hollows, and drawing toward the eye of the pit, it came up with incredible
force; the wind and fire tore most of their clothes off their backs, and singed
what was left, burning their hair, faces, and hands; the blasts falling so
sharp on their skin, as if they had been whipped with cords. Some, that had lest
shelter, were carried fifteen or sixteen yards from their first station, and
beaten against the roof of the coal, and sides of the post, and lay afterward
a good while senseless; so that it was long before they could hear or find one
another. As it drew up to the day-pit, it caught one of the men along with it,
that was next to the eye; and up it comes, with such a terrible crack, not
unlike, but more shrill, than a cannon, that was heard fifteen miles off, with
the wind; and such a pillar of smoke, as darkened all the sky over-head for a
good while. The brow of the hill above the pit was eighteen yards high, and on
it grew trees of fourteen or fifteen yards long; yet the man's body, and other
things from the pit, were seen above the tops of the highest trees, at least
100 yards. On this pit stood a horse-engine of substantial timber, and strong
iron work; on which lay a trunk, or barrel, for winding the rope up and down,
of above 1000 pounds weight; it was then in motion, one bucket going down, and
the other coming up full of water. This trunk was fastened to that frame with
locks and bolts of iron; yet it was thrown up, and carried a good way from the
pit; and pieces of it, though bound with iron-hoops and strong nails, blown
into the woods about: so likewise were the two buckets; and the ends of the
rope, after the buckets were blown from them, stood a while upright in the air
like pikes, and then came leisurely drilling down. The whole frame of the
engine was stirred, and moved out of its place; and those men's clothes, caps,
and hats, that escaped, were afterward found shattered to pieces, and thrown
amongst the woods a great way from the pit.

FROM Nannerch, I continued my journey along the narrow vale, picturesquely
ornamented with hanging woods. Leave the church of Skeiviog on the right. In
this parish was shot, a few years ago, HOOPOE.
that singular bird, the Hoopoe, vol. i. No 90. of British Zoology. This
species is of the size of a stare; easily distinguishable by its large crest;
long, slender, incurvated bill; and by having only ten feathers in the tail. I
can add to my former account, that the Arabs call it the messenger bird; not
only from the resemblance which the crest bears to the plumes that decorate the
caps of Chaous or Turkish messengers; but also, because the Mahometans believe
it to have been the bird which (when birds could speak) held a conversation
with Solomon, and to have been the courier which carried on the epistolary
correspondence between that wise monarch and the Sabaean queen Bochart Hitroz.
pars ii. p. 347. Also, Universal ancient Hist. iv. 107, notes.
.

AT the junction of the vales of Nannerch and Bodvari, I ascended to Caerwys;
CAERWYS.
a town mouldering away with age. It consists of four streets, crossing each
other at right angles, answering to the four points of the compass. The name,
as Camden has long since observed, savors of great antiquity. Caer, the
fortress and Gws, a summon, which shows it had been in early times, the place
of judicature; and it certainly had that honor long before it was removed to
the county-town of Flint. I will not assert that it had been a Roman station,
notwithstanding I am credibly informed, that in the present century, a number
of copper coins were found in a bottom below the town; and there still remains
in the parish, a Latin inscription, cut in rude letters, on an unhewn upright
stone to this effect: HIC JACIT MULI ERBO.... OBIIT. Multitudes of tumuli are
scattered over the neighborhood; and one very near to it. This plain, probably,
had been a field of battle. Whether this inscription referred to any heroine
that fell on this place, I will not dare to affirm. It is an unfinished piece,
Hic jacit mulier BO -- and, at a distance, the word obiit.

CAERWYS Powel, 360.
, with a neighboring town now lost, called Tref Edwyn, and Rhuddlan, had been,
from very early time, the seats of the judicature for these parts of Wales. In
1281, the noblemen of Tegengl laid before the archbishop of Canterbury (who
came down on the Christian design of reconciling the differences between Edward
I. and Llewelyn) the infringement of their liberties in this particular;
asserting, that it was the tenor of their privilege to be judged according to
the laws of Wales, at those three places; and that the best men of the country
were taken because they desired to be judged at Tref Edwyn by the laws of Wales
Ibid.
. How far their complaints were remedied does not appear: but when justiciary
courts were in after times appointed, Caerwys recovered its ancient honors. In
this town were held the great sessions. It had its town hall, and its jail; and
was the place of execution. It remained the place of judicature till sometime
past the middle of the last century, when the courts were removed to Flint.

IN the year 1241, or the 26th of Henry III. that prince granted to the
inhabitants of Tegengl, a charter Mostyn MSS.
, exempting them from the amobr; but at the same time, imposes on them an
obligation to find twenty-four people, who were to keep the peace of the
country: and obliges this town, Picton, Axton, and other hamlets, to find three
men each, to work three days in the harvest, as they were wont in the days of
the two preceding Welsh princes. This seems during some temporary advantage
which Henry had over the Welsh.

CAERWYS has the most considerable fairs for cattle, sheep and horses, in all
the county. They are of great antiquity. The first John Trevor, bishop of St.
Asaph, appears among the subscribers to a charter for a market in 1356; but the
markets have now failed entirely, since the increase of Holywell.

THE earl of Plymouth is lord of this manor; and possesses, by purchase of an
ancestor, the estate of the Griffiths, descended from Ednowen-Bendew, one of
the fifteen tribes, whose seat is still standing, inhabited by tenants.

BUT what gave a particular glory to the town of Caerwys, was the honor it had
of being the place of the Eisteddfod, or the sessions of the bards and
minstrels for many centuries. It was the resort of those of a certain district;
as Aberfraw in Anglesea was of those of that island, and the neighboring
county; and Mathraval of those of the land of Powys. The reason that these
places were thus distinguished, was, because the two last were the residence of
princes; and Caerwys, on account of the royal palace that stood below the town,
the residence of Llewelyn ap Gryffydd.

THESE Eisteddfods were the British Olympics. Fired at first with generous
emulation, our poets crowded into the list, and carried off the prize,
contented with the mere honor of victory. At length, when the competitors
became numerous, and the country became oppressed with the multitude, new
regulations of course took place. The disappointed candidates were no longer
suffered to torture the ears of the principality with their wretched
compositions. None but bards of merit were suffered to rehearse their pieces;
and minstrels of skill, to perform. These went through a long probation: judges
were appointed to decide on their respective abilities; and degrees suitable
were conferred, and permissions granted for exercising their talents, in the
manner that will be related in the following pages. The judges were appointed
by commission from our princes; and after the conquest of Wales, by the kings
of England, notwithstanding, Edward I. exercised a political cruelty over the
generation of bards of his time; yet future princes thought fit to revive an
institution so likely to soften the manners of a fierce people. The crown had
the power of nominating the judges, who decided not only on the merit, but the
subject of the poems; and, like our modern lord chamberlains, were certain of
licensing only those which were agreeable to the English court.

BEFORE I enter on the account of the succession of British Eisteddsfods, I
shall just mention the high antiquity of the character that made, ANCIENT BARDS.
in after times, the principal figure in these meetings. The Bardi (the Beirdds
of the Britons) were of great authority among the Celtic nations: the Germans
were animated in battle by verses delivered in a deep and solemn tone Tacitus
de mor. German, lib. vi. 246.
. among the Gauls Strabo, lib. iv. 302. Athenaeus,
, they sung the actions of great men; and particularly, celebrated in their
hymns, the heroes who fell in fight:

Vos quoque qui fortes animas belloque peremtas
Laudibus in longum vates dimittis in aevum
Plurima fecuri fudistis carmina BARDI.
LUCAN. i. YOU too, ye bards, whom sacred rapture fire
To chaunt your heroes to your country's lyre,
Who consecrate in your immortal strain,
Brave patriot souls in righteous battle slain;
Securely now the tuneful task renew,
And noblest themes in deathless songs pursue.
ROW. IT is highly probable, that the bards and minstrels were under certain
regulations during the time of Druidism; but we find no proofs of them till
long after; IN TIME OF CAPWALADR:
till the days of Cadwaladr, last king of Britain, who died at Rome about the
year 688. Of him it is said, that being at an assembly of this nature, with his
nobles, there came a minstrel, and played in a key so displeasing, that he and
all his brethren were prohibited, under a severe penalty, from ever playing on
it any more; but were ordered to adopt that of Mwynen Gwynedd, or the sweet key
of Gwynedd North Wales.
.

I IMAGINE, OF ARTHUR:
that previous to this, there had been musical regulations in Britain; for I
find that a tune, called Gosteg yr Halen, or the Prelude of the Salt, was
always played whenever the salt-seller was placed before king Arthur's,
knights, at his round table Mr. Morris's MSS. of British music.
.

AFTER Cadwaladr, the next princes who undertook the reform of our minstrelsie,
were Bleddyn ap Cynfyn and Gryssydd ap Cynan. OF GRYFFYDD AP CYNAN
The first was cotemporary with the conqueror; the last with king Stephen.
These enacted, that no person should follow the profession of bard or minstrel,
but such only who were admitted by the Eisteddfod, which was held once in three
years. They were prohibited from invading one another's province: nor were they
permitted to degrade themselves by following any other occupation. Neither of
these were to demand above ten shillings in any article, under pain of losing
the whole, besides being suspended from their profession for three years Leges
Wallieae, 35.
.

AFTER the times of the princes, the great men, their descendants, took these
people under their care and protection, allowing them the liberty of circuiting
their respective territories thrice a year, viz. at Christmas, Easter, and
Whitsuntide; and the whole principality once in three years.

THE bards were in the highest repute. I cannot give a stronger idea of the
esteem they were in, than by citing from the Welsh laws, the account of their
rank in the prince's court, and the various rewards and fees they were entitled
to, and the severe penalties that were enacted to preserve their persons from
insult. They were supposed to be endowed with powers equal to inspiration. They
were the oral historians of all past transactions, public and private. They
related the great events of the state; and, like the scalds of the northern
nations, retained the memory of numberless transactions, which otherwise would
have perished in oblivion. They were likewise thoroughly acquainted with the
works of the three primary bards, viz. MYRDDYN AP MORFRYN, MYRDDYN EMRYS, and
TALIESIN BEN BEIRDD. But they had another talent, which probably endeared them
more than all the rest to the Welsh nobility; that of being most accomplished
genealogists, and flattering their vanity, in singing the deeds of an ancestry
derived from the most distant period.

THE BARDD TEULU, or COURT BARD, held the eighth place in the prince's court.
He possessed his land free. The prince supplied him with a horse and woollen
robe, and the princess with linen Leges Wallicae, 35.
. He sat next to the governor of the palace at the three great festivals; for,
at those seasons, the governor was to deliver him his harp The same, 35, and 16.
On the same festivals, he was also to have the Disdain's, or steward of the
houshold's garment for his f^e.

WHEN a song is called for, the Cadeir-fardd, or the bard who has got the badge
of the chair, is first to sing a hymn in glory of GOD; after that, another in
honor of the prince. When those are over, the Teuluwr, or bard of the hall, is
to sing some other subject.

IF the princess calls for a song after she has retired from table to her
apartment, the Teuluwr must sing to her highness in a low voice, least he
should disturb the performers in the hall. John Dafydd Rhys says, that the
subject was to be on death; but I rather follow Wotton, who, instead of angau,
which signifies death, prefers the word amgen, or a separate subject from what
was sung in the hall.

WHEN the bard goes with the prince's servants on a plundering expedition, and
performs before them his animating compositions, he is to have the finest
heifer of the booty; and in case the detachment was drawn up in order of
battle, he was to sing at their head, the praises of the British monarchy. This
was to remind them of their ancient right to the whole kingdom; for their
inroads being almost always on the English territories, they thought they did
no more than seize on their own.

THE prince bestowed on him an ivory chess-board; others say a harp: and the
princess a golden ring. His lodging was to be with the governor of the palace.

WHEN he is required to sing with other bards, by way of distinction, he is to
have a double portion.

IF the bard asks any favor of the prince, he must sing one of his
compositions: if of a nobleman, three: if of a common person, he must sing till
he is so weary as to rest on his elbow, or to fall asleep. This, I fear, shows
our bards were a very importuning race, and required a check; yet still they
were in high estimation. Their Gwerth, or compensation for their life, was
rated at cxxvi cows leges Wallicae, 37.
, and any injury done them, at vi cows and cxx pence.

THE Merch-Gobr of his daughter, MERCH-GOBR.
or marriage fine of his daughter, was cxx pence. Her cowyll, argyffreu, or
nuptial presents, was thirty shillings; and her portion three pounds Ibid. 37.
. It is remarkable, that the PENCERDD GWLAD, or chief of the faculty, was
entitled to the merch-gobr, or amobr for the daughters of all the inferiors of
the faculty within the district, who paid xxiv pence on their marriage; which
not only shows the antiquity, but the great authority of these people.

THE PENCERDD was not among the Ibid. 68.
officers of the court: but occasionally sat in the tenth place. He also had
his land free; was to perform much in the same manner as the court bard, whom
he seems to have taken place of, whenever he attended; for, when the Pencerdd
was present, the former sat only in the twelfth seat. No other was to play
without license from him. His death was valued at cxxvi cows; and any injury
done him, at vi cows, and cxx pence. Each of the chief musicians was to receive
from their lord, the first, a harp; the second, a crwth; the third, a pipe;
which, on their deaths, were to revert to the lord Leges Wallicae, 68.
.

THE prince's harp was valued at cxx pence, and that of Pencerdd at the same;
the key at xxiv pence: a gentleman's harp was estimated at lx pence.

POWEL 191.
says, that Gryffydd ap Cynan brought over with him out of Ireland, diverse
cunning musicians, who devised in a manner, all the instrumental music now
used. With all respect to our sister kingdom, I must imagine, that if our
instruments were not originally British, we were copyists from the Romans, who,
again, took their instruments from the Greeks. Methinks I see the model of a
harp in fig. 7. tab. lxxvi. of the supplement of Montfaucon, volume iii.; of
the crwth in Doctor BURNY'S Psalter, tab. v. fig. 4. or his Etruscan lyre, fig.
10. and of the pipe, in several simple pipes, before it received from us the
addition of the horns, from whence it got the title of pib-gorn, and the
English name of cornet See figures of the crwt^ and pib-gorn in Archaeologia,
iii. tab. vii.
.

A COMMISSION for holding an Eisteddfod at Caerwys, in 1568, is still in
possession of Sir Roger Mostyn, together with the SILVER HARP; which had from
time immemorial been in the gift of his ancestors, to bestow on the chief of
the faculty. This badge of honor is about five or six inches long, and
furnished with strings equal to the number of the muses. The commission is the
last of the kind which was granted; and is in form following:

BY THE QUEEN.
ELIZABETH, by the grace of GOD, of England, Frannce, and Ireland Queen,
defendor of the faith, etc.
to our trusty and right well beloved Sr Richard Bulkley knight, Sir Rees
Gruffith knight, Ellice Price esquior, Doctor in cyvill law, and one of our
counsel in our marches of Wales, William Mostyn, Jevan Lloyd of Yale, J^n
Salusbury of Ruge, Rees Thomos, Maurice Win, Will^m Lewis, Peers Mostyn, Owen
Jhn ap Host Vaughan, John Will^am ap John, John Lewis Owen, Moris Gruffyth,
Symound Thelvall, Ellice ap Wm Lloyd, Robt Puleston, Harry Aparry, William
Glynne, and Rees Hughes, esquiors, and to every of them, greating.
Whereas it is come to the knowledge of the lord president and other or said
counsel in or marches of Wales, that vagraunt and idle psons, naming themselfs
mynstrells, rithmors, and barthes, are lately grown into such an intolerable
multitude wth-in the principalitee of Northwales, that not only gentlemen and
others, by their shameless disorders, are oftentimes disquieted in their
habitacons; but also thexpert mynstrells and mucisions in town and contry
thereby much discouraged to travail in thexercise and practice of their
knowledge; and also not a little hyndred in their lyvings and pferm^. The
reformacon whereof, and the putting of these people in ordr, the said lord
president and counsel have thought verey necessary, and knowing you to be men
both of wisdom and upright dealing, and also of experience and good knowledge
in the science, have appointed and authorized you to be comissioners for that
purpose. And forasmuch as or said counsel of late, travayling in some pte of
the said principalitee, had pfect: understanding or credible report, that
thaccustomed place for thexecucon of the like comssyon, has been hertofore at
Caroyes in our county of Fflynt; and that William Mostyn esquior, and his
ancestr^ have had the gift and bestowing of the sylver harp apptayning to the
chess of that faculty, and that a years warning at the least has been
accustomed to be geaven of thassembly and execucon of the like comissyon. Our
said counsel have, therefore, appointed thexecucon of this commissyon to be at
the said town of Caroyes, the Monday next aftr the feast of the blessed
Trynitee, with shall be in the year of or Lord God 1568.

AND therefore we require and command you, by the aucthoritee of these psents,
not only to cause open pclamacons to be made in all ffayors, mrketts, towns,
and other places of assembly wthin our counties of Anglize, Carntvon,
Meyryonneth, Denhigh, and Fflynt, that all and evry pson and psons that entend
to maynteigne their lyvings by name or color of mynstrells, rithmrs, or
barthes, wthin the Talaith of Aberfiowe, comphending the said fyve shires, shall
be and appear before you the said day and place, to show their learnings
accordingly: but also that you, xxt^^, xixen, xviiien, xviien, xvien, xven,
xiiiien, xiiien, xii^, xin, xen ix, viii, vii, or vi of you whereof you, Sr
Richard Bulkey, Sr Rees Gruffith, Ellice Price, and Wm Mostyn, Esquiot^, or
iii^^ or ii of you, to be of the nombr to repair to the said place the day
aforsaid, and calling to you such expert men in the said faculty of the Welshe
music, as to you shall be thought convenient to pceade to thexecucon of the
pmiss^, and to admytt such and so many as by your wisdoms and knowledges you
shall find worthy into and undr the degrees heretofore in semblable fort, to
use exercise and follow the ^^yences and facultes of their pfessyons in such
decent ordr as shall apptaigne to each of their degrees, and as yor discrecons
and wisdoms shall pseribe unto them, geaving straight monycons and comaundmt
in or name and on or behalf to the rest not worthy that they return to some
honest labor and due exercise, such as they be most apt unto for mayntenaunce
of their lyvings, upon pain to be taken as sturdy and idle vacaboundes and to
be used according to the laws and statutes pvided in that behalf, letting you
with or said counsel look for advertisemt by due certificatt at your hands
of yor doings in thexecucon of the said pmiss^. For seeing in any wise that
upon the said assembly the peace and good order be observed and kept
accordingly, assertayning you that the said Willm Mostyn has pmised to see
furnyture and things necessary pvided for that assembly at the place aforsaid.

Geven under or signet at or city of Chester the xxiiith of October, the nynth
year of or reign. Signed her Hignes counsel, in the mrches of WALES.

In consequence, an Eisteddfod was held on the 26th of May following: and on
this occasion the following persons received their degrees:

Lewis Edward, were created chief bards of vocal song. William Lln, were
created chief bards of vocal song. Owen Evan, alias Gwynedd, were created chief
bards of vocal song. Simwnt Fychan, were created chief bards of vocal song.
William Kynwal, -- primary students of vocal song. Lewis Menai, -- primary
students of vocal song. Sion Tudur, -- primary students of vocal song. Huw
Llyn, -- primary students of vocal song. Bedo Havesp, -- primary students of
vocal song. Sion Phylip, -- primary students of vocal song. Huw Conway, --
primary students of vocal song.
Ieuan Tew, were created secondary students of vocal song. Huw Pennant, were
created secondary students of vocal song. Howel Keiriog, were created secondary
students of vocal song.
Davydd Alaw, -- probationary students of vocal song. Edward Brwynllys, --
probationary students of vocal song. Rhys Gelli, -- probationary students of
vocal song.
INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC.

Sion ap Rhys Bencerdd, HARP.
-- chief bards and teachers of instrumental song. William Penllyn, -- chief
bards and teachers of instrumental song. Hwlkin Llwyd, -- chief bards and
teachers of instrumental song.
Thomas Anwyl, HARP.
-- chief bards (but not teachers) of instrumental song. Dd Llwyd ap Sion ap
Rhys, -- chief bards (but not teachers) of instrumental song. Edward ab Evan,
-- chief bards (but not teachers) of instrumental song. Robt. ap Howel Llanvor,
-- chief bards (but not teachers) of instrumental song. Humphrey Goch, -- chief
bards (but not teachers) of instrumental song.
Richard Glyn, HARP.
-- primary students of instrumental song. Robert Llwyd, -- primary students of
instrumental song. Evan Penllyn, -- primary students of instrumental song.
Lewis Llanver, -- primary students of instrumental song.
Huw Dai, HARP.
-- secondary ditto. Huw ap Morus, -- secondary ditto. Siamas Morlas, --
secondary ditto. Sion Niwbwrch, -- secondary ditto. Ellis Gruffydd, --
secondary ditto.
Lewis Berain, HARP.
were created probationary students of instrumental song. Ieuan ap Meredydd,
were created probationary students of instrumental song. Gwalchmai ap Davydd,
were created probationary students of instrumental song.
Siamas Eutyn, CRWTH.
-- chief bards and teachers of instrumental song. Evan Penmon, -- chief bards
and teachers of instrumental song.
Robert ap Rhys Gyttyn, CRWTH.
-- chief bards (but not teachers) of instrumental song. Thomas Mon, -- chief
bards (but not teachers) of instrumental song. Sion Ednyved, -- chief bards
(but not teachers) of instrumental song. Thomas Grythor, -- chief bards (but
not teachers) of instrumental song.
Sion Ddu Grythor, CRWTH.
-- primary student of instrumental song.
Robert ab Evan Llwyd, CRWTH.
secondary students of instrumental song. Edward Grythor, secondary students of
instrumental song. Thomas Kegidva, -- secondary students of instrumental song.
Rhys Grythor Hiraethog, -- secondary students of instrumental song. Thomas
Grythor Bach, -- secondary students of instrumental song. Davydd ab Howel
Grythor, -- secondary students of instrumental song. William Ednyved, --
secondary students of instrumental song.
Richard Conway, CRWTH.
-- probationary students of instrumental song. Sion Alaw, -- probationary
students of instrumental song. Robt. Conway, -- probationary students of
instrumental song. Crythor Llwyd Marchedd, -- probationary students of
instrumental song.
It must be observed, that players on crwths with three strings, taborers, and
pipers, were reckoned among the ignoble performers: they were not allowed to
sit down, and had only a penny for their pains.

THE different degrees were comprehended in this list. There were four in the
poetical, and five in the musical faculty. The lowest, or more properly what
should be called a candidate or probationer, was Y Dyscybl Yspas, or the lowest
disciple, who was obliged (if a candidate for poetry) to understand the
contraction or five species of Englyns, and to compose them before a Pencerdd,
who was to declare upon his conscience, that he was endowed with a true
poetical genius. After this he commenced

DYSCYBL DYSCYBLAIDD, Discipulus disciplinabilis: here he becomes a graduate,
but must understand twelve of our different metres, and produce specimens of
each of his own composition, and if in three years time he does not, by his
merit, acquire the next degree, he is degraded from this. If he succeeds, he
then proceeds to the degree of

DYSCYBL PENCEIRDDIAIDD, or candidate for degree of Pencerdd, when he must
understand the propriety of expressions, and the different metres, and compose
in twenty-one species; and if in three years he does not attain by his own
merit to the next degree, he falls back into that of Dyscybl dyscyblaidd;
otherwise he becomes a

PENBARDD or PENCERDD, chief of the faculty he was candidate in; when it is
necessary he should be accomplished in every branch of his art. He then
received the badge of the silver-harp; or that of a golden or silver chain,
which he wore upon his shoulder. He also was placed with much ceremony on a
magnificent chair, part of the furnyture mentioned in the patent; was there
invested with his degree, and then acquired the honorable name of Cadeirfardd,
or Bardd cadeiriawg.

IN instrumental music there were five degrees; which differ nothing from those
in the other faculty, except in the two lowest: I. the Dyscybl yspas heb radd,
or without a degree, 2. Dyscybl yspas graddawl, or graduated; 3. Dyscybl
dyscyblaidd; 4. Dyscybl penceirddiaidd; 5. Pencerdd. These, like the others,
were to be attained by their respective merits in the science; but as then
qualifications are expressed in technical terms of British music, it is past,
my skill to give an explanation. None but a Pencerdd should presume to become
an instructor. The chief of our days, is that uncommon genius, the blind Mr.
JOHN PARRY of RHIWABON, who has had the kingdom for his Cylch clera, or musical
circuit, and remains unrivalled.

OUR PENCERDDS thus qualified, were licensed to sing, or to perform under
certain restrictions. By the law of our princes, particular regard was paid to
their morals: They were to be no make-bates, no vagabonds, no alehouse
haunters, no drunkards, no brawllers, no whore-hunters, no thieves, nor
companions of such, in which things, if they offend, every man, by the
statute, is made an officer, and authorized to arrest and punish them; yea, and
to take from them all that they have about them Powel, 192.
.

THEY were prohibited from uttering any scandalous words in speech or whispers;
detraction, mocking, scoffing, inventing lies, or repeating them after others,
under pain of fine and imprisonment: nor were they to make a song of any person
without his consent; nor to enter any man's house without formal leave first
obtained.

EVERY Penbardd and Pencerdd was allowed to take in disciples for a certain
space of time, but not above one at a time. A disciple was not qualified to
make another. Each was to be with his teacher during Lent, unless prevented by
sickness or imprisonment, under pain of losing his degree. He was obliged to
show every composition to his teacher before it was publicly sung. They were
not to follow the practice of cl^er y dom, i. e. dunghill bards and musicians,
or any other species of vagabond minstrels. They were enjoined a month before
each festival, to settle their routs with their respective teachers, least too
many of them should crowd to the same places; only one being allowed to go to a
person who paid ten pounds a year rent; and two to such who paid twenty
pounds, and so on in proportion to those of higher rank: and every teacher was
obliged to keep a copy of these rules, to show and inculcate to his pupils in
time of Lent, when they came for their instructions.

No person was to mimic, mock, or scoff at the awenyddion on account of their
mental absence, or when they had on them the AWEN or poeticus furor; from an
opinion that no bard, duly authorized, could ever meditate on improper subjects.

To whatsoever house they came in the time of wakes, they must remain there
while the feasting lasted; unless they had leave from the master of the house,
or were invited by another. If they wandered from house to house, they were to
be apprehended as strollers and vagabonds, and to be deprived of their clera Or
their pay. Sometimes it signifies the act of their perambulation.
, which was forfeited to the use of the church. If they got intoxicated, they
forfeited their reward: but if they violated the chastity of wife or maid, they
were fined and imprisoned, and lost their clera for seven years.

THEIR fees or rewards were regulated. A dyscybl dyscyblaidd was entitled to 3
s. 4 d. for his cowydd.

A DYSCYBL PENCEIRDDIAIDD, received for the same species of composition 6 s. 9
d.

His teacher, or the Pencerdd, had no more; only the master of the house
usually presented him with a garment, or some other mark of favor.

THE minstrels received these rewards; a dyscybl yspas graddawl had only 1 s.
upon each of the great festivals.

A DYSCYBL DYSCYBLAIDD, at the same seasons 2 s. and a dyscybl penceirddiaidd 3
s. 4 d.

A PENCERDD the same, besides a voluntary gratuity. He was also entitled to
fees at royal and other weddings; and upon their cylch clera, which was
permitted only once in three years. But besides these fees, in order to
encourage the clerwyr to keep up the language and the memory of the exploits
and pedigrees of the Britons, they were allowed a penny out of every
ploughland, and a halfpenny out of every half ploughland of their district.

THE Penbardd and Pencerdd, in their circuits, frequented only the houses of
the gentry; but if he degraded himself by visiting the commonalty, he was only
to expect the fee of a common clerwr, whose province it was to visit the
plebeian houses. The following were the persons who were allotted to entertain
the vulgar ears.

A PERSON laboring under any infirmity; such as blindness, lameness, etc. a
dyscybl yspas, a dyscybl dyscyblaidd, and dyscybl penceirddiaidd. The first
regulation was founded on humanity.

No public festivity, great feast, or wedding could be duly solemnized without
the presence of the bards and minstrels. A glorious emulation arose among them;
and prizes were bestowed on the most worthy. In 1176, the lord Rhys prince of
South Wales, made a great feast Powel, 237.
at Christmas, on account of the finishing his new castle at Aberteifi; of
which he proclaimed notice through all Britain a year and a day before; great
was the resort of strangers, who were nobly entertained; so that none departed
unsatisfied. Among deeds of arms, and variety of spectacles, RHYS invited all
the bards of Wales, and provided chairs for them, which were placed in his
hall, where they fat and disputed, and sang, to show their skill in their
respective faculties, and bestowed great rewards, and rich gifts on the
victors. The bards of North Wales won the prizes; but the minstrels of Rhys's
household, excelled in their faculty. On this occasion the Brawdwr Llys, or
judge of the court, an officer fifth in rank, declared aloud the victor, and
received from the bard, for his fee, a mighty drinking-horn, made of the horn
of an ox; a golden ring, and the cushion on which he sat in his chair of
dignity Leges Wellicae, 28.
.

THE bards of those times often accompanied their voices with the harp, as they
were wont of old, in the manner described by Ammianus Marcellinus Lib. xv. 9.
. There was also another species of musician, of an inferior kind, called
Datceiniad, who accompanied the musical instruments of others with his song. He
was inferior to both bard and minstrel; yet it was requisite he should be
possessed of a considerable degree of knowledge in both sciences: he ought to
be able to tune the harp and crwth: to show his skill in playing several notes
and keys, and to be perfectly conversant in what are called the twenty-four
measures of instrumental song; and to be able to sing with judgment and melody.
He was likewise to be master of reading justly, and writing correctly. He was
not only to understand the twentyfour modes of metrical compositions; but to
exhibit specimens of his own, at left in three of them; and if he met with any
old song faultily transcribed, he was to rectify it. He was also to carry with
him a harp or a crwth in a white case. He was further required, not only to be
a ready waiter at table, but to be an expert carver of every species of fowl.
At the weddings of any of the royal family, his office was to wait on the bride.

ON those occasions, I am reminded of another custom in which the bards were
concerned. After their nuptial feast, a Pencerdd was constituted CYFF CLER, or
pillar of the cler, and seated in a chair surrounded by the other bards
standing, who made him the subject of their merry and ludicrous compositions,
to raise mirth in the company. He was that day to make no reply; but on the
next, he was to divert the hall at the expense of the inferior bards; and was
also to compose a poem upon a subject given him suitable to his dignity.

THE most inferior of the musical tribe was sometimes admitted. DATCEINIAD.
This was the Datceiniad pen pastwn, or he that sung to the sound of his club;
being ignorant of every other kind of instrument. When he was permitted to be
introduced, he was obliged to stand in the middle of the hall, and sing his
cowydd or awdl, beating time, and playing the symphony with his pastwn or club;
but if there was a professor of music present, his leave must be first obtained
before he presumed to entertain the company with this species of melody.
Wherever he came he must act as a menial servant to the bard or musician
Several parts of this account are translated from Cambrobrytannicae Cymraecaeve
Linguae Institutiones; a very rare book, written by Doctor John Davydd Rhys of
Llanfaethlu in Anglesey, printed in 1592. He took his doctor's degree at
Sienna; but was educated at Oxford. He returned to his own country, where he
practiced with great success. At the request of Sir Edward Stradling, of St.
Donats, he composed this book. He tells us, he wrote the first part at Mr.
Morgan Meredydd's in Radnorshire; the rest at a place of his own in
Brecknockshire, as he says, at the age of seventy, and under the shade of a
hawthorn grove. Vide his preface.
.

I SHALL conclude this account of the Eisteddfods and my Tour, with the
description of the poetical genius of the Welsh by Michael Drayton POLY OLBION,
song iv.
, who elegantly and faithfully records the various personages concerned in the
entertainments.

''Mongst whom, some there were bards, that in their sacred rage
'Recorded the descents and acts of every age:
'Some with their nimble joints that struck the warbling string,
'In fingering some unskilled, but used to sing
'To others harp; of which you both might find
'Great plenty, and of both excelling in their kind,
'That as the Stethon ost obtained a victor's praise;
'Had won the silver harp, and worn Apollo's bays:
'Whose verses they deduced from those first golden times,
'Of sundry sorts of feet, and sundry suits of rhimes.
'In Englins some there were, that in their subject strain;
'Some makers that again affect a lostier vein,
'Rehearse their high conceits in cowyths; other some
'In owdells theirs express, as matter haps to come.
'So varying still their moods, observing yet in all
'Their quantities, their rests, their ceasutes metrical;
'For, to that sacred art they most themselves apply;
'Addicted from their birth to so much poesy,
'That in the mountains, those who scarce have seen a book
'Most skilfully will make, as though from art they took.
FINIS.
ADDITIONS.
PAGE 2^. BASINGWERK ABEY.
IN an out-house is lodged a stone with the following inscription: JESUS MARIA.
HERE. LIES. TH. Y. BODY. OF. GEORGE. PE. TREE. LATE. OF. GREENFIELD. IN. FLINT
SHIRE, Esquire. SONE TO. W. LORD. PETRE BARON. OF. INGLESTON. IN. ESSEX. and
MARRIED ANE. E / Y. RELICT. OF. JOHN MOSTOIN. Esquire. BEING.E / Y DAUGHTER OF.
HENRY. FOX. Esquire. WHO. FOR. E / Y. TO. MANE. CATHOLIC. FAITH. and. LOYAL. TY.
TO. HIS. TIE / MA. LEFT HIS. COUNTRY. and. SPENDING. HIS. TIME. T / W. GREAT.
EDIFICATION. OF. HIS. NEIGHBOVRS. DIED. AT. WEXFORD E / Y 26 DAY OF SEP. AN.
DO^ 1647 AGED 34.

THE following order, for putting the chapel over the well into possession of a
clergyman of the church of Rome, was addresed to Sir Roger Mostyn baronet, by
the queen of James II. P. 30 HOLYWELL.


Sir ROGER MOSTYN.
IT having pleased the king, by his royal grant, to bestow upon me ye ancient
chapel adjoining to St. Winifride's well; these are to desire you to give
present posesion, in my name, of the said chapel, to Mr. Thomas Roberts, who
will deliver this letter into yr hands. It being also my intention to have the
place decently repaired, and put to a good use, I further desire, that you will
affoard him your favor and protection, than he may not be disturbed in the
performance thereof. You may rest assured, that what you do herein, according
to my desire, shall be very kindly remembered by

Your good friend, MARY: REGINA.
May ye 8th, 1687. WHITEHALL.
ROBERT DAVIES Esquire of Llannerch, by deed, dated October 10th, 1626, gave the
advowson of Holywell to JESUS College Oxford; that is to say, as often as the
vicarage shall become vacant, the said Robert Davies and his heirs, shall
freely and charitatis intuitu, et absque aliqua morosa cunctatione, present a
native of Wales, rightfully and canonically nominated by the college.

NEAR GADLYS smelting works is a lofty round mount, flat at top. p. 85. GADLYS.
On this had probably been a casteler, the residence of some of our princes;
which gave rise to the name GADLY's Palatium Castrense. This may, perhaps, be a
better reason than that which I assign; notwithstanding, I believe it to be the
spot occupied by Henry.

THAT Edward I. P. 43. FLINT.
enlarged the castle of Flint greatly, and that Henry II. was only the founder
of a small fortress on that spot, is evident from these complaints of the Welsh
in 1281: That the noble and best of the country be injured; for that the king
builded the castle of Flynt upon their ground; and the king commanded the
justices to give the men as much and as good ground, or the price: but they are
spoiled of their lands, and have neither other lands nor money. Powel, 361.

ABOUT a mile above Flint is another great mount of the same kind, called Bryn
y cwn.

EULO was reckoned an appertenance to Montalto or Mold. MS. notes to a copy of
Powel's history of Wales, lent by Edward Lloyd Esquire of Pengwern. P. 87. EULO.


Was burnt by Llewelyn after king John had divested him of it. P. 232.
ELLESMERE.


A REMARKABLE circumstance, which put a stop to much cruelty exercised by
ordonnance of parliament against the native Irish, who served in England in the
royal army during the civil wars, happened at this place Prince Rupert, in one
of his marches across this country, halted at Ellesmere, and determined, by
retaliation, to revenge the deaths of the Irish sufferers; thirteen of that
kingdom had lately been executed by the parliament army in cool blood. Here the
prince ordered the prisoners whom he had in possession, to cast lots for their
lives on the drum-head; and the thirteen on whom the fatal destiny fell, to be
hanged. The die was cast, and the unfortunate men selected. While preparation
was making for their execution, one of them ( Philip Littleton) who had been
park-keeper to Robert Corbet Esquire of Stanwardine, saw Sir Vincent Corbet of
Moreton Corbet ride by, who was in the prince's army. Littleton told a soldier,
that he was sure if Sir Vincent knew he was there, he would intercede for him.
The soldier, with great humanity, ran to the knight, and informed him of the
case; who immediately obtained his pardon. The rest were executed, and after
this, no more Irish were put to death in this kingdom.

Communicated from a MS. by the reverend Mr. Edwards.

THE Kynastons are of Welsh descent, derived from Bleddyn ap Cynvyn prince of
Powis. P. 234. OTTLBY.
Fadoc, son of Philip ap Gryffydd, was the first who took the name of Kynaston.

THEY became masters of Ottley or Ockle, as it has been some time written, by
the marriage of Humphrey Kynaston Esquire of Stokes, with Elizabeth, daughter and
heiress of Richard Ottley of this place. He was granfaher to Sir Francis,
mentioned p. 234. SALUSBURY Pedigree.

THIS celebrated book is in the possession of Sir Watkin Williams Wynn, who
favored me with the loan of it. It contains the pedigrees of all the gentlemen
in North Wales, and of some adjacent counties, with their arms finely
illuminated. It was compiled by John Salusbury Esquire of Erbistock, who lived
about the middle of the last century, and appears to have executed it with
great accuracy.

WAS garrisoned for the king in the beginning of the civil wars. P 258.
O^^^^TRY.
The governor fortified it very strongly; and, least the enemy should annoy the
place from the tower steeple, pulled it down to the body of the church, part of
which he also demolished. It was besieged by general Mytton, who placed his
cannon against the new gate, which he soon demolished. A bold and daring young
man, named George Cranage, went with his hatchet, and cut down the chains of
the drawbridge. The parliament forces then entered, and obliged the royalists
to retire into the castle. Cranage was then persuaded to hang a buttar (petard)
at the castle gate. After being well animated with sack, he undertook this
desperate attempt: crept with the engine from house to house, till he got to
that next to the castle; fastened it to the gate, set fire to it, and escaped
unhurt. The gate was burst open, and the place taken. Mr. Edwards's MSS.

IN July 1644, Oswestry was besieged by the king's forces under colonel Marrow.
Sir Thomas Middleton relieved the place; took 200 common soldiers, 7 carriages,
and 100 horse.

Whiteclock, 94.

AFTER the death of the king, this fortress was totally demolished.

FROM Chirk, I made an excursion to Brynkinallt, about a mile below the
village. P. 270. BRYNKINALLT.
This had been the seat of the Trevors, descended from Ednyved Gam, a
descendant of Tudor Trevor.

THE house is of brick, built in 1619. In it is a good portrait of Sir John
Trevor, master of the rolls, in the robes of his office, sitting. He enjoyed
that place both in the reign of James II. and of William III. He was able,
dextrous, and enterprizing; and in the reign of the first, had the disgraceful
compliment paid to him of being the designed successor in the chancellorship to
Jefferies, in case it was possible that the last could have been affected with
any scruples. King William found it necessary to make use of Trevor, who was
made first lord commissioner of the great seal, and privy counselor. He had
been speaker of the house of commons in each reign. In that of William, he is
recorded to have been the first who managed a party by buying of votes, for
which purpose he was entrusted with money by the court; but in 1694-5, was
expelled the house for receiving a bribe of a thousand guineas from the city of
London, in order to expedite the passing of the Orphan bill, which had long
stuck in the house; and which he ought to have done from the sole motive of
justice and compassion. The commons designed to have proceeded against him by
impeachment; but the affair dropped by the prorogation of parkment.

By the marriage of his daughter Anne, in 1690, to Michael Hill Esquire this place
passed into this family; and is now possessed by Arthur lord Dungannon of the
kingdom of Ireland, descended from Arthur Hill Esquire second son of that match.

IN February 1645-6, colonel Watts governor of the castle, delivered it,
furnished with bread and beer, to Sir Thomas Middleton's daughter for her
father's use; but first raised contributions on the neighborhood. P. 272. CHIRK
CASTLE.
He then marched toward the king, at that time at Welsh Pool; but was
surprised by the country people, and his wagons taken. Mostyn MSS.

IT is singular that the ancient Britons should make so light of the crime
intended, when one nation of our Celtic ancestors, the Germans, inflicted the
most cruel punishment on the female offenders at lest. P. 274. PARAGRAPH FOURTH.
Tacitus de Mor. Germ.

EDWARD I. P. 278. LLANGOLLEN.
by charter to Roger Mortimer, dated July 16th, 1684, grants a market every
Sunday to his manor of Llangollen, and two fairs annually. Both were to
continue three days: the first began on the eve of St. Dunstar; the other on
that of St. Martin, in the winter. This charter was witnessed by bishop of Bath
and Wells; Henry de Lecy, earl of Lincoln; Richard de Burgh, earl of U(...);
Reginald, de Gray; John de Montalto; and others. Communicated by Paul Panton Esquire

I BEG leave to correct a small error respecting the site of this post; it not
being between Offa's and Wat's dikes; but about two hundred yards to the
outside of the former. P. 290 GARTHEN.


CALLED anciently Wrightesham, and Wrightelesham. P. 291. WREXHAM.


ERRATA.
Page 2. for Welsh, read read Welsh Page 3. Allen, read Alun Maelwr, read
Maelor Page 4. Tegangle, read Tegengl Rudland, read Rhuddlan Mynnydd, read
Mynydd Page 11. Eisteddfad, read Eisteddfod Page 14. Llandidno, read Llandudno
Llandulas, read Llanddulas Page 19. Llannerchymor, read Llannerchy moc Page 26.
Basingwerst, read Basingwerk Page 28. Angared, read Angharad Page 32. Hidgen,
read Higden Page 38. Llandeniolen, read Llanddeiniolen Page 44. Malgon, read
Maelgwn Page 45. Penmai^, read Penmaen Page 53. Bagilt, read Bagillt Page 60.
Silley, read Scilly Page 66. note, curea, read aurea Page 74. Bromefield, read
Bromfield Page 81. Brunford, read Brynffordd Page 83. Malgwyn, read Maelgwn
Enion, read Einion Page 91. Hawardin, read Hawarden Page 107. Septimus, read
Septimius Page 116. Gwinedd, read Gwynedd Page 118. Brochmail, read Brochwel
Page 123. Gryffyd, read Gryffydd Page 178. Meschina, read Meschines Page 190.
Haggarth, read Haygarth Page 209. note, Cirreg, read Cerrig Page 221. Amobyr,
read Amobr Page 234 line 13. e, read the Page 239. bovarii, read boveria Page
250. last l. house, read use Page 319. Comhere, read Cwm her Page 320.
Strathfleur, read Y strad fflur Page 324. Dolgellu, read Dolgelleu Page 370.
line 10. duo, read du o Page 386. Avidus, read avidas Page 401. Brynkinalt,
read Brynkinallt Page 413. dele Firt in margin Page 416. alters, read alter
Page 424 paged 244 Page 433. l. 23. loug, read long
INDEX.
A
ACTON house Page. 296 Ad Dietam Page. 162 Agricla Bwlch Page. 388 Album
monasterium Page. 249 Alfred besieges the Danes in Chester Page. 119 Amobr,
what Page. 221 Anglesea, men fined for being concerned with Glyndwr Page. 357
Antiquities, Roman, found near Flint Page. 67 Arenaria saxatilis Page. 19
Assach, whre Page. 364 Assassinatioa in Chester cathedral Page. 181 Assassins,
determined resolution of Page. 276 Atiscross hundred, part of Flintshire Page.
6, 50
B
Balderton bridge, Welsh defeated at Page. 105 Bangor, famous seminary Page.
222 Bangor, monks of, strenuous opposers of the church of Rome Page. 224
curious coffin-lids at ibid.
Basingwerk castle Page. 22 abbey Page. 24 epitaph there on a Petre. Page. 448
Battle of Chester Page. 118 Coleshill Page. 85 Eulo ibid. Crogen Page. 268
Bishopric of Chester Page. 172 Bettisfield Page. 219 Bodidin house Page. 379
Bordarii, what Page. 6 Bovium Page. 224 Bra, Castle Dinas Page. 279 Brass made
by the Britons Page. 62 works of, imported in queen Elizabeth's time Page. 78
British posts Page. 413 Broadlane, seat of the Glynnes Page. 101 fine
portraits there ibid.
Broughton, near Hawarden Page. 104 in Maelor Page. 216
Brutus the elder, fine bust of Page. 10 Bryn y pys Page. 229 Bryn Yorkin Page.
406 Bwlch y Rhiw Velen Page. 376 Bychton Page. 14 Byssus Jolothus Page. 38
C
Caer Ogyrfan Page. 258 Caergwrle Page. 402 castle Page. 404
Calamine, the cadmia of the ancients Page. 63 its use forgot for many
centuries ibid.
Cangi Page. 4 Carreg Carn March Arthur Page. 390 Caryocatactes, a bird Page.
20 Castle Brogyntyn Page. 262 Ceangi Page. 4 Ceiriog brook Page. 267 Charles
VII. of France, his alliance with Glyndwr Page. 341 Cheese making, its
antiquity Page. 117, 129 Chert Page. 18 Chester, not British Page. 106 station
of the Legio XX. victrix. Colonia Devana Page. 107 excavated streets Page. 108
great vaults, lost Page. 109 Roman gate Page. 110 hypocaust Page. 111 other
antiquities, altars, etc. Page. 113 Saxon, state of Page. 118 battle of, ibid.
Chester, Danes, winter there Page. 119 guild mercatory Page. 127 trade in
Saxon times Page. 128 in the Norman Page. 132 its Whitson plays Page. 137
besieged Page. 148
Chester bridge and bridge-gate Page. 150 mills Page. 151, 152 waterworks
Page. 153 walls ibid. water-tower Page. 156 east gate Page. 157 castle Page.
158 jail Page. 161 charters Page. 164 praetorium Page. 168 abbey Page. 174
chapter house Page. 177 cathedral Page. 179 St. John's Page. 187 present trade
Page. 196 quays Page. 197 canal Page. 199
Chirk church Page. 268 castle Page. 270 given up by Col. Watts Page. 454
Clwydian hills Page. 411 Coal known to the Britons Page. 17 Coed Eulo, battle
there Page. 85 Coleshill Page. 40 battle near Page. 85
Collieries Page. 15 Copper Page. 62 Roman cake of Page. 11, 63
Condolanus, where slain Page. 238 Coracles Page. 225 Crogen castle Page. 270
D
Damps in mines Page. 423 Datceiniad Pen Pastwn Page. 446 David, prince,
surprises Hawarden Page. 92 put to death by Edward I. ibid.
Davits, Edward, the Cneifiwr glass Page. 375 Deva, Devana Page. 107 Dietam ad,
what Page. 162 Dinoth, St. Page. 222 Domitian, his name on a pig of lead Page.
57
E
Earls of Chester, their ancient dignity nearly regal Page. 125 hold a
parliament ibid.
Eaton, in Cheshire Page. 202 Eccleston Page. 201 Edgar lays up his fleet at
Chester Page. 123 rowed up the Dee by six petty kings ibid.
Edwin, earl of Chester Page. 123 owns Flintshire at the conquest Page. 7
Eisteddfod Page. 427 Eleven towns 257 Eliseg, pillar of Page. 373 Ellesmere
Page. 230 remarkable event there Page. 450
Emral hall Page. 220 Englefield Page. 7 Erbistock Page. 215 Erddig house Page.
291 Ethelfleda the heroic, her history Page. 120 Eulo castle Page. 84 battle
near, Page. 85 potteries, at Page. 87 an appertenance to Mold Page. 450
Eurgen, St. Page. 83 Exchequer in Chester Page. 162 Explosion, dreadful, at
Chester Page. 170 Eyton in Denbighshire Page. 226 Eyton, John op Ellis, his
tomb Page. 286
F
Falcon, long flight of one Page. 8 Farn Page. 203 Festa asinaria Page. 143
Fire-brick Page. 87 Fitz-alans, earls of Arundel Page. 252 Fitz-warine, a
valiant family Page. 239 Flint town Page. 41 castle Page. 42 a Roman station
ibid. antiquities found near Page. 50, 67 complaint of the men of Page. 450
Flintshire Page. 2 by whom subdued Page. 5 revenues of the county in the time
of Edward III. Page. 49
Fwyall, Sir Howel y, his grant of Chester mills Page. 151 Ffynnon Leinw Page.
412
G
Gadl's Page. 85 Gam David, an account of Page. 335 when released Page. 362
Galanas, a Welsh mulct Page. 274 Garreg, fine view from, Page. 13 Garthen,
the, a British post Page. 290 a mistake about it rectified Page. 455
Gelli chapel Page. 13 Germanus, St. Page. 380, 389 Gestes of Guarine Page. 244
Gherbod earl of chester Page. 124. Glass, Roman Page. 68 Glisseg rocks Page.
301 valley Page. 375
Glyndwr, Owen, his history Page. 302 to 369 his prison Page. 362
Glynne, chief justice, his portrait and character Page. 101 Gobowen Page. 259
Goch Jolo, Glyndwr's bard Page. 304 Gold found in Britain Page. 64 a temptation
to the Roman invasion ibid. the Britons early acquainted with its uses Page. 66
Greyhound, singular story of one Page. 47 Gresford Page. 298 Gray, Reginald,
lord, oppresses Glyndwr Page. 309 Grosvenour, vast mineral grant to the family
Page. 74 Gryffydd ap Madog, his treason Page. 280 murder of his children by
earl Warren Page. 210, 280
Guarine, founder of the Fitzwarrens Page. 239 Gwernhailed Page. 228 Gwerth
Page. 274 Gwynedd, Howel, beheaded on Moel y Gaer 83 Gwynedd, Owen defeats
Henry II. at Coleshill 85 his sons defeat the flower of Henry's army ibid.
Gwysaney 393 Gyrys, the first collector of Welsh proverbs Page. 388
H
Halkin, fine view from Page. 73 church Page. 81
Halston Page. 234 Hanbridge Page. 106 Hanmer Page. 217 Sir Jenkin, slain at
the battle of Shrewshury Page. 339
Harp, silver Page. 11 Hartsheath Page. 401 Hawardan castle, Saxon owner Page.
89 Norman Page. 90 ceded to Llewelyn the great Page. 91 surprised by David ap
Gryffydd Page. 92 granted to Montacute earl of Salisbury Page. 93 to Sir John
Stanley Page. 94 acquired by chief justice Glynne Page. 95 besieged Page. 96
Hawarden rectory, great Page. 101 Henry VII. protected at Mostyn Page. 9 Hen
Ddinas Page. 258 Henry prince of Wales, his early valor, passim in the account
of Glyndwr Hespalun 410 Hilbree isle Page. 19 Holt Page. 204, 211 Holywell
Page. 38 castle ibid. stream, its greatness and utility Page. 39
Hope Page. 406 Hotspur joins with Glyndwr Page. 334 slaia Page. 339

I
Jefferies, lord chancellor, his portrait, and history Page. 296 Sir Thomas,
his portrait ibid.
Interment, ancient mode of Page. 381 to 388 Jolo Goch, a bard of Glyndwr Page.
305 Ithyphallus, an amulet Page. 71 Iron mines, Roman Page. 64 Jungermannia, a
moss Page. 37
K
Kilken Page. 411 Kymhorthau, what Page. 366 Kynastons, their descent Page. 451
L
Latimer, or interpreter between the Welsh and English Page. 241 Lead, ancient
state of its mines, etc. Page. 51 Roman pigs of Page. 55 Roman regulations in
respect to mining Page. 51, 57 silver extracted from it by the Romans Page. 58
lead, how smelted by the Britons ibid. mines worked by the Saxons ibid.
Leeswood Page. 399 Llanarmon Page. 380 Llandysilio Page. 301 Llangegla Page.
378 Llangollen Page. 278 its bridge Page. 279
Llanverres Page. 389 Lleuci Llwyd, her story Page. 85 Llowarch Hen Page. 376
Llwyd, Gryffydd, chief bard to Glyndwr Page. 310 Llys Edwin Page. 82 Lupus,
Hugh, earl of Chester Page. 124 his hall in Chester castle Page. 159
Lyrewyte Page. 222
M
Maelor Saesneg Page. 215 Maesgarmon Page. 408 Maen achwynfan, an ancient cross
Page. 12 March, earl of, an attempt to steal away Page. 344 Marcheta mulierum
Page. 221 Maserfield Page. 247 Merton Page. 6 grievances of the inhabitants in
Edward I. time Page. 14
Middletons of Chirk-castle Page. 271 Mineral property in the time of Edward I.
Page. 75 Henry VI. ibid. Edward IV. and Henry VII. Page. 77 Elizabeth ibid. not
secured to the subject till the Revolution Page. 80, 81
Mineral tract Page. 416 Mines in Wales, what Page. 213 Mines royal, society
for, when founded Page. 78 Mining, Roman, state of Page. 51 Moel Venlli Page.
389 Moel Famma Page. 410 Moel y Gaer, a British post above Northop Page. 83
Mold 390 to Page. 398 Mortimer, Sir Edmund, taken by Glyndwr Page. 329 Moss,
sweet, in St. Winefrede's well Page. 37 Mostyn Page. 8 singular portrait at
Page. 10
Mysteries and moralities, the old religious Drama Page. 138 Mythras, statue of
Page. 116 Myfanwy Vechan, an ode to Page. 281 Mytton, Mr. William, his MSS.
Page. 236
N
Names, when first abridged in Wales Page. 12 Nannerel Page. 415 Nant y Bele,
romantic view from Page. 288 Noah, the mystery of a curious performance at
Chester Page. 140 Northop Page. 83
O
Offa's dike Page. 259 Oldford Page. 203 Ordovices Page. 1, 3 Oswald, St. his
history Page. 246 Oswestry Page. 246 church and monastery Page. 248, 251 castle
Page. 252 taken in the civil wars of Charles I. Page. 452 old Page. 258
Owl little, the true Athenian Page. 229 Overton Page. 226 Owen, Sir John, his
history Page. 263 epitaph Page. 266

P
Parfew, bishop of St. Asaph Page. 393 Pelagius, a monk of Banger Page. 223 Pen
y Llwch, or Hawarden Page. 89 Penbedw Page. 412 Pengwern Page. 278 Perry river
Page. 235 Pick axes, ancient Page. 53 Pier on the Dee at Wepre Page. 88 Plague
at Chester Page. 147, 150 Plas-teg Page. 401 Poem to Owen Glyndwr Page. 311
Myfanwy Vechan Page. 281
Porkington Page. 262 Posts, British, on the summits of the hills Page. 83
their uses ibid.
Posts, British Page. 413 Powysland, brief account of Page. 206 to 210
Pulestons Page. 220 Putecaine Page. 6
R
Radman, what Page. 41 Richard II. taken at Flint Page. 45 Robert of Sicily, a
play acted at Chester Page. 136 Rod, divining Page. 53 Rood eye at Chester
Page. 190 Rafts, the, a British post Page. 300 Royal mine, what Page. 80, 81
S
Sacheverel, Doctor Page. 267 Saltney marsh, granted to the monks of Basingwerk
Page. 105 Salushury pedigree-book Page. 451 Sandford, captain, his curious
letter Page. 98 Sele, Howel, account of Page. 344 Sellatyn Page. 262 church
Page. 266
Seteia estuarium Page. 2 Shartar Gwtta Page. 253 Shocklach Page. 214
Shropshire Page. 229 Sicily, king Robert of, an ancient morality Page. 136
Silver, British, known to the Romans Page. 66 Smelting, British Page. 58 Roman
Page. 51-55
Stanlies, their property in Flintshire Page. 82, 87 Stews, public, at Chester
Page. 145 Stratalun Page. 390 Stylus found near Flint Page. 71 Sweating
sickness at Chester Page. 135 Sycharth, the seat of Owen Glyndwr Page. 306
T
Tecla, St. her well Page. 379 Tegengl Page. 4 Threapwood Page. 217 Tin early
exported by the Phaenicians Page. 60 worked by the Romans Page. 61, 62
Tombs at Northop Page. 84 at Chirk Page. 269 Rhiwabon Page. 284 Wrexham Page.
292 Gresford Page. 300 Hope Page. 407 Mold Page. 393 Llanarmon Page. 380
Tommen y Rhodwydd Page. 377 Tower, remarkable event at Page. 399 Transmutation
of metals, ancient opinion of Page. 75 Trevalun 300 Tudor Trevor 238, Page. 278
Tysilio, St. Page. 301
V
Valle Crucis Page. 369 abbey ibid.
Victoria Alleluiatica Page. 408 Virrgula divinatoria Page. 53 Vitilia Navigia
Page. 225 Vulture, a new species Page. 228
W
Walcheria Page. 257 Warner, lady, her story Page. 0219 Warton, bishop of St.
Asaph, vide PARFEW Wat's dike 21, Page. 259 Wedge, Roman, found in a lead mine
Page. 53 Wenefrede, St. her well Page. 28 life Page. 31 chapel, order relating
to Page. 449
Wepre Page. 88 Werburgh, St. her shrine Page. 181 Weregeld Page. 273 Whiff, a
species of flounder Page. 244 Whiteford, Widford Page. 6 its products Page. 15
Whiteminster Page. 249 Whitson plays acted at Chester Page. 137 Whittington
Page. 237 castle Page. 244 church Page. 245
Wrexham Page. 291 Woburyhill, a supposed camp of Glyndwr Page. 351 wooden
castle Page. 377
Wynn-stay house Page. 288 Wynn, Sir Watkin Williams, his epitaph Page. 287
Wynn, Sir Richard, his portrait Page. 289 Win, rev. doctor, his epitaph Page.
394
Y
Ynyr ap Howel, etc. Page. 379 Young, Gryffydd, Glyndwr's chancellor, and
ambassador to France Page. 342 Young, Richard, bishop of Bangor Page. 326
PROPOSALS For Publishing by SUBSCRIPTION, FROM AN ACTUAL SURVEY, A Large
Six-Sheet, and also a Smaller MAP, of the Six Counties of NORTH WALES.
BY JOHN EVANS.
CONDITIONS.
I. That the Dimensions of the Large Map shall be Five Feet Six by Four Feet
Three Inches, and the Small one Two Feet Ten Inches by Two Feet One Inch and an
Half. II. That all Market Towns, Villages, Gentlemen's Seats, and other Places
of Note, shall be inserted. III. That all the Rivers and Public Roads shall be
truly delineated. IV. That this Work shall be executed by the ablest Hands in
the several Branches of Engraving, and delivered to Subscribers by Christmas
next; the Large Map at Two Guineas, and the Small one at Ten Shillings and
Sixpence; the one half to be paid at the Time of subscribing, and the Remainder
on Delivery. V. That the Subscriptions shall remain in the several Treasurers
Hands, and be returned in case of Nonperformance.
* SUBSCRIPTIONS are received by Mess. R. MORRIS, President of the Cymrodorion
Society, at the Tower; WALE and GWYNN, Little-Court, Castle-Street, and E.
EVANS, George-yard, Lombard street, London; J. FLETCHER, Bookseller, Oxford;
CARDEN and BISHOP, Mercers, Worcester; R.GRIFFITHS and E. LOYD, Chester;
VENABLES and NEWSHAM, Liverpool; S. PRYSE and T. WOOD, Salop; L. JONES,
Oswestry; J.H. JONES, Lanfyllin; J. WILLIAMS, Pool; A. POOL, New town; M.
HUGHES, Bala; R. TYBBOTS, Machynlleth; H.JONES, Caernarvon; W. OWEN, Conwy; R.
HUGHFS, Langauhafal; W. EVANS, Holywell; L. KNOWLES, Gwyndy, Anglesea; and the
Publisher, at Lwynygroes, near Oswestry, Salop.

A List of Subscribers will be Engraved in the Large Map.

N. B. The Work is now under the Engraver's Hands.

LATELY PUBLISHED,
BRITISH ZOOLOGY, VOL. IV.

Containing the History of the WORMS, CRUSTACEA, and SHELLS; illustrated with
Ninety-Four Plates, printed in Quarto and Octavo, to complete the Three First
Volumes.

ALSO, FLORA SCOTICA: OR, A SYSTEMATIC ARRANGEMENT, IN THE LINNAEAN METHOD, OF
THE NATIVE PLANTS OF SCOTLAND AND THE HEBRIDES. By JOHN LIGHTFOOT, A. M.
Chaplain to the Duchess Dowager of PORTLAND.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHORS. M,DCC,LXXVII,

SUPPLEMENTAL PLATES TO THE TOURS in WALES.
THESE Plates, the first efforts of Moses Griffith in the art of Etching, will,
he flatters himself, be on that account heartily received. What they want in
elegance, is made up in fidelity; for they give the most just idea of what they
are intended to represent.

HE has this year received his manu-mission, and preferring a quiet life to the
hazard of embarking in a stormy and tumultuous world, has lately settled
himself in a small retreat under my wing. He offers his pencil to the public,
as far as its uses can extend, compatible with his plan of retirement; and,
having had the liberty of communicating most of the drawings he has made for
me, possesses the means of gratifying, in many respects, the wishes of the
curious. His illuminations of the margins of the second Volume of my Tour in
Wales, will be no small ornament to those copies, on which he has, bestowed his
labors. I take the liberty of mentioning this to the public, that the merits of
a worthy, sober, and ingenious Man, an almost self-taught genius, may receive
more ample reward than an individual has in his power to bestow.

DOWNING, MARCH 10, 1781. THOMAS PENNANT.

PLATE I. p. 27.
IN the porch of the church of Whichurch, near Denhigh, is a brass plate, on
which are engraven, kneeling, RICHARD MIDDLETON, governor of Denhigh Castle,
and JANE his wife, daughter of Hugh Dryhurst, of Denhigh. She died December the
3d, 1565, aet. 40: he, February the 8th, 1575, aet. 67. Behind him are nine
sons: behind her, seven daughters. -- Of the sons,

1. RICHARD married Jane, daughter and sole heiress of John ap John, of Wepra.
He was likewise owner of Cadogan-Hall, near Wrexbam, forfeited on the execution
of John Jones, Esquire for his concern in Babbington's conspiracy. It was alleged
against him, that he had lent a horse to Thomas Salusbury, of Llewenni, to
promote his escape; and that he had harbored some of the persons concerned in
the treason. He seems not to have taken an active part in it, but through
friendship to Salusbury, had concealed what he had in vain attempted to
dissuade him from. 2. SIMON. 3. WILLIAM, the sea officer, and noted Poet. 4.
THOMAS, Lord Mayor of London. 5. HUGH, the great benefactor to our Capital, 6.
CHARLES, successor to his father in the government of Denbigh Castle. 7.
ROBERT. 8. FOULK, married to the daughter and heiress of -- Win, of Bodlithe,
or Plas Newydd, in Llansilin. 9. PIERCE.
THE daughters were JANE, LUCE, MARGARET, ELYN, ALICE, GRACE, and BARBARA.

[See page 27, where the inscription is given.]

PLATE II. p. 52.
1. A View and Plan of Ruthen Castle, taken from a drawing in the British
Museum, representing its state before the civil wars. 2. Plan of Castle
Corndochon, p. 73.
PLATE III. p. 61.
1. A Cross in the churchyard of Derwen, in Denbighshire; not visited in my
Tour. 2. The Cross in Corwen churchyard.
PLATE IV. p. 87.
1. The tomb of Gryffydd ap Ynir Vychan, in Dolgelleu Church. 2. The Coffin of
Llewellyn ap Jorwerth, Prince of Wales, at present in Llanrwst church. He died
in 1240, and was interred in the abbey of Conway.
PLATE V. p. 93.
1. The stone in Gwytherin churchyard, p. 48, inscribed Vinnemcili fili
Senemcili. 2. Stone at Towyn, which I cannot make out. 3. Another with Pascent.
i. e. Pascentius. 4. A fourth in the churchyard of Llanvyhangle y Tratheu, in
Meirioneddshire, inscribed Hi^ est sepulcrum WLEDERMATIS Odeleu qui primum
edificavit hanc ecclesiam in tempore EWINI Regis.
PLATE VI. p. 102.
Castle Prysor, in Meirioneddshire.

PLATE VII. p. 140.
View of Upper and Lower Gwedir, and the great Rock Carreg y Gwa^^b.

PLATE VIII. p. 151.
View of the grand groupe of stones on Glyder Bach.

PLATE IX, p. 152.
View downwards of the Trevaen, from the gap in the Glyder Bach.

PLATE X.
1. The Altar mentioned in the account of CHESTER, vol. i. p. 14. 2. Another,
discovered in digging the foundation of a new row of houses in the
Watergate-Street, in the Yatch field. This beautiful altar was addressed by the
family and freemen of a certain person, Fortunae reduci et Aesculapio. The
emblems of those two deities, and various sacrificial instruments, are engraven
on the sides. The inscription is extremely injured.
FINIS.
SCULPTURE IN THE PORCH OF WHICHURCH.


1. RU^THEN CASTLE. 2 CASTLE CORNDORHON.


1. IN^DERWYN CHAPTER YARD 2 IN CORWENT CHY.


IN DOLGELLEN CHURCH. 2 IN LLANRWST CHURCH.


COLUMNS IN MERIONEDDSHIRE.


CASTLE PRYSOR.


GWEDIR.


ON GLYDER BACH.


TREVAEN FROM GLYDER BACH


ALTARS FOUND AT CHESTER.



