THE PLAIN DEALER: BEING SELECT ESSAYS ON SEVERAL CURIOUS SUBJECTS, RELATING TO
FRIENDSHIP, LOVE, and GALLANTRY, MARRIAGE, MORALITY, MERCANTILE AFFAIRS,
PAINTING, HISTORY, POETRY,
AND Other Branches of POLITE LITERATURE.

Published Originally in the YEAR 1724. And now first Collected into TWO
VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

LONDON: Printed for S. Richardson, and A. Wild: And sold by A. BETTESWORTH,
J. OSBORN and T. LONGMAN, and J. BATLEY in Paternoster Row; W. INNYS, J.
KNAPTON, and C. RIVINGTON, in St. Paul's Churchyard; J. CLARKE, in Duck-Lane;
and J. LEAKE, at Bath. M.DCC.XXX.

THE PREFACE.
THOUGH such ESSAYS, as compose the following Volumes, are in Universal Esteem,
and liable to every One's Observations, yet it has not been my Fortune to meet
with any Discourse written purposely upon the Nature of them. The ESSAYISTS are
apt to beat the Imagination in Search of strange and exotic Subjects to write
upon, while a Disquisition into their own Works, which are capable of affording
Matter so ample, seems to be entirely overlooked by Them. In this resembling
the human Mind, which while it enters into, and examines the Depth of all other
Sciences, seems to consider nothing less than its own Motions.

MOST other Kinds of Writing have, I think, been the Objects of Criticism, and
Rules and Orders have been laid down for the Writers of them to Observe; but in
this Species, nobody is confined; The only Rule that I know, (and it is
generally well observed) is not only to go without, but to go against all Order
and Method whatsoever. Montaigne, if I mistake not, was the Inventor of it; and
He is in all its Beauties and Faults the best Pattern to examine it by. He has
a great deal of Wit, much good Observation, and some Learning; but his ESSAYS
are wild, rambling, and incoherent; some of them don't treat at all of the
Subjects proposed, and others might as well have any other Title as those they
wear: They are, in effect, like Mr. Bays's Prologue, that would do either as
Prologue or Epilogue, or serve indifferently for any other Play, as well as
that which it was written for.

THOUGH there are to be found among the Ancients some little Tracts upon
particular Subjects, which if they were written at this Time, would be called
ESSAYS; yet as they were generally (if we except the Symposiacks of Plutarch)
made by Receipts, and done with a View to the Rules, which Orators and
Declaimers laid down for such Compositions; the Honor of this Invention must
still be ascribed to Montaigne, who first introduced that useful Practice of
Digression into Treatises upon select Subjects; and by giving us every
whimsical Conceit that came into his Head, has led us as it were dancing after
his Morality, much more pleasantly than if we walked in the Stilts, or were
directed by the Leading-Strings which Seneca had accustomed us to. Montaigne
had a great many Followers in France, and some in this Country: But the best,
and he that excelled his Original, was La Bruyere; the finest and most delicate
Remarks, the strongest Sense, and the justest Reasoning, all embellished by an
Elegance of Style, and a Felicity of Expression, are to be found in his Works;
to which we must add, that the frequent Egotisms; the needless Quotations, the
whimsical Display of the Author's Character and Manners at every Period, and
other Impertinences which pass upon some for Humor, are not to be met with in
him. He has all the Variety, and an Appearance of the Irregularity which
pleases, but entirely divested of the Digression and Distraction which consound
and disgust the READER in these Performances. In short, reading Montaigne, is
Hunting in a Country where you start so much Game as to spoil your Sport; while
La Bruyere gives you all the Pleasure and Variety of the Chase, without the
Fatigue of following the Prey too far.

WITHOUT arraigning the Taste of others, I will venture to say, That very
little in this Way, worth Observation, has appeared at Home till the TATLER
began to retail his Pennyworths of WIT. Several Political Tracts, it is true,
have come forth, and some Argumentative Discourses which had their Shares of
Merit; but did not come properly within this Species of Writing. The Character
of BICKERSTAFFE, had it been real, was more upon the Humourist and Whimsical
than that of Montaigne; and I believe the Fiction which was seen in it, by
being natural, heightened the Pleasure which it gave us; besides, the Limits of
his Paper prevented his being so diffuse and prolix, as we often find the
Frenchman, who for want of such a Confinement, sometimes disgusts us. The
SPECTATOR, and NESTOR IRONSIDE, are Characters also excellently well adapted to
the Creation of our Pleasures, by our Knowledge of their being Fictitious: For
such is our Malignity of Temper, that we cannot forgive a real Author acting or
thinking oddly or idly, though our Entertainment arises from thence, because we
consider him as a reasonable Man, and obliged by a superior Duty to another
kind of Behavior; but we can indulge an imaginary, or assumed Personage in any
ludicrous, frolicksome or whimsical Words or Opinions, because we know that he
only plays the Fool for our Delight and Amusement, which we grudge him to do
for his own. Thus Montaigne's Faults are the Beauties of BICKERSTAFFE and
IRONSIDE; and thus Cibber and Hippesly are applauded on the Stage, for what
they would in private Life run the Hazard of Correction.

CERTAINLY, writing under an assumptive Character is a fine Improvement in this
Way; and I believe the Novelty of it, without derogating from the Wit, Humor,
good Sense, or excellent Style of those mentioned Papers, made up the greatest
Part of their Merit: The little Incidents of human Life, Pieces of
Conversation, and familiar Arguments, which may be thrown into Writing under
such a Character, give it the Advantage of all other Methods: And I am of
Opinion it must eternally Please (and the Success of the following Papers, when
first published, corroborates the Opinion) if as new Matter is continually
rising, some Genius's could be found able to treat it in a Manner equal to
their Predecessors. Though perhaps, The Stamp Act first, and then the Rise and
Multiplication of Weekly Journals, are now such Impediments to a fair Hearing
in this Method, as almost amount to a Prohibition of such ESSAYS for the future.

THE Invention of Weekly Journals, was, I believe owing to the Taste which the
Town began to entertain from the Writings of the TATLER, SPECTATOR, and others.
Small ESSAYS were so much liked, that it was imagined worth while to put a
little Wit, and a great deal of History in a large Quantity of Paper, and sell
it for the same or a less Price than The Stamp Duty had raised the half Sheet
Treatise to. The Project succeeded, and we have had several excellent Things
published in that Way; some that in their Fame almost rivall'd any Thing that
went before them, but by the Nature of their Subjects, ought to be excluded
from this Class of Writing; which whatever Liberties Men take, ought never to
be drawn into Controversies about Religion or Government, Things that, to be
sure, require a more orderly and regular manner of Treating, than is consistent
with the Freedom and Latitude of an ESSAY.

BUT, as I hinted before, we have almost lost the Advantage of Entertaining in
any other Manner; the Journals come abroad so seldom, that if a Humor was
begun, Men would forget it before it could be prosecuted, and the Jest would be
lost before it was found. The general Way now of communicating our Thoughts to
the Public, is, by distinct and unconnected Letters to the Author of this or
that Journal, and the common assumed Characters are, a Philosopher, a Critic,
or a Divine; in these, some important Point is constantly laid down, and as
gravely and solemnly discussed. Thus we intrude upon the Pulpit, and seem not
to think that to mend the Heart it is necessary to please the Imagination.

THIS certainly is missing the Mark, and these little ESSAYS are written in the
truest Taste, when they cloth good Sense with Humor, and embellish good
Morals with Wit; when they instruct Familiarly, and reprove Pleasantly; when
they don't swell above Comprehension, nor sink below Delicacy: In short, when
they adapt the Wisdom of the Ancients to the Gust of the Moderns, and constrain
Montaigne's Pleasantry within BICKERSTAFFE's Compass.

I CANNOT conclude without mentioning two Objections, which amongst others,
these Sort of Writings, and their Authors, are liable to, the first is, That as
from the Nature of their Subjects, it is often necessary they should be
Occasional, which requires Dispatch, and prevents that Accuracy, which much
Leisure, and frequent Reviews, generally produce in other Works, that in such
Cases, to sketch out, or design well, is as much as can be performed, which
certainly can give the Mind but a half Pleasure, and so far the Work must
necessarily be Imperfect.

THE Second is to be found in Ben Johnson's Discoveries, which therefore take
in his own Words.

SOME that turn over all Books, and are equally searching in all Papers, that
write out of what they presently find or meet without Choice; by which means it
happens that what they have discredited and impugned in one Work, they have
before or after extolled the same in another. Such are all the Essayists, even
their Master Montaigne. These in all they write, confess still what Books they
have read last; and therein their own Folly, so much, that they bring it to the
Stake raw and undigested: Not that the Place did need it neither, but that they
thought themselves furnished, and would vent it. THESE Objections had not been
mentioned, but that we believe the following Pieces stand clear of them; the
Reception which was at first given them, encourages us in that Thought, and it
is hoped, That from a Perusal of them, the candid READER will entertain the
same Opinion.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No I.
VOL. I.
-- Hoc est
Vivere bis, Vita posse priore frui.
MART.
MONDAY, March 23. 1724.
WHEN a Stranger comes into Company, the Whisper goes round, Who is He? and the
Face each Man wears, is the Effect of his Information: You ought therefore, to
know, who I am, that you may regard what I say; and then, it is to be hoped, we
shall converse without Jealousy.

I AM a talkative Old Bachelor, in my grand Climacterick, of a sanguine
Complexion; well-limb'd, strong and hearty; in Stature more than middling; my
Face is round and smooth, my Forehead high and open, my Eyebrows are widely
arched, my Teeth sound, and white; I have a Nose a little Aquiline, Eyes black
and spritely; my Hair is brown and short, but somewhat of the thinnest, with a
Silvering of Gray among it: I wear my Clothes plain, am a great Lover of
Walking, and go commonly alone; I carry a pair of Mouse-colour'd Gloves in one
Hand, and my Oaken Stick in the other, instead of a Cane; for I am naturally
partial to the Manufactures of my Country, and an irreconcilable Enemy to the
East India Company.

MY Father, who was one of the Cavaliers of the last Century, had a Dash in his
Temper, of what his Mistresses called Surly; but he was of frank Heart and
simple Manners. There was an unlucky kind of Contrast in his Disposition, for
he was Amorous, but Unpolished: He seems to have been rather Serious, than
Witty; yet he loved Wit in others, and was particularly charmed with the
Wantonness of Mrs. Behn. That arch Baggage has made bold, in her Comedy, called
the Rover, both with his Name, and his Character. -- Whoever has seen Ned
Blunt, has seen, not the Copy, but the very Life of my Father.

HE left me an Estate, rather moderate than plentiful; which I have neither
improved, nor diminished. I was naturally disposed to Quiet, and affected to
think calmly: For this Reason I have obstinately resisted MARRIAGE. I pass my
Summers at Blunt-Hall, the ancient Seat of our Family, in the dirtiest Part of
Sussex: My Winters I enjoy in Town, where I am the oldest Member now alive of
an Assembly, of both Sexes, very numerous and diversified: We meet, twice a
Week, at the House of a sober Widow, whom we placed there on Purpose. But,
because I delight in Study, and am an Enemy to the Faction and Flutter of the
Polite End of the Town, I have my Lodgings in a low-built, silent House in the
City, which has a large, shady Garden, and covers the very Spot, where, of old,
as Stow tells me, stood the Watchtower of Barbican.

IT has always been my Custom, To keep a daily Account, in Writing, of my
Actions and Observations, even to Particulars of no seeming Importance. By Help
of these Notes, I live over again my past Time, and learn Wisdom from my
Follies. -- I have lately been reflecting, and taken it stongly into my Fancy,
That, wanting Children of my own, I should be Every Body's Father: I have so
many Things to say, and am so naturally fond of Teaching, that I promise my
self no small Fame, from the Success of my Weekly Counsel: The SUBJECT of my
PAPER gave me little or no Pain: My Propensity to Talking required, That it
should be General, and Unboundedly Copious; But the NAME was a Difficulty, that
I could not easily get over: That Large Part of Mankind, which consists of
SUPERFICIALISTS, judging every Thing by Appearance, taste but coldly of a
Meaning which is not dressed to their Relish; and the Will, that is too
stubborn to bend to the Fancy, shall hardly be able to work upon the
Understanding.

THIS Doubt was so knotty, that I submitted it to the Assembly, where a learned
Clergyman spoke first, and was for calling it the INQUISITOR; He was honestly
proceeding to give his Reasons for that Name, but was smartly interrupted by an
Alderman's Wife, who, with Eyes full of Fire, and Face as red as her Ribbands,
told him, That, however the Inquisition might agree with His Principles, it
would never go down with honest People and Protestants: -- If you desire, (said
she to me) That your PAPER should be read by the Friends of the Government, you
should give it a sober Name, and call it the TRUTH-TELLER.

A pert Coquet, who sat next her, a Toast, and a great Fortune, burst into a
loud Laugh; Oh! Heavens! cried the Gipsey, I shall faint at the odious
Formality of that Title! Ah, Madam! How could you be so unreasonably mistaken!
The TRUTH-TELLER! -- Lord, deliver us! why, the COURT can never bear it! and
all the gay World will despise and abhor it! -- No, no, if you wish your PAPER
to Spread and grow Public, you have nothing to resolve, but to call it the
SECRET.

FOR my Part, answered a grave Virgin, about Fifty, I think they would do well
to entitle it the COQUET; There Is scarce a Fop in Town but would be fond of
that Name; for he would consider the PAPER as his Property.

A FAMOUS Critic interposing, remarked, That the Taste of the Age was so
vitiated, that no Name could be acceptable, unless it were Musical; and the
Wind, (says he,) of Modern Arguments, being an Over-match for their Weight, I
am for calling it the BAGPIPE. -- Oh! much rather the FLUTE, replied the
Coquet; The BAGPIPE is so filthy, so horrible an Instrument! that 'twould be
impossible to bear the Sound of it, unless 'twere introduced in an Opera.

A Justice of the Quorum, my next Neighbor in the Country, and an eminent
Fox-hunter, maintained, with invincible Strength, both of Voice and Authority,
That it ought, by all Means, since it was intended for Society, to be called
the GOOD FELLOW; But he bowed, and changed his Mind, when our Alderman's Young
Daughter, who sat at her Mother's Elbow, blushed, and whispered in his Ear,
That for her Part, she could think of no Name, that would be so pretty, as the
SWEETHEART.

AN Old Maid of the Widow's, to whom, for Pleasantry-sake, we indulge the
Familiarity, and Privilege of Impertinence, had been standing all this while
behind her Mistress's Chair, and broke out, on a sudden, with an Air of
Amazement; Hey Day! if you must whip it about thus, and keep it constantly
spinning, the best Thing you can do is, To call it the WHIRLIGIG. All the
Company laughed at the Wench's Conceit; 'till the Critic, assumeing a
surpised and decisive Air, assured us, positively, It must take; for that No
Body could fail to expect as much Wit, at least, in the WHIRLIGIG, as in the
What-d'ye-call it.

I was unsatisfied with All This; and having a natural Partiality to my own
Character, I bethought my-self of the PLAIN DEALER. The whole Assembly agreed
in Approbation of That Name, and gave it, as their Joint-Opinion, That, Whether
it would be generally liked or no, it was never more generally wanted.

THE LADIES, when they hear, That my Design is PLAIN DEALING, will consider me
perhaps, as an Old-fashioned Fellow, who can have nothing to do with Them; yet
I know they will be frequently kind enough to furnish me with Business, and I
shall handle them, as often as they allow me Opportunity. -- The CHURCH and the
STATE I have no great Genius for meddling with; They are either well as they
are, or will never be the better for any Thing I can say to them. But the
Passions, the Humors, the Follies, the Disquiets, the Pleasures, and the
Graces of Human Life, All these I claim a Right to consider as my Subjects; and
shall treat them, without Prejudice, in the most frank and open Manner; so that
the Watchtower of Barbican shall again resume its Use, and overlook this
Ancient CITY, for Her Service, and Her Safety.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No II.
-- Ridentem dicere verum
Quis Vetat?
HOR.
FRIDAY, March 27. 1724.
THREE Enormous Abuses, have grown of late Years to a scandalous Height among
us, Masquerading, Gaming, and Stock-Jobbing. They are Enemies to the Civil
Society of Mankind, and Destroyers of that valuable Doctrine of PLAIN DEALING
which I would so earnestly recommend.

MASQUERADES are the Undoers of Beauty, Honor, and Innocence, and, methinks it
should be enough to deter any young Lady, if she did but reflect upon this
Great Truth, That her Masque, has, at best, thrown a Cloud upon her Reputation,
that will hang heavy for a long Time after, and sink her in the Esteem of her
former Admirers.

AS to Gaming, the Sons of our Nobility, and the Heirs to plentiful Estates,
especially those who become too early their own Masters, are the Victims of
Sharpers, the Prey of those Man-hunters, who form Associations to over-turn as
many Honest Societies as they can; and only live in Peace together, by being
united in a Confederacy to spread Desolation among others. The Heads of our
best Families may not improperly be called the GAME of this wide-wasting
Fraternity.

STOCK-JOBBING is the Overthrow of all regular Commerce, and involves many a
rich Trader, in the utmost Distress.

THESE Three Grand Enormities stand in direct Opposition to PLAIN DEALING; and
the Province which I have undertaken, demands of me to declare War against
them, and exert my best Endeavors to remove them out of the Way as fast as I
am able. They grow out of the Obliquity of a Mind, that meditates an unnatural
Increase of its own Ease, by diminishing the Satisfaction of other People, and
filling them with Uneasiness and Disquiet. These Subjects are so fruitful, that
I shall employ this whole Paper upon the Masquerades alone, and defer the
Correction of the other to a second Opportunity.

THE Count of the ill-favored Visage may may be considered as the Leader and
Captain General of these Forces; and therefore, if in entering into a single
Combat with him, I am valiant enough to get the better, I doubt not but the
Army under his Command will pull off their Masks, in Respect to my Victory,
and not be ashamed to show their Faces, when they appear on the side that is
uppermost.

THEY who lay Masks to the Count's Charge, have accounted for it very
pleasantly, and will have it to be a politic Undertaking. He ought, say they,
by the Laws of Sympathy to have Regard to a Vizor, since his natural
Countenance bears such Resemblance to those artificial ones, that the only
means in his Power to look like a Man, was to teach every Man to look like a
Monster.

BUT I am not in a Humor to content my self with such abstracted Speculations,
which appear to me to be artfully framed on purpose to excuse a Man they
pretend to find fault with. It is true, they make a Jest of the Person, but
they throw a Masque over the Mind, which ought certainly to be most chastised.
I dare swear for the Count, it is not his nature to be angry with any Body,
that, by handling his Face a little freely, gives him a handsome Opportunity
for handling the Pockets of other People. Greater Statesmen than He, have been
contented to look silly for a wise End, and to become the Jests of the People,
when they have been sure of an Equivalent. This makes me afraid that these
Waggs, who speak of him with so much seeming Smartness, are his Friends at the
bottom, and I doubt, if the Truth were known, he has bribed them to be of his
Party by letting them now and then, into the Secrets of Masquerading.

I MUST therefore take leave to look a little seriously into this Matter, and I
am afraid we shall find, That the Count has not so much a Design to make
Persons of Quality with their Masks on, look like the Count, as to make the
Count look like Persons of Quality with their Masks off.

SEVERAL Clergymen, some Bishops, and other grave Personages, have thought this
a Matter of Importance enough to take Notice of as well as I; but still, it
seems, the Count is secretly resolved to have Wit enough to take no notice of
any of us. It must be allowed indeed, That he is a Person of uncommon Parts, to
stand Proof against the Reasoning of so many Learned, and Great Men, without
being in the least convinced or persuaded.

BUT, though this Power, of resisting the Force of so many Eloquent Reasoners,
proves him a Prodigy in Genius, and demonstrates him to have a world of Wit,
yet I would not have him forget, that there is some Merit also, in Modesty. If
a Clergyman or a Bishop, give their Opinions against him, he thinks it
sufficient to shrug his Shoulders, and say, grinning in his own Defense, That
he wonders they should make such a Bustle, for that a Domine, a Cassock, and a
Mitre, are the most common Masks in Fashion. This raises a loud Laugh, and he
comes off cleverly among the young Fellows; but he must not imagine to escape
so with Persons of my Gravity.

SEVERAL old Counselors of State, and at Law, grave Physicians, ancient
Citizens, and worthy Country Gentlemen, just come up with their Wives and
Daughters, to pay a Visit to the Town, have all complained of him in their
Turns, and met with no better Quarter, and notwithstanding all they can say to
the contrary, he has continued to carry on his Show with very successful
Raillery: I expect that he will give me my Share of his Taunts among the rest;
but I have as little Taste for his Wit, as I have for his Sweetmeats; and to
deal plainly with him, I am in no such merry Vein, as he may think, when I tell
him this unwelcome Truth, That the Effects of Masquerades, are very serious
Things to Husbands, and Fathers, though they are Jokes to him and to some, who
are pleased to support him. I must, therefore, desire him to lay aside his Wit,
and consider, with a little Wisdom, whether He may not be in Danger of falling
hereafter into the Clutches of a certain dark Enemy, who is now his Friend in
Masquerade, and who will not be so easily eluded.

HE may recollect, if he pleases, in one of the Masquerades, a strange
Spectacle, like a Man, whom he took, at first, to have a Vizard on, but found
upon a more narrow Examination to have exactly the Lineaments of his own Face,
the same Shape, the same Air, the same Gait, the same Clothes, as himself, and
his very Wig of the same Color, and hanging with the Fore-top on one Tip of
the Ear, just like his own: He may remember, that this ghastly Mimick,
constantly attended him, that whole Night, did every thing that he did; said
every thing he said; and went to every Place where he went: He may remember,
that he was struck with a terrible Panick, and did not know what to think of
this uninvited Companion of his, but took him, sometimes, for a mere Mimick;
sometimes for a Spectre, but at last he was convinced, that it could be no
other, than the Devil, which a great many well-meaning People believed was
certainly the Truth: and he very well knows, that he, and his Companion, were
easily mistaken for one another, and that no body at last could well tell which
was the Count, and which was the Devil.

THOUGH the Count, as the Phrase goes of him, looks bad enough at the best, he
was remarked to look much worse after this Vision, than at any time before: He
was for many Days much dejected, and profoundly pensive and melancholy, and the
terrible Apprehensions he was under, caused a visible Increase of Wrinkles, and
furrowed him into such Frightfulness, that if ever he went to take Coach, the
Horses would start, and run away from him. -- But one Day, above the rest, when
he was deep in the doleful Mood, an airy young Fellow hearing him say, He
intended to have no more Masquerades, got out of him the Secret of his
Disorder: This Youth who was afraid, that if that Diversion discontinued, he
should not succeed with a Lady, for whose sake He was used to hide his Face,
that he might charm her, with less Difficulty, found an Expedient to free the
Count from his Fears, and made him believe, that it was a Trick of the Prince
de Monte Aspero. But the poor Count is imposed on, if he gives Credit to that
fictitious Story, and might have been better advertised of the Truth, if he had
only had an Eye to the Club-Foot, which stood out, and plainly showed his
Companion, as several innocent Spectators then present could testify. Besides,
as a Poet, who would preserve Probability, could produce no Body proper to
personate Amphitryon but Jupiter, nor to mimick Sofia to the Life but Mercury;
so the Count, if he reflects sufficiently, upon his Person, Parts, and
Qualities, must of necessity be convinced, in his Mind, that since nothing
Human could so exactly resemble him, It must be, at least, a Cacodaemon.

UPON the whole, if he lay this seriously to heart, as I hope he will, he will
lay aside jesting, become a true Penitent, and take the good Time of Lent to
consider, Whether it will not be proper to quit all Thoughts of Masquerading,
for fear that Ghastly Figure that once took his Person upon him, should the
next Time, take off his Person.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No III.
-- Non est mortale quod optas.
OVID. -- dicique beatus
Ante Obitum Nemo supremaque funera possit.

MONDAY, March 30, 1724.
SO weak is the Frailty of Human Nature, that we can never be too secure, though
armed with the sublimest Virtue, against the repeated Attacks of so many
Passions, as constantly besiege us; and, though the Garrison of the Mind may be
never so well provided with all Means of Resistance, the greatest of Qualities,
Virtues, and Perfections, that our Nature is capable of attaining; nevertheless
Treachery, within, Force or Stratagem, from without, may surprise and defeat
us: An Example of which Infirmity the following Story will furnish the Reader,
and teach him, of all Things, to avoid, what is called Spiritual Pride, That
Contempt of another for not being so good, as himself, when he sees how, in an
Instant, the greatest Piety and Religion, may be changed, (by indulging only
one dangerous Passion) into the other Extreme of Wickedness; so that we may
apply to the Lubricity of Human Virtue, what a wise Man of Greece, said of
Happiness, That it can never be determined, 'till Death.

IN the following Story, which is true, as to Fact, I shall be obliged to
disguise some Circumstances of Time and Place, to prevent the unfortunate
Subject of this Paper, or his Family, from being known, so that it will be
enough to inform the Reader, That, less than half an Age ago, there lived a
certain Gentleman, of good Birth and Fortune, who had polished, and finished, a
Learned Education by the Improvement of a Camp, and a Court; in Both which He
spent some Time; when about the Thirtieth Year of his Age, he thought fit to
settle himself in the World, and change his Condition, by choosing a Partner of
Life, whose Mind was as well Adorned, as her Person was Engaging: This happy
Couple spent Five Years together, in perfect Felicity; the Husband with
Reputation, as well as Fortune, and the Wife with Virtue, not inferior to her
Beauty.

BUT what crowned all their Bliss, was, That mutual Esteem they had contracted
for one another; in this time they had two or three Children, who all died in
their Infancy: And now, it pleased Heaven to snatch, from this happy Man, the
only Joy and Comfort of his Life; his Charming Spouse died, and left him not
only an inconsolable, but almost distracted, Widower: When the first Emotions
of Grief were over, he retired, from his own House, to a little Farm, in
another Country, where no Object should come in his way, to revive in his
Memory the Loss of his lamented Wife: Here he spent two Years, which led him
into the Thirty Eighth of his Life: this Time he divided between his Studies
and Devotion; being Religious from his very Infancy: Which natural Piety was,
now, so much increased, by his late Loss, that at last he resolved to quit his
Native Country, and to retire into a Convent, being born, and bred in the Roman
Catholic Communion.

THIS Resolution was no sooner known to his Friends, but they endeavored to
divert it, by all manner of Persuasions and Arguments; by remonstrating to him,
That he was, now, in the Flower of his Age, and blessed with a plentiful Fortune
to give him all the Comforts and Pleasures of Life; that it would be unjust,
thus, to fling himself away, not only to himself, but his Friends and Family,
to whom he owed the Debt, which he had contracted, for Posterity to continue
his Name: They told him, That he had paid all the Tribute to the Memory of his
deceased Wife, that the Laws of Honor, Decency, and the Obligations of a good
Husband required; that he was now at Liberty to make another Choice; that one
good Woman was not a Phoenix, but that others of the same Species might be
found, to make him as happy as before.

THESE Arguments, though backed with Reason, were all ineffectual; he was deaf to
every Remonstrance; and passed over into Flanders, where he placed himself, at
first, as Pensioner in a Religious House; and lived with the same Strictness,
that even the Rules of that Order required from those, who were under Vows of
such Austerities; nor did he receive more Edification from the Example of
others, than he gave by his own.

AFTER a Life led, for some time, with the greatest Esteem and Reputation, he
communicated to the Superiors of the House, his ardent Desire of being received
into their Society: The good Fathers, though inwardly pleased with the Honor of
having so excellent a Person, in their Order, did not receive his Proposal with
that Cheerfulness, which he expected: Their Prudence suggested to them, that he
was yet too young a Man, to be really, upon good Grounds, disgusted with the
World, into the Love of which he lay under great Temptations of relapsing, by
reason of that large Fortune, which could furnish Means of enjoying those
Pleasures, which he must now for ever abandon; and the Loss of which, if he
should repent his Vows, would make him as miserable, as he proposed to himself
to to be happy: They conjured him, at the same time, strictly to search his own
Heart, so as to be convinced, that this Desire was an Impulse, and Call from
God, and not any Temporary Disgust of the World, which might blow over, and
vanish in time: He submitted to this Proposal, and in a little time assured
them, That it proceeded from the Directions of that Providence, to whose
Service he had so strong and glorious a Passion to dedicate the rest of his
Life: Upon this, the Society consented, on Condition, That he would undergo a
double Noviciate, that by the length of the Time, they might be assured of his
being confirmed in those pious Resolutions.

THIS he accepted, and immediately sent over Powers into his own Country, to
convey and settle his Estate upon his Heir, which was accordingly done; and the
Time of his Noviceship being expired, he took his Vows, and embraced that Life
in which he proposed to himself so much Heavenly Satisfaction.

HE had not thus lived long in the Convent, but his great Capacity and
Learning, rendered him too necessary to the Service of his Order, to be kept at
home; by Command of his Superiors he went on several Commissions into other
Countries, where he executed the Orders, which he had received, with wonderful
Address and Fidelity; at the same time acquiring an universal Reputation, for
his extraordinary Sanctity of Life.

HIS Fortune settled him, at last, in France, where he met with the same
Esteem, and Veneration, as in other Countries, being universally caressed, and
admired: At last his ardent Zeal for the Service of God, inflamed him with a
passionate Desire of laying down his Life, in asserting the Cross of Christ;
nothing would now satisfy his growing Fervor, but to be sent on a Mission, to
convert Infidels to the Christian Faith, in which Employ he had the holy
Ambition to meet with a Crown of Martyrdom. This pious Inclination he
communicated to the Superiors of his Order, but was repulsed in his Request,
being told, That Men of less Weight, than he, might be as serviceable in the
Conversion of Savages; that less Abilities, than his, were sufficient to
instruct Nations, so stupidly ignorant; that his Presence was more necessary in
Europe, where they had so many Learned Adversaries to combat.

THIS Repulse not a little mortified the Zeal of the good Father, whose Passion
for Martyrdom was now more inflamed, by hearing, That there was a new Mission
of French Jesuits going over to America: He applied himself to the Bishop of
Quebec, who was just upon his Departure for Canada; this Prelate was so charmed
with the Zeal, and Piety of the Man, whose Character he had heard before, that
he entered into his Sentiments, and made use of the Interest he had in the
Court of France, to get the Request of this New Apostle granted by Authority.
Thus, Master of his Wishes, he went over with the Bishop to Canada, where he
met with as much Veneration of his Piety, Humility, and all other Christian
Virtues, in America, as he left behind him in Europe: After some time of
Refreshment, he prepared for his Apostolical Function, and went with his
Colleagues, among the most savage, and cruel Nations of the Indians: Some of his
Comrades were murdered by these People; others died of the Hardships and
Fatigues which they endured, while our Missionary escaped, through the Goodness
of his Constitution.

IN this first Expedition, he was several times in imminent Danger of Life,
having once the Knife over his Head to scalp him; but Providence, whose Secrets
are unsearchable, preserved him, and would not vouchsafe that Honor, which he
so passionately desired, of dying a Martyr: In this first Attempt, he succeeded
so far, as to vanquish the Obstinacy and Ignorance of Twenty-two Indian Men and
Women, whom he baptized, and brought with him to Quebec; which Town he entered,
triumphantly, with his Converts. The Reader may guess at the Veneration paid
him by the People, who looked on him as a Saint and Apostle, and pressed near to
touch, and kiss his very Garments: The Winter Months he was obliged to spend
his Time at Quebec, it being impossible to preserve Life in so cold a Country,
without the Cover of Houses against the Inclemency of the Air: The
Summer-Seasons were taken up, entirely, by the Labors of his Mission, in which
he had wonderful Success the third Winter, at which time he approached the 50th
Year of his Age: The Governor, who had a profound Respect for him, invited the
good Missioner to come and reside at his House, with a Request to instruct his
Daughter, who desired to learn Languages, and Mathematics: The good Father
cheerfully undertook his New Province, and very assiduously attended his young
Pupil, the Pregnancy of whose Parts made his Pains the more agreeable: This
Lady was about Eighteen Years old, with a Person equal to the Beauties of her
Mind, and all the Vivacity so natural to her Country: The Preceptor had not
often attended his fair Scholar, but he found those Emotions in his Heart,
which, in a little time shipwrecked his Virtue; he fell desperately in Love,
and through the Eyes, sucked in that Poison, which now tainted a Soul, that so
much Virtue had long, and constantly defended before: LOVE, that invincible
Tyrant, entirely subdued, and added the Heart of this once Holy Man, to his
other Triumphs: In order to make himself the more agreeable, he cut off his
Beard, and now put on Linen, next his Skin, which he had not worn for some
Years, the more to indulge his Mortification, though he was not obliged to that
Austerity by the Rules of his Order: That Devotion, which had flamed so long in
his Heart toward God Almighty, was now turned into Adoration of one of his
Creatures; LOVE converting all others Passions into itself, as the Plague does
all other Distempers.

IN short, he managed his Amors with that Address, That, at last, he
triumphed, and gratified his Criminal Desires; the Fruits of which soon
appeared; the young Damsel was with Child, which flung the Lovers into the last
Confusion and Distress: There was no Remedy, but one, which was, To fly;
accordingly one Night, the Summer now advancing, so as to permit them to lie in
the Woods, they got over the Ramparts, and fled to the Indians, among whom he
had a great Interest, and who now received them with open Arms. As he had seen
some Campaigns in his Youth, and understood Fortification, and the Mathematical
Part of War, he began to Train and Discipline the Savages, whom he persuaded to
revolt against the French: In the mean while, the Governor, overwhelmed with
Grief for this terrible Misfortune in his Family, sent out several small
Parties to bring them back; but these were defeated by the Superiority of
Numbers; upon which the Governor marched with the whole Garrison, and all the
Fighting Men he could muster; the Lovers animated and encouraged the Savages,
whom they brought, in great Numbers, to oppose the Enemy; the little Armies
came in sight, and while the Two Unfortunate Lovers stood close to one another,
she, with an Indian Quiver at her Back, and Bow in her Hand, the first Fire
from the French laid them both on the Ground; Such was the sad Catastrophe of
this unhappy Man, whose Piety, and good Life, for so many Years, could not
prevent his Falling, at last, so Memorable an Example of The Imbecility of all
Human Accomplishments.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 4.
-- Tigris agit rabida cum tigride pacem
Perpetuam, saevis inter se convenit Ursis.
JUV.
FRIDAY, April 3. 1724.
GAMING, and Stock-jobbing, come to Day, under my Observation. The first
methinks, needs no Aggravation of its Guilt in order to extinguish it; since it
may so truly be said, That there is nothing Honorable, that it does not aim to
make Vile; nothing Great and Magnificent, that it does not reduce to look
Little and Despicable.

HOW would the deceased Bucharis have been able to leap down from behind the
Chariot of a departed Lord, and step into a finer of his own, if he had wanted
the happy Turn of obliging unlucky Gentlemen to live in a more uncomfortable
State, than even his Companions, (before himself became a Gentleman.) What must
the great Cartaerarius think when he prances along the Pavements, upon a Par
with the Prime Nobility, and sees a Wretch walk the Streets half-starv'd with
Cold and Hunger, dressed in Sagathie in the Depth of Winter, whom he knew to
have been his Superior in Wealth, and Magnificence, till he reduced him to this
Disparity? Can my Readers imagine, That Cartaerarius must not lose the Jollity
of his Heart for a Moment, at so mortifying a Prospect? or, Do they think he
can be Brute enough to enjoy himself upon the Reflection of his different
Fortune, and of the Tricks he had played in his Life, and the Numbers he had
made as wretched, as the Object I have mentioned?

THIS is a strange and melancholy Fate: a Box and Dice heartily stamped upon a
Table here in London, shall have a more powerful Effect, on the Walls of a
strong-built Castle in the Country, than the firing of Twenty Morta^s against
it could have had, on the Spot, and shall force the Possessor to surrender it
at Discretion, with all the Territories round about it, to one who is
innocently called, a fair Enemy, and who attacks it in Play only.

IT is still more strange, That a Custom, which has been known to have brought
such uncommon Calamities upon the greatest and richest Men, should at last
become common, among the common People themselves: And yet this was lately the
Case. Tradesmen and Sharpers of a Lower Rank, committed the like Hostilities,
and Shops were shut up by way of Gaming. I know one Wise Man an Apothecary, who
neglected his Business to become Rich, and has been seen to lose more Money by
shaking his Elbow over a Gaming-Table in three Hours, than he could recover by
brandishing his Arm over a Mortar in three times as many Months.

I AM the more slack in my Remarks, and throw together only a few loose Hints
against this vicious Habit, because a more effectual Way has been lately taken
to check its Progress. And, if People of Fashion did not think themselves above
the Benefit of those Laws which vulgar Persons are cautious of transgressing,
for fear of being treated as Cheats, and Impostors, this Discourse would be
rendered useless. The Nature of Imposture, is no otherwise altered, by being
the Fact of a Person of Distinction, but by its becoming more highly Criminal.
Out of Persons of Fashion and Estate, are generally chosen those, who are
obliged to watch over the public Welfare: And can they guard Property in
public Life, who lay Snares to entrap it in a private Capacity? No Man should
be allowed to appear in an Assembly of Business, who has made himself a Member
among the Surrounders of a Hazard Table. There have been of late but Two
Gamesters, that stepped high enough to have any Rule in public Affairs
entrusted to their Management, Exlex and the young Montanus; these, though
otherwise Men of signal Capacities, and many worthy Qualifications, could not
resist their Natural Propensity, and thereby infused into two Kingdoms such an
universal Spirit of Avarice and Gaming, by strange Schemes, 'till then
unheard of, as must, if continued, have soon accomplished the Ruin, which they
threatened at their first Appearance.

AS to Gaming in lower Life, the Justices of the Peace have acted with such
commendable Vigilance, That they have scarce left me a known Sharper in the
Town, to exercise the Edge of my Satire upon. Most of them have, I believe, by
this time, taken to the more honorable way of Robbing with a Pistol and Brace
of Balls in it, which is much less dangerous to the Offended, and less safe to
the Offender, than a Box with a Pair of Dice in it: Others have gone in Gangs
like Foot-pads, and while one knocked down the Passenger, the other rifled him,
which is only a kind of Emblem of their Play called Two poll One. Thus I
believe, that, if a strict Scrutiny were made into the Numbers that are left,
of the Fraternity, we should find, that, since the happy Dissolution of that
Knot, most of the loose ones have been swept away, by his Majesty's industrious
Subject Mr. Jonathan Forward Rear-Admiral of the City Transports.

BUT there is a Species of more mischievous Gamesters remaining still among us,
who ought, methinks, to have had free Passage in some of that Great Pilot's
Vessels -- I mean, the present Fraternity of Stock-jobbers.

THIS Brotherhood, who play their Game upon the Hopes and Fears, of other
People, make use of cant Names, as the Gamesters did, and with just the same
Propriety. The Gamesters called their Instruments of Mischief by the
Denomination of Squibs and Puffs, and the Stock-jobbers have their Bulls and
Bears; nor were those half so formidable in Covent Garden, as these are about
the Royal Exchange, in Cornhill.

A Bear is a Beast of Prey, who, not having perhaps a Morsel in the World,
appears with the Pretense of a whole Paw full of Stock, which he agrees to
deliver on a Day. But, if Stock rises, he must, as the Phrase is, Show his
Tail, that is, he must Run away.

A Bull is just the Reverse of this: He, is as Pennyless as his Brother Beast,
but roars and bellows for Stock, and Devours all that is offered him; and if,
at the Time when it is to be paid for, it happens to fall, then he too must Run
off, as the Bear did.

NUMBERS of honest Tradesmen are deluded by these odd Beasts, and kept warm
with imaginary Hopes of turning their Money better and faster upon Stocks, than
in Business: And where the Unskilful are drawn in to try their Fortunes this
way, their Money becomes a Sacrifice to the Jobbers, and themselves Bankrupts
to the Public: Bulls and Bears, as opposite as they are in their Natures,
agree very well together, and sometimes personate one another to draw in an
honest Citizen; and if he once gets between both, by that Time the Stocks, have
had a few Variations to and fro, he is sure, by their tossing him from one to
the other, to be worried out of his Senses.

MY Friend the Alderman, who has sometimes a way of Jesting peculiar to
himself, says, That when he has been running over the Advertisements, relating
to Bankrupts in our Gazettes, he would frequently make Marks on the Margin,
denoting, Where such a brokenhearted Butcher has been forced to shut up his
Stall upon being Gored by the Horn of a Bull; and where the Paw of a Bear has
pulled a rich Linnen-Draper by the Head and Ears, over his Counter. I warrant
you, my old Friend, (will he often say, for he is apt to dwell upon old Jokes)
when the Watchtower of Barbican was standing, the sharpest Eye of any Man that
stood in it, could never perceive round this whole City, one such voracious
Animal, threatening Ruin to the Inhabitants, as the Modern Bulls and Bears are.

IT is certain, That the Alderman's Jest was true in Earnest. For our wise
Ancestors made wholesome Laws for extirpating all wild and mischievous Beasts
out of the Land, and set a Price upon their Heads. It must be therefore very
wrong in such a Populous Town as this, to permit Bulls, and unmuzzled Bears, to
have their Stalls and Dens about Exchange-Alley, where they have Opportunity to
run out and destroy unwary Citizens. Besides, the Alderman told me (as a Remark
of his Wife,) That under Boast of the vast Stocks they deal for, they tempt the
yielding Hearts of many a rich Citizen's Daughter, and pin themselves on
Families to be kept without a Groat, and sometimes take a Bite of the young
Lady, in that Part they like best, and then run away, without coming to account
for it. She says, That Mr. Honeyman, a Sugar Baker, has Two Cubs upon his
Daughter's hands, by a Bear that has left the Alley; and that Mr. Simple's
Favorite Child is upon the Point of being delivered of a Calf, begot by a
silly awkward Bull, that Burst himself, by swallowing Stock, beyond the Power
of his natural Digestion.

THESE are Things not to be tolerated in any Civil Government whatsoever; for
they manifestly tend to the Ruin of Commerce; and at this rate it will come to
pass in the course of a few Years, That while Russia is polishing its rough
Inhabitants into the finer Resemblance of Englishmen, the Politeness of Britain
will be transformed into the Barbarity of Russia, and the greatest Part of this
Metropolis will be overrun with an unheard of Generation of Savages and
Monsters. It is, therefore, my serious Opinion, That the Practice should be put
down; and that for the Quiet and Safety of sober Citizens, every Bull and Bear
of them all, should be first driven out of the City, by the way of Newgate, and
then transported out of the Kingdom.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 5.
Militat omnis amans, and habet sua Castra Cupido.
OVID.
MONDAY, April 6. 1724.
THE LOVE of our Country, when it is understood, as Great Spirits consider it,
is the most Noble, among those Virtues, which grace and elevate Human Nature:
But, in the General Idea, which Men form, when they speak of this public Duty,
it is a mean, and selfish Frailty! A poor Contraction of Soul, which would call
in our Beneficence from Mankind, our common Brotherhood! and confine it, with a
scandalous Frugality of Affection, to the Land which we were born in; for the
same ridiculous Reason, which made the Ape, in the Fable, the First, that
produced her young Ones, when a Decree had been published, That the most
Beautiful, among the Beasts, should succeed to the Government.

FEW Men, I am afraid, have any Nobler Motive, than this Love of themselves,
for the Love, they bear their Country! But the Partiality of a true Patriot
must be justified by his Care of the Public Honor: He must contribute to the
General Interest, with the Loss of his particular Ease, and to the Hazard of
his private Safety. The same impatient Beat, with which the Soul, conscious of
Immortality, presses forward to Futurity, and inspires a Secret Pleasure in our
Hope of Fame Hereafter, though we are sure we shall be Dust, and have no Ear for
those Praises, which we charm our our selves in Death, with but the Prospect,
and faint Image of: -- The same Noble Source has the Spirit of true Patriotism!
-- It teaches a wise Man to Love his Country, Like his Offspring; not merely,
as they are His; but for the Natural Virtues, which he observes in them, and
which he has taken Delight to to cherish, and urge forward, for the Ornament of
Posterity.

THE Prejudices of our Minds, and the different Interests we are led by, make
us very unqualified Judges, of the State of this Virtue, with Regard to the
Times, we live in: And the same Passions have always produced the same Effects,
in the Historians, of former Ages: But there are some Instances, so strongly
Demonstrative, in their Nature, That Partiality can add no Beauty, by the Arts
of Describing; nor can Envy discolor them, by false Lights, or misplacing.

DEEP Enquirers into Nature have recommended it, as a way to judge soundly of
Men's good, or evil Tendency, by observing what Effect is produced in their
Passions, upon Relation of some Amiable Example, of Human Excellence; if such a
Trial is just, I should wish to avoid the Society of that Man, who could
reflect on the following Story, without unusual Emotions, in Honor of the
Noble Roman, to whose true Sense of Public Spirit, we owe it.

IN that part of the Punick War, when Fabius Maximus commanded the Forces of
Italy, against Hannibal, certain Officers of the Roman Army, were taken
Prisoners by the Enemy. Fabius was well acquainted with the Skill and Courage
of these Men, and resolved not to lose them: He, therefore, treated with the
Carthaginians, and agreed upon their Ransom, at a very high Sum. for Payment of
which, by a Day appointed, he engaged the Honor of the Roman Senate: But the
Senate, instead of sending him the Money, refused to ratify the Agreement. --
Fabius received the News, with more Grief, than Indignation; and, giving strict
Orders, for concealing it from his Army, dispatched his Son to Rome, with all
Secrecy and Expedition, to make Sale of his Own Paternal Estate, and to return
to him with the Money; which as soon he received, he sent it to Hannibal, as
from the Senate, -- For I had rather, said he, It should be reported of the
Romans, That they have a General without Land, than a Senate without Humanity?

OUR Clergyman, whom we delight to consider, as a Blessing to the Assembly,
because his Life is a silent Enforcer of his Doctrine, was expatiating, the
other Day, on the Grace, and Grandeur, of this Action; and had fixed us, in the
most satisfied, and respectful Attention; when he was broke in upon, by the
Coquet, with the following Relation, which she assured us, was Matter of Fact,
and happened very lately; -- And it contains, added she, so exalted an Instance
of refined, and generous Love, That if ever I find a Man, who would be Mine
upon such Terms, I shall Marry, and bid Defiance to the Sound of the Word
Matron!

COURTHOPE was the Son of an English Merchant, who had lived long in the Canary
Islands; he had been sent young to London, for the Advantage of his Education,
and (while there) fell in Love with Bellaria, the only Daughter of a Gentleman
of a good Family and Estate, who had promised this Lady to a distant Relation,
of his Name: But she had an Aversion for his Person, and made open Profession
of a Passion for young Courthope, which the Father was so far from approving,
that, being provoked by her Firmness, he commanded her, under Penalty of his
Hatred, and his Curse, never more to converse with him; and confined her, from
that time forward, to prevent even the Possibility of it. Bellaria,
notwithstanding this Restraint, found means to escape, and dressing her self in
Boy's Clothes, embarked with Courthope, on a Spanish Ship, that was bound for
the Canaries; where he assured her, they would be welcome to a Father, whose
gentle Nature knew nothing of that Rigor, which, from her Infancy, she had
been oppressed by. They were taken in this Voyage, by a Moorish Vessel,
belonging to the Rovers of Sallee: And it is easier to conceive, than express,
the Affliction, the Despair, the Astonishment of Courthope: fallen, at once,
from a Prospect of the sweetest, and most lively Joy, to the Depth of
consummate Misery! He saw Her, now, the Companion of his Slavery, who had
wished, and ventured, so much, to make Him Partner of her Affluence; and he
suffered more than Death, every time, that his Eyes, all swimming in Tears,
stole a Glance, at his Bellaria, whom he durst not distinguish, by any Marks of
Respect, or Service, for fear of pointing out her Sex, to the Brutes, who were
their Masters.

BUT what aggravated his Sorrow, to the most piercing Extremity, was, an
Information he received from a Native of the Canaries, whom he found a Slave at
Sallee, That his Father was newly dead, and that all his Effects had been
seized by the Spaniards, on Occasion of some Criminal Correspondencies, which
he had unwarily been drawn into.

THEY passed about a Week, with the rest of their Ship's Company, in a public
Dungeon of the City, where they were to expect the killing Summons, which must
expose them in a Market, to be sold, and torn for ever from the Enjoyment of
that mutual Comfort, which was, now, the only Thought, that could support 'em
in their Wretchedness. The Moon, one Night, shone clearly through the Grates of
the Prison Windows; and Courthope, while the rest were asleep, hung, in
melancholy Transport, over the Bosom of Bellaria, who started, in broken
Slumbers, and filled his Soul with sad Reflections. He took Notice of a rugged
Stone, which rose, pointed, through the Earth, and imagining it might hurt her,
removed it, with much Difficulty, and had no sooner drawn it out, but he
discovered an old Piece of Woollen Cloth, which had formerly been hidden under
it, in which were Sixty Moidores, Two Gold Rings, and a Writing which he
perceived to have been French, but now defaced, and not legible,

HE approached Bellaria's Ear, and awaked her, in all the Ecstacy of a Man, who
considered himself, as distinguished by Providence: He whispered his new Hopes,
of an immediate Redemption; and found Means soon after, by Aid of an honest
Jew, a Man of much Charity, who visited the Slaves every Morning, to be carried
to the Alcaid; and, trusting his Gold with the Jew, proposed to ransom Himself
and Bellaria, whom he called his Brother: But the Conflict of his Passions had
so visible an Effect, in his Looks, and his Earnestness, that the Alcaid took
Advantage, from what he observed, and insisted on the whole Sum, for the
Liberty, of One only, which was offered him, for Both. -- He bid him name, at
his Choice, either his Brother, or himself; but advised him to lose no Time,
for an English Sloop was ready to sail out of the Harbor, with ransomed
Captives on Board, and would carry him to Gibraltar, where his Countrymen were
in Garrison: -- He added too, That all the Christian Slaves in Sallee, were to
set out the next Morning, for Mequinez, to work on some New Buildings of the
Emperor of Morocco.

Courthope trembled with Jealousy; and a Thousand different Fears, at the
distracting Imagination of Bellaria, in the Eye and Power of such a Tyrant! --
He went out with the Jew, and took a sudden Resolution.

ABOUT Noon the same Day, the Jew returned to the Prison, and carried with him
an Order for the Dismission of Bellaria; who, enquiring after Courthope, was
told, He went before, to prepare Things for her Reception, on Board the Vessel,
they were to embark in; and had given him Orders to conduct her thither
immediately. Never was any Order obeyed with so much Transport; the Jew hired a
Boat, and attending her to the Ship, returned, abruptly, to the Town, without
taking Leave of her: -- She was led into the Cabin, where, expecting to find
her Lover, she was received by the Master of the Vessel, with whom the Jew had
been before, and who delivered her a Letter, which she opened, with trembling
Hands, and read in it, what follows.

HOW miserable should I have been, my dear, my lost Bellaria! if Heaven had not
enabled me to redeem you from Misery! -- The Money, which I found in the
Dungeon, was too little to save us both; allow me, therefore, the Honor, to
have restored you to that Liberty, which you lost, for having pitied me: I am a
Wretch, whose Ill-Fortune, neither your Sex nor your Limbs, were framed to be
Partakers of! -- If I am worthy of Bellaria, I shall see her again: If she
blesses me with her Prayers, I cannot fail to be Fortunate: -- And if she
wishes to live without me, I shall die happiest in Absence! -- Angels Guide you
to your Father! If he has loved, he will forgive me, and permit a Sigh now and
then, to the Memory of poor

COURTHOPE.


SHE flew, skrieking, upon the Deck, as soon as she had read this dreadful,
this insupportable, Letter! but saw, with as much Distinction, as her Tears
would permit her, that the Ship was under Sail, and all she wished to live for,
left in Slavery behind Her.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 6.
-- Quae te
Ter purelecto poterunt recreare Libello.
HOR.
FRIDAY, April 10. 1724.
THOUGH Good-Breeding and Politeness, are generally thought the same, they are
Qualities very different. Politeness is the Influence of a Natural Refinement:
Good-Breeding, the Form of an Artificial Civility. The Last but Restrains us
from giving Offense; the First, Impowers us to give Pleasure. Politeness is the
happy Mixture of Greatness, with Benignity: It Is a Sunshine from the Soul, on
the Looks, Words and Actions. Good-Breeding is often, a Surface without Depth;
and, like the Painter's gay Colors, on dark Primings, spreads a Gloss over the
Outside, even of Vices, and Meanspiritedness: Whereas Politeness, like the
Crystal, is transparent as well as shiny; and always appears lovelier, the
fuller Light it is placed in.

I INTENDED to have adapted to this serious Introduction, a very sober
Dissertation, which many of my Gentle Readers, might, no doubt have mistaken
for a Dull One: But I shall substitute in its Place, a most extraordinary Essay
of the Epistolary Kind, which will serve for the same Purpose. It brings me the
uncommon Case of a faithful, though unfavour'd Lover, whose Good-Breeding,
without Politeness, has lost him a Mistress, by an odd Kind of Civility which
he made use of, for engaging her.

I NEED not inform my Readers, That this Letter is an Original: They will
discover natural Graces in it, which are inimitably Genuine.

These for the Plain-Dealer, at Mr. Roberts's in Warwick Lane. With Care and
Speed, Deliver.
Mr. Plain-Dealer: SIR,
ALL Yours, yet published, have regularly received, and note their Contents. I
thought it proper to let you know, That although I am a Cooper, I loved her as
well as her finical Turkey-Merchant. But I forgot to let you know, first, That
the needful of this Letter is, That she, that I mean, is a pretty, young Woman,
worth a Brace and a half of Thousands. But that makes nothing to the Story: I
had Money enough, for that Matter; and though I was no powdered fine Fellow, with
a finical white Wig, yet I valued and esteemed her, as if I had been the Mother
that bore her: And I should have been glad, when Heaven saw fit, to have had
her in her Smock! And so, mayhap, now I think on it, would her Beau too; but I
mean in an honest way only. But what matters that? Fair and False was an old
Saying in its Time! And if I had stuck close to my Calling, and valued her no
more than the Paring of my Nails, I had been a better Man for it, by some
Hundreds. But there is no setting Old Heads upon Young Shoulders. Every Body
knows, I am no Bragster; and, though I say it, that should not, I could have
loved the very Ground that she went upon: And very unhappy she has made me,
that is certain; whereby, I hope, somebody that is higher than she, will
remember her for it, in the Last Day, for then all Secrets will be laid open. I
cannot, for my Life, imagine, what possesses me, but I shall begin to hate my
own-self shortly, if it was, in Nature, to be possible, because, whenever she
comes into my Head, I am ready to cry at the Thoughts of her.

NOW you must know, she had told a Friend of mine, that wished me to her, not
once, nor twice, but that very Day, that he was leading her Home from Draper's
Gardens, That she thought, as how no Man could fall in Love with a Red-Hair'd
Woman. But, to see how strangely Mistakes will come about! this was all but her
own Fancy; for I never once thought of it; nor was never the Man, that had ever
concerned my self, with any Thing she had about her. So, because I woud'n't be
uncivil, I made a great Supper, and invited an old Aunt of mine, that she
know'd, and half a score young Women, besides herself, to take Part of it: for
it burnt in my Mind, strangely. In the middle of the Supper, I watched my Time,
to drink to her; and told her, before 'em all, That she might be sure, by my
having no Body to Supper, but Folks with Red Hair, as how I shou'dn't like her
a Crum the worse, for That: For I didn't care a Pin, for that matter, if she
was as red as a Fox, all over. To be sure, she looked, all Night, after it, as
the Devil looked over Lincoln: And when I went, the Afternoon after, to make
Love to her, as I used to do, nothing vexed me, but her sending me down word,
by that pert Gossip, Mrs. Briget, (that, I am sure, has had of me, at Times, in
Presents, besides Good Words, to the Value of Five Pieces!) and yet, she bid
Her, forsooth, to go and tell me, That I had no need for giving my self any
more Trouble to come there; for her Mistress would have nothing to say to a
Hoop-driver.

NOW I, knowing, as how we are commanded to forgive all our Enemies, would not
do her no Harm, for the World: And so, hoping you will print this, only to
expose her, concludes the needful, at present, from

Your Real Friend, G -- B --
P.S. Her Hair was not Golden Locks, but that hot Sort of Red, which most Folks
call Carrots.




As I shall borrow, from my Correspondents, the Entire Entertainment of this
Day, here follows an Epistle, which I have newly received, from the Malapert
Mistress of a Riding-Hood Warehouse.

To the withered, old, Crab-tree, who calls himself the PLAIN-DEALER.
Dear Drybones!
WITH all due Respect to the Dignity of Woollen Night-caps, what has urged
thee, to profess such a Spleen against Masquerading? when nothing less than a
Mask, can make thee fit to keep Company. It was just such a Vinegar Visage as
thine, appearing abroad, uncovered to the terrifying of whole Parishes, that
made Impudence be called barefaced. Thy Oaken-stick is a Type of Thee; only not
half so dry, nor so tough, nor so crabbed.

IT IS well, you have taken up your Lodgings in a Watchtower. If I knew how to
come at you, you should have a Feeling of my Respect, for your Parts and your
PLAIN DEALING. -- Yet you are in the Right too, in one Thing, that relates to
your Paper; which is, your Publishing it on Fridays: For Fish-Days, and Fasts,
prepare People for Mortification.

IF you needs must be Preaching, are there not Subjects enough to cant on,
without quarrelling with one pleasant Night or two in a Moon? Which gets so
many honest People a comfortable Livelihood too! and which accommodates sober
Gentlemen, and Ladies, with so decent an Opportunity, to converse, without
Censure! Why, since you must rail, don't you rail, like a Good Subject, at the
inconvenient Presumption, of late so much in Fashion, of Making bold with our
Betters? Egad! if I was Somebody, Nobody should dare to Deal Plainly.

IT is a Sign you are an Old Fellow, since you cannot meddle with the Ladies,
without nettling 'em! If this is your Manner of handling us Women, which you
had the Confidence to threaten, at your first setting out, a Fig for all you
can do to us. -- You could never want Subjects, if you did not want Brains,
without abusing Pleasures, you are past the Enjoyment of: -- There Is the Fool,
and the Wise; and the Statesmen, and the fine Gentleman, Scope enough for
Variety! -- Let alone but the Masquerades, and use the World, at your Pleasure.

THE Fool will be, readily allowed, to the PLAIN DEALER. But many, indeed, may
wonder, what the Wise can have to do with your Paper. -- Why, they see the Rest
in the wrong, and laugh where they should remedy: Their Ill Nature, therefore,
stands in need of a Snarler. -- The Statesman, you know, is by Prescription,
and the Happiness of our Constitution, the Right of the Scribbler! And, as for
the fine Gentlemen, (I mean those of the newest Edition, all gilt down the
Back, and tightly bound, in Calf's Leather); they are a Race of breathing
Blanks, fast asleep, with Eyes broad open! Yet, if you were good for any Thing,
but to spoil Trade, you might wake 'em, by a Pinch or two, of Plain-Dealing,
into an Apprehension of this Truth, which they never so much as dreamed of, --
That the Dead may as well be called Members of a State, as they who Live to no
Purpose.

SEE, now, Goodman Sowersop! Here is Business enough cut out for you. -- Let
the Women alone; and concern yourself with what you are fit for. -- Not a Word,
for the future, in Prejudice to an Assembly, where Love and strictest Union,
make the general Occupation. Throw away your greasy mouse-colour'd Gloves, and
wear these clean Ones,

From yours, as you shall merit, M -- L --


THE PLAIN DEALER. No 7.
-- Sapientia Prima
Stultitia caruisse --
HOR.
MONDAY, April 13. 1724.
BEING the other Day in a large Company at a Gentleman's House in
Covent Garden, I was highly delighted, to hear a young beautiful Lady
acknowledge that Tears flowed from her Eyes, upon reading of the Story of
Courthope. She who had the Virtue to be so Elegantly moved by his Distress,
will relish an Account of his better Fortune, which she may hereafter expect to
be Entertained with. But when she added, That she had been a Coquette too long,
and if ever it should be her Fate to meet with a Suitor of Courthope 's Desert,
she would let him lose no Time, for Fear of Accidents: when I perceived she
made this frank Confession, not only with her Lips, but from her Heart, I
confess, I began to conceive Hopes of knowing very speedily, That some visible
Fruits would arise from these my Labors.

I WAS therefore a little concerned, when I found my self interrupted by a
young Wag, who was pleased to pass Pertness upon the Company for Jesting. 'That
PLAIN DEALER, said he, is a well-meaning Writer, but he does not strike out a
Meaning cleverly. This is one of the best Stories I have read, upon the Subject
of Love; only, there is not one Double-Meaning through the Whole, and that
makes it Insipid. He has been generally hitherto, a perfect Inhabitant of his
Blunt-Hall, which seems to be, rather the Seat of his Understanding than of his
Person. But, since the Ladies like him, I will endeavor to be of Their Mind,
and especially because he tells us, he is an Old Bachelor, as well as a PLAIN
DEALER, and we must have some Humor struck out of him, when he comes to act
that Character.

I GUESSED what the young Malapert would be at by the Word Humor, and I found
I was not deceived, when he pulled out of his Pocket a little Scrap of Poetry,
entitled, -- An Epistle from Mrs. Robinson to Senesino, -- in which he
peremptorily swore, There was a great deal of Turn, Life, and Spirit.

IT is certain, He showed some Spirit in reading it, and proved himself a
Master of Humor, for he went boldly and undauntedly through it; and would never
observe, that every fresh Line excited fresh Blushes in the Faces of all the
Fair and Modest Part of the Assembly.

I TAKE this Opportunity of Informing that young Spark (and all others of the
same Class are desired to take Notice of it) That he is greatly mistaken, if he
expects any such Humor from me, notwithstanding his irreverent way of talking
of his Elders, and throwing, over my Shoulder, a General Sneer upon all the Old
Batchelors in Great Britain.

MY Province must be Tedious, before it can grow Pleasant; I must first remove
Folly, before I can make Room for Wit; for it is by clearing their way through
the Rubbish of Absurdity, that Men take the first Steps to Wisdom.

IF, according to the Maxim in the Forehead of my Paper, it was my immediate
Office to Teach that young Spark better Things, which I had then a great
Inclination to Do, only for Fear of discovering my self, I would begin by
Weeding out of his Mind that rank Conceit, which he entertains of his Parts,
and showing him, that there is no true Humor in Lewdness, nor true Wit in a
Double Entendre.

HOW different was the Principle of Waller? That Excellent Writer, as I have
heard my old Friend Mr. Dryden relate publicly at Will's, in his Commendation,
used to say, That he would raze any Line out of his Poems, which did not imply
some Motive to Virtue. This is a Saying that ought to be Memorable among our
Poets; it carries with it the Energy of Good Sense, as well as Virtue.

FOR my own Share, I declare, I would rather Propagate one such Maxim, with
good Effect, amongst the Writers of the present Age, than be the Head of those
Writers myself, and the Author of better Verses, than Waller's.

THEY who believe this to be my real Sentiment, may guess how extremely
delighted I must have been, with the following Answer, which a young Lady has
given, to the Affront and Outrage offered to the whole Sex, by one who
personates Senesino, in that scandalous Epistle.

An ANSWER from Mrs. ROBINSON to SENESINO.
FROM thy Loose Lines I turn my Eyes away,
Nor know, overspread with Blushes, what to say;
The Modest MUSES, wounded by thy Strain,
For Me, and for Themselves do thus complain.
O Thou! our Country's Folly and Expense!
Dull Foe to Tragedy and GOD-like Sense;
Too long, mean, mercenary Shade, too long,
Have thou these ISLES Enchanted with thy Song.
Musick's soft GOD Unbinds the Charm he raised,
He blessed thy Tongue, and while He blessed, we praised:
By Thee polluted, He disclaims his Choice,
And will no longer warble in thy Voice.
His Trembling Notes, where melting Softness hung,
And every Grace, will seek a Chaster Tongue.
No more, the Lover shall thy Song Repeat,
No more the FAIR ONE sigh, -- It Is wondrous sweet!
Oh Guilty Senesino! Thou no more,
Shall bravo! bravo! hear; -- or loud Encore.
The Loose and Dull, shall All thy Audience be,
The Chaste and Witty shall Resent for Me.
All unattended shall thy awkward Form
To sad, uncrowded Scenes, or whine, or storm.
Thy wretched Ha -- shall unapplauded grow,
And ill-plac'd Bays fall withering from thy Brow,
Know, Songster, Julius GOD-like Chief! disdains,
Thy shrill, unnatural, ungraceful, Strains,
With Rage redoubled, Pompey's Ghost must burn,
To find such Tears profane his Sacred Urn.
Remember, Echo, soon thou wilt know the Time
Stripped of thy Robes, thy Legions and thy Rhyme;
(Thou poor Machine, of mean, delusive Sound)
When I shall see thy Temples all unbound,
And Those that Heroes Act, like Heroes Crowned.
Thou, to thy famished Italy shall go,
And Rival Faustus to the Shades Below.
THE Business of the following, is of a Nature very surprising. To say Truth, I
was startled at it. It does not, directly, indeed, come to me from the Devil:
But it was sent me from a Deputy of his, who Professes the Black Art, and
styles himself Doctor Faustus. He dates his Letter, From the Theater in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, -- and would pass upon me, for a Player, or a Tumbler, or
Zany, under the Disguise of a Magician: But I beg his Pardon for That; I am
seldom deceived so easily. I am almost persuaded, It is an Agile, Evil Spirit,
that walks and does Mischief, by Candlelight, and assumes enticing Shapes, to
draw in the Unwary, and deprive People of their Wits. But, if he be, really,
Flesh and Blood, I am at a Loss what to think of him; only his Assurance seems
considerable, (since he appears, by his Letter, to belong to One of our
Theaters) that he should imagine me to be Novice enough to believe, he could be
a Conjurer.

FAUSTUS, the MAGICIAN, To the PLAIN DEALER, Greeting.
FORASMUCH as I Reverence your Name and your Purpose, I decline the Revenge,
which, by Aid of my Art, I might return for my Injuries; and content my self,
by your Means, to expose an Impostor.

HAVING fixed my Place of Residence, on my Arrival in this famous City, at the
Theater by Lincoln's- Inn, for the Public Display of Qualities which
Distinguish the Sons of Magic; I heard, with a Due Mixture of Contempt and
Displeasure, that the Rumor of my Purpose had encouraged another Theater to
disguise under the Venerable Character of Faustus, a professed Lover of Levity;
and endeavor, in Spite of Nature, to give him the Weight of a Wizard.

BUT, being satisfied in the Consciousness of my own Superiority, I have
overlooked and neglected him; 'till, emboldened by Success, he has dared, now,
at last, to publish his List of Fooleries; with a pertinacious Pretense to
something not unlike Comparison! I am therefore determined, immediately, to
make him leap out of my Gown, and confess himself No Doctor.

IN that Catalogue of Tricks, (most illiberal Appellation!) he makes use of
these strange Words -- A Usurer comes in, and brings a Money-Bag to the Doctor;
for which he offers his Note; but the Usurer entirely contemns the Proposal,
and will have the Doctor' s Leg, instead of Security for the Money. The Doctor
endeavors to dissuade him from this Demand, and offers him his Head, in
Exchange of the Leg he wanted.

I PASS over the unmagical Absurdity of a Necromancer's wanting Money; or, That
a Usurer, who would rather have parted with his own Leg, to save a Bag of
Money, should be so whimsical to surrender it, in Exchange for Another's. I
leave such Remarks to the Trite Essays of Critics, not descending, my self, to
the Insignificance of being Witty: But what I would convey to the Knowledge of
your Readers, is, The Necessity which my Charms have laid this Boaster under,
to Expose and Discover himself, in the very Act of his Imposture.

FOR who does not know, That had he been the true Faustus, his Brains must have
had their Situation in his Head? His Head therefore, he would have preferred to
all his inferior Members. But the Seat of his Understanding having been placed,
by his Profession, at the Bottom of his Body, I commissioned a Familiar to
perplex his Apprehension; who, by convincing him of how little Worth his Head
was, in comparison with his Heels, drew him under such a Terror, that he
continually cries out, to those who come for his Catalogue, The Devil is, in
good Earnest, in the Conjurer of Lincoln's End; but I am only a Dancing Master.

YOU shall prosper in PLAIN-DEALING if you Publish this Letter, and have Faith
in

FAUSTUS the ENCHANTER.


THE PLAIN DEALER. No 8.
-- Nos duo turba sumus.
OVID.
FRIDAY, April 17. 1724.
THERE is a Liveliness, and Race of Spirit, which we commonly call Wit; but it
is the Effect of Natural Accident; and depends, like a Machine, upon Order and
Parts. It is only the Result of a Mixture of different Humors: and of Animal
Spirits, finer and more delicately agitated, than ordinary; which imprint in
their Passage, a quick and lively Sense of Images; and animate by that
Impression, the Visage, Voice, and Deportment.

IT is merely by this Quickness, and Heat of their Imagination, that witty Men
surprise us. A smart and sprightly Rhetoric! A humorous Turn of Phrase! A
frank Vivacity of Mien! with a modish Affectation of peculiar Looks, and
Gesture, make the Merit of their Character. But these Men want, for the most
Part, both Strength of Mind, and Penetration. Their Imaginations are thin, and
delicate; and play lightly on the Skirts of Objects: But they are too weak for
solid Reasoning; and, in any Thing abstracted, and above the Pitch of the
Senses, they are miserably Impotent, and grow presently weary.

THEY are the Ladies Favorites, however; by a Kind of Sympathy, or
Resemblance: For, Women, being naturally of feeble Constitutions, have their
Brains of soft Consistence; with Fibers fine, and slender; apt and easy to be
moved, by the weakest Agitations. They are subject therefore, to their Senses;
and wanting Force, to strike deeper, set up for Judges of Modes, and Fashions;
and relish nothing, but what contributes to their Pleasure, or their Ornament.
They have fixed the Standard of Wit, by certain Rules of this Tendency; and
find nothing so difficult, as to believe a Man can want it, who has such Charms
for their Entertainment.

NED VOLATILE, a Member of our Assembly at the Widow's, is a Foreman of this
Species. With a great Extent of Good Nature, he appears Void of any; his
Facility to jest and rally, transports him, beyond Decency, to illustrate
Objects, or debase 'em; and, without regard to Ceremony, Merit, or Condition,
he contracts Things, or magnifies them, when they fall in his Way, 'till he has
adapted them to his Talent, of presenting every Thing ridiculously.

WE have the very Reverse of this Character, in the frank-hearted Major
Steadfast: a Brave, and Able Officer, the Reward of whose Merit has been
Oppression and Injustice! yet, so firm is the manly Generosity of his Temper,
that, at one and the same Time, he vindicates his Character with the Boldness
of an injured Soldier; and offers Arguments, in Excuse for the Rashness of his
Ruiner! Imputing to Credulity, and the Malice of Misrepresenters, what his
Friends, All, consider as an Act of Violence and Barbarity. There is no
Subject, which he, oftener, or with more Pleasure, enlarges on, than the great,
and noble Qualities, of the Man who has undone him! Nay, he talks, even of his
Justice, with as much Warmth and Seriousness, as if he had, himself, been
obliged by it.

THE Major and Ned Volatile, are the North and South Poles of our Assembly. Ned
speaks, and the Major thinks. The first is always pleased, but the other always
pleases. There is a Humanity in the Major's Air, that never fails to mark him
out as the common Friend of the Company: and a kind of Majestic Tenderness in
his Behavior, gives him the Authority of their Father. He corrects, and
approves, with Openness; and is, at once, severe and amiable! There is a solemn
Force and Weight, in the Manner of his speaking, which seems to borrow its
Equality from the Steddiness of his Principles. He esteems, without Transport;
and condemns, without Anger. What is Fancy in Ned Volatile, is Reason in the
Major. The One has a Judgment, that is Solid and Plain: The Other an
Imagination, that is Sparkling and Wanton.

IT is a very frequent, and agreeable Entertainment, which arises to the
Assembly out of the natural Opposition, of these two Characters; who yet
preserve a Decorum, by Effect of the Regard each has for the other. The Major
loves Ned's Cheerfulness; But thinks him trifling and impertinent: And Ned
Volatile hears, with Reverence, the Wisdom of the Major; but would like him a
great deal better, if he would be merrier and more noisy.

WE had lately the Pleasure of hearing, in a full Meeting, some of the newest
Opera Songs, by a skilful Italian Lady, who has been famous on our Theaters;
and is equally remarkable for the Sweetness of her Voice, and the Strength of
her Features! she is an Acquaintance of the Widow, who asked us, as soon as she
was gone, our Opinion of this Person, to whom, we all knew her Partial. Ned
Volatile prevented any Answer but his own; and desired, He might have Liberty
to give it, under his Hand. He had Pen and Ink brought him; and every Body was
grown Impatient for the Product of his Muse, when he presented it, in the
following VERSES, from Randolph.

NOW Shame pursue my meddling Sight;
Would, I had been All Ear, to Night!
Sweet is her Voice, as Flowers in June;
But never was Face so out of Tune.
Lower than Gammut are her Eyes:
Her Nose does above Ela rise!
Were I to choose my self a Dear,
Not by my Eye, but by my Ear,
Here would I fix -- could I but woo
The Sound, without the Substance too.
Some Women are All Tongue -- and oh!
What Joy 'twou'd be, were This but so!
Harmonious Gods! to ease my Mind,
Or strike her Dumb, or make me Blind.
NO sooner had Ned Volatile repeated his Verses, but a General Applause, of
Laughter, was returned him by the Company. All but the Widow, the Major and
My-self, were extravagantly transported with the Humor and the Satire: And Ned
was triumphantly expanding his Poetry, with an Air of Levity, and Satisfaction;
when the Major, to prevent a second Reading, of what he saw was distasteful to
some Part of the Assembly, began to speak in this Manner.

THE Company must acknowledge, they are obliged to Mr. Volatile, for the Pains
he is at, to please them: But, if he were as inclinable to reason, as he is to
entertain, no Body could convince us sooner, that the finest Ridicule is to be
considered but as Cruelty, where it borrows its Subject from Men's Natural
Defects, or their Miseries. I know very well, that whatever savours of
Instruction is offensive in Conversation; and that nothing is more
insupportable, than a Liberty People take, of prescribing Rules to all the
World. We presently wish to fly the Society of those who dogmatize: For the
Mind of Man is Generous, and resists Truth, or receives it, as its Approaches
are Rude or Gentle. But then, there is an equal Inconvenience in the contrary
Extreme: And if we would enjoy Conversation, with a Delicacy of Wit, we should
have Liberty to bound it, by the Interposition of our Judgment.

THE Harmony of this Lady, who has so agreeably entertained us, is a Beauty
that might weigh against the Absence of other Charms, more frequent, and
perhaps less valuable! It Is the Motherly Indulgence of Nature, to rob us of no
Benefit, without bestowing on us some other, in a double Proportion. How seldom
do we find all Accomplishments united in the same Person! Some are happy in
their Humor, and have their Spirits full of Fire; and swift and subtle in
their Motion. Others, not so sprightly, have a Blood more cold and phlegmatic;
but the Course of their Animal Spirits being temperately regulated, they are
cautious in Deliberation, strong and constant in Resolution; and unshaken in
their Enterprises. How visible is this Difference! One is airy and facetious;
the Other thoughtful and judicious. The Wit of One is sharp; the Sense of the
Other, solid.

I REMEMBER to have seen, during the last War in Flanders, in a Town where I
had my Winter Quarters, a wonderful Example of this Recompense, observed by
Nature. An old Man, who had been born blind, and had always continued so, had a
natural Sagacity, that was prodigious and scarce credible! A Legacy being left
him, to the Value of Fifty Pistoles, the poor Man, who had never expected to be
Master of such a Sum, was under no small Solicitude how to secure his
Possession of it. He determined, at last, to dig a Hole in the Cellar, and hide
it: But it happened, that a Dutch Soldier, who was quartered in the House, saw
him bury the Purse, and went afterward and stole it. The Blind Man bethinking
himself of a Place more convenient, returned, in an Hour or two, and discovered
his Misfortune; for which he contrived an ingenious Remedy, by detecting the
Author of it, which he judged to have been the Dutch Soldier; but the
Difficulty was, how to prove it.

THEY lay in the same Room; and, at Night, when they were in Bed, the Blind Man
began, under Pretense of Friendship and Confidence, to consult with the
Soldier, concerning a Necessity which he said, he was under, to hide a hundred
Pistoles. To say Truth, added he, I have hid fifty of them to Day; and would
dispose of the other fifty in the same Place, to Morrow; only I am desirous to
be satisfied, Whether, in Point of Conscience, such a Practice is unlawful? My
Relations being so extravagant, that they would waste it all, if they could
come at it.

THE Soldier swallowed the Bait, and argued, like a Casuist, to confirm the
Intention; expecting, now, to get it all. He rose, therefore, betimes, and
going into the Cellar, restored the fifty Pieces to the Hole, he had taken them
from: The Blind Man went, afterward, and recovered his Money, as he expected,
by the Success of his Stratagem.

HERE, the Major closed his Speech; and it was difficult to say, which had most
pleased the Hearers, His Story, or his Goodnature: Ned Volatile, himself, though
his Vanity was a little shocked, felt an Awe, from the Virtue and Plain-Dealing
of his Friend; and, looking generously out of Countenance, told the Major, with
a serious Smile, 'That, in Company of 'the Wise, none are Foolish, but the
Witty.

YET, to show you, said he, (by this Time, beginning to recover himself,) That
I have edified by your Sermon, I will make an honorable Amends to the Ladies,
by producing the Example of a Living Glory to their Sex, who has also been
pleasant on a natural Defect, but in a manner, much more Generous. She made
them, on a Boy that was Dumb, but of excellent Quickness of Parts. And I speak
with the more Pleasure, in Praise of this Lady, because I know I can do nothing
more acceptable to the Major, whom I have often heard declaring himself, One of
Her devoted Admirers. I Sing the Boy, who gagged and bound,
Has been, by Nature, robbed of Sound:
Yet has she found a generous Way,
One Loss, by many Gifts, to pay.
His Voice, indeed, she close confined;
But blessed him with a speaking Mind.
And every Muscle of his Face,
Discourses, with peculiar Grace.
The LADIES, tatling, over their Tea,
Might learn to charm, by copying Thee:
If Silence, thus, can Man become,
All Women Beauties should be dumb.
Then, happy Boy, no more complain,
Nor think thy Loss of Speech a Pain;
Nature has used thee, like good Liquor,
And cork'd thee, but to make thee quicker.
THE Major embraced Ned Volatile with a fatherly Pride, and Tenderness: And
there was not One, in Company, who did not think it a Happiness, to be guilty
of a Fault, which had furnished an Opportunity of repenting, so gracefully.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 9.
-- fratremque ruentem
Sustentat dextra --
VIR.
MONDAY, April 20. 1724.
THERE is Nothing more talked of and less easily found than Friendship; Every
One Pretends to It, and not One in a Million really Possesses this Noble
Passion, which is the most Generous that can Actuate and Adorn the Soul of Man;
being as Necessary a Cement, in Private and Domestic Life, as Public Faith to
Public Society, and the greater Commerce of the World.

FOR Want of Authentic and Real Examples of this Noble Quality so conducive to
Pleasure as well as Profit, the Ancient Poets have had Recourse to Fiction, and
told us Stories of their Pylades and Orestes; but we will entertain the Reader
with the greatest Action of Generous Friendship that Human Nature is capable of
Performing; and this from an Author of unexceptionable Credit, who was both an
Eye and Ear Witness to Part of the Story, which is more remarkable, by
happening between Two Brothers, whom the constant Observation of all Ages, has
remarked to be less often Friends, notwithstanding the Ties of Blood, than
other Persons; insomuch that Virgil, who had a Perfect Knowledge of Human
Nature, has thought fit (as it were Proverbially) to express himself on this
Occasion, Et infidos agitans Discordia Fratres.


IN the Beginning of the XVIth Century, the Portugueze Carracks sailed from
Lisbon to Goa, a very great Colony of Portugueze, in the East Indies. These
Carracks are the largest Vessels that press the Ocean: On Board of one of them
were Twelve Hundred Souls, Mariners, Merchants, Passengers, Priests, and
Friars, who were going on their several Missions established in China and the
Indies: The Beginning of their Voyage was Prosperous; they had doubled the Cape
of Good Hope, and were steering North-East to the Continent of India, when some
Gentlemen on Board, having studied Geography and Navigation, found in the
Latitude in which they then were, a very great Ridge of Rocks laid down in
their Sea Charts; upon this, they applied themselves to the Captain of the
Ship, and acquainted him with the Danger which they apprehended, desiring him
at the same Time, to communicate what they had discovered to the Pilot; which
Request he immediately gratified, recommending to the Pilot to lie by in the
Night, and slacken Sail by Day, 'till they should be past the Danger. By the
Discipline of the Portugueze Navy, the Sailing Part is absolutely committed to
the Care of the Pilot, who is answerable with his Head, for the safe Carriage
of the King's Ship, and under no manner of Direction from the Captain, who
commands in all other Respects.

INSTEAD of complying with so reasonable a Request, on which the Safety of so
many Lives depended, the insolent Pilot, thinking it an Affront to be taught in
his own Art, crowded more Sail than he carried before.

THE Observations of these Gentlemen were too true, not to have a fatal Issue:
They had not sailed many Hours, but just upon Break of Day, (which would have
been prevented if they had lain by) the Ship struck upon a Rock, and broke her
Back.

I LEAVE to the Reader's Imagination, what a Scene of Horror this must be; the
Fright of Twelve hundred Persons in the same inevitable Danger, at the Sight of
that instantaneous Death, which star'd them in the Face!

THE Captain in this Distress, ordered the Pinnace to be launched, into which,
after having tossed in a small Quantity of Biscuit, and some few Boxes of
Marmelade, he got himself with nineteen others, who seeing the Danger of a
Crowd in the common Horror, rushing into the Boat, drew their Swords and
prevented the coming in of any more: The same Necessity obliged them
immediately to put off, lest their Pinnace should be drawn in by the Suction of
the sinking Carrack.

HERE their Eyes were entertained with the most dismal of Spectacles, the Sight
of their sinking Friends, and their Ears with the Cries of so many in the same
Misery, whom they could not help without their own Destruction; a Scene of Woe,
which nothing could alleviate but the Reflection, that they themselves were not
in the same Extremity, though humanly speaking, they were not in a much better
Condition, being destitute on the vast Indian Ocean, in an open Boat, without
any Compass to direct them, without any fresh Water, but what must fall from
those Heavens, whose Mercy alone could deliver them. To which must be added,
the inevitable Danger of being overset by the first Wind that should raise the
Waves, besides the Certainty of perishing as soon as their small Stock of
Provisions should be spent, which only served to prolong their Miseries by
reserving them for a more lingering and cruel Death. In this Distress, after
they had for four Days rowed to and fro, without Guide or Direction, the
Captain, who had been sick, and very weak, for some Time, overcome with Grief
and Fatigue, died. This added, if possible, to their Misery, for now they fell
into the last Confusion, Every one would Govern, and none would Obey: This
obliged them to choose one of their own Company to command them, whose Orders
they agreed implicitly, without any Reserve, to follow.

THE Choice fell upon a Gentleman, who was, what the Portugueze call a
Mestizzo, that is, one begotten between an European and an Indian: This Person,
vested with his new Authority, proposed to the Company to draw Lots, and throw
every fourth Man overboard, by Reason their Provision was spent so far, as not
to last above three Days longer: They were now Nineteen Persons in all; in this
Number were a Friar and the Carpenter, both whom, they would exempt, by Reason
of their being so necessary, the One to Absolve and Comfort them in their last
Extremity, and the other to take Care of the Boat, in Case of a Leak, or other
Accident; the same Compliment they paid to their new Captain, he being the odd
Man, and his Life of more Consequence than any of the rest. He refused a great
while, but at last acquiesced; so that there were four to dye out of the
sixteen remaining.

THE Three first on whom the Lot fell, after having confessed, and received
Absolution, submitted to their Fate.

THE Fourth, whom Fortune condemned, was a Portugueze Gentleman who had a
younger Brother in the Boat, who, seeing him about to be flung overboard, most
tenderly embraced him, and with Tears in his Eyes, besought him to let him dye
for him; enforcing his Arguments by telling him, That, He was a Married Man,
and had a Wife and Children at Goa, besides the Care of three Sisters who
absolutely depended upon him: That as for himself, he was single, and his Life
of no great Importance; he therefore conjured him to let him supply his Place.

THE Elder Brother astonished, and melted with this Generosity, replied, That
since the Providence of GOD, had appointed him, it would be wicked and unjust
to suffer any other to dye for him, especially a Brother to whom he was so
infinitely obliged.

THE Younger would take no Denial, but flinging himself on his Knees, held his
Brother so fast, that they could not disengage them: Thus they disputed for a
while, the Elder Brother bidding him be a Father to his Wife and Children, and
as he would inherit his Estate, take Care of their common Sisters; but all he
could say, made him not desist; This was a Scene of Tenderness which must fill
with Pity any Breast susceptible of generous Impressions!

AT last, as it is no difficult Thing to persuade a Man to live, the Constancy
of the Elder Brother yielded to the Piety of the Younger; he acquiesced, and
suffered the Gallant Young Man to supply his Place; who being flung into the
Water, when he came to it, could not be content to dye; but being a very good
Swimmer, got to the Stern of the Pinnace, and laid hold with his right Hand;
which being perceived by one of the Sailors, he cut off the Hand with a
Cutlass, upon which, dropping into the Sea, he caught hold again with his Left,
which received the same Fate by a second Blow; thus dismembered in his two
Hands, he made a shift, notwithstanding, to keep himself above Water, with his
Feet and two Stumps.

THIS moving Spectacle so raised the Pity of the whole Crew, that they cried
out, He is but one Man, let us save him; which was accordingly done; and he
taken into the Boat, had his Hands bound up as well as the Place and
Circumstances would permit. They rowed all that Night, and next Morning, when
the Sun arose, as if Heaven would reward the Gallantry and Piety of this Young
Man, and for his Sake, save all the rest, they descried Land, which proved to
be the Mountains of Mozambique in Africa, where the Portugueze have a Colony;
hither they all safely got, where they staid 'till the next Ships from Lisbon
passed by, and carried this Company to Goa; where Linschotten, a Dutch Author
of good Credit, assures us, That he himself saw them land, supped with the two
Brothers that very Night, saw the Younger with his Stumps, and had the Story
from both their Mouths, as well as from the rest of the Company.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 10
-- Dulcis Odor Lucri.
-- didicisse fideliter Arts.
-- Emollit mores nec sinit esse feros.
HOR.
FRIDAY, April 24. 1724.
AMONG the Benefits we owe to Trade, there is One Disadvantage, unavoidably
annexed to It -- It weakens our Humanity, and eradicates an open Confidence,
which most Men are born with; but lose, as it were, insensibly, by the
Influence of low Maxims: such as are early imprinted on the Minds of all who
are educated to the Arts of Bargaining.

THE Notions of such Men, unless in some extraordinary Cases, are strangely
narrow, and confined. They are seldom capable of relishing, or even of
comprehending, the Extent of a disinterested Beneficence. -- Their Wisdom is
but Cunning, and their Learning is a Craft. When they hear the Fame of some
vast Bounty, some Expansion of the Soul, that is unusual, and astonishing,
instead of that Emotion and warm Transport of Heart, which it excites, in the
Generous, all their Wonder is the Effect of their Incapacity to conceive it:
for, measuring it by a Supposition, That there must be some latent Design, they
are at a Loss to account for the Gain, or the Drift of it.

CIVILITY, in these Men, is not Manners, but Mystery. Their Friendships are a
Kind of Barterings, for Exchange of Good Offices, and the weakest of their
Passions, are their Love, and their Pity.

NO Condition of Life can be more afflicted and mortifying, than the Misery of
Owing Money to these Scantlings of Humanity. They consider you, then, no longer
on the Foot of Merit, or Quality; but, as if Good Manners, and Decency, were
their Ready Money Commodities, they throw off all Respect, and grow brutal, and
unsociable.

Mr. Hawthorn, my Neighbor, the Sussex Justice of the Quorum, came lately into
the Assembly, with a Mien, disturbed, and Martial. He swung his Arms, like a
Pendulum. His Face was flushed, and flaming; and his whole Gesture menacing. He
puffed and breathed short; sat him down, in one of the Windows; threw his Hat
upon the Floor; and, as soon as he could speak intelligibly, gave us loudly to
understand, That he had been waiting, six Hours, in a Tavern, without eating or
drinking, with a furious Determination, to break the Head of the Vintner. -- Is
this, said he, the Good-Breeding of your Welcome-mongers, that keep Taverns? --
Is this, the little, flattering, scraping, sneering, wagtail Fellow, that used
to be so ready, and so nimble? -- To rub his Hands, and wriggle forward, like a
Spaniel, to the Street-End of his Entry? -- Odsbobs! it was a lucky Reprieve
for his Bones, that he was gone down to the Custom-House! for I am verily
convinced, that, in the Fury of my Heart, I should have broke the King's Peace,
though I had lost my Commission for it.

THE Assembly was, by this Time, in a Midway Disposition, betwixt Mirth and
Astonishment! when he threw me a rumpled Paper, and nodded at me, to open it. I
did so, in some Confusion, and, perceived, it was a Letter; which, upon a
second permissive Nod, I read, aloud, to the Company.

For 'Squire Robert Hawthorn. These.
SIR,
I SHOULD a'thought, how such as you, should a been a Man of Honor. Your Friend,
as gave you a Character, promised, That you was Ready Money, for that Pipe of
Neat Port, as I sent away, by your Order, to the Carrier's in the Borough. --
But I find no such Matter. I have writ one Letter, besides this, and had no
Answer, to none of 'um. I depend upon hearing from you, to my Content, betwixt
and next Saturday, without fail: -- Or Trouble will ensue.

Yours, Giles Winpenny.


I WAS a little at a Loss how to act in this Business, for it happened,
unfortunately, that I had recommended Mr. Winpenny, to my worthy Neighbor Mr.
Hawthorn; so that I was under some Surprise, and in Perplexity, what to say:
When Ned Volatile, whose Levity is, sometimes, of much Weight, interposed, very
seasonably, and with his usual Vein of Humor.

LEND your Cudgel to Me, Mr. Justice of the Quorum; for, if you should pay him,
your self, you will pay him, with Interest. -- Besides, it is an Honor that
every Body does not merit, -- to be beat by a Magistrate. -- The Matter is not
so great neither. -- If you will do me but the Favor to sup, to Night, at my
Lodgings, there is my Man, now, I Will warrant you, can produce half a Score, such
tender Billets as this. -- I give 'em him, once a Week, to cut out into
Fringes, for my Candlesticks. -- But, as to poor Winpenny, he is an honest
Fellow, at Bottom, and no worse than a Miser. -- But so pleasantly covetous,
that, if you were as learned in him, as I am, you would forgive him, out of
Gratitude, for the Laughter he would afford you. -- Shall I tell you a merry
Story of him? -- Poor Winpenny, you must know, lost a Cargo of Wine, that was
coming to him, from Lisbon; and, in the Anguish of his Heart, he resolved to
live no longer: He tied a Rope about his Neck, and fast'ning it to a Beam in
his Cellar, jumped, heroically off, from an unlucky, empty, Hogshead, that
tumbled down, from its Stand, and alarmed one of his Drawers, who was
unseasonably Vigilant. The silly Rogue cried out; and I, happening, at that
Time, to be Drinking behind the Bar, run immediately down; and, as Ill-Luck
would have it, came Time enough to cut the Rope. -- Great Endeavors were used,
to compose his ruffled Mind. -- But, when he was told, the next Morning, in
what Manner he was preserved, he grew desperate, and uncomfortable; And nothing
would serve his Turn, but his Rope must be paid for. -- I have the Bill, at
Home uncancell'd, where he charges me, by Way of Postscript, with this
remarkable Article, -- For Cutting a New Rope, what you please, or think
reasonable.

MR. Hawthorn lost his Anger, in Ned Volatile's Start of Pleasantry; and the
Assembly grew composed, and took Occasion, from this Incident, to enter upon a
serious, and instructive, Chain of Reasoning, on the Loveliness of that
Quality, which is called Generosity: At the Close of which, the Major, who had
listened, from the Beginning, with a silent Approbation, and a Face augustly
sweetened, with an Amiable Reverence, took his Turn in the Conversation: And as
soon as he offered to speak, a cheerful Expectation appeared in the Eyes of the
whole Company; and every Body paid him the Homage of a voluntary Attention.

I have been greatly delighted, said this Friend of Mankind, with the Discourse
which I have heard, of an Excellence, I love: And, which, I remember a fine
Experience of, by a Companion of mine, an agreeable, young Fellow, who, in an
Exigency, that befell him, tried the Difference of Men's Natures. -- He applied
himself to Two Persons; of whom One was his near Relation, and the Other had
been his School-fellow. He sent each of them a Letter, which had the same
Contents, Verbatim. -- From the first, he had this Answer. I keep both Copies
in my Pocketbook; for I should be sorry to lose Either.

Dear Tom,
YOU could never have applied your self to me at so unlucky a Time, as Now: For
I have not a loose Corn by me. The Funds are, to me, instead of a strong Box:
And, you know, when they are in such a fair Way of Rising, one would not
willingly sell out; unless for some extraordinary Occasion. I send you the Note
again, because it don't fall in my Way to make the proposed Use of it: But I am
heartily, and sincerely sorry, that it should happen to be thus out of my
Power: For no Body in the World can be more willing, and ready, at all Times,
to serve You, than,

Dear TOMSY, Your loving Uncle, and real Friend, D. W.


The ANSWER to his other LETTER, was very different, and runs thus:
SIR,
NO good News can be more welcome, than a Proof, That I am honored with the
Friendship of the Deserving. -- I must consider in this Light, the Obligation
you have laid me under, by that Confidence you allowed to my Professions of
Sincerity. -- This Bill should have come alone, but that I find my self under a
Necessity to rectify a Mistake, you have made, in the Note, you sent me. --
Forgive me, therefore, that I return it you. I am, with the greatest Respect,

SIR, Your most Obliged, and most Obedient Servant, M. Z.


THE Note, which he sent back, was that, by which my Friend had acknowledged
his Receipt of the Money he desired to borrow; and which he promised to repay,
on Demand, to the Lender, or his Order: All this, the refined Obliger had
eraz'd with his Pen; and instead of it, wrote what follows, on the blank Side
of the Paper. -- I do hereby declare, That I owe five Hundred Guineas, to my
good Friend, Mr. S --, and will always reserve them in a Readiness for his
Call; in Return for the Pleasure he has given me, by borrowing of me One
Hundred.

WHILE we were expressing our Satisfaction in this fine-spirited Instance, of
the Art of enlarging Favors, by the Manner of conferring them, the Alderman
was observed to have fixed his Eyes on the Floor, in a Posture of Thought, and
Sadness, that was very unusual in him. -- Ned Volatile, who had just made a
Tour, round the Table, to beg a Pinch of Spanish from the Coquett's Venetian
Snuff Box, passing close behind the Alderman, and supposing him fast asleep,
guided Part of it to his Nose, and roused him, into a Fit of Sneezing; which,
as soon as he was freed from, he looked round for Ned Volatile; and, after a
Half Smile, and a Sober Wag of his Head, thus addressed himself to the Company.

I KNEW, I owed this Favor to the Wantonness of that young Mad-cap; who is as
full of Mischief as a Monkey. He fancied, I was nodding; and, truly, I am
sorry, that he happened to be mistaken; for I was musing, and very melancholy.
-- This Story of the Major's brought afresh into my Mind an extraordinary
Accident that I met with, my self, in the Year of the Great Frost, that was
before the Revolution.

MANY Losses, that Year, had disabled me to make good my Credit; so that I was
run upon, by my Enemies; and gave myself up for no Better than a Gone Man. But,
one Morning, early, -- I shall never forget it! -- I was just come down into my
Counting House, in my Nightgown, and Slippers; -- when, in comes a Porter, and
delivers me a Letter; and away he goes, immediately, without asking for an
Answer. -- The Letter was from a Merchant, that had formerly been my Best
Friend; but we had broke off, for some Years, upon my refusing to lend him a
Thousand Pounds, upon his Bond; and we had never conversed, since that Time,
till now, that he sent this Letter; the Contents of which, were to tell me,
That he was sorry to hear, what was reported abroad, to the Discredit of my
Circumstances; for he knew, it must be owing to some unfortunate Accident;
since, whatever Defects I had, I could never want Frugality. -- But, however,
says he, If Five Thousand Pounds can save you, call for it when you please, and
I will lend it you, by Way of Punishment, for an Unkindness of Yours, formerly:
And since the Mortification This must give you, merits Pardon for your Fault, I
will forget it, from this Time forward, that we may be Friends again, as usual.

THE Alderman interrupted himself in this Part of his Story, by a sudden Burst
of Tears; which he strove, in vain, to suppress; and which affected the whole
Assembly with a Sympathy, more touching, than could have been excited by the
most pathetick Force of Eloquence. -- He recovered himself, after a short
Pause, and went on, to inform us, That, within less than a Week, after he had
saved himself from Ruin, by Receipt of this Money, his generous Friend, the
Merchant, fell out of a Boat, below Bridge, and was, unfortunately drowned. --
It is true, continued the good Alderman, I repaid it, very punctually, and have
made all Acknowledgments, and done all Services, in my Power, to his sorrowful
Widow, and his Children. -- But, alas! What did all That signify? -- He was
dead, that had Obliged me: -- And gone, beyond all Possibility of ever knowing
how I repented my unkind Usage of him! and what a Shame, and a Change, his
Generosity had produced in me!

He would willingly have spoke more; but could not support his Anguish; -- and
wept again, very passionately; so that rising abruptly, he hastened out of the
Room, and left Us all in great Disorder.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 11
-- Nugis addere Pondus.
HOR.
MONDAY, April 27. 1724.
I YESTERDAY went to see a very agreeable Friend, at whose House, I found a
handsome Appearance of Young People of both SEXES. Upon my Entrance, every one
rose, and very obligingly proffered me a Seat, each insisting on the Preference
I should give in Acceptance of the Honor designed me.

AS I was unwilling to disoblige any One, where All had treated me with so much
Civility, I winked at my Friend, who, with great Formality, conducted me to a
large Elbow-Chair; and put an End to the Dispute.

WHILE I was wondering with a secret Pleasure, at such an unaccustomed Piece of
Good-breeding, and examining the Countenances of the Company, my Friend, who
till then had discoursed of indifferent Matters, told me with a Smile, He had
assembled this Set of Young People, with a Promise of showing them the PLAIN
DEALER, and therefore desired, I would throw aside all Reservedness, and look
upon every one as my professed Admirer, and Friend, which was immediately
confirmed by a General Reverence.

I THANKED him for the Favor he had done me, in introducing me to such
Agreeable Society; and could not help discovering by my Looks, the inward
Satisfaction I felt, at the Sight of so much Youth, and Beauty; which ended in
that melancholy Reflection, How many Dangers it was exposed to, and how easily
it might be vitiated.

WHEN the Tea-Equipage was removed, and every One remained silent in
Expectation of what I should say, the Charming Leonilla, my Friend's Eldest
Daughter, after having first fixed her Eyes on a Young Lady that sat opposite
to her, and then on me, desired in Behalf of Part of the Company, I would give
my Opinion in the Case of That Restriction Young Women lie under, who, from a
Custom, which, in her Opinion, had no just Grounds for its Support, are forbid
by Decency, let their Passion be the most virtuous and tender that was ever
felt, to make the least Advance, by which the Party beloved may discover the
Sentiments they have in his Favor. To which I answered, A Woman of Sense can
never feel that Tenderness for a Fool; -- and a Man of Sense would always
reckon such a Declaration, a Desire of enjoying that Happiness, whose Basis is
Love, and whose Support is Virtue.

AFTER I had delivered my Opinion in Favor of Leonilla, I turned to the Lady,
with whom (I could perceive by the Blush in her Cheeks) she had been disputing,
and told her, There was a false, as well as a true Decency; and that One
consisted in Grimace and Show, the Other in an open Deportment, the Result of
an unaffected, disinterested Love of Virtue. And that it would always be found,
a Man has no more Reason to conceive Hopes from the free Converse of the
Latter, than to fear Success from the distant Carriage of the Former. True
Virtue wants no Foil, and is never talking of itself. False Virtue, sensible of
its Weakness, is forced to have Recourse to Hypocrisy, and is ever boasting a
Strength it is a Stranger to.

AS I was running on in this grave Discourse, I was interrupted by a young
Gentleman, who told us, he had just met with a Copy of VERSES, said to be
written by Lady W -- y M -- e, wherein he thought there was the most Delicate
Sense of Virtue, mixed with the most agreeable Turn of Wit. Upon the whole
Company's desiring to see it, he pulled a Paper out of his Pocket, and read as
follows.

The RESOLVE.
WHilst Thirst of Praise, and vain Desire of Fame,
In every Age, is every Woman's Aim;
With Courtship pleased; of silly Toasters proud;
Fond of a Train, and happy in a Crowd;
On each poor Fool bestowing some kind Glance;
Each Conquest owing to some loose Advance;
Whilst vain Coquets affect to be pursued,
And think they are virtuous, if not grossly lewd;
Let this Great MAXIM be my Virtue's Guide,
In Part she is to blame, who has been tried;
He comes too near, that comes to be Denied.
WE all agreed in the Character he had given of this little Piece; particularly
a Gentleman, who has a Smattering in Poetry; who, not to be behind-hand with
the Sex in Modesty, produced the subsequent Lines, which he desired I would
read to the Company.

ANSWER to the RESOLVE.
WHilst empty Coxcombs blast a Woman's Fame,
In every State and every Age the same;
With their own Folly pleased, each FAIR they toast,
And where they least are happy, swear they are most;
No Difference marking 'twixt the Gay and Lewd,
But dreaming, All, who fly, would be pursued:
Whilst thus they vainly think, and vainly live,
Lost, to that Reverence Love's soft Lessons give,
Let this Great MAXIM be my Passions Guide,
May I never hope where I am never denied,
Nor gain a Woman willing to be tried.
IF before, we were loud in Commendation of the First, here, we were
extravagant; the LADIES oppressed him with Thanks; and told him, He should lose
Nothing, by the Generous Opinion he had entertained of the SEX. To which a Wag,
in Company, with an envious Smile, replied, 'If he should lose Nothing by it he
was sure, he would get Nothing, but what would be merited, by his
Mortifications.

MY Friend perceiving both Parties grew warm, desired them, before they went
on, to consider what they were saying, since he was persuaded the PLAIN DEALER
would print the Occurrences of that Day. Upon which, they all composed their
Looks, and a general Silence ensued. When my Friend turning to me, 'You see,
(says he) the Necessity of a Man of your Character: Every way you're
Serviceable; the Public feels the Benefit of your Writings; and Private
Families of your Presence: One is restrained by Fear of Public Censure; the
Other, of Private Reproof; If therefore you have any Enemies, treat them with
Candor, and convince them of their Errors by a -- But I am engaging in a
needless Office; and giving Advice where I ought to ask it.

IT growing late, I took Leave of the Company (not without a particular
Invitation from Each, which I promised at the first Opportunity to comply
with,) and calling at my Printer's as I went Home, found the following Billet,
which, but for the Advice my Friend gave me, I should hardly have been
prevailed upon to make public.

To the PLAIN DEALER.
April 25th, 1724. SIR,
THE best Construction I can put upon your Attempt is Vanity or Folly; for
unless you look upon yourself as superior to the Authors of the Tatlers,
Spectators, Guardians, Free-Thinkers, etc. You are very weak, to think any
Thing inferior can be relished by those who are Admirers of Them; amongst the
most Passionate of which, you may reckon

Indelectabilis.
N.B. You love PLAIN DEALING; so do I.




To Indelectabilis.
SIR,
YOUR Letter being so Witty, as not to be Capable of an Answer, -- You have
reduced me to the Necessity of bestowing it upon your Postscript. I am, Sir,

Your most humble Servant, The Plain Dealer.
N.B. Plain Dealing, is a Virtue, but Rough Dealing an Impertinence.




THE PLAIN DEALER. No 12.
Pasces in Cruce Corvos. --
HOR.
FRIDAY, May 1. 1724.
I HAVE as just a Veneration as any Man living, for the Laws of my Native
Country: They are generous, mild, and gentle; built on equal Foundations of
Justice and Mercy: And, to say all, in a Word, they are such, as every Freeman
would wish to be governed by. I am so far from denying them the Reverence they
deserve, that I have always read with Pleasure, the most elaborate, and
strained Encomiums, with which the Gentlemen of the Robe fill their Writings,
on this Subject.

BUT, since it is the most desirable, among all the Advantages of Liberty, to
think, and speak freely; it cannot, I hope, be offensive, if I declare myself
not well satisfied, with any Arguments I have, yet, heard, in Defense of
Capital Punishment for certain Crimes, which are low, and frequent: And which
carry, methinks, no Proportion, in Comparison with others, of a much blacker
Complexion; to which notwithstanding, they seem paralleled, by the Equality of
their Sentence.

THE Life of a Man is, so infinitely of more Value than his Beast, or his
Moveable, that, whenever I see the Sufferings of pinched, and hunger-starved
Wretches, under the Agonies of an Execution; for having robbed perhaps to avoid
famishing; I find myself oppressed by a Grief, which nothing mitigates, but
this Reflection -- That their Lives were exposed to such Extremities of Want,
and Misery, that their Death should be a Comfort. -- And yet, the long
protracted Gazings, the Paleness, the Tremblings, and the ghastly, distorted
Faces, of the poor departing Strugglers (who die with strong Reluctance, and
linger, and lengthen out, their last painful Moment) make it evident, to the
Beholders, That, Unfriendly as the World was to them, they are not willing to
forsake it.

I AM convinced, that if it were possible to see, on some such Plain, as that
of Salisbury, under one assembled Prospect, the whole Number, of Men and Women,
who have been executed, for Theft only, in all the Counties of this Kingdom,
within the Memory of any Person, of but a moderate Advance in Years; such a
dreadful Demonstration of the Waste, which is made, by this Sweep of the Sword
of Justice, would be a startling Inducement to those, whose Province it is
known to be, to weigh, with Pity, and Deliberation, whether Punishments, more
adequate, and more politic, too, than Death, might not easily be appropriated
to a Number of Petty Crimes, which ever were, and ever must be, unavoidably
frequent, in all peopled Places; being the necessary Consequences, either of
the Wants, or the Depravity, of the lowest Part of the Human Species.

ONE Evening, very lately, All my Neighborhood, in Barbican, were in an
Uproar, on a sudden; and I was disturbed, in my Meditations, by the shrieking
of Women, the mixed Cries of Children, and a growing Hum of Concourse, that
seemed close under my Window. -- I threw aside my Pipe; and, hastening to look
out, saw the Street entirely filled, by a Groupe of dismal Faces; that had
gathered themselves into a Tumult, about a House, directly opposite, and
appeared to be touched, as strongly as Common Natures are capable, with a
Mixture of Surprise and Sorrow. It seems, the Husband of a laborious, poor
Creature, who was Mistress of this House, had been condemned, at the County
Assizes, in one of the late Circuits, for stealing a Horse: And a Letter had,
just now, been delivered to his Wife; which the Criminal himself had written,
the very Morning he was executed.

HIS Relations and Acquaintance had depended on a Reprieve; for the Man was
universally beloved among his Neighbors: And, though always very poor, and
unfortunate in his Dealings, had been remarkable for his Industry; of a sober
Disposition, and never known, before, to have been guilty of the least
Dishonesty. He had Six Children alive, and the Eldest but Eight Years old. His
Mother, who lived in the same little House, had been disabled, by Sickness, for
several Months past: So that, perceiving it beyond his Power to subsist his
Family any longer, and not daring to stay in Town, by Reason of some Debts he
had contracted, he went down, to try his Friends, who lived, in good
Circumstances, in the Country. But, instead of meeting with Assistance, he only
spent, in this Journey, all the little he had carried with him: And not being
able to support the Thoughts of returning, without Bread, to a Family, in such
want of it, he rode away with a Horse, which he found tied to a Gate; and being
pursued, and overtaken, was tried, condemned, and hanged, for it.

THIS History was loudly given me, by the good Women, in the Street; after
which, I had the Curiosity to press in, among the Crowd; and was struck, at my
first Entrance, by the most moving Scene of Sorrow, that I ever remember to
have met with. The Widow had broke open her Husband's Letter, in Transport,
concluding, That it brought her the Confirmation of a Reprieve, which a former
had given her Hopes of. But she was so shocked, and overwhelmed by the sudden
Reverse of Passion, that her Grief was a kind of Madness. She sat on the Floor
without Headcloaths; and had an Infant, cross her Knees, that was crying, with
great Impatience, for the Breast, it had been thrown from. Another slept in a
Cradle, close by a little Bed, in which the Grandmother sat weeping; bending
forward in strong Agony; and wringing her Hands in silence. The Four Eldest
Children were gathered into a Knot, and clung about the Neck of their miserable
Mother: stamping, screaming, and kissing her, in a Storm of distracted
Tenderness! -- The poor Woman, herself, was in a Condition, past describing!
She pressed the Letter of her dead Husband, to her Eyes! -- her Lips! -- her
Bosom! -- She raved, and talked, and questioned him, as if he had been present!
-- And, at every little Interval, dried her Tears, with his Letter: And cast a
Look upon the Company, so wild! and so full of Horror! that it cannot be
conceived, but by those, who were Witnesses of it.

AS soon as she saw me there, she stretched out her Hand; and made Signs, that
I should read the Letter; which I received from her, accordingly. And going
back, to my Lodging, with a Resolution to send over some fitter Person than
myself, to assist, in the Distresses of so disconsolate a Family, I sat down,
and took a Copy of it, because it moved me exceedingly.

Dear, Loving Betty,
IT is now nine a Clock; and I must be fetched out, by and by, and go to die,
before Eleven. I shall see my poor Bess no more, in this World; but, if we meet
one another again in the next, as I hope in God we shall, we may never part
afterward. Methinks, if I could but only once more look upon my good Betty
before I die, though it should be but for a Minute; and say a kind Word to my
Fatherless Children, that must Starve now, if God don't take Care for them, I
should go, away, with a good Heart. And yet sometimes I fancy, it is better as
it is, for it would be sad, to die, afterward, and I fear it would make me
fainthearted: and I should be wishing, that I might live, to get you Bread, and
Clothes, for your poor precious Bodies. Sarah Tailor made my Heart ache, when
she told me, that you had pawned away, every thing, to make up that last fifty
Shillings that you sent me by Will. Sanderson, who is now in the Room with me,
and sits down upon the Straw that I laid on, last Night, and is weeping for me
like a Child. But God will make up all the Money to you again, that you have
let me have, to no purpose. And I should be sorry that any unkind Body should
hit it in your Teeth, that I come to such an untimely, bad End: For I thought
as little of it, as they do. But all the Way as I walked up to London, afoot, I
could not help having a Fancy in my Head at every Turn, That I saw my poor dear
Betty, and my six helpless little Ones hanging upon me, and crying out
bitterly, That they had no Bread, to keep Life in 'em; and begging me to buy
them some. And so, I thought that I would sell that Horse, and make you
believe, that I got Money, of your Sister Parker: But she was too Sparing, for
that; and would never once look upon me. -- I pray to God to forgive her, and,
if she would but be Good to you, when I am gone, God bless her. -- Loving
Betty, remember me to my sorrowful Mother, and tell her not to take on too
much. And bid Richard and Harry, take Warning by my Fall, if ever they come to
be Men: And, for the poor Girls, they are too young, as yet, to understand any
thing you can say to them. God's Goodness be your Comfort, and if you can,
don't think about me, for it will make you only melancholy. -- I hope, the Old
Deputy will be kind to you, and help you to do somewhat. I am sorry I cannot
write no more, because my Tears are come into my Eyes. -- Little did I think of
this dismal Parting -- Oh! it is very sad! -- God bless you, in this unhappy
World; Dear, Dear Betty,

From your unfortunate, dying Husband, R. S.
P.S. Nothing vexes me, but when I think that it is a very hard Case for a Man
to be made to die, for a Horse. They say, the King is to have him; he is not
worth much: but if my poor Betty had the Money, he could be Sold for, it would
be some Comfort however; for then I should not have left you all so Bare, as
you be now.




I carried this Letter with me to the Assembly: where it was universally
Agreed, That there is a plain-hearted Honesty, very manifest in all Parts of
it; and a generous and manly Sorrow, not arising so much from his own Desire to
Live, as from a Prospect of their Wants, whom his Death was to leave Destitute.
Our Clergyman, in particular, was greatly moved to Compassion; and proposed a
Charitable Collection, to be sent to the poor Widow, to which himself
contributed first, in a very liberal Proportion.

He related to us afterward an extraordinary Dying Speech, of a very different
Turn; which he heard made when a Student, by a Housebreaker, who was hanged for
Murder and a Robbery.

GOOD People, said the Criminal, since I am to serve you, for a Sight, the
least you can do, is to be Civil to the Man that entertains you. I ask nothing
of you, but the Justice, that is due to me. There are some meddling Tongues,
which I can hear among the Crowd, very busy to incense you. Though it is true, I
have committed Murder, yet I hope I am no Murderer. The Felony I really
purposed; but my Intention had no part in the Death that I was Guilty of. The
Deceased cried for Help, and was so Obstinate, and Clamorous, that I was under
a Necessity to kill him; or submit my self to be taken. And thus I argued in my
Mind. If I Murder him, I shall get off; or, at worst, if I am taken, my
Punishment will be no greater, than if I spare him, and Surrender: I can be BUT
HANGED for Murder, and I must be HANGED TOO, for the House-breaking! This
Thought, Good People, prevailed with me to Shoot him; so that what you call
Murder, was but Self-Preservation. Now that I should have died in this same
Manner, whether I had Shot him, or no, Witness these two Weak Brothers here,
who look as if they were already at the other End of their Voyage, though they
have not hoisted Sail yet! one of these Stole some Bacon, and the other, a wet
Smock or two. The LAW must be certainly Wiser than you are; and since that has
been pleased to set our Crimes on a Level, be so civil or compassionate as to
hold your silly Tongues, and let me die, without Slander. We had several other
Stories, on this Subject, of the Public Executions: but none pleased me
better, than one, which I shall close my Paper with; and which we were also
obliged to the Vicar for.

THE late King of Sweden had condemned a Soldier to die; and stood at a little
Distance from the Place of Execution. The Fellow, when he heard this, was in
hopes of a Pardon; but being assured he was mistaken, cried, his Tongue was yet
free, he would use it, at his Pleasure; which he did, with great License;
accusing the King, most insolently, and as loud as he could speak, of Barbarity
and Injustice, and appealing to God, for Revenge of his wronged Innocence. The
King not hearing him, distinctly, inquired of those about him, What the Soldier
had been saying? and was told, by a General Officer, who was unwilling to
heighten his Resentment against the Miserable, That he had only repeated, very
often and loud, That God loves the Merciful, and teaches the Mighty to moderate
their Anger. The King was touched by the Lesson, and sent his Pardon to the
Criminal. But a Courtier of an opposite Interest, took Advantage of this
Occasion, and repeated to the King exactly the Licentiousness of the Fellow's
Railing; adding gravely when he had done, That Men of Quality, and Trust, ought
never, in his Opinion, to misrepresent Facts to their Sovereign. The King for
some Time stood suspended in his Thoughts, but turning at length toward the
Courtier, with a Face of Reproof, It is the first Time, says he, that ever I
have been betrayed for my Advantage! But the LIE of your Enemy, pleased me
better, than your TRUTH does. THE PLAIN DEALER. No 13.
-- Trahit sua quemque Voluptas:
Dic mihi, si fueras tu Leo, qualis eris?
MART.
MONDAY, May 4.1724.
THERE are in every Man's Life, even the wisest, and most fortified, certain
Periods of Weakness, which demonstrate our common Frailty, and seem thrown into
our Nature, as Preservatives against Pride; and for the Mortification of Human
Vanity.

THAT Venerable Sage of old, who has left us this Aphorism, That no Man should
be esteemed happy, 'till after his Death; might have extended his Observation,
as well to our Conduct, as our Fortune: Let no Man, during Life, be called
Resolute, or Prudent.

COULD I ever have thought, That after passing my giddy Youth in a steady
Contempt of Beauty, I should be enslaved to it, against Judgment, in my Grand
Climacterick! If the Duty of a PLAIN DEALER did not indispensibly oblige me to
the most rigid Impartiality; even to the giving Sentence against my-self, with
what Face could I confess, (what I am ashamed, when I but think of) That I, who
am a staid Old Bachelor, am afraid, I am falling in Love with Patty Amble the
Coquet! who always seemed to me, to have been born in a Fit of Laughter! and
never had a Thought of Gravity, but when it furnished her with an Occasion to
divert herself at the Expense of it!

WELL! If this should, in good Earnest, come to pass, I shall have a most
uncomfortable Time of it! What Reason I have had, and from what Time, to
suspect it, I shall, without Reserve, communicate, in the Progress of my
PAPERS. But let it prove what it will, the Occasion of this Preamble is from an
unusual Disorder, in which I am come Home this Evening, after a kind of
frolicksome Adventure, with that young Romp; which has left me under an
Impression, little better than Witchcraft; though at any Time before last Easter,
I should have thought it not worth telling.

TO Day, when she hoyden'd into the Assembly, the whole Company rose together,
and received her with that Pleasure, which her Gayety diffuses every where. She
sailed through us all, with a swimming, smiling Port, that was visibly
affected, but irresistably engaging! -- When she had fluttered, and fidgeted,
and sloped her self forward, and wheeled down her Hoop, to the widest Swell of
its Unequal, in a Circular Course of Courtesies; she tript sideways to her Seat;
and I was just beginning to hope Calm Weather, after such a Whirlwind of
Ceremony! when she rose, as it were in a Start, with a Look most whimsically
Serious; and drawing a Paper from her Bosom, paced demurely to my Chair -- She
carried her Head to the left side, softly sweeping her right Eye-Brow, with the
Knob of her Fan, and sinking forward, when she came near me, with a Fantastical
Air of Languishment, brushed my Mouth with her Paper; and began to play over
her Tricks, in a long and mystical Jargon of most Womanish Impertinence.

AND were they, said she, so naughty, to leave it by it is nown self? And did no
body help it to write it is PLAIN-DEALERS? and was it abused, and over-work'd
and neglected? Well then, let it be Good, and mind it is Book, and wash it is
Face, and forget to be cross, and comb it is Head, and throw away it is dirty
Stick; and see what I intend to do for it! There take it, and Print it; And,
don't care a Pin for the Work they have put upon it. For I love it, and will
think for it; and bring it good Things. And if it would not look Grim, I should
buss it, and stroke it, and chuck it under the Chin; and make much of it, and
play with it, and -- etc. -- etc. -- etc. --

AFTER this silly Rate, she ran on, with a ridiculous, but lively and
never-ending Volubility: and perceiving, that the Company laughed out, and were
diverted at the grotesque Figure I was making under her Hand's, at length she
kissed me outright, and set 'em all, in an Uproar. I would fain have looked
peevish. I turned my Face from her, and cried Pish -- and Pshaw -- and Fiddle
-- and shook my Head in a great Heat, and winch'd in both Shoulders; and much
Pains I took, to seem nettled, and uneasy. But, to confess a foolish Truth, it
was all, but mere Show; for I was never so agreeably made an Ass of in my Life,
and while I felt the busy Wanderings of her Fingers about my Face, I was stung
I cannot tell how, with a Kind of tingling Delight, all over me; which being
desirous to prolong, I pretended to make Efforts for pushing her away; and
under that Pretense, gave my Hands the Opportunity of touching her, here and
there -- And I must own, I was sorry when she put an End to her Gambols.

BUT as soon as I came home, and looked into her Paper, I was not so much an
Ass, (far gone as I found My-self) but that I presently discerned her Drift:
And I wish, with all my Heart, that I had Courage enough to return it her; and
tell her, in downright Terms, I don't think it worth Printing. But whatever the
Cause of this strange Alteration may be, there is nothing so dreadful to me, as
the Danger of disobliging this She-Cockatrice! Since therefore, I am in this
odd Manner, bewitched, even take it, in the arch Flirt's own Words: For it is
no Work of mine; and I will have nothing to do with it.

The LADIES Equivalent. A TALE, with a MORAL to It.
IN the Reign of the Emperor Justinian, the City of Constantinople was much
thronged with Foreigners; for whose Entertainment, unusual Pastimes were
invented. The Public Theaters were embellished, interlarded and embroidered,
with Music, Magic and Tumbling; and such unspeakable Additions, as were
fittest to give Pleasure to the Eyes of Goths, Vandals, and Saracens, to whom
Plays, alone, were insipid, because acted in a Language, which they were, in a
Manner, wholly Strangers to.

THEODORA, the Empress, had been formerly a Comedian, and was a liberal
Promoter of whatever could contribute to make Pleasure pompous. Among the
Numbers, who found their Interest in this Byas of the Court, there was a wily
and egregious African; whom for the Flatness of his Nose, the Tawniness of his
Complexion, and a certain Majestical Brutality, in the Composition of his
Features, the merry Greeks had nicknamed the LION. This Man became rich, by the
universal Encouragement, that was given to an odd Project, of his starting. --
It was a Kind of Blind-Buzzard, or Midnight-Mummery; of which it is difficult,
at this great Distance of Time, to conceive a clear Notion: But Persons of the
highest Rank, of both Sexes, met there, disguised, and under borrowed
Resemblances, danced, regaled, and discoursed with each other, at large, and
disengaged from all Ceremony, Distinction, or Punctilio.

IT was generally allowed, however, by all but the LYON's Enemies, that nothing
passed in these Meetings, either Scandalous or Misbecoming: Every thing was
Magnificent, Ornamental, and Enlivening: But no Privacies were permitted, nor
Indecencies connived at.

IT fell out, notwithstanding, most unfortunately for the LION, That Religion
was at this Time very flaming, and watchful. The Good Fathers of the Church
became scandalized, and alarmed, at the Probability of Impurities, in this
new-invented Nightwork: For, it was dangerous, they knew, to allow such
Latitude to their Female Flock, while their Shepherds were at Rest, who kept
the Wolf from biting them. They determine, therefore, vigorously to remonstrate
against it. But there was One considerable Rub, that lay full in their Way. The
Emperor himself was often present at these Meetings, and indulged them, as an
innocent, and agreeable Recreation.

TO Remove this heavy Difficulty, the Good Fathers, with great Dexterity,
charged the Motive of their Fears, upon the Weakness of the Women, whose
Natures, they said, were liable to very dangerous Impressions, from those
Whisperings, and Squeezings, and Inflammations of their Vanity. They went on to
assert, That a Woman's Defense against Man, lying rather in her Dread of Shame,
than her Abhorrence of Iniquity, she should never be thought Safe, while under
the Hazard of Temptations. The Men indeed, they believed, might be strong
enough to resist; but not their Wives, and their Daughters: Weak Vessels! and
brittle! and which would break with a Fall! It were Prudence therefore, to
place them out of the public Reach, and cupboard them up, for the Household Use
of their Owners: So they humbly represented, That it would be an Act of great
Piety and Edification, if his Imperial Majesty gave Command for the Total
Suppression of these New Nurseries of Debauchery.

IT is one Thing to be Pious, and another to be Wise. The Warmth of their Zeal
had not suffered them to consider, That there were Women of Wit, and Spirit,
who would vindicate their Sex's Honor; and make use of their powerful
Influence, to oppose the good End of these Reverend Memorialists, were it for
no other Reason but because the Means were unmannerly. THEODORA, the Empress,
was provoked to the last Degree; and after reproaching their Partiality, and
the mean and false Idea's, which they had conceived, of Women's Virtue, fell to
reason with them in this Manner.

HOW Contemptibly would your Sex compel us to consider them, if all Men were to
treat us with so ungenerous a Diffidence! Is it possible, think ye, That our
Persons can be won, before our Hearts have disposed of 'em? And, whenever we
Love passionately, we have Courage to Act resolutely; and make Opportunities,
if we were not allowed to find 'em. If you once confine our Bodies, you set our
Minds at full Liberty. Our Natures are too generous, to deceive those who trust
us. But we think it a Merit, to make Fools of the Faithless. THE LION, grinning
horribly, behind the Empress's Chair, was ready to roar, with Delight, at this
Rebuke to the Fathers. But, steadfast, and immovable, in the Piety of their
Purpose, they were about to Reply at Large: When the Emperor, who had Meanings
not to be traced on his Countenance, concealing his Resentment, returned this
Answer to their Remonstrance.

I Thank you, for this Religious Simplicity, of your Proceeding. You are the
Eyes of our Conscience, and see farther than we can. But I am not more pleased
with your applying for Redress of this formidable Grievance, than surpised, at
your overlooking another, of like Tendency; and which your laudable Zeal, for
Removing Temptations, must excite you, to thank me, for resolving to see
remedied.

THE Women have a Custom, when they stand in need of Absolution, to send for
their Confessor, and open their Hearts to him, in their Closets. Were all your
Reverend Order of equal Sanctity with you, this could possibly administer no
just Cause of Scandal: But, since Nature is depraved, and there have been
Wolves, in Sheep's Clothing, I conceive it a Design, of much Edification, to
abolish, for the future, this Indulgence of the Women; and withhold their
Absolution, 'till they come for it, to the Churches. Intending therefore to
join these good Purposes in One, I commit it to your Care, to prepare an Edict,
for Both, that I may decree it into Law, with as much speed, as possible.

THE Good Fathers were, so unexpectedly, and beyond measure, confounded, at
this over-liberal Extent of the Emperor's pious Purpose, that they stood long,
at a Loss, to find fit Words to thank him. But they did it at last, with this
Hope, in the Rear of all; -- That his High and Imperial Majesty would not
hasten them too much, in Two Decrees of such Importance, since the Empress had
urged some Arguments, to prove One of them needless; and who could tell, when
they came to examine Things more closely, but they might be mistaken, in Both
of 'em?

THUS, I have given you, the Coquet's Story; and am well enough aware what the
Gypsy's Head was running on: But, if any Body should desire to be made as wise
as I am, I shall tell 'em an old Story and let 'em take it, in Satisfaction. --
'A Philosopher bought some Meat, and returning from the Market, hid it under
his Cloak. An Impertinent Fellow met him, and would needs know What it was? --
It is there, said the Philosopher, on purpose, That you should not know it.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 14.
-- P^r pari referemus.
CICERO.
FRIDAY, May 8. 1724.
LITTLE Follies, which we but Smile at in Persons who are Indifferent to us,
gives us Sorrow and Pain, when observed in those we Love. Patty Amble is of
late become of such Importance, that I watch her with a Tenderness, that
interests me in all her Actions. For this Reason, I am frequently contriving to
interrupt Her, when she lets her Tongue run Races, that out-gallop her Reason.
But I always lose my Labor: My Operations upon this Gossip are like the Wind's
upon Fire; I may blow till my Breath fails, -- instead of putting her out, I
make her burn but the faster!

I HAVE succeeded however, in what I failed to do My-self, by the Assistance of
Ned Volatile, But not to assume more Triumph than is due to me, the Stratagem I
made use of, was found out by Shakespeare, before me. That Poetical Politican
taught his Richard the Third, among the rest of his surprising Victories, to
conquer a Woman's Tongue; but it was by Aid of one of his Drums, which no
sooner Beat up, but the Enemy was put to Silence.

WE shall now enjoy some Freedom, and may all Talk in our Turns; for Ned, and
the Coquet, will be played off at Pleasure. When either of 'em grows
Troublesome, we shall let loose the Rival, and like Sulphur and Saltpeter, one
shall blow up the other.

PATTY AMBLE came Yesterday finely dressed to the Assembly; ready to burst with
Impatience for our Admiration of her Fancy. She kept us Silent above an Hour,
while she was so kind as to open to us the Labors and Difficulties, she had
for fourteen Days been fatigued by, before she could unite so elegantly all her
trifling Varieties. From her Head to her Foot, she obliged us with the Minutes
of her whole Fortnight's History. It was not to be expected, that in the midst
of so much Business, she could be at Leisure to consider, That after we had
approved both the Price, and Color of her Damask, it was of no great
Edification, at least to the Male Part of the Company, to know what Shop she
bought it at. But happy had it been could she have found Rest so speedily!
Nothing like it, I assure you; we were also to learn, in what Places she missed
it. Yet for my own Part, I must say, I was particularly edified by her critical
Remarks, on certain Differences to be found, betwixt buying on Ludgate Hill, or
of the Mercers about Covent Garden.

BUT ill fare, say I, that unlucky Word Garden! It put her fatally in Mind of a
Fat fresh-colour'd Country Lady, who could never be persuaded to make Visits,
in any thing but Garden Silks, though her Arms were as big as a Rolling-Stone!
Then the unfortunate Word Fat, brought as aptly to her Remembrance, poor old
Dimpley the laughing Staymaker, that used to Work for her Grandmother, when
first she was Married! and never laced our Patty, when she was a Girl, but she
made her very Neck ache with twisting it to look back at him. At length, after
infinite Disappointments and Dangers, she arrived safe at her Hoop-Petticoat;
where, being seized with a Fit of Gratitude for the Parliament's strange good
Nature, and extraordinary Care of Trade, she was thinking to turn WHIG, because
they had taken off the Duty, that lay so heavy upon Whalebone.

WELL, as to that however, she was not altogether so positive. But there was
one Thing, of more Consequence, that she was absolutely convinced of; she would
venture any Wager, that not one Person in the Company, could be able to guess,
what her Ground Brussels Head had cost her a Yard; nor where, nor by what
particular odd, Accident, she had been so happy as to light of it! The Duchess
of M -- r took Coach in a Fright, the very Moment she saw it, to buy up the
Remnant. But since she was sure we could not guess, she would tell us the Price
her self; and not name one Farthing more or less than it really cost her; she
wondered, for her Part, how Women could be so silly! For what signified after
all, the little Vanity of being thought skilled in good Penny-worths! If she
had a mind to be Vain, she need only believe, what was said to her at the
Opera, by a certain Duke, who must be nameless! But one Thing his Grace was
pleased with, that she might venture to speak of, and it was that Fancy of her
own upon her Fan! Lord! she remembered too he observed, That there was
something in a Lady's Fan, much genteeler in its Use, than any part of the Men's
Equipage.

IT was just in this Place, that I took Pity of the Company; for I thought I
felt their Heads ache! So tipping the Wink on Ned Volatile, he started up from
his Chair, with such a Stare of Amazement, that one would have thought he was
apprehensive the House had been falling! The Coquet started too, and holding
her Tongue till she could look round her, Ned, with wonderful Agility, snatched
the Nick of that Interval; and resolving at once to bear down all Opposition,
broke in upon her, like a Torrent, with this sudden Exclamation, ' Ah! Madam!
Madam! What a Trifle is a Fan, in Comparison with a Feather! I should be sorry
to dissent from any Opinion you are fond of; but pray let your Reason be Judge
of this Difference! I have one, in my Hat here, that all the African Ostriches,
clubbing Tails, to produce the Fellow of it, might be moulting these thousand
Years, and all to no Purpose! Dear Madam, do but look on it! The nearer you
examine it, the more it will charm you! With all your Wit now, and your
Industry, my Life to one of your Lappits, it puzzles you these three Hours to
guess where I bought it? I cannot be altogether so positive, that you will not hit
the Price of it; but upon my Honor, if you should, I Will acknowledge it to a
Farthing. There Is some Pleasure in conversing on these critical Affairs, with
so nice a Judge as you, Madam! Why here is a Coat, I have worn this five Weeks,
and not one in fifty has had the Taste to take Notice, that all the Wool it was
made of, is true unmixed Spanish! You were saying something about Whalebone:
It Is a useful Commodity indeed, as you Ladies have managed it, but what are
Hoop Petticoats, to the Woollen Manufacture?

'FOR Heaven's sake take Breath, cried the Coquet, (swiftly Fanning herself;
and half bursting with a Windyness, from Suppression of Meanings,) do but hear,
what I was going to say to you? -- Never, never, replied Ned, he can never be a
good Subject, who submits to hear any thing to the Prejudice of the Woollen
Manufacture. Mark the wonderful Progress of this silly thing called Wool, but
from the Sheep's Back to Mine! Take Notice, in the first Place, of these few of
the many Mysteries which depend on this humble Material! There Is the Grazier
for Example; and the Shepherd, and the Shearer, and the Sorter, and the Comber,
and the Carder, and the Spinner, and the Dyer, and the Scowrer, and the Fuller,
and the Weaver, and the Napper, and the Presser, and the Stretcher, and the
Carrier, and the Factor, and the Draper, and the Tailor, and the Packer, and
the Merchant: But mentioning the Word Merchant, I must stop a little in my Way,
and lay open to you the Wonders and Advantages of Navigation! I shall inform
you clearly, and distinctly, under their proper Heads and Divisions, to what
different Corners of the Universe, you Madam, are obliged for all those
Ornaments which are adorned by you! I will begin like a good Builder, and
examine first your Foundation. That glittering Pair of Shoes, which we can but
see the pointed Tips of, had a long and tiresome Journey, to the prettiest Foot
in the World, from three most distant Parts of it. The Silver in their Lacing,
you are indebted for to America. Now, you would ask me, as I go along, whence
that new Quarter of the Globe took this Name of America? I shall come to it in
its Turn; but first you must be acquainted with the Fortunes of its chief
Discoverers, Spanish, English, French, Portuguese, and Hollanders. And for
clearing Things more effectually to your Apprehension, I shall, with as much
Brevity as possible, trace the Originals and Histories of these Nations. But
speaking just now of Silver, I am presented by that Means, with a fortunate
Opportunity to Sail away with you for Peru; and when once I have got you there,
we shall never want Amusements suited to the Mercury of your Spirit. For in the
first Place, Madam, I will carry you to the Bottom of those Mines, which have
enriched and embroiled all Europe. And because I know you are a Lady of most
unsatisfied Curiosity, I will now anticipate in some measure this Improvement I
design for you; for I will enumerate, in their proper Order, the Subterraneous
Inhabitants of the whole mineral Kingdom. There is Gold, Madam, and Silver, and
Copper, and Tin, and Quicksilver, (your Favorite, Madam!) and Iron, and Lead,
and Antimony, and Marchasites, and Lapis Calaminaris, and Pyrites, and Vitriol,
and Allom, and Brimstone, and Sal Gem, and Crystal, and Marble, and Millstone,
and Alabaster, and Bolus, and Ochre, and Talc, Madam! And of all these I will
immediately explain to you the Growth, and the Operations; and their strange
and distinct Uses, whether in Science or in Trade! And afterward I will take
Occasion from this wonderful Provision of Materials for our Industry, to
demonstrate, beyond Denial, how needless it is for Man, Woman, or Beast, to
live idle, and unuseful. But First, (for I would be Regular) I must return to
your Shoes. What I was, in their second Division, to particularize, was the
Silk, which they are covered with. I dare not be positive, at this Distance,
whether it is Christian or East-Indian; but I will tell you immediately, when I
have examined it a little nearer.

NED was risen from his Chair, and had levelled his Eye at her Foot, when she
made her Advantage of the lucky Opportunity which this Pause of his afforded
her; and recovering her lost Ground, renewed her Charge with a Vigor, that was
fatal to her Opponent.

' BRAVELY Shot! cried she, laughing, but I am not so easily to be scared, I
assure you. 'Twill be time enough to listen to such wise Harangues as yours,
after I have talked myself weary. A most polite Entertainment indeed you are
designing us! With your greasy Generation of Scowerers, and Wool-Combers! The
Assembly will be better pleased with the intricate Prettinesses, which are to
be learnt in the Art of Lace-making. Oh! the dexterous Disposition of the
Cushion, and the Pattern, and the Pins, and the Bobbins!

SHE set us all to work, but had no sooner entangled us, among her Threads, and
her Bobbins, when she flew on a sudden, out of that Subject to another; and
from that to a third. She led us up, so far back, that we were present at her
Mother's Labor; and after having been merry at her Christening, she took us
along with her to her Nurse's on Bansted Downs. From thence to her Father's
Country House beyond Canterbury. After this we lived with her four Years at a
Boarding School in Hackney; and returning thence, with Pleasure, had the Honor
of her Company to the very first Play that ever she saw in her Life; nay, she
permitted us to take Part with her, even in the Masquerade; and at the Opera.
But the worst of it was, that, before we were well seated, we were drawn away
in her Aunt's old Coach, and carried down, the Lord knows whither to make
Butter and Cheese in Warwickshire. Yet in this Place, to do her Justice, she
kept us to our no small Emolument, for we grew as good Housewives as her Aunt
was. We all learnt to Brew and fatten Hogs, and feed Poultry. But what I found
most Relishable were, certain savoury Instructions, she was so good as to
communicate; insomuch that I who but yesterday Morning could almost as easily
have made a Horse, as a Pudding, am to Day a Man of Learning as well in Dishes
as their Garnitures. I can read, if I please, when I meet with a Person of good
Taste, a long luxurious Lecture on Farces, Bisks, and forced Meats, Marinades,
Puptoons, and Olios, Soops, Sauces, Ragousts, Puffs, Pastry, and Pickles,
Tarts, Cheesecakes, and Custards, Jellies, Conserves, and Marmalades, Slops,
Washes, Pomatums, Cold Creams, and Cordial Waters!

BUT, what was still more obliging, not content to have enriched us with this
profound Knowledge! she was liberal enough to talk on, with such unceasing
Rapidity, that we had no Time to thank her; till at length, she saw Ned
Volatile was preparing to take his Turn; and rose, and fluttered her Fan, and
scudded out of the Assembly; but we heard her Tongue running, all the way down
Stairs, asking Questions of the Servants, and answering them herself; and, for
any think that I know, she may be Talking to this Time, while I am penning the
Narration!

I AM myself too a great Talker, only I sometimes love to listen; and nothing
is so strange to me as that since these Pratlers are thus transported, but by
too much Vivacity, that very Vivacity should not teach 'em to know when they
grow Troublesome! I sometimes fancy them like Horses, which shutting their Eyes
in their Swiftness, pass the Bounds of their Course, and never stop till they
are beat backward by some Wall which they run their Heads against.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 15.
Neque cuiquam, statim, tam clarum ingenium est, ut possit emergere, nisi illi,
materia, occasio, fautor etiam, commendatorque contingat.

PLIN. EP.
MONDAY, May 11. 1724.
AS I know not a more amiable Figure than that, which a Prudent and Indulgent
Father, makes with regard to an only Son, who is a promising young Gentleman;
And as I am not able to frame an Idea, of any Prospect so Shocking and
Frightful to Human Nature, as that which represents a Mother who can look with
Indifference (not to say with Aversion) upon the Child of her Body, I was
resolving the other Day to form a PLAIN DEALER out of these two different
Characters.

METHINKS I would not miss ranging the Deformities of one Parent, near the
Beauties of the other; because this Manner of Illustration by Opposites, in
Writing, like Shade and Light in Painting, will make the Moral appear with
Vigor, and strike upon the Eye of the Understanding a more forcible Effect.

COULD I execute this Design according to my Wish; could I make the Draught
just, and give it the Lively Touches and warm Colors it deserves, it might
perhaps be a valuable Present, and instructive Family Piece, for the married
Part of my Readers, and some of their Posterity might, for ought I know, have
good Reason to thank me for it.

I WAS, according to Custom, opening my Mind upon this intended Subject to the
worthy Major Steadfast; and telling him, That I should be agreeably lost in
Pleasure, while I was tracing, in a good Father, the secret Springs of a
Thousand little Beautiful Actions which would pass unnoticed by common Eyes,
that are too Incurious and Indelicate on such Nice and Elegant Occasions.

-- HERE I paused a while, with Intent to name some particular Observations, I
have made, of these Critical Workings of a Spirit truly Parentile; when this
constant Friend of Mankind changed my Inclination to speak, into the greater
Pleasure of attending to what he began to say, in this Manner.

THERE is, no fear of your losing yourself in that Delightful Part of the
Contemplation: But when you come to consider the Unnatural Mother, I don't know
how difficult a Task it may be, even for all your Philosophy to account for it.
You will find yourself extremely perplexed, if you descend to make Enquiry,
what Monstrous Turn in the whole Course of the Blood, what Prodigies
overruling the whole Rational and Animal System, can Eraze from a Mother's
Heart all those fond Records of Tenderness which the Hand of Nature must have
engraven there, in behalf of the Being which received its first Principle of
Vitality so near it, and its immediate Preservation from it.

YOU may remember that, at your setting out, I told you, the Expression, which
hit my Taste the best of any in your First PAPER, was, That you would look upon
yourself as every Body's Father; and I would rather see you acting like a
Father, than describing one: which said he (giving into my Hand a Paper) you
may do, by publishing those Verses, which, according to my Opinion, want
nothing more than their being Known, in order to their being Applauded.

THE Author is a Young Gentleman who, though severe Accidents, and the Rigor of
Fortune have thrown him into the Condition of an Orphan, is still likely to
prove a Favorite Son of the Muses: But a Genius, though never so promising, will
not readily make its Way into Esteem, without the Aid of a Recommender, or the
Encouragement of a Patron.

HERE I read over the Verses, and signified my Approbation, in very few Words,
because I perceived the generous Temper of the Major inclined him to speak
further, in behalf of Unfortunate Desert; when, resuming the Discourse, he
proceeded in this Manner.

YOU may guess by this little Performance, That those Talents, which were not
happy enough to procure their Possessor a Competency, from Parents who lived in
Affluence, may, if Cultivated and Improved, entitle him to the Adoption of some
great Personage, who, observing a Noble Impartiality, with Regard to Strangers
and Acquaintance, may assist Merit wheresoever he finds it. It would really be
pity that a Person, who has demonstrated, that he has a Capacity to entertain
the World, should not meet with a Patron in it, to give him a Taste of its
Enjoyments. Whoever may be meant by HORATIUS, if he makes as Handsome a Figure
in his Reception of the Poet, as he does in the Poet's Description, he will be
to him instead of a Mecoenas; and you will have the Satisfaction of knowing,
That you put the Meritorious in a Way to meet Reward, and administer an
Opportunity, the most Grateful (that can be) to a Person truly Great, an
Opportunity of doing a Graceful Action.

HERE a Gentleman interrupted us, and left me no Room to make Reply by Word of
Mouth: But the best Answer I could, since, make him, was to repeat, in this
manner, what he said, and to publish the following Lines instead of the Essay I
intended.

To a Young Gentleman, a Painter: Occasioned by seeing his Picture of the
Celebrated CLIO.
By Mr. SAVAGE.
FORGIVE an Artless, an Officious Friend,
Weak, when I Judge, but willing to Commend;
Fallen as I am, by no kind Fortune raised,
Depressed, Obscured, Unpitied, and Unprais'd,
Yet, when these well-known Features I peruse,
Some Warmth awakes; some Embers of a Muse.
Ye Muses, Graces, and ye Loves, appear!
Your Queen, your VENUS, and your CLIO's here!
In such pure Fires her real Thoughts refine!
Her Eyes with such Commanding Sweetness shine!
Such living Tinctures through yon Ether glow,
Stain Summer Clouds, or gild the Watery Bow:
She smiles, she speaks -- she blushes, while we gaze,
I hear your Colors and I feel their Blaze:
More at each kindling Touch, your Canvass glows!
Till the full Form, instinct with Spirit, grows!
Let the dull Artist puzzling Rules explore,
Dwell on the Lines and creep the Features over;
You eye the Soul, the Source of Likeness find,
And through the meaning Muscles, strike the Mind.
Nor can one View such boundless Power confine,
All Nature opens to an Art like thine!
Now Rural Scenes in simple Grandeur rise!
Vales, Hills, Lawns, Lakes, and Vineyards feast our Eyes!
Now Halcyon Peace a smiling Aspect wears!
Now the Red Scene with War and Ruin glares!
Here Britain's Fleets over Europe's Seas preside!
There long-lost Cities rear their ancient Pride!
You from the Grave can half redeem the Slain,
And bid Great JULIUS charm the World again:
Revive Pharsalia, mark out Munda's Fray,
And re-awaken Darkness into Day.
But if new Glories most our Warmth excite,
If Toils untried to noblest Aims invite;
Would you in envied Pomp unrivaled reign,
Oh, let HORATIUS grace the Canvass Plain!
His Form might even Idolatry create,
Serenely striking, and unproudly great.
Through those bright Features CAESAR's Spirit trace,
Each conquering Sweetness, each imperial Grace,
All that has Softness, Terror, Wisdom, Weight,
In Love, in War, in Knowledge, or in State.
Thus shall your Colors, like his Worth, amaze!
Thus shall you merit even your CLIO's Praise!
Clear, and more clear your Sunny Genius shines;
While my dim Lamp of Life obscure declines:
Dulled in damp Shades it wastes, unseen, away,
While yours, Triumphant, blazes into Day.
THE PLAIN DEALER. No 16.
Neque enim est hoc dissimulandum, quod obscurari non potest, sed prae nobis
ferendum: trahimur omnes laudis studio, and optimus quisque, maxim, gloria
ducitur.

CICER. Pro Archia Poeta. Quam multos scriptores rerum suarum magnus ille
Alexander secum habuisse dicitur? Atque is tamen, cum in Sigoeo ad Achillis
tumulum astitisset, O fortunate, inquit, adolescens, qui tue virtutis Homerum
praeconem inveneris! and vere. Nam nisi Ilias illa extitisset, idem tumulus,
qui corpus ejus contexerat, nomen etiam obruisset.

Ibidem.
FRIDAY, May 15. 1724.
THERE is a Scantiness, in some Men's Souls, that gives a distasteful Air to
their very Favors, and their Praises; what the Mien is to the Body, the Temper
is to the Mind. And for Want of this Observation, on Occasions where it had
been most useful, some have lost their Friends Good Will by an arrogant Manner
of obliging them; and others praised Men into a Contempt both for their Persons
and their Civilities.

THERE must be visible, in those, who would say, or do, Things engagingly, a
certain Sweetness in the Eye, and a Sense of Pleasure in the Deportment. A
Compliment is an Affront, when accompanied with a sullen Brow, or a negligent,
an absent, or supercilious, Behavior. I appeal to my Readers, Whether they do
not always find themselves uneasy in the Company of a Person, who seems more
pleased with Himself, than with those he is conversing with.

I WAS drawn into this Reflection, by reading, the other Day, a little Copy of
VERSES, which is printed, with some Poetical Pieces of Mr. Pope's, and was
written by a Person of very great Quality, and whose Wit, too, was of the first
Mangnitude!

On Mr. POPE, and his POEMS.
WITH Age decayed, with Courts and Business tired,
Caring for nothing, but what Ease required;
Too dully Serious for the Muses Sport,
And, from the Critics, safe arrived in Port:
I little thought of launching forth again,
Amidst adventurous Rovers of the Pen:
And, after so much undeserved Success,
Thus hazarding at last, to make it less.
Encomiums suit not this censorious Time,
It self a Subject for Satiric Rhyme;
Ignorance honored, Wit, and Worth defamed,
Folly triumphant, and even HOMER blamed!
But to this Genius, joined with so much Art,
Such various Learning, mixed, in every Part,
Poets are bound a loud Applause to pay;
APOLLO bids it, and they must obey.
And, yet, so wonderful, sublime, a Thing,
As the great Iliad, scarce should make Me sing:
Except I justly could, at once commend,
A good Companion, and as firm a Friend.
One moral, or a mere well-natur'd Deed,
Does all Desert in Sciences exceed.
It Is great Delight to laugh at some Men's Ways,
But a much greater, to give Merit Praise.
THE good Nature of Mr. Pope, must be as Extensive, as his Wit, if his Esteem
for this Noble Author was not lessened, by so Ignoble a Start of his Poetry. It
is a grudging, haughty, conscious, reluctant, and penurious Encomium! Under
Pretense of Praise to a Friend, it indulges Spleen to his Enemies. It carries,
throughout, a closer Eye upon his own Merit, than upon His to whom he addresses
it. In four and twenty Verses, the four odd ones, I think, have some faint
Inclination to show Respect to another; but the twenty, I am sure, with a much
stronger Bent, point directly upon Himself.

WOULD this great Man have applauded such a POET, as he ought, he should have
forgotten, or seemed to forget, both Himself, and his Rank, in that Reverence,
so justly due to an Excellence, which will do Honor to our Nation. He should
not have imagined himself over Bountiful in his Condescension: The Praise of
Mr. Pope will be a Theme for Wit, and Learning, when all the Dukes, his
Patrons, shall be lost in the Dust that covers them! The accidental Advantages
of Birth, Wealth, and Title, are so far from bestowing Worth, where they find
it not originally, that they serve but to make the Want of it more obvious and
contemptible; whereas a Genius like this Gentleman's, surmounts all the shadowy
Superiorities of Fortune, adorns Dignity itself, and makes Obscurity
illustrious!

THE great Cardinal Richelieu, in a Circumstance of like Nature, acted in so
different a Manner, that I am always charmed afresh, when I read over a Letter,
which he sent to Balzac a French Writer, whose Merit was as inferior to Mr.
Pope's, as the Grandeur of the Prime Minister was superior to the Nobleman's:
Let a Judgment be drawn, from an impartial Comparison.

A LETTER from Cardinal Richelieu, to Monsieur de Balzac.
Paris, February the 4th, 1621. SIR,
THOUGH I have often, and openly, declared what I think of your Writings, yet
cannot I satisfy my self without sending you, by this Letter, a more Authentic
Approbation: I never had any particular Affection for your Person, and since,
therefore, it is the Prerogative of Truth, that compels me to my Opinion, I
will take care, That the Esteem, I profess for your Works, shall be no barren
Compliment; for my Praise shall be seconded by the Applause of a whole People.

Or, if, notwithstanding my Endeavors, some low Spirits shall be found, who
may affect to think otherwise, Time will make them but too sensible, that the
Faults, they impute to You, are Defects in their own Judgment. They are like
People in the Jaundice, who see every Thing of that distempered Color, which
themselves are afflicted by.

IN the Days of our Ancestors, Persons of narrow Understanding were implicit
Admirers of what was above their Comprehension; but now, by a kind of
Elasticity in modern Reason, Judgment extends or contracts itself, to sit close
upon our Capacity; and we approve, but just as far, as we are able to
understand; blasting every Thing by our Censure, that we cannot reach by our
Practice. Yet I hope, I do not presume too much, when I say concerning your
Works, That I see Things as they are, and declare 'em what I see them. Your
Conceptions are strong, and the Flight of your Imagination outsoars every Thing
but your Reason: Your Language is pure, and your Expression strongly Elegant.

I WILL conclude with this Caution; That you will be guilty in the Eye of God,
if you suffer such a Pen to rest; or if you employ it too idly. You ought to
apply yourself henceforward, to grave and important Subjects; and I am content
that you shall impute to Me, all the Blame, if, when you do so, you receive not
the Returns, which will be due to you. Already I am meditating an Opportunity
to be known for

Your Affectionate Humble Servant, The Cardinal of Richelieu.


I AM transported, while I read this Letter, at the flaming Intermixture of
this Statesman's lovely Qualities! What a Glow of Humanity! What a
Consciousness of that Care, which is the Duty of the Great, to draw up Merit,
out of Obscurity! What a Knowledge of a State's true Interest, from the Force
of such Examples! What a genteel Magnanimity! What a spirited Race of
Sweetness, does there shine, in this short Letter!

IT is pleasant enough to remark, That both the French Encomium and the
English, had Effects, the very Reverse of what was intended by their Authors;
yet, at the same Time, strictly consonant with Justice, and their different
Merits; while the English Applauder addresses to Mr. Pope the Praise he means
to Himself; his Verses are never read without lessening his own Character;
whereas, the generous French Cardinal, meaning nothing in his Letter, but the
Encouragement of Monsieur Balzac, draws that Honor on his own Name, which he
would bestow upon another's; and becomes Himself, the Reader's Idol, while he
is pointing him where to worship!

IT was impossible for Monsieur Balzac, after being thus nobly distinguished,
not to strain his Genius to the utmost, to keep Possession of a Glory, he must
so justly have been Proud of; whereas Neglect, on the other Hand, has
discouraged a thousand Spirits, which might have been capable, had they been
Fortunate, or supported by those who were so, to shine out as living Lights,
and illustrate the Age, they were born in, through a long Course of Futurity.
Camoens, whom the Portuguese call the Virgil of their Country, has touched this
Subject very happily, in the 5th Book of his Lusiad.

HOW sweet is Praise, and justly purchased Glory,
By our own Actions, when to Heaven they soar!
Each noble Soul will Strain, to leave his Story,
An Overmatch for all who climbed before.
Those wondrous Heights, Achilles reached in Arms,
Had never so strongly moved the World's great Lord,
Had not the Muse of Homer given 'em Charms,
And roused him from a Rest, he, thence, abhorred.
Scipio's, and Caesar's, PORTUGAL can boast,
But has not blessed them with exalted Hearts,
Once Dead, they Die for ever, and are lost,
Because, unfriended by the deathless Arts.
All those immortal Names, that tread on Time,
Were learned themselves, or loved the learned All;
In Greece, in Rome, in the most barbarous Clime,
In every Land, but tasteless PORTUGAL.
Mournful I speak it, to my Country's Shame,
Want of Excitement keeps its Genius Low;
Our rude a^ boisterous Lords are deaf to Fame,
And seem, as careless to be known, as know.
Dull and of gross Desires, their empty Pride,
Dark and contracted, tastes not what is writ;
For how, alas! should Lameness learn to stride?
Or he, who understands not, cherish Wit!
Blessed let the Muses be, by those I sing,
That I, for no Reward, but Honor, born,
Have for my Country's Glory, touched the String,
And laugh her titled Arrogance to scorn.
While on the Fame of Lusitania bent,
Your Charms, ye Nymphs of Tagus, I reveal,
Fortune the Frame of my proud Hope has rent,
And drags me friendless at her Chariot Wheel.
Degraded, at another's Board to eat,
A Rock of Want! surrounded by my Woes;
Ingratitude it self, unmoved I meet,
And rise, the stronger, against Envy's Blows.
See, Nymphs! what learned Lords your Tagus boasts!
What Patrons of the noble Arts we find!
Such is their Worth, who fill the Public Posts!
And such the Prize, that crowns a generous Mind!
THE PLAIN DEALER. No 17.
Quid si prisca redit Venus? --
HOR. -- Tecum vivere amem
IBID.
MONDAY, May 18. 1724.
MY Old Maid, who has lived with me these thirty Years, and claims the tucking
me up, as a Privilege annexed to her Office; left open my Window-curtains last
Night, which so early let in the Beams of the Sun upon me, that I was waked
from a Dream, which I could have wished to enjoy much longer.

FANCY had removed all my Distance from Youth; and given me back those gentle
Flames, which warm and brighten Life in its Morning. I saw an adorable Object,
which my Soul, methought, had once been passionately fond of: And of whose
Perfections I imagined myself to have been virtuously enamored: But I had lost
her, as I fancied, in Death. Oh! the Pain of that Imagination was terrible even
in Sleep! I saw this lovely Person, adorned with all her Sweetness! I heard the
Music of her Accents, informing me, she was my PATTY. Now grown kinder and
more sensible, I even felt her leaning over me; and found the animating
Influence of her Soul-enchanting Pressures! With what Ecstasy of Fondness did I
survey her lovely Languor! Her Eyes were meltingly relaxed; and their Beams
serenely tempered with angelick Softness and Compassion. Her very Soul seemed
to shine upon me, through the Smile of every Feature. Oh! how beautiful is a
chaste Passion! How sweetly does it remain upon the Mind, and appeal from Death
to the Memory! I never knew, till this dear Dream convinced me, what I lost by
not loving, while my Body, as well as my Soul, could have done Justice to the
Passion.

WHILE I was thus tenderly employed, I wish some Artist could have snatched my
Picture! Old as I am, I flatter myself, That Love would have lent it Luster. I
would have all my Friends, who are not, resolve immediately, to commence
Lovers. The Insipids, who have never loved, may be said to live as the Greedy
drink; they swallow Life without tasting it.

BUT, all transported as I was, with this charming Dream, it was ravished from
me, by the Sun. Yet did I not complain. It had tuned my Soul to Harmony; and
transformed me from an Old Philosopher, into a young and happy Wanton! I
started from my Bed, and flew with Vigor to the Glass! to which I have long
accustomed myself to creep without Transport. Old and Worm-eaten as it is in
every Part of its broad Frame, yet did it not alarm me. I even saw my own Face
in it without the least Mortification. Nay, I took Notice, That my Nightcap
was not so White as it ought to have been; which in more unpolite Hours, I
should have thought not worth remarking. But Love adorns and improves us! My
Bosom swelled with Sighs, and my Eyes shone with Pleasure. I brushed up my
Mouse-colour Gloves, and was wishing they had been Yellow ones. I powdered my
short Hair; and combed it down to look longer. Nay I almost arrived at the
Foppery of spoiling my new Beaver, by inflicting the modern Pinch on it. At
length I remembered, That my Youth was but a Dream! And my PATTY a COQUET! My
Arms, at this Thought, folded sadly upon my Breast; I sunk into my easy Chair,
and was, some Minutes, quite lost there, before I could recover myself. How
dreadful is the Descent, from airy Pleasure to substantial Misery! It is not to
be described in Prose, and since LOVE both deserves good Poetry, and can
inspire it, let me see what my Muse will say to it.

Oh! Lovely Object! Whose dear Form I keep,
In busy Daylight and in silent Sleep!
Revisit Fancy -- to my Sighs attend;
Thou imag'd Shadow of my Soul's soft Friend!
When I recall thy Beauties to my Mind,
How dead are all Things thou have left behind!
Study, Pride, Friendship, languish for thy Sake;
Oh! Why did Love from thy sweet Tomb awake?
Why move his pointed Arrows in my Breast,
In Life's Descent, and the cool Vale of Rest!
Oh! charm not thus my Soul, which is designed
To flow down Time, and strengthen Humankind!
WELL! My Readers should think as I do, that all Things are for the Best. I
lost my Dream, and they find a Poet. The Witlings will say, a dreaming one! But
Melancholy has its Charms, and I am sweetly Sad, in the Remembrance of it.

WHILE I was indulging this mournful Tenderness, I heard a gentle Rap at my
Door, as if it feared to alarm me; and the Outside of it seemed to be swept by
the rustling of Silk; a Music I am not used to! I opened it slowly, for I was
still lost to myself; and was addressed by a Lady in a modest but most
enchanting Manner. She appeared to be near thirty; and was dressed, very
gravely, a little removed from the present Mode. But my Heart sprung within me!
For all the Beauties of my Vision were more than verified in this Reality! The
Soul of a God seemed to stream through her Eyes! And the Ideas of her Wit and
Majestic Understanding flamed and sparkled in her meaning Softness! There was
something in her Air, that made the Room seem to blaze round her! I led her to
my great Chair, but she gracefully declined it, and seated herself at some
Distance, not to show the Respect she had, to my Age, I hope, but my Writings:
After a Preface, of the sweetest Praise, that Vanity could wish to hear, she
took a Paper from her Bosom; and seemed to tremble, while she gave it me, as if
it enclose'd some Declaration, that her Heart was concerned in. How becoming is
Humility, when such Excellence condescends to wear it! -- She withdrew: and,
from her Manner, I opened her Paper with Impatience; and found in it what
follows.

Good SIR,
I WAIT on you, with my own Letter, from the Respectful Desire I have to see
the Person of him, whose Soul I so much admire, in the PLAIN DEALER. I knew
very well, That the Reverence you must inspire, would prevent my speaking
freely, and I chose therefore, to write, what I wished to inform you of.

I WAS the other Day, in an Assembly, of what the World calls fine Ladies; to
which gay Part of our Species I have lately been a Stranger, so that I found
their Dress, and their Conversation entirely Foreign to me; though, (through
all Disguises) I could discover the British Beauty! -- The Confusion of their
Fans, and the Loudness of their Laughter, alarmed, and oppressed my Ear; as the
new Situation of their Elbows drew my Eye under Astonishment! One of the
Ladies, who, I fear for her own sake, is what they call a Toast, was, most
lamentably, delighted with a young Gentleman, who sat next her, and who by the
Oddness of his Dress, surpised me, more than the Ladies did. -- His Wig,
instead of gracefully adorning his Shoulders, was tucked up into a Bag, of the
same Content with his Head; and had two Wings shooting from it; so that he
looked like a Mercury reversed. The little Hair, that escaped this Bag,
(because no Hat was allowed to shield it) was cemented by Oil and Powder; to
secure it against Tempest. The Sleeve of his Coat had removed the Middle of his
Arm, from the Place I should have looked for it in, and preferred the Bend of
his Elbow, to within three Inches of his Shoulder. His Stockings were so high
embroidered, that they left no Shape to his Leg: And his Hands, to his Fingers
Ends, were entombed, in a Pair of Ruffles. He was buttoned up to the Chin, in a
white Dimmity Waistcoat; and wore a Frock, which, I suppose, he borrowed from
one of his Grooms, to emulate the Jockey Air with the more Elegance, and
Propriety.

AS odd a Creature as this was, he seemed to consider Me as an Odder; for I
overheard him whisper his fair Neighbor, That, by my Ill Dress, and my
Neglect of the Company, I must be either a Wit, or a Tory! It was plain, he
said, from my Behavior, that I was unlearned in the new World, and he fancied,
for his Part, that I dropped out of the Eclipse, last Monday! -- The Favorite
Lady obliged him with a tender Look; and burst into a loud Laughter. I found
that all his Discourse was filled with Arrogance, and Folly; and a Monster bred
of both, which they call Double Entendres. At last, he hum'd half a Tune;
danced a Step or two, to his own Music; took Snuff and Leave together; and
hopt out of the Company.

The Ladies were now at Leisure to look a little at me. But their Hearts seemed
strangely full of this ridiculous Object, whom they immediately fell a
praising, with a kind of miserable Emulation. Mr. Flushcheek, said the Toast,
is, sure! the most delightful Creature! the finest, and best-bred Gentleman!
how witty! how tender! how polite and how severe, he is! He is the Soul of
Sense, and Gallantry; and the very Life of the Masquerade: I started, at their
Admiration; and felt my Heart sink into Pity for 'em; while I contemplated, in
Silence, the Perfection of my adorable Bellario.

OH! Mr. PLAIN DEALER! that I had proper Language to convey him to your
Imagination! You would then approve my Passion: And I should be justified even
to your Reason. His Person is divinely formed, Tall and Graceful! His Eyes,
which are full of Wisdom, wear a Gentleness, as if they grieved their own
Luster, and were willing to decline themselves in Pity to the Beholders! His
Lips are rarely opened but to praise or to improve, though he has Teeth, which
he might be proud of showing. There is, in the Turn of his Arms, an
inexpressible Air of Majesty! I never look on him without seeing all the great
Men, I have read of. I tremble before him, with a kind of religious Passion!
For Religion and Virtue are adorned by his Conversation! So that I may say,
without Falsehood, that it is Heaven to hear him! His Dress is disengaged; and
he knows all Things but, that he is charming! Oh! that you were acquainted with
his Mind, which is shining with every Virtue! Amidst the Throng of his
Beauties, I forgot to tell you, That he is a Poet, a most Divine one! Believe
me it is no Fiction! Place him therefore before Mr. Flushcheek's Eyes; and
convert his fair Admirers: for they take in the PLAIN DEALER.

I am, with great Respect, Sir, your most humble Servant, CLEORA.


THE PLAIN DEALER. No 18.
Qui fit, Moecenas, ut nemo, quam sibi sortem
Seu ratio dederit, seu fors objecerit, illa
Contentus vivat: laudat diversa sequentes.
HOR. Caetera de genere hoc (adeo sunt multa) loquacem
Delassare valent Fabium. Ne te morer, audi
Quo rem deducam. Si quis Deus, En ego, dicat,
Jam faciam quod vultis: eris tu, qui modo miles,
Mercator: tu, consultus modo, rusticus: hinc vos,
Vos hinc mutatis discedite partibus. Eia!
Quid statis? nolint. Atqui licet esse beatis.
Quid causae est, merito quin illis Juppiter ambas
Iratus Buccas inflet: neque se fore posthac
Tam facilem dicat, votis ut praebeat aurem?
IBID.
FRIDAY, May 22. 1724.
I FELL asleep, the other Night, after meditating, in my Bed, on our general
Dissatisfaction, at the Fortune that is alloted us; and had, again, an
extraordinary Dream, but very different from my last; and so strongly distinct,
and entertaining, that I flatter myself, my Readers will be glad to share its
Impression, while it is new, upon my Memory.

I WAS placed, I knew not how, on the Top of a green Hill; which was very
flowery, and fragrant. The World, methought, lay under it, in a vast Descent of
Cloudiness! A thousand Roads led up to it; but, with such intricate, and mazy
Windings, that my Eye was unable to trace any of them, distinctly: Yet they,
all, opened at last, upon the Summit of the Hill, and poured out a mixed
Multitude, of both Sexes, and of all Ages, and Conditions; who, as soon as they
had reached the Flat, hastened forward toward its Center.

I WAS wonderfully pleased, to discover Patty Amble, in the Crowd; and, giving
her my Hand, led her on, with great Composure. She informed me, That the Place
we were upon, was the Mount of Fortune; and, That she was going to a Fair,
which is held on it, and called, Mend-all Market. Her Business, she said, was
to change her Condition, for a Better; and, she doubted not, but I might do the
same, if I pleased, since I had found my Way, up the Hill. For all People, who
came thither, were allowed the happy Privilege, to lay down their own Burdens;
and take up lighter, in the Room of them.

IN the very middle of the Plain, we came, at length, to a kind of May Pole,
which was bigger than the Monument; and as high as the Pike of Teneriff: It was
of a bright Yellow, or Gold-colour; but twinkled, strangely, at a Distance; and
looked dazzling, and transparent. There hung, off from it, all about, lovely
Garlands, of precious Stones, with a Mixture of the sweetest Flowers; the Hues
of which were changeable, and varied every Moment, with a most bewitching
Delightfulness. Upon the Pinnacle of this Pyramid, sat the Goddess of the Place,
very busily spinning: But the Thread she twisted off, was too fine, to be seen,
distinctly, by Us, who stood, so far, below it. The Wheel, in its Motion, made
a musical Sound; but so rough, and so loud, that it shook the Hill, all round
it. It scattered, while she turned it, a sparkling Shower of Globules, that
were many-colour'd, but hollow; and broke, like empty Bubbles, in their
descending over the Multitude.

WHAT I observed, with most Concern, was, that, the nearer we came, the
Prospect grew less charming; for the Dust was so thick, that our Eyes, and
Mouths, were filled with it; and our Heads ak'd with the Bustle, and the Noise,
of the Tumult. The Commodities, which were to be bartered for, lay, spread,
every where, in Heaps; and All, who passed between, were invited to come, and
cheapen them. -- Sweetmeats, Limonades, and Variety of the finest Fruits, were
offered, diligently, up and down, by little Cupids, with painted Baskets: And
Trumpeters, Jugglers, Rope-dancers, Merry-Andrews, and Opera-Mongers, were
exerting themselves, on all Sides, to complete the Uproar of the Market. But,
though I passed by all their Stages, I saw no more than Two, whose Faces were
well known to me; and Those were, Heidegger, and Doctor Faustus.

IN the Front of every Pile, rose an Alabaster Pillar, whereon hung a Picture,
filled with Figures, all in Motion; representing whatever was most tempting,
and desirable, in the Merchandise it recommended. And, at the Foot of each
Pillar, was placed an Ebony Chair; on both Sides of which, stood young, and
beautiful Women, dressed like Muses and Graces: Some inviting Passengers to
take Possession of the Empty Seat; and others pointing up, to a Compartment, on
the Top of it, where was to be read, in golden Letters, the Name, and Quality,
of the Merchandise.

WE made up, to a Heap, that was remarkably higher than the Rest; and read,
there, the Word ROYALTY. We were agreeably surpised, to see, moving, in the
Picture, that hung upon this Pillar, Armies, Palaces, and Navies! Crowds of
Men, upon their Knees; and Women, still more prostrate! -- Banquets, Treasures,
Sports, and Triumphs, all succeeding, in their Turns, drew a mighty Crowd of
Gazers; who were struggling for the Chair, and pushed each other from it. Patty
Amble was very earnest, to have had me put in for it: But I winked upon her, to
be quiet; and presently, we saw a Person, breaking strongly through the Crowd;
who, with loud Huzza's, and Concurrence, placed him, there, and bowed round
him. -- But, no sooner was he seated, when the tempting Figures, in the
Picture, changed, immediately, into horrible Ones! -- Cares, Dangers, Hatred,
Restlessness, and a thousand sooty Furies, rolled, unquietly, about him! The
Muses, and Graces, were transformed into Serpents, and Satyrs! that hissed,
grinn'd, and pointed at him. And, when he would have, gladly, escaped, and
sprung out of the Chair, he found himself held down in it, by a Troop of meagre
Phantoms, that frighted us away, from any further Observation of him.

THE next Place, that we stopped at, was the Column of BEAUTY. We looked up, to
the Picture, and saw, moving, in it, a mixed, and confused Bustle, of Coaches,
Footmen, and Coronets: Men, with their Hearts in their Hands; and an indistinct
Cavalcade, of shapeless Things, without Heads, called Smiles, Sighs, Vows,
Desires, Faintings, Languishments, and Adorations. There came, up, to this
Place, in great Hurry, a fat, but sprightly, Young Woman, with a Bundle, under
her Arm; which she laid down, by Way of Barter; and which, we observed, as she
sorted the Goods, to be filled with large Legs, red Hair, brown Skin, big
Breasts; and Small-Pox-Marks, in abundance. The Attendants, at the Pillar,
having agreed to the Exchange, were inviting her into the Ebony Chair; when I,
who, by this Time, began to suspect their fair Appearance, turned the Picture,
with my Stick: and exposed its other Side to the She-Merchant; which was to be
Part of her Bargain, and consisted of Scandal, Spleen, Jealousy, Anguish,
Perjury, and Ruin. She no sooner saw the Faces of this ugly Nest of Monsters,
but, snatching up her own Bundle, she ran, as fast as her thick Legs could
carry her; tumbling, Head over Heels, at every Heap in her Way; and getting up,
as she best could; without staying, to look behind her.

WHILE we were diverting ourselves, at this pleasant Flight, a Person, whom
Nature had designed, and limbed, for a PLOWMAN, had been seized with an
Ambition to be made a Minister of State; and, having thrown down his Burden, of
Toil, Penury, and Dirtiness before the Pillar of POWER, had seated himself,
triumphantly, in the Chair, at the Foot of it; but was frighted out of his
Wits, by that time we came up to him; for we found him almost smothered, under
an unmerciful Load of Slanders, Terrors, Axes, and Halters; which he had much
ado to crawl out from; and was bawling, with great Earnestness, and Distortion
of Muscles, to have his Own Goods restored him.

IN the next Compartment we examined, we found written the Word, TITLES. We
saw, there, a Beau, with six Footmen behind him, very earnestly perusing the
moving Trophies, in the Picture. My Coquet felt her Heart beat, at the Sight of
so fine a Gentleman; and whispered her Opinion, That I need not turn that
Picture; for sure! there was no Ill to be apprehended, there; -- I did it,
however, and the Beau fell into Fits; at the sudden rushing out of a Whirlwind
of Ignorance, Conceitedness, Scorn, Luxury, and Diseases!

I frighted an honest Citizen, in much the same Manner, from the Standard of
WEALTH. He had taken a Fancy for Preferment: and was wishing, extremely, to be
erected into an Alderman! -- He had counted out, for the Purchase, a Life-full
of Ease; a small Parcel of Understanding; and Ditto, of Conscience. But, the
very Minute I turned the Picture, there flew, into his Face, Dullness,
Cuckoldom, and Clumsiness! upon which he took to his Heels, and left his own
Bag behind him.

AT the Column of WIT, I was agreeably entertained, among a large Circle of
Gapers, who were admiring the wonderful Mechanism of the Picture, that was hung
upon that Pillar. -- Cities, Mountains, Oceans, Woods, Skies, Meadows, Gardens,
Gods, and Goddesses, Giants, Mermaids, Cupids, Dragons, Mistresses, Witches,
Enchanted Castles, Fields of Air; and Seas of Fire; all, delightfully,
intermixed, and confounded, rose, and charmed the Observation! -- But the Crowd
dispersed, immediately, on my discovering, to their great Terror, and
Amazement, that there lurked, behind all this Gaiety, a lean Society, called
Envy, Malice, Poverty, Dependence, and Calamity!

I WALKED quite through the Fair; and, wherever I wandered, perceived it was,
in all Parts, alike. They, who brought Complaints, to exchange, against
Good-Fortune, chose to carry their own back again, rather than conclude a New
Bargain. There was something, in every Heap, that they were inclinable enough
to purchase; -- But there was something too, that must go with it, which they
could not bear to be troubled with: so, they went murmuring, away; and bestowed
their Curses, in great Plenty, on the Goddess, who kept the Market; which was
never the thinner, notwithstanding; for, still, new Crowds supplied the Places
of those, who returned, dissatisfied. Nor could the Warnings they met with,
from such Numbers who had been disappointed, prevail with these new Comers, to
believe, they should go back again, without being the Richer, from a Mart, that
was stored, so plentifully, with all, that the World calls Valuable.

AMONG the infinite Variety of Temptations, which glittered, every where, about
me, I was in Danger but once; and That was, at the Pillar of FAME. I saw, when
I turned that Picture, that the Weight of the Counter-balance lay, chiefly, in
these four Evils, -- Death, Time, Detraction, and Uncertainty! Yet, so strong
was my Desire to float my Name through Futurity, that I was resolutely
determined to take Possession of the Chair. -- But, having Nothing of Value
about me, but my Oaken Stick, and Mouse-colour'd Gloves, (the first of which
they refused, because of the Mischief it had done 'em, in turning up the wrong
Sides of their Pictures; and the Second, because not fine enough to be
fashionable, in that Region,) I was forced upon an Expedient, which I am almost
afraid to confess, for fear of losing, for ever, the Good Opinion of my Female
Readers.

TO say all, in a Word, I was, heroically, resolved, to give up my Love for my
Glory; so, taking Patty Amble by the Hand, I proffered Her, in Barter, (having
no Other Commodity.) The Attendants, who watched the Pillar, were just ready to
take hold of her; when she threw her Arms about my Neck, and conjured me, by
all the Ties, of Honor, and of Gallantry, that I would not leave her, a
Sacrifice, to so empty a Divinity, as the Regent of that Mountain! She begged,
that I would return, with her, to the Lower, but happier World: and, whatever I
should ask of her, she would grant me, by Way of Recompense. I took her
suddenly, at her Word, and asked her Heart for a Fairing. -- Nay, spare me but
that One Thing, said she, with a languishing Reproachfulness, and take any
thing else, about me.

Unfortunately overjoyed, at this Bliss, which, methought, befell me, the sudden
Flow of my Spirits, under a Sense of the promised Transport, caused so violent
an Agitation, that, waking on a sudden, I dropped, out of her Arms, and perceived
myself in my Bed, in Barbican.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 19
Non nostrum inter vos tantas componere lites.
Et vitula tu dignus, and hic: --
VIR.
MONDAY, May 25. 1724.
I PASS some agreeable Hours, now and then, at the House of Sir Portly Rufus,
an old and wealthy Acquaintance; who lives, a few Miles, out of Town; and
having got his Estate, by a long and busy Life, spent in Trading,
adventurously, to most Parts of the World, is, now, retired from its Hurry; and
enjoys it with a graceful Ease, and undesigning Hospitality. The only
Inconvenience, I have to complain of, when I am with him, is, that the Company
I meet there, is not so Delicate as I could wish it; but mixed with that
Ineligance, which must be expected, and submitted to, among Men of Business:
whose Friendships are formed, for the most Part, not on Sympathy of Minds; but
mutual Commerce of Interests.

YET, as there is, always, something to be learnt, from the most inconsiderable
Accidents we can meet with, I never returned from Dineing, or Supping, with my
good Friend Sir Portly, but I brought away with me as strong a Proof, as I
could any where have met with, That the Reason why, in mixed Companies, we
seldom find much Pleasure, is, because every Person, not under some immediate
Guard of Hope, Fear, or Reverence, keeps only Himself in View: And directs his
Discourse, and Behavior, not to the Taste of those he should Entertain; but to
the particular Bent of his own Humor, or Capacity.

ONE of the most constant Guests, at Sir Portly's, is Tony Gingle his Sister's
Son; who has a great Genius for Poetry. He makes very good Verses, and
pronounces, gracefully enough, those he repeats, from other Writers, -- so far,
all is well. But the worst of it is, that Tony has studied nothing, but Poetry.
He is quite dark in the useful Doctrine of Times, Seasons, and Places. It is
the same Thing to him, when the Muse bites, whether he quotes Tragedy, to a Man
of Letters, his Taylor's Wife, or a Stockjobber. The Chimes of his Numbers are
for ever, ringing in his Fancy: And all, who chance to sit near him, must have
their Share of the Melody. He has taken it into his Head, that, because he can
make a considerable Figure, as a Poet, there is nothing, considerable, but
Poetry! And it is a very pleasant Scene to observe Tony, studying, at one of
the Tables of a full Coffee-House, in the midst of the City; scanning Verses,
on his Fingers: Conceiving, writing, and blotting out: And humming them over,
to himself, with all the Rapture, and Gesticulation, of Tone, Action, and
Passion! Regardless that he is star'd at, and remarked, all the while, by a
dozen or two of thriving Citizens; who shake their Heads and pity him, as a
Man, that has lost his Wits; even while he is under the Operation of being
Witty! -- He has never permitted his Brain to grow cool enough to reflect, That
Wit, in dull Company, is the dullest Subject in the World; and that it is a
Folly, to talk of Homer, Horace, or Pope, among Grave Fellows within Ludgate;
who, when they hear of a Great Poet, will tell you a Story of Tom Brown; and
feel no Difference in the Power of Tony Gingle's own Works, and the humble
Labors of their Bellman.

Jack Juniper, the Apothecary; and Tom Tiresome, the Haberdasher, living both
in the same Street, ride down together, twice a Week, to take a Bottle, with my
Friend, Sir Portly. -- Jack Juniper reads us Lectures, on the new Improvements
in Botany, and the Rise, and Progress of Inoculation, which are, accurately,
answered, by Mr. Thomas Tiresome; with the Price of the Stocks; and the
Mournful Decay of the Spittle-fields Weaving. -- As soon as this very able
Apothecary has opened, and explained to us, the Circulation of the Blood, the
punctual Haberdasher repays his Kindness, with the Course of Exchange. If some
Patient, of the One, has taken Physic, for her Complexion; some Lady, who is
the Other's Customer, has, with equal Advantage to her Skin, fallen into the
Wear of his new Blush-Colour. -- But, in the very Height of their
Elucidations, Tony Gingle never fails to wedge in, between 'em both, some six
Dozen of Quotations, from a Poem, called the Dispensary; though the intelligent
Mr. Juniper is continually interrupting him with the true History of every
weighty Occurrence, in Apothecaries-Hall, which provoked the Muse of the merry
Doctor. While poor Tom Tiresome, when he has yawn'd, and listened, in vain, to
the full Extent of his Patience, for an Opportunity to grow Eloquent on the Use
of Colchester-Bays, falls asleep, in his Chair; and snores at us, in Revenge,
to maintain his Part in the Conversation.

HONEST Sir Portly would be often at a Loss, to shape such stubborn
Obliquities, into any direct Line of Society, if he had not, always, at his
Elbow, the good-natured Mr. William Weathercock, a Gentleman Farmer, in his
Neighborhood; who has a large, but empty, Understanding. -- The Mind of Will.
Weathercock is like the Sail of a great Ship, that has Room, to contain much
Wind; but, having none, of its own producing, is swelled out, by Turns, from
all the Quarters of the Compass. Will. hits every Man's Taste; and is of all
People's Opinion. He is so desirous to Oblige, that there is not a Point in the
Circumference, but would serve him for a Center. He is this Moment, in your
Sentiment: and, the next, will, before your Face, be of his Opinion who
contradicts you. But, if a Third affirms you Both to have been in the Wrong,
and appeals to Will. Weathercock: -- Will, with the best-bred Agility in the
World, shifts, immediately, to his Side, too; and thinks it as clear as the Sun
that You were, All Three, in the Right of it.

THIS pliable Ductility, in the Reason of Will. Weathercock, hitches in, and
chains together, the most repugnant Idea's; and, uniting them into an active
Body, like the hooked Atoms, of Des Carts, gives 'em Strength, Fluidity, and
Consequence. Such a lively Effect have the very Weaknesses of Humanity beyond
the Force, and Subtlety, of Ill Nature, and Self-Interest!

Tony Gingle, the last Time that I saw this Company together, was so put to it,
for an Opportunity, to repeat some Verses, he was big with, that, in order to
bring 'em in, with a tolerable Appearance of Propriety, he began, to compliment
Sir Portly's Lady, on the Fineness of her Shape, and Skin, and inferring, from
their being Praiseworthy, that they should lie open to Observation, took
Occasion, by these Lines, to enforce his kind Opinion, that it was necessary
for her, to go naked.

Can Forms, like yours, want Ornament of Dress?
Beauty, like Truth, shines most, in Nakedness.
Dressing, may skreen Deformities from View:
But, even, Adornment does but shadow you!
Most, but by what they wear are lovely made:
You, Madam, lose, whenever you seek such Aid.
While others dress, their Lovers Hearts to warm,
You put off nothing, but what veiled a Charm!
THE Lady blushed, and smiled. Sir Portly laughed aloud; and begged to hear 'em
over again. For my Part, I was doubly pleased, with the Turn of the Verse; and
Particularity of the Fancy. Tony Gingle, himself, was in Raptures, which he
could not hide, at the Applause his Muse had met with. -- But Tom Tiresome had
been weighing with the Foresight of a prudent Citizen, the Ill Consequence of
going naked, to his good Friends the Weavers, and felt a commendable
Indignation, against the tuneful Mr. Gingle; insomuch that in the Heat of his
Resentment, he called him Madman; and Ballad-Singer -- Pray, what do you
suppose, said he, would become of many thousand honest People, who live, by
making Petticoats, and what belongs to Petticoats, if all handsome Women were
to go impudently Naked! -- Out upon it! Methinks I see 'em; and am ashamed of
you! It is scandalous, and indecent; and to say nothing of the Plot, which may
lie, concealed, in it, against Trade; it is the Whim of a Heathen Turk! and not
fit to be thought of, in a Christian-Country!

TONY by this Time had fathomed the Depth of his Antagonist, and began to play
upon him, from his Batteries of poetical Artillery; the War was growing hot:
and threatened dangerous Consequences, when Will. Weathercock put in, between
'em, and taking Part with the Wit, because he observed him to be a Favorite,
made this Charge, upon his Opposite, like a brave and faithful Auxiliary.

YOU are certainly in the right, most diverting Mr. Gingle! -- Nature never
would have covered Women with such white, and tempting Skins, if she had not
meant 'em for a public Ornament. The Ladies are Nature's Favorites; and, can
we suppose her to have been less liberal, to those Favorites; than to the
Beasts, which she placed below 'em? -- She never sent us a Calf, but he came
into the World, with his Coat on. An Ox has no Breeches to pull off, when he
goes to Bed weary. The Lamb is born, ready dressed, with her Freeze Coat about
her. And who, ever, saw a Sow, drawing off her Shoes, and Stockings? -- None
sleep softer than the Birds do: Yet they rise, in the Morning, with their
Featherbeds, upon their Backs. -- The most Excellent, of the Virtues, are
always painted, like Women; but it is, like Women, without Clothes on! And,
what does this mean, but to insinuate, to the Sex, that all, who love Virtue,
should despise Hoop-Petticoats, and go naked? -- There is this manifest
Absurdity in Women's Dressing, that it involves them in Perplexities, which make
the chief End they dress for, much more difficult than it need be: For, as they
order the Matter, they are to be taken to Pieces, like Watches, before a Man
can come near enough, to examine the Wonders of their Workmanship. -- Fashions
differ, in all Nations; and, what is a fine Dress, in one Place, is a frightful
one, in another. But, were Women once uncovered, all Men's Judgments would
agree, about 'em. -- In a Word, since the Sun, Moon, and Stars, appear, as
Nature has made 'em; since all Animals are satisfied with their own natural
Figures; and, since the Roses are not ashamed to show their Thorns, with their
Beauties; why should Woman, Nature's Masterpiece! seek to hide, or disguise,
her Loveliness?

WILL went, eloquently on, after this extraordinary Manner, till he had fully
convinced, and satisfied, all that Part of his Audience, who were on this first
Side the Question. But, casting his Eye, on poor Tom Tiresome, and, pitying the
melancholy Air, with which he listened to an Opinion, he had not Wit enough to
argue against, though he thought it little Better than Fornication, and
Adultery; -- Will, in simple Honesty of Heart; and out of a mere Motive of
Compassion, slipped, by a very sudden Transition, into a sure Method of
comforting him; and changed his Level, as follows.

YET, I must do Justice to both Arguments, and it seems plain, beyond
Contradiction, that Beauty was made, to be ornamented. The Peacock's starry
Tail, shows, that Nature loves gay Fancies. Nature dressed the Hills, and the
Meadows, in their fine, embroidered Mantles. It was she, that spangled over all
that glorious Veil, of Heaven! -- Who, but Nature, spotted the Ermin? And gilt
the scaly Skins, of Fishes, and of Serpents? -- Man, indeed, she sent into the
World, plain, and naked: -- Not, that she meant, he should remain so, -- but,
because she adorned all Things else, for his Reason, to choose a Dress from.
What is the Silkworm, but Nature's little Spinster, set to Work for our common
Benefit? The very Spider keeps a Loom; and weaves a finer Manufacture, than the
Artists of Spittle-Fields, can! -- Why smell these lovely Flowers, round the
Summer House we are sitting in, so delightfully sweet, and fragrant, but to
teach us, That we should perfume our selves? And, to what End can we suppose
they were made, so various, in their Colors, but to give Ladies the happy
Hint, of employing Dyers, and Silk-weavers!

TOM TIRESOME broke in upon him, at those two inspiring Words, with a loud and
triumphant Hollow; and filling, instantly, two Bumpers, drank Prosperity to
Trade; and Health and Happiness to Mr. Weathercock. -- His Toasts went round
the Company; and both Parties were so well satisfied with the Share each had,
in his Decision, that Neither of them appeared shocked at the manifest
Contradiction of his Reasoning. But Tony Gingle went away, the most pleased, of
the Two; because Sir Portly desired him, at parting, to repeat his Verses, the
third Time; and to make another Copy, against next Meeting, on the comfortable
use of Swan-skin Breeches, to Ladies who wear Wide Hoops, in a sharp and frosty
Winter.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 20.
Tum pater Anchises lachrymis ingressus obortis:
O nate, ingentem luctum ne quaere tuorum:
Ostendent terris hunc tantum fata, neque ultra
Esse sinent --
VIR. Heu miserande puer! Si qua fata aspera rumpas,
Tu Marcellus eris. --
Ibid. Discite justitiam moniti, and non temnere divos.
Ibid.
FRIDAY, May 29. 1724.
SIR,
YOU observed, very justly, in one of your late Papers, that no Figure in Life
can be more graceful, and amiable, than that of a wise, and good, Father; with
Respect to an only Son, who possesses, and deserves, his Indulgence.

THAT Lover of Mankind, Hortensius, gave us, lately, a fine Example, of the
Force of this Truth: But I look back, upon it with Anguish, because I judge of
his present Pain, by the Excess of his past Pleasure.

THOUGH Hortensius had, properly, but one Son, he was, in some Sense, the Common
Father. -- Nothing ever was carried higher than the Manliness of his Heart,
except its Sweetness, and Humanity: For he was softened, by the benevolent
Overflowings of a Pity, that touched him, at once, in the two Extremes of
Sensibility! His own Joys were damped, by other Peoples Afflictions; and his
private Sorrows cheered, by the Prosperity of those who hated him. -- He not
only forgave, readily, the most malicious of his Enemies; but, that he might be
sure to do it, generously, he forgot the very Injuries. -- Even his Faults were
no other, than the unsuccessful Result of his Virtues; for acting rather by the
measure of his Mind, than of his Power, he provoked the Disappointed; to whom
the Will is no Obliger. -- His Wit could fear no Rivals, but his Courage, and
his Honesty: -- And every Person who shall read this faint Character of his
Excellence, has been obliged, by the Effects of it; with regard to the Public
Interest; and the Ornaments of Society.

SUCH was Hortensius! -- and such Hortensius is; if yet he may be said to be,
after the Death of that dear Son, he lived in; and into whose fine Mind he had
poured out, and transfused, all the Fullness of his Virtues; with a kind of
Hope, in him, and his, to have immortalized his very Body! and to receive, from
future Ages, in the Honors paid to his Descendants, the Tribute of that
Praise, which his own, declining Life, is, now, too scanty to make Room for.

HE, who knows the Father's Prospect; and how suddenly Death has blasted it;
having snatched away the Son, when just blooming into Manhood; and, already,
the Companion, and the Friend, of his Father! never looked on, without Joy; --
never obliged, without Gratitude; -- never thought on, without Tenderness; --
never hearkened to, without Wonder! must be touched with a lively Sense of what
that Fate brought with it; which tore, from such a Parent! (who, before, had
lost the Mother,) such a Son; to leave him, joyless; with the future World
before him, like a bleak, and barren Desert! -- And the past, more dreadful
still, by a thousand goading Tendernesses; which cling for ever to the Memory;
and torment, and sting, Reflection.

WHAT is Life, when we consider it under the Accidents it is liable to, but an
unresting Conflict, in the Dark, with Labors, Doubts, and Disappointments! --
One, such Loss, as Hortensius has sustained, in this loved Son: (and so felt,
too, as Hortensius feels it) serves, for ever, to imbitter Hope; and draws
Gloom enough over the Mind, to put a Stop to our wild Pursuits, of Riches,
Power, and Reputation.

WHEN I compare the present Calamity of this Gentleman, with the Satisfaction
he is fallen from; -- with that ripening Expectation; -- that observing
Vigilance; that unspeakable Succession of little Transports, and tender
Triumphs; -- and all that Train of Noble Weaknesses, which warm, and open the
human Heart, upon these dear, and soft, Occasions; I confess to you that I am
lost, in too quick a Sense of his Misery! -- And I tremble, while I learn from
it, that we are exposed to it, most dangerously, on that strongest, and
unguarded, Quarter, whence we look for our sincerest Happiness!

I MET Hortensius, some time since; and, letting down my Glass, by Accident,
just as his Chair was passing me, my Soul was wounded, through my Eyes, at the
moving Majesty of his Sorrow. -- He endeavored to have skreen'd it, behind the
Greatness of his Spirit; and put me in Mind, when I was gone by him, of this
fine, and natural Stroke, in Shakespeare. -- She never told her Pain;
But let Concealment, like a Worm, in the Bud,
Prey, on her Damask Cheek: -- seemed, all unmoved;
And sat, -- like Patience, on a Monument;
Smiling, at Grief!


IF a Man, who had embarked himself, for some long Voyage, with his Friends,
and his whole Family, should have the miserable Deliverance, to escape, alone,
from a Shipwreck; and be thrown ashore, upon some barren Island, whence he
could discern no Object round him, but the Swelling of the Sea, while it was
covering the sinking Heads of all, who were near, or dear, to him: and, to
preserve whose cherished Lives, he would, himself have died, with Pleasure! --
Could such a dreadful Distinction be considered as a Blessing to him? -- Or,
should we not rather pity him, as the Person, of the whole Number, whose Lot
was least supportable? And to which, a thousand Deaths were preferable!

YET, methinks, Mr. Plain-Dealer, though, to lose a Worthy Son, must be
acknowledged a trying Misery; It is a Fate, severer still, to be the Father of
an Unworthy one. -- -- And live, to feel,
How, sharper than a Serpent's Tooth, it is,
To have a thankless Child!
Shakespeare in King Lear.

SHOW me a Good Man, whose paternal Care has been rewarded with Contempt, from
the ungrateful Object of his Tenderness: -- Who sees his Name disgraced, by the
sordid Qualities of an Heir, from whose expected Excellence he had promised
himself an Increase to its Reputation: -- Who lives, convinced, that he is
hated, avoided, and wished dead, by a Wretch, whom he has given Life to! and
from whose Virtues, he had flattered himself, that his Old Age would find a
Comfort! and his Memory retain a Glory! -- Such a Father shall look, with a
kind of Envy, on Hortensius, and be the only Person capable of weighing his
Distress, without Agony.

THE Impartiality of Time, and Reason, placing in the same Degree of Fame,
those who polished, and instructed, Nations, with those who governed, or
conquered, them; Hortensius need not blush, to see his Name, ranked with
Princes. -- I will therefore instance an Example of a vaster Misery than his
own, in the greatest Monarch of our Age: (why did I not say of any Age?) I mean
the Czar of Russia: -- A Prince! whose Actions will draw after him a Blaze of
Glory, and Astonishment, through the latest Depth of Time! and warm the Hearts
of Posterity with the same generous Reverence, for the Name of this immortal
Emperor, which we now feel, at mention of Alexander the Great: or the first,
and noblest, of the Caesar's.

THERE can be very few of your Readers, who have not heard the Czar accused of
one of the most shocking Kinds of Cruelty, with regard to the Death of his Son,
the late Prince Royal -- But most of 'em, I believe, are ignorant, that this
great, and generous Sovereign, was so free from the Guilt of that ill-grounded
Imputation, that he pardoned his Condemned Son, in Person, in the most tender,
and moveing Manner, after he had been sentenced to Death, not by the Czar
himself, but by a Convention of the Senate, and States, of Russia,
Ecclesiastical, -- Civil, -- and Military: -- for having (to use the very Words
of the Sentence) Formed a Design to get the Crown even in the Lifetime of his
Father: opposing, and undermining, all his glorious Improvements; and
soliciting Insurrections, of Rebels, at Home; and the Assistance of a Foreign
Army, to accomplish the Destruction of them.

I COULD produce the most authentic, and undeniable, Evidences, that,
throughout the whole Course of this great, and private, Affliction, the Czar
discovered more, of the Vastness! the Humanity! and the Firmness, of his Soul,
than in all the Public Torrent, of his Dangers; and his Victories! -- And, I
think, I may challenge the most partial Admirers of Antiquity, to produce any
Thing, so humane! so heroic! so God-like! as this Letter! even from their
greatest, and most honored, Characters. -- It was writ, and delivered, by the
Czar's own Hand, to the Prince Royal, his Son, on the 11th Day of October, in
the Year 1715.

Extract of a LETTER, from the Czar of Russia, to his Son, the Prince Alexei.
My SON,
YOU cannot be ignorant, since it is known to all the World, to what Degree our
People groaned, under the Swedish Oppression. We saw, by the Loss of our
Maritime Provinces, that we were cut off from all Commerce with the rest of the
World. You know, too, what it cost us, in the Beginning of this War, to qualify
ourselves to give a Check to so implacable a Violence. But God led us by the
Hand, till we were worthy, in our Turn, to make that Enemy tremble, before whom
others had, long, trembled. -- We owe this, next to God, to our own, unwearied
Toil; and the Affection of our Best Children, our faithful, Russian Subjects.

BUT, if, while I am viewing this Prosperity of my Native Country, I turn an
Eye to my own Posterity, my Heart is oppressed, with Grief, that is too heavy
for my Glory. -- I see You, my Son! rejecting all the Means of becoming able to
protect, or govern, what I leave you. -- You will not so much as hear of
Warlike Study; though by that only we broke out of the Obscurity we were involved
in; and made ourselves notic'd among Nations.

I DO not exhort You to make War, without Reason; -- I but press you to learn
the Art of it. I could place before your Eyes many Proofs, that this is
necessary: But I will name the Greeks, only; for they are united in the same
Faith, with us. -- What, but Neglect of Arms, was the Occasion of their Ruin?
Rest, and Idleness, had weakened them, till they could submit, even to Slavery!
You mistake, if you think it enough, for a Prince to have Good Generals. Men
look up, to the Head: They examine his Inclinations, that they may conform
themselves to his Genius. -- My Brother, in his Reign, loved Magnificence, in
Dress, and Horses. The Nation, ( before, not at all inclined that Way) formed
their Taste, upon their Prince's; for they imitate us, as well in our Good
Qualities, as our Evil.

YOU hate War: -- You neglect it: -- You will, consequently, never learn it. --
How, then, can you command others? -- How judge, of the Rewards, which should
encourage the Deserving? or the Punishments, which must be held out, to the
Eyes of the Unworthy? -- You will see, and hear, for ever, with the Eyes, and
Ears, of others; and resemble a young Bird, that holds out its Bill to its
Feeder.

I AM a Man, my Son, and I must die. -- To whom shall I leave the
Accomplishment of my Labors? To whom shall I commit the Protection of my
People? -- To one! who, like the slothful Servant, conceals, the Talent, he
should employ! -- and falls back, from the glorious Trust, which God has
distinguished him by!

REMEMBER your long Obstinacy -- and become generously ashamed, of this
Perverseness in your Nature. -- How often have I reproached You! Nay,
sometimes, you have compelled my Affection even to punish you! -- For some
Years past, I have scarce spoke to you. -- Yet, all this availed nothing. -- It
was losing my Time! -- It was striking the Air! -- All your Pleasure consists
in Indolence! Things, of which you ought to be ashamed, because they make you
contemptible, compose your dearest Delight! -- Nor do you concern yourself for
the Consequences, it may produce to your Country!

AFTER having weighed, in my secret Breast, the fatal Tendency of your
Proceedings; -- After having reflected, how long, in vain, I have endeavored
to redeem you: I have thought fit, by my own Handwriting, to give you the last
Result of my Will. -- With this Determination, however, -- to wait, still, some
Time longer, before I put it in Execution; to expect, or hope, your Amendment:
-- If not, you are, hereby, to know, that I will deprive you of the Succession;
as a Man would cut off a gangrened Member.

DO not fancy, that, because I have no other Child but you, I only write this
to terrify you: By God's Pleasure, I will, most certainly, do it. For, since I
spare not my own Life, for the Welfare of my People: Why should I regard your
Honor, who are not framed for becoming it? -- I will, rather, transmit my
Dominions to a Stranger, who shall be Worthy of them, than to my own unworthy
Son, who can neither defend, nor adorn, them.

Signed, in the Original, with the Czar's own Hand, PETER.



I WILL close my Paper, here, and revere the Soul of this great Prince, in
Silence! for, to say any Thing, in Praise, or Explanation, of such a Letter,
were to treat my Readers, like Insensibles. -- If there lives any one Person,
who can consider it, without Love, and Veneration, for its Writer, his
Apprehension must be so grossly covered, with a Cloud of Dullness, and Stupidity,
that he is destined to remain impenetrable, by Honor, Justice, or Humanity!

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 21.
-- Natio Comoeda est.
-- Ridiculum acri.
HOR.
MONDAY, June 1. 1724.
THE Coquette, and Ned Volatile, have been Indulged in their Propensities to
talk, and, enjoyed their Humor and Pleasantry; nay, they have been permitted
to break in upon one another, sometimes, with unexpected Vollies of Raillery,
which might, perhaps, have been carried to unwarrantable Lengths, and attended
with ill Consequences, if they had not been overawed by the Presence of us, of
a more sedate Turn; and sometimes, seasonably parted, by the Interposition of
the Major, and timely relieved from one another in those brisk Onsets.

IF an Account of the little Infirmities of this pair of Scufflers has had its
proper Tendency toward the Cure of any noted Impertinents, of either Sex, who
have a Flux in their Tongues, I shall not think that I have as yet offended the
Gravity of my Character, or lost any Time, in penning down such Levities, the
Knowledge of which, rightly conveyed, produces Consequences of so much
Importance to the Quiet and Repose of the more serious part of the Human
Species. Thus far I can say, from what has fallen within my own Observation,
That several gay Parts, which I have discovered, of the Conversation between
Ned and the Coquette, have excited an unusual Vein of Merriment among many of
my young Readers; but, though I must confess, I had a secret Pleasure in finding
them pleased; I should have been delighted, in a more exquisite Degree, if my
Writings, taking a better Effect, had stirred up, in some of them, whom it would
have become, a little more Self-Reflection, and less Laughter. They who only
laugh at the Follies of others, give me the worst half of their Applause; I
shall never be completely pleased, till I can teach them to laugh at
themselves: they think me a pleasant and facetious old Fellow, but I would be,
at the same Time, a useful and a profitable Companion.

I LATELY saw the most penetrating pair of Eyes that ever shone upon Paper,
very busily employed upon that Plain-Dealer, wherein I described the last
Tongue-Skirmish, between the Two Talkatives of our Assembly. She read it to
herself, and ever, now and then, laughed out heartily. I could guess, by
observing her Eye, what Passages tickled her the most, and found 'em to be
those, which threw the forward Humor of the two Combatants into the strongest
Pitch of Ridicule. I was in hopes, That, if any of that Female Infirmity, which
she so heartily laughed at in others, fell to her Share, she would ever after
carefully avoid appearing in the same Light, in which she had seen her
Neighbor make so ungraceful a Figure, and whom she confessed, by such sensible
Signs, to be a proper Object of Ridicule. But, to my very great Wonder, she no
sooner laid the Paper out of her Hands, but she incontinently exercised those
Lips, with ten times more Velocity in Talking, than they seemed to have in the
Course of their Reading. Her Tongue out-gallop'd the Coquette's; and I am
persuaded, if Ned Volatile had been to start with her upon equal Terms, she
would fairly have distanced him; he would have lost Sight of her in the first
Flight: Up got I, (no Room being given to take Leave) and marched off, as fast
as my Oaken-stick would help me; and have been mightily discouraged, to see the
little Effects of my Performances. -- I warrant this Gossip, told the next
Company she fell into, That she read my Paper, and the Moment after, in utter
Contempt of the Moral palpably contained in it, bolted away into numberless
Fooleries, and as many Impertinences as before. But can this pert Fair-One be
properly said to have read the PLAIN-DEALER? No, she saw it, but did not read
it. At this Rate I must be obliged to turn Lecturer upon my own Works, and
where there are any genteel Hints, substitute rougher, and coarser, in their
Room, that they may not be too delicate, and escape Observation. It is the Sign
of a well-manner'd Writer, just to touch upon the Verge of a severe Truth, and
leave the rest to a Reader's private Meditation. But if this Method proves
ineffectual, it is next to impossible, to preserve the Character of a
PLAIN-DEALER, without saying something that may penetrate, more violently. I
shall, therefore for the Future, without Scruple, declare, that any Eyes, let
them appear never so beautiful, which at once look over, and overlook, these
Papers, are in a Manner as bad as blind; and that the only Grace in beautiful
Lips, which are almost always in Motion, and scarce ever to the Purpose,
consists in the Propriety of their Color, which shows, as if they blushed,
with a Sense of their own Impertinence.

THE Gentlemen run over my Papers, as well as the Ladies, without reading them.
They conceive a Jest on some particular Person, then laugh; and become more a
Jest themselves: yet will not consider, till they are told in plain Terms, that
each of them is that particular Person.

THE odd Spark, whom my Correspondent, fair Cleora, very properly liken'd to a
Mercury Reversed, is the same odd Spark he was, and, what is worse, has since
that Time brought over Hundreds of Proselytes, to the same silly Fashion; so
that one would be apt to imagine, there is nothing more wanting, to make a
Dress very popular, but showing it first to be very ridiculous. There seems to
be a general Emulation among the Fashion-Mongers, which of them can be the most
Whimsical, as the only sure Way to be the most Taking and Successful.

THESE Mercuries consist mostly of your Sma^t, Dapper Blades; though some very
tall Men have condescended to come into the Fashion, which makes them appear to
have no Heads at all, or as if half the Head, lay hid in the Bag behind it.

IT is an extraordinary Entertainment to see the whole Mall crowded with this
kind of Puppets; and yet more so, when examining these Childish Figures, you
read in their Faces, that they generally consist of Persons from Five and
Twenty, to upwards of Forty Years of Age. Some Fops of Fifty-odd, make the
first Decays of Age remarkable in them by this Dress, which would be otherwise
unnoticed. A jolly old Friend of mine, was taking an Airing with me in the Park
the other Day, 'What must be in these Peoples Minds, said he, that, in order to
look Gay, appear Hoary, like the Pictures of Old Winter, when every Thing looks
flourishing about them? The very Breezes blow to refresh them, and sweep away
the Load of Dust, which would swelter them if they had not ingeniously
prevented it, by a Cement of Orange-Butter.

CAN any of these Sparks pretend to read my Papers; who, without looking into
their Minds, continue to cultivate the Outside of their Heads after such a
prodigious and preposterous Rate! As to the Powderers of Fifty, I must tell
them, that even I, who am in my grand Climacterick, and have gone through the
Snow of so many Winters, am not half so much powdered as they, and that
therefore it cannot look decent in them.

IF we survey from the Head downwards, every Part of their Dress, there is not
one, but what is preposterous.

IF a Man, for Example, was to take a Review of the Officers and Soldiers,
provided they had Sleeves of the Modern Cut, he would take them for an Army of
Invalids. The Company of Tailors seem to have forgot themselves, and want the
Assistance of the Barber-Surgeons, to instruct them in the Rules of Anatomy,
without which, the Elbows of Men are visibly out of Joint, and can never be set
cleverly.

THE young Fellows have dropped down the Flaps of their Coats, very near as Low
as the Clocks of their Stockings, so that scarce any thing of the Leg is to be
seen but Ancle; and they seem to be pulling them still lower and lower, that
they may be more and more like Petticoats, which the Women are, gratefully,
tucking up shorter and shorter, that there will be a decent Necessity for
converting them into Breeches.

BUT I observe, that the Ladies go open-breasted in Winter, though the Dappers
button up to the Chin in Summer; and have garnished the Folds of their Coats
with Supernumerary Buttons, the Use of which I cannot possibly learn, though I
have applied to those who are very deeply read. I would propose Buttons and
Button-holes down the Seam of the Back, that they may be buttoned up to the
Poll, as they are to the Chin, which will be of great Use, when, they are lazy;
for they may be unbuttoned, as Ladies are unlac'd, behind, by a Servant.

IF these Alterations should be carried on a little further, my Friend Gunter's
Predictions, concerning the Mutation of Sexes, must be allowed to be punctually
verified.

WHAT I most fear is, lest our Merchants and others, whose Affairs have kept
them many Years beyond Sea, should be surprised, at their Return, to find us
dressed after the present Mode, hear our Officers sing Italian, our Beaus
compliment one another in High Dutch, our old Women talk Politics in French,
and not believe us to be the same Generation of People, they left behind them
in this Island.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 22.
Sed tamen amoto quaeramus seria ludo.
HOR. In facinus jurasse putes
OVID. O pulchra ista pars, quae actiones vitamque been format ac diriget.

TACIT.
FRIDAY, June 5. 1724.
IT has been remarked in the Course of these PAPERS, that among the Wise, there
are none more Foolish than the Witty: May it not with great Truth be said,
That, among the merely Witty, none are more ridiculed than the Wise? If a
Clergyman offers to speak, the Witlings foretell Dullness.

BUT the Case is quite otherwise with Persons of a serious Cast of Thought, who
know, that, as Truth is the only Mean, by which Divines can surely instruct, so
their Style must be peculiarly clear, which, without stopping at Brightness,
pursues Solidity. I am therefore fully satisfied, that, that Grave Class of my
Readers, whom I count doing me an Honor, when I see them clap on their
Spectacles to read my Works, as if they thought they could meet with
Improvement from them, after their own long Experience of the World, will be
pleased with the following Discourse, which the Clergyman made, the other Day,
upon that Virtue called Plain-Dealing.

WHEN we consider that every Body, said he, is continually recommending the
Subject of your Papers in common Conversation, one would think there was little
need for a Writer to employ his Time upon it: But when we reflect how few
practice it, no Subject requires more Pains to enforce it. People praise it
every Day, and violate it every Hour, and common Honesty, like common Sense, is
boldly pretended to by every Body, but really possessed by few.

IT must be worth a little of our Meditation to inform ourselves, how this
Quality comes to be so Valuable among us, and yet we so frequently and so
easily part with it; in short, by what Mystery in our Conduct such Numbers of
Men, would appear to be what they are not.

WE see upon the first Moment's Reflection, that PLAIN-DEALING is the Soul of
Friendship; it is the necessary Essence of it; and, when that is once gone, the
most warm and lively Intimacies can no longer subsist: They grow cold and dye
at once. Now Friendships, we all know, are the very Bonds of Society; again, we
as clearly comprehend, that what we call, a Good Understanding, among public
Bodies of Men, (which cannot be maintained but by Fair-Dealings) is the Prop
and Support of every Civilized Government. Since we are so soon and so
perfectly convinced, that Plain-Dealing carries along with it such Advantages,
it is no wonder, that we should desire to be reckoned the Possessors of so
valuable a Good. It is Natural for us to desire it; it is in this Sense scarce
a Virtue; for, morally speaking, it is what we cannot help desiring. Every
Mortal breathing has felt the first Principles of Honesty very strong in his
Heart; and even he that departed from it, knows his Struggle was very great. It
is the Quality he covets to find in every one with whom he converses, and he
secretly adores the Man in whom he happens to meet it.

ON the other hand, if Plain-Dealing had not all these attractive Charms, yet
there is something so ridiculous and unpopular in playing the Double upon
Mankind; there is such a Baseness in the doing of it, such an Impossibility of
doing it often without being discovered; such an irretrievable Ignominy, such a
quick and painful Remorse, that a Life of Dissimulation is full enough of
Horror to fright Men from it, if a Life of Honesty had not Charms to tempt, and
invite us.

SURE then it is a Riddle, that we are not like the People we Love, but the
People we Hate. The meanest Slave cannot bear to be called a Dissembler, and
yet the greatest Princes do not blush to dissemble. Qui nescit Dissimulare,
nescit Regnare, is grown their Political Motto. Statesmen originally meant the
same as Faithful Servants of a State; they are now adays called Politicians,
and Politican is little more than a new Name for Deceiver. Even Religious
Persons have entered into a Conspiracy against Plain-Dealing; Dissemblers, in
Holy Orders, have caused, In verbo Sacerdoti, to signify a Falsehood, and Nolo
Episcopare to stand for desiring earnestly what a Man pretends to decline.

UPON the whole it is nothing but Folly and Cowardice, that seduces Men first
out of the plain Road of Honor and Virtue, into the By-ways of Double-Dealing?
and, when once Cunning took the Place of Wisdom in Men's Minds, and Fear instead
of Resolution governed their Hearts; they at length brought Double-Dealing
(which was, at first, a Crime, by Accident) through a long and constant Habit, to
be no less than an Art and Profession.

SUCH a Duty as Plain-Dealing, cannot be too much known, and nothing is learnt,
more easily; but then in a Corrupt Age nothing is so easily lost: in a depraved
and impious Company, nothing is so readily parted from.

THE Clergy have a Right to diffuse among the People this Spirit of Honesty, by
Precept, and a more particular Duty, incumbent upon them, to enforce it by
Example. But too many among them have such a Taste for worldly Interest, as to
have lost the Relish of Primitive Religion; and while they profess themselves
Priests, appear ashamed, to be thought Christians.

AS there is nothing nobler than a good Priest; so there is nothing so shocking
and ridiculous, as to see a base Man of that Profession, which annexes Reverend
to his Name. A Layman, that does not reverence a good Pastor, is a Profligate:
But a wicked Man, in holy Orders, is a Monster. The Ancients, when they drew
the Pictures of Beauty and Ugliness, took Pieces from several Objects, the
better to complete their Design. In order to excite true Horror against wicked
Prelates I shall use the same Liberty, and draw from the wickedest, I have
heard of, a kind of Ecclesiastical Caligula, and suppose him to be a Bishop, to
give him the Fullness of his Deformity: I shall then give the Sketch of a
virtuous Ecclesiastic; but must remark, for the Honor of Priesthood, that the
ill Character is compounded of a great many Double-Dealers, and that the good
one, did really belong to one good Man.

UMBRA was always a great Pretender to Virtue and Piety, but never Possessor of
Common Honesty: He made Godliness his Gain, and never espoused the Interests of
Virtue, but with the View of pushing his own. Umbra canted inordinately; but
never once prayed heartily. In order to ingratiate himself with great Families,
he applied himself to learn a false kind of Oratory, and grew a famed
Panegyrist, and Composer of Funeral Sermons, in which he would salve up the
Vices of great Men, in favor of Deathbed Repentance; and demonstrate very
elaborately, how the Virtue of a Moment, could atone the Impiety of an Age. If
he dined at a Nobleman's Table, he said a scanty Grace to a full Meal, and
would just dip down his Head to the great Author, who multiplies Food for the
Use and Benefit of his Creatures; but, before he seated himself, would make a
profound Reverence to the Debauchee that entertained him. When he grew, by
these Means, acquainted with great Men, he turned Politician, and raised
himself up on the blind Side of one, by setting him at Variance with another:
He next became a State Preacher, and changed his Note as the Times changed, so
that there were many Sermons of his, direct Contradictions to each other. He
sold the Gospel by Retale, and lived long in Grandeur, by debasing
Christianity: he has sometimes taken Delight in abusing the very Priesthood,
and triumphed in a Bishopric, when he deserved to be excommunicated. Thus
vested, unhappily, with Prelatical Authority, he would ruin his honest
Inferiors, and if they sought Justice, terrify them by his Privilege. This
Double-Dealer, with a Mitre on his Head, lived prevaricating for many Years,
and then died as he lived, leaving such Falsehoods under his Hand on his
Deathbed, as if the Measure of his Days had been too short for his
Prevarication.

THERE was such a Person lately living as Cordatus, who had an honorable Post
in the Church. He belonged to a great Cathedral, and was really a Person of
Quality; joining the Gentleman with the Christian, he was both Religious and
Polite. He had this peculiar Felicity in his Temper, that, though he lived in
an Age of Faction, he judged many, of a different Opinion from himself, to be
honest and well-meaning Men, and, by treating them as such, won them over to
his Opinion. He never used his Authority but to quiet Animosities, to make or
renew Friendships, and to establish Peace, good Will, and Union. He was learned
and wise, and though he had an Impediment in his Speech, he preached clearly to
the Understanding. He never chose that Oratory, which tends more to nourish
Pride in the Speaker, than to instill Virtue into the Hearer. He knew it his
Duty to instruct the Ignorant, and therefore studied Perspicuity, in all that
he delivered from the Pulpit. He made Virtue the Study of one part of his Life,
and the other was taken up with the Labor of communicating what he had learnt,
for the Use and Instruction of others. He never concealed any thing that might
make other Men better; save one, and that was his Charity. All knew he
recommended what he acted, and finding the Preacher in earnest, the Hearers
were so too. Nothing among his Parishioners, was delivered over to Shame, but
Impiety. He lived thus for many Years a general Blessing, and his Death was a
Common Calamity. The Poor lost a Benefactor, the Rich a valuable Friend, and
every individual Man of his Acquaintance, an exemplary Companion.

I MUST, before I conclude, advise all Clergymen not to fix any Parts in the
Description of Umbra, upon any particular Persons they may not think well of;
because that will be showing, they have some of his Spirit: Let them rather
study to live like Cordatus, that they may die with his Character. What
signifies finding out who is meant by Umbra, or who is Cordatus? The profitable
Search will be to examine what Parts they have acted like Umbra, and amend
them; and, in what they have personated Cordatus, and improve them: If they do
otherwise, they will imitate the Dog in the Fable, and, by catching at the
Shadow, lose the Substance of my Dissertation.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 23.
Helleborum frustra, cum jam cutis Aegra Tumebit,
Poscentes videas. Venienti occurite morbo.
Et quid opus Cratero magnos promittere montes?
Disciteque O miseri, and causas cognoscite rerum.
PERS. Ad populum phaleras. Ego te intus and in cute novi.
Ibid. -- dicisque, facisque, quod, ipse,
Non sani esse hominis, non sanus juret Orestes.
Ibid.
MONDAY, June 8. 1724.
I PUBLISH the following LETTER, in Justice to some great Qualities, which were
latent, till now, in my good Friend, Mr. Jyngle: And which he held, it seems,
like the Flint; that never sparkles till it is struck upon.

Old Favorite!
HOW little did I think, when you professed yourself a PLAIN DEALER, that you
would, so soon, become a Tatler! Pray don't mistake this, for a Compliment: I
am not in so obliging a Humor, I assure you. I find, Men must be cautious,
when they keep communicative Company: For there are a kind of Talkative old
Gentlemen, who never know when to have done, with their Acquaintance; but will
carry a Man about with 'em, for half an Age after his Funeral: However to go,
at once, into my Matter.

I HAVE a very particular Regard for Sir Portly Rufus: Nor do his Commands want
their due Weight with me. But, as a certain Poet, somewhere expresses himself,
All Duties must to Self-Defence give Way;
For injured Honor cannot brook Delay.


LET the Ladies, therefore wait, for their Swan-skin Breeches. My Muse may,
perhaps, be at Leisure, against Winter: And none, but a hasty Prude or two, can
want 'em, this warm Weather. So, I shall have Time to stand justified, against
your false Accusation, That I study nothing, but Poetry. Tom Tiresome, a heavy
Blockhead! can talk of nothing but the Stocks! But Mr. Juniper is a Man of
Learning; let him speak of me, from his own Knowledge. Or I might appeal to
Will Weathercock, (against whom I often maintain Arguments) whether there is
any Truth in your Accusation? But, as another Poet says, upon some Occasion or
other, in some Place that I have forgot, In vain are Toothless Satires writ
Against him, who feels himself a Wit.


I shall scorn to owe my Vindication to any Hand but my own: And hope to
convince you, before I end this Letter, That I have more in me than Poetry.

PRAY, who taught you in the first Place to be Witty upon your Friends, before
you could Spell their Names right? All the Men of Erudition, who have been
numerous among the Jyngles, wrote themselves with an j Consonant: A soft and
shapely Letter! Which you have barbarously demolished; and built up, in the
Place of it, a broadback'd, Gothic G: A rough, and choking, Guttural! that is
scarce fit for any Thing, but to gargle a German's Throat with! Every Graduate,
(duce take this G!) Every Student, in Orthography, knows the manifest
Difference, between Jyngle and Gingle! what though Jilt sounds like Gentlewoman,
and Jackanapes like Ginger-bread! If our Language is a Double-Dealer, and for
want of settled Usage, and a limited Acceptance, gives Encouragement to idle
People to run Divisions on the Alphabet; that is nothing to me. All I mean by
it, is, to convince you, that I understand something, besides Poetry.

THIS, however, en passant only, for I am Master of better Sciences; such as
are new, even in Theory. But, not to triumph, too much, over the Mistake of a
Friend, (since it is a very common Error to think too meanly, of the Merit we
are familiar with) I will open upon this Occasion, but one Vein of my Skill;
and let it flow to your Shame, till it shall be stopped, by your Conviction.

I AM, you must know, then, a kind of immaterial Anatomist: I can dissect an
Imagination; or disembowel a Quality: I am about to make public Profession of
my Art: And having my Chariot as good as ready, the rest of my Apparatus will
be, comparatively, of no Consequence. I shall drive fast into Practice. But the
chief Scruple I labor under, is, by what Title to distinguish myself: I would
make use of the Word Doctor, but that the College of Physicians, who place much
Learning in Privilege, would have me ascend, by Degrees, to that Dignity: Which
is too phlegmatic a Prescription to agree with my Temper. I am, therefore,
inclinable, since very much of my Practice will lie among the Ladies, to call
myself a Mind-Midwife: Insinuating, by that Hint, That I can see 'em as safely
brought to Bed of their Affectation, and other spiritual Conceptions, as they
can be assisted, in their Matrimonal Pregnancies, by the bodily Brothers of my
Profession.

THE first Patient I propose to lay, is a pregnant Male Member of that learned
College I was mentioning. To be a Doctor's Doctor, is, to cure, in the best
Light possible: And I would emulate the Example of that memorable Magician,
Zyto, who was sent for, says a grave Historian, by the Emperor Charles the
IVth; to try his Skill, against a High German Conjurer; Zyto, who was a White
Wizard, and worth a Hundred of your Faustus's; stood, in Presence of the
Emperor, and, with inflexible Composure, observed the Instances of his Rival's
Art; who swallowed, at last, a burning Horse-shoe: And defied our Zyto, to do
it after him. But Zyto chose, rather (that he might end the Dispute, at a
Morsel) to swallow the Conjurer himself! And expanding his Mouth into horrible,
and inhuman, Wideness, snapt him up, like a Radish! But, when he came to his
dirty Shoes, and disdained to swallow farther, he ran with him, to a
Horse-pond, hard by; and launched him out into the middle of it; to the no
small Entertainment, and Satisfaction of the Company.

THE Name of my future Patient, is Sir Clouterly Rumble: a Professor, of the
Equestrian, as well as the Medicinal Order. He carries, on his Countenance, the
clearest Symptoms of his Grievance: Which is a Distemper, that some moral
Doctors have distinguished by the Name of Vanity. It operates, with most
Violence, on the Head, and the Heart; though it affects the Limbs also: And,
sometimes swells the whole Frame, into the most enormous Turgidity. It shakes
the Fingers of this afflicted Gentleman, with a yearly Convulsion of the
Nerves; during which Fits, it is dangerous to let Paper lie in his way: For he
applies himself, with the wildest Ecstasy to strike it over, at Random, with
odd Lines, crooked Ciphers, and Characters, wholly unintelligible! to the
pitiful Disquieting, and Perplexity, of his Brain: Which, becoming heated,
praeter-naturally, by such extravagant Agitation, inflames, and nourishes his
Malady.

IT was a laudable Accomplishment, that of calculating Distempers by examining
the Patient's Water! In Imitation of this good Custom, I poured out, before me,
a large Quantity of the sick Man's Prosaic, and Poetic Emissions; and upon
inspecting the Label, annexed to one of 'em which he addresses, poor Gentleman!
to an Illustrious young Prince in Germany, with as grave, and serious an Air,
as if it was really, something fit to be looked upon! I presently discovered
both the Distemper, and his proper Cure for it. The Tokens, as far as I can
remember, were Strongest, and most Evident, upon the following Eruption of
purulent Matter, from a Complication of Scrophulous Humors, which the Greeks
call (...). But the Name the Patient himself would have it go by, is ALFRED. It
is, in short, a most malignant, and virulent, Species, of the Epic, or
Narrative Cacoethes! See a Part of it!

THE Glory of a People depending on the Excellence of their King, he, who loves
his Country, cannot better promote its Happiness, than by teaching this King to
Govern it. I know, that your Highness is well enough Taught already: But
Examples being better than Precepts, especially, when presented in the Works of
Celebrated Authors; Men of copious Invention, and a fruitful Imagination: It
was for that Reason, Sir! That I wrote the following Poem! having had the
Honor to contribute more to the Succession of your Illustrious House, than
ever I boasted of; because I did it, for the Service of Religion, and the Glory
of my Country. NO Spots, in a Purple Fever, were ever thus Morbidly
Significant! If there were not, in the Nature of the Symptoms, something
opposite to Contagion, I should have judged Sir Clouterly's Distemper to be,
most Putridly Pestilential! -- The poor Man, in fine, is extremely far gone!
and would, certainly, have been irrecoverable, under any Hand but mine. --
There is but One Cure, for so exceeding foul a Stomach, and that must be, to
ply him with Emetics, till, to speak in a Physical Phrase, I have made him
Vomit his Heart up. -- I have a Pill, to Purge Vanity; a Specific! and a
Nostrum! which will do his Business, effectually; and it shall be the first, of
my Operations, as soon as my Horses are harnessed; -- for a Man would not
become noted, you know, till he is in a Readiness to be sent for. I am, in
Prose, you see, as well as in Poetry,

Your humble Servant, however, Tony Jyngle.


BY a very unlucky Accident, this Letter, before I received it, fell into the
Hands of Tom Tiresome; who has writ to me, about it, in very high Terms. And
what the Consequence of it may be, I know not.

Mr. Edward Plain-Dealer, Sir,
TAKING it for granted, that you know, and every body knows, as bad as the
World is, there is some Difference still it is to be hoped, between a Poet, and
a Haberdasher! I would have the conceited Mr. Antony Jyngle junior, to know,
that, as witty as he thinks himself; I am wittier than he, by every Penny I am
worth; for Sir Portly said, 'twas Pity that all his Money lay in his Brains:
And I say, that his Brains are addled: to go in that manner and write
Blockhead, about One that he has nothing to do with. -- No -- nor shall have
nothing to do with! for, if ever he talks Tragedy in my House again, I Will be
bound to say as one of my foolish Daughters does, that Mr. Jyngle is a pretty
Gentleman: Which if I think, or ever will think, in the Humor I am in, never
more give Credit to,

Your Friend, to serve you, Thomas Tiresome.


WHILE I was at a Loss how to account for the Cause of this great Misfortune,
the following, from Will Weathercock, unriddled the whole Mystery.

Dearest Sir,
HONEST Mr. Jyngle, our good, and agreeable Friend, put into my Hands,
Yesterday, a Copy of that comical Letter, which he sent you, about Sir
Clouterly Rumble, and I, being wonderfully pleased with the Fancy, must needs
be showing it to Alderman Blunder, who dined with us, at Sir Portly's. The
Alderman laughed immoderately, and was so taken with it, that all Dinner Time
he could talk of nothing, but Tony's Pills to Purge Vanity. But Tom Tiresome
unluckily, came down, in the Afternoon; and the first Thing the Alderman said,
was, Oh! Mr. Tiresome! Here Is the Pleasantest Letter! -- Nay, you must see it,
for 'twill make you laugh till you cackle again! -- It was in vain to endeavor
at diverting him, by other Subjects. The Letter was all his Cry! Mr. Tiresome
must see the Letter! In short, he did so; and the only Remark he made was, that
he found himself called Blockhead, in it. Well! you cannot imagine, how angry he
is about it! Pray, do your best to reconcile 'em; or we shall have sad Work, at
Sir Portly's. Shall I give you my Opinion, which is most in the wrong?
Certainly Mr. Jyngle, for why should one Man call another Names? -- Yet Mr.
Tiresome was most to Blame; because these Things are Common, among Friends.
But, be it as it will, I thought it absolutely necessary to write you Word of
it, and my own Opinion of the Difference: Who am,

Your most Faithful and Sincere Servant, William Weathercock.


I AM afraid, I must close in, with my Friend Will's Opinion, That they are
both in the Wrong. But what shall I do, with this unlucky Alderman Blunder? The
odd Creature has no harm in him; but he does more harm than a Stockjobber! He
has a plain and open Heart, but wants both Foresight and Reflection. He is
Mischievous, not Malicious: and errs on, without Ill Purpose, from a Natural
Clumsiness of Mind, and Healthy Coarseness in his Understanding. He overturns
Things, without feeling 'em, like the Elephant of Africa; that, walking gravely
in the Night, among the Villages, of the Negroes, does not disturb himself in
the least, about the Houses, that stand in his Way; but, keeping straight
forwards, oversets 'em, says a Dutch Author, without intending it, as if they
were so many Nut-shells.

WHEN I took him with me, the first time, to drink Tea, at Patty Amble's, after
she had prattled and trifled him into an Ecstasy at her Wit, and Beauty; he
turned from her, in a Start of Rapture, and said, to me, aloud, How could you
be so Mistaken, as to tell me, she was not Handsome? I shall never forget the
extraordinary Look, she obliged me with, upon this fine Question! I gloss'd it
over as well as I could, by telling Blunder, That he misrepresented my Words,
which were not, That she was not Handsome -- But That she was more Witty than
Handsome. He had found out, by this Time, that he had done a ridiculous Action,
and looked as like an Ass, as any reasonable Man could have desired him; but he
repented, as most Men do, when it was too late, and to no Purpose: And I verily
believe, I am doomed to great Afflictions, (if my Passion should continue) for
that dull Start of Mr. Alderman Blunder's.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 24.
-- Micat, inter omnes,
Julium sidus, velut, inter ignes
Luna, Minores.
Gentis humanae pater atque custos,
Orte Saturno, tibi cura Magni
Caesaris fatis data: tu, secundo Caesare, Regnes.

FRIDAY, June 12. 1724.
SIR,
HAVING observed, That my Extract of the CZAR of RUSSIA's Letter to his SON,
which you published in your 20th Paper, gave a very great Surprise to the
Generality of your Readers, who had formed, upon common Rumor, an Opinion of
that Prince's Death, extremely different from the Truth; I now send you as
brief an Abstract as possible, from a Relation, which was published in High
Dutch, by the Minister of a German Court, not likely to be partial in Favor of
the Czar, and who was present, and an Eyewitness of the Facts, which he
publishes.

THE Czar had long inclined to ally himself with some powerful Family of
Germany, by the Marriage of his Son; whom he hoped to reclaim from his
Indolence, by the Conversation of a Princess of high Extraction, and a noble
Education: For this Prince had, by a continual associating himself with the
vilest Company, contracted such corrupt Habits, as could not fail of producing
an Aversion to him, in all honest Minds. He was so far sunk in Sensuality, that
no Representations, no Pains, could recover him: So that the Czar, being, at
length, by his Son's perverse Conduct, almost brought to an Abhorrence of his
Person, began to drop Intimations, That he would cause him to be shaved for a
Monk, and shut him up in a Convent. -- The Prince's own Favorites were alarmed
at the Danger; and earnestly entreated him to have his Welfare at Heart; and to
conceal, if he could not suppress, his rigorous Hatred against Foreigners. This
disposed him to fall in with the Czar's Proposition, and he was married, as is
well known, to a Princess, of the Family of Brunswick Wolfenbuttel, and Sister
to the present Empress.

BUT, after he had brought her to Russia, he showed not the least Complaisance;
nor endeavored, at all, to divert her. -- On the contrary, I observed, That,
on all Public Occasions, he never exchanged a Word with her; but,
industriously shunned her Company. The Prince had the Apartments of the right
Wing; and the Princess those of the Left: But they saw each other scarce once a
Week; and, had not the Prince considered the begetting an Heir, as the Support
of his own Safety, he would have made himself entirely invisible to her. He
even neglected the Repair of the House, to that Degree, that the Princess lay
exposed to the Injuries of the Air, and Weather, in her own Bedchamber.

WHEN the Czar expostulated with him, concerning these Proceedings, he loaded
her with Reproaches, as if it was she, who had accused him; whereas, that wise
Princess submitted to her hard Fate, with the firmest Constancy and
Resignation; nor had any other Witnesses of her Tears, but the Princess of
East-Freisland, her Companion, and the Walls of her own Apartment. She lived,
four Years, in this Manner, and was then seized with an Indisposition, so
dangerous, that her Recovery was immediately despaired of.

WHEN she perceived her End approaching, she desired to see the Czar, who was,
at the same Time, indisposed: But he caused himself to be carried to her, in a
Machine, moved on Wheels. -- The Princess took her Leave of him, in the most
moving Expressions; and recommended her two Children to his Care and
Protection; embracing them, in the most tender manner possible; and almost
melting away in Tears. Then, she sent for her Servants, who, to the Number of
two hundred Persons, and upwards, lay prostrate, in the Antichamber, imploring
Heaven to assist their dying Mistress, in her last Agonies. -- She comforted,
admonished, and gave them her Blessing: -- The Physicians would still be
pressing her, to take some Medicines; but she threw the Glasses from her,
crying out, with great Emotion, -- Do not torture me any more. -- Permit me to
die in quiet. -- For I am resolved to live no longer. -- She expired, in
fervent Prayer, and departed an unfortunate Life, before she was quite one and
twenty Years old.

IT was soon after the Funeral of this Princess, that the Czar gave that
admirable Letter, which you published in a late PAPER, into the Hands of his
Son. And, what follows, is the unequal Answer, which he had the Mortification
to receive from him.

The Answer of Prince ALEXEI, of RUSSIA, to the Letter of the CZAR, his Father.
Most Clement Lord, and Father,
I HAVE read your Majesty's PAPER, and have nothing to reply to it; but, that,
if your Majesty will deprive me of the Succession to the Crown of Russia, by
Reason of my Incapacity, Your Will be done. I do not think myself fit for the
Government: The Rule of so many Nations, requires a more vigorous Man than I
am. -- I will not pretend to the Succession, for the future, of which I take
God to Witness; and swear it, upon my Soul, desiring nothing more than bare
Maintenance, during Life.

Your most humble Servant, And Son, ALEXEI.


MANY further Attempts the Czar made, on his Son's Obstinacy: But the
Consequence of them all; and of his pretended Resignation, was his Flight to a
Foreign Protection, and a plunging himself into those High Crimes which are
particularized, in his Sentence.

THE Czar, upon this extraordinary and melancholy Occasion, convok'd a High
Court of Justice; consisting of all the Chief of the States. -- He lay, for
eight Days, successively, many Hours, on his Knees; imploring God, with Tears,
to inspire him with Sentiments, becoming his double Duty -- as a Monarch, and
as a Father. -- The Prince was brought into Court, under Guard of four
Officers; and proceeded against, in a Manner too tedious, and circumstantial,
to be particularized in so short a Compass.

THE Court, upon the whole, having pronounced a formal Sentence, and condemned
the Prince to Death, the violent Surprise and Terror of his Mind, and the
disorderly Conflict and Fluctuation of his Passions, threw him into an
Apoplectick Fit. The Czar no sooner heard, that he was in this Danger, and that
he was desirous to see him, but he visited his dying Son, with the most visible
Marks of Pity, and a Proof of Paternal Tenderness.

THE Prince, at Sight of his Father, burst out into Tears; and, with Hands,
raised, and folded, said, 'He had grievously offended the Majesty of Almighty
God, and the Goodness of the Czar --; that he had not even a Wish, to recover
from his Indisposition, being unworthy to live longer. He begged his Majesty,
for God's sake, only to take from him the Curse, he had laid on him, at Moskow:
to forgive him all his heavy Crimes; to impart him his Blessing; and, to cause
Prayers to be put up for his Soul.

DURING these moving Words, the Czar, and the whole Court, almost melted away,
in Tears. -- His Majesty returned him a most noble, and pathetic, Answer: He
represented, in a few, of the mildest Words, he could select, all his Length of
Offenses; and then, gave him, in the most touching Manner possible, his
Forgiveness, and his Blessing: After which, they parted, with abundance of
Tears, and Lamentations, on both Sides.

VERY late, in the Night, came a Messenger to acquaint the Czar, that the
Prince was extremely desirous, once more, to see his Father. And his Majesty
had just stepped into his Sloop, to go over to the Fortress, when another
Messenger brought News, that the Prince was already expired. -- He was
deposited in the new Burying-Vault, of the Czarish Family; and placed next the
Coffin of his late Consort. -- The Czar, among the Mourners, carried a lighted
Wax-Taper, in his Hand; and was observed to be bathed in Tears, during the
Procession; and, in particular, at the Church Service; where the Priest had
chose, for the Text of his Funeral Sermon, these Words of the mournful David,
-- O! my Son Absalom! -- my Son! -- my Son, Absalom!

YOU see, Sir! how different this Great Monarch's Conduct, in so nice, and
trying, a Circumstance, really was, from the Clouds, which Rumor blew upon it,
to shade, and blacken, an unequaled Character! -- The Roman Fierceness has been
celebrated, in Men, who not only condemned their Sons; but stood by, and saw
'em executed, in the most severe, and shameful Manner, for the Love and Safety
of their Country. Yet there was a Brutal Inflexibility, and a kind of Politic
Necessity, in the Actions of those Roman Fathers! But this prodigious, modern,
Prince, under no Influence of Fear, Dependence, or Obligation, chose, to set
aside his own Blood, for the future Glory of his People! Only, with this fine
Difference from the Roman, that, what was, there, done, with a Stoicism, that
gave Suspicion of Insensibility, was, here, adorned with Pity, and the most
manifest Strugglings of an amiable Weakness, that convinced his Subjects how
Dear their Prosperity must be, to a Sovereign, who could thus provide for it,
by a Sacrifice, against his Nature, even of his private, and domestic, Comfort!

HAVING shown, in the foregoing Instances, the afflicted Side of the Czar's
Behavior: It is but just, that I should change the Light, and surprise you, by
a View of that unshaken Firmness, with which he regarded the Danger of the
Conspiracy; while the Reflection, Who was the Author of it! gave him so moving
a Misery!

UPON the Examination, and Confessions, of that infinite Number of
Confederates, who were engaged in the Prince's Projects, it appeared, that the
Defection was so wide, and so general, that many of his nearest, and most
trusted Servants, were embarked in it; and such also, in whose Hands lay great
Part of his Wealth and Power; so that he was congratulated in Form, by the
Ambassadors of Foreign Princes, upon his Discovery, and Prevention, of so
endangering a Combination. To which, he gave this noble Answer -- Dangers
always are strong, if they are weakly resisted: -- Where a Fire meets with
Straw, it soon spreads, and burns through it. -- But, if Iron lies in its Way,
it falls back, and is extinguished!


THE PLAIN DEALER. No 25.
-- Uterne^
Ad Casus dubios fidet sibi certius; hic qui
Pluribus assuerit mentem, corpusque superbum:
An qui contentus parvo, metuensque futuri,
In pace, ut sapiens, ap erit idonea bello?
HOR.
MONDAY, June 15. 1724.
WITH the Leave of the Grammarians, I shall venture to put one of their Moods a
little upon the Rack; while I affirm, in a kind of Riddle, for the Use and
Pleasure of my Reader -- That, though every Body may be Happy, yet scarce any
Body can be so.

THERE is no Definite Point, that we can fix at, when we would describe what
Happiness is; yet the Road, to this great Journey's End is very Short, and
Obvious. One would wonder therefore, how it comes to be so universally
mistaken, if it were not easily observed, that most Men are under an Error,
even as to the very Placing it. -- Happiness is seated, not in Power, but in
Will. -- Though very few can be Fortunate, yet all Men may be Satisfied: And
they, who lessen their Desires, have, in one great Point, the Advantage, over
those who enlarge their Prosperity; for, allowing both to be equally Happy, yet
the First, at least, are Happy, with less Danger, and Encumbrance.

WHOEVER can be so wise, as to content himself with his present Lot, while he,
patiently, hopes a better, will escape the common Fate, of tasting, with
Disrelish, what he finds within his Reach, from a restless and devouring Thirst
after what is Future, and Uncertain -- Life slides from the Impatient, like the
Motion of a murmuring Brook; where the Current wastes much faster, than if the
Surface had been smooth, and silent. -- When we are upon the Brink of the
Grave, we start, -- and wonder at our Situation! And, then, first, begin to
look back, with Shame, and Sorrow, at the too Little we have Done, in Life; and
the too Much, we have wished, in it.

Oh, greatly blessed! who can, as Fate requires,
By ductile Wisdom, temper your Desires!
Balanced, within, you look abroad, serene:
And, marking both Extremes, pass, clear, between.
Oh! could your loved Example teach your Skill,
And, as it moves my Wonder, mend my Will:
Calm would my Passions grow; my Lot might please:
And my sick Soul should think itself, to Ease.
But, to the Future, while I strain my Eye,
Each present Good slips, undistinguished, by.
Still, what I would, contends with what I can;
And my wild Wishes leap the Bounds of Man.
SO complained a Friend of mine, to a Gentleman, wiser than himself, by as much
as his Desires were more moderate. -- It was in a Poem, which he called his
Choice: But his Mind was so discomposed, by a Tempest of ungoverned Wishes,
that he scarce knew what to choose, even when his Choice was the Subject chosen!

If in my Power it lies, to limit Hope,
And my unchain'd Desires can fix a Scope:
This were my Choice -- Oh, Friend! pronounce me poor:
For I have Wants, which Wealth can never cure!
Mean is that Soul, whom its own Good can fill:
A prosperous World, alone, could feast my Will.
He Is poor, at best, who Other's Misery sees,
And wants the wished for Power to give it Ease.
He Is rich, who, sole-supreme, and unconfined,
Can, with unbounded Influence, bless Mankind.
A Glory this! unreach'd, but on a Throne!
All were Enough. -- But less, than All, is None.
This my first Wish. -- But, since 'twere wild and vain
To grasp at glittering Clouds, with fruitless Pain,
More safely low, let my next Prospect be;
And Life's mild Evening this fair Sunset see.
Far from a Lord's loathed Neighborhood, -- a State,
Whose Little Greatness is a Pride I hate!
On some lone Wild, should my strong House be placed;
Surrounded by a vast, and healthy, Waste.
Steril, and coarse, the untried Soil should be:
But forced to flourish; and subdued by me.
Seas, Woods, Meads, Mountains, Gardens, Streams and Skies,
Should, with a changeful Grandeur, charm my Eyes.
Still, where I moved, new Marks of my past Pains,
Should plume the Mountain Tops, and paint the Plains,
Greatly Obscure, and shunning Courts, or Name,
Widely befriended, but escaping Fame:
Peaceful in studious Quiet, would I live;
Lie hid, for Leisure; and grow Rich, to give.
I AM sure, I wish no Ill to the Author of the Manuscript, from which I took
these Verses; because, to say Truth, he is the most Intimate of all my
Acquaintance; -- yet, I foresee an inexhaustible Provision of Disappointments
in Store, for a Mind, that is so unstable, as to afflict itself with other's
Sorrows, when there are Domestic ones, more than enough, in the happiest Man's
Condition, to interweave, and make Checquer-work of, the richest Robes of
Fortune.

I REMEMBER a pleasant Fancy, in Plutarch's Feast of the Seven Wise Men,
concerning the Limits we should set to our Desires. -- 'If a Person, (says the
Speaker) is a Man of Wisdom and Gravity, he wants no Rule but his Reason, to
prescribe him a proper Measure: But, if a Fool were to ask me the Question, I
would tell him this Story. -- The Moon, upon a Time, was very earnest with her
Mother, that she would make her a new Petticoat, that might sit handsomely
about her; and be neither too short, nor too long, for her Body: -- But how is
that possible, answered the Mother, with some Emotion, when thou art always
changing Shapes, and never contented with thy own Figure?

THERE is a restless and universal, Circulation of Discontent, in all Degrees,
and Conditions; -- The Rich Man is miscrable, because he has no Heirs; and
wishes himself but so blessed, as the poor Labourer; who cries out, while he
trims his Hedges, that he could be happy and live comfortably, if he had no
Children, to provide for! -- The Citizen sighs, with Envy, at the Smell of a
new Hay-cock; and longs to wind himself out of Business, that he may enjoy Life
in the Country! -- The Country Gentleman finds his Time the most heavy, of all
his Cares; and dreams, for ever, of the Delights, which he could pass it in, at
London! -- The great Man complains, that he is wretched, from too much Notice;
and the good Man is really so, from too little. -- Command is full of Cares;
and Dependence pinched with Miseries! Every Body repines at some Deficiency in
his own Fortune, and has something to wish for, from another, who is still less
satisfied!

DISTANT Prospects are most pleasing; but they seldom fail to deceive us. The
rough Lines, and Ruggednesses, which look smooth, a great Way off, perplex, and
entangle, us, when we find ourselves among them. -- I have often been
entertained, by an ingenious Italian Emblem, where, to satirize the Levity of
this insatiate Disposition, Boys are painted very busy, running about, with
erected Faces, to pursue, and catch at Bubbles; which are blown down, among
them, by a Monkey, with a long Pipe, and a Basin. -- The Boys, who are supposed
to have grasped some, look amazed, and disappointed, that they are vanished, in
the catching! And the Motto, underwritten, is -- He, who reaches me, loses me.

PERHAPS, it might deserve to be remembered, as a Maxim, That nothing ought to
afflict us, which it is absolutely out of our Power to remedy. -- If it were as
easy to regulate our Lives, by this Rule, as it is reasonable to approve it,
much the largest Part of our Calamities would, at once, be cut off, and
effectually prevented, for the future. -- It is certainly an Ambition, not only
just, but noble, to pursue the honest Calls, either of Fortune, or of Glory:
But, if we could pursue 'em, with such Patience, and Moderation of Desire, as
not to lose, in the Interim, all Relish of our present Condition; not to place
our only Happiness, in attempting to become more happy; but content ourselves
with what we are, from the Prospect of what we hope to be: -- All the
Bitterness of Adversity would lose its Taste, in our Use of it; and Prosperity
become less envied, than Peace of Mind and Tranquillity.

BUT this, however possible to Nature, is impossible to Pride and Custom --
Things, indifferent, in themselves, become hateful, or amiable, from their
Consequences. -- The Reputation, that follows Wealth, gives the sharpest Pain
to Poverty: And a Man who is brave enough to provoke Danger, and Death, shall
want Courage to bear Contempt, though but an imaginary Evil!

HATEMTAI, says the Arabian History, was the most bountiful, of all Mankind;
and was flattered, by a Train of Followers, with continual Flights of Praise,
and Congratulations of his Good Fortune. -- They were asking him one Day,
'Whether, ever, he had seen, or heard of, any Man, who had so noble a Soul, as
Hatemtai? -- He smiled, and returned this Answer: -- I walked out into the
Fields, on a certain Time, when, at a Sacrifice of a Hundred Camels, my House
was filled, by my Order, with all the Poor, and the Miserable, who could be
found, in the Space of many Miles round my Dwelling. -- Some of the Lords in my
Company, discerned, at a little Distance, a Man, who was very busy, in
gathering up a Bundle of dry Thorns, to sell, at the next Village. We went to
him and asked, why he was not among the Number of his Fellows, who were
feasting at the House of Hatemtai? -- Because, answered he, a Man, who can
provide himself with Bread, by his own Labor, needs not be obliged to
Hatemtai. -- This Man, said he, had a Nobler Soul, than Hatemtai.

I WALKED, lately, into the City, toward the Close of the Day, and observing a
Church open, went in, to Evening Prayers. I sat near a Lady, whose fine Face,
methought, appeared like the Seat of a long War, between Beauty, and
Affliction. She saw, that I had no Prayer Book, and modestly offered me her
own. I kept it, during the Service, and took Pleasure to charge my Memory with
the Eight following Lines, which were written, in a Woman's Hand, on a white
Leaf, at the Beginning; and were, I believe, of her own composing.

Here, tracing Duty's Path, redeemed from Care,
I heal my Sorrow, with the Balm of Prayer:
Patience, that arms the Mind for every State,
Has taught me, not to feel Affliction's Weight.
They, who can, bravely, bear the Woes of Life,
Steer, safe and steady, through a Sea of Strife.
While they, who pine their Hope, to feed their Grief,
Embosom Anguish; and resist Relief.
THIS was a fine, and useful Lesson; and not improperly placed. But it was pity
that she learnt is not soon enough to protect her against those Passions, which
had left their Traces too visibly on her Eyes, her Air, and her Complexion.

THE World, upon the whole, may be divided into two Classes; -- The one seldom
Find, what they are, always, painfully Seeking: The other Find it, easily, but
are never the more Contented. -- Among many Remarkable Proverbs, which are
proper to the Eastern People, they have one to our present Purpose. -- ' There
are only two Things which can fill the Covetous Man's Eye; -- Discretion: -- Or
the Earth that his Corpse must be covered with.

AFTER all that can be said of Riches; or, that is the Consequence of their
Possession: -- Content is the surest Comfort. -- It is Luxury, that creates
Poverty; and they are Rich, who desire Nothing.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 26.
Si quis nunc quaerat, quo res haec pertinet; illuc:
Dum vitant stulti vitia, in contraria currunt.
HOR.
FRIDAY, June 19. 1724.
THE Number of my Correspondents increasing, very fast, I must resolve to
disengage my self from some of their Obligations: As many of their Letters,
therefore as I can make room for, to Day, shall compose my Reader's
Entertainment.

Oh! SIR,
WOULD to Heaven, when you were so severe upon Masquerades, you had warned us,
against Opera! you had saved an undone Woman! and one, who, for ought I see, is
still likely to be undone; for, thinking no Harm, where, I had heard, there was
no Danger, I am fallen desperately in Love, with Signior --, the Italian, What
do you call it? -- One of those People with an ill-favored Name, like the ugly
Folks, in the Bible, that waited on King Ahasuerus. -- I thought, I could have
sworn, I had been Proof against Man: But, alas! -- He is not Man! -- He is a
Being more refined: and I am wretched, without Remedy! -- I have heard some
People report Things, to his Prejudice; but I dare swear it was all Envy. --
The Men, to be sure, could never endure him, because the Women were so pleased
with him; and besides, he sings so much finerthan they can. -- But, do you
think, Mr. Plain-Dealer, that a Man, that sings finely, may not be a good Man,
for all his Singing? -- I would fain know what they mean, by laughing, when I
mention the Value I have for him; and saying, with a waggish Look, that no Lion
will eat a Lion? -- However heartily I love him, I did not tell 'em, I would
eat him. -- But I suppose they mean something, that, I fancy, is not true. No
Body, I am sure, would think it, who has seen how he makes Love in the Opera's.
-- I know where I can sit by him, every Day; but I don't know what to say to
him; for I cannot speak one Word of Italian, but only Bravo! -- Pray, if you
know what one should do in this Case, oblige with your Advice,

Your Disconsolate Admirer, FIDELIA.


PERHAPS, this Lady's Case is not so bad as she thinks it. -- Let her only find
out what it is, she would do with him; and, for what she has to say to him, she
may take a Hint, from the following Verses. -- They were written, in Italian,
by Milton, when he was at Florence, in his Youth; and fell in Love, as Fidelia
has done, with a Person, whose Language he understood but little of. -- They
were addressed to his Italian Mistress.

I.
When, in your Language, I, unskilled, address
The short-pac'd Efforts of a trammell'd Muse;
Soft Italy's fair Critics round me press,
And my mistaking Passion, thus, accuse.
II.
Why, to our Tongue's Disgrace, does thy dumb Love
Strive, in rough Sound soft Meanings to impart?
He must select his Words, who speaks, to move;
And points his Purpose at the Hearer's Heart.
III.
Then, laughing, they repeat my languid Lays --
-- Nymphs, of thy Native Clime, perhaps, -- they cry,
For whom thou have a Tongue, -- may feel thy Praise:
But we must understand, ever we comply!
IV.
Do thou, -- my Soul's soft Hope! these Triflers awe;
Tell 'em, it is nothing, how, or what, I writ:
Since Love, from silent Looks, can Language draw,
And scorns the lame Impertinence of Wit.
Dear SIR,
I AM an honest Man, and keep a Coffee-House; and pay Twopence apiece for your
Plain-Dealers. My Customers are so pleased with them, that I take it for
granted, they are worth the Money: But what I think I have just Cause to
complain of, is, that, when a Gentleman calls for a Dish of Coffee, and the
Plain Dealer, if he finds any thing in the Paper, that he is mightily taken
with, he makes no Scruple of convincing me, that he is as taking, as the Paper;
-- that is to say, he puts it up, and carries it away with him, to divert his
Club, or his Mistress. -- So, he has Twopence in Wit; and Twopence, in
Liquor: Yet, pays me only for the Liquor! -- as if Wit were worth Nothing! -- I
am served thus, so often, that, though your Papers come out, but twice a Week,
I take 'em in, twice a Day; as my Account-Book can make appear, by very woeful
Experience. -- Now, what I want you to say, to these light-finger'd Purchasers,
is, that a Man, who has no Hair, may as well lay Claim to my Periwig, as a Man,
who has no Wit, pocket up that, which I have paid for. -- Pray, a Word or two
to this Purpose, for the sake of

Yours, to Command, D. B.


Epsom, May the 19th, 1724. Mr. Plain-Dealer,
I AM a sort of silly Coquet; but not so happy a one, as the envied Patty
Amble. -- I am sensible of my Faults; but, since that is not enough, unless I
also confess them, pray put me into a Plain-Dealer, that the Party, I mean, may
take Notice, how I think of him.

I discharged some random Shot, among the Wild-Fowl, at our last Horse-Races;
but the only two I wounded, were a Buzzard, of the Foot Guards; and a
Canary-Bird, called a Templer. -- The Templer was a Wit; and, I speak it, with
a Sigh, -- a charming one! -- He was vain, conscious, cheerful, and as false,
as my own Smiles were. -- My Foot Officer was serious, honest, friendly: but I
thought, he was too Dull. -- I received both their Addresses, but not with
equal Sensibility: The Soldier, I slighted, but the Wit became Triumphant. --
Now, first, my Heart felt Warmth enough, to beat with real Passion; and had
just impressed the Image of this gay, this loved, Deceiver; when News was
brought, one Morning, that he had bid farewell to Epsom, without taking Leave of
me, to follow a Flirt of a Fortune, that was hoyden'd away, to London. -- But,
what gave me a double Sense, as well of my Error, as my Shame, was, that, the
Evening before this happened, my honest Lover, the Soldier, had slid into my
Hand the following Prophetic SONG; which I bosomed up for a Billet.

I.
Be wary, my Celia, when Celadon sues,
These Wits are the Bane of your Charms:
Beauty, played against Reason, will certainly lose;
Warring, naked, with Robbers, in Arms.
II.
Young Damon, despised, for his Plainness of Parts,
Has Worth, that a Woman should prize:
He Will run the Race out, though he heavily starts,
And distance the short-winded Wise.
III.
Your Fool is a Saint, in the Temple of Love,
And kneels all his Life, there, to pray:
Your Wit but looks, in, and makes haste to remove:
It Is a Stage, be but takes, in his Way.
NOW, Sir, what I have found out, too late, is, -- That my serious Lover, whom,
I was silly enough to think Dull, was the greatest Wit, of the two. -- I would
tell him so, now I have lost the other, but that I am afraid, he will laugh at
me.

BUT I hope, you will contrive it, so, that he may read it, in the Plain-Dealer.
-- Pray, put it in, for you cannot guess the Disorder of,

Your nettled, humble Servant, COQUETILLA.


SIR,
I AM a most Catonick Adherer to the Old, English, Simplicity; the Virtue, the
Bluntness, and the Liberty, which were the Ornaments of our Ancestors. -- I
have taken some Pains to prove, that we Britons, should not only be left Free;
but, that we ought to be left Rough, too. -- I am not able, therefore, to
resist the Indignation, that rises in me, at the too visible Increase, in the
Number of our Courtiers. -- It is natural for our Gentry, to love to shine, in
that gay Light: But, why should Tradesmen be corrupted by the Taste of undue
Dignity? -- I cannot walk the Streets, but I see fresh Instances, in every
Corner, of the spreading Power of Preferment. The Court Verge, of old, reached,
I think, but to Charing Cross. -- Of late, it is ek'd out, to White-Chapel, and
Norton-Folgate. Nay, I have been credibly informed, that there are Courtiers of
great Eminence, in and about Hockley in the Hole!

I SHOULD not be so averse to this Increase of the Royal Retinue, if his
Majesty's Ease, or Interest, were, proportionably, enlarged by it. -- Thus, it
is neither Useless, nor Uncomely, for a Prince to have his Cow-House: But there
is another Court Establishment, which little can be said in support of, and
that is, the King's Ass-House. -- His Honor, of this Office, holds his
Residence, in the Road to Hide-Park-Corner: It being Decent, he says, that his
Dwelling should be near his Duty; and where he may be under the Eye of his
Fellow Statesmen. -- I was the other Day at an odd Christ'ning, in one of the
Horns of this huge City, where, a newly preferred Court Lady was complaining,
to her Sister Gossips, How unavoidable it is, in Divided Times, for those, who
are distinguished by Court Favors, to have the Disaffected for their Enemies.
-- I whispered a grave Gentlewoman, to know, what Post that great Lady held?
And was answered, with becoming Seriousness, that she was married to the King's
Mustard-maker.

HIS Majesty's Oculist, in Extraordinary, lately departing this Life, I am
glad, it has been resolved, to abolish that High Station: Nothing being more
dangerous to the Peace of a Body Politic, than to multiply Officers, without
Office. -- Yet, there are not wanting imprudent People, who have Hopes of
instituting a Royal Mantua-maker, in Place of the defunct Oculist. -- Now, it
is quite a different Case, where Commissions are really useful: No good
Subject, for Example, can think much of the King's Pudding-maker, and a great
deal might be said, in Honor of the King's Punch-house. -- The Royal
Chimney-sweeper is a Minister, not of Rank only, but Necessity: and something
like it may be offered, in Behalf of His Majesty's Butter-Woman. -- But I would
be glad to be informed, what serious Pretense can be urged, by any Man, who
makes a Conscience of his Arguments, in Defense of the Royal Ginshop? -- Or,
who can assert the Benefit, or, indeed, the Propriety, of the King's Royal
Riding-hood Woman? Or, His Majesty's sworn Staymaker?

TO speak with the good old Bluntness of a Briton, these are some of the
luxuriant Excrescences of Monarchy; and would, in the watchful Times of our
Forefathers, have been pared away, for the Public Benefit. And I will take it
upon me to averr, that, unless some seasonable Restraint be soon put upon this
growing Evil, the Courtiers will set up Shops in the very Heart of the City;
where, if, among their other Customs, they should introduce their way of
Paying, -- Trade will die of the Inoculation, and leave Credit its Executor. --
I am,

Your Friend, and my Country's Servant, DUKE HUMPHREY.


Dear SIR,
I AM a Woman, who, by the Help of a little Reading, am, so far at least, more
learned, than the Generality of my Sex, that a Hard Word does not fright me.
But my Husband is a Person, of great Goodness, and little Knowledge. He has a
small Estate, in Essex, and is only, what they call a Sportsman. -- We came to
Town, last Week; where my poor Dear drank hard, and fell so ill, that I was
alarmed for him. -- The Lady, whose House we lodged at, would needs send for
Doctor Fossile, who is, I find upon Enquiry, a Man of excellent Learning; but,
to borrow a Phrase of Shakespeare's, it is sicklied over, with Affectation. --
When he had felt my Husband's Pulse, and gone through his Course of Questions,
he turned, from whispering Mr. Juniper, who was in waiting, at his Elbow; and
said to me, with a physical Air, not the Air of a Physician, -- Maam! -- I have
ordered Mr. What Is his Name here, your Spouse's Apothecary, to Phlebotomize
him, to Morrow Morning. -- To do what to me? cried my poor Husband, starting
up, in his Bed -- I will never consent to suffer it -- No, -- I am not, I thank
God, in so desperate a Condition, as to undergo such a damnable Operation as
that is. -- As what is? my Dear, -- answered I, half smileing, -- The Doctor
would only have you blooded. -- Ay, -- for bleeding, replied he, I like it well
enough. -- But, for that other Thing he ordered, I will sooner die, than submit
to it.

NOW, Good Sir! -- cannot such a useful Mass of Learning, as distinguishes
Doctor Fossile, render him capable of discerning, and correcting, this odd
Weakness? -- It exposes him to the Ridicule of malicious Persons, who, hating a
Merit, they despair of ever equalling, are glad to depreciate his Character, by
making the Worst of his Particularity. -- Since Ars est celare Artem, the
Doctor would be thought more learned, if he less endeavored to display his
Learning. I know, I have made a forced Application of my little Latin Sentence;
yet, it will do, well enough, too, in the Sense that I have given it. -- I am,

Good Mr. Plain Dealer, Your Constant Reader, and Servant, LAETITIA LOVELIGHT.


THE PLAIN DEALER. No 27.
Audire atque togam jubeo componere, quisquis
Ambitione mala, aut argenti pallet amore,
Quisquis luxuria, tristive superstitione,
Aut alio mentis morbo calet.
HOR.
MONDAY, June 22. 1724.
THE Writer of the Rehearsal, puts into the Mouth of Mr. Bays, with regard to
the Good to be extracted from Books, by the most indifferent Hands, a Truth,
that might have been spoken by a Person, whose Air of Gravity, was not (like
that of Mr. Bays,) intended to make him Ridiculous.

HOW far was I from thinking Mr. Jyngle the most Eligible Companion in the
World, when I met him at Sir Portly's? And yet this very Mr. Jyngle, (for I
will take heed how I anger so touchy a Philologist, by mis-spelling his Name
any more, with a broad-back'd Gothic G, as he calls it) no sooner became my
Correspondent, but he proved himself a Man of more than ordinary Parts, and one
whose Talents are new and uncommon. I may liken him to some curious Engine, of
great Use to me in my Writing-Capacity; and very necessary in the Machinery of
some Inventions which I shall make known in the Course of these PAPERS, for the
Benefit of those, who have contracted an ill Habit of Humor, and are sickly in
their Understanding.

I EXPRESS myself, with much Seriousness, when I declare, as I here do, that I
know not one Science, so Advantageous in Theory, as Mr. Jyngle's New System of
Mind Midwifery. If this lucky Gentleman can but make it answer in Practice,
according to the vast Idea's I conceive of its Excellence and Use, he will be
as much superior to Hippocrates as the Soul is to the Body. Now, Hippocrates,
as Sir Clouterly Rumble, in one of his Physical Treatises, informs us, was
complimented with Divine Honors, just as his Predecessor Aesculapius had been
erected to the Dignity of a Demi-God, from so low a setting out, as that of a
Tooth-drawer. As mean a Conception, therefore, as I, or any of my Readers,
might have, too hastily, entertained of Mr. Jyngle, as a mere Repeater of his
own Rhimes, there is now ample Room for forming great Idea's of his Abilities,
and of the Preferment, he may come to, since he is, the Inventor, and will, in
all Probability, be the Perfecter of this more noble Art of Healing. And if, in
the very Infancy of his Science, he makes a thorough Cure of his desperate
Patient Sir Clouterly; I do verily think, after that, there will not be the
least Room for any sick minded Person whatsoever, to despair of Success under
his Regimen.

HOWEVER, since a Person must be in a painful way indeed, before he cries out
for the Physician, I would propound a kind of Diet to those who discover
Symptoms of any approaching Spiritual Malady, which will serve them by way of
Prevention. This Method is certainly preferable to the common way of Delaying
till the Disease is actually upon them, which is then in Danger of not being
removed, without Recourse to violent Remedies. In Sir Clouterly's Case, the
Prescription of Mr. Jyngle is so very ungentle, that Fair Ladies, who find
themselves a going into any Immoral Habit, should, one would think, take early
Care to stop the Progress of it, for fear of lying under the Necessity of such
dreadful Emeticks. That, it seems, which the Titled Patient must be forced to
undergo, for the Cure of Vanity only, (and, what Person, with a Title, thinks
Vanity so great an Ill?) will, he confesses, be attended with such violent
Workings, that it will make him vomit his Heart up. Now, who would not avoid
this rough Handling, by taking Things in Time, when they apprehend a Disorder
to be rising, and observing a regular Mind-Diet.

I SHALL proceed, to lay down some general Rules, and short Recipes, by way of
Specimen, that the Ladies, especially, may encourage a Pocket Volume, which I
intend shortly to publish, on the Subject of Mind-Labours, and Deliveries, and
which I only wish may be dispersed into as many Hands as Culpeper's Midwifery;
for I am sure I may say, without Boasting, it will be a more useful and
valuable Treatise.

PERSONS, who have any Consideration for the Health of their Minds, are desired
to reflect Seriously, that all Excessive Passions are Distempers of the Mind;
and but Forerunners of Diseases in the Body. Let them know, that nothing
conduces more, to the Restraint of these Humors, (which grow peccant and
pernicious, the very Moment they become Inordinate,) than Exercise in the
Thinking Faculty.

READING the Salutary Maxims of Wise Men, with Attention, digesting them by
Meditation, and imprinting them on the Memory, by frequent Recollection, is a
Mind-Diet or Regimen, which will, in a short Time, restore Health to a decayed
Constitution, and add incredible Vigor, to a Weak and Languishing
Understanding. Minds the best armed, are not always Invulnerable: There are
constantly some peevish Accidents, some cross and fretful Disappointments, in
the rugged Road of Life, to throw a Cloud over the serenest, and discompose the
most equal Tempers. But, there is not methinks, a quicker or sweeter Remedy
than to step to the Closet, and take down a moral Draught, which will smooth us
into the most perfect Calm. Gallus, Tibullus, Ovid, Catullus, will afford us
Lenitives; and Horace, Juvenal and Persius, will furnish us with Corrosives, so
that we may find a Cure for every Distemper. There are not any Infirmities,
Pains, or Sufferings of the Mind, but what the Writings of some of these
Doctors contain proper Specificks for. The best of this Method of prescribing,
is, that the Physic is easy and delightful. For what does it consist in but
Exercising one's Wits with some of the best Company in the World, whom even
Ladies cannot go to for Diversion, without finding them at the same Time
useful, or visit for Instruction, without finding them agreeable. Dryden,
Congreve, etc. Have made them refined Englishmen, and our Modern Beauties have
the same Advantages in their Translations, the Roman Ladies had in the
Originals.

WHY should it not be the Care of professed Visiters, not to contract ill
Habits which are always very catching, and fill the Mind, with Spots and
Blemishes? a Toast that never had the Smallpox, would be in a Pannick, at the
Appearance of a Face newly marked; and Persons who break out with Detraction,
have the Smallpox of the Mind, and are frightful when the Marks are upon them.

YOU shall see a Young Creature torture herself into Beauty punish herself to
please her Lover, and skin her Face for a Complexion; And yet, though she knows
she is a little Vixen in her Nature, she shall not so much as once, after she
is married to him, endeavor to learn, how she may avoid the praeternatural
Palenesses and Flushings, which Anger excites in a Beautiful Countenance,
giving the whole Form of it such a contrary Cast, that it is enough to terrify
all Beholders. Whenever any of these blooming Bustlers begin to bluster, the
Husband may be the Physician; for, when the fiery Particles within them betray
any of the Soft Things to an unbecoming Fit of Rage, the Sight of a
Looking-Glass, at that Critical Minute of Deformity, has been prescribed by our
Forefathers with admirable, and neverfailing Effect. But this is only a
transitory Cure, and does not go to the Root of the Disease. There are Passages
relating to the Effects of Anger in a married State, that would place their
Inside as clearly before them. A Lady, whom this Practice would not work into
Gentleness of Temper, could never be cured of so violent an Inflammation, but
by one of Mr. Jyngle's severest Operations.

IS a Lady jealous? And will she not have Sense enough, to blush at the Follies
of Jealousy, when she is reading them, in private, and save herself from the
Inconveniency of looking frightful, in public Company? She stands highly in
need of Mr. Jyngle. Who, that could not read away a Fit of the Spleen, in that
Excellent Modern Poem, the Rape of the Lock, could be otherwise than given
over, as quite lost, Unless Mr. Jyngle appeared, to carry it off, by his new
Invention? Those Ladies, who have Wit enough to plead their being of the
Unfortify'd Sex in so artful a Manner, That, if weak Women go astray,
Their Stars are more in Fault, than they,
have likewise Wit enough, to Fortify themselves by proper Lectures, against
the Attacks of Passion and Folly. Therefore, after this seasonable Warning, Mr.
Jyngle is the Word; and if any wild, disorderly, pretty Creatures, will Steal
away from these Precepts, and run Gadding after their own Inventions, till they
hurt their Health and Quiet; Care shall be taken, to send Mr. Jyngle, with all
convenient Speed, after them; and he may drive as fast as he pleases, into
Practice.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 28.
Tendentemque manus, and jam sua fata videntem,
Et, MATTER, MATTER, clamantem, and colla petentem
Ense ferit MATTER. --
Quam vocat hic Matrem?
OVID. METAM. -- Grande doloris
Ingenium est, miserisque venit solertia rebus.
Ibid. Mota quidem est genitrix, infractaque constitit ira,
Invitique oculi lachrymis maduere coactis.
Ibid.
FRIDAY, June 26. 1724.
THE Loss of Friends is a Misery, which, more than any other, puts our Patience
to the Trial; and breaks in upon Human Nature with a Violence not to be
resisted. All the Looks, Words, and Actions, of those, who were dear to us, in
their Life-times, rise, like Ghosts, to haunt the Memory: But, with this
Difference from their Effects, before Death had interposed, that we now
remember with a kind of Pleasure, the Wrongs and Slights we may have suffered
from them, as the only Remedy we can have Recourse to, for some Mitigation of
our Sorrow: Whereas their Virtues, their Endearments, and the Good Offices they
have done us, are like Tortures to the Imagination; and the most painful
Enflamers of our Misery.

BUT the Tenderness of the Lovelier Sex maintains a generous Superiority, over
ours, in the Warmth, and Softness, of their Sorrow. There is a Sweetness, in a
Mother's Grief, when she drowns her Charms in Tears, that raises Beauty into
Majesty; and mixes Reverence with our Fondness for her. It is her Soul, we are,
then, enamored of! And the Husband, Son, or Father, of such a Mourner,
considers, with an inward Triumph, the Interest, he is proud to hold, in a
Heart, so graced by Pity; and so sincerely Sweet and Sensible.

THE Force of Natural Affection has its strongest Effect, in Mothers from the
great Necessity there is, for that long Care, and Patience, which are the
Supports of the Human Species, during the Wants, and Helplessness of Infancy:
And the most unreasonable Partialities, of fond Mothers, to their Children, are
not only Pardonable, but Beautiful, when we consider, what good Effects are
owing to the Influence of this charming Weakness.

SHAKESPEARE's Tragedy, of King John, has, I hear, been lately altered, with
Design to bring it on the Stage next Winter. I doubt not, but the Alterer has
been careful not to rob us of the Grief of Constance, for the Loss of her Son
Arthur, when in the Hands of the King, who designs to murder him. -- Being
told, that she is Mad, not Sorrowful, she replies, I am not mad, Oh! would to
Heaven I were!
If I were mad, I should forget my Son.
-- I have heard 'em say,
That we shall meet, and know our Friends, in Heaven:
If so, I, yet, may see my Boy again.
-- But Sorrow's Canker will have eat his Bloom;
'Till he looks Pale, and Meagre, as a Ghost:
And dies, so changed, that, when, in Heaven, we meet,
I fear, I shall not know him!


THIS Thought, of her Son's Sorrow, and his becoming so altered by it, as not
to be known, if she should meet him, in Heaven, has so natural a Mixture in it,
of the Tender and the Wild! Something so exquisitely adapted both to her
Character, and her Condition, that I have always considered it, as one of the
liveliest Strokes in the Tragedy: Though it is finely supported, by what follows.

Grief fills the Place up, of my absent Son,
Lies in his Bed; walks with me up and down;
Puts on his pretty Looks; repeats his Words;
Swells out his vacant Garments with his Form.
-- But Memory smarts to miss him!
HOW much easier, and less lovely, would this Constance have appeared, under
the Affliction of her Son's Loss, had she regarded him with the cold
Indifference of a Modern Mother; whom I am glad, for her own Sake, not to find
named, in the following Letter!

SIR,
I HAVE the Pleasure of a very intimate Acquaintance with that unhappy young
Gentleman, whose Verses to a Painter, you printed in one of your PLAIN DEALERS;
with a generous Remark, or two, on the Merit of the poor Gentleman, himself,
and the uncommon Cruelty of his Mother.

PERHAPS few Things could be more surprising, than a History of his Birth and
Usage! -- Of two Fathers, whom he might have claimed, and both of them Noble,
he lost the Title, of the one, and a Provision from the other's Pity, by the
Means alone of this Mother! who, as if she had resolved, not to leave him a
single Comfort, afterward robbed him of herself too! and, in direct Opposition
to the Impulse of her Natural Compassion, upon mistaken Motives of a false
Delicacy, shut her Memory against his Wants, and cast him out to the severest
Miseries; without allowing herself to contribute even such small Aid, as might
at least, have preserved him from Anguish; and pointed out some Path to his
future Industry.

BUT I forbear to be too particular, on any of these Heads, because I know it
would give him Pain, for whose sake only I remember them: For while Nature acts
so weakly, on the Humanity of the Parent, she seems, on the Son's side, to have
doubled her usual Influence. Even the most shocking Personal Repulses, and a
Series of Contempt and Injuries, received, at her Hands, through the whole
Course of his Life, have not been able to eraze, from his Heart, the
Impressions of his filial Duty: Nor, which is much more strange! of his
Affection. I have known him walk, three or four times, in a dark Evening,
through the Street this Mother lives in, only for the Melancholy Pleasure of
looking up, at her Windows, in Hopes to catch a Moment's Sight of her, as she
might cross the Room by Candle Light.

HIS good Qualities, which are very numerous, ought the more to be esteemed and
cherished because he owes them to himself only: And, without the Advantage of
Friends, Fortune, or Education, wants neither Knowledge nor Politeness, to
deserve a Mother's Blessing, and adorn, rather than disgrace her. -- I am
strongly persuaded, from the Character, which, upon all Occasions, he has taken
Pleasure to give me of the Lady's Humanity, with regard to the rest of the
World, that nothing but her having, much too long, already been a Stranger to
such a Son, could make her satisfied to continue so. -- It is impossible, at
least, that she should not distinguish him, by some kind Notice; some little
Mark of her returning Tenderness; if, without Regard to his Merit, she knew but
his Manner of thinking of her: Which is, itself, a shining Merit! and a
surprising Instance of Generosity! if considered against those Reasons, which
might excuse a different Treatment of her.

He writ the following Copy of Verses, and several other, on the same Subject,
at a Time, when I know not which was most to be wondered at; -- That he should
be serene enough, for Poetry, under, the Extremity of Ill-Fortune! -- Or, that
his Subject should be the Praise of her, to whom he owed a Life of Misery!

Hopeless, abandoned, aimless, and oppressed;
Lost, to Delight, and, every Way, distressed:
Cross his cold Bed, in wild Disorder, thrown,
Thus, sighed Alexis, friendless, and alone. --
Why do I breathe? -- What Joy can Being give,
When she, who gave me Life, forgets I Live!
Feels not these Wintry Blasts; -- nor heeds my Smart:
But shuts me from the Shelter of her Heart!
Saw me exposed, to Want! to Shame! to Scorn!
To Ills! -- which make it Misery to be born!
Cast me, regardless, on the World's bleak Wild:
And bad me, be a Wretch, while, yet, a Child!
Where can he hope for Pity, Peace, or Rest,
Who moves no Softness in a Mother's Breast?
Custom, Law, Reason, All! my Cause forsake:
And Nature sleeps, to keep my Woes awake!
Crimes, which the Cruel scarce believe, can be,
The Kind are guilty of, to ruin Me!
Even she, who bore me, blasts me, with her Hate,
And, meant my Fortune, makes Herself my Fate!
Yet has this sweet Neglecter of my Woes
The softest, tenderest, Breast, that Pity knows!
Her Eyes shed Mercy, wheresoe'er they shine;
And her Soul melts, at every Woe, -- but Mine.
Sure, then! some secret Fate, for Guilt unwill'd,
Some Sentence, prae-ordain'd to be fulfilled!
Plunged me, thus deep, in Sorrow's searching Flood:
And washed me from the Memory of her Blood.
But, oh! whatever Cause has moved her Hate,
Let me but sigh, in Silence, at my Fate.
The God, within, perhaps, may touch her Breast:
And, when she pities, who can be distressed?
THEY, who are deprived, by Death, of their dearest Friends, and Relations, are
left wretched, in the Want of them; But they have this Comfort, however, --
that, before those Deaths, they were happier: -- Whereas this Gentleman, on the
contrary, is unhappy, by his Mother's Loss, while she is living, gay, and
fortunate! and only dead, to that Affection, which other Mothers chiefly live
for!

IF you, Mr. Plain-Dealer, would give us a Paper, on these Heads, it might, I
believe, have some Effect, for the Service of a too early Sufferer, whose
Merit, and the Wrongs he has sustained, from his Parent's Cruelty, entitle him
to the Hope, of finding better Parents, among Strangers! to the open Reproach,
and Dishonor of a Mother, who, since she has so many fine Qualites, wants,
perhaps, but to be touched into a Sense of her Mistake, to atone for it, by a
generous Change, in her Regard for him, for the future. I am,

Sir, Your most Humble Servant, AMYNTAS.


I AM sorry, that, in a Nation, justly famous for Goodnature, we have so
strong an Exception, as may be taken from this Letter. But I will forbear, with
my Correspondent's Leave, to address any Arguments, to the Lady: Since, if she
is not hardened, beyond Nature, the generous Sorrow, and the Sufferings,
expressed, in her Son's Sentiments, will melt her Heart into Pity for him; and
move her, more effectually, than any Thing, that can be, morally, offered to
her.

I WILL turn my Advice, therefore, to the Service of those Sons and Daughters,
who are neglected, and made unhappy, by the Aversion, or Partiality, of the
Parent they depend on. A Case, too common, in most Families! and which stands
in need of all the Comfort, that can be poured upon their Affliction.

IT is a very melancholy Circumstance when this happens, as it often does, to
the finest spirited Child, of the whole Number. But it should be Ground enough
for Consolation, that such Sufferers owe the wrong Position, they appear in, to
a Weakness in the Parents Reason: A kind of Deception, in their Judgment's
Sight! As, when we see our Shadows, in the Water, our Heads seem to hang
downwards; and our lowest Parts are preferred, to look, unnaturally, uppermost.

TIME will, certainly, bring a Remedy, to those, who bear this Trial, with
Temperance: For Submission disarms the Rancour, that would gather Strength,
from Exercise, by an imprudent Opposition. None, whose Injuries are received,
with Mildness, and returned by Acts of Affection, can be, long, without
discovering, and repenting, their Ingratitude. Whereas, by permitting ourselves
to revenge the Wrongs we suffer, we furnish our Oppressors with an Appearance
of Justice; and only make them more blind, when it is our Interest, that they
should see clearly.

IMPATIENCE under this, or any other, Affliction, does but double our
Mortification. How languid would Life be, to the largest Part of the World, if
Expectation did not quicken it! Hope is the sweetest, of all Companions! -- If
it leads us not to the Road, which we are most inclined to travel in, its
Conversation, however, is so entertaining, and agreeable, that we can never
tire, in the Journey.

WHEN a wicked Man is happy, he seems unworthy of his Happiness: But, where
Virtue is unfortunate, it looks the larger, for the Clouds we see it through.
-- There is a Courage, in Adversity, that can put Fortune out of Countenance.
-- Men are not despicable, by their Fate, but, by their Manner of supporting
it. The Lion has more Majesty, in his Chains, than when in the Forest: His
Fierceness is reduced, and softened, by the Restraint of his Condition, and,
what was terrible, in him, before, becomes venerable, by his Calamity.

BUT, we should not only bear our Misfortunes, with Patience; we should sustain
'em, too, with Silence. -- Complaints are weak Men's Weapons: And, there was
something, delicate, and finely judged, in the Conduct of a Persian Merchant, I
have read of, who, finding himself on the Brink of Ruin, by a Race of Losses,
that befell him, gave strict Orders, to his Son, that he should speak of it to
Nobody. For, otherwise, said he, of One Misfortune, we shall make Two -- The
Loss, itself, which we complain of; -- and our Enemy's rejoicing at it.

BUT, as the most perfect Pleasures in the World are always mixed with
Afflictions, so the sharpest Afflictions have their Uses, and their Pleasures.
-- A Man's best Friend, is his Enemy! Since by mortifying his Vanity, he adorns
his Nature with Humility; and teaches him to shun the Practice of those Ill
Qualities, toward Others, which he finds so unjust, and hateful, while he
himself is oppressed by them.

BUT, while I talk of Humility, I blush, at my own Pride, who would teach
others a Science, which I am myself, but a Learner in. -- My Reader, in this
Case, must be so good as to compare me to a Blind Man, with a Torch in his Hand
-- Though I see not my own Way, I carry Light enough along with me, to guide
the Steps of those who follow me.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No. 29.
-- Pudet haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse and non potuisse refelli.
OVID.
MONDAY, June 29. 1724.
UNLESS my Legs are in Motion, my Imagination is apt to stand still: for which
Reason I am so great a Walker, that, if the Weather does not allow me to take
the Air, in the open Fields, I measure my Landlady's Hall Floor, so many Times,
for a Breathing, that I can walk Twenty Miles, without stirring out of my
Lodgings. -- I was meditating, Yesterday Morning, in one of these reverted
Perambulations, when I heard the Sound of a Horse's Feet, on the Pavement,
before my Door; which was followed by a loud, rustic, Whistle; and a thumping
against the Porch, with the Handleend of a Whip. -- I looked out; and was
saluted, by a Country Servant of Will. Weathercock's, with this simple, and
hearty Address, -- That Master remembered his Love to me; and had sent him up
with a Letter. I dispatched my Friend's Courier; and shall lay before my Reader
the Contents of this Intelligence.

Dearest SIR,
THE good Company, at Sir Portly's, are at a sad Loss, in your Absence. Mr.
Tiresome, and our Friend Tony, will not drink one another's Healths yet. But Mr.
Juniper has done as strange a Cure, upon Mr. Jyngle, as Mr. Jyngle himself
intends to do, upon Sir Clouterly Rumble. -- Tony has never been right, as he
should be, since you made him so ashamed of shooting his Poetry, at Random. He
looked very pale, Yesterday, and complained of a Pain in his Stomach. There was
something, he said, lay, like a Load, at his Heart: and he had much ado to draw
his Breath, for it. -- Mr. Juniper felt his Pulse, and said, he hoped there was
no Danger: Asking him, at the same Time, If he had made no Verses, for this
Week past? Mr. Jyngle told him, Yes -- and repeated six hundred Lines, of a
Poem, he has made a Beginning in. The Verses, I must needs say, sounded as
fine, as ever I heard any! But, what I thought strange, was, that, as soon as
he had done Repeating, Mr. Juniper bid him hem -- and go, cheerfully, about his
Business: for his Oppression, he said, was removed. -- And it really proved, as
he said. -- Mr. Jyngle's Color returned immediately; and he breathes, as
freely as ever he did!

BUT, I fancy, for all this, he is not quite cured, yet. His Distemper, I
doubt, works inward: and, unless it has constant Vent, may blow up, into his
Brain, and do more Mischief, than we are aware of. For I observe, though he
says nothing, the suppressed Spring of his Fancy twitches his Eyebrows, up and
down, and moves his Lips, like a Rabbit's! -- He has got an odd Whim, too, --
the Effect, to be sure, of his Melancholy! Of untying the Knots of People's
Periwigs, who happen to sit within Reach of him! He will do the same, by the
Ladies Apron-Strings; and has made an Attempt or two, at their Garters! Yet, is
musing, all the while, without meaning any Harm in it. -- Pray send me Word, by
Humphry, who rides old Robin to Town, on purpose, whether you don't think, this
untying Wigs, and Apron-Strings, an untowardly Symptom, in poor Mr. Jyngle? --
Methinks, I would not, for a great deal, that his Brain should have any Thing in
it. -- Pray a Word, of your Advice, to, Dearest Sir!

Your most Faithful Servant, William Weathercock.


THE Answer I returned to this apprehensive Humanity, of Will. Weathercock,
was, That I could determine nothing, suddenly, in so doubtful a Case: But I
desired him to tell Tony the following Story, the first Time he should catch
him at a Wig-Knot, or an Apron-String: and, from the Effects of it, I might
judge better.

AN Arabian Physician, of great Learning, went to visit the Caliph, who took
Pleasure in discoursing with him, concerning Diseases, and their Remedies. The
Physician was demonstrating the Necessity of Binding Madmen to prevent Danger,
from their Extravagance; and the Caliph who sat, involved, in the profoundest
Attention, had insensibly applied his Fingers to the Bottom of the Doctor's
Gown; which finding a little unstitch'd, he had ripped it, to the very Girdle.
The Doctor, observing it, made a Pause, in his Narration. -- The Caliph, then
asked him, By what Tokens they knew, when it was Time to Bind a Madman? -- We
bind him, answered the Physician, when he pulls People's Clothes to Pieces,
without the smallest Provocation. June the 8th, 1724. SIR,
GOING last Sunday, in the Afternoon, to a Church, not far from the Temple, to
hear an Eminent, and Learned, Divine, who is remarkable, for his good
Preaching, I found the manifest Necessity we are under, of a PLAIN-DEALER:
Since most of our well-bred Enormities, which were suppressed during the Reign
of your great Predecessor, Venerable Spec, of Immortal Memory, are crept again,
into Practice. -- Lay-Parishioners, for Example, repeat the Absolution, with as
much Loudness, and Assurance, as if they were, all, in Priest's Orders! They
barbarously, drown too, in their Responses, the Vocal Zeal of the Parish Clerk;
to the Disgrace, and utter Overthrow, of that ancient and useful, Office! --
The Psalms, which were sung, plainly, in the simple Worship of our Forefathers,
are, now, most musically, warbled, by gay, powdered, Choristers, who have their
Ears refined, by Opera, with such a rapturous Italic Quavering, that every
Syllable pants, and trembles, with the Sighings of a broken Spirit! -- The
Reverend Doctor declaimed on Pride: But neither the Terror of his Reasoning,
nor the awful Gravity of his Person, could restrain a giddy Covey, of young
Female Gold-finches from fluttering their Fans into a Whirlwind; that blew
Grace, and Edification, quite out of the Church Windows! -- These Indecencies
fall more properly under your Cognizance, than the Pulpit's; therefore, at your
Leisure, I hope, you will animadvert on their Growth, and Consequence. A Nod,
from you, will startle them: for they fly PLAIN-DEALING, like a Pestilence. I
am,

Your hearty Well-Wisher, etc. J. H.


Mr. Plain-Dealer,
I AM one of those Light-finger'd Purchasers, complained against, in a Letter
to you, from the Keeper of a certain Coffee-House, for filling my Pocket with
Wit of another Man's paying for. The Truth is, I did it; but it was by way of
Revenge only. For before your Paper became established, I went a Dozen Times,
to his House, with no other Intention, than to read over the PLAIN-DEALER: But
the Answer, I always had, was, -- They did not take in the Paper. At last, his
Customers so often asked for it, that he was ashamed to be longer without it;
and I continue to drink his Coffee, for the Pleasure of reading your Paper. But
in order to be even with him, I kept a private Account how many Twopences I
spent, in vain, while I was disappointed by his Avarice: And just so many PLAIN
DEALERS I am determined to pocket up, that I may bring Things to Balance. After
that, I will content myself to carry off, in my Memory, what I now bring away
in my Pocket. And this is the true State of Mr. D. B's Complaint to you.

But, since Coffee-Men must be murmuring, I will put you in a Way to mortify
some of the Backward Ones, of that Fraternity; who care not how little Wit they
lay in, for their Customers, because themselves have no Relish for it: And they
love to deal in nothing, but what they can come in for a Taste of. You must
know, Sir, that several of them are resolved to wait, 'till Winter, before they
take in the PLAIN DEALER; as if Cold Writers were fittest to refresh their
Summer Customers. But your Disciples are so numerous, that, if you only give
the Word, that none, who have Wit, or Breeding, shall drink, even a single
Dram, at any Coffee-House, that is not licensed, by the Stamp of the PLAIN
DEALER; then, these Friends to Money, and Dullness, who, to save a Groat a
Week, lose Twelve Pennyworth of Improvement, would take it in for their Profit
Sake, though they have no Concern for their Unstanding: And by that Means,
extend your Influence to many Thousands of his Majesty's sober Subjects; who
now, sit and sleep in the Corner of a Dusty Coffee-Room, for want of Matter to
be kept awake by. I am,

Sir, Your Humble Servant, VINDEX.


UPON opening some late Letters, which have been sent me by my Correspondents,
I found, enclosed in one, the following Learned Proposition, for unravelling
the Occult Sciences.

PROPOSALS, for Printing a Book, Entitled, The Mystery of Modern Gameing; being
a Description of the Abuses, in Games at Dice: Proving, by calculated Tables,
That Hazard is an unequal Game. Exposing the Nature of unfair Dies and Boxes,
with the Operations of Loaded Dies, Scoop'd Dies, Flat Dies, Chain Dies, and
Linked Dies. The Art of working with a Grate Box; Eclipsing, Sighing, Waxing
and Topping.

A Dissertation on Pharo, Basset, Picquet, Wisk, and other Card Games: Proving,
that a Pack of Cards may be shuffled, cut, dealt away, and, afterward,
disposed to your Interest, notwithstanding. With a particular Description of a
Pharo-Bank; its Attendants and Expenses. Calculated for the Meridian of those
two famous Universities, Bath and Tunbridge-Wells.

THE Book will be Printed on fine Paper, Octavo, with a New Dutch Letter, and
neatly Bound: Price One Guinea, half down, as usual. It Is now ready for the
Press; and any Subscriber shall, if he pleases, see the Copy, to convince him,
that it deserves Encouragement. Subscriptions are taken in at Mr. William
Leverland's, at the Golden-Key, in King Street, Covent Garden.

I AM ignorant with what Intention this Proposal was enclosed to me; there
having been no Letter sent with it. But I take it for granted, that it is the
Wish of the Undertaker to have it notic'd, in the PLAIN DEALER: And I recommend
it, with the more Readiness, because, if this Work is any way answerable to its
Title, the Author will deserve to be considered as a Patriot! and may, by
opening the Eyes of those, who are fond of that vile Art, called Gaming, become
the Means of more Good to his Country, than the Care and Wisdom of our
Parliaments have, yet, been able to accomplish.

Worthy SIR,
I MY own self am a Barber, by Trade, but my Wife takes in Plain-work. I could
never endure to be Idle; and, therefore, when we rented a little House, in the
New-Buildings, I hung a Board, at my Pole's End, with these Words writ upon it,
in Great Letters, SHAVE FOR A PENNY, Though I say it, that should not, I have a
clean Stroke with a Razor: But, because I love a stirring Trade, I thought it
better to work for a little, than stand still, and get nothing. Now, it is a
strange Thing to consider, how little Encouragement Honest Industry meets with.

ONE Evening, last Week, a Beau with a great Black-Bag at his Back, was set
down, out of a Stage-Coach; and fixing his Eye upon my Pole, put his Hand to
his Beard, and came directly to my Door, as if he meant, I should Shave him:
But, as soon as he read my Rate, that was written on my Show Board, he turned
short, upon his Heel; and cried out with a silly Oath, "That, Six Pence, he
thought, was too little, for a clean Shaving: But, if a Man must pay for being
flayed, a Penny was too much in Conscience.

I WAS quite out of Heart, at this unexpected Return, for falling the Price of
my Practice: And my poor Wife, who overheard it, as she sat at work, fell a
crying, at the Ill Nature of it. But, presently, we heard a jolly Voice, in the
Street, Come, let us go in: -- I will encourage this Honest Fellow, though I
have been shaved once, to Day, already. So, there came into my Shop a grave,
well-dress'd Gentleman, and a pretty Youth with him: He was kind, and talked
very familiar to me; and had so good-humored a Face, that I loved dearly to
look upon him: When I had done with him, he said, that I had the soft Sweep of
your Turkish Barbers; and, as he was going out of my Shop he gave me a Crown
Piece; and told me, "That such Industrious Men, as I, ought to be paid, as we
deserved, and not, as we expected: And that no body else should Shave him, as
long as his Beard grew in London.

AS soon as he was gone, my Wife fell a crying, again. -- But, this Time it was
for Joy, That in spite of Beaux and Black-Bags, there is some good Nature left
in the World yet. -- If you will put this into your PLAIN DEALER, and accept of
a Shaving, the next Time you come our Way, you may Command the ready Hand of,

Your Obedient Humble Servant, Latherlight Edgely.


THE PLAIN DEALER. No. 30.
-- Nec Vox hominem sonat, O Dea certe!
VIR.
FRIDAY, July 3. 1724.
IT is said, by a Vulgar Error, That the English are fond of Novelty. -- I have
wondered, a Thousand Times, how this Notion became established: For, that
nothing is more false, in Fact, may be proved, from our oldest Histories: and
is, every Day, remarkable, in our modern, and familiar Practice.

THOUGH ten Englishmen, in twelve, are the Descendants of Foreigners, and the
very Name itself, of England, is Foreign: Yet, the Notion of a Foreigner has
been, always, ridiculously, distastful to us!

INNOVATIONS were ever odious to us; and we chose rather to neglect Advantages,
than to try an untrodden Path, for 'em. -- What lost England the first
Possession of that Gold and Silver World in the Spanish West Indies, but her
Disposition to discredit Novelty? -- Our very Laws depend on Precedent: -- And
the Defense, even of Rights, in Parliament, is supported upon what has been;
and seems unconcerned in why it was. Those scandalous Oppositions, which are so
obstinately given, to the Clearest Bills, for Public Benefit, such, as making
our Rivers Navigable, -- Putting our Lands under a Register, -- Promoting
untried Trades, -- And Establishing National Fisheries: Are, all, convincing
Instances, that no Nation, under Heaven, have so fixed an Aversion to Novelty;
which, yet, every Body is imputing to us, as the Reigning Humor of our Country.

BUT we have a Present Example, that will confirm my Remark, and for ever put
to Silence those, who accuse us of the Love of Novelty. I mean, the new
Practice, of Inoculating the Smallpox, on Bodies, purposely, prepared to
receive it: So, to prevent the usual Danger, and Malignancy, of that Distemper;
and sustain it, without the Terror, the Fatality, and the Sorrow, which have
heretofore, gone along with it.

IT was a generous Undertaking, in that Publick-spirited Member of the Royal
Society, who, resolving, by clear Matter of Fact, to establish or explode, this
Practice, has, with an unwearied Application, and the most steadfast
Impartiality, informed himself of its Success, throughout all Parts of the
Kingdom; and given the World an Account of it, in his Pamphlet, lately
published. A Treatise! which deserves the Eye, and most careful Consideration,
of every Parent, who has Reason, or who would save a Favorite Child, the
promised Comfort of his Life! from being snatched away, perhaps in its Bloom,
by the Sweep of this Distemper.

IT is demonstrated, in the mentioned Treatise, from a Forty Year's Examination
of the Bills of Mortality, 'That the Smallpox carries off, at least, one in
every six, of all whom it seizes in the natural Way; whereas not one in fifty,
(scarce one in many hundreds) of those who receive it by Inoculation, have been
found to die under it.

THE whole Number of Persons, who have been so much as suspected to owe their
Deaths to it, ever since its first Introduction, in England, amounts to Nine,
only! -- They are, all named, in the Printed Account; and there is scarce one
among them, for whose Death a Clearer Cause, than the Inoculation, is not
assigned, and attested, by the very Physicians, and Surgeons, who directed the
Operation -- So that Providence seems to have guided, and enlightened, Art, in
this Practice, to assist, and relieve, Nature, for the Preservation of the
Human Species.

YET, with what Violence, and Malice, has it not been railed at, and opposed?
-- How many False Affirmations have we seen, with unblushing Boldness,
insulting Truth, in our Public Newspapers! -- Nay, the Pulpits, too, have
trembled, under the Zeal of Reverend Railers; who, in the holy Blindness of
their Passion, have shown us Job, upon his Dunghill; inoculated, for the
Smallpox, by the Devil, of a Surgeon!

IT has been represented, as a Wilful Murder! A new, and wicked, Presumption!
An Assault on the Prerogative of Heaven! And a taking God's own Work out of his
Hands, to be mended by Man's Arrogance!

BUT the Common Arguments, however despicable, give me Diversion, and
Entertainment. -- When I hear a pious Old Woman wisely wondering, -- What this
World would come to! and concluding her Remarks with this great Maxim of
Resignation, that God's own Time is best! I compare this Force of Female
Reasoning, to the Representation which, a late Writer tells us, The old Boyars,
or Grandees of Russia, gravely made, to the Present Czar, when he attempted a
Communication, by Diging a Canal, between the Volga, and the Tanais. -- " The
Design, they said, was Great; -- But they humbly conceived it Impious: -- For,
since God had made the Rivers to run one Way, Man ought not to turn them
Another.

IT is an established Rule, amongst Gamesters, That Losers should have leave to
speak: And, for this Reason, I rather pity, than grow angry with an unmarried
Prude or Coquet, when I catch 'em Railing at Inoculation, with a Thousand
Excuses for it, in their Faces. -- As it is a Comfort to the Miserable to have
Companions in their Misery, so, it must be a Provocation, to these Fair
Invalids, to hear of a Preservative, for other's Beauty, when it is too late,
to save their own by it.

YET, these good Ladies, unmindful that they carry about with them, the Cause
of their own Peevishness, treat an innocent Practice, when they join the Chorus
of Railers, as the Indian did the Looking-Glass, which he found on the
Seaside. -- He was frightfully Ugly; and, starting back from his own Image,
threw away the Glass, in great Rage, with this comfortable Observation: -- I
might have guessed, thou were good for nothing: Thou would not have been
left here else.

IT is the Observation of some Historian; but I forgot where I met with it:
That England has owed to Women the greatest Blessings she has been
distinguished by -- In the Case, we are now upon, this Reflection will stand
justified. -- We are indebted to the Reason, and the Courage of a Lady, for the
Introduction of this Art; which gains such Strength in its Progress, that the
Memory of its Illustrious Foundress will be rendered Sacred, by it, to future
Ages.

THIS Ornament of her Sex, and Country, who ennobles her own Nobility, by her
Learning, Wit, and Virtues, accompanying her Consort into Turkey, observed the
Benefit of this Practice, with its Frequency, even among those obstinate
Praedestinarians; and brought it over, for the Service, and the Safety, of her
Native England; where she consecrated its first Effects, on the Persons of her
own fine Children! And has, already, received this Glory from it, "That the
Influence of her Example has reached as high as the Blood Royal." And our
noblest, and most ancient, Families, in Confirmation of her happy Judgment, add
the daily Experience of those, who are most Dear to them.

I HAVE seen a short Poetical Essay, on the Occasion we are now treating of. I
would say, if I meant the Verses an Encomium they should be envied for, "That
their Subject need not blush at them!

On Lady Mary Wortley Montagu's bringing with her, out of Turkey, the Art of
Inoculating the Smallpox.
WHEN Greece, reviving, into short Delight,
Felt Pride, and Comfort, at Our Muse's Sight:
The Rivaled Nine no sooner saw her Face,
But even their Envy gave their Wonder Place!
Charmed, into Love, of what eclipsed their Fame!
They waked Apollo, with her powerful Name.
See! -- God of Grecian Wit! Urania cries,
How sweet a Muse the Western World supplies!
Say, should she ask some Favor, from your Throne,
What could you bid her take, that is not her own?
Sparkling in Charms, the heavenly Stranger view,
So graced! -- she scarce can owe a Beam, to You!
Beauty, with Love, her Power to Yours prefers:
And Wit, and Learning, are, already, Hers!
Roused, at her Name, -- receding, from her Eyes,
The gazing God rose slow, in soft Surprise!
Fair Miracle, he said, -- and paused, a while:
Then, thus, -- Sweet Glory, of your envied Isle!
Charmed, and obliged, lest, we ungrateful seem,
Bear hence, at least, One Mark of our Esteem.
One, of my three great Claims, your Wish may fit;
Whose Voice is Music: and whose Thoughts are Wit!
Physic, alone, remains, to grant you, here --
A Skill! your godlike Pity will endear.
Formed, to give Wounds, which must no Ease procure,
Atone your Influ'nce, by new Arts, to cure.
Beauty's chief Foe, a feared, and fierce Disease!
Bows, at my Beck; and knows its God's Decrees.
Breathed, in this Kiss, take Power, to tame its Rage:
And, from its Rancour, free the rescued Age.
High, over each Sex, in Double Empire, sit:
Protecting Beauty, and inspiring Wit.
A Journey into Greece being the Subject of these Verses, Parnassus lay a
little too directly in the Way. -- I should, else, have been out of Humor,
that the Force of the Author's Fancy took its Turn from the Pagan System: and
does Apollo as much Honor, as the Lady, who is worth a Thousand of him. But,
it is an uncommon Misfortune, to her Genius, "That the only Thing in the World,
worth knowing, and not known, to her, is, her own prodigious Excellence. -- So,
she is neither able, nor willing, to describe it, herself; and no Verse, but
her own, can soar high enough, for her Merit. -- The sweetest of our English
Poets has endeavored it with less Success, than attended any of his other
Compositions: And, if a Nameless one has missed it, after him, he has, at
least, this Consolation, "That he miscarries in such Company, as it is a kind
of Honor to go astray with.

I WOULD not, however, be mistaken, in this Censure. -- The Verses, I mean,
abound with Wit. -- They have only an Air of wanton Levity, that looks too
merry, to be enough in Earnest, and gives the Turn of a smiling Satire. --
Praise ought always to be serious, when it is addressed to the Person praised,
and where the Subject is of Weight, and Dignity.

THERE is, I know, a pert Species of Panegyric, which has been admired, in the
Examples of Balzac, Voiture, and other French Writers; who, when they would
praise Kings, and Heroes, took 'em, ironically, to Task: and chid 'em, by way
of Commendation. -- But, to speak like a PLAIN DEALER, such familiar, and smart
Encomiums imply something like a Sense of superior Qualities, in the
over-conscious Bestowers of 'em. -- Some of the Verses, just now hinted at,
have a little too much of the Sportive; but nothing of the French Arrogance.

Then bravely, fair Dame,
Renew the old Claim,
That, to your whole Sex does belong:
And let us receive
From a second bright Eve,
The Knowledge of Right, and of Wrong.
But, if the First Eve
Hard Doom did receive,
When only One Apple had She;
What a Punishment New,
Must be found out for You,
Who have tasted, and robbed the whole Tree?
THIS is exquisite, and lively, Wit! But it is Wit of too brisk a Species, for
the Purpose it is applied to. -- If a Barrister should take a Fancy to dance in
his Pleading, would the Judge admit his Skill, in Excuse of his Indecorum? --
This Praise, so gayly given, would have surpised, like a Flash of Lightning;
where, instead of being the professed Subject, it had been struck out,
unexpectedly. -- As it is, it looks like Trifling; and misrepresents the
Author, as not charmed into Reverence of the Worth he celebrates. It speaks him
Regardless; and but half Intent: -- and is like tripping, antickly, over a
Drawing Room, when it is prepared for the Steps of Majesty.

IF ever this Remark should fall in the way of that Excellent Writer, and he
should not, himself, think, as I do; I shall fear, I have been mistaken. But,
It is the Duty of every Man, when he assumes the Critic, to speak frankly his
Opinion, what is an Error, and what an Excellence; that his Reasons being
weighed by the Reader's Impartiality, may contribute to produce that Judgment,
which is the sole good End of Criticism.

BUT, to return to the Lady, from whose extensive Benevolence, we received the
Art we have been speaking of; -- It is a Godlight Delight, that her Reflection
must be conscious of! when she considers, to whom we owe, "That many Thousand
British Lives will be saved, every Year, to the Use, and Comfort, of their
Country, after a General Establishment of this Practice!" -- A Good! so
lasting, and so vast! that none, of those wide Endowments, and deep
Foundations, of public Charity, which have made most Noise in the World,
deserve, at all, to be compared with it.

SAADI, the Persian Author of the Work called Gulistan, tells a Story, of three
Sages; -- A Greek, an Indian, and a Persian; who, in Presence of a King of
Persia, debated, on this Question. " Which, of all Evils, was most grievous?"
-- The Grecian said, Old Age, oppressed with Poverty. -- The Indian answered,
Pain, under Impatience. -- But the Persian decided it to be Death, without Good
Works before it.

IF the want of Good Works is all, that makes Death Terrible, the great
Bestower of the mentioned Blessing cannot fail to die, with Cheerfulness. -- It
must be Impossible for her to want Joy, at her last Moments: But it may be
feared, she will carry it away with her to the other World; -- For this will be
left, in Sorrow.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 31.
-- Teque his, Infaelix, Exue Monstris.
OVID.
FRIDAY, July 6. 1724.
Good Mr. Plain-Dealer,
I AM a young Widow-Woman, that was bred and born in Wapping; and, had one of
the Best of Husbands; that was Master of as good a Ship as ever used the
Guiney-Trade. But he died, in his last Voyage, as he was bringing Home a great
Elephant for a Token: And I have taken a strange Fancy to the Beast, because he
puts me in Mind of my poor Husband. -- Most of our African-Company have been to
see him; and they all agree, there is more in him, than in a whole Court of
Assistants.

BUT, for all he looks so big, there is no Manner of Harm in him. He is as
Tame, as one of us, Women; and plays twenty clever Tricks, to make People
merry, that make much of him. -- One could not forbear laughing, though one lay a
dying, to see, how the good-natured, clumsy, Beast will dance Moll Peatly! He
will so catch up his Feet, and frisk round, in a small Compass; and thump the
Floor, to keep Time; and move his Backside to the Music! and, in short, your
other End of the Town Dancing-Masters, are no Body at all, to him!

HE plays at Trap-Ball, in a Rope-Walk, by our House; and strikes out the Ball
with his Snout; and is the comicalest poor Creature alive, to be sure! -- A
Gunner, and a Man of War's Chaplain of my Acquaintance, are, now, very busy, in
teaching him to dance upon the Ropes; and I must needs say, he comes on, very
towardly; only, he looked a little silly, at first, and tumbled off, when they
cried, Jump, for the King; and could not keep steady, for the Life of him. -- He
cracks Nuts, with his Nose: and makes a woeful Splutter, when he gets Loose
among the Herb-Womens Apple-Baskets. -- All my Neighbors love him; and tell
me, that he will bring in a world of Money, if I would but make a Show of him.
-- Pray, what is your Opinion? And where-abouts, do you think, it will be best
for me to set up, with him? In answering this you will do an Act of great
Kindness, to

Your afflicted, humble Servant, SUSAN SOFTLY.


Honorable SIR,
OBSERVING by some of your Plain-Dealers, that you are a great Admirer of the
Czar of Muscovy, I humbly presume to acquaint you, that I am, lately, come out
of his Country; and have brought with me a Commodity, called a Russian Bear. --
He has shared very largely, in the Improvements of his Fellow Subjects; for, he
can fiddle, as well as any Body; he sits bolt up on End, and holds his Kit in
one Paw, with the Butt End against his Belly; and, with his Fiddlestick in the
other Paw, tunes it away, after the Italian Manner, with his Head of one side,
all in Raptures, at his own Harmony! -- It would do your Heart good, to look at
him, when he is splitting a Note into Graces: For he shakes his Nose, and his
Paw, together, with such a Variety of melodious Quavering, that his Ear must be
confessed as delicate, as if he had been a Subscriber to the Opera.

BUT, there is one Thing, that I take to be a very particular Happiness to him!
He looks, when he is Grave, for all the World, like that Ingenious Swiss
Gentleman, that has so many diverting Fancies, to get Money, by making Ladies,
and Gentlemen, merry together. If they were to be dressed both alike, I am
confident there would be no knowing 'em asunder. May be, that may go a great
Way, toward making the poor Thing's Fortune. -- I have him, here in Town, but
he is out of Business, at present, so, if you could but be so kind as to put
him in some Way of Preferment, he shall wait on you, where you please; and
entertain you with a Sample Lesson: Which is all, that offers, at this Time
from, Honorable SIR,

Yours to Command, JONAS QUEER.


I TACK this extraordinary Pair of Epistles together, because of a manifest
Resemblance in their Contents; and, for that I am desirous to promote a Union
between Mrs. Softly, and Mr. Queer. -- Their Beasts, at least, if not
themselves, must be subscribed into a Joint Stock, for the better carrying on
of their Trade. -- They may afterward debate, at Leisure, concerning the
Incorporation of their Persons. But, certain it is, that two Animal Artists, of
such Sagacity, as both the African, and the Russian Stranger, could never have
honored London with their Residence, at a properer Time than this: Or, with a
fairer Promise, for their own Benefit.

SOME Statesmen, who look deep into National Consequences; and discern at a
Distance, the Fate of Mightiness, and Ministry, have pretended to foresee the
sudden Downfall of Opera! -- Who knows, if such a melancholy Revolution should
befall the Polite World; but these two, qualified, Performers, may take
Possession of that deserted Theater; and, under the Auspices of so noble, and
so unanimous, a Board of Directors, outdo, even the surprising Things, which
have already been heard, and seen, there!

OR, suppose, it were, yet, a Winter, before the Haymarket will be in a
Condition to receive them: They cannot fail, in the mean Time, to meet with
more than reasonable Encouragement, if they but apply themselves to the
Managers, of either of our Theaters: In one, of which, they labor under such a
want of good Actors, that two such accomplished Comedians (having the
Advantage, too, of being foreign Ones!) may, certainly, make their own Terms,
if they are inclinable to strengthen the Youngest Company: Or, if Fortune,
against her usual Custom, most propitious to her old Favorites, should dispose
their Choice another Way; they may be entertained, as Friends, and Allies, upon
the Foot of well-paid Subsidies; the Commanding Officers, of those Veterans,
entering, lately, with much Vivacity upon New Plans of Action, which fall,
immediately, within the Genius of our fourfooted Virtuoso's.

HAVING barely touched this Hint for the Service of my Correspondents, who are
Persons, of great Parts and Industry; I come now to say a Word or two, in my
own Person, to the Stages.

MUCH of the Summer is, yet, before us; and Winter, being the Season of our
Theatrical Campaigning, I shall prepare myself against that Time, to take the
Field, at their first Marching: and move, with one, or other of the Bodies,
during the whole Course of their Operations. My Readers may then, expect to be
entertained, from my private Journal, with the Good, or Bad, Discipline, of
both Armies: and the Personal Conduct of their Generals, in the Exercises,
Evolutions, Sallies, Stratagems, or Engagements, they shall, at any Time be
concerned in. -- Let 'em therefore stand warned: and assure themselves, that I
shall animadvert on their Behavior, with a Frankness, they have been little
used to; and lay 'em Open, like a PLAIN DEALER.

BUT, to enter on another Subject, I have received several Letters, from the
Female Part of my Care, to complain of my Odious Title, (so they call it!) of
PLAIN DEALER. -- They had heard of me, it seems, but did not dream I had any
Thing in me. -- They took my Business to have been Politics. -- They little
thought me the Man they find me. -- Instead of Humor, and Wit, they looked for
Bluntness, and Malice, from a surly, old, Fellow, that was setting himself up
for a Cynick, -- with a great deal more, to the same Purpose. But one arch
Flirt, among the Rest, is for forcing me to declare myself, that People may
know, what to make of me. She is at a Loss how to think, or what to say, of my
Papers; and can neither like, nor dislike, with any Manner of Certainty, till
she hears, whether I am a Whig, or a Tory? -- She adds, in a Postscript, "That,
perhaps, I may think indifferently of both, and pretend to an Impudent
Neutrality, like the Old Grasier, in our Civil Wars: who, when he was met, on
the Road, by Either of the opposite Parties, and asked: For King? Or for
Parliament? told 'em. -- For Neither: 'till both were wiser.

THE Hotheads, and Testimonies, of this present Generation, think it a Disgrace
to their Vivacity, not to be as briskly in the Wrong, as their Ancestors. And I
pity, very heartily, the Condition of the King's poor Subject, who has sent me
the following Letter.

Master PLAIN DEALER,
I WISH you would lend me but one Lash, or two, of your PLAIN DEALING, for some
Folks, in Red-Coats, and Others, in no Coats at all: For, if Things go on, as
they stand now, an honest Man will not be able to travel the Road, pro, and con,
for a Set of silly Busy-Bodies, that must be meddling with us, about Things,
that we have other Matters to do, than to think of. For, you must know, Master
Plain-Dealer, if you please, That I drive a peaceable Wagon, of my own; and
have done so, these Thirty Years, without being molested in my Calling: till
now lately, that a Pack of strange People have got a Whim into their Heads, to
make us Englishmen, all of one Mind: -- But, if ever they bring it about, I
will be hanged, for 'em.

ABOUT Six a Clock, in the Morning on the Nine and Twentieth Day of May last,
I, and my Wagon, were met, near a Wood-Side, by a Knot, of fifty, or sixty,
roaring Fellows, stuck all over with Oaken Boughs; and loaded with Branches of
the same. -- They stopped me, in the Road, to know, Whether I loved the Memory of
King Charles the Second. -- I said, Yes, with all my Soul. -- At that Word,
they fell a dancing, and set up a loud Huzzaing: waving their Hats, and their
Boughs, till my Team became frighted, and took 'em all to be bewitched, and was
within a Hair's Breadth of running away with my Wagon. Then, they handed me a
two Quart Brandy-Bottle; and bid me drink a Dram, To the Glorious Memory of the
Restoration: And, as soon as I had got it down, they gave a great Shout, again,
stuck my Horses, and my Wagon, all over with Green Boughs; said, I was a very
honest Fellow: and had a Heart of English Oak. And, so, we parted, with much
Ceremony, and Satisfaction, on both Sides.

BUT, before Eleven, the same Day, as I was driving into a Town, where my
Wagon was to Dine, there came up, in a great Rage, seven or eight of the
Troopers, that were quartered there; and asked me, What I bush'd out my Horses
for? I told 'em, To drive Flies away: But they said I was a Jacobite Rascal, --
that my Horses were guilty of High Treason; and my Wagon ought to be hanged.
-- I answered, That it was already drawn; and within a Yard or two, of being
Quartered; but as to being hanged, It was a Compliment, we had no Occasion for,
and therefore desired them to take it back again, and keep it in their own
Hands, 'till they had an Opportunity to make Use of it: -- I had no sooner
spoke these Words, but they fell upon me, like Thunder, stripped my Cattle in a
Twinkling; and beat me black and blue, with my own Oaken Branches.

THIS went off, and I thought no more of it: 'till the Tenth Day of June came.
I was then Inn'd in London; and, from where my Wagon lay, in Holborn, I went
to Soho Square, to deliver a little Parcel, that I had brought up, for my
Landlord's Lady. -- She ordered, That I should have as much Strong Beer, as I
could drink, and that I should drink a Health to her Inclinations. -- She
smiled at me, and was so kind, as to give me, out of her own Hand, a fine
Nosegay of White Roses. I was very proud of my Nosegay, for my Lady's Sake,
that had given it me: And went along the Street smelling to it, thinking all
the Way as I walked, How pretty it looks in your Gentry, to be so free and
good-natured with a poor Man, as I am: When, all of a sudden, a Scarecrow, lean
Man, in a fine laced Coat, snatched it out of my Hand, and another Gentleman in
red, who was along with Him, lent me a Cut cross the Shoulders, with a cursed
smarting Cane, and told me, -- That he would teach such a dirty Dog, as I was,
to be smelling to Tory Roses.

IF I could have got one of these fine Fellows all alone with me, in my Wagon,
I should have made him know his Driver. -- But as it was, I thought it best to
show him a good Pair of Heels for it. -- Which of us might have run fastest, in
a fair Field of Battle, I can but give a guess at. -- Upon this Occasion, it
was my Luck to be nimblest, and outstrip Both of 'em. -- I don't know, for my
Part, what to make of all these Doings. They are strange Times we live in; and
as I love to be musing, when I have nothing else to do, methinks, very often,
as I travel along the Road, from one End of the Kingdom to another, and find
the People of such different Notions, I fancy my Wagon and I are moving upon a
Draft Board; Old England is turned Checquer Work, and mixed Black and White all
over. So, wishing Things would mend, I rest, Master PLAIN DEALER,

Your humble Servant to Command, RALPH DOBBYN.


THE PLAIN DEALER. No 32
Verane te facies? Verus mihi nuncius affers?
Vivo equidem, vitamque extrema per omnia duco:
Ne dubita, nam vera vides.
VIR. Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse Supremum;
Grata superveniet, quae non sperabitur, hora.

FRIDAY, July 10. 1724.
I MADE a Visit, the other Day, to a Gentleman, who has a Country House, near
London; and, while we refreshed ourselves with a Social Glass, in a Summer
Bower, which he has raised above the Corner of his Garden-Wall, I observed him
to fix his Eyes, with much Attention, on the Gate of a stately Building, that
stood on the opposite Side of the Road. -- The Mistress, said he, of that fine
House, has been charming me, all this Morning, in a Poem, which was written, in
Praise of her Extraordinary Beauty, by a very celebrated, English, Genius. --
The warm, and lively, Imagination of the Poet has placed her exactly before me!
I feel, methinks, the Influence of her Eyes! I am enchanted, by her Air and
Movement! -- But I lose my self in Rapture, while I seem to gaze upon that
Spring of Youth, which he describes with so much Wantonness! That living,
thinking, Bloom! that quickens her soft Languor; and adds Health, and Joy, to
Loveliness. -- But, see! -- Look yonder! The very Charmer comes, This! this! is
she: This gay, young, wished, adored dear Masterpiece of Nature; whom I have
been reading of, with so much Transport.

I STARTED up, in great Amazement; and, inflamed by eager Curiosity, looked
out, to see this Prodigy. -- But I beheld no other than a thin, withered,
stooping, old Lady; whom Two Servants, with much seeming Difficulty, supported;
and were leading along, between them, toward a Coach, that waited for her, at
the Gate. Her Head, and both her Hands, shook, strongly, with the Palsy; but
every other Part seemed motionless, and quite insensible. -- I sighed at the
Appearance of so mortifying an Object! And recalled my Eyes, from aching at it,
to fix 'em, reproachfully, upon my Friend, for his ill-pointed Levity, in
sporting with the Weakness, and Misery of Human Nature. -- Yet This, said he,
was once, so changed as we now see her! that Divine! that Godlike! that
resistless Miracle! whom, to contemplate, in Dryden's warm Description of her
Influence, when the Hearts of a gay Monarch, and a Court of Rival Lovers, were
the Trophies of her Beauty, Who could think, that Time would thus reduce her,
to a Contradiction of all those flourishing Attractions; which, though perished
in the changed Original, will bloom, for ever, in the Poet's Picture.

I PROTEST, the sudden Shock, which this malicious Artfulness of my good
Friend's Morality surpised and struck me with, quite damped, and overwhelmed
my Cheerfulness. -- I sicken'd, at this too near and naked View of Life,
without its Palliatives. -- I resolved to drink no more. -- Your Wine, said I,
has lost its Relish, and your Society is grown insipid; from the tingling
Thoughts which you have filled me with. -- So, rising for my Hat and Gloves, I
took my Leave abruptly, and walked homeward, cross the Fields, oppressed with
musing Melancholy.

I have not, to this Moment, lost the Weight of its Oppression; and shall never
cease to wonder, That the Young reflect so seldom on the Shortness of their
Spring, when yet the Old are always near us; and the Younger coming up behind,
to push us forward into Winter. -- It was a sharp and startling Answer, That of
the Armenian Beggar, who, leaning double on his Staff, was asked by a young
jesting Coxcomb, How much that Bow had cost him? For I would be glad, said he,
to buy one -- Have Patience, answered the old Man, and, if God prolongs your
Life, you will have as good a one for nothing.

THERE is but one Thing Here, that can deserve our constant Thoughts, and that
is the very Thing, which we most hate to think of! -- What ought, so
frequently, to busy our Remembrance, as the only sure, and unavoidable common
Lot of ALL who ever lived, who now do live; or who shall live hereafter? --
Where are, now, Times past? -- We toil, and strive, and labor on, through
Life, as if to live were our chief Business! Unmindful, all the while, what
empty Shadows we are grasping at; and for how short a Time, and how uncertainly
they can be Ours, when we have gained them. What is become of all those busy
Bustlers, who have lived and died before us? Are they not vanished, and
forgotten? They have made their Way through Life, as an Eagle does through Air;
and their Path is closed up after them; nor have they left a Track to follow by.

TIME is the greatest of all Deceivers; but deceives us, without flattering us.
-- It has a Tongue in every Steeple; and points its Finger to the Dial's
Shadow, to alarm and give us Notice. But we neglect its hourly Summons; we
trust its gentle Pace, against the Harshness of its Warning. Yet, were we wise,
we should think Time a smooth, but precipitate Current, that carries us down to
Death, whether we are bound thither, or no: And He will, always, have the
roughest Passage, who, instead of gliding quietly, will be struggling to swim
against it.

LIFE has nothing, that is truly desirable, but the Presence of those we love;
yet this, of all its Pleasures, is most precarious and unstable. -- Are we
charmed by the Power of Beauty? Let us learn from such an Object, as the once
blooming Lady, whom I have been speaking of, that it is a false and fluid
Prospect. -- It is changed since Yesterday; and will be further changed,
Tomorrow. -- All, that is Ours, is mutable. We still, indeed, live on; but we
are no longer what we have been, nor can we continue what we are. Though the
River is still known by its old Name, its Waters, Today, are not the same
Waters that were Yesterday. Not our Blood alone is flowing, and in constant
Motion; our Faces, Strength, Health, Comforts, Fears, Joys, Miseries, and
Dangers, all move and mix us in one Gulf, Eternity!

I KNOW nothing so ridiculous, as what is called being serious: nor is any
thing more idle, than what we usually term Business. -- We would be fortunate,
loved, feared, great, every thing, but what we should be: -- For, whoever, in
this Life, proposes to be completely happy, hopes to build, like the Men of
Babel; and would raise a Pile, as high as Heaven, without Foundation to erect
it on. The World is too narrow to allow Dimensions for a Basis, where the
wild-intended Height is so unproportionably extravagant.

The Mahometans, who affect, after the ancient Manner of the Eastern Writers,
to express their Moral Doctrine, in a kind of proverbial Chain of Parallels;
say, there are six Things which a wise Man will ground no Hopes on: -- The
Color of a Cloud, because imaginary. The Friendship of the Covetous, because
mercenary. The Love of Women, because inconstant. Beauty, because frail.
Praise, because airy: And, the Pleasures of this World, because deceitful.

IT is equally to be wondered at, since Life is so little valuable, and Death
so certain, and unavoidable, "That we should be so unreasonably fond of the
One; and, so fruitlessly afraid of the Other." There is no Harbor on this Side
Death: And, the nearer we approach to those shining Follies, which we pursue
with such dangerous Eagerness, the more we multiply our Cares, and distract and
weary our own Purposes. The whole Earth is not broad enough for two proud Fools
to quarrel in! whereas Death is the End of Contest, the weary Man's Repose, the
great Man's Glory, the sick Man's Health, the poor Man's Comfort; and a Shelter
against Wrongs and Misery.

SINCE a Traveller can enjoy Pleasure, by often thinking on his Journey's End,
while he is yet but upon the Road toward it; why might not Death be made
familiar to us, and disrobed of its false Terrors, by accustoming ourselves to
look out for it? To acquaint our selves with it, at a Distance, during our
Journey, through Life to it? Life is, properly, a Journey; but differs from our
other Journeys, of less Consequence, in this surprising Particular, "That we
are traveling as fast, while we are sleeping, and intend no Progress; as, when
we are awake, and know we are moving.

LIFE, then, being a Journey, Death, I think, may be considered as an Inn at
the Land's End: And, since the Traveller, when he comes thither, is still
obliged to go farther; and must set out for Discoveries, upon a deep and
unknown Ocean; if he takes not along with him, fit Provisions for his Voyage,
he must be either a Fool or a Madman.

THE Difference between the Great Man, and the Good Man, is never so plainly
seen as when they, both, come to die. Then, the one shuts his Eyes; and steps,
trembling, and in the Dark, into the Dreadfulness of Uncertainty: While the
other smiles, with Joy, upon the Enlargement of his opening Prospect; and
comes, out of a miry Labyrinth, into Daylight, and a boundless Champian! -- I
sometimes take Pleasure to consider the Birth of Man, as a Commitment of his
Soul to Prison; where, during the Life of the Body, it is chained short, and
can move but a creeping Pace; and in limited and dusky Stages. But, it is set
free, and unfettered, by Death, and, at one Spring, reaches Heaven. -- Such
Discharge is, to the Soul, what Light is, to the Eye; when it opens Colors,
and Objects, which before, were concealed in Darkness.

Thus, then, when it is said, we die, we are rather born into real Being; we
are infranchis'd, by the Grant of Death, and incorporated among the Millions
upon Millions, who have died before us. Those we leave, are a Number, very
small and inconsiderable, in Comparison with those we go to. The Patriarchs,
the Prophets, the Apostles, the heroic Conquerors, the shining Poets of
Antiquity, and the whole, assembled Congress, of long-known and glorious,
Characters, who have flourished, from the World's Creation, are to be the
Company, to whose familiar Converse Death will introduce us. -- And, that we
may add one charming Hope, to warm and sweeten, all the rest! There, too, we
shall, perhaps, embrace, and be restored to, those lost Friends, we loved, most
dearly: and whom we never more expected to have met with.

BUT, I will, now, relieve my Readers from the Severity of these Reflections,
by entertaining them with a Copy of Verses; which, I am assured, were, really,
written to a Lady, eminent for her Wit, and Beauty: by a Gentleman, who thought
it no Disgrace to her Loveliness, to mix his Admiration of it, with the Memory,
that she was mortal.

To CLELIA, in the COUNTRY. On the pulling down St. Martin's Church.
WHILE from the noisy Crowd, you lean, retired,
In silent Shades, by Love of Thought inspired,
I, vexed by varied Cares, to Business chained,
Mourned your lost Converse, and in Town remained.
Dark, as the Midnight World, your Sunshine gone,
Guideless, in sullen Gloom, I wandered on.
Passion's wild Influence ebbed, and flowed, my Mind;
As Seas drive different, with the changing Wind.
But, to what Point soever my Will was bound,
In vain I turned th'unresting Compass round:
Doubtful, a while, the wavering Needle hung;
Then, trembling, backward to your Image sprung.
Pensive, I viewed a Sacred Pile, of late,
Which falls, like Man, to rise in nobler State.
The Doors, thrown wide, it seemed unveiled to lie:
And reverend Ruin struck my startled Eye!
Entering, amidst the busy Hammers Sound,
I saw Time's dusty Trophies scattered round.
Each violated Pillar stood, bedewed;
And wept, in solemn Grief, a Fate so rude.
From Tombs, by Force disjoined, reluctant Stones
Rolled, mixed with Clouds of Dust, and human Bones.
From faithless Walls, defaced Inscriptions fled:
And to long Night consigned the nameless Dead.
The Pews pale Squares, in their whole lengthened Row,
Gave Way, and opened a sad Scene, below!
Beauty, Youth, Wealth, and Power, reduced to Clay,
Larded with Bones, yet moist, unshelter'd, lay.
Remnants of Eyeless Skulls, with concave Stare,
Mocked the proud Looks, which living Charmers wear.
Coffins rose, broke, unfaithful to their Trust!
And Flesh flew round me, in unjointed Dust.
Scarce a short Span, beneath that opening Floor,
Where kneeling Charmers prayed, the Week before;
Where Forms, like Yours! rejoiced the admiring Eye,
Forms, once, like Yours! in naked Atoms, lie.
O! Fate of failing Life! O! flattering, Dream!
What wintry Sunshine is Thy shadowy Gleam!
Thus, while I mused, Thy Soul approached my Ear:
Thy soft-wing'd Soul! that, always, hovers near.
See Thou, it sighed, How these sad Relics lie!
And do Thou fear, that CLELIA thus can die?
No, she is All Mind: and Her immortal Name,
Eluding Death's short Reach, shall tread on Fame.
Tongues, yet unthought-of, CLELIA shall adorn,
And charm adoring Nations, yet unborn.
Heroes, at whose Resolves the World will shake,
Shall treat thy Sex with Reverence, for thy Sake:
And each fair Tyrant, who would Empress be,
Form but One Wish --
" To Think, and Look, like Thee.
THE PLAIN DEALER. No 33.
Ostendit Tibi Te. --
HOR.
MONDAY, July 13. 1724.
AMONG some extraordinary Epistles, which have been lately sent me, I had the
Honor to receive the following, from the Right Worshipful Mr. Alderman
Blunder: But, not thinking fit to reply to it, explicitly, I have only taken
it, Ad Referendum, as our good Neighbors, the Dutch States, receive Petitions,
which they find themselves inclinable to answer with the political Eloquence of
saying nothing.

SIR,
I, And Mr. Weathercock, were at a Tavern, with Ned Volatile; who may have Wit,
for any thing I know to the contrary: But, as for Money, I dare be positive,
that the first Time he saves Sixpence, will be when he has but a Groat in his
Pocket. And yet this extravagant young Fellow (as I have lately been well
informed) has the underhand Impudence to make Love to my Daughter! -- A Whim
took him, while we were merry together, that he must set himself, forsooth, to
Scribbling. -- Presently, it comes into my Head, that he was writing a
Love-Letter to my Daughter: And so, pretending to mind nothing but Talking, I
leaned back in my Chair, and overlooked what he was doing. -- But, as if the
young Rogue had had Eyes in his Elbows, he broke off what he had begun, and
writ, thus, in a new Place. -- If an impertinent Old Fellow, that sits by me,
did not overlook what I am writing, I should have told you a pleasant Secret --
I let him alone, as far as this; but, then, being thoroughly provoked, at his
calling me Names, I told him roundly, That he was a Liar, and an unmannerly
young Coxcomb, to pretend to write Folks Word, that I overlooked his Letter,
when I had not so much as seen a single Word he had been writing. -- The only
Answer he gave me, was, to laugh till he tumbled out of his Chair. But I would
have him to know, that this is no laughing Matter. Mr. Weathercock says, he is
in the Wrong: But, that he was in the Right of it too. I don't much like this
Decision, because I cannot tell what to make of it; so I resolved to refer it to
you; and, pray tell the pert young Jackanapes his own: which is the Needful.

I rest, Yours to serve you, HABAKKUK BLUNDER.
P.S. Mr. Thomas Tiresome has something to say, which he will write, by the
same Hand.




Worthy SIR,
MY good Friend, the Alderman, saying, he was to write to you upon
extraordinary Business, makes me lay hold on this Opportunity, to ask a little
of your wise Advice, what I shall do with the Sum of Twelve Hundred and Ninety
Three Pounds Sterling, which are come back upon my Hands, by selling out my
India Stock, very seasonably, upon this melancholy Story, that is whispered
about, so cautiously, concerning the Great Mogul's entering into an Alliance
against Prince Tockmas, and the Czar of Muscovy? -- My Broker is for South Sea
Dipping: Because, now, says he, it is Low Water, in those Parts, and the Danger
of Drowning not half so great, as it was formerly. But, I believe, I shall
stay, till their New House is quite finished; and, then, perhaps, I may, for
any thing I see to the contrary, stay still a little longer: For the young King
of Spain seems to have more in his Head than ordinary. They say he is angry
with the Irish already, because of the Bustle they made at Cadiz lately; and,
if the next he falls out with should be the English, South Sea will go near to
pinch for it. -- Besides, who can tell (you know) what may happen, upon the
Choice of this New Pope? He will not let People wear good Clothes: And, some of
our public Prints say, that he is so horribly covetous, that he makes the
Cardinals go bald-headed, to save the Charge of buying Perriwigs! Pray, what
can be his Meaning, in all this, but only to ruin the Protestant In-Interest,
and make Stocks fall, to destroy Trade, in downright Spite to Old England? The
poor Bays-Makers, at Colchester, seem to suffer for it, already: And the
Weavers that are Up, about Columpton, have much ado to be kept Quiet at it! --
Then, again, What could the French King mean, by calling home the Marshal de
Villeroy? I make no Doubt, but there is some Mischief in that too. -- In short,
while Things stand in this ticklish Posture, a wary Man will think twice,
before he runs into the Stocks. -- Indeed, if the King of Prussia should come
over, there might be some Reason for venturing: But, as it is, I am afraid, I
must lay out my Money in Lottery Tickets: For, when all comes to all, that is
the only absolute Certainty. -- Knowing you to be a long-headed Man, would be
glad to have your Opinion, in a Matter of such extraordinary Difficulty.

Your Friend, THOMAS TIRESOME.


Mr. PLAIN DEALER,
I AM a good agreeable young Woman, of a very Loyal Family: and have a most
mortal Aversion for a Roundhead. It gives me no small Pain to observe how fast
they increase, in this present Generation. Pray, make public Proclamation, in
the Name of Us our ownself, and many Hundred unsubscribing, Spinsters, who
adhere to our Opinion, "That a Fat, Chubby Face, with a Short, Thick Neck, and
Broad, Big Shoulders, were never made for Nightcap Perriwigs, of the New,
Scarecrow Model! that show the Ears a little of the Longest: but all the rest
of the Head, as Round, and as Empty, as a Cipher." -- Give the Great O's this
Hint, from

Your humble Servant, ARAMINTA SQUEAMISH.


Old PLEASANT ONES,
THIS comes to acquaint you, That my dear Spouse is taken sick, of a sudden,
and stands in need, to the utmost Degree, of that Experience in Mind-Midwifery,
which you gave out Bills about, in your XXVIIth Paper. -- Pray, let Doctor
Jyngle be sent for, immediately: And beg him to come away, whether his Chariot
is brought home or no. -- We must have him, though he comes in a Wheel-barrow.
-- The Bearer knows how to bring him: And, pray, let his Emetics be such as
will work deep, and fetch up Choler, as well as Phlegm. -- Rageing Jealousy is
the Distemper: And, if the Bitter, and Green, and Yellow, that lie as low as my
poor Fubsy's Heart, is not, all, brought away by it, he had even as good give
her a Caudle.

BUT, unless Doctor Jyngle has better Physic, for sick Minds, than those
Poetical Pills, which you prescribe, out of the Classical Dispensatory, I shall
have little Faith in his Modus of Practicing. -- I have tried, to no Purpose,
an admirable Modern Doctor, who has given us finer Recipe's of that Kind, for
Cure of either the Hot or Cold Fits of Jealousy, than the whole College of your
Ancients, Greeks, and Romans, put together. -- I love him at my Heart, and have
most of his Lectures without Book. And, I am sure, he is profoundly skilled in
my dear Love's Distemper, by this feeling Force, with which he speaks of it:
Oh, Jealousy! -- All other Storms are Calms
To Thee! -- Thou Conflagration of the Soul!


THAT Word Conflagration, is the very Picture of my Fubsy's Symptoms! -- I had
prepared, from the Salutary Works of this learned Gentleman, a healing Linctus,
that I thought infallible, if my afflicted Deary could be persuaded but to
apply her Tongue to it now and then, in order to dulcify her picquant Palate,
when the acid Particles should rise too vehemently. I had got it ready written,
upon a Sheet of her own gilt Paper; and the last Time she was taken, I gave it
kindly into her Hands, and desired her to apply it moderately. She looked it
over, with great Composure; and I began to conceive such Hope, that I took up
an untasted Sillabub, that had just been set before us, and entreated her, if
the Physic was too bitter, that she would wash down the Taste of it, with a
Sip or two of that emollient Sweetner. But the Spout was no sooner within a
Foot of her pretty Lips, when the Conflagration, abovementioned, blazed out at
both her Eyes; and, with a frightful flaming Face, she tore the Recipe in a
thousand Pieces; and burnt so strong, and so outragiously, that, fearing I
should be scorched as she flew toward me, and not being, just then, provided
with one of Mr. Godfrey's Chemical Extinguishers, I had no Way left to quench
the Fire, but by Affusion of my Sillabub; which, very fortunately, put her out,
by the Copiousness of its Adhesion. But I was so frighted at the Ebullition
that ensued immediately upon it, that I ran away as fast as I was able; having
left her a good deal cooled, and in a fair Way to be extinguished.

I THOUGHT it proper to give you this Intelligence, how far I have failed, that
Doctor Jyngle may come, prepared, with more powerful, and searching Remedies.
-- Let him make but a thorough Cure, and I Will warrant him we do his Business.
There are Nine-and-Thirty Ladies of Quality, of my Fubsy's particular
Acquaintance, who are All down, at this very Time, of the self-same Distemper;
and All taken, too, with the Conflagration, exactly as she, herself, is. He
shall never want good Patients, if his Emeticks but go to the Bottom. -- I am,
in no small Impatience,

Dear PLEASANT ONES, Thine, most Expectantly, GREGORY DINGLE, Knight.


Oxford, July 1, 1724. Mr. Plain-Dealer,
I HAVE a wonderful Piece of News for you; and desire, that you will apprize
the World, That Wit may be worth something, when a little Good Fortune goes
along with it. -- My Muse was so long my Mistress, that I began to grow weary
of her; and she has been so kind, in the very Nick, as to help me to a Wise. --
I had been in Love above three Years, and never got three good Words from the
dear Tyrant; 'till I went a Fishing with her, one hot Evening, in the Middle of
last Month. -- She delighted much in Angling, out of an old Summer House, over
a River, that makes part of her own Royalty. -- Upon these Occasions, you must
know, I was always her Humble Trout; and it was my Business to bait her Hooks,
and sit, and read to her while she watched her Fishing Rods. But, that happy
Evening, abovementioned, I had, upon a Hint out of Doctor Done, composed three
little Stanza's; and, hiding the Paper they were waitten in, betwixt the Leaves
of one of the Volumes of Dryden's Miscellanies, I read her the Title, and
Verses, as if they had been part of the Printed Collection.

To a LADY, who loved ANGLING.
SOme, by the bending Reed's slow Aid,
May boast the unwary Fish betrayed:
Others may finny Shoals beset,
And sweep 'em with the treacherous Net.
But, why should SYLVIA use Deceit,
Who is, herself, her own best Bait?
Step but, undressed, within the Brook,
And smile at every needless Hook:
Each willing Fish will round thee swim,
Gladder to catch thee, than thou him.
Or, if one Fish, uncaught, goes by,
That Fish is Wiser, far than I!
She was taken with 'em, as I could wish; and, without dreaming that they were
mine, cried out, to hear 'em again; for nothing, sure! was ever so pretty: But,
observing me very careful to conceal the Inside of the Book, she snatched it
out of my Hand; and, discovering her Mistake, blushed, and cried Pish! -- and
looked most charmingly silly! -- But, in short, my Bait took so well, that I
have now got her on a Hook, that she is never like to slip off from, 'till one
of us has done with Fishing in this World; which has at present, no happier
Creature in it, than

Your most fortunate Humble Servant, PETER TROUT.


SIR,
IT is said, that England, within this last Century, is grown Richer, and more
Potent, beyond Comparison, than in the Days of our Forefathers. I verily
believe, it is so: Because the Increase of Rank Weeds is a natural Indication
of Strength in the Soil that breeds them. I was reading, the other Day, That in
the Reign of King Edward the Second, the Number of Attorneys was limited; and
one hundred and forty declared sufficient, to serve the whole Kingdom!

WHAT a Surplusage of rapacious Claws has this Nation then to spare, if we were
disposed to cut our Nails, and send the Parings to our Neighbors! -- Put the
Case, Mr. Plain-Dealer, That yout Friend, the Czar of Russia, were to borrow
thirty or forty thousand of our Inns o'Court Laborers, to help his own clumsy
Subjects, in Digging that Canal, for joining the two great Rivers you were
mentioning? I can but smile to think, how happy they would make him! -- Let his
Rivers be never so distant, they will bring 'em together by the Ears; and work
away every Inch of the firm Ground between them. -- You cannot think, what an
admirable Talent they have at your Dirty Work: for, wherever they find a
Hole, they never leave it, 'till it is past stopping. -- So, pray, use your
Interest, to procure a Transportation in that Monarch's Favor, of these
Root-and-Branch Pioneers; for it is Pity, so great a Prince should want an
Assistance that we could lend him, without doing ourselves the least Hurt by
it. I am,

Yours, as far as is left of me, GOOSE FEATHERLESS.


THE PLAIN DEALER. No. 34.
Notus in fratres animi paterni.
HOR.
FRIDAY, July 17. 1724.
I NEVER waked in more Harmony, and Composure of Mind, than I did Yesterday
Morning; when, rising cheerfully, with my Spirits more diffused than ordinary,
I visited my Friend the Major, whose Face, as often as I see it, makes me
happier than I was before. From his firm, and steady Temper, I learn to break
the Force of my Disappointments, by the Patience with which I receive them: And
I am taught, by his Generosity, to feel the Weight of no Misfortunes, but those
which oppress my Friends, whom I love, without being able to comfort. -- When I
see this Gentleman despising, and even adorning himself by, his Afflictions, I
am ashamed to have ever murmured, or considered my own as burdensome.

I FOUND this faithful Friend reading one of my printed Papers, and
entertaining his little Family, with all the Cheerfulness of the Fortunate. --
He rose, and received me, smiling. I have been Reasoning away some Pain, said
he, by the Influence of your PLAIN DEALER. How powerful are your Thoughts? And
how happy am I in your Friendship? What a Force of Delight comes with the
Praise of those we love? It is Music to the Mind, and our Cares dissolve
before it.

THE generous Fullness of his Heart, was prepared to say much more, if I had not
interrupted him, by proposing a Walk into the Fields. -- It was one of those
sweet, sunless Days, when, though no Place was sheltered, yet every Place would
be shady. We had wandered, without designing it, 'till we found ourselves by
Chelsea-College. The Grandeur, Use, and Beauty of that Building, charmed us
into a short Silence, which the Major broke agreeably, by these apt, and just,
Reflections.

THOUGH Charity is last in Rank, when we name the three great Virtues, it
stands first, methinks, in Dignity; for it seems to include the others. There
may be Faith, and Hope, where there is no Charity; but there can be no Charity
without both. It imploys Faith in the easy Credit which it allows to affirmed
and rational Appearances: And it applies Hope to its own, and others Benefit,
by indulging an Expectation, that all that is amiss, will mend; and Ills
produce good Consequences. The common Notion of this Virtue, centers in a
contracted Beneficence toward the Support of the Poor and Needy: And that, too,
for the most Part, when the Bestower has no longer the Power of enjoying what
he parts with. Whereas Charity, in its noblest Sense, requires a Return of good
Offices, to the very Malice that oppresses us: For, it teaches us not only to
act well, but also to think generously. -- It banishes from the human Soul, all
its sordid Affections; All Partiality to our own Interests; All Attachment to
our own Opinions; All Jealousies, and low Suspicions, concerning the Designs,
Words, and Actions, of those we hear of, or converse with. It is, in short, the
great Refiner, and Ennobler of the Mind: It swells the Heart with Pity,
Friendship, Justice, Pardon, Openness, and Magnanimity; And stifles the inward
Struglings of Self-preference, Revenge, Distrust, Pride, Avarice, and Ignorance.

THOUGH it is certain, answered I, That Charity, at full Extent, is no less
than you describe her; yet, even in the Sense most limited, her Influence is
sweet, and amiable. How wretched would many Thousands be, through want of the
most common Comforts, if Ostentation did not borrow the white Robe of Charity,
to disguise her Pride of Heart, in the Appearance of Humility! And if the
Miser, on the Brink of Life, did not fill his trembling Hands with Benefits,
that bless the Destitute as effectually, as if his Will, and not his Penitence,
had urged him to bestow them!

HOW many want the Pity, which even an Hospital can give them? How many return
hungry, cold, weary, disappointed, and despairing, to their famished, and
unfriended Children? What double Death would it be to an unhoping, wanting
Husband, to see the Breast of a loved Wife dried up with killing Want; and a
dying Infant held, in vain, to her insensible, exhausted Bosom? -- I know, you
feel not that you can be miserable, 'till you think of the more miserable: And
I should not, therefore, haunt so apprehensive a Reflection, with Apparitions
of imagined Sorrow. But, how frequent would such Lots become, if not prevented
by the late, indeed, yet always welcome, Bounty, of those Founders, even of our
common Houses of Compassion? Our Monuments of Deathbed Bribery! to which, for
the Example's sake, This World allows the Name of Charity!

IT has been remarked, but, I hope, it was unjustly, That the Charity of Women
is much narrower than that of Men. -- If this is true, it is an Accident which
must be owing to some Error in their Education; for Nature meant it otherwise,
and softened their tender Minds, to fit them for Impressions of a mild, and
pitying Quality. -- In all the Sculptures, and fine Paintings of Antiquity, we
see Charity represented as a smiling Woman, to show, it is the Sex's Virtue;
and, that Sweetness, Grace, and Bounty, should adorn a Lady's Loveliness. --
When I see a Woman fortunate, yet narrow-minded, and unmerciful, I look with
Scorn upon her Beauty, and think most upon the Dross it covers. I grow angry at
beholding such a gay and gilded Sepulcher, and turn my Eyes from her shining
Dust, to the more grateful Earth, which it was taken from.

HOW different, replied the Major, from such a Woman as you are describing, is
the charming Belvidera? I have seen her lovely Features, which give new Joy to
the Triumphant, languish, and look comfortless, when she has heard of the
Unhappy. -- Her Voice, which wakes the Soul, and calls it up into the Ear, with
all the Music of a Trumpet, falls, and trembles, when she talks of
Wretchedness, which she is sensible she cannot remedy. The Numbers whom she
obliges, have two Rival Benefactors, which divide and perplex their Gratitude;
for they know not which most merits it, her Manner, or her Bounty. -- To such a
sweet Excess of Tenderness does Belvidera raise her Charity, that she would be
old, unseen, unlovely, rather than adorable, as she now is; because she pains,
where she must only pity. -- She is, at once, the most charming, and least
conscious, of all Women!

WHILE we were speaking of her, we were surprised in the most agreeable Manner
possible, by the Sight of her Chariot passing us. -- She bowed very humbly, and
ordered it to stop; and, while her Servants retired, with a Politeness and
Sensibility, which I have very seldom remarked in Persons of their low
Condition, she received us with an Air of Sweetness, that resembled the Idea
which we have of a descending Angel. -- She lamented, that she was in her
Chariot; because her Coach, she said, might have held us all; she would,
therefore, leave it, to bless our Walk. The Major offered her his Arm; at which
I felt a kind of foolish Envy, which I knew not how to reconcile with my
growing Passion for Patty Amble.

HOW attractive is Beauty, when it is softened by the humblest Modesty, and yet
dignified by Wit and Majesty! -- She busied and delighted my Soul; and I was so
transported by her Voice and Sentiments, that I fell in Love with my own
Silence, because it prolonged the Pleasure of her Speaking.

WE were joined in this Place, very unexpectedly, by Ned Volatile, who had
inquired for us at the Major's, and rambled hither in pursuit of us. He had
never seen Belvidera, nor so much as knew who she was, yet came up with his
usual Air, of brisk Assurance and Sufficiency. -- What! cried he, my Old
Friends engaged in a Confederacy against my Liberty! Then he retreated, with a
kind of counterfeit Astonishment, and, lowering his Voice, went on thus,
looking, with a genteel Levity, upon the Lady; I don't know, Madam, what
undeserved good Opinion you may have, of these grave Gentlemen; but I shall
never be brought to think patiently of 'em again. -- 'Twas ungenerous, and
unpardonable, to give a poor Wretch no Warning; but draw him in, with an
unguarded Breast, to stand the Mark of all these Charms, where it is impossible
but I must fall by some of 'em!

Believe me, Sir, replied Belvidera, with a Mixture of Disdain and Compassion;
The Danger you complain of, is too small to excuse your Terror. -- However open
your Heart may lie, few first Blows reach thither. -- If you are wounded at
Sight, the Hurt was only in your Eyes; and the Armor, you should have been
defended by, was not a Breast Plate, but a Headpiece.

I SHALL never forget, with what an Air of Surprise and Awe, poor Ned Volatile
started back, at the piercing Voice of Belvidera, and from the smiling
Sharpness of her Satire: But I love the young Rogue's Virtue; and, I own, my
Heart triumphed for him, under the Mortification of this Retreat; for it sat
on him, methought, more gracefully, than all his natural Gayety.

HE kept behind us all the Way, in a sincere and becoming Confusion, listening,
attentively, to Belvidera, without one Attempt to Rally: But I observed him, at
length, draw out his Pocketbook with a Sigh; in which, he writ for Three or
Four Minutes, and then, giving it into my Hands, I found he had been penning
down his Dying Speech, with a woeful Warning to all Christian People, to take
Example by his Suffering.

Let rash, young Fools for what I now endure,
Learn, never to believe their Hearts secure:
Once, O ye Gay! a striking Hour may come,
When Mirth shall cease to smile; and Wit grow dumb!
The light, low Jest! the giddy Repartee!
The cheerful Triflings, of the Vain and Free!
When Love's warm Hand shall wake the wondering Heart,
Will shame the Memory, and increase the Smart.
Oh! Love! -- from Midnight Mirth, Wit, Friends, and Wine,
Take my snatched Soul, from this soft Moment Thine.
I COULD not resist the Temptation I was under, to make Atonement for Ned's
Impertinence, by presenting his Poetic Penitence to the Divine Belvidera: She
perused it with a conscious Blush, and an Air of eloquent Disorder, which has
given a reviving Hope to the Distress of her new Lover. But it robbed us too
soon of her Company; for she took Leave presently after, and, permitting her
Hand to Ned Volatile, stepped, again, into her Chariot, and left us, melancholy,
and dissatisfied.

THE Major and I, were for returning to our first Subject, and had resumed the
Discourse of Charity; but Ned would have nothing but Love. His whole Soul was
filled with the Image of Belvidera: And a Passion, which, 'till now, he could
never mention seriously, was become, on a sudden, the darling Theme of his
Conversation. -- Groves, Brooks, and Belvidera, were the Objects of his
enamored Fancy. -- Silence, Thought, Shade, Solitude, Things which he had
never before a Notion of, presented themselves to his Imagination, as the most
desirable Delights of Nature. -- The Major obliged him beyond Acknowledgment,
and won all that remained of his Heart, by talking to him of a Poem, which he
could show him, when he came Home, called, The Picture of Love; and repeating
out of it some Lines, the most adapted to Ned's new Circumstances.

Cautious, ye Fated! who frequent the Fair,
Your Breasts examine, nor too rashly dare.
Curb your untrusted Hearts, while yet they are free:
Love is resistless, when you feel it is He.
Small is the Soul's first Wound, from Beauty's Dart,
And scarce the unheeded Fever warms the Heart.
Long, we mistake it, under Liking's Name:
A soft Indulgence! that deserves no Blame.
A Pleasure, we but take, to do her Right,
Whose Presence charms us, and whose Words delight!
Whose sweet Remembrance broods upon the Breast;
And whose dear Friendship is, with Pride, possessed!
Excited thus, the smothered Fire, at length,
Bursts into Blaze, and burns with open Strength.
This Image, which, before, but soothed the Mind,
Now lords it there, and rages unconfined.
Mixing with all our Thoughts, it wastes the Day;
And when Night comes, it dreams the Soul away;
Pungent Impatience tingles in each Vein,
And the Sick Bosom throbs, with aching Pain.
Ned was impatient to learn more, of a Lesson which he found so fit for him.
But the Major, with much Difficulty, came off, by assuring him, that though he
could remember no more at present, yet he had it at Home in Manuscript, and
would show it him all another Time. -- He then grew quiet, and walked on
contentedly, 'till the full Advance of the Day put us in mind, that if we
returned, we might perhaps, find Dinner waiting for us.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 35
-- Davusne? Ita, Davus amicum
Mancipium Domino. --
HOR.
MONDAY, July 20. 1724.
WHEN Souls of a superior Form, look Abroad, and discover among their honest
Inferiors, Minds capable of the finest Impressions, and only in Danger of being
rendered barren by Poverty, Ignorance, and Injuries; they take a Godlike
Pleasure in communicating their own Virtues: they strive, with the most
Praiseworthy Charity, to substitute the more influencing Power of their own
good Example in the Room of evil Patterns by others, 'till, by turning Injuries
into Benefits, they raise their obscure Neighbors, to bright Images of
themselves.

ALL Persons, who are Favorites of Fortune, who shine in exalted Stations, who
are gifted with large Possessions, and surrounded with a Multiplicity of
Dependents, have the Blessing, I have been speaking of, in their Power. They
may choose for their Domestics, the Distressed of both Sexes, whom Poverty has
rendered humble enough to wish to become Servants; and whose Discretion,
adapting their Nature to their Condition, has taught them the Spirit of
Obedience, and Diligence.

A GOOD Master may be considered as the Soul of his Family, who communicates
Action and Dignity to all, who are under his Influence, and animates them by
his own Example, to be, in some measure, like himself; his House will be the
Habitation of Wisdom, Virtue and Honor. If such a Master be at Home, and a
Stranger wants Access to him, that Stranger will be prejudiced in his Favor,
even before he beholds him; for it is easy, and natural, to read in the Voices,
Looks and Gestures of the People below Stairs, what sort of a Person one may
expect to meet with above, Nay, suppose him even Absent, he remains in some
measure at Home, leaving so much of the Force of his Presence, in those, who
represent him: He reigns in the obliging Deportment of his Domestics; and
their grateful Manner of receiving all Persons who inquire after him, proclaims
the Goodness of their Master. All the Honor, or, Dishonor, of a Family,
reverts to the Source, and either clears or pollutes the Fountain.

THERE are too many haughty Flutterers, in the World, made giddily vain and
unthinking by too much Prosperity, who dream, that People of low Condition,
ought to be overlooked; and that Servants, because Servants, should not be
treated as of the same Species with themselves. These Gentlemen, as they must
be called, have Understandings abundantly too coarse to be come at by Railery:
They ought to be bluntly told, That good Servants might make good Masters, and
that theirs possess good Qualities of which themselves appear to be destitute.
They ought in very plain Terms, to be informed, That Reason has placed their
Servants above them, though themselves are pleased, unreasonably, to despise
them, because Fortune, without Demerit of theirs, had placed them seemingly
lower.

A LOW and obscure Birth has been often the Lot of a high, and noble Spirit. It
seems to be the Victory of Nature over Fortune, that she can produce such
valuable Creatures, in the most abject State of Servitude: A Plain-Dealing,
faithful Servant is a Jewel of inestimable Value.

THE Compassion due to honest Men, on account of their Poverty, must, after
having approved their Integrity, be refined into Regard, and Esteem. I have,
for this Reason, considered it as a well-spirited Piece of Advice in Monsieur
Bruyere, who writes like an accomplished Gentleman, when he counsels all, of
that Rank, to treat a Good Old Domestic, rather like a Friend than a Servant.
And truly, it is far from impossible, but that a Master may stand in need of
such a Servant for his Friend, and find him, upon Trial, a much better, than
those inconstant Comrades, whom the World, in their mistaken Phrase, would be
apt to call his Betters.

I LATELY had a Story told me to this Purpose, and if it affects the Reader, as
it did me, he will not be displeased, that I give it him by way of Example.

A GENTLEMAN named Belmont; a Person of Distinction, filled an honorable Post
in the Army, and behaved himself well during the late Wars in Flanders. He is
Honest, Brave, Hearty, Sincere, Generous, and Affable; was generally courted
for his Company by his Brother Officers, and universally beloved by his
Soldiers. In those Sunshine Days of his Prosperity, Belmont held dear, as his
Bosom-Intimate, a Gentleman, by Name, Celsus; and had one particular Servant,
whom, on account of many rare Qualities, he loved above the rest, and treated
as Monsieur Bruyere advises, and whom, for the Sake of his Fidelity to his
Master, we will call Fido.

BELMONT, and Celsus lived, indeed, like true Friends: And, as if each thought
the other's Interest his own, they commutually, as Exigences on either Side
required, furnished one another with Money, and desired no Interest or
Security. At length, when they had long loved and lived together, Celsus, was
called to another Quarter: Never did Soul and Body part with more Reluctance
than these Friends, being less certain when, and where, and how, they should
meet again. Much about the same Time, Fido, having been bred to a Trade, and
got a little Stock by his Master, had Thoughts of setting up in the World. His
Master, when he discharged him, added to the Salary he paid him, a handsome
Present, and wished him good Fortune, with such Familiarity and Condescension,
as made the Wish more endearing than the Present.

AFTER this, if we behold Belmont, it must be under a Cloud of Evils: He met
with cross and severe Accidents which reduced him to narrower Circumstances,
than suited so liberal a Soul: He, who delighted in extricating others out of
Troubles and Perplexities, was, at length, involved in Difficulties himself. In
a word, his Affairs were brought to that Extremity, that a certain Sum must be
punctually paid on such a Day, or Belmont be exposed to such an indecent
Distress, as it is painful but to think of.

MANY Measures he had tried, in vain, to make Provision against it: He was
acquainted with many Persons of Fashion, who had been lavish of their Vows of
Friendship, and profuse, even to Prodigality, in offering him their Services,
at Times, when they well knew there was no Danger in the Offer. He tried them
all in their Turns: And found them, all, false alike.

HOW will it go with poor Belmont, who has the Ill-luck of such Acquaintance?
why, the Reader will be pleased to hear, That Celsus is returned to England, as
much in the Abundance, as Belmont in the Want of all Things, and settled within
a Mile or two of London. On him were Belmont's Eyes turned from the sad Scene
that threatened him: Here he is sure to be right; Here his Address must
prevail: I fancy myself walking over the Fields with Belmont; I hear him say,
he is no longer to groan under his Misfortunes, than till they can reach the
Ear of Celsus; They want nothing toward being relieved, but being barely laid
before him: Then Belmont is to astonish him with the Falsehood and Meanness of
his other Acquaintance. Thus soothing his Imagination, he arrives at the House
of Celsus, is received with the Warmth of Friendship; he opens his Complaint,
and tells the Story of the Usage he had met with. Here the Reader will be
stunned -- the Story was as unprofitable in the Ear of Celsus, as if their
Friendship, had been a Fable.

AS Belmont was returning home cross the Fields, loaded with heavy Reflections,
with whom should he meet, but his old Man Fido! walking out with an Intention
to lie that Night at his Country-Lodgings, for the Benefit of the Air. Fido
would walk back, part of the Way with his Master: And finding him very
melancholy, implored him to tell the Cause of it. -- At length Belmont, half
smiling, said, Thou can not help me in it, honest Fido; and yet, with a
Sigh, said he, now I think on it, I will tell thee, for thou know Celsus. --
Thou must remember him. -- Sir, replied Fido, and ever shall. -- I cannot forget
your best Friend: I hope he is not dead! -- Belmont told him the whole Story:
Just as he had finished it; they reach a little public House on the Road --
Fido, without answering, begged him to walk in, called for Pen, Ink, and Paper,
and wrote a Note for the Money, and giving it his Master, said thus; I am glad
at my Heart it was a Sum within my Power, without breaking in upon my Stock,
because I should have parted with it All; for, Sir, I owe it All to you.

LET us consider Celsus and Fido, Celsus a Friend and a Companion; Fido a
Menial Servant: Fido a Weaver of fine Silks, Celsus a Wearer of finer; how then
shall we reconcile this Matter, That Celsus, after all this Difference in
Substance and Figure, should be only Gentleman in Appearance, Fido in Reality?
It is easy to answer, that the Stage of Life is like the Theater, where the
principal Parts acted, are not always the best: It is not what Part we act, but
how we act it, that gives us Applause. I have frequently known a Servant the
chief Ornament of a Play: It is the same in the World; where they often make
considerable Figures.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No. 36.
Admiranda tibi levium spectacula rerum.
VIRG.
FRIDAY, July 24. 1724.
I AM never more delighted, than when I meet with an Opportunity to unveil
obscure Merit, and produce it into Notice: There being nothing that more easily
deceives us, than our Judgment on the Wit and Learning of a Cotemporary Writer,
when we take not our Measure from our own Examination, but rely on the
Authority of Public Rumor.

A PLEASANT Vein, a busy, meddling Talent, Acquaintance, Importunity,
Preferment, or any outward and accidental Advantage, shall throw forward an
assuming Trifler into Distinction and Popularity: While a great, and modest
Genius is neglected and unfam'd; because not One in Fifty, of our Men of
Fashion, or of Quality, as they call themselves, has an Understanding that is
able to go alone. They are forced, therefore, to wait 'till they have their
Sustainer's Opinion to lean against, before they dare venture upon the Praise,
even of what they are inclinable to think favorably of, as far as poor, weak
Wards, can presume to think at all, whose Wits are out in Guardianship, and
under other Men's Disposal.

IT is owing to the Multiplicity of these overgrown Infants, that our Eyes and
Ears are fatigued by such Impertinence of mistaken Encomium. Insomuch, that, to
those who inspect the Things and Persons which are most praised among us, we
appear a Nation of Grotesque Thinkers, whose Idea of our Writers Excellence,
like the Dutchmens Taste of Painting, seems to be Nature, in a Fit of
Distortion, where Grimace is placed for Dignity.

BY a Custom, that has prevailed too much, since the cheerful Times of King
Charles the Second, when they ran into the contrary Extreme to that which they
had suffered by, and confounded the Serious with the Humorous, treating the
most solemn Subjects after a light and wanton Manner, we have established a
false Taste of Wit, which has insensibly, like an unnoted Current, declined us
from our right Course, and brought us so far out of our Way, that it will be
some Time before we find ourselves restored to our old Relish. -- The slender
Shape of the Modern Muse, is made for becoming the Hoop-Petticoat; but there
was a charming, majestic Nakedness in that nervous Simplicity, and plain
Soundness of pathetick Nature, which went to the Hearts of our Forefathers,
without stopping at their Fancy, or winding itself into their Understanding,
through a Maze of mystical Prettinesses.

BUT, though this venerable, undressed Nature, is seldom to be met with now;
and has, indeed, been lost among us, for above a Century, it was so frequent
Two or Three hundred Years ago, that their lowest Class of Poets, the Composers
of our good Old Ballads, have left us some of the noblest Examples of the
Sublime, in its most striking Energy. But, in the present Practice, it is
stifled, as the Roman Maid was, under the Oppression of Golden Earrings,
Bracelets, Jewels, and heaped Heavinesses of the Gothic Armory. Yet, now and
then, we start upon it in the Writings of our Modern Poets; as I did, the other
Day, in an Ode, on the Power of Music, which was written by a young Scots
Gentleman, who has conveyed, in a naked Grandeur, and in the utmost Degree of
Plainness, the following aweful Thought, which carries a Terror, that will
shake the Soul of every attentive Reader.

When Living Men shall die, and Dead Men live,
And Order is, again, to Chaos hurled;
Thou, Melody! shall still survive,
And triumph over the Ruins of the World!
A dreadful Trumpet, never heard before,
By Angels never blown, 'till then,
Through all the Regions of the Air shall roar,
That Time is now no more!
BUT the Accident, which has drawn me into this Lamentation for the Loss of
Nature, in our Works of Wit and Poetry, where she ought most to show herself,
is, my having taken up, in a late Perambulation, as I stood upon the Top of
Primrose-Hill, a torn Leaf of one of those Halfpenny Miscellanies, which are
published for the Use and Pleasure of our Nymphs of low Degree, and known by
the Name of Garlands -- That Part of it, which first caught my Eye, had its
Turn a little too Modern, as well in the Matter, as the Poetry, and celebrated
the Midnight Triumphs of some straggling Female, of whom I had no Knowledge;
but one, it should seem, of more Beauty than Delicacy; Who took the Place of
Ladies bright,
And with their Lords lay all the Night!
Who pleased them with her Humor free;
Oh! the charming Sally Sal'sbu -- ree!


BUT I passed lightly over this Lyrick Fragment, as too ludicrous for a Person
of my Gravity, and fell, unexpectedly, upon a Work, for so I make no Scruple to
call it, that deserves to live for Ever! And which (notwithstanding its
Disguise of coarse, brown Paper, almost unintelligible Corruptions of Sense,
from the Blunders of the Press, with here and there an obsolete, low Phrase,
which I have altered for the clearer Explanation of the Author's Meaning) is so
powerfully filled, throughout, with that Blood-curdling, chilling Influence, of
Nature, working on our Passions (which Critics call the Sublime) that I never
met it stronger in Homer himself; nor even in that prodigious English Genius,
who has made the Greek our Countryman. -- The simple Title of this Piece was,
WILLIAM, and MARGARET. A BALLAD.
I.
WHEN Hope lay hushed in silent Night,
And Woe was wrapped in Sleep,
In glided Marg'ret's pale-ey'd Ghost,
And stood at William's Feet.
II.
Her Face was like an April Sky,
Dimmed by a scattering Cloud:
Her clay-cold, lilly Hand, Knee-high,
Held up her sable Shroud.
III.
So shall the fairest Face appear,
When Youthful Years are flown!
Such the last Robe, that Kings must wear,
When Death has reft their Crown!
IV.
Her Bloom was like the Morning Flower,
That sips the Silver Dew:
The Rose had budded, in her Cheek,
Just opening to the View.
V.
But Love had, like the Canker-worm,
Consumed her tender Prime:
The Rose of Beauty pal'd, and pined,
And died before its Time.
VI.
Awake! she cried, Thy true Love calls,
Come from her Midnight Grave!
Late, let thy Pity mourn a Wretch,
Thy Love refused to save.
VII.
This is the dark, and fearful Hour,
When injured Ghosts complain:
And Lovers Tombs give up their Dead,
To haunt the faithless Swain.
VIII.
Bethink thee, William! af thy Fault,
Thy Pledge of broken Truth:
See the sad Lesson, thou have taught
My unsuspecting Youth!
IX.
Why did you, first, give Sense of Charms,
Then all those Charms forsake?
Why sighed you for my Virgin Heart,
Then left it, thus, to break?
X.
Why did you, present, pledge such Vows,
Yet none, in Absence, keep?
Why said you, that my Eyes were bright,
Yet taught 'em first to weep?
XI.
Why did you praise my blushing Lips,
Yet make their Scarlet pale?
And why, alas! did I, fond Maid!
Believe the flattering Tale?
XII.
But, now, my Face no more is Fair;
My Lips retain no Red:
Fixed are my Eyes, in Death's still Glare!
And Love's vain Hope is fled.
XIII.
The hungry Worm my Partner is:
This Winding Sheet my Dress;
A long, and weary, Night must pass,
Ere Heaven allows Redress.
XIV.
But, hark! -- it is Day! -- the Darkness flies:
Take one long, last Adieu!
Come, see, false Man! how low she lies,
Who died for pitying You.
XV.
The Birds sung out; the Morning smiled;
And streaked the Sky with Red;
Pale William shook, in every Limb,
And started from his Bed.
XVI.
Weeping, he sought the fatal Place,
Where Marg'ret's Body lay,
And stretched him over the Green-grass Turf,
That veiled her Breathless Clay.
XVII.
Thrice called, unheard, on Marg'ret's Name,
And thrice he wept her Fate:
Then laid his Cheek on her cold Grave,
And died -- and loved too late.


I AM sorry I am not able to acquaint my Reader with his Name, to whom we owe
this melancholy Piece, of finished Poetry, under the humble Title of a Ballad.
-- Such Ballads were the reverend Fragments of disjointed Homer, when they were
sung about the Streets of the Grecian Cities, before Lycurgus caused the Limbs
to be assembled into Union; and so piec'd, redeemed, and consecrated them to
the End of Time, as we now see 'em in his Iliad. -- Yet, the Common Fate of
Merit is so unequal to its Claim, that one might almost venture to conclude,
That this great Genius, whoever he was, lived poor, and died unknown; in Want
perhaps, of Ease and Comfort, while he had Excellence, that merited a Nation's
Gratitude, for the Honor he might have lived to do it.

FROM an Air of impressive Earnestness, that is distinguishable through this
Piece, I am of Opinion, that it was founded on the real History of some unhappy
Woman of the Age the Author lived in, who had the Misfortune to die untimely by
her Lover's Insensibility; or, rather, by his Ingratitude. -- I please myself
with an Imagination, that this Sonnet might be one of Shakespeare's. A hundred
worse are imputed to him: And there is his peculiar, solemn Power to touch this
Churchyard Terror, very visible in the Ghost of this Ballad.

BUT, whoever the Author was, his Judgment appears to have been as
extraordinary as his Genius; as is finely visible in his Conduct of this little
Poem. -- When the Ghost has glided in, and stands at the Bed's Foot of the
sleeping Lover, had the Speech begun immediately, the Reader must have been
hurried too fast away from the Impression which the Apparition was designed to
make on him: He is, therefore judiciously detained in this Place by a
Description of her Face and Posture, so strongly painted, that we really seem
to see her. And, after a short Moral Reflection, which follows aptly in the
Third Stanza, we are acquainted, during this artful Interval, with her
Character, her Youth, her Beauty, and the Cause of her unhappy Death: And, by
that Time we are prepared to know her, and to pity her, the Speech is opened
with this sharp and startling Summons. Awake! she cried, -- Thy true Love calls,
Come from her Midnight Grave!


BUT nothing was ever juster, or more strikingly imagined, than his Comparison
of the Ghost's Face, to an April Sky, (which is, at best, but faintly shining,
and is here made fainter still, by a scattering Cloud that dims it) to the
Shadow, as it were, or thin Resemblance of a Light not visible. This is an
Image, so true to the Meaning, so Poetical, and well-adapted, that it greatly
deserves Notice: As does also, That Clay-cold, Lilly-Hand, that holds up a
sable Shroud! The Opposition of the Shroud's Blackness, to the Lilly Whiteness
of the Hand, is a delicate and graceful Stroke, and very judiciously heightened
by that Epithet of Clay-cold, which makes us shrink, as if we felt, what we
see, so very strongly.

TO wake us from this Horror, in order to make way for that Pity, which he is
preparing to move in us, we are, by a sudden, yet almost imperceptible,
Transition, carried away from what she is, to what she was, before Love changed
her; Her Bloom was like the Morning Flower,
That sips the Silver-Dew.


I AM charmed by a Stroke in this sweet Simile, which is touched with so much
Delicacy, that it would go near to escape the Observation of any Reader, not
skilled in Poetry: I will therefore take Notice, That her exact Time of Life
being directly pointed out by The Morning Rose, just opening to the View, that
Expression of Sipping the Silver-Dew, is peculiarly just and elegant: For,
where a Flower is full blown, the Dew-drops have free Admission, and are taken
in, as it were, by large Draughts; but a budding Flower, receiving no Moisture,
but on its Edges, is, with the finest Propriety, said to sip it.

A SECOND excellent Simile is, That where he compares a secret Love in a
Woman's Heart, to the Canker-worm in a Bud, that fades and destroys it: And
this, again, has the Air of Shakespeare, who has the same Allusion for Grief in
one of his Tragedies. -- There is something exquisitely touching in that noble
Tenderness of her Reproach, in the Eighth Stanza. -- That Erotema, or Figure of
Questioning, which takes up the Ninth, Tenth, and Eleventh, is pursued with the
most pathetick Emphasis; and, at last, broken off with an Aposiopesis, so
natural, and so moving, that I have seldom seen a Beauty more distinguishable.
It is where, after all those passionate Why's, with which she has been
upbraiding her Lover's Falsehood, she interrupts them, on a sudden, with this
Self-accusing Question, which strikes out the Moral too, in a surprising Flash
of Warning, where it was least to be expected; And why, alas! did I, fond Maid!
Believe the flattering Tale?


BUT it were endless to particularize the Beauties of this charming Ballad. The
whole may be said to be one continued Beauty! And, I believe, it will not be
possible for any serious Reader to peruse, or hear it, without Emotions in his
Blood, that will speak more in its due Praise, than the most regular Critique
on it.

IT is a plain and noble Masterpiece of the natural Way of Writing, without
Turns, Points, Conceits, Flights, Raptures, or Affectation of what Kind soever.
It shakes the Heart by the mere Effect of its own Strength and Passionateness;
unassisted by those flaming Ornaments, which as often dazzle, as display, in
Poetry. This was owing to the Author's Native Force of Genius; For they, who
conceive a Thought distinctly, will, of Necessity, express it plainly, because,
out of the Words which arise, and offer themselves to embody a Meaning, they
find no Use for the Superfluous, but to darken, and confound their Purpose.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 37.
PROPRIA QUAEMARIBUS. --
LILLY's Grammar. Interea volucres Pyrois, and Eois and Aethon,
Solis Equi, quartusque Phlegon, hinnitibus auras
Flammiferis implent, pedibusque repagula pulsant.
-- Nec froena remittit,
Nec retinere valet, nec nomina novit equorum.
OVID.
MONDAY, July 27. 1724.
I HAVE remarked an Impropriety, in our Use of common Names, which cries out
aloud for Redress: And I am absolutely determined to proceed, ex Officio, and
without waiting to receive Complaints, in giving Sentence against certain
nimble-tongu'd, married Females; who have taken it into their Fancies, so far
to invert Order, and Distinction, among the Animals which they are possessed
of, as to bestow upon their Dogs the Names of Heroes, Gods, and Goddesses; and
apply plain Puppy, to their Husbands.

I KNOW not how it comes to pass; but an Enormity, of like Nature, has had
Confidence enough of late Years, to creep into His Majesty's Navy; to the most
manifest Hazard of bringing a bad Name upon many a Ship-full of good Mariners.
-- What a Hardship, for Example, must it be, for a Crew, who can fight like
Lions, to be sent to Sea in the Antelope? Or, for a Commander, as keen as a
Hawk, to hear his Ship called but the Swallow? There is a Sound of something to
the Purpose, in the Warsprite! The Dreadnought! The Revenge! and, The Defiance!
-- The very Names of these Ships carry a Report, like their Artillery. But who
would dream of a Man of War, in the Hare? or the Roe-Buck? In the Hind? or, in
the Weasel?

I WAS at a Loss how to account for these Runaway Names, in the most fighting
Fleet of Europe, till I found, upon due Enquiry, that the Riders of our
Sea-Horses have been jockey'd out of their proper Titles, by the Encroachment
of the Newmarket Racers. I would fain, therefore, have the Claims of these Two
Parties adjusted, and assign to each its proper Quota. It is but reasonable,
that His Grace of Bolton should keep his Sloven to himself: But his Terror
ought to be given up, in Exchange for the Roebuck, or Antelope. -- Against
Creeping Jenny, and Cone^-Skins, much might be said, in a Way of Criticism. But
I am not, at present, in so carping a Humor, but that I will indulge the
Fraternity in Possession of those Appellatives. Nay, I will even throw 'em,
into the Bargain, Dryboots, Fiddler, and Blackpudding: Provided, absolutely,
that they part with Scarecrow, Swimmer, Ranter, Old Surly, Thunderbolt, and
Drunken Barnaby, to the Use, Behoof, and Disposal of the Commissiners of His
Majesty's Navy.

I AM indebted to a little white-headed Son, of my good Landlady, for the
Honor of my Acquaintance with so many Horses of Quality, who are worthy, I
make no doubt, of all the Friendship that is shown them, by those grateful
Allies, and Confederates, their Masters. The Boy came up, to my Appartment,
with a Petition, and a Paper of Gunpowder; which he desired I would instruct
him in the Mystery of making out, into Crackers: And I busied my self, for half
an Hour, with becoming Gravity, and Application; enjoying all that Pleasure,
which I perceived I gave my Pupil: Whose Powder being applied to the important
Use which he had bought it for, the Paper it was wrapped in, happened to be left
upon my Hands; and seems to have been an Original Letter, from some honest poor
Fellow, of the inferior Class of Horse-Coursers (if any Certainty, as to his
Rank, may be drawn from his bad Spelling.) -- The Beginning was torn off, with
the Date, and Place, it was sent from: But, what remained, was as follows.

-- IT was early in the Morning, the Thursday before our Races was to come on,
as All Us Horses in the Field started together, for a Breathing. But mad Work
we made, amongst us: For that same Coney-Skins, that bit Tom. Varney by the
Shoulder, at Barnet, kicked Betty Williams in the Belly, before she had run a
Stroke: And Dryboots, with me upon his Back, started close against Captain
Collier's Pig; and bid fair, for half the Course, to bite him by the Tail, if I
had not not been thrown out, by a cross Fling of Blackpudding; That is, for all
the World, such another wicked Beast, as Master Bond's Kentish Lady! -- After
him came Drunken Barnaby, blundering, jig by jole, along with Master Morgan's
Beau: And, so, they kept up, till they came, both, to the Gap-side, and there,
struck out, for the nonce, and overturned Bully-Rock, into the Ditch, upon
Creeping Jenny. -- When we were up, at the Broad-Pond, Miss Kitty, that had
only a Chimney-sweeper's Boy upon her Back, was put in a great Fright; For
Squeaker and Scarecrow, run her up to the Rail Brink! But souce came Swimmer
between 'em, flouncing directly through the Water; and, as soon as he came out,
shook himself dry, upon Old Surly, that was close up with Hobler; and made him
run back upon Tender-Toe, which beat down Ranter into a Rutt. Mean while, whip
comes Thunderbolt, full drive along with Whitefoot. But Whitefoot came first
in, although Fiddler was a Length behind him. You never saw such strange Doings!
For, except Blue Dick and me, there was Nobody rid, that knew what breathing a
Horse meant, any more than Nell Clapton does. But pray be down a Friday: For
never was such rare Work, as we are like to have at the Ass-Matches!

So no more, for now, but I rest, Your loving Kinsman, till Death, SETH THOMSON.


Fish-street Hill, July 14. 1724. Mr. PLAIN DEALER,
I BELONG to a Club of Friendly Citizens: And we meet, every Monday Night, to
discourse of such Things as may entertain, and improve us, in a way most
suitable to that industrious, and unambitious, Honesty, which Men of Trade
propose to thrive by. But our Diversion has been often spoiled by a great
Scholar, who is got among us, that makes no more of Greek, and Latin, than if
it were only plain English! -- Ever since he was introduced, he has had all the
Talk to himself; but was never understood, above Three times from the first
Night he came into our Company. He is Great Mogul of our Club, and reigns
Absolute, and without a Ministry: Publishing his Edicts in a Language peculiar
to the Throne, and which, being unintelligible, by any of his Vassals, can
neither be contradicted, nor disputed against.

HE expatiated, last Night, with a Style, unusually florid, on the Verbosity,
Loquaciousness, and Propension to Garrulity, of a worthy Common-Council-Man,
whom we were commending, for a ready Speaker. And when one of us, by way of
Atonement, mentioned my Neighbor Hushly, the Cheesemonger, as the silentest
Man, in London; he answered, That Taciturnity was a Quality as ineligible as
Excess of Narration; for it dehominated those Persons who were obnubilated by
its Umbrageousness; and involved their Comprehension in a Labyrinth of
Internality.

IT happened, fortunately for the CLUB, that an honest Drunken Officer,
belonging to the East India Company, was among us upon this Occasion. -- He
was, now, what we call Half Seas over; and star'd at our Man of Oratory, for, a
Minute without Motion! At last, he began to tell him, with the most composed
Face in the World, That he was charmed with this Opportunity of discoursing
with a Gentleman of so much Wit and Learning, and hoped he should have his
Decision in a Point, that was pretty nice, and concerned some Eastern
Manufactures, of Ancient and reverend Etymology. Modern Critics, he said, were
undetermined about them; but for His Part, he had always maintained, That
Chintz, Bullbull, Morees, and Ponabaguzzys, were of nobler and more generous
Use, than Doorguzees, or Nourfurmannys; not but he held against Byrampauts, in
Favor of Ni^canees and Boralchauders; Only, he wished, That so accurate a
Judge would instruct him, why Tapzils, and Sallampores have given Place to
Neganepauts? And why Bejatapoutz should be more esteemed, than the finer
Fabric of Blue Chelloes?

THERE was not One, of all the Company, except the grave Banterer himself, but
laughed out aloud, at this humorous Retribution of the Scholar's affected
Language. He looked a little out of Countenance, and sat silent for some Time.
But he started up, at last, with a smiling Air of good Humor: And, filling out
a Brimmer, drank the Health of the East India Officer; and, then, spoke to him,
as follows. -- Sir, I find myself much obliged, and return you my Public
Thanks. You have held to me so true a Glass, that I see, and am ashamed of the
Image of my Vanity. I was weak enough to be growing angry; but, upon a short
Recollection, find you have used me no otherwise, than I have treated the CLUB,
and been forgiven for it, these Six Months. In short, Sir, you have redeemed
me, from an Affectation, that made me ridiculous; and, as long as I live, I
will take Care to be Wiser.

THUS all ended well; and the CLUB being restored to Freedom, I am deputed, in
their Name, to write this Account of it, to the PLAIN DEALER; that it may be
published for the common Benefit. Your Health is just going round, and,

I am, SIR, Your constant Reader, etc. J. H.


FOR my Reader's Entertainment, I shall add, to these Two Letters, Two uncommon
Pieces of Poetry. The First was written, by Karasin, the Favorite Mistress of
Tamerlane the Great; by way of Congratulation, after his Success against
Bajazet. It was composed in Form of a Lozange; the Letters of which were
Brilliant Diamonds, upon a Ground of Crimson Velvet. The Words, the Order, and
the Figure, are exactly as in the Original. Note, The Wit of the Lady's Poetry,
lay in its Shape, and fine Clothes: Where a Lady's Wit often lies, in other
Countries, besides Tartary.

SOUND
O YE HARPS!
SOUND OUT IN STATE,
TEMIR THE GREAT:
WHO, WITH HIS SWORD,
OF BRIGHT, RESISTLESS, STEEL,
MAKES ALL, WHO MEAN HIM HARM,
AND THOSE, WHO WRONG HIM, FEEL
THE STRENGTH OF THAT RIGHT ARM:
CLEAVING, BETWIXT BOTH EYES,
SUCH, AS AGAINST HIM RISE.
WHAT FAME HE WON
BY DEEDS NEW DONE,
BEFORE THE SUN;
BAJAZET, LATE,
IN HIS FATE,
FOUND.
Tamerlane answered her in like Form; but with a great deal of Gallantry, and
Politeness in Letters of Amethysts, upon a Ground of Green Velvet.

FIVE
BATTLES FOUGHT,
AND DEARLY BOUGHT,
THY TEMIR WON:
AND IN THE BLOODY FIELD,
HAS FORCED ALL FOES TO YIELD,
REDUCING CROWNS, AND LAND,
BY HIS TRIUMPHANT HAND:
YET NEVER GAINED I CONQUEST, YET,
SO JOYFUL, AND SO DEAR, TO ME,
AS WHEN I CONQUERED THEE.
O! KARASIN! THY WOES
ARE MY WORST FOES.
BUT GENTLE BE;
FOR LOVE OF THEE
KEEPS ME
ALIVE.
THE Second, which now follows, is a Copy of Verses, by Queen Elizabeth; on
Occasion of her first Uneasiness, concerning Mary, Queen of Scots. -- I met
with this little Piece, in an Old Art of English Poesy, which was Imprinted at
London, in the Year 1589; and Dedicated to the Lord Treasurer, Burleigh. -- The
Author, speaking of these Verses, says, ' And this was the Occasion of them;
Our Sovereign Lady, perceiving how, by the Queen of Scot 's Residence within
this Realm, were bred secret Factions among her People, some of them desirous
of Innovation, and aspiring to greater Fortunes, by her Liberty and Life: The
Queen, our Sovereign Lady, to declare, that she was nothing Ignorant of these
Secret Practices; albeit she had long, with great Wisdom and Patience,
dissembled it, writes this Ditty, most sweet and sententious.

Watchful, to shun those Snares which would my Peace destroy,
In doubt of future Woe, I lose my present Joy
When Falsehood's Tide flows in all Duty's Channels ebb:
And meddling Folly toils, to untwist Wisdom's Web
N^w Clouds of Toys, untried, overcast the aspiring Mind:
Then fall in empty Showers; and drive, with every Wind
B^t Pride of Hope, supposed, the Root of Ruthe will be;
And all their grafted Guiles a sudden Blast shall see.
That Daughter of Debate, that does Contention sow,
Shall reap no Harvest here, where Peace has used to grow.
Our Swo^d, that rusts with Rest, shall first his Edge employ:
And lop this Love of Change, that gives such distant Joy.
HAVING never met with these Verses before; and questioning, whether they are
extant, in any Book, but that, in which I found them; I have taken Pleasure to
communicate them as a Relic, that merits to be preserved; and is worth the
Notice of the Curious.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 38.
-- Quis enim generosum dixerit hunc, qui
Indignus genere, and praeclaro nomine tantum
Insignis? --
JUVEN. Rarus enim ferme sensus communis in illa
Fortuna. --
Ibid. -- Nobilitas sola est atque unica Virtus.
Ibid.
FRIDAY, July 31. 1724.
THERE is a Hobbyhorse, in the World, called Nobility by Right of Birth; which
was the Invention of industrious Policy, to entail, and perpetuate, Virtue.
But, like Vinegar, from the finest Wines, it is so changed, by its
Putrefaction, That there is not a sharper Curse, among the Scourges of God's
Vengeance, than is inflicted on Mankind, by that silly Thing, called, Pride of
Descent. It was first indulged, as a Mark of Merit: But it clings, inseparably,
to the Line, after the most manifest Extinction of all the Worth, which it was
given for.

YET, there was both the Rational, and the Generous, in that Hope, which seems
to have been conceived, by the first Inventors of Nobility, from its Original
Institution. -- Some Great, and Powerful Prince, when he had experienced a
Servant's Courage, his Conduct, or Integrity; and, was willing to transmit
those Virtues (after they had been so useful to Himself) to the future Benefit
of His Heirs and Successors; made it his first Care to bestow, on this able
Favorite, such Lands, and Extent of Revenue, as might place him above the
Necessity of concerning himself for his Childrens Support in Life. And this
left him at perfect Leisure, to enlarge, and inspire, their Minds, till He made
them capable of succeeding, as well to his Toils, and Dangers, as to his
Honors, and Possessions.

TO strengthen, yet more, their Expectation of so good an End, They contrived
this further Means of adding visible, and outward Marks; betokening Honor,
Power, and Wisdom: Such as Titles, Robes, Rank, Privileges, and a Train of
Pomps, and Ceremonies. All These they made Hereditary, for this weighty, and
sufficient Reason: -- Because, It was a natural Hope, that Persons, who were
exempt from private Wants, should, also, be unsubject to private Baseness. They
would, then, be at Liberty to enlarge, and exalt, their Thoughts, in Proportion
to that High Condition, which they grew up in the Expectation, and
Foreknowledge of: 'Till they came to disdain narrow Principles, and renounce
selfish Purposes; such as Poverty might have seemed to justify; but, which
could never correspond with that Magnificence and disinterested Scope of Mind,
which was proposed to be the Consequence of so distinguished an Education, in a
Life so happily provided for.

A NOBLEMAN, the Descendant of Noble Ancestors, when we consider him in this
Light, seems to be One of the Pillars of Human Virtue, and the honored
Ornament of a Body Politic! And the only Reason, why we talk with Respect, or
even with Gravity, of the Antiquity of a Man's Family, is, Because, by how many
more Successions the Line has continued Noble, by so many more Examples their
Virtues are supposed to have been fortified; 'till the Practice, and Love of
Glory, Justice, Knowledge, and Compassion, are esteemed inherent, in their very
Nature; and their Blood flows down, distinguished, by a kind of Inspiration,
which it carries with it.

BUT, exclusive of this single Consideration what a ridiculous Pretense to
Reverence is the Accident of having been born, to live lazily! -- It is
Insolence; in the highest Degree, for a Cipher, of Rank, and Title, to expect
Submission, from a Person, who is venerable, for his good Qualities, upon no
better a Foundation, than because the accomplished Commoner is, perhaps, the
Son of an honest Man, who had nothing to depend on, but his Industry; And the
foolish Lord had a Father, who left him an Estate, and a Title, which somebody
(a long Time ago!) gave a sturdy, valiant, Soldier, to maintain his Posterity,
till they should grow good for nothing, and look with Scorn, at their first
Founder: Drawing all their empty Glory from the numbered Ages, which have
passed, since Merit, and Humility, could claim a Place, in their Great Family!

IF, in the World, there is a pleasanter Piece of stupid Impertinence, than
ordinary, It is, that conceited and satisfied, Self-Preference, with which one
of these Happy Creatures looks down, from his own Sublimity, upon the Merit
that lies below him! -- But I wonder what he would Answer, if, in the Height
of his Exultation, Fortune should take a Freak to whisper this Question, in his
Ear, " Pray, my Lord! have you considered, how to Deserve this fine
Distinction, which you inherit, without knowing why? -- Are you Honester, than
your own Steward? Pretty much upon a Par. -- Are you Braver, than your ragged
Cousin? Oh! no -- Not at all. -- Are you more Pious, than your Chaplain? Far
from it, I assure you. -- Are you Wiser, or more Learned, than my Lady, your
Lordship's Wife? But a little, if any thing. -- Are you Richer, than your
Banker? Not so Rich, by half a Plumb. -- Pray, what then may your Lordship's
Pretensions be, to that Respect, which you claim from others? -- Why, -- you
know, says he, that I was born to it."

IT is a pleasant Pretension! let us trace it a little higher. -- Why is This
Lord's Family of more Dignity than That Lord's, since their Estates, and Rank,
are Equal? Oh! there is a very good Reason for That: It is, because His Race is
most Ancient. -- Pray, what do you mean by Ancient? Was not Adam their common
Father? Yes: But This My-Lord has been longer in Possession of Lands, than That
My-Lord has. -- So then, the Case, it seems, stands thus, Other Men's
Acquirements must give Him DIGNITY, to whom Other Men's Merit has given
DISTINCTION!

ANTIQUITY of Name, and Family, is one of the most riduculous Things in Nature,
when it is made use of, as the Ground of Honors: There being nothing more
certain, than that the Revolutions of Time and Fortune, have used all Families
alike. And, were it possible to see, backward, into the Obscurity of past Ages,
we might pick out Beggars, from our proudest Lines; and point at Princes, in
our humblest. This Nobility, that consists in Sound, is an empty, and
chimerical, Grandeur: It is a mere King of Clubs, who, as the Game happens to
be, may run away from the Knave, and see the single Ace a nobler Card than His
Majesty!

I FANCY, that, if I were a Lord, the Turkey-Cock, with his sweeping Wing,
erected Neck, and Peer-like Strut, within the Sphere of his Barn-door Royalty,
would make me sick of my boasted Quality, unless I had better Claim than my
Pride, to the Stateliness I was distinguished by.

THE true Use of Titles, is, That they may serve, as shining Lights, to lay
open and illustrate, the spacious Chambers of a Mind well-furnished. But, to a
close, and sordid, Soul, they are like Torches, which we carry down, to
illuminate a sickly Dungeon: Where they expose, but the more disgracefully, the
narrow Cells, bare Walls; and Dirtiness.

THE basest Thing in Nature is, To have Power to do much Good, without Will to
do any. How contemptible, then, are they, who, becoming insolent by Prosperity,
think on nothing so seldom as the Distresses of the Miserable? And, while they
were made Noble, for this End only, to be active in good Offices, live, for
Pleasure, and to no better Purpose than one of their Hounds, or their setting
Dogs? -- If a Nobleman, who is thus declined, from the only End of his
Institution, can be Author of any Good, by Effect of his Example, it must be
such an accidental, and involuntary, Service, as was done, of old, to the
Philosopher. -- He was asked, From whom he learnt, to be so steady, in Pursuits
of Virtue? 'I learn it, said he, from the Persons who live most viciously: For,
observing what makes them despicable, I see plainly what to shun: And I guess,
by the Reverse, what it is that I ought to practice.

The Eastern People ascribe to Plato several excellent Sayings, which we do not
find in his Works: And, among others, they cite this following. ' Plenty and
Want, are Two Clouds, the fullest stored of any; the First rains Dullness, and
Arrogance; the Second, Learning and Humility. For, while the Body of the Poor
is improving into Spirit, the Spirit of the Rich is degenerating into Body.' It
is a pretty Remark: And every Man's Experience will enable him to justify it.
For how few Public or Private Improvements have been owing to our Men of Rank?
And how many to the unsatisfied Application of the Unhappy; who, finding
themselves pressed, by uneasy Circumstances, whet and urge their active
Talents, 'till Prosperity can afford them Leisure to be as useless, as if they
were born to it.

IT is plain, then, That a Nobleman, who has no other Merit, than his Rank
gives him, has no Merit at all: And is just so much more despicable than a
Commoner, who is equally worthless, as the Duties of his Condition are more
elevated, and important. And that Respect, which is looked for, by a Lord,
merely as a Lord, deserves to be numbered among those Sacrifices, which we make
to Custom, at the Expense of our common Sense; and to the Dishonor of our
natural Liberty.

AN Essay Writer, of the last Age, who had learnt from tiresome Experience,
That he had, irrecoverably, lost those Years, which he had spent in attending
the Great, (as they love to hear themselves called) quitted the Pursuit with a
manly Scorn: And having observed, for his Reader's Use, That these Men make no
Friendships, but such as are subservient, either to their Interests, or their
Pleasures; he closes all, with this Remark -- 'I have so hearty a Contempt for
what is commonly called Greatness, that if I did not meet with the Word Lord,
in a Prayer I repeat daily, I should never name it, but with Detestation!' And,
to allow this Author but common Justice, no Man is so foolishly, a Tyrant over
his own Heart, as he, that humbles himself, to a Will, that is too proud to
take Notice of it: And waits on those, from whom he can expect nothing, but
what he must dearly pay for, in Guilt, Dishonor, or Mortification.

I am pleased with a frank Correction, of that peevish, and humoursome,
Arrogance, so inseparable from these proud Men's Behavior, as it was given, by
a Syrian Doctor, to one of the Caliphs of Babylon. They were Angling, upon the
River Tygris; and the Caliph, growing impatient, because he had catched
nothing, ordered the Physician out of his Sight, for he was sure he should have
no Sport, in Company with one, who was so unlucky. -- 'Nay, but methinks,
replied the Doctor, you accuse me a little rashly: My Father was a Drawer of
Water, and my Mother but a Slave; yet I have been Chief Favorite of many
successive Caliphs, and am Rich, and Fortunate, beyond my Wishes: How then can
such a Man, as I, deserve to be called unlucky? But if you would be informed, I
can name a Person, who may, truly, be styled unhappy.' The Caliph told him, he
might explain himself. ' -- It is, Sir, pursued the Physician, a Lord, who
descending, lineally, from Four illustrious Caliphs, and being, himself too, a
Caliph, sits, unmindful of his Dignity, catching Fish, like an idle Saunterer;
while Ignorance and Rest, are spreading Nets, to catch his People.'

SINCE Honors were first bestowed, as a Reward of Men's past Virtues, and for
Excitement of their Future, it seems the justest Thing imaginable, That all
Lords, who possess them, fruitlesly, should forfeit them: And step down among
the Herd, to hide the Shame of those Defects, which, by Reason of their too
high Situation, blaze out, like a Beacon, to the Disturbance of a whole
Country. As, (for the same Reason) where a Nobleman is truly such, his Wisdom,
his Courage, and his Loyalty, strike out their Influence in larger Circles,
than the Virtues of inferior Ranks can possibly be extended to.

FOR my Part, as it is my Purpose to speak of every Thing like a Plain Dealer,
I declare with the utmost Indifference, That, though no Man more sincerely
reverences what a Nobleman was meant to be, yet I can have no Respect at all,
for the Name, where the Thing is wanting. On the contrary, it is my Opinion,
That every Gentleman of Spirit should despise, and mortify the Vanity of such a
chimerical Superiority, as would advance itself, above substantial Honor, by
the empty Memory and Sound of it.

THE Breath of a Sovereign may have Power to create Titles; But it can have
none, to invert Qualities. Though the Vessel is in the Potter's Hands, and the
Man must be called Noble, whom the King delights to Honor, yet, he will
never be so, by his Patent, if he was not before, so, in his Nature. -- But
there is a Kind of Man, who, will, always, be found Noble, without Aid of Pomp,
or Titles: And, in what Place soever you chance to meet him, you may know him
by the following Marks: He will be Humble in Greatness; and Immovable, in
Adversity. He will be compassionate, without Weakness; Brave, without
Arrogance; Conscious, without Pride; and Sincere, without Indecency. He will be
Wary, but not Suspicious: And his Anger will have no Malice. He will Love,
without Folly: and Disapprove, without Hatred. His Hope will be Strong, but
Patient: his Fear Awake, but Easy. He will be Active, without Hurry; and at
Leisure, without Idleness: And, at least, if he be not Learned, he will be a
Lover of Learning.

THE PLAIN DEALER. N 39.
-- Turpi Secernis Honestum.
HOR. Nec duo sunt, sed forma duplex; nec foemina dici
Nec puer ut possit: neutrumque and utrumque vid tur.
OVID.
MONDAY, August 3. 1724.
THE following Letters being written in the Spirit of Benevolence, and tending
very much to the Reformation of some vicious Habits, which are grown to an
enormous Height in too many of both Sexes, they shall furnish the Entertainment
of the Day. These Female Correspondents, who are such powerful and ingenious
Advocates in the Behalf of Beauty, Innocence, and Modesty, will, probably,
observe with Pleasure, that their Letters, in a short Time, will have had a
good Effect upon those who are not lost to all Sense of Shame; they will then
enjoy the Satisfaction, of having efficaciously corrected, with their own
pretty Hands, the Rudenesses and Abuses, which they, so justly complain of.

Epsom, July 25. 1724. Mr. PLAIN-DEALER,
I HAVE had the Misfortune to be Educated after the old-fashioned Method of our
Ancestors; who were so ignorant, to instill Modesty, as a Virtue, into their
Female Pupils. Now, you must know, Sir, this Place is filled, at present, with
a polite Set of Ladies, (Members of a Society, with so hard a Name, that I am
afraid I should spell it wrong, so will omit it) that have Heroically resolved
to put all Modest Virgins out of Countenance, by staring unmercifully in their
Faces. This Behavior adds so many new Charms, and renders them so agreeable to
all they converse with, that I would gladly assume a little of this Modern
Accomplishment: But the Prejudice of early imbibed Principles, is so strong,
that, instead of answering a SMART in his own Way, I cannot forbear Blushing,
both for Him, and the Ladies that are diverted with his prodigious Wit: So beg
you will either assist me to conquer these ill-bred Flushes; or prevail with
the Ladies to confess their Sex, by a Grain or two of Modesty, out of
Compassion to several Sufferers; and particularly,

SIR, Your Obedient Humble Servant, BIDDY BASHFUL.
N.B. It would not be amiss, if you would be pleased to appoint different Hours
of Public Appearance, to the two Classes, of the Bolds, and Bashfuls.




SIR,
MOST of our Neighbors, knowing that I have the Honor to be related to you,
have put me upon writing this Letter, to acquaint you, That Yesterday a strange
and surprising Creature was seen to pass through our Town on Horseback: It had
the Face of a young Woman, stuck full of Patches; a Perriwig, which hung down
to Its Waist; a Hat, cocked with the Smartness of a young Officer; a huge Bunch
of Ribbons, fastened behind Its Left-Shoulder; a Shirt laid in large Pleights
on the Breast, and tied close at the Neck and Wrists, which, with a Vest of
White Satin, trimmed with Black, had much the Resemblance of a Shroud. Our
whole Town was soon alarmed with this strange Appearance, and various are still
the Opinions what It really was: The Old People who were the most courageous
generally, went pretty near to It, with their Spectacles on, to view It more
distinctly; the younger Sort kept It at an awful Distance: Some were of
Opinion, that It was a Highwayman in Disguise, and accordingly were for seizing
It; others took It for a Nun; but by a certain arch Lear It had with Its Eyes,
I dare engage It had not a Bit of Nun's Flesh about It: However, by its pale
Complexion, and Shroudlike Dress, most of my Neighbors, at last, concluded It
to be a Ghost, and so took to their Heels, and left me, (who am no great
Believer in these Things) almost alone with It in the Road. I had now an
Opportunity. during the Time It was drinking a Glass of Rhenish Wine and Sugar,
at the Saracen's-head-Inn, to survey It well, and thereupon, concluding It to
be an Hermaphrodite, I enquired of the Man, who seemed to have the keeping of
It, If he intended to show It in our Town? and at what Inn? for, you must know,
Sir, that I have a mighty Curiosity to see one of those Creatures all over: But
the Man, with an angry Countenance, told me, That what I took for an
Hermaphrodite, was only a young Lady, and that the Sort of Dress she was in,
was commonly worn for a Riding-Habit by the Ladies of Fashion at London: But as
neither I, nor my Neighbors, can believe it possible for Folks, upon no ill
Design, to disguise themselves in such a Manner, I desire you will, in one of
your PLAIN-DEALERS, (for we have it constantly brought to us by our Coach)
inform us of the Truth, which will tend very much to the Satisfaction of the
best Part of our Town, who are your Readers; and particularly,

Honored SIR, Your Kinswoman, And most Humble Servant, DOROTHY PLAIN.
Kettering in Northamptonshire, July 27. 1724. P.S. SIR, Since I writ my
Letter, some of my Neighbors tell me, they believe the Creature I have writ to
you about, is one of the Masqueraders we have heard of, that are common with
you at London; but, for my Part, I cannot think it ugly enough for one of them
neither.




THE subsequent Epistle is very curious, and gives an Account of a new Method
of Scandal, which, my Correspondent assures me, takes very much with the
Satirical Part of her Sex; whom I am sorry to see so uncharitable to each
other, and indiscreet enough to trust their Reputation to the Tongue of so
loquacious an Animal.

SIR,
I WAS prevailed upon, one Day last Week, to visit my Lady Tattle, where I was
no sooner seated, but I heard a Voice (which I thought too hoarse to come from
our Sex) cry, ' It Is true, she is very pretty; but she has Mrs. Frail 's Fault,
that loves Fellows Company: And then a little afterward: Good Lord! What Is
become of Miss Patty! will she never leave the Country! People say, before she
went, she was fat about the Waist. Hearing my best Friends scandalized after
this rude Manner; I could contain no longer, but, turning about to see the
Author of such injurious Expressions, I was surprised to hear the same Voice,
in the most humble Tone imaginable, cry, Poor Poll, scratch Pole; pretty
Parrot! It is impossible to describe the Pleasure, that appeared in Lady
Tattle's Eyes, upon hearing her Bird's Discourse: She told me, She had bespoke
Three more, and that she designed one for Party, another for Scandal, and the
Third, which she would instruct herself, should speak Poetry; I beg, Sir, you
would either in your Writings put a Stop to this growing Folly, or desire some
Member of Parliament to propose an Act to prohibit the Importation of Parrots.

I am SIR, Your most Humble Servant, VINDEMIA.
Kensington, July 27.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 40.
Omnia vincit amor, and noscedamus amori.
VIRG.
FRIDAY, August 7. 1724.
To the PLAIN DEALER.
SIR,
THE few Lines, I sent to you, on the 27th of the last Month, were intended for
the Diversion of your Readers, and were the Dictates of a Mind at Ease. I write
to you now, with a quite different' Spirit, and on a more substantial and solid
Motive. My Heart was then, so light, that I little thought it would, in so
short a Time, grow so heavy as I now find it. I am in Pain about a very worthy
Relation of ours, young Mr. True Love, who, being just returned from his
Travels, is married to a young Lady, upon whom he had secretly set his Heart
for some Years before he went Abroad. The Perplexity of the Case is, That he
has married her, without the Knowledge of his Father, and that the good old
Gentleman, without the Knowledge of his Son, had provided for him a Lady,
Beautiful like her, himself has chosen, and young, like her; Equal in Family,
but vastly Superior in Point of Fortune. Never was there a more Paternal
Affection, than my Uncle True Love has shown innumerable Marks of to his Son;
nor were there ever more Tokens of Filial Piety, than my Cousin has taken all
Occasions to demonstrate toward his Father. It would be a wondrous Pity, that
any Misunderstanding should happen between so loving and beloved a Father, and
so loving and beloved a Son: And yet we are all in mighty Apprehensions, that
this Marriage may occasion a fatal Breach between them. The Father placed the
Prospect of the Son's Happiness in his having a Wife with a plentiful Fortune.
The Son thought that, with Regard to his own Happiness, no Fortune could be put
in Competition with the Value of the Woman, whose Virtue, Beauty, and
Innocence, had endeared her to his Heart. The Father (if all our Family guesses
right, and much I fear we do) will be enraged at the Loss of an Estate, in
which he had imaginarily placed the whole Sum of his Son's Felicity in this
World; he will tax him of Imprudence, tell him he has thrown himself away, and
call this Marriage so entered upon without his Knowledge or Consent, an Act of
Disobedience. My Cousin, who bears a tender and an affectionate Heart, will ill
brook these Rebukes, that make his Father seem to undervalue the precious
Creature, whom he, above all the World, holds dear; he will not, he cannot,
suffer them. He will justify his Choice; He will be warm in the Defense of the
Fair One his Father has despised; He will speak with Indifference of the
Fortune; his Father had with Pains been seeking, in Comparison of her, and
maintain the Privilege of his being of Age, and free to choose for himself. Thus
their very Affections, by this different Notion, they have of Happiness, may be
the Causes of their Difference; and since those, who have a Violence in the
Passion of Love, carry with them that Violence into other Passions, we are apt
to fear, that, unless some Precautions be taken, the Rupture may be dangerous;
and we rather think, by gentle Methods, to break the Force of the
Disappointment in the Manner of discovering the Marriage to the Old Gentleman,
than leave him to the Chance of a hasty Fury, upon his suddenly discovering it
himself. We are all on the Son's Side, before the Matter breaks out; and we
have a Mind to make it up with the Old Gentleman, as it were without his own
Knowledge. Our Contrivance is, what I am sure your Humanity will prompt you to
help forward; that you should pen a Paper, in Defense of the Right which young
Men have of choosing for themselves, and against the Hardship there would be in
a Father's interposing his Authority against the Inclinations of his Son, in
the Case of Marriage, and after we have read that to him, we will open it by
Degrees. Though it is more particularly ours at present, yet it is the World's
Concern: The Young of both Sexes will be pleased with the Speculation, and it
may be very extensively beneficial. If that Fatherly Gentleman, that wise
Companion of yours, the Major, joins with you in supporting the Cause of the
young People, two such Authorities will be of great Weight with the old Ones,
and, at least reconcile them so far to this general Opinion of all Children,
that when such Accidents happen, they will not stand in need of so many
Arguments to reconcile them to their Persons. In complying with this, you will
give great Ease and Satisfaction to our whole Family, and particularly to,

Honored SIR, Your Affectionate Kinswoman, and Humble Servant, DOROTHY PLAIN.
Kettering in Northamptonshire, Aug 1. 1724.

WHEN this Letter came to my Hands, the Major happened to be present, and as
soon as I had looked it over, I told him, He had a Right to read it; he did so,
and returning it with a Smile, Your Kinswoman (said he) makes a very reasonable
Request; The Old People, who are generally in the Right, when they differ from
the Young, will not be angry with us, their Coaevals and Well-wishers, if we
should endeavor to show, that the young People are not altogether in the Wrong
in this Point. For my share, I must frankly declare, That, when young People
are at Years of Discretion before they marry, the Law of Nature and Reason,
seems to speak them Free to choose for themselves, since they, and not their
Parents, for no less a Term than Life, are to enjoy the Happiness of a Right
Choice, or feel the Smart of a Wrong one. The Major and I agreed in this
Sentiment, and had a long Discourse upon the Subject, which, when I got Home,
threw me into the following Reflections.

OF all the Affections, which move and act pleasurably upon the Frame of Human
Nature, Plato reckons Love the most desirable: For He, says this curious
Philosopher, who is thoroughly affected with this Passion, removes his Soul to
the Place, where he has settled his Affections, and loses Himself to find the
Object he doats upon. This pleasant Straying, this delightful Wandering of the
Soul from its own Mansion, is a beautiful Description of the Force of Love, and
the Power, which those, who were created to charm, have to transport us, as it
were, from the Government of Ourselves, into their own absolute Dominion. A
Passion, which is, of its own Nature, so violent, renders Men excusable, in a
great measure, when they seem to misplace it: They cannot be said to be guilty
of a Fault in disobeying their Relations, when they are transported beyond the
Power of giving Law to themselves. They are sunk in the soft Captivity, and
Captives, are not free Agents: Neither is it hard it should be so in Nature; on
the contrary, as good and virtuous Women, alone, have the full Power of moving
and captivating the Soul in the manner I mention, it is so far from being an
Evil, that it is a Blessing to be highly coveted. The Man, who is born of a
good Mother, says little enough, when, transported by her Desert, he calls
Women the Ornaments of Mankind in their Prosperity, and their Supports in
Adversity; There is no being happy in Life without them.

PLATO, in another Place, has carried the Sentiment to a more agreeable Height,
he says, The Soul of a Man, in Love, dies in his own Body, and lives in
another. This is Energy of Expression; and yet there is not more of Strength
and Delicacy, than of Propriety and Justness: For, the Soul of a Man in Love,
is dead to all other Appetites. The Man, who was in Love with Riches, and eager
in the Pursuit of Honor, before he beheld the Fair One, who captivated his
Soul, the Moment his Heart confesses itself a Victim to the Enchantment of
Beauty, looks no longer upon Honor and Riches as the Two principal Movements,
they grow only secondary Blessings, and are no farther valued than as they may
help him to comfort, and adorn the adored Companion of his Life. Love is
really, witn regard to other Affections, what the Philosopher's Stone is
pretended to be, with regard to Metals: It inriches, and ennobles every Thing
it touches: It is the genuine Elixir, that gives a golden Tincture to every
Disposition of the Mind; it heightens Ambition; it inlarges Generosity; it
quickens Joy; it banishes Envy; it extinguishes Lust; it enlivens the Virtues,
and extirpates the Vices of Men in all Ranks and Conditions of Life. Is there a
King, who is a Lover of Money? The Beauty whom he languishes to make a Queen,
is valued beyond all his Treasure: Is there a Courtier that is warm in the
Pursuit of a Coronet? Let him be in Love, and his Mistress is his Pride:
Without her, the Coronet will not hinder his Head from aching: A Garter will
less assuage the Swellings of his proud Heart, than a Favor of her bestowing.
A Man that has a Fullness of Joy in his Composition, will grow melancholy, if he
loses the fair Object of his Desires; Music cannot please where her Voice is
not heard: Equipage, Embroideries, and Brocades are false Colors upon the
Heart that is inwardly in Mourning. The Envious Man envies no Body but his
Rival, while he continues a Lover. The Lustful forgets his Appetites after
Variety of Women. What Parent can rationally expect to be heard, when he
undertakes to plead against such powerful Impressions? All the Urgings of Duty
will be of no Effect; all the Arguments that can be used, will be no Arguments
to these; all the World, beside his Mistress, is nothing to the Man that is in
Love, and She is all the World to him.

WHAT can they hope to propose to a Son in this Condition, thar will deter him
from his Purposes? Will they propose to him a Women, whom they think more
beautiful and agreeable, and that as an infinite Superiority of Fortune, above
the Fair One, that is his own Choice; Let her be as great a Fortune as she
pleases, she is no Fortune at all to him: She would be, with all her Wealth,
the Load and Calamity of his Life. Love, he would say, is built upon the Union
of Minds; Hearts are not to be bribed by Gold, and true Passion is not to be
bought off by the Treasure of both Indies. He can have no Relish in
Possessions, that his desired Partner shares not. Will they add, That besides
Fortune, the Mistress they recommend, has infinitely more of Beauty in the
World's Eyes? He will answer, The World's Eye is none of his; he will grant,
even that she may have Defects, and will not stop to say, That he is even in
Love with those Defects. In fine, All they can propose will never avail, nor is
it, indeed, reasonable that it should. If they threaten him with their
Displeasure, and tax him with want of Duty, he will tell them, That he is
dutiful in all other Points; he will be sorry for their Displeasure, but cannot
obey in this One Case; he will make this undeniable Quotation in his Defense,
That he is to leave his Father and Mother, and cleave to his Wife. And, truly,
if his Parents think, that he sins against Prudence in choosing a slender
Fortune, all the World will judge, that they would sin against Justice, if,
forcing his Inclinations, they make him Wretched, under Pretense of making him
Rich, and render him Miserable, under the Color of making him Fortunate.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 41.
Principiis Obsta --
OVID. -- Vellent tibi barbam
Lascivi pueri --
HOR.
MONDAY, August 10. 1724.
THE Complaint of CHLOE, in the ensuing Letter seems to be formed upon so
laudable a Desire of making her Husband more agreeable to her, that without
being entirely uncomplaisant, and void of all Gallantry whatsoever, there is no
such Thing as refusing to insert it, or denying her all the Assistance, that
such a Plain Old Man, as I am, shall be able to give her, toward procuring her
a proper Redress from her Husband. -- It is, indeed, a nice and ticklish Matter
to have any Thing to do between married Folks; and, unless I had great Hopes of
doing good, I should have little Inclination to meddle in it.

BUT I remember to have heard a particular Case once, when a very Reverend
Divine was applied to, by both Parties, to accommodate a Difference between
them; the holy Man, excused himself, with a venerable Shrug, saying, That he
had laid it down as a Maxim, Never to go between a Man and his Wife, on any
Consideration whatever. -- A Friend of mine, who knew both the Man and the
Wife, assured me, That the first Grounds of their Difference were too
ridiculous to bear being told; but, that both being very stiff and obstinate
not to yield an Inch on either Side, were, however, inwardly ashamed, and
wanted nothing more earnestly than a Pretense to come together by the
Interposition of the Divine: If the Doctor had only used Will. Weathercock's
healing Method, and said no more, but that, Though both of them had been in the
Wrong, yet both of them were in the Right too, all would certainly have come
right, and they have been as good Friends as ever.

FOR this Reason therefore, I shall never think it a Matter of Scruple to
thrust in between a discontented Couple. My Correspondent CHLOE complains of a
very obvious and visible Obstruction, that is easy, and will be even refreshing
to her Husband to take off, and I comply with her Desire of inserting the
Complaint, because, I confide, that her Husband's Compliance with the Prayer of
her Petition, will be the Consequence of mine.

Mr. PLAIN DEALER.
THIS very Day makes it exactly Half a Year, since I became a Wife. My Husband,
when he made his Applications to me, always appeared Gay, Genteel, and
Debonnair. But, about Two Months after we had tied the Gordian Knot, He began
to dress in a more negligent Manner. He now appears so much the Reverse of what
he did formerly, in Point of Dress, that the Neighbors look upon it as a bad
Compliment to his Yoke-Mate. Before Matrimony, his Chin was scarce shaded. But
now, the Barber is never sent for but on a Saturday Night. This strange
Metamorphosis, you may naturally suppose, is no ways agreeable to me. I assure
you, Sir, I have spared no Pains to prevail with my Deary, to make his
Appearance, in a Manner suitable to his Station. However, my repeated Petitions
have, all of them, proved ineffectual. I therefore, beg of you, Mr. PLAIN
DEALER, to give me your Assistance in this Affair, and you will highly oblige,

Your very Humble Servant, CHLOE.


IF the Maxim of the abovementioned Divine was to be followed in our present
Case, I do not know where this Complaint might end, and whether it would not
come to an open Rupture: It is certain, the most remarkable Divorces have
arisen from as small Beginnings. The very Letter of this young Lady, shows her
to be a neat and cleanly Person, and therefore her Complaint of this (I cannot
help terming it) dirty Usage, carries the greater Weight with it. I can,
methinks, behold this young Sloven approaching the tender Thing, and embracing
her in a manner that turns Pleasure into a Torment; I see him hold her
struggling against a Kiss, his Arms round her unwilling Neck, force her Face to
his dreaded Lip; he is put to the Necessity of ravishing a Kiss from his own
Wife, and yet is ignorant of the Meaning. -- He takes it, however, by Violence.
-- She looks half pleased, half angry, hangs down her Head, hides the Water in
her Eyes, pushes him, between Jest and Earnest, from her Bosom; rubs her
glowing and smarting Mouth, calls him Rough Thing! with half a tender-laughing,
and a half-whining Voice. -- The unpolished Creature casts a Booby Stare at
her, and is stupidly at a Loss to know why she struggles so hard against what
she likes: Unless he is told, point blank, That his Beard is the Cause of all
the Disorder, he cannot perceive that her Cheeks look red and angry with his
Kisses, and wear rather the Print of Fury than Love. He must be told, That a
delicate Skin was never formed to be brushed over by a bristly Beard, that is
rough, and stubborn, like the Humor that lets it grow. I call it more
particularly stubborn in this unaccountable young Fellow, for she has told, and
told him of it again and again, in plain Terms, and he, notwithstanding all
this, pertinaciously continues to go rough. Now is it not a preposterous way of
acting, after all, that when a Lover, he should shave close, for fear of
offending the Eye of a Mistress whom he was uncertain of obtaining; and yet let
it grow, when a Husband, without having the Fear of wounded Beauty before his
Eyes; and without any Apprehensions of hurting that Face by his Roughness, that
charmed him by its Softness.

I DWELL the more upon this Subject, as inconsiderable as it may seem to some,
because it is a Male Vice that I have frequently taken Notice of, and as often
wished to see remedied for the sake of the fair Sufferers, who are wedded to
such unpolished Barbarians. A Marriage Conversation ought to humanize and
temper Men; on the contrary, these, instead of growing tamer, are made more
savage by Matrimony.

YOU shall see a Lover in a fine Campaign Peruque, and an embroidered Suit of
Clothes, altered into a Husband, with an awkward Country Bob, and a Surtout
made out of a Rug. You shall find his Manners following his Dress, and his
Complaisance degenerating into Bluntness. It is in all Degrees alike. You shall
see one, whom before Marriage, you would take for a Lord, altered, after it,
into a Coachman; many that seemed Senators transmuted into Jockies; a hundred
ceremonious Beaus turned Clowns, and numberless Sir Clements transformed into
Country Lobbins.

SURE, as old as I am, I have a more amorous Nature in me still, than these
mysterious young Fellows, whose Affections and Actions are so different, I
cannot tell what to make of them. I can easily guess it would tickle my Ear
strangely, to hear a young beautiful Creature telling me, how I should become
more agreeable to her, by adorning myself, and entreating me to do it. For
Example, if Patty Amble and I were upon absolute Terms of Agreement, There are
not any little Customs, that I would not depart from for her Ease. As fixed an
Aversion as I have professed against clouded Canes, I should, however, be
easily persuaded to carry a painted Stick, instead of an Oaken, if by walking
with it, I was sure to make Progression in my Wife's Affection; nay, I would
admit a Knot of Ribbons to it into the Bargain, provided it would render our
Marriage-Knot the easier. Again, I have known Women, who have a prodigious
Aversion to a Mouse, and are not only very wary at guarding their Petticoats
upon the Approach of that little noxious and nimble Animal, but do not even
care that any Thing, which looks the least like it, should come near them: Now,
if my Patty was of that Temper, I, who know how far Women are apt to stretch
some Antipathies, would alter the very Color of my Gloves for fear of Offense;
and though I have affected Mouse-colour for so many Years, I would fit myself
with a Pair of White, or, at least, of a less frightful Complexion, before I
would come within Arm's Length of her Hoop. In fine, though I wear a little
Mustache (the Fashion when I was young, and a Peculiarity I have not mentioned
of myself 'till this Day) that would rather tickle than offend, yet sooner than
that should interpose, it should be devoted to the Edge of the Razor. For I am
absolutely for rescinding the least Obstacles between a Man and his Wife,
before Matters are carried too far.

A GREAT many People will object, that these are Trifles; but I say, They are
Matters that have more Consequences than they dream of. However, granting the
Objection true, if conforming one's-self in little Matters is sufficient to
please, it is the least a Man can do, to indulge so amiable a Creature.

COMPLIANCE in Dress, is a Piece of Matrimonial Wisdom, Fine Feathers making
fine Birds: Women often choose more judiciously than the Men; and have Regard to
Sense, Temper, and Behavior, but they will have a Mixture of Appearance too,
in the Composition of their Man, if possible; and Dress passes, with some of
them, even beyond Looks; insomuch, that though Finery, in the general Rule, be
the Glory and darling Passion of a Woman, yet there are Exceptions of many, who
would rather see their Husbands fine, than themselves. Nothing is more common,
than to hear ordinary Women, especially, who, after they are married, are very
free in declaring the Source of their Affections, say, That the Neatness of her
Husband, the Smugness of his Look, and the Cleverness of his Shape, etc. first
made her in Love with him. If this be the Case, when the Cause ceases, the
Effect will cease too: The Moment he grows dirty, wears a long Beard, or drowns
himself in a large Josephus, the pleasant Picture, that his Wife had painted of
him, in her Fancy, vanishes; and if not re-imprinted sometimes, her Liking
insensibly wears away. In fine, as much Trifles as these are, a Wife's Heart,
if that be a Trifle, is lost by the Disuse of them; and perhaps made a trifling
Present of, to a Stranger that minds Dressing.

I HAVE been credibly informed, That it is a political Piece of Cunning, among
those unlucky Sparks, who affect to shine by the Means of modish Wickedness, to
observe, how the Husband, who grows careless after Marriage, appeared in the
Times of his Courtship, and to equip themselves accordingly. They Play the Part
of the Suitor so well upon the Husband, as to estrange from him the Affections
of his Spouse, and transfer them to their proper Purpose. They dress in the
same Manner, wear Clothes of the same Color, are punctual in his very Pinch
and Cock of the Hat, mimick his Air, Gait, Mien, and by this Policy in Love,
make the Husband his own Rival. But as the Face is the Mart of Love, so these
Inconveniences happen mostly from an Over-neglect of that Part; the being not
shaved ruffles a Woman's Temper against her Husband; while the Gallant, by
being trimmed, smooths a Passage to her Inclination.

I AM sure, if the Case stands thus, a Barber is an Artisan of Importance,
since, besides taking off the Beard, he lops away such growing Evils.

LET Him, therefore, that values his Head, look to his Beard; and be mindful.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No. 42
-- Cinis and Manes, and Fabula fies.
PERS.
FRIDAY, August 14. 1724.
EVER since I was a Schoolboy, I have been fond of walking in
Westminster-Abbey, where, when my Heart is heated, by the Violence of some
unruly Passion, I enjoy a cool Composure, and a kind of Venerable Refreshment.
-- Its dusky Cloisters, majestic Isles, Quire, Organs, Royal Tombs, and
reverend Variety of strong, impressive, Images, have a never-failing Power to
reduce my Mind from Transport, when Hope, Prosperity, or Pleasure, have
betrayed it into Vanity; or, to relieve it, when disordered, by a Weight of
Anguish, or Oppression.

DEATH, and the Sun, says a French Writer, are Two Things not to be looked upon
with a steady Eye. -- Though there is something in his Observation, rather
pretty, than just, yet so far is certainly true, That we are unqualify'd to
think, serenely, on our Dissolution, while we are surrounded by the Noise, and
Hurry of the World, in its ambitious Scenes; or softened into sensual Wishes,
by the Languor of an idle Solitude. -- While we are Part of our own Prospect we
can never view it justly: But, in such a Situation as the Abbey, we are placed
as it were, out of ourselves, and, from this ancient Stand of Death, look back
upon a Country, which we seem no longer to have any Concern in; and which,
therefore we can judge of with the necessary Clearness and Impartiality.

THE Mind that is steadfast enough to meditate, calmly, on Death, will be armed
to resist the Strength, and the Flattery, of human Passions. -- Such Thoughts,
if they make us not better, will, at least, make us wiser; since that must
moderate our Wishes. which puts us out of Countenance at their Levity: And, who
can reflect, without being ashamed, that while every Thing, in Life, is
accidental, and Death, the only Certainty; we go on to act notwithstanding, as
if all Things, else were infallible, and Death but accidental.

I, sometimes, suffer myself to be shut up for Five or Six Hours among the
Tombs, where I sit down without Ceremony, or Reprehension, among the proudest
of those Princes, who were once, too stately to be conversed with, but at
Distance, and with Fear and Reverence. -- I possess, in common, with the
Spiders (their Companions, and most constant Servants, who spread Network over
their Trophies) the unenvied Privilege of surrounding those last Beds of
forgotten Majesty. -- Here I bury myself, in solemn Silence, and imprint my
Imagination with Images, which awaken Thought and prepare me for Humility. --
The stained, and melancholy Light, that enters faintly through the painted
Windows, as if it wore a decent Mourning, to become the Scene it opens to me,
guides me, slowly, by the cloistered Allies, dusty Tombs, and weeping Statues,
till I am lost in that still Pomp of figured Sorrow, which, on every Side,
incloses me.

From finished Prayer, the Flock disperse apace,
And each glad Foot forsakes the dreary Place:
The hooded Prebend, plods along before;
And the last Virger, claps the ringing Door.
Then, thoughtful, lingering, curious, and alone,
In the dark Temple, when the rest are gone,
No Noise invades my Ear; No murmuring Breath
Not one low Whisper, in the Hall of Death!
No trampling Sound swims over the silent Floor;
But the slow Clock, that counts the sliding Hour!
HERE, indulging Contemplation, I forget my Cares, and Misfortunes, and
disencumber myself from the Forms, and Embarrassments of Converse. I become the
Inhabitant of a quiet, and unbusy World, where all is serene and peaceful: I am
disturbed by no Fears, inflamed by no Anger, inspired by no Hope, tormented by
no Jealousy: I can expect, whitout Impatience; and be disappointed, without
Affliction: The Dust, which is scattered round me, and which once, was Living
Flesh, as I am, choaks the Fountains of my Pride, and produces in me a
Mortification, that is too strong for all my Passions.

I WAS present, very lately, when of those Monumental Historians, whose
Employment it is to draw a Profit from reading Lectures, on these Resting
Places of our ancient Princes, was showing the Tomb of Henry the Fifth, to a
Circle of Holiday Strollers. -- After having informed the tasteless Wonderers,
That this was He who conquered France! That His Son was crowned in Paris! That
he married the French King's Daughter! And what else he had been Able to
collect from the Records of this great Prince's Reign; he pointed to a Plain,
Wooden, Worm-eaten, Coffin, that was placed upon the Ground, by this Tomb's
Side, and told them, That it contained the Body of Queen Catherine, the
beautiful Wife of this Triumphant Henry. -- Adding, That for a small,
additional, Contribution, he would unlock the Coffin, and let them look in upon
her Corpse, which lay there, perfect, and undecay'd, though she had been dead
almost Three hundred Years. They had Curiosity enough to pay the Price
demanded, and the Proposer made good his Promise, unveiling to their Sight, and
Touch, the Relics of that Royal Charmer.

I CANNOT express the Indignation, and Concern which this Scene gave me. -- Her
lovely Limbs, which, once, were thought too tender for the Wind to blow upon;
and which were never seen without Joy, Reverence, and Wonder, by the Conqueror
of Her Father's Kingdom, and the Sovereign of This in which she died: Now, lay
neglected, and exposed! denied even Earth to cover her! and made a Spectacle,
for Entertainment of a Crowd of common Wanderers!

SUPERIOR, as this Lady was, in her Beauty Birth, and Fortune, what
Prae-eminence in Death have all these given her above the Meanest, and most
Unlovely? -- After having made her Life a changeful Course of Sorrow and
Calamity, they left her destitute, in Death, without the Decency of a Grave to
shelter her! -- There, now, she lies, a Proof of transitory Greatness! To
comfort the Wretched, with this Reflection, when they look in upon her exposed
Remains, that Nature has made no Difference between a Royal, and a Vulgar,
Body; But, that, taking away what was added by Fortune, each, from the Moment
of Death, is the other's Equal to Eternity.

WHAT Rank, or Condition, is there among us, which may not draw, from this
great School of Moral Reasoning, some Observation for their Benefit? -- Even
the Unwary and Extravagant, whose Lives are a continued Luxury! and to whom the
Miseries of Debt appear remote, and without Terror! Even They, may find a
Lesson among these Tombs; for there they may be shown the Bodies of great Men,
doing Penance in their Velvet Coffins, and imprisoned after Death, to satisfy
the Malice of their stubborn Creditors, as if the Influence of sordid Money
could extend its Cruelties beyond Life, and had a Privilege to disturb, by
Avarice, the sleeping Ashes of departed Sovereigns!

IS a Man insulted? wronged? betrayed? Does he hate his distrusted Enemy? Are
his Thoughts employed on Revenge? And does he break his Sleep with Stratagems,
to avoid, or retaliate, the Injustice that may be done him? Let him walk with
me in this instructive Circle, and I will show him the Dust of a murdered
Monarch, mixing quietly with his who murdered him. -- I will tread with him
over Earth that is passive, and ferments not, though composed of united Atoms
from the mingled Bodies of those Men, whose battling Interests and Affections,
while they lived, shook the Kingdom like an Earthquake! -- When the Quarrelsome
consider This they ought to blush at their little Hatreds, and grow ashamed to
let their Souls be divided by Animosity, when Death may crumple their Bodies
together, and incorporate them with their most malicious Enemy!

THERE is no Fortune so exalted, but it may find a Check in this dark Mansion:
Nor any Condition so dejected, but that it may be sure of a Comfort: Every
Stone that we look upon, in this Repository of past Ages, is an Entertainment,
and a Monitor. -- I never leave its venerable Gloom, without finding my Mind
cooler, and more composed than when I entered. -- I sink deep into myself, and
see my Heart without Disguise; in its good, or evil Propensities: And I gather
Power from these strong Impressions to resist Pleasure, Pride, Ambition, or low
Avarice: And to fortify the Impulses of Humility, Forgiveness, Charity, and the
Virtues of Content and Quietude.

THERE was published, a few Years since, a Poem, called WESTMINSTER-ABBEY. I am
sorry the Author's Name was not printed with it. There is something highly
elevated in his Genius, that is sweetly serious, and sublimely melancholy! --
The Verses inserted above, I am indebted for to that Poem: And I shall borrow
from the same Piece, these following, which, I will take the Liberty to affirm,
are as fine ones, as were ever written. -- I ask Pardon for a Transposition,
and Alteration, or Two, which I have only made, that I might have the Pleasure
of collecting into one view, as many of the Beauties, as could possibly be
drawn together in the narrow Compass of my Paper.

Lead on, my Muse! while, trembling, I essay
To trace thy Footsteps, through the Cloistered Way:
Throw a thick Veil around thy radiant Head,
And lead me through the Dwellings of the Dead.
Where the still Banner, faded, and decayed,
Nods, pendant, over its mouldering Master's Head,
Where Loves, transformed to Marble Angels, moan:
And weeping Cherubs, seem to sob in Stone.
Seize Time: and by the Pinions, urge his Stay;
Stop him, a while, in his Eternal Way.
Bid him recline his Scythe, on each pale Tomb,
And name the Tenant of the darksome Room.
O, Muse! with Care, the blended Dust explore;
And re-inspire, and wake, the sleeping Floor.
To mount their Throne, here, Monarchs bend their Way,
Over Pavements, where their Predecessors lay:
Ye Sons of Empire! who, in pompous Hour,
Attend, to wear the cumbrous Robe of Power!
When ye proceed along the shouting Way,
Think, there is a Second Visit, still to pay.
And, when in State, on buried Kings you tread,
And swelling Robes sweep over the imperial Dead!
While, like a God, your worshipped Eyes move round,
Think, then, O think! you walk on treacherous Ground.
Though firm the checkered Pavement seems to be,
'Twill, surely, open, and give Way, for Thee!
While crouding Lords, address their Duties near
The anointing Prelate! and the kneeling Peer!
While with obsequious Diligence, they bow,
And spread the careful Honors, over thy Brow:
While the high-rais'd Spectators shout around,
And the long Isles and vaulted Roofs, resound:
Then, snatch a sudden Thought and turn thy Head,
From the loud Living, to the silent Dead.
With conscious Eye, the neighboring Tombs survey:
These will instruct thee, better far, then They!
What now, thou art, in yon gay Homage see:
But These best show, what thou art sure to be!
I AM ignorant what Reception this excellent Performance met with in the World;
but I, hope, for the Honor of my Country, that it was not a bad one! -- The
whole Poem is full of Beauties; but, if it had no other Merit than appears in
what I have here copied from it, every candid Judge of Poetry, must allow it to
have deserved the highest Applause and Admiration.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No. 43.
-- Hic murus aheneus esto
Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa.
HOR.
MONDAY, August 17. 1724.
But thou shall flourish in immortal Youth,
Unhurt, amidst the War of Elements,
The Wreck of Matter, and the Crush of Worlds.
Add. Cato.
Mr. PLAIN DEALER,
I Am an old Man, as you are, and when I reflect on the fantastic Vicissitude
of human Affairs; when I consider the Shortness of Life, and the small
Pretensions I have to any longer Share in it, it fills my Mind with something
grave, solemn, and, I must own, melancholy; but when I give my Thoughts a more
unbounded Scope, and pass over that short Intermission of Life, into the
Contemplation of an Eternal Being, my Mind recovers from that Gloom, which the
first Reflection filled me with, and grows gay, in Proportion to the Influence
which this latter has upon it.

I WAS, last Night, reading that celebrated Speech of Cato whence I have taken
the Motto, with which I head this Letter, and whether it was from the serious
Thoughts which that Soliloquy inspired, or the last strong Glimpses of a Mind
almost expiring, and habituated to such Speculations, I am not able to
determine; but I was no sooner fallen asleep, than the following Dream, or
rather Vision, grew into Form, and filled my Fancy.

METHOUGHT the dreadful Hour was come, in which I was to resign this Life; my
Bed was surrounded by a silent Company of weeping Friends, whose Sorrows
touched me more, than my own approaching Dissolution, which happened in less
Time, than human Nature can conceive, and therefore (though at that Period I
felt it sensibly) it is impossible I should now describe it. I was no sooner
freed from the Encumbrance, and Obscurity, of Matter, but my Soul became
refined to such an infinite Degree of Conception, that my Eyes, having nothing
to interrupt, or confine their View, were strengthened with such piercing
Beams, that they darted every Glance through an innumerable Progression of
Worlds, and illuminated me with a particular, and perfect, Knowledge of the
Harmony, and Fabric of each extended System.

WHILST I was thus lost in Contemplation (for infinite Spare, like an endless
Source, still afforded me new Objects to nourish that inextinguishable Thirst
of Knowledge, which is the Employment of Eternal Life) I felt a Heavenly
Transport, which diffused itself, swifter than Thought, through the Frame of my
new Being; and which, at the same Time it made my Soul tremble with its
Influence, invigorated, and enabled it to support the Energy.

I NOW enjoyed perfect Felicity, and whilst my Soul (whose Desire of Knowledge
increased in proportion with its Power to gratify it) employed each different
Sensation in pursuit of that Branch, which which was peculiar to its Nature; on
a sudden, I heard an universal Crack, which seemed to arise from the whole
Number of created Worlds, and resounded from Globe to Globe, with a long
Continuance of reverberated Uproars.

AT last, the Chain that linked them in that dependant Order, in which, from
the first Moment of their Creation, they have perpetually been moving,
shivered, of itself: The loosened Orbs, thus disunited, began to roll, with an
unconceivable Swiftness, through the vast Expanse of Space, and met, and
shocked each other in the dark Vacuity! The Sun, now robbed of Light, whirled
rapid, and irregular! The Moon let loose her Seas, and rained a Deluge in her
falling! The fixed Stars, that, from the Birth of Time, had kept their
appointed Stations, no longer awed by the all-powerful Word, broke loose, and
rushed together. Prodigious was the Sound! and horrible the Conflict! The
Elements, forgetting their respective Qualities, and urged by the immutable
Decree, met, all, and mixed, and lost themselves, in ruinous Confusion.

WHEN all seemed buried in profoundest Darkness, the wild Uproar ceased at
once; and as I wondered at this sudden Silence, a Pyramid of Fire broke through,
that in a Moment, enwrapp'd the Whole, and, having nothing left to prey upon,
at length, devoured it self.

THUS was the End of All! When from that inaccessible Brightness, where the
Divine Presence conceals, yet makes it self known, a Beam of Day shot out,
which lighting up the infinite Extent of Heaven, and rendering it transparent,
discovered all its Glories. I there perceived the Stream of Life, which running
through the midst of Heaven, quickened wherever it rolled, and watering the
Tree of Knowledge, nourished it eternally: Next, I saw numberless Swarms of
Beings, like myself, that filled the Vastness of Infinitude, and seemed lost,
like me, in Wonder, Praise, and Adoration. I heard a Voice (which had more
Influence, than the most perfect Harmony of human Art, and communicated itself
to all alike) cry, Come, Eat of the Tree of Knowledge, and Drink of the Water
of Life.

IMMEDIATELY the Angelick Host, and all the Children of Earth (who, by
Obedience to this Command, were become one, and the same) eat, and drank, as
they were commanded. The first Effect of this, that I found on myself, and
perceived in all the rest, was a perfect Recollection of whatever I had done
since my first entering into Life: Various were the Consequences! The
Ungrateful, the Murderer, the Miser, the False Friend, and the Rebel,
remembered, with Horror, their past Crimes, and grew frantic, at every
Thought, with the Consciousness of what they had merited. They felt the
severest Pangs of that most lively of all Torments, Despair; but the Just, and
those who had the least to reproach themselves with, found, yet, they had too
much to answer for, when, in the Book of Record, which was thrown open to the
View of all, they perceived, that the minutest of their Thoughts were
registered.

NOW we all became sensible, how easy the Rule was by which we were to have
lived; and how adapted to the required Obedience of human Nature! Whilst we
were thus lamenting our unhappy States, and aggravating our Misery by
Self-Conviction, in an Instant, we discovered a fiercer Blaze of Light, and
beheld the mystic Veil drawn off, that shrouded the Almighty's Presence:
Raised on a Throne, to which the Brightness of the Sun would have been dim, the
Divine Father of all Things disclosed Himself; His Countenance was mildly
aweful; Paternal Tenderness shone out in every Feature of His Face, and
discovered a Concern for us, which, we knew, proceeded from a Divine Idea, That
if He should be Merciful, He must be more than Just.

ON His Right Hand sat the Second Person, our known Redeemer; In Him, the
Beauty of the Father was divinely manifested; In Him, the Glory of His Power at
once was softened, and exerted. Behind Him the fatal Figure of that Cross, on
which He suffered, hung, like a dreadful Comet, prognosticating the Hour of
Judgment. On the Left, was placed the Third Adorable Person, in the, now, no
longer Mystic Union. In Him, an equal Mixture of the Father, and the Son,
revealed itself, uniting, in his Countenance, the severest Glory of the One,
with the most ineffable Sweetness of the Other.

BENEATH, and on the Right of the World's triumphant Savior, sat his Twelve
Disciples: Their Eyes were fixed on their great Master's Looks, and seemed to
borrow thence, by Reflection, all their Softness, and their Luster. In equal
Stations, on the Left of the Holy Spirit, appeared those Ancient Philosophers,
who, through the Dusk of Superstition and Idolatry, by the Light of Reason, and
mere Nature, saw, and taught, One True, Eternal God; and in Defense of that
Belief, had Courage even to suffer Martyrdom.

WHILST I contemplated this Divine Appearance, I heard a Voice, which,
proceeding thence, pierced the profoundest Space of Heaven, proclaming, That
each should be his own Judge, and from the Testimony of his own Conscience,
acquit, or condemn himself.

IMMEDIATELY all the Just, and those whose Consciences, by due Allowances for
the Frailties of human Nature, could acquit, and encourage them, advanced, and
(with a Modesty, at once more humble and assured, than any thing on Earth)
asserted, and made known, their Virtues and Obedience to the Divine Commands,
concluding, that, though they had acquitted themselves, and were entitled, by
the unalterable Word, to Everlasting Felicity, yet could they not pretend to
claim it, 'till they had received the Almighty Sanction, which they hoped for,
through the Mediation, the Merits, and the Blood of his beloved Son, who died
for Man's Redemption, Pardon, and Salvation. After which, they prostrated
themselves before the Throne, and, receiving Diadems of Glory, were admitted as
Partakers of Beatitude without End.

I THEN heard the same Voice repeat, Let each be his own Judge, and from the
Testimony of his own Conseience, acquit, or condemn, himself; But, far from
seeing any more advance (though still there were infinite Numbers remaining) I
observed, that they drew back, reproaching each other, beating their Breasts,
and making such Variety of Lamentations, that the violent Noise awakened me, in
such a Mixture of Joy, and Horror, that it will be long before my Memory wears
out the Impression of so strong a Vision, which, if it affects you enough, to
make you judge it worth publishing, I shall have slept, as I love to wake, for
the Service, or Warning of others.

I am, SIR, Your constant Reader, C. D.


THE PLAIN DEALER. No 44.
Obsequium amicos, veritus, odium parit. --
TEREN. Fortior, est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit
Moenia --
VIRG. Nil agit exemplum, litem quod lite resolvit. --
HOR.
FRIDAY, August 21. 1724.
I was visited, some Days ago, by several of my distinguished Friends; and, on
this Occasion, must particularly name the Major, and Ned Volatile, in regard
they were the principal Persons concerned in that Afternoon's Conversation,
which gave Birth to this Day's Paper.

THE Discourse turned upon a Subject, to which a late unhappy Rencounter
furnished too many Materials: 'Twas the Dispute between Two dear and
inseparable Friends, which ended not, but with the Life of one of them. The
Personal Acquaintance, that some of us had with one, or both, of the Gentlemen,
continued our Conversation longer, and carried our Reflections farther, than we
should else have allowed of, at a Time, when we met to give, and receive a
mutual Pleasure.

THE Point of Honor, which is usually the Foundation, upon which these unhappy
Disputes are grounded, was, by the Major, beautifully explained, and set in a
just Light, opposite to the too generally mistaken Notions of that noble
Qualification; and which Ned had too warmly debated, 'till Will. Weathercock
diverted his pushing it to Extremity, by the seasonable Interposition of his
peculiar Judgment. Will's Decisions, as the Pagans painted their Janus, always
appear with Two Faces, which favor both Parties, and reconcile them in good
Humor. Nevertheless, we could not leave the Subject entirely, without a
Progress of Reflection upon the Fatality of sudden Startings, and ungovernable
Passions, which are too much indulged, and but too little provided against, by
the Generality of Mankind.

I REMEMBER 'twas agreed to, that most of the ill Blood, Debates, and Quarrels,
that happen, owe their Original to Unconcern, and Carelessness about our Humor
in Conversation. A Man must be Master of himself, and preserve a watchful Guard
over his Behavior in Company, if he would either please, or be pleased. There
is a natural Liberty, which all Mankind claims by Right; but the mistaken Use
of it leads to Mischief. A licentious, or rambling, Tongue proves, as injurious
to Society, as Treason to a State; and Traitors smart no more, frequently, for
This Guilt, than Prattlers for That Folly.

NED VOLATILE, not yet quite cool, broke in upon our Chain of Reasoning, by
asserting, 'That a strict Watch over one's Words, Actions, and Humor, in all
Companies, is a Restraint, which, in his Opinion, differed nothing from
Torture. What! said he, must I be always under the Slavery of thinking before I
speak? Shall I never have the Pleasure of expressing my own Sentiments? Who
would sacrifice his natural Rights, to please another Man? Would any but a
Fool, or Flatterer, praise what he hates? or declare himself an Enemy to what
he loves, merely to show his good Humor, or Complaisance? No Gentlemen, I
maintain, That Grandeur itself, would be too dear bought at this Priee; and
whoever affirms the contrary, is no Friend to Plain-Dealing.

HE paused here, and looked at me for Approbation; I was going to distinguish,
and remark the Circumstances that should be punctually regarded, when the Major
begged to be heard. 'The Restraint, said he, that you represent so dreadful,
gives more Satisfaction, than Pain. Your Complaisance, and good Humor, is more
your own Interest, than your, Companion's. Is it not for your own Sake, that
you accommodate yourself to his Humor, from whom you hope good Offices or
expect agreeable Enterainment? Do you take for Dissimulation a Guard of
Prudence, which induces you to seem in the Sentiments of a Man, whom you would
willingly draw into yours, when either your Interest, or Inclination, requires
it? For my Part, I think you have a Right to applaud yourself, when you can
enter agreeably into opposite Humors: What induced all the Anticents to admire
the pliant Conduct of Alcibiades? And why do we still wonder, that a Man could
so aptly accommodate himself to the different Manners of the several Countries
where he lived? Nothing was so much talked of at Athens, as his Eloquence and
Gallantry. Among the Persians, he was always feasting, and nothing was seen
more splendid, than his Dress and Equipage; but he passed over to opposite
Manners, when he was obliged to go to Sparta; for there the most rigid
Lacedemonian led a Life less austere than Alcibiades.

' ALCIBIADES, cried Ned Volatile, was an Affector of Popularity. His Maxim was
like that of a Friend of mine, Cum fueris Romae, Romano vivito More. But, hang
it. -- I hate that Suppleness of Humor, It may be necessary for Ambassadors
and Travelers; but Ned Volatile has nothing to do with it.

HE was proceeding, in his usual Volubility of Speech, when I interrupted him,
in the following Manner.

'I AM sorry my Friend Volatile would decry one of the Blessings, upon which
the Happiness of Society is in a great Measure, founded. The Commerce of Life
requires our Regard to Variety of Humors every Day, and when Nature denies the
Mastery, of them, Men should endeavor to acquire it. Who would not rejoice
with a Friend, newly, and happily, married? Congratulate one just arrived from
his Travels? Or Condole with another on the Loss of an only, and valuable Son?
This is no Suppleness, no Inequality of Humor? It Is a Sweetness, it is a
Virtue. Tell me; Would not yourself, in the Presence of a Gay Prince, devoted
to his Pleasures, appear with a cheerful Countenance? Or, Would you accost with
a smiling Air, a cloudy, and suspicious, one? No more is it fitting to carry a
Passion into Company disagreeable to that which reigns in it, or to discover a
Mien which condemns the Sentiments wherewith the Company is prepossessed. In
short, nothing is more opposite to the Maxims of Civil Society, than an
Opinionative, and Dogmatical, Conduct; and he who will obstinately follow it,
is in Danger of never getting new Friends, and even of losing his old ones. I
wish I could say, That these Duels, and Deaths, we have been speaking of, are
not its common Consequences.

'I HAVE heard, and enter into your Sentiments with Pleasure, said Ned
Volatile; but allow me, at least, to affirm, That one who is thus Master of his
Temper, must never abuse this Power; never betray his Sentiments, in
maintaining an Error, or in giving Praises to Words or Actions, that he is
sensible do not deserve it.

'RIGHT, answered I. -- How then, said he, or wherein, do you appear Master of
your Humor? -- When I submit it, replied I, to that of others, or decline my
own Will to theirs, to whom I would show a Deference, my Words, at least, my
Silence, should carry Tokens of my Complaisance. As for Example; Did one whom I
would not displease, commend an ill Man, not well known to him? or who had
wronged, or disobliged me? In such Case, I would stifle and conceal my
Resentment; and be silent, since I could not be of the same Opinion with a
Person whom I was unwilling to offend.

'NO, no cried, Ned Volatile, if ever I subject my Humor, it shall be to the
Ladies; There are many Capricio's, that must be borne with, from them; but, in
all other Cases, my Mind is my Kingdom; I am absolute, and will be so.'

HE ran on, to this Purpose, near a Quarter of an Hour; and, at last, happening
to touch again on the Article of Honor and Friendship, which had introduced
the Subject of our Discourse, the Major requested him to hear a Story, in
which, an Example of both these valuable Distinctions would better plead for
their right Use, than any Account he could give of his own particular Sense of
them. The Story, said the Major, is Modern; but not well known; and amongst all
the Instances of Bravery, is a fine, and uncommon Display of it. It Is what most
Fighters would think below them, yet, what none, but a Conqueror, could come up
to.

ALTAMONT, and Honorius, were both Men of Quality, and of Eminence in the Army,
wherein they had served long in Friendship together. Altamont was, deservedly,
placed in the full Height of Power and Preferment: Honorius, inferior but a
small Degree in Post, was greatly so in Fortune; but he was filled with
Princely Virtues, and his Soul had a distinguished Greatness: He had been a
Sharer in the whole Course of Altamont's innumerable Glories. -- Honorius, on
some after-Occasion, whether, as supposed, by Altamont's Breach of Promise, or
what other Ground for Resentment happened, is neither known, nor material to be
debated; it is sufficient to tell you, That Honorius was so disobliged, that he
sent Altamont a Challenge, to determine their Difference, in a Duel, at a Time
appointed, in Hyde-Park.

AT the Time in which Altamont received this Challenge, he was so deeply
engaged in a Trust, whereon depended the Preservation of the King's Person and
Government, that he could not sacrifice, or neglect them, by risquing his
important Life, in a Personal Quarrel, at that Juncture; but knowing well the
Honor and Bravery of Honorius, and jealous too of his own, he sent for
Carolinus early that Morning, in which he was to fight. -- ' Brother, said he,
You know how much of the Weight of Government lies at this Time upon my
Shoulders, and there are some secret Concerns of State, to which you are yet a
Stranger. I am called upon to a Duel: It concerns a Case of Honor, and my
Adversary is a Man of Bravery. You must meet him, in my Stead, and give him the
Satisfaction he requires.'

CAROLINUS, resolved to act in his Brother's Cause, as in his own, without
Delay, went to meet his unknown Opponent; but when he arrived at the destined
Spot, he was confounded, to see him the dearest Friend he had upon Earth! 'Good
God! said Honorius, to what am I fated? I expected your Brother, and is it You,
my Carolinus!' It is, replied Carolinus, with a Sigh! They gazed on each other;
their Breasts were agitated by a Tempest of warring Passions! -- After a Length
of silent Confusion, Honorius thus addressed himself to Carolinus -- 'You are
that very Friend, I ever called, and thought you; You are the Man who have so
often vowed the most sincere, and exalted Friendship for me.' 'I am, replied
Carolinus, and I bring with me the same devoted Heart, a Sacrifice to your
Disposal! If you survive, you will know my Innocence, and the Cause why I am
here, which weighty Reasons forbid the Discovery of at present; But come --
Since it must be thus' -- They both advanced, and in that Instant, Honorius
cried, Hold my Carolinus! It Is done! The Struggle of my Soul is over, and our
Dispute at an End. I am determined! I will not, I cannot break the Chain that
has bound our Souls so long together; no, not for your Brother's Power, or my
Prince's Crown. -- They continued some Time in Disorder and Expostulation. Both
of them were brave, sovereignly brave! and none ever lived, who better knew
what Honor was, or could defend it more nobly!

HONORIUS went on; -- 'Well, my Friend, 'till now, I never felt Extremity. Your
Brother, who has done me Wrong, ought to give me Satisfaction, and were he
here, I could not sheath my Sword unsatisfied; but you are my Friend, with whom
I can have no Difference. I would die a Thousand Deaths to save, or to serve
you; and I will put the greatest Force upon my Nature, and even ask Pardon of
the Man who has injured me, rather than hazard a Life, so much more precious
than my own. But, let us leave this Place with Speed; I Will give up my
Resentment. Let your Brother, let the World, treat my Conduct, at their
Pleasure: There is nothing, but my Hopes of Heaven, that I would not hazard for
my Carolinus: -- He went, and did as he said; and whatever Constructions the
World might put upon Altamont's Behavior, and Honorius's Condeseension, a
noble Example was here given of the most generous, and exalted, Friendship; and
of that absolute Self-Conquest, which Solomon, the wisest of all Men, prefers
to the Conquering of a City.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 45.
Scribere jussit Amor. --
OVID.
MONDAY, August 24. 1724.
I DEDICATE this Paper to the Ladies; for I design it as a Lesson of Love:
which a certain perverse Foreigner, will have to be no more than a Phantom;
Because says he, Like an Apparition, Every Body has heard of, but Nobody has
seen it.

IT is much easier, indeed, to love, than to explain what Love is; For it is
one, among the Paradoxes of that ungovernable Passion, that it strikes the
Tongue dumb; but makes every other Part of the Body eloquent.

THE Major, to please Ned Volatile, has indulged him the Perusal of that
PICTURE OF LOVE, from which he recited the Verses, in my XXXIVth Paper. -- I
had the Misfortune to be present, and to hear him read it over. I call it a
Misfortune, because my Passion for that wild Insensible, my Coquet, who is
rambled away to Tunbridge, was half suppressed before, for want of Occasion to
inflame it; but has rekindled itself, at the Fire which it caught from this
unlucky Picture; and I, now, bleed afresh, like a dead Body, at the Touch of
its Murderer.

YET, why do I complain, that I am sensible of a generous Passion, which, to
lay aside the Pride of Wisdom, and the Formality of Age, and Gravity, he who is
insensible of, is stupid? -- The Philosopher defined Love prettily, when he
said, It was a Circle, returning through Happiness, to Happiness, from
Happiness. The Emblem was ingenious, and the Lover's Ring is a proper, and
significant, Allusion to it.

I AM so far, when I think seriously, from being ashamed to be called a Lover,
that I am, sincerely, of Opinion, that whoever has not loved, has put his
Virtues to no Trial. -- Love is the Breeze of Life: A healthful, and
refreshing, Gale, which, by its Agitation of the Spirits, keeps our Faculties
in lively Motion; so, as neither to stagnate, in unfruitful Rest, nor drive
tempestuously, with the most stormy Passions. -- The Heart of a Lover is
impressed with Sweetness, and Humanity. His Soul receives Extension, beyond its
natural Power; and is as much more refined, than a selfish, common, Soul, as
that Soul, which it so excels, is above the Body it belongs to.

THERE is something, in Love, that is stronger than Calamity, and more gentle
than Pity! serener than Silence, more splendid than Riches, and statelier than
Honor! More trembling than Fear, and more charming than Pleasure! It is, even
more powerful than Conscience: For whom we love, we imagine, always, present,
and passing Judgment on our most secret Purposes. We regulate them, therefore,
according to our Apprehension of what She would approve, or condemn; and, so,
supply ourselves with a constant Vigilance, and Propensity to noble Actions.

IN some Sense, he who loves, may be said to be like a God; for he has but one,
Care, and That, a Great, and a Heavenly, One! He is, wholly, intent upon
Beneficence. -- He has the Prophet's sacred Privilege, to be rapp'd, out of
himself! To enjoy perpetual Ecstacy! To be emptied of his own Soul, that he may
be animated by one, more dear to him! -- Our Ideas of the Joys of Heaven, can
represent them no other, than that we are, there, to love, and to be beloved:
And they, who love, here on Earth, are above the World, while they are in it.
Nor can Death disunite Lovers so entirely as it does other People, since Love
dies not, with the Object loved. She lives, so tenaciously, in our charmed, and
retentive, Memory, that her Death seems no more, than a long, and lamented,
Absence, rather indearing, than defacing, her Image. -- So that This is the
only Difference, which Death seems capable of making, when he interposes
between Lovers; -- While both lived, their Two Bodies had no more than One
Soul: And, now one is dead, their Two Souls hove no more than One Body.

NEITHER has Age, that alters all Things, a Power to deface our Love; for, whom
we love, can never seem Old. Our Remembrance presents her Beauty everlastingly
in its Spring: And her Idea is retained inchantingly, in the very Attitude,
which, first, she struck us by.

THE restless, but unwearied, Lover, seeks for himself, out of himself: Let him
gaze, touch, listen, and be blessed, for ever, yet, still, he longs, and is
unsatisfied! -- There is a Dropsy, in his Mind, and his Thirst augments, with
drinking. -- His Soul is either not at home, or in a starting, and impatient
Posture. -- If he presses his Charmer's Hand, it darts, with Violence, into his
Fingers. If he leans at her loved Side, it beats against his Breast, as if it
would break its Prison, to be nearer her. When she speaks, it is in his Ear:
When he looks on her, it is in his Eye: But, he has no Soul at all, when she is
absent.

Absent from her, in whom, alone, we live,
Life grows a Bankrupt, and no Bliss can give:
Friends are importunate, and Pleasures lost;
What, once, most charmed us, now, disgusts us, most!
Fretful, to silent Solitudes we run,
And Men, and Light, and noisy Converse, shun.
Pensive, in Woods, on Rivers Sides, we walk,
And to the unlistning Winds, and Waters, talk.
How, next, we shall approach her, pleased, we weigh!
And think, in Transport, All, we mean to say.
Tenderly bowing, Thus will we complain;
Thus, court her Pity; And, Thus, plead our Pain.
Thus, sigh, for fancied Frowns, if Frowns should rise,
And Thus, meet Favors, in her softning Eyes.
Restless, on Paper, we our Vows repeat,
And pour our Souls out, on the lettered Sheet.
Write, blot, restore, and in lost Pieces, rend
The Mute Entreaters; yet, too faint, to send.
Unblessed, when no Admission we procure,
It Is Heaven, at Distance, to discern her Door.
Or, to her Window, we, by Night repair;
And let loose Fancy, to be feasted, there.
Watch her loved Shadow, as it glances by:
And, to imagined Motions, chain our Eye.
Has she some Field, or Grove, or Garden, blessed?
Pleased, we retread the Paths her Feet have pressed.
Near her, by Chance, at Visits, or at Plays,
Our rushing Spirits crowd, in speaking Gaze,
Light, on her varied Airs, our Eye Balls ride,
Dark, as the Dead, to the full World, beside.
LOVERS converse, like Angels, by a kind of Intuition! They hear one another's
Souls; and prevent each other's Wishes. -- Like Divinities quitting their
Shrines, they disrobe themselves of their Bodies; and intermingle their meeting
Minds, as we see Two Lights incorporate. -- Their Souls glide out, from their
Eyes, to snatch Embraces, at a Distance; and return, enriched, with the fancied
Treasure. -- There is more Harmony, in Love, than in Music: A Harmony! like
that which the old Philosophers imputed to the Spheres! Only Two Spheres are
acted; by one, and the same, Intelligence. For the Strings of Two Hearts
sympathize, like those of Two Lutes, with correspondent Trepidations.

HOW mistaken are they, who call Love an idle Passion! -- Thought itself is
scarce more active. There is an unsatisfied, and continual Thirst, in the
Appetite of a Lover: A constant Spring, in his Delights, and Torments. He
pursues his Discoveries, with a restless, and impatient, Vigor: And, though like
the shining, heavenly, Bodies, he is, everlastingly, in Motion, yet, he is so
far from becoming weary, that he is rather refreshed, by his Labor.

I WILL copy, yet farther, from the Picture abomentioned, the following Group,
or Assembly, of the Symptoms, Moles, and Tokens of this Passion. -- It is upon
the Lover's first Approach to his Mistress's Person: We recover, slowly, from
our sweet Surprise, says this Doctor of Cupid's- College, and, advancing, with
a blushful Tenderness, Bowing, we kneel; and her given Hand is pressed,
With sweet Compulsion, to our beating Breast:
Over it, in Ecstacy, our Lips bend low,
And Tides of Sighs, 'twixt her grasped Fingers, flow.
High beats the hurried Pulse, at each, forced, Kiss:
And every burning Sinew aches, with Bliss:
Life, in a Souly Deluge, rushes over;
And the charmed Heart springs out, at every Pore!
The first fierce Raptures, of Amazement, past,
Confusion quits us, and Desire grows, fast.
We sit: And, while her gazed at Wonders rise,
A humid Brightness fills our sparkling Eyes:
Modest Disquiet, every Action wears;
And each, long Look, the Mark of Passion bears.
Disordered Nature, no cold Medium keeps;
Transport, now, reigns, and dull Reflection sleeps.
All, that we wish, or feel, or act, or say,
Is above Thought, and out of Reason's Way!
Joy murmurs, Anger laughs, and Hope looks sad:
Rashness grows prudent, and Discretion mad.
Restless, we feel our amorous Bosom burn:
Now, This Way look we; And, now, That Way, turn.
Now, in sweet Swell of Thought, our lifted Eyes
Lose their low Languor, and attempt to rise:
Now, sinking, suppliant, seek the Charmer's Feet;
And court wished Pity, in their glanced Retreat.
Often, in full Gaze, they dwell upon her Face;
Then, start, astonished, from some dazzling Grace.
Now, in bold Liberty, fly out, unbid:
Now, awed, 'scape, inward, 'twixt the closing Lid.
If we dare speak, and would our Wish pursue,
The Words fall, feath'ry, like descending Dew,
The softening Accents, even in Utt'rance, die:
And the Tongue's Sweetness, here, outcharms the Eye.
'Till mingled Sighs our fainting Voice confound:
But Lovers Meanings speak, though robbed of Sound.


I AM fond of thinking we might draw, from Love, a Proof of the Soul's
Immortality: What, else, mean our Desires, when they extend themselves, beyond
the utmost, that willing Nature can indulge us in. -- Why, else, are the Joys
of Love mixed with melancholy, and unsatisfied Tremblings? -- They increase,
indeed, and refine, the Pleasure: But they convince us, That there is a Union,
more adapted to our Mind's free Essence; and, which, Bodies are not fine enough
to permit them the Enjoyment of.

HENCE, that exquisite Expansion! That Liquefaction, of the Heart! when it
refuses to allow us the Possession of our dearest Wish, in the very Moment we
become Masters of it! The subtle Workings of this exalted Passion, upon the
Refinements of our Mind, have Deified the beloved Object, 'till we faint, with
Awe, when we should receive her Tenderness: And, by a fantastical kind of Envy,
consider ourselves, as our own Rivals! -- The supremest Joy of Love must, if
Men will have it so, be called Bodily: But All, that heightens it, to be worth
the Wish of a wise Man, it must be indebted to the Mind for. -- Whence could
Images so warm, as these which follow, receive a Purity, in their Expression,
that adapts them to the chastest Ear, if the Mind's Part were not strongest,
even where the Body pretends most Influence?

Is there no more? Oh! yet the Last remains!
Crown of our Conquest! Sweetner of our Pains!
There is a Time, when Love no Wish denies:
And smiling Nature throws off All Disguise.
But, who can Words, to speak those Raptures, find?
Vast Sea of Ecstacy, that drowns the Mind!
That fierce Transfusion of exchanging Hearts!
That gliding Glimpse of Heaven, in pulsive Starts?
That veiny Rush! That warm, tumultuous, Roll!
That Fire that kindles Bodies into Soul!
And, on Life's Margin, strains Delight, so high,
That Sense breaks short -- and, while we taste, we die!
BUT, I am going, I know not whither. The Painter of this Picture has bewitched
me, from my Purpose; which was to have entered upon a Philosophical
Dissertation, concerning the Qualities of Love: Instead of which, I am rambling
into a natural one, upon the Effects of it!

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 46.
-- Parts speculamur in omnes.
CLAUD.
FRIDAY, August 28. 1724.
IN my XXXVIth Paper, I published some Remarks on an excellent Old Ballad,
called WILLIAM, and MARGARET. I was charmed with the Strength, and Beauties, of
its masculine Simplicity: and, really, took it to be, what it appeared, The
Work of some Old Poet, long since dead; but I have been agreeably undeceived:
The Author of it is alive, and a North-Briton; I congratulate his Country, on
the Promise of this rising Genius: For the Gentleman, it seems, is very young,
and received his Education in the University of Edinburgh.

AMONG many fine Qualities, which adorn him, he is so unconscious of his own
Merit, or possesses it with so sincere a Modesty, that he declines being
publicly named: But, as he has obliged me with a Letter, containing the short
History of an unhappy Accident, which gave Occasion to his Ballad, it will be
an agreeable Entertainment if I publish it, as the Author sent it me.

SIR,
YOUR PLAIN DEALER, of July the 24th, was sent to me by a Friend. I must own,
after I had read it over, I was both surpised and pleased to find, that a
simple Tale of my Writing, had merited the Notice, and Approbation, of the
Author of the PLAIN DEALER.

AFTER what you have said, of WILLIAM and MARGARET, I flatter myself, that you
will not be displeased with an Account of the Accident which gave Birth to that
Ballad.

YOUR Conjecture, that it was founded on the real History of an unhappy Woman,
is true -- A vain, young, Gentleman, had, for some Time, professed Love to a
Lady, then in the Spring of her Life, and Beauty. He dressed well, talked loud,
and spoke Nonsense, with Spirit: She had good Understanding; but was too young
to know the World. I have seen her, very often. There was a lively Innocence in
her Look. She had never been addressed to by a Man of Sense: And, therefore,
knew not how despicable, and unsincere, a Fool is. In time, he persuaded her,
that there was Merit in his Passion. -- She believed him, and was undone.

SHE was upon the Point of bringing into the World the Effect of her ill-plac'd
Love, before her Father knew the Misfortune. Judge the Sentiments of the good
Old Man! yet his Affection outweighed his Anger. He could not think of
abandoning his Child, to Want, and Infamy. He applied himself to her false
Lover, with an Offer of Half his Fortune; But the Temper of the Betrayer was
savag'd, with cruel Insolence. He rejected the Father's Offers, and reproached
the Innocence he had ruined, with the Bitterness of open Scorn. The News was
brought her, when in a weak Condition, and cast her into a Fever. And, in a few
Days after, I saw her, and her Child, laid in one Grave, together.

IT was some Time after this, That I chanced to look into a Comedy of
Fletcher's, called, The Knight of the burning Pestle. The Place I fell upon
was, where old Merry-Thought repeats these Verses; When it was grown to dark
Midnight,
And all were fast asleep:
In came Margaret's grimly Ghost,
And stood at William's Feet.


WHICH, I fancy, was the Beginning of some Ballad, commonly known, at the Time,
when this Author wrote. -- These Lines, naked of Ornament, and simple, as they
are, struck my Fancy; I closed the Book, and bethought myself, that the unhappy
Adventure, I have mentioned above, which then came fresh into my Mind, might
naturally raise a Tale, upon the Appearance of this Ghost. -- It was, then,
Midnight. All, round me, was still, and quiet. These concurring Circumstances
worked my Soul to a powerful Melancholy. I could not sleep. And, at that Time,
I finished my little Poem, such as you see it here. If it continues still to
deserve your Approbation, I have my Aim; and am,

SIR, Your most Obliged, And most humble Servant, etc.


IT does, most justly, continue to deserve, and will, for ever, deserve, not
only Approbation, but the Applause, of all true Judges of Wit, and Nature. The
Author's Copy, which he enclosed to me, is different in several Places, from
that which fell into my Hands; but the Sense of both, is exactly the same; and
the Variation, in some Expressions, not considerable enough to make it
necessary to republish that excellent Ballad.

HAVING this Occasion to speak of Scotland, I judge it the properest Place to
insert my Acknowledgment of a Letter from Edinburgh, signed Fergus Bruce. I
take this Name to be fictitious; but, whoever the Writer is, I am pleased with
his proposed Correspondence, which will open a New Scene of Intelligence to the
Expectation of my Readers; as they may see by the following Extract of the
Letter itself, which is writ, with the Politeness of a Gentleman, and in the
Style of a Man of Learning.

Edinburgh, the 16th. of July, 1724. SIR,
THE first PLAIN DEALER, that came to my Hand, was that, wherein you represent,
in true Colors, the Character, and Conduct, of the present Emperor of Russia,
with Regard to his Son, Prince Alexei. -- My Fancy was charmed, and my Judgment
entirely satisfied, with the Account you gave: Our Coffee-Houses take in your
Papers, and I observe, with Pleasure, the Welcome which our politest People
receive them with. Not the Men alone, of all Ranks, but the Ladies also, make
them their Entertainment. The general Conversation of both Sexes turns, on the
Matter you afford.

I CANNOT help writing to you, that I may let you know your Influence. It must
be a Pleasure to your generous Soul, to be conscious of the Extent, and Power,
of its Beneficence: And I should be wanting in my Duty to the Man, who gives me
Weekly Delight, and Instruction, if I concealed from him, what might, any way,
contribute to his Satisfaction.

I WILL presume, if you please, to send you, now-and-then, my Reflections, upon
the Matter which the Beaux, and Belles, of this City, may furnish, for a
PLAIN-DEALER. Something happens here every Day, not unworthy Public Notice.
And there are a Thousand Things, that fall, naturally, under your Cognizance,
that neither the King, the Parliament, the Pulpit, or the Bench, have any Thing
to do with. Perhaps, too, it would be of Use to our Gentry, at Edinburgh, to
know, you have a Spy, here, upon their Conduct. Pray tell them so, and depend
on the most watchful Fidelity of,

SIR, Your sincere Friend, And most humble Servant, FERGUS BRUCE.


I CANNOT forbear confessing, that I shall expect, with a very sensible
Pleasure, the Event of this Northern Correspondence: For I have retained, from
my Infancy a kind of affectionate Partiality, for the generous Bravery, and
gallant Plainness, of our Brothers, beyond Tweed. When I traveled, in my
Youth, I scarce ever saw a Court, even in the remotest Parts of the civilized
World, where some Gentleman, or other, a Scot, by Birth, or Descent, was not,
one, of its noblest Ornaments: And, now, since the Muses, and the Graces, have,
very visibly, from the Beginning of the present Century, fixed, and seated
themselves, in their learned Seminaries, their rising Youth, of both Sexes,
seem to vie, with one another, in a warm, and generous, Emulation which shall
most adorn their own, or soonest match the Elegance, of other, even the
politest, Nations.

NOT the Gentlemen alone, but the very Ladies, of Edinburgh, form themselves
into select, and voluntary, Societies, for the Improvement of their Knowledge,
instead of the Entertainment of their Fancy: And go on, at the same Time, to
refine their Conversation, enrich their Understanding, and polish, and render
amiable, their Personal Deportment.

I SHALL, in the Course of my Observations, take Occasion to demonstrate the
Truth of this Remark, by a Variety of Particulars; which, while they are doing
Justice to the North, will contribute, in no small Degree, to the Pleasure of
the South Part of this Kingdom. At present, I shall produce but Two Instances:
And the First is, A Society of Young Gentlemen, most, if not all of them,
Students in the University of Edinburgh, who from a Sympathy of Affections,
foundded on a Similitude of Parts, and Genius, have united themselves into a
Body, under Title of THE GROTESQUE CLUB; the Reason of which Name, I shall
explain in a future Paper. Their Business, to express it in the Words of one of
their own Members, is, A Friendship that knows no Strife, but that of a
generous Emulation, to excel, in Virtue, Learning, and Politeness.

TO how surprising a Degree these fine Spirits have succeeded, in their noble
End, let the following Sentiments declare; conceived, and expressed, with all
the Clearness, Depth, and Strength, of an experienced Philosopher, by a Member
of this Grotesque Club, who was in his Fourteenth Year only, when he composed,
in Blank Verse, a Poem, now in my Hands; and founded on a Supposition of the
Author's sitting, a whole Summer Night, in a Garden, looking upward, and quite
losing himself, in Contemplation on the Works, and Wonders, of Almighty Power.
-- If this was a Subject, naturally above the Capacity of so very a Boy, to
what a Degree does it increase our Wonder, when we find it treated, in this
Masterly Manner!

Now, I surveyed my native Faculties:
And traced my Actions to their teeming Source.
Now, I explored the universal Frame;
Gazed Nature through, and, with interior Light,
Conversed with Angels, and unbody'd Saints,
That tread the Courts of the Eternal King!
Gladly, I would declare, in lofty Strains,
The Power of Godhead, to the Sons of Men.
But Thought is lost, in its Immensity!
Imagination wastes its Strength in vain:
And Fancy tires, and turns within itself,
Struck, with th'amazing Depths of Deity!
-- Ah! my loved God! in vain, a tender Youth,
Unskilled, in Arts of deep Philosophy,
Attempts to search the bulky Mass of Matter:
To trace the Rules of Motion: and pursue
The Phantom Time, too subtle, for his Grasp!
Yet may I, from thy most apparent Works,
Form some Idea of their wondrous Author;
And celebrate thy Praise, with rapturous Mind.
How can I gaze upon yon sparkling Vault,
And view the Planets, rolling in their Spheres,
Yet be an Atheist! -- Can I see those Stars,
And think of others, far beyond my Ken,
Yet want Conviction of creating Power?
What, but a Being, of immense Perfection,
Could, through unbounded Spaces, thus, dispose
Suth numerous Bodies, All, presumptive Worlds?
The undesigning Hand of giddy Chance,
Could never fill, with Globes, so vast! so bright!
That lofty Conclave! --
Where shall I trace the Sources of the Light?
What Seats assign to the Element of Fire,
That, unconfined, through all the Systems, breaks!
Here, could I lie, in Contemplation wrapped,
And pass, with Pleasure, an eternal Age!
But, it is too much for my weak Mind to know:
Teach me, with humble Reverence to adore
The Mysteries, I must not comprehend!
LET this prodigious Young Man, bear the Blame, of my not having left myself
Room in this Paper, to pay that Respect, which I intended, to THE FAIR
INTELLECTUALS: A Club of Ladies, at Edinburgh, who set a Pattern to Female
Excellence: And whose History, Rules, and Constitutions, I have the Pleasure to
see, before me, with the conventual Address of Mistress Speaker, to the lovely
Sisterhood; and the admissory Speech, of one of the Ladies; as set forth by the
able Pen of Mistress Secretary. -- I shall say more, on a future Occasion, of
the Honor done to the whole Sex, by the dangerous Ambition of these Ladies:
And of the Political Necessity, which, I conceive, there will soon be, of
putting a Stop to the Progress of such unlimitted Improvement of a Power,
already too exorbitant!

THE PLAIN DEALER. No. 47.
-- Veniunt a Dote Sagittae.
JUV.
MONDAY, August 31. 1724.
I HAVE endeavored to show, in a former Paper, that Parents are highly to
blame, when they force their Children to marry for the Sake of a Fortune which
can never repair the least of those innumerable Mischiefs, that are inseparably
annexed to it. Using Authority in such a Case, turns the most Indulgent of
Fathers, into an insupportable Tyrant, who by one inconsiderate Decree, that is
irreversible, dooms his own Child to the most doleful Imprisonment for Life.
The following Epistle, gives us so sad, but so lively a Representation of this
Truth, that I insert it for the Sake of those, who might, possibly, be
betrayed, in their Conduct, to give the same fatal Proofs of their Affection to
their Offspring, that seem to Edge all the Sufferings of our present
Complainant.

SIR,
I AM a Young Man, about Three and Twenty, that much against my Will, have
complied with the incessant Importunities of my Friends; or, rather, obeyed the
absolute Commands of an indulgent Father, and a fond Mother, in marrying a very
Rich Maid of about Thirty Six, who, it seems, is only mine, because several
Suitors of equal Pretensions in Wealth with herself, that liked her Person,
left her, as soon as they had conversed with her sufficiently to sound her
Temper.

BEFORE I married her, I enjoyed Health, and good Humor, and thought my
Fortune good enough as it was, and abundantly sufficient, with a Female
Companion that brought the like Ingredients toward it, to make Life tolerably
happy.

SHE has not been my Wife, quite a Year, and yet has managed her Time so well,
that she has robbed me of all my Quiet. The natural Gayety of my Disposition is
sowr'd, almost enough to make me think of growing her Torturer, as she is mine:
The Floridness of Health has left me; and I am overcome by an inward Pining,
that wastes me outwardly: In fine, she has convinced me, that a Man may be
emphatically Poor in the Affluence of Wealth, and truly, and properly said to
Want, amidst the Abundance of all Things.

I HAVE industriously studied to show Gratitude, and true Friendship. For I
really had an Intention to render myself as agreeable as possible; and the
more, because, during the Time of our modish Courtship, she had told those,
from whom I should hear it again, that she liked me: By this habitual Art of
Tenderness, I almost brought it to be Natural, and began to deceive myself into
an Opinion, that I should not be incapable of even loving her at last. She, in
Return, began, after a manner then perfectly unaccountable, to do every Thing,
not only that she thought would disoblige me, but that she knew would be a
sincere Affliction to me. I find since, I am taken, by way of showing, she
could have her Man; and I am the Subject of her Revenge, because she lost, the
Person, she had a Liking to.

SHE is a Woman of a strong, but mischievous Understanding; and letting it be
guided, by what it should correct, her Humor, which is my inveterate Enemy,
she can be as poignantly cruel to me as she pleases. She lets me know, by broad
Hints, that she sees what would delight me, but is blind, like a Jew, out of
Hardness of Heart. If I ask how I may oblige her, she is Dumb; but if I drop an
ambiguous Word, that may be tortured into a malignant Construction, she can use
her Tongue like a Larum. -- If I explain, the Simplicity of my Meaning, and beg
Pardon for want of Caution in expressing my-self; her Ears are shut, and she is
like the Deaf Adder. The Comparison is true beyond the Deafness: she is like it
in my Bosom; she stings like it, she poisons like it, only with this
Difference, That her Poison is of an Italian kind; it lengthens out Torment,
and kills, at Distance of Years, after a painful Confinement.

IN my Father's Presence, this fair Hypocrite, is never dumb, but ever eloquent
in my Praise. -- Such a Husband! and such a Wife! We are the happiest Couple:
-- Then she calls often upon me, with an Air of Friendship, to be merry, under
the Effects of the Melancholy she causes. Her Eyes, her Ears, her Tongue, her
Hands, seem all too little to oblige me. -- The Old Gentleman doats on her. --
I help to carry on the Farce; it would be Tragedy, if he knew otherwise. -- He
blesses his Stars, and very comfortably puts me in Mind, how much I possess the
Joy he wished me.

WHAT is to be done with this Riddle of a Woman, so much in her Senses, and out
of them, as she pleases? What Prospect can I have of Happiness, but from her
Death; whom, by my Public Vow, and hard-tugg'd Virtue, I am obliged to
support, in Sickness.

I WOULD never have complained, but that I hope it may be a proper Caution, and
serve for the Preservations of others; I am pleased, that I never discovered
these Grievances, because, had I complained every Time, I had Occasion, I
should have been ashamed to complain any longer, and she would have appeared as
irreprehensible, as an Angel: Thus I have a Fortune, which has been the
Purchase of Misery. To make me rich, my Relations have made me wretched; and,
for my part, I have nothing to hope, but that long Patience, and Sufferings may
make me insensible.

I am, SIR, Your most humble Servant, A. Z.


TO what a Multitude of Sorrows is this genteel Complainer betrayed; The first
Considerations, that ought to precede a Matrimonial Choice, are the Piety,
Education, Person, and Liking of both Parties; indeed, a competent Fortune, is
a material Consideration to be weighed together with the others; but never
separately from them. Of this Pliny, the politest Gentleman, as well as finest
Writer of his Age, has given us a satisfactory Account in Two of his Epistles,
which I am glad, for the Benefit of the LaLadies, to find published in Two
Volumes in in Eaglish. In one, he shows us his Judgment in choosing a Husband,
for a Friend's Relation; in the other, the happy Effects of a judicious Choice,
in the Person of his own Wife.

To JUNIUS MAURITIUS; on choosing a Husband for his Relation.
THE particular Opinion you have of my Choice of a Husband for your Brother's
Daughter, is very obliging; you well know, how much I loved and esteemed that
great Man; with what Advice he cherished my Youth, and by his own Commendation,
gave me the Credit of being thought Praiseworthy: You could have injoined me
nothing of greater Consequence, or more agreeable, nor any Thing I would
undertake with more Honor, than to choose a Man fit to continue the Family of
Arulenus Rusticus, which, indeed, might prove a Work of Time, did not Minucius
Acilianus luckily present, who, as young Men do each other (for he is some
Years younger) loves me intimately, yet treats me with a Respect due to Age. He
is pleased to be formed and instructed by me, as I used to be by you. His
Country is Bresica, of that Part of our Italy, that does yet retain, and keeps
up much of the Ancient Modesty, Frugality, and even Rusticity. His Father
Minucius Macrinus, eminent in the Equestrian Order, for he aimed no higher,
being chose by Vespasian into the Praetorian, with great Constancy preferred an
honest Ease to this our Ambition (shall I call it?) or Honor. His Grandmother,
of the Mother's Side, is Serana Procula of Padua; you are acquainted with the
Manners of the Place, yet Serana is to the Patavins an Example of strict
Virtue. His Uncle P. Acilius is a Man of singular Discretion, Prudence, and
Honesty; in Truth, you will meet with nothing in the whole Family less
agreeable than in your own. Acilianus himself, has a great deal of Vigor and
Industry, accompanied with the utmost Modesty. And having already discharged
the Offices of Questor, Tribune, and Praetor, with Abundance of Credit, yet he
has referred it to you to make his Court for him. He has a comely Face, a
sanguine Complexion, his whole Person Gentleman-like, with a becoming Gravity
in his Mein, Things, I think, not to be disregarded, but due to the Merit of a
virtuous Woman. I am in Doubt, whether I need take Notice of the large Estate
of his Father; for when I consider You, for whom we propose a Son-in-Law, I
think I need not: When I reflect on the Common Custom, and even the Laws of the
City, which principally have Regard to the Fortunes of Men, that seems, by no
Means, to be omitted, and to one that thinks of Posterity; this, in the making
of a Match, is not the least material Consideration. Perhaps you will think I
have indulged too much the Love of my Friend in this Account; but I will stake
my Credit, you shall find every thing exceed my Description: I love the young
Man, indeed, most ardently, as he deserves; but it is the Duty of Friendship,
to be moderate in Commendation.


To HISPULLA, his Wife's Aunt.
AS I remember that great Affection, which was between you and your excellent
Brother, and know you love his Daughter as your own, so as not only to express
the Tenderness of the best of Aunts; but even supply that of the best of
Fathers: I am sure it will be a Pleasure to you to hear, that she proves worthy
of her Father, worthy of you, and of your and her Ancestors. Her Ingenuity is
admirable, her Frugality extraordinary: She loves me, the surest Pledge of her
Virtue, and adds to this, a wonderful Disposition to Learning, which she has
acquired from her Affection to me: She reads my Writings, studies them, and
even gets them by Heart: You would smile to see the Concern she is in, when I
have a Cause to plead, and the Joy she shows, when it is over: She finds Means
to have the first News brought her, of the Success I meet with in Court; how I
am heard, and what Decree is made. If I recite any Thing in Public, she cannot
refrain from placing herself privately in some Corner to hear, where, with the
utmost Delight, she feasts on my Applauses. Sometimes she sings my Verses, and
accompanies them with the Lute, without any Master, except Love, the best of
Instructors. From these Instances I take the most certain Omens of our
perpetual and increasing Happiness, since her Affection is not founded on my
Youth and Person, which must gradually decay; but she is in Love with the
immutable Part of me, my Glory and Reputation. Nor, indeed, could be less
expected from One, who had the Happiness to receive her Education from you;
who, in your House was accustomed to every Thing that was virtuous and decent,
and even began to love me by your Recommendation: For, as you had always the
greatest Respect for my Mother, you were pleased from my Infancy to form me, to
commend me, and kindly to presage, I should be, One Day, what my Wife fancies I
am. Accept therefore our united Thanks; mine, that you have bestowed her on me,
and hers, that you have given me to her, as a mutual Grant of Joy and Felicity.


THE PLAIN DEALER. No 48.
-- Quod nequeo monstrare and sentio tantum.
JUVEN.
FRIDAY, September, 4. 1724.
DETRACTORS may be said to lead their Lives in a Habit of most injurious
Falsehood toward good Men, and of the most offensive Impiety to Heaven.
Persons, of this itching and abandoned Appetite, may, If we consider the
numerous Mischiefs they do to human Society, be compared to the most ravenous
Beasts of Prey, with this Difference, That, as Beasts of Prey do good
sometimes, in worrying one another, these, on the contrary, will not fall upon,
or devour any thing but what is excellent.

WIT, Wisdom, Beauty, good Humor, Modesty, Valor, Integrity, in fine, all the
Virtues and all the Graces, which can illustrate any Person of either Sex, are
as so many tempting Spoils to the savage Slanderer, and strong Provocatives to
Detraction. There is scarce a Man living, that has many little, infamous
Srories, more than ordinary, privately handed about wirh great Industry, from
one to another, in order to depreciate his Character in the World, but what
will be found, upon a close Examination, to have merited public Applause for
some noble Action or other; Examine still farther, and it will as certainly be
found, that that noble Action was the very Source of a secret Envy and a
private Hatred, which broke out in a Hundred whispered Traditions, till it
spread and enlarged itself into public Defamation.

THE most unhappy Circumstances which attend the illustrious Sufferers in this
Way, I reckon to be these; That, as Persons, who seek after Fame the most
eagerly, do, for the most part, very plentifully deserve it; so they are the
most frequently interrupted in the Search, and the least able to bear the
Trouble of such unwelcome Interruptions. No Men are more Ideally fond of Glory,
than such as most substantially deserve it; this is a pleasant Weakness: But
then no Men have a quicker Sensibility of unjust Reproaches than those who take
Care never to deserve them; and this is a sore Frailty, which opens, through
the Bosoms of the Generous and the Innocent, a Way to a Thousand unnecessary
Heart-Achs. It is Pity, it should be so much in the Power of Calumny, as
Experience shows it is, to strike a Damp upon the most Generous Spirits, and
throw a Load over an aspiring Mind, that is upon the Stretch after Glory. But
what seems at present the most of all to be regretted; is, That, by the
frequent Complaints I have lately received, this Vice is as prevailing, as it
is insupportable.

I HAVE a Letter from a Gentleman, containing a very lively Description of a
Lady, whose Charms have been so long drowned in Tears, that they are almost
worn out and carried away by the wasting Tide of her Sorrow, which she hides,
but cannot stop: -- He proceeds to tell me, "That, upon Inquiry into the Source
of this mighty Woe, he finds it arose from Two or Three ambiguous and broken
Sentences, glancing at her Virtue, and Conversation, artfully dropped by a
malicious Woman in the Ear of a Youth of a Jealous Disposition, who loved her
whom she loved, who was contracted to her, and departed from her on this
Account. -- What signifies talking to her of her innocence, and telling her,
that no Mortal living credits it but that one Jealous young Man? -- Alas! it is
only his not believing it, that must pour Comfort upon her Affliction. -- 'Till
then she must remain as Inconsolable, as she is Innocent."

MY Correspondent goes on to say, "That he had the Curiosity to go and see this
Detractress. He found her, as he tells me, Old, Wrinkled, Ugly; her Visage of a
pale, just turning black, as with a Mortification; her Conscience he takes to
be much of a Complexion with her, Face; for, when he charged her with it, she
owned it as some trifling Mistake; then, drawing her Mouth into a scornful
Smile, to contradict her Words, cries out, That she did not mean it as it was
taken. -- When the fatal Consequences were pressed upon her, -- she said, She
was sorry, but expressed her Grief so very unconcernedly, desiring to be
troubled no more about it, since it was not Actionable, that she might have
sat for the Picture of Envy's Look, when she has just stolen from doing one
of her most precious Mischiefs." --

THIS Correspondent of mine, justly moved with his own Relation, concludes his
Letter with warm Expostulations. -- "Shall GUILT sin thus! and shall INNOCENCE
look pale for it; is there no Redress, -- Yes, there is -- Others, who are out
of the Question, may, and ought to rise up in the Defense, of Innocence. -- Let
the PLAIN DEALER, says he, whenever any Scandal is traced to the Fountainhead,
but mark the Quarters of the Detractors, as Crosses in the Time of the
Pestilence are placed upon the Doors of the Deceased, and that Method will
effectually strike the Tongue of Detraction dumb."

ANOTHER Account has been lately transmitted to me, concerning a young
Gentleman, who is said to have numerous good Qualities, and has been divided
from the Estimation of his Friend, by the as constant as false Insinuations of
a worse than once perjured Woman; who insists, That the young Gentleman
betrayed his Friend's Liberty for a Bribe. -- The contrary has been made out,
and attested to her Face -- She continues, behind his Back, to load him with
the Calumny. -- Finding, since she began her Evil Reports, that they would not
take without putting on an Air of Charity and Sanctity, she now concludes her
Story to Srrangers thus. " -- He (meaning the Person she aims to scandalize) is
generally allowed to be a good Man, an honest Man -- Pretty generally indeed.
-- But what is there to be said for Accidents in this World? -- There is
nothing wonderful -- Nothing new under the Sun. -- I have so often Occasion to
Wonder, that I am resolved never to let any Thing, for the Future, surprise me
into a Fit of Admiration. -- He is no Lover of Money -- that is certain, as
some say. -- But, say they what they will, there is such a Prevalence in
Bribes, no one knows his own Strength till he be tried. -- There is no trusting
any Body. -- I would not have believed it of him if Everybody had not said it;
but, What Everybody says must be true." --

HERE my Correspondent says, he asked the Detractress, How Everybody came to
know it? and she immediately boasted, That she was the Discoverer of it, to all
who heard it at first Hand, "To what, continues he, may we properly liken such
a dangerous Creature as this is, who puts out false Colors that she may come
up safe, and rob Virtue, unsuspected? She can be compared to nothing that
resembles her so nearly as a Witch, in one of those fatal Operations, where
Murder is the Consequence of her Incantations. The Detractress molds her
Descriptions, as the Witch does her Waxen Images. When the Witch has made an
End of her Image, the bewitched Body perishes; and where the Detractress ends
any of her Descriptions, she makes an injured Reputation die!"

I HAVE other Accounts of the like Sort, to all which I shall give an Answer,
in a future Paper, when I shall explain my self at large upon this Head.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 49.
-- Hae nugae seria ducunt
In mala, derisum semel exceptrumque sinistre.
HOR.
MONDAY, September 7. 1724.
THE Entertainment of this Day shall be furnished by my restoring to my
Correspondents, in this public Manner, what they were so kind to lend me
privately for that Purpose.

SIR,
I HAVE been Married about Two Years to a Young Woman that is every Way
agreeable to my Temper, but only she is given to be a little too Superstitious.
The Truth is, she was determined in her Choice of me by the Prediction of a
Fortune Tellers. Without thinking myself more obliged to him, than in good
Reason I should. I may safely say, without Superstition, that I shall like him
for having caused my good Fortune, by foretelling it, the longest Day I have to
live. She would be the best-natur'd Creature in the World, if her Mind was not
haunted by Spirits, Stories of which, take up most of her Conversation by Day,
and make her waken me a Nights very frequently. I laughed at these little Tales
at first, but, not being able to get her out of them, I indulged her in the
relating them, which she has continued to do so prettily, that, though I know,
according to right Reason, I ought not to be Terrified, I am brought to tremble
at the tumbling of a Saltseller. -- If my Wife could be once cured, I am sure I
should be well soon after. -- She has been for these Three Months last,
counting our Hours by a Death-watch, and has made me almost sick with Fear,
that she, who so often speaks of her Death, should die in good Earnest -- This
splenetick Cast of her Temper having an Effect on me, who sympathize with her
in every Thing, throws a Gloom over our Hours, which would otherwise pass as
delightfully, as any Couple's upon Earth. -- Pray give her some better Reasons,
than I am able to instill into her, to fortify her Mind against these little
Surprises of Superstition; and you will make her the best Wife in the World,
who studies to be, and is, EASY to me in every Case, but this, that she is
UNEASY to her ownself.

Your most Humble Servant, MARK DOCILE.


Mr. PLAIN DEALER,
YOU have pretended to give Laws about People's Behavior in Marriage, and
there is no such Thing in Nature to be done. I am a Man of the best Humor in
the World, or otherwise I could not please my Wife, by appearing to be the
Worst. If I am not angry half a dozen Times a Day, she will be out of Humor,
and not speak to me. I found out her Delight, and have got many a sweet Kiss
for what in another Couple would have gone near to have caused a Divorce. She
uses a hundred Plots to put me out of Humor, all which increases my good
Nature, so much, knowing that poor Molly falls out for nothing but to make
Friends, that I sometimes find it hard to be pleased to be angry with her. I
am, perhaps, the merriest Man of a passionate one, that was ever known; and my
Wife, the most contented of all Sufferers. I should weary your Patience, if I
was to tell you the different Stratagems, by which she almost tires out my good
Humor, to make me exert it in trying her Patience. My Shoemaker, has a Wife as
like her as Two Lasts. But she is more violent in her Cravings; insomuch that
he is forced to proceed, from Sound, to Substance. -- He says, she never is a
kinder Bedfellow, than when she has induced him to do her the Kindness to bang
her into Bed. He adds, that he has bound her to him in all Kindness, by laying
his Strap over her Shoulders almost every Day she lives. If he miss it some
Days together, the poor Thing cries, and thinks herself neglected. You, see
what Happiness there is in Matrimony: And that there are other Rules for
Behavior, between Husband, and Wife, besides those of your Teaching.

Yours, BOB. MERRY-THOUGHT.


SIR,
YOU lately gave us so lively a Description of the Races at Newmarket, that I
cannot but wish you would exert your Wooden-Horse, as Men of your Age commonly
call their Oaken-Sticks, and take a Journey from your Watchtower of Barbican
to Exchange Alley. You will find that the Citizens, who have been a long Time
injuriously misrepresented as a plodding Generation of People, have as brisk
Imaginations, in their way, as any of the quickest Wits that inhabit the
Temple, or any courtly Part of the Town beyond the Bar. Their Fancies run upon
Wheels, but they are substantial ones, and, since the Lottery has been set up,
they all seem to turn upon that great and important One, of Fortune. They are
so clever in their Devices, that they have formed several Streets into Courses,
and fixed a convenient Market just at hand, where a Man may purchase a Racer,
at any Hour of the Day, to try his Luck upon, and scower away into a large
Estate, between Sun and Sun. In fine, the Scene of Newmarket is shifted to
London, and Smithfield translated into Exchange-Alley. As ill a Figure as the
top Citizens have been said to make on Horseback, with all their Pageants about
them on a Lord-Mayor's Day, yet, to do them Justice, now, they are become
serious in Horsemanship, and have turned Play into a Trade, you cannot imagine
what expert Jockies they make. Our Newspapers have lately diverted us with
strange Accounts of slow Beasts called Asses, that have been brought up to be
very nimble, and of Cows, turned into Gallopers, for the Sport of our ingenious
Brethren that have running Heads in the Country: We have very far overmatch'd
them, in Town, for we have Exchange Bears, and Exchange Bulls, that will mount
a Titt as cleverly as if they were born to it. They will purchase you a Nag for
Three Half Crowns, and count him but a mere Jade, if he wins the Rider less
than a Thousand Pounds. Guildhall is the Goal they run to, and if one of your
City-Racers comes in at the Nick, as we call it, (for we run the Twelve Hours
by lucky Minutes.) two Boys hold up their Hands, and bid the Man, that has run
the Course, be happy all his Life after. I don't doubt but when Bartholomew
Fair was put to so early a Period, you deplored the Accident, because, lasting
a little longer, the odd Mirth of the People, that frequented it, would have
furnished you with Materials without going far from your Neighborhood. But
this Bull and Bear Fair, in the City, will be of long Continuance, and make you
ample Amends if you will but come and see it; When I see the Wheel go round,
and the Racers are by at the Twirling of it, my Imagination represents it to
me, like the flying Chariots, and Machines, for young Travelers in Smithfield,
in which, methinks, I see an Apprentice seated over the Head of a
Common-Council-Man; a Suburb-Habardasher of Small Wares mounted three Stories
higher in Fortune than a grave Alderman with a Gold Chain about his Neck; and a
Semstress more lofty than a Lady Mayoress. But I am giving you a Description
which I had rather you should come and take; I dare say it will make as
diverting a Paper, at least, as the List of the Lottery Tickets, and you need
not desire a better Prize than to have yours read by equal Numbers, with equal
Curiosity, Desire, and Circumspection. I am of the Mule Kind in Trade, and
sometimes Bellow in the Alley, like a Bud, upon the Fall, and sometimes Dance
like a Bear, upon the Rise of the Stocks: You shall be welcome to take a secure
Stand in in my Den, from whence you may see all the Diversion. You will be
presently directed to it, if you ask any one, out of the many Thousands of City
Jockies, that you will see there, for

Your very Humble Servant, URSA MAJOR.
From my Den, near the Pope's Head in Cornhill, Sept. 2. P.S. A Vintner had but
one Leg of a Horse, which whole Horse cost but Three Half Crowns, and won Five
Hundred Pounds to his Share by that Leg. Pray come and see the Sport, and you
will say, That as old as you are, you never saw the like since you was born;
nor do I think, except the Time of the South Sea, there was ever such merry
Trading in the Memory of Man. If you continue to like Mrs. Patty Amble, bring
her with you, I must put her in a Way of making a properer Wife for you by
teaching her how to mend her Paces and her Fortune together, both which you may
remember, you left in a desperate Way at that Place, which you described, in a
most delightful and instructive Paper of yours, by the Name of Mend-All-Market.




THE PLAIN DEALER. No 50.
Dignum laud virum musa vetat mori.
HOR. Virtus repulsae nescia sordidae
Intaminatis fulget honoribus,
Nec sumet aut ponit secures
Arbitrio popularis aurae.
Ibid.
FRIDAY, September 11. 1724.
THE Estimation, of public Actions, seems to me to be unjustly calculated, Men
derive the Quality of Actions from that of the Actor; Would it not be more just
to measure the Actor by the Action? The Ancients considered the Degrees of
Superiority to consist in those of Merit and Virtue. Pliny has distinguished
himself, by Remarks, on this Head, in his admirable Epistles, and though he was
at the Head of the Nobles, as well as the Wits of his Age, he thought it not
below him, to pay Acknowledgments, nay, refined Compliments, to the Merit of
Persons in low Life; but took a worthy Pride in raising them from the
Obscurity, annexed to that Condition, by a Comparison with the highest renowned
for Deeds which sprang from the same Greatness and Elevation of Spirit. As
Titles are often but Accidents, this is a just Way of Judging; since Worth is
not the Consequence of a Name, but a great Name ought ever to be the
Consequence of Virtue.

"MODERN Writers," said our Critic, the other Evening, "have gone into a
different Turn of Thinking: They extol, to the Skies, the indifferent Actions,
and palliate the Blemishes, of Titled People, who disgrace the Figure of Life
they appear in; but meanly, decline the right Use of Art upon Subjects, where
they might point out Greatness in obscure Men, who were never little in any
Thing but the Accident of their Birth, and who living and dying, did an Honor
to Human Nature. Such Penmen may be called, The Rabble of the Wits, who are
dazzled by the false Glare of the Great, but can look at solid, Virtue, without
the least Emotion, or Sign, of being able to see it. The Styles of these petty
Panegyrists, are, like their Subjects, glittering, but not solid; swelling, but
rather empty than great; they seem never to have heard of that beautiful
Simplicity, which arises out of Nature, and forms the Sublime, so much admired
by the Readers, and so masterly executed by the Writers of Antiquity."

WE were led into this Track of Thinking, by my looking, the other Day, into a
little Book, called, The History of the Preservation of Charles the Second,
after the noted Battle of Worcester; which was fought in the Year 1651, on the
Third of this very Month of September. I there meet with such a prodigious
Instance of Fidelity, and Loyalty, in a poor mean Country Fellow, named
Pendrell, and all his Family, that I know not any so Illustrious, to which my
Heart would lead me to pay greater, or sincerer Acknowledgements. I am not at
all surprised, to find, that this amazing Incident, of Integrity, is coolly,
and insensibly, treated by Men of slender Abilities; who have an Affectation to
shine upon more pompous Subjects; who choose rather to spend their Strength in
relating the Fury of that Battle, and lay out all their mistaken Eloquence in
raising the Powers of Hell, to push on its horrible Consequences; but it is
both a Matter of Surprise, and Confusion, to think, that so many truly great
Poets, and Orators, should live just after, and leave an Example, so beneficial
to Posterity, in a manner forgotten, for want of being commended, with that
Spirit it so richly deserves.

PERHAPS the History of the whole World, were we to turn it never so carefully
over, could furnish us with but few Things more astonishing, more moving, and
pathetick, more exemplary, and edifying, than this uncelebrated Passage! -- A
Monarch to be forced, by a prevailing Faction, to turn a Fugitive, in his own
Kingdoms! And when discomfited Princes, disabled Lords, and routed Armies,
could no longer assist their Sovereign, that it should be reserved for a poor
simple Hind to preserve this Lord's Anointed from a cruel, pursuing Victor,
whose praeternatural Swells of Fortune made him the Terror of all Christendom!
-- That it should be reserved for an ignorant Countryman, to save a wise and
mighty Prince from falling, like his good Father, to be afterward, received as
our Glory, with the Applauses and Acclamations, not only of our own Three
Kingdoms, but all the Nations about us! And shall this Englishman, recorded
with Honor, by foreign Writers, be only coldly spoken of by our own? -- Is he
a mean Man? Consider the noble Trust, and the nobler Discharge of it! and he
grows great in Proportion to the Littleness of his Condition. Is he Poor? How
does that Poverty add to the Richness of his Virtue, who hears Praemiums bid
for the precious Life, he has in Custody, and yet, disdaining the Bribe of
Gold, ventures his own for his Loyalty? Sure, nothing but a Soul, which is
abandoned to Barbarity and Meanness, can let a little Idea of him take Place,
upon Account of his despicable Figure. It is the noblest Addition to his
Greatness! As inconsiderable as he might be otherwise, he must, in this View,
make a fine Picture, and he is a living Disgrace to that Herd of Titled
Criminals, who followed the Fortunes, and partook the impious Greatness, of the
Pursuer of Majesty. Let those, who look no farther than the outside of Things,
think a Plebian, below Eulogy; I, who view him with other Eyes almost think him
above it. Had he lived in more generous Times, and been the Preserver of an
Augustus, his honest Contempt of Gold, would have justly given him a Place
equal with Camillus, in the Horatian Ode, consecrated to the Praises of that
Emperor.

IT is a Scene, that the Imagination cannot entertain without a Mixture of
Grief and Admiration, when we place before our Eyes that Prince in the Habit of
a Rustic, amidst so many different Dangers, relying upon the Conduct and
Fidelity of this real Rustic, this venerable Clown, and his little Family for
his Guards. I remember to have been informed, by a very great Man, That "He has
heard the King tell the Story in Jest, and wondered to see many smile, when his
Majesty said pleasantly, That He He was once in danger of losing his Guide in
the Nightime, but that the Rustling of Richard 's Calves-Skin Breeches was a
Direction to his Ear in the Dark. The King might, indeed, make a Jest of it,
said he, but I could not think of Majesty in such Distress, without being
touched in good Earnest, by a Grief, which it was beyond the Notion of an odd
and comical Dress to remove." -- I must say the same, as this Nobleman, with
regard to the King; and even as to Pendrell, there is something too serious in
his Integrity, not to make us lose his Appearance, in our Veneration of his
Virtues. As there was a Princely Person in one rough Garb; there was a noble
Soul in the other; for when he attended the King, for the last Time, he showed,
he had a true Sense of the Weight of his Charge. For, his Majesty complaining
of the Horse, That it was the heaviest Jade he ever rode on; Pendrell,
smilingly told him, That the Horse had the Weight of Three Kingdoms on his
Back, and ought not therefore to be blamed, if he went a little heavily.

WHEN I Meditate the many Passages, that this little History recounts, between
the King and Pendrell, my Attention is so fixed to the Parts, which exercised
this Man's Fidelity, that I scarce have Room in my Thoughts, for the Glories of
a Restoration, that he was reserved for. I love to dwell upon this good Man: It
is a familiar Example, but it is the more useful; the Least Man may be
faithful, and Fidelity will make him Great; while the Greatest Man, without
Integrity, dwindles into a Little one. -- It is true, also, Integrity makes a
Great Man much Greater; so it is with General Monk, a Name, far beyond his
Title. Duke of Albemarle, strikes no Ear; calls for no Admiration. But Every
one admires the General and the Restorer.

A LITTLE gentlemanly Estate was afterward settled upon his Descendants; and
had he been advanced by the Pleasure of the King, from that lowly Degree, to
the Nobility, no Lord could have thought himself injured, by having for his
Peer, and Companion, the Heir of that worthy Man, who preserved the Fountain of
Honor.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 51.
-- Fallacia
Alia aliam trudit.
TEREN.
MONDAY, September 14. 1724.
CREDULITY is a Weakness, from which very few are exempted. It is the
Groundwork of Craft and Imposture; and the Means by which they are propagated.

I HAVE often reflected, with Concern, upon the Condition of Humanity, in this
Regard: And nothing can be more afflicting, than to behold one Part of the
rational World making a Trade of misguiding the other! If all the Errors, into
which People are drawn, had but the Marks of Truth, some Excuse, might be found
for their Credulity; but the Shame is, in their receiving what is new, at the
Expense, even of Probabability. Vulgar Minds are most struck with what is most
incredible; and the Way to convince, is, to amaze them. Reason makes few
Proselytes: But Mystery rarely fails. And the less they know why, the fonder
they grow of the Imposture.

BECAUSE I would not dip into Controversies, wherein Religion, and Government,
are concerned; I must descend into Low Life, and only touch the little
Artifices which owe their Reputation to this Weakness.

THE World is wearied with Stories of Witches and Fairies, and begins to see
through the Imposture. The Craft of Astrologers, Conjurers, and Prophets, begins
also to be exploded, by the Vulgar, whose Oracles they have long been. But I am
not a little amazed to find, that, instead of the Delusions, once practiced on
the Multitude, They, now, work strongest among the polite and fashionable
People. What Staring, what Clapping, what Waste of Time and Money have
Harlequin and Faustus occasioned? The Madness, both of Actors, and Spectators,
has so provoked me almost to Tears, that I could even have wept over the City!

I WILL not be so partial, to our Worshipful Society of FREE and ACCEPTED
MASONS, as to forbear reproving them, on this Occasion, for the unaccountable
Pother and Noise they have lately made in the World. What Stories have been
told to amuse, and engage the Credulous? What Reflections, what Reproach, have
they brought upon That ANCIENT ORDER, by making Proselytes, in so cheap and so
prostituted a Manner? It afflicts me sensibly, when I see Coxcombs introduced
into our Lodges, and made privy to our Secrets. I have often entered my Protest
against this Abuse, in private Society; and must use the Freedom to offer this
Memorial, in my public Character. It Is my Opinion, That the late Prostitution
of our Order is in some Measure, the betraying it. The weak Heads of Vintners,
Drawers, Wigmakers, Weavers, etc. admitted into our Fraternity, have not only
brought Contempt upon the Institution, but do very much endanger it. And I have
heard it asked, Why we don't admit Women, as well as Tailors, into our Lodges?
I must confess I have met with as sufficient Heads among the Fair Sex, as I
have found in the BROTHERHOOD: I have some Reasons to fear, that our SECRETS
are in Danger. There is, in the Conduct of too many, since their Admission, the
-- Caecus amor sui,
Et tollens vacuum plus nimio Gloria verticem;
Arcanique Fides prodiga, perlucidior vitro;
which is expressly prohibited by our Excellent RULES and CONSTITUTIONS; and,
which is the very Characteristick of the Fools, that were received into the
LODGES at ROME, in the Days of AUGUSTUS CAESAR; and whereof our Brother HORACE
complained vehemently, in an Ode to VARUS, who was then GRAND MASTER. But
whatever Freedoms others imagine they may lawfully and discreetly use, my
Conscience cannot brook them.

-- NON EGO TE --
INVITUM QUATIAM: NEC --
SUB DIVUM RAPIAM --
MY Female Readers, and, I Am afraid, some of the Brotherhood may stop here, and
stare, as if I had blabb'd out the whole Mystery. They may be doubtful whether
the above Words, and Dashes may not be decypher'd into the famous Mason Word?
But I leave the Ignorant to their Wonder; and proceed to assure my Brethren,
that they have promoted Superstition and Babbling, contrary to the Peace of our
Sovereign Lord, the King, by their late Practices, and Condescentions. Alarming
Reports, and Stories of LADDERS, HALTERS, DRAWN SWORDS, and DARK ROOMS, have
spread Confusion and Terror: And, if the Government does not put the Laws
against us in Execution, it will be an extraordinary Favor, or Oversight. For
my own Part, I am so faithful a Subject, and have the Weal of Our Ancient
Order, so much at Heart, that unless the GRAND MASTER puts a Stop to these
Proceedings, by a peremptory Charge to the BROTHERHOOD, I wish I could
honorably enter into ANOTHER.

AND, now I have hinted at ANOTHER Order, I must entertain my Readers with Two
Letters; the first addressed to my self, and the last written from Rome, to the
Author of the first.

HANG CHI to the British PLAIN-DEALER: Health.
Sage SIR,
BY the Help of my Secretary and Interpreter I peruse your Lucubrations; and
write this Epistle, to assure you of my Esteem.

I AM informed, that you have taken Notice of the Advertisement I caused to be
published in the Newspapers; and that you called at the Castle, to be
satisfied of the Truth of my Arrival in this Place. Your Enquiry, and the
Conversation you had with my Secretary, give me Occasion to gratify you
farther; and I am proud to have it in my Power to distinguish one of your Merit
in the Manner I intend.

THE Laws and Constitutions of the most ancient and illustrious Order, of the
GORMOGONS oblige us to be cautious and frugal, in admitting new Members.
Remarkable Virtues have always recommended the Candidates. No Rank, Station, or
Condition of Life, intitles a Person to be of our Fraternity. We know neither
Prejudice, nor Partiality, in conferring this Honor; and all the Interest in
the World to procure it, would be fruitless, without Merit.

MY Residence here will be short. It cannot therefore be expected, that I
should invite many worthy Persons to enter into our Order; nor dare I render it
cheap and contemptible, by admitting every Pretender: But I know several who
deserve to be received, and to whom I have promised the Distinction.

I SHALL consider it as an Ornament to our most ancient and illustrious ORDER,
which is the Honor and Ornament of all its Members, if you, Sage Sir, will be
pleased to accept the Privileges that I am empowered to bestow on the
Deserving. I confess, you must first be DEGRADED, as our Laws require, and
renounce, and abandon, the Society of False-Builders. But, as your great
Judgment must distinguish the Excellence of our Order, I hope you will prefer
being a Fellow with Us. Nothing would more sensibly concern me, when I leave
London, than not be able to transmit your Name in the List, that I must send to
the ECUMENICAL VOLGEE in China.

I am, Sage SIR, Your Affectionate Friend, HANG CHI.


SHIN SHAW, to HANG CHI, at London: Health:
Most Illustrious Brother and Friend,
I CONGRATULATE you on the speedy Progress you have made from the Court of the
Young SOPHY, and your safe Arrival in the Isle of Britain. Your Presence is
earnestly expected at ROME. The Father of High Priests is fond of our Order,
and the CARDINALS have an Emulation to be distinguished. Our Excellent Brother
GORMOGON, Mandarin, CHAN FUE, is well, and salutes you. Since my last, I had
Advices from Pekin, which confirm former Accounts, that our new Emperor is an
open Enemy to the Jesuits: But I pray, their Disgrace in China may not provoke
the Europeans to use Us ill. Take Care of your Health. Farewell.

SHIN SHAW.


I ACKNOWLEDGE the Honor done me, by the illustrious Mandarin HANG CHI; and,
though I cannot prevail with my self to be DEGRADED, in the Manner required by
the Laws and Constitutions of the Order of GORMOGONS, I approve, and applaud,
their admitting none, but whom Merit recommends into the Fellowship of the
ECUMENICAL VOLGEE. Moreover, I propose the Good Conduct, and Regularity of the
GORMOGONS, as a Pattern to the FREE and ACCEPTED MASONS, for the Future: And,
if I shall be enabled to make any useful Discoveries for the Service of the
Brotherhood, they may depend on my watchful Fidelity.

THE Letters, signed MAECENAS, communicated to us, by PHILANTHROPOS, are come
to Hand, and deservedly claim a Place in this Paper the first Opportunity.

Our Fair Correspondents, the one from Edinburgh, the other from Surrey, who,
both so beautifully, and pathetically, pour forth their Complaints to the PLAIN
DEALER, shall meet with a proper and early Regard.

THE ANONYMOUS Gentleman, who requests our speedy Opinion of a certain Case,
which, he says, is urgent, is desired to suspend his dangerous Advice to his
Friend; and we shall touch upon that Subject, in an ampler Manner, than is
consistent with the Haste he requires.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 52.
-- De tot modo millibus unus:
-- De tot modo millibus una.
OVID.
FRIDAY, September 18. 1724.
THE following Letters signed MAECENAS, were written, as their Dates show, some
Time since, by a Gentleman from London, to his Friend at Cambridge, and being
full of a generous Spirit, we have inserted them, according to our Promise in
our last.

London, December 20. 1723-4. SIR,
WHAT I here write to you, is Affection, true (because spontaneous) Affection
to a Family who know not me, or that I am now writing, or intending to write to
you, or any body concerning them.

I AM just now seated at a Coffee-house, not far from the Royal Exchange, where
I am very much affected (as I often have been) with the genteel, humble
Deportment of the Bar-keeper; A Deportment most agreeably adapted to her
present Station. -- Yet, at the same time, such as betokens a Genius superior
to this Way of Livelihood. It is known to every body that sees this Gentlewoman
(seeing her is knowing it) that she is a Gentlewoman: But that, moreover, she
has this additional Merit, To have been the Comfort, the loving, and beloved
Comfort, of the great and admirable Favellus; this perhaps is not so
universally known.

FAVELLUS was an eminent Preacher of the Town: Those that know his Character,
can tell 'twas a Compound of all the good Characters belonging to a Christian,
to a Divine, to a Gentleman. He had a most extensive Genius, which, with his
own Education and Industry, made vast Acquirements in all sorts of Theological
Literature. This will appear to a Man of any Sagacity, that makes use of That
and his Sermons, when published, which are now Printing by Subscription. The
first of these Sermons, that was preached in my Hearing, gave me a most
surprising Mixture of Pleasure and Concern: Pleasure, in hearing, at once, a
Demosthenes, and a Euclid, a Chrysostom, and a Bentley ( All met together) All
speaking in this accomplished Divine; who was himself a most powerful, a most
pathetick Orator, a most exact Reasoner, a most persuasive Theologer, -- in one
Word, an universal consummate Scholar. -- This was the Pleasure. A Concern too
it gave me (a Concern inexpressible) arising from a certain Uneasiness I felt
in my own Breast, from reflecting, that though I had been Years in London, this
was but my First Pleasure of hearing this inimitable Man. After this, you may
be sure I became his eager Attendant: And of All the Sermons I attended, Head
and Heart say this. -- They were All, to a Degree that is incredible, All
Edifying, All Entertaining; Entertaining, I mean in that Way wherein
Theological Performances may and ought to entertain. It Is rare, remarkably
rare, to meet with the Man that writes, or indeed is capable of writing, in
that Close, that Mathematical, that Concatenating Way he excelled in; or, that
has the same Sagacity in Pointing out the Intricacies of an Argument, together
with the same Acuteness, the same Clearness in Removing 'em; -- putting
Prejudice to the Blush; -- reconciling Scripture to Scripture; -- making Error
appear to be Error, Truth to be Truth. You Would be sure not only to be pleased,
but to exult in the Pleasure you took, if you had heard him frequently, as I
did, advancing (and that so ingeniously) some Truths that were uncommon, and
defending common ones in an uncommon Manner; making obscure Things plain; plain
Things surprizingly plainer. -- To raise Objections so pertinently, to state
'em so heartily, to answer 'em so unanswerably, is a Talent, or rather many
Talents, wherein but few Men, if few, could come up to him.

I ASK now, Should it not be (Matter of Wonder to ALL Men, and) to Men of
Merit, Concern, that this very Man, a Man of their own Number, a Minister of
the Gospel too, an eminent Minister, an eminent Writer, -- Great in Learning,
-- Great in Goodness, -- Great in Renown, -- Of a meek humble, winning
Disposition, -- Of a sweet, sober, edifying Conversation, -- Of a blameless, of
an unspotted Character, -- Withal too, a Man of strict Orthodoxy (and is not
This alone a Thousand good Characters?) -- I say, should it not, even in Point
of Humanity (much more so of Charity) affect All Men of Merit or that love
Merit, to observe how it passed unrewarded, slighted, discouraged, though seen
plainly, though admired universally, in this excellent Man?

THINK -- (and grieve when you think) how he Died! How Indigent! How
exceedingly Indigent! -- and this, after a Life wherein there was nothing of
Excess, -- except that of its being painful, willingly painful to Himself, --
and that purposely that it might be useful to Others.

BEHOLD him, when Living, living blamelessly in every Thing; -- Blamelessly did
I say? It had been just to have said, Admirably in every Thing: Admirably every
where: At Home Studious, at Home Frugal, in all his Economy: Abroad seldom --
except at his Church: At Church attended with a full Congregation (perhaps the
fullest in this great City, wherein were Persons of almost all Denominations,
all all Ranks and Persuasions; all pleased, all greedy to hear this
incomparable Man. -- And yet,

BEHOLD him, when Dying, not worth enough to defray the Charge of his Funeral!
Now, it appears (through his own singular Modesty, it did not till now) What a
poor Livelihood ( -- Wonder, and be astonished! and yet this was All his
Livelihood (for himself and Family) he got by the Ministry: Poor! so deplorably
poor, that his distressed Widow, and Two or Three young lovely Children, at
least some of 'em, are likely, ever long, ( -- O pity! pity!) even to -- I
cannot speak it! -- What shall I say? -- My Heart bleeds when I think of it. He
died, as I Am told, not worth Ten Shillings.

WITHIN the Circle of your Acquaintance, and my own, there are, some, no doubt,
that have Inclinations, but want Abilities to be Beneficent; some, that have
Abilities, but want Inclinations: Some, that have Both, and would employ both,
but know not where to employ 'em. To these last sort of Persons, to all these
able-well-inclining Persons, namely, to all that have no Heirs of their own to
inherit after them, or have more Riches than enough for their Heirs, and for
such like Reasons have generous Design, I say, To these surely I need not say
more.

PITY, even common Pity, moved me thus to throw in a Word or two (I hope, at
least, 'twill have some favorable Consequence) in Favor of this unhappy Widow
and Children (the Melancholy Remains of that Learned Good Man I have been
speaking of); and the this rather, because, as you see, they are now reduced,
for the Sake of a Subsistence, to the Business of a Coffee-house.

THE Widow's Demeanor, in this new Way of Life, as I told you, genteel
Humility, submissive, easy, cheerful in this the Station allotted her, Because
it is allotted her. She has this Character, in all its Beauty and Elegance, in
all the Nicety and Goodbreeding belonging to it. See the Whole of her Conduct.
See in that, the worst of Adversities in its best Dress. Whoever attends to it
(and whoever beholds cannot but attend to it) has a very instructive Amusement.
There is scarce an Action she does, that in this Way is not an excellent
Document, being itself a Comment on that polite Humility I am speaking of. To
see her, just now, bringing me the Dish of Coffee, I called for, with HER
peculiar Way of doing it, is an admirable Criticism on those Words of St. Paul,
I know HOW to be abased. And to attend her, saying Sir, I thank you, and her
Manner of saying it ( -- with the Curt'sy annexed) to a Gentleman that a while
ago laid his Penny at the Bar, is perhaps a better Sermon than many a Divine
could have made on this Text of St. Peter [ Be Courteous] So much for the Widow.

THE Children (poor, fatherless, undone Children!) seem to carry an Hereditary
Goodness in their very Aspects. It would melt any Heart to behold them; any,
especially, that remembers that worthy Father they descended from.

SIR, Sure you are affected with this Melancholy Narrative: It Is Truth.
Inquire, and you will find it All to be Truth, as related to you, by

Your most Affected MAECENAS.


London, May 21. 1724. Dear SIR,
IN my last I grieved, in this I rejoice; as you will, when I tell you that the
distressed Widow of the late Reverend and Excellent Favellus is lately Married
to a Good Man, and an ample Estate, ample enough to provide handsomely for her
and her Children. Behold the Benevolence, behold the Goodness, the Superlative
Goodness of Amasius! that has thought fit to bestow Himself, and his All! and
this without Hurt to any Relation of his own. I esteem, I admire the Man, 'tho
I know him not. I Am all Joy and Transport, and impatient to tell it you. I can
write nothing else; -- therefore conclude in an Ecstasy.

Yours, MAECENAS.


Sept. 1. 1724. SIR,
IT IS the Opinion of me, and of many that the two Letters, I enclose, may pass
with Advantage through your Hands to the Public. If too long, abridge 'em as you
think fit. I was at Cambridge, when I reciv'd both from Maecenas, who I must
tell you, is a Gentleman of the Temple, that will not permit me to say more of
him; nor need I to a Person, of your Taste and Discernment, that can read the
Soul of a Man in his Letters.

BE just, Sir, to such a remarkable Piece of Generosity as this of Amasius, and
convince the World, that it is not only an uncommon Generosity, but an uncommon
good Sense; a good Sense, perhaps, which a great many foolish People have not a
Notion of, and which a great many wise ones have only a Notion of.

THE like Conduct to this of Amasius, was the other Day, that of THEODOSIA, a
Lady of an amiable Character, and of a very considerable Family and Fortune.
She has had a long and intimate Knowledge of Honestus, and of All his Good
Qualities. She has often heard, often seen, what a kind Husband he made to his
Wise, whom he has lately lost, and with her an Estate, that was all he had to
subsist upon. He had met with many Adversities, many Trials before. But this
was the greatest. He bore it manfully; hoping, trusting, resting, firmly and
cheerfully, in an Almighty Wisdom, Goodness, and Providence. With this
Resolution, he made a friendly Visit to his Acquaintance in the Country; among
the rest, to Theodosia, who received him kindly, and pitied him. He there fell
ill of a Fever, during which, she gave him a Thousand Proofs of her Tenderness!
and, after he had recovered, added this to the Number of 'em, She Married him
-- Not without the Advice of her best Friends and Relations. --

THIS is the Character of Honestus; a great deal of Merit, but, withal, a great
deal of Poverty, and Four Children along with it. For this she is reflected on.
Cruel World! thus to treat the generous Theodosia! And thus to treat her,
because she is generous! -- Cruelty itself! But encourage her, I beseech you,
Sir, and let it be your Generosity to say all you can in behalf of Theodosia's.

HEREBY, (if speedy) you will oblige many besides,

SIR, Your Sincere Friend, And Humble Servant, PHILANTHROPOS.


THE PLAIN DEALER. No 53.
Trahimur omnes laudis studio: and optimus quisque maxim gloria ducitur.

CICERO.
MONDAY, September 21. 1724.
WE regard not Rivals in Love, with more Malice than Rivals in Fame: And the
softer Sex, is most liable to the malignant Impressions of Envy; because their
Pursuits being fewer than ours, their Application is more intense and
collected: And they brook Disappointments with less Comfort and Moderation.

WIT and Beauty, are the Arms they conquer by; It is with Jealousy, therefore,
that they behold them in any Hands but their own. The Praise of one Lady, is
considered by another, as a Reproach: And her Soul must be sublimely Great,
who, not only observes with Pleasure, the Fame and Influence, of a powerful
Rival; but contributes her own Endeavors, to the Support, and Increase of them!

I HAVE been led into these Reflections, by the Delight, with which, I perused
the following Letter, and Copy of Verses, which were lately sent me, by a Lady,
who has either too much Generosity, to malign the Excellence and Applause of
others: Or too large a Share of both, herself, to be alarmed, at their
Advance, in either.

SIR,
I HAVE found, That your Paper has a Power to move the Soul; and holds a
Command over the Passions. Your PLAIN DEALER on Death, is one continued Beauty.
He ought, methinks, to live for ever, who can make Death so desirable. While I
was reading in it, all Vanity, and Love of Life forsook me. -- My Eyes resigned
themselves to Tears: and I even seemed to feel the Grave. The beautiful Verse
glided through my Veins; and I trembled, with a pleasing Horror.

WHILE my Mind was, thus delightfully sadden'd, Death deprived me of a perfect
Friend, to whose dear Memory, I have devoted the Lines enclosed. They have
little Beauty, but the Truth and Passion of my Concern. Perhaps, That will
plead their Pardon.

THE Lady, whose Loss I lament, was an Ornament to one Sex; and the Reproach
and Admiration of the other. I wonder, a Death, so considerable, appears so
little deplored. -- Where is Friendship? -- Was it buried, in Delia's Grave?
Let me invoke it, to lament her. -- She who could, so gracefully, mourn, let us
mourn her. -- She, who could give Life to our Imagination, let us be sorry for
her Death, and assist her Fame, by our Gratitude.

YOU, Sir, who know how to Charm your Readers, as you please, I wish, you would
choose this inspiring Subject of Friendship. Its divine Spirit is too much
confined among Persons of narrow Natures. -- As for me, I am not insensible of
it: I feel its Power at my Heart; but cannot do Justice in expressing it. -- The
Descent to Age, and Affliction, is smoothed and softened, by the Aid of
Friendship. It rebates the Edge of sharpest Miseries. We seem not to grow Old,
when we have a Friend, to make Life tasteful to us: Time flies over us, indeed;
but he seems to brush us with downy Wings; and marks his Way, with slight
Impressions.

WHEN I see a Face, more serene, or more lovely, than usual, I take Pleasure to
imagine, she owes her Sweetness, to the Influence of some charming Friend's
Society. The Soul is quickened in its Energy, by the Power of so divine a
Softness, nor shares, nor laments, the Body's Miseries.

EXCUSE the Fullness of my Heart, on this favorite Subject: And I will be
frank enough to own, that I am sometimes blessed, with a Friend; of your Sex,
too: And, while I have the Joy of listening to his Wisdom, methinks, we have
already passed the Grave, and are enjoying the Delights of Heaven.

I am, SIR, Your most Respectful, Humble Servant, CLEORA.


VERSES, Written by a LADY: On the Death of Mrs. MANLEY.
PALE bleeding Friendship, and distracted Grief,
Leave me no Voice, to give my Woe Relief:
Even the soft Gratitude my Eyes should pay,
Flows from my Soul, and speaks, this nobler Way.
My weeping Pen shall my Distress impart,
And its dark Tears dissolve the Reader's Heart:
Till Tears on Tears, in social Grief, descend,
And the World mourns my Soul's lamented Friend.
Yet does my Muse, but a bribed Offering give:
Since, joined to Thine My Name is sure to live.
Why were Thou ravished from my Love, so soon?
Why gleam'd thy Evening only, on my Noon?
Had thy dear Friendship warmed my Morning Lays,
I had deserved the Glory of thy Praise:
Sprung, lively, forward lightened by thy Ray;
Cheered, for the Race; and darted into Day.
But thou were held, from my desiring Sight:
And my Muse wandered, distant from Thy Light.
How strong, yet soft, was Her accomplished Mind!
Sincere, like Heaven; and, as its Angels, kind.
Safe, as the Sun, in her Superior Rays,
How full shone Merit, in her graceful Praise!
Such active Flame, did her warm Fancy give,
That every glowing Letter seemed to live!
Where Is now the unconscious Heart, that could descend,
To bless my Wishes, with the Name of Friend!
Senceless, and cold, 'twill, now, no longer move,
At Pity's tender Voice, or weeping Love!
Where shall we, now, those bright Ideas find,
That peopled Thought, from thy creating Mind?
Death has turned back the intercepted Store:
But thy Fame lives, and thou can die no more.
Such Immortality Thy Friendship gave;
For none, whom Delia sung, can fear the Grave.
Life of my Genius! whither art thou flown?
To what new Regions, to my Soul unknown!
Let me overtake thee -- for I weary grow;
And sicken at the World, that is left below.
The Sunless World, where Friendship has no Part,
Is cold, and dead, to my be-winter'd Heart.
In Life's vain Joys, no Comfort can be found,
No Cure for Mem'ry's ever-smarting Wound.
When the bright Traces of thy Mind I read,
Oh! how will waking Recollection bleed!
Thy Angel Pen, awed even unblushing Vice:
And chased high Guilt, from its proud Paradise.
But Innocence and Virtue, were thy Care:
Thy towering Genius, shone Triumphant there.
Oh! Delia! tuneful Mistress of my Mind,
Dear to my Friendship, to my Errors kind,
Where shall my Muse another Delia find?
What wished Entreaties did I still receive!
Such, the true Great, alone, have Soul, to give.
While, in immortal Honors she was dressed,
She stooped, to raise me to her generous Breast?
And wooed my distant Merit, to be blessed?
I grasp thy Tomb, nor would I thence depart;
The World has, now, no Charm, that tempts my Heart.
Dark, let me sigh, to thy departed Shade,
Nor Light, intruding, solemn Grief invade:
My trembling Arms, would this cold Marble bind.
Till my lost Body, joins my buried Mind.
I AM charmed, almost equally, with the Verse and Prose, of this Lady: -- There
is in her Style, a peculiar Mark, or Mole, which her Minerva may be known by.
It is a certain majestic Shortness in her Periods, impregnated with Sense and
Fullness. And her Poetry is so rich in Beauties, that her Eyes have scarce more
Fire; or her Mind more Scope and Sweetness.

IT has often been observed, That the Ladies of this Island, are the most
beautiful in the Universe. I shall endeavor, for my Country's Honor, to prove
them also the most Witty. And, that they are most Wise, we are under a
Political Necessity of maintaining, because no Remark is more obvious to
Foreigners, than, that the Superiority of our Women's Talents, has almost
universally preferred the Sex, in this happy Corner of the World, to a Right of
Governing their Husbands.

BUT when I come to speak of the Wit of our English Ladies, I will not do 'em
the Injustice of comparing them with our Male Poets. -- There was a Corinna
among the Ancients, who carried away the Prize of Poetry from the Immortal
Pindar himself. -- To write better than the Men, therefore, is a Triumph below
the Genius of some of our Female Wits, whom I could name, since other Women
have been already, so far Conquerors in other Nations. But, if I match our
modern Muses, against the Sappho's, and Corinna's of Antiquity, and they shall
be victorious over those famed Victors, That, indeed will be a Glory.

I SHALL consecrate Three future Papers, to the Great, and different Excellence
of Three English Ladies, who are all now living; And whose Writings shall be
tried, in a most impartial Comparison, with the finest, and most celebrated
Remnants of Female Genius, which have been preserved and wondered at, through a
Length of applauding Ages. -- And, I doubt not, but I shall make it
demonstrable, in those Three Papers; that the English Ladies have excelled the
Ancients, in the Depth, the Tenderness, and the Sublimity of their Compositions.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 54
Cur ego, si nequeo, ignoroque, Poeta salutor?
HOR.
FRIDAY, September 25. 1724.
IN a Coffee-Room, the other Day, where the Conversation turned on Wit, a
Gentleman was taking Pains to draw an odd kind of Demonstration, from the List
of Subscribers to Mr. Pope's Translation of Homer, That there never was an Age
so favorable to Poets, as This: -- And, That, from the Number of our Noble
Patrons, the Glorious Reign of King George will shine brighter to Posterity
than the Reign of Augustus Caesar.

THOUGH I love Loyalty, at my Heart, and am as conscious as I ought to be of
the Influences of His Majesty's Glory, yet, I confess, I was a little startled,
at the Novelty of this Assertion; and expressed my Surprise, with some Emotion.
-- I find then, cried I, that I have lived in profound Ignorance! -- As for the
Politics indeed of the present Age, I have always considered 'em as too
remarkable to be soon forgot: But, for the Wit of it, I was in Hopes, there
could be no Danger of its being remembered.

IT seems, continued I, the severest Misery of Men of Learning, that Custom has
misled them to depend, for their Encouragment, on those Great, Little,
Creatures, whom we call People of Quality. -- Were Wisdom the Consequence of
Riches, Rank, and Power, it had been prudent, and reasonable, for Merit in
Distress to apply itself to the Mighty. -- But, since the Flattery, and
Indulgence, in which Those called Great Men, are educated, must give Liberty to
their Passions, and Restraint to their Intellects, (for Understanding is scarce
necessary to Men who can pay others, to think for them!) therefore, with due
Regard to a few shining Exceptions, a Lord is above Wit: And most of 'em would
have found it more to their Taste, and their Talent, to subscribe to Heidegger,
than to Homer, but that the numerous Acquaintance of this fine, and happy
Genius united themselves, so powerfully, to recommend his Translation, that, to
be out of the List, was to be out of the Fashion: which Misfortune, no Doubt,
it was well worth Six Guineas, to be delivered from the Disgrace of -- But, let
me see these shining Names to Mr. Dennis's Miscellaneous Tracts, which he is
now publishing by a Subscription, scarce the Sixth Part so chargeable, and I
will afterward, suppose, that They can read, as well as purchase. -- This,
however, is what I know them too well to expect at their Hands, unless Mr.
Dennis shall become as much The Mode as Mr. Pope is.

I WAS surpised to observe, that at my Mention of Mr. Dennis, almost every
Person present, joined in a Clamor against Critics. They affirmed, Thus it
was but just, to neglect the Writings of a Person, who only writes, to censure
Others. And, That the World should, without Regard to a Critick's Learning,
declare War, against his Malice; and treat, and consider him, as a King of
Common Enemy.

I CONTENTED myself with smiling, at the Extravagance of this Reasoning, and
replied, That I doubted hot, however, but the Name of Mr. Pope would be found
among Mr. Dennis's Subscribers; because He has Soul to know, That though Living
Merit, may sometimes, as in his own Case, be popular, yet Popularity is so far
from being the Mark of Living Merit, that Real Excellence, for the most Part,
both wants and disdains it.

IN the Progress of my Papers, I am determined to examine into the Foundation
of this silly Notion, That Critics are Enemies to Wit and Learning: And I dare
be positive, beforehand, that I shall discover it to take its Rise from a
Cause, of the same Nature with that, which makes the Pickpocket hate the
Horsepond.

TO pretend a Love of Learning, and at the same Time io despise Criticism, is
as ridiculous an Absurdity, as to delight in noble Buildings, and exclaim
against Architecture. -- If there is not some Rule, whereby we are to measure
Wit, then Wit has no Dependence on the Reason, and the Judgment; and, to be a
Wit, or a Fool, are in that Case, Terms Synonimous. -- But, if Wit is to be
judged, by the Examination of our Reason, then that Reason is Criticism: And
he, who is a Critic, is the Champion of Wit, and defends it from Profanation.
-- How can he, therefore, be the Enemy, of what is supported by his Influence?

THE true Friends of Learning ought to be cautious, how they give up Critics;
lest, to free themselves from a present Fear, they destroy their future Hope,
and fall into Oblivion, under the Growth of assuming Ignorance: Like the
Degenerate Roman Armies, who slackening the Severity of their old martial
Discipline, came at length, says Procopius, to think Helmets and Corslets too
hot for them. -- They were cumbersome and insupportable: -- They fainted under
the Weight of 'em: -- And had Courage enough, they were sure, to fight, as
successfully without 'em. -- They tried it: And the Consequence was, They were
never, from that Time forward, able to stand, against the Arrows of the
over-numbering Goths, and Vandals: So deprived of their Defense, they lost
their Empire to Barbarians.

BUT, since no Truth operates so powerfully as that which convinces by Example,
let the Good, or Ill, of Criticism be decided, in fair Combat, between the
Gentleman I have named above, who professes, and forms himself on it; and one
of our most rapid, and voluminous Compilers of Poetry; who though one would
imagine him too heavy to ride Post; yet, trusting wholly to Inspiration, breaks
over Hedges and Ditches, and never checks his Horse's Speed, whether out of the
Road, or in it.

THIS Merchant Adventurer was for engrossing Trade to Himself: And began with
firing the Magazines of Those who dealt in the same Commodity. -- One of his
first witty Performances, was, A Satire against Wit. -- An Accident befell me,
the other Day, that may furnish him with Matter of Speculation. I am very fond
of a Cat: And, ever since I lodged in Barbican, have delighted in the Society
of a Tabby Favorite of my Landlady's Children. But, it happened, a few Days
since, that, not being in a Humor to be so familiar with her as usual, she
opened one of her Claws, and was pleased to scratch my Leg, with no small
Freedom, and Impertinence: Upon which, in great Wrath, I took her up, by the
Tail, and tossed her out of Window. -- The Cat got no Harm: but I have quite
lost her Heart upon it. And now, I may call, coax, and tempt her, as much as I
please, she keeps, always, out out of my Reach: And I dare be positive, I shall
never catch her, though I were to live and die in Barbican.

BUT, to go on, with what I proposed. -- After his Satire against Wit, he set
forth his Wit against Satire; and published an Epic Poem, called PRINCE ARTHUR.
-- The Excellent Critic, abovenam'd, saw, upon perusing this Piece, that the
Gentleman wanted Skill and Application, in the Art he was bent on practicing.
He put himself, therefore, to the Trouble of composing, for his Use, a just,
and generous Reprehension, which he entitled, Remarks upon Prince Arthur. --
Had the Author been either humble, or wise, enough to make Advantage by it,
This would have served him as a Plan, to build stronger, for the future; and
given a Turn to his Reflection, that might have made him, him what he had so
earnest a Desire to pass for.

BUT it was, then, as it is now, the Custom to despise a Critic. And the
Author of Prince Arthur fell, so courageously, into the Fashion, that in almost
His Coach-Load of Epic Poems, which he has, since obliged the World with, from
Arthur, down to Alfred, (I speak it without Compliment) The same
distinguishable Purity, Fire, Elegance, Fancy, Copiousness, and Elevation,
shine, alike, in every one of 'em: And, All, are equally secure, as well from
Criticism, as Imitation.

BUT, not content with raising, and adorning Human Nature, He aspired, at last,
to write, upon Divinity Itself. -- The Great Almighty, and His Works, were,
now, to be the Subject of his practiced Panegyric. -- Here, sure! if ever, He
was to guard himself with Caution, and put on the Critick's Armor. -- Creation
opened to him, with its boundless Luster! -- Worlds beyond Worlds, were to be
discovered, by his Poetic Telescope: And other Suns, whose Light (though swift
enough, to travel a Hundred and Fourscore thousand Miles, in one Second of
Time, is notwithstanding, spent, and lost, in unconceivable Immensity, before
it reaches, This, our own, Sun's Confines!) This Light was to be more
Illuminated, by His Muse, and shine down, upon his Reader's Fancy.

HERE, the admirable Critic, his old Friend, had, Himself, set an Example;
such, as can never be too much applauded. -- The noblest, the most extensive,
the most astonishing Ideas, which can expand the Human Soul, had enriched his
powerful Conception. And one would have hoped, that Mr. Dennis had made it
impossible for any future Writer to treat this Subject, in a mean and grovelling
Manner; after he had obliged the World, so nobly, in his Paraphrase on Te Deum,
with Verse, and Sentiments, sublimely suited to the Vastness of the Occasion.

Wherever, at utmost Stretch, we cast our Eyes,
Through the vast frightful, Spaces of the Skies;
Even there, we find Thy Glory! -- There we gaze
On Thy bright Majesty's unbounded Blaze!
Ten Thousand Suns, prodigious Globes of Light,
At once, in broad Dimensions, strike our Sight.
Millions, behind, in the remoter Skies,
Appear but Spangles, to our wearied Eyes.
And, when those wearied Eyes want farther Strength,
To pierce the Void's unmeasurable Length,
Our towering Thoughts, more vigorous, farther fly:
And, still, remoter, flaming Worlds discry.
But, even an Angel's comprehensive Thought,
Cannot extend so far as Thou have wrought,
Our vast Conception, to such Swelling brought,
Swallowed, in Infinite, is lost, in Naught!
THIS is Poetry, that defies Censure, and is raised, even above Praise: for it
is scarce possible to say so much of it, as it truly deserves. -- But, now,
behold; on the opposite Side, an Abstract, from the Muse of Prince Arthur, in
his Hymn to the Creator.

Hail, King Supreme! -- Of Power, immense Abyss:
Father of Light! Exhaustless Source of Bliss!
Thou Uncreated, Self-existent Cause,
Controlled by no Superior Being's Laws.
THE first Three Lines being truly poetical, what Pity, that the Author's Pride
deprived him of the Use of Criticism! Had he buoyed himself, by the Help of
That, He could never (though he had Sir John Falstaff's Alacrity in Sinking)
have sunk, so soon, and so shamefully, as to tell us, in the 4th Verse -- That
He, who is Supreme in Power, is controlled by no Superior.

ABOUT 20 Lines after this, God goes out with a Pair of Compasses, to mark the
Limits of the World: Not that the Poet had any Design they should be made use
of; but Mr. Milton had described Compasses, upon this very Occasion: And our
Author was resolved to be up with him.

Through the black Bosom of the empty Space,
The Gulf confess the Omnipotent Embrace:
And pregnant grown, with Elemental Seed,
Unfinished Orbs, and Worlds in Embryo, breed.
TO suspend a short Remark, on the manifest Contradiction of these two Ideas --
The Drawing out with a Pair of Compasses, -- And the Begetting, by Embraces, --
I challenge the whole Tribe of Critick-Haters throughout Europe, to match this
last Image with any thing so indecent, so improper, so ill-express'd, and,
indeed, so almost blasphemous, and extravgant!

BUT, that no Cause of Complaint may disturb the Lovers of Variety, whoever
likes not one Image, shall have a Dozen new ones, to make Choice of. -- The
Author, to do him Justice, is no Niggard of his Fancy: We are, all, kindly
welcome to it, as far as it will go: And He, that desires more, is too
unreasonable in all Conscience.

From the Crude Mass the Omniscient Architect
For every Part, Materials did select:
And with a Master Hand, the World erect.
Labored by him, etc. --
By His cementing Words, the Parts cohere:
And rolls, by His impulsive Nod, in Air.
I AM sorry I have not Room to entertain my Reader with the whole; but we may
measure Hercules, by his Foot. -- One of your creeping narrow, Genius's,
Creatures, who stand in Awe of the Critics, would never have been capable of
half this luxuriant Fullness! nay, They might have been silly enough to suppose
it blameable! By which pusilanimous Fear of theirs, the Reader must have lost
the Sublimity of these fine Ideas, Of His Creator, at one, and the same Time,
measuring the World with a Pair of Compasses. -- Omnipotently Embracing it --
Impregnating it with Seed -- Breeding Orbs in Embryo -- Picking Materials from
the Crude Mass -- Erecting it, with a Master-Hand -- Laboring it -- Cementing
it -- Nodding at it -- And setting it a rolling.

SHAMEFUL Heap of Inconsistencies! -- Are Images, that should elevate the Soul
of Man, to an Astonishment, at His Maker's Power, in creating, with a Word, the
Heavens, and the Earth, and All, that is in them all! Are Images, fit for This,
to be borrowed from the Pains, and Postures, of a Common Labourer? Had not he a
nobler Lesson before him? And does not Moses inform him, that, when God says,
Let there be Light, there WAS Light? -- But such as These, are the Effects of
maintaining War, against Critics: And the prodigious, and unbounded Difference
between these two Gentlemen's Performances, upon One and the Same Subject, may
convince the Self-sufficient, That it is not a dancing Brain, a wild, eruptive,
Fancy, that can qualify a Man to be a Poet; though it serves, well enough, to
set him a going, as a Scribbler.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 55.
Est modus in rebus, sunt certi denique fines,
Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere rectum.
HOR.
MONDAY, September 28. 1724.
THE following Letter, from the Gentleman, who obliged me with a former, from
Edinburgh, will speak so excellently for Itself; that the kindest Thing I can
do for my Reader, will be, to say nothing concerning it, which may detain him
from the Pleasure of perusing it.

Edinburgh, Sept. the 8th. 1724. SIR,
YOUR Paper of Friday the 28th. of August, is arrived in North-Britain, and has
occasioned much Speculation; but all its Readers are sensibly obliged, by the
Respect you have shown our Country, and for the Honor you have done the rising
Generation of both Sexes; and I believe, there is none here, who would not
heartily join their Acknowledgements with mine on this Occasion. I may
therefore presume to thank you in the Name of all my Countrymen, who may not
use the Freedom to write to you: But the Gentlemen of the Grotesque Club, whom
you have so remarkably distinguished, must represent their Sentiments, in a
better Manner than I can; and I will not pretend to speak their Sense, or
anticipate their Gratitude.

GIVE me Leave, SIR, only to express my Mind in the Sequel. You have brought me
under strong Obligations to you, by the Notice you have taken of my Letter. And
since you seem to promise to yourself, and the World, some Intelligence from
this Quarter, by means of my proposed Correspondence; I cannot but use my
Endeavors, to answer, in some Measure, your Expectations. You have fixed me,
SIR, in the Character of your Northern Spy, and you may depend upon my most
watchful Fidelity.

EDINBURGH being our Metropolis, and the Place of my Residence, must be the
chief Scene of Action, and the Date of your Intelligence from North-Britain.
Here is a vast Variety of Humors, Customs, Manners, and Conversation, to be
considered. Many Things happen in this Place, that are worthy your Knowledge as
a PLAIN-DEALER. Some deserve Praise and Admiration, others Displeasure and
Reprehension; both Regards may be useful, either as Examples provoking
Emulation; or, as Reasons, warning from Danger: And sure, your Judgment, SIR,
cannot err, in the Improvement and Application, of any Accounts I send you.

I BEG leave to lay before you, several of the Advantages, and Disadvantages of
our good Town, before I descend to Private Life.

WE are blessed with an able and active Magistracy. Most of Those entrusted with
with the Superintendency of the City, are Gentlemen of Breeding and Letters,
and all have a Bent of Mind, that favors the Public Grandeur and Emolument.
It seems to be the united Ambition of our Magistrates to adorn the Place, and
by rendering it more beautiful and commodious, to invite new Inhabitants, to
increase its Treasure and Revenue. They would surmount all the Difficulties it
labors under, by a Superiority of Genius: And, as they appear true Friends to
the Public Interest, in respect of Trade; they are not wanting in giving
Countenance and Encouragement to Arts and Sciences. Politeness thrives under
their Influence, and some of them set an Example of it to the Youth, in their
own Practice and Behavior. Here, SIR, are few cloudy, heavy-headed Aldermen,
whose Length of Wigs and Gowns, is their sole Mark of Dignity. You would take
our Provosts for First Ministers, and our Bailies for Courtiers. I have seen
Statesmen, make a worse Figure than our Deacons, and heard as good Speeches in
the Town-Council at Edinburgh, as at the Council Board of Great Britain. I wish
all our Peers had Abilities equal to some of our Weavers, and that every
Clergyman, had half the Grace of some Bonnet-Makers of our City.

BUT, SIR, you know there is no Body-Politick, perfect; many Things are
wanting, to make our City more flourishing and famed. And, perhaps, the
greatest Misfortune we labor under, is Faction and Party. This, SIR,
discourages many noble Purposes, and baffles glorious Undertakings. Self-Love,
Pride and Ambition, prevail everywhere, and sway all Men, more or less: These
are natural to all Creatures. The Oldest Cock is Lord of the Roost, and the
strongest Bull is Grand Seignior in his green Seraglio; the eldest Buck is
Tyrant of the Park, and, from his Strength and his Horns claims a Right to be
Chief in Power; and, no doubt, but every individual Creature, of every Species,
with the same Force, would seek and exercise the same Jurisdiction. But Men are
remarkably distinguished, by their Love of Precedence, and often add, to their
natural Desire of Governing, a certain low-spirited Spleen and Malice. Our
worthy Magistrates, meet with more Opposition and Discouragment, from little
Pretenders to their Place and Authority, than from any other Cause. If the
Town-Council, beholds not Macro, with the same Partiality, with which he
considers himself, he wonders at their Blindness, and grows peevish upon it;
for the Root of the Spleen, is often Pride disappointed. Some carry it farther
than mere Envy, by laboring to undermine and depose those who are above them,
and commonly the greater the Merit is, the more obnoxious to Ill Will and
Reproaches. As the Red Dragon pursued the Woman in the Revelation, Faction or
Private Malice, pursues the most deserving Man; and when it cannot overtake
him, it opens its Mouth, and throws a Flood after him: People who have not
Merit to rise themselves, would at least level others. And what has often been
my greatest Wonder, in this Case, is, that most of our little Jars, are created
and carried on by our Clergy. Priestcraft is here, as Infallible as it is at
Rome, and our Popes are as absolute, to the full Extent of their Parishes. For
my own Part, I have neither Personal Partiality for any of the present
Magistrates, nor Prejudice against their Adversaries: I never had, nor ever
needed the Favor of any of them. I speak my Sense freely, and it is the Result
of just Reflection, and Observation. And I heartily wish, I had not such Ground,
to expose the Spirits of any of my Neighbors, to the Plain-Dealer. But what a
Pity is it, that Faction should deface the Public Good? And how vile, to plot
the Downfall, or calumniate the Fame of Those, whose Power is their Country's
Blessing?

MY Concern for the Place of my Birth, has carried me farther than I ought to
have allowed myself Liberty; but as I am not to touch this Subject again, you
will have the Goodness to excuse, what I judged, in some respects, to be
requisite.

I SHOULD not neglect giving you an Account of the State of Trade in this Place
nor ought I to pass over in Silence, the University and College of Justices.
Many of the Clergy too, deserve their Praises, and must, upon some Occasions,
come under Consideration: But being unwilling to tire your Patience, and huddle
my Materials too much together, I will conclude this Letter, when I have
acquainted you with what the Ladies would have most known, and what every Body
here would be glad to have your Opinion of: I mean, The FAIR ASSEMBLY. This,
SIR, consists of our best-bred Ladies, of different Qualities and Ages: It Is
but a late Institution, and at first, was thought to be a proper Theme for our
Pastors Sunday Sermons; all our Pulpits railed against it, as they did, of Old,
against Perukes and Tobacco. But the holy Fire is now much spent, and we are at
Liberty to meet in our great Hall, without Danger of the Kirk's Anathema; nay,
some of the Wives and Daughters of the Sanctified, begin of late, to grace our
Fellowship. For my own Part, I despair not to see the Reverend themselves,
eating Sweatmeats in our Company: And mixing innocently, in our Country Dances.
And I own, notwithstanding they are worthy Ladies, of undisputed Virtue and
Honor, who preside over the Fair Assembly, I should be better pleased to see
at our Head, a Moderator from the General One. Slander and Detraction would fly
before him, and innocent Freedom, and Christian Communion would be cherished by
his Influence. Husbands would allow their Wives to go into Company, without
Jealousy, and Parants send their Daughters, without fear of their leaving
behind them any thing, that they ought to bring back again. But till that
Halcyon Day arrives, we must be contented with the want of Sanction, and dance,
and drink Tea without them. I shall say more of our Fair Assembly hereafter,
and at present only subscribe myself,

Sage SIR, Your Trusty Spy, And Humble Servant, FERGUS BRUCE.


THE PLAIN DEALER. No 56.
Virtutem incolumem odimus
Sublatam ex oculis quaerimus invidi.
HOR.
FRIDAY, October 2. 1724.
To the Author of the PLAIN-DEALER.
Sept. 21. 1724. SIR,
I RETURN you Thanks for the Pleasure which I have received from several of
your Plain Dealers, and particularly from that which you lately published
concerning Detraction, which could never have obliged the World at a more
seasonable Juncture; because, as you justly observe, Slander was never so
prevailing, as it is at present, and never so insupportable.

DETRACTION, or Slander, or Calumny, call it by what Name you please, is, for
the most part, begot by Knaves, and nourished, and maintained, by Fools; and
the more Fools and Knaves, there are, in a Nation, the more must Slander
flourish in it; but the more corrupt and degenerate a Nation grows, the more
Fools and Knaves must abound in it. Now, whether this Nation was ever so
corrupt and degenerate, as it is at present, I leave to others to determine.

THE Fools, and Knaves, of either Sex, have a natural Aversion to Merit, and
when they are neither able, nor willing, to reach a Height, to which others,
more befriended by Nature, and more beloved by Heaven, have attained, they
constantly endeavor, with all their Might, to bring the envied Object down to
their own Pitch: And, the more extraordinary the Merit is, the greater is the
Envy, and the stronger the Efforts, which it makes, to blacken the Deserving:
Which has occasioned a famous Observer of Mankind to say, That whenever he
hears a great deal of Ill said of any one, and sees none at all in him, he
begins to suspect, that That Person has a troublesome and offensive Merit,
which eclipses that of others.

AS soon as a Knave has invented a Slander, a Fool cries out, There must be
something in it, -- There is no Smoke without Fire: Which is as much as to say,
that there can be no such Thing as Slander; or, that no Slander can be
propagated; which is equally contrary to common Sense, and to constant Matter
of Fact. -- How different an Opinion of this Matter, had the judicious, and
penetrating, La Bruyere, who tells us, That the Reverse of what is commonly
reported, concerning Persons, or Things, is what may reasonably be believed of
either.

THERE is another musty Proverb, made use of in the Propagation of Slander,
which is mentioned in your last Paper, viz. That, what Everybody says, must be
true. -- If they, who pronounce this, meant, that Every thing must be True
which has the universal Consent of Mankind, there might, perhaps, be something
in it; but, alas! their Meaning is vastly different: They only infer, That when
a Report, or Opinion, in any Place, so far prevails, as to become, in that
Place, general, that Report, or Opinion, must be true. So that, in the Notion
of these Gentlemen, If Calumny, at any Time, so far prevails, as to become
General, it is no longer Calumny, but Truth; and a sure Consequence of this
Doctrine is, That Popery is the best Religion at Rome, and Mahometism at
Constantinople.

BUT, how little do they, who talk, at this Rate, know, either of the Frailty,
or Malignity, of Human Nature, or the Transactions of their own Times, or the
Records of preceding ones? Some of the best, and most deserving Persons, both
among Ancients, and Moderns, have labored under general Calumny; under
Calumnies which were not only inconsistent with common Sense, but were directly
contradictory of those Virtues, and great Qualities, for which they had long
been eminent, and for which some of them have been celebrated, by Twenty
succeeding Centuries; and though the Truth was so manifestly on their Side, yet
some of these, and those of the most deserving, have been quite oppressed by
such Calumnies; as Socrates, and Phocion, among the Graecians. -- Among the
Romans, Camillus, and Coriolanus. -- SOCRATES, the most Religious, and most
Virtuous, of all the Athenians, was condemned, and excuted, as an Atheist, and
a Corrupter of Youth. Among the Jews, the Prophets were stoned, and Jesus
Christ, Himself, was crucified as an Imposter, and a Blasphemer.

YOU have, very justly observed, That Detraction brings most Disquiet, to those
who are most above it. -- You may say such Things, without any Consequence, to
a worthless Fellow, as will blow a Man of Honor into a Flame, not to be
quenched, but by Blood. But, if such Injuries are so insupportable, to a Man of
Honor, when they come from one single Person, provoked, perhaps, by some
imaginary Offense, and quite frantic, with Passion, and Wine; what Impressions
must they not make, when they are whispered in cold Blood, by a Number of
different Persons? Such Slanders obstruct the Progress of Arts, the Advancement
of Learning, and the Growth of Virtues, by the killing Impressions, which they
make, on Individuals. -- I wish you would proceed to show, what Disorder they
bring to Families and what Desolation to States. Hannibal was undone, and
Carthage was ruined, by the malicious Slanders of Hanno; and the Duke of
Marlborough's unparalled Victories could not defend him against Ingratitude,
while the Malice of his Slanderers met with Countenance from Men in Power, who,
being, privately, his Enemies, had not Soul enough to sacrifice their little
Spleen to the Love of their Country's Glory.

I am, SIR, Your most Obedient Servant, A. B.


DETRACTION is an Evil, which, however hateful in its Nature, the World must
always expect to abound with. And, therefore, since my Correspondent has
written so much, and so well, in Detestation of this ungenerous Weakness, all I
will add, upon the Subject, shall be, to advise those who suffer under the
Severity of its Consequences, rather to despise, than complain of it. To which
End, they would do well to reflect on the Answer of the Philosopher, whom his
Friends were urging to contrive some public Means, whereby to redeem himself
from the Disgrace which he suffered, under the Malice of some busy Slanderers.
-- They who love me, said he, will give no Credit to malicious Rumors, to my
Disadvantage: And, as for those who hate me, I will live, in a Manner so
contrary to what they believe of me, that I will make 'em ashamed of their
Credulity.

THAT very Socrates, which my Correspondent so justly produces, as one of the
most glorious of all the Victims to Slander, triumphed over it, in the very
Current and full Force, of its Influence. For when Aristophanes, in his Comedy,
called, The Clouds, had exposed this great, and virtuous Sufferer, with the
utmost Bitterness of witty Malice, to the public Spleen of the Athenians,
Socrates came, in Person, to see the Comedy acted; and, taking his Place in the
most remarkable Part of the Theater, stood up, and exposing himself to the
Observation of the whole Audience, told 'em, aloud, when the Play was over,
that, They had been at a merry Feast, where He was served up, for their
Entertainment; nor was he angry, to have been their standing Dish, because the
Aversion which some had brought with them, would last no longer than till they
had tasted him.

SINCE it is inseparable from Merit, to be exposed to Envy, and Envy
necessarily produces Slander, there is no hoping to live free, from the Effects
of this pernicious Calumny. But, next to not feeling it the most desirable
Strength of Mind, is, Not to appear to feel it. -- One of these is out of our
Reach; the other we may attain, by Force of Reason, and Resolution: And its
prettily observed, in Aelian, (asserting that Defamation sinks deepest in weak
Natures) The Slander of the Strong is like Water thrown against a Wall; but the
Slander of the Weak is like the Wall thrown into Water.

To the Author of the PLAIN DEALER.
Sept. 19. 1724. SIR,
THE Lady, who was the Occasion of my Writing the Song I have sent you, has
Merit enough to justify me, both as a Lover, and an Author. -- When you have
Room for it in your Paper, you will oblige me if you publish it.

I am, Your very Humble Servant, PHILANDER.


O Love! thou never-absent Thought!
Thou only Purpose of the Mind!
All are to thy Subjection brought,
Yet, not One Rebel can thou find:
Thou God! who dealst out every Human Lot!
Whose Power decrees, who is Happy, and who not.
Reign still, thus Mighty, as thou art!
I wish not Liberty restored:
For the bright Idol of my Heart
Was born to Rule, and be Adored!
But, oh! the Passion which you raise, protect!
Nor let such Truth be blasted by Neglect!
THE PLAIN DEALER. No 57.
-- Tantaene animis coelestibus irae?
VIRG.
MONDAY, October 5. 1724.
I HAVE lately received a Letter containing some Remarks on the Battle of the
Angels, as it is described by Milton in the VIth Book of his Paradise Lost, and
I thought I could not find a more proper Occasion of publishing that Letter,
than just after the Feast of St. Michael, on the 29th of the last Month, which
was set apart by the Church to celebrate the Victory which that Archangel got
over Lucifer, and his rebellious Crew. I make no Doubt, but it will appear,
that Milton, by the Account which he has given of that Victory, has gained a
very glorious one himself, and has carried away the Praise of Sublimity from
all Poets, both Ancient and Modern.

SIR,
OF all the Commentators on the Paradise Lost, Mr. Addison was certainly the
most ingenious, if he was not the most learned; but he has not given Milton his
full Due, either through want of Discernment, or want of Impartiality. In the
17th Page of the small Edition of his Notes upon the Paradise Lost, he has
these Words of the Author:

MILTON's chief Talent, and, indeed, his distinguishing Excellence, lies in the
Sublimity of his Thoughts. There are others of the Moderns who rival him in
every other Part of Poetry; but in the Greatness of his Sentiments he triumphs
over all the Poets, both Moderns and Ancients, Homer only excepted. BUT as when
a Man departs from Truth, which is the only Bond of Union and Agreement, both
of our Sentiments with those of others, and of our Sentiments with themselves,
he his ready immediately to differ from, and to grow inconsistent with himself;
Mr. Addison, who expressly here either equals or prefers Homer, for the
Greatness of his Sentiments, before Milton, contradicts himself at least, no
less than twice in the Course of his Observations: For, says he, in the 7th
Page of the foresaid Edition, There is an indisputable and unquestioned
Magnificence in every Part of Paradise Lost, and, indeed, a much greater than
could have been formed upon any Pagan System. Now if there is a greater
Magnificence in every Part of Milton's Poem, there is by Consequence a greater
Sublimity, than there is in the Iliad, which was formed upon a Pagan System.

AGAIN in the 92d Page of the foresaid Edition, Mr. Addison, speaking of the
Excellence of Milton's Performance in the Sixth Book of his Poem, delivers
himself thus:

MILTON's Genius, which was so great in itself, and so strengthened by all the
Helps of Learning, appears in this Book every way equal to his Subject, which
is the most sublime that could enter into the Thoughts of a Poet. NOW, SIR, if
Milton's Subject is the most sublime that could enter into the Thoughts of a
Poet, and his Genius is every way equal to his Subject, it follows, That Milton
is more exalted than any Poet who has not a Subject so elevated, and,
consequently, than Homer, or any other Poet ancient or modern.

BUT, as in the 91st Page of the foresaid Comment, Mr. Addison takes a great
deal of Pains to show the Greatness of one particular Passage of Homer, and to
describe it, after Longinus, in all those chosen Circumstances, which may make
it appear to be noble and exalted, which Pains he has not taken with any other
Passage, we may reasonably conclude, that he believed this to be the most lofty
of any that are in the Works of Homer, as indeed it really is: Now, as there is
a Passage in the 6th Book of Paradise Lost, which was produced upon a parallel
Occasion, let us see if we cannot find by comparing them, for the Honor of our
Country, that the Passage, of our Briton, is as much superior to that of the
Grecian, as the Angels of the one are more potent than the other's Gods, or as
the Empyrean Heaven is more exalted than Ossa, Pelion, or Olympus.

IN order to this, SIR, give me leave to lay before you the Words which Mr.
Addison makes Use of to set sorth the masterly Strokes of Homer. After he has
told us, That there is no Question, but that Milton had heated his Imagination
with the Fight of the Gods in Homer, before he entered upon the Engagement of
the Angels (of which, by the Way, I do not believe one Syllable: I would sooner
believe the greatest Absurdities of the Alcoran) he is pleased to add what
follows:

HOMER there gives us a Scene of Men, Heroes, and Gods, mixed together in
Battle. Mars animates the contending Armies, and lifts up his Voice in such a
Manner, that it is heard distinctly amidst all the Shouts and Confusion of the
Fight. Jupiter at the same Time thunders over their Heads; while Neptune raises
such a Tempest, that the whole Field of Battle, and all the Tops of the
Mountains, shake about them. The Poet tells us, That Pluto himself, whose
Habitation was in the very Center of the Earth, was so affrighted at the Shock,
that he leaped from his Throne. Homer afterward describes Vulcan, as pouring
down a Storm of Fire upon the River Xanthus; and Minerva, as throwing a Rock at
Mars, who he tells us covered Seven Acres in his Fall. WITH these imaginary ne
plus ultra's had Mr. Addison so filled his Capacity, that when Ten thousand
greater Beauties are before his Eyes, he stops short of them, and never in the
least discerns them, as you will see immediately; for thus he goes on:

AS Homer has introduced into his Battle of the Gods every Thing that is great
and terrible in Nature, Milton has filled his Fight af good and bad Angels,
with all the like Circumstances of Horror. The Shout of Armies, the Rattling of
brazen Chariots, the Hurling of Rocks and Mountains, the Earthquake, the Fire,
the Thunder, are all of them employed to lift up the Reader's Imagination, and
give him a suitable Idea of so great an Action. With what Art does the Poet
represent the whole Body of the Earth trembling, even before it was created?
THUS, with this very pretty trifling Remark, does Mr. Addison stop short,
within the very Touch of one of the vastest, and the sublimest Beauties, that
ever was inspired by the God of Verse, or by Milton's Godlike Genius; when the
very next Lines, the very next Words, strike and astonish us with such
wonderful Ideas, as are able to lift up the Reader's Imagination to a Thousand
Times a greater Height, than either the Shout of Armies, the Rattling of brazen
Chariots, the Hurling of Rocks and Mountains, the Earthquake, the Fire, or the
Thunder. But that these Beauties may be seen in all their Luster, and in all
their Glory, give me leave to set the whole Passage before you.

The Arch-Angel's Trumpet through the Vast of Heaven
Resounded, and the faithful Armies rung
Hosanna to the Highest: nor stood at gaze
The adverse Legions, nor less hideous joined
The horrid Shock; now storming Fury rose,
And Clamor, such as heard in Heaven till now
Was never; Arms on Armor clashing, brayed
Horrible Discord, and the madding Wheels
Of brazen Chariots raged; Dire was the Noise
Of Conflict: Over-head the dismal Hiss
Of fiery Darts, in flaming Vollies, flew,
And, flying, vaulted either Host with Fire.
So, under fiery Cope, together rushed
Both Battles main, with ruinous Assault,
And inextinguishable Rage: All Heaven
Resounded; and had Earth been then, all Earth
Had to her Center shook: What Wonder! when
Millions of fierce encountering Angels fought
On either Side, the least of whom could wield
These Elements, and arm him with the Force
Of all the Regions?
BUT now, Sir, if Millions of fierce encountering Angels fought on either Side,
and the very least, the very weakest of so many Millions, had Power to rend
this Globe of Earth and Ocean from its Axle, and whirl it, with its dependent
Atmosphere, through the Ethereal Regions, what must be the unutterable, the
inconceivable Effect of so many Millions furiously contending against each
other, and each of them exerting all his Might for Victory? When, -- Each on
himself relied,
As only on His Arm the Moment lay
Of Victory.


THESE are amazing, these are astonishing Ideas, worthy of the great Original
Fight, the Battle of the Empyrean.

BUT now, Sir, if the least, if the weakest of so many Millions, as fought on
either Side, had Strength to remove this Globe of Earth, with its dependent
Elements, what could not the greatest of them? what could not Lucifer? what
could not the Prince of the Archangels, Michael's next-to-Almighty Arm, do?
The following Lines, and our own Reflections on them may a little help to
inform us.

-- Long time in even Scale
The Battle hung, till Satan, who, that Day,
Prodigious Power had shown, and met in Arms
No Equal, ranging through the dire Attack
Of fighting Seraphim confused, at length
Saw where the Sword of Michael smote, and felled
Squadrons, at once.
BUT, now, Sir, of whom were these Squadrons? Why, Squadrons of those the least
of whom could wield
These Elements, and arm him with the Force
Of all their Regions.


WHAT must the Power of that Archangel be, who, with one Stroke of his Sword,
could fell whole Squadrons of those, The least of whom could wield these
Elements,
And arm him with the Force of all their Regions?


(...)

