THE TRIUMPH OF PRUDENCE OVER PASSION: VOL. II.

THE TRIUMPH OF PRUDENCE OVER PASSION: OR, THE HISTORY OF MISS MORTIMER AND
MISS FITZGERALD.

By the AUTHORESS of EMELINE.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

DUBLIN: Printed (for the Author) by S. COLBERT, No. 136, Caple-street,
opposite Abbey-street.

M,DCC,XXXI.

THE HISTORY OF Miss MORTIMER, AND Miss FITZGERALD. VOLUME THE SECOND.
LETTER XXXII. Miss FITZGERALD, to Miss MORTIMER.
Feb. 6. --
I COULD not get time till this day, to answer my Louisa's very agreeable
favor, of the 1st instant, as some old friends of my mother's have been with
us these ten days, and I could not leave them long enough to compose an
epistle, for we were always engaged either in conversation or cards, as I
happened to please the old ladies; and besides that, they played whist, and
could not make a party without me.

I had a letter from Charles yesterday; he had settled his affairs to his
satisfaction, and was returned to London, where, he says, his stay will be but
short, though he has made some agreeable acquaintances, and is engaged in a
perpetual round of amusements; but adds, he has so little relish for them when
I am absent, that he shall quit them very soon without the least regret, and
hasten to Dublin, where he hopes to meet me. Though I have not the least doubt
of his affection, I do not think myself bound to give credit to all he says on
the subject; especially as the liveliness of his style contradicts what he says
of not having a relish for amusement; I dare say, he enjoys them with a very
good gout, nor am I so weak as to expect he should not have any satisfaction
but when I am present.

Poor Gertrude! Indeed I think she must have a good deal of resolution, if she
can keep up her spirits tolerably on the approaching change in her condition;
for there is something very melancholy in the idea, of leaving ones friends and
country for ever: I shall be extremely sorry if they go before I get to town;
though to be sure she will come over now and then to see us all, and no doubt
you will sometimes pay her a visit; if I can prevail on my mother to undertake
it, we will make a party to spend two or three months at Montpellier; and I
think she would be the better of it.

Gertrude's cousins are fine girls, I hope she will provide agreeable young men
for their partners: Harry Maunsell, without doubt, will be a bride's-man, but
we all know who will be the object of his attention. You say there is very few
to whom your example should be recommended; and I will venture to assert, there
is very few indeed who would choose to follow it; for notwithstanding the many
pretenders to sentiment in both sexes, there is not one in a thousand that has
really such refined notions, as to be capable of considering love in any other
light than as a passion; so you need not be the least apprehensive that any of
the Misses will bring themselves into danger, by attempting to adopt your ideas
on the subject: for I must confess you have a singularity in your opinions,
that is perfectly adapted to your situation; or, I believe, it will be rather
more proper to say, you have adapted your situation to your sentiments; for it
is certainly of your own choosing. You are a character, my dear Louisa, an
amiable one, every body acknowledges, but at the same time, very uncommon for
so young a person. I wish I was just such another, for I do not know any body
so happy.

You are very severe on fine feelings, and I cannot but say, the ladies you
hint at have left you great room to be so; however, I think it can be only an
affectation of sensibility, when one feels only for themselves; but weak nerves
are so fashionable, there is no being a fine lady without them.

I have got my poor woman removed to her new habitation, and presented her with
your generous donation; part of which she will apply to the purposes you
mention, when she is able to attend to those matters; as yet she is very weak,
though surprizingly recovered since she has had proper care and nourishment;
where she is now all her neighbors will assist her, till she is well enough to
do her own work; and I am sure they will always be kind to her, for they know
it will oblige me; and besides that, the natural disposition of our country
people, is compassionate in a high degree: even the poor creatures she lived
near, when I met with her, shared their scanty provision with her; I gave them
all some little matter, and will do more for them hereafter. I need hardly tell
you what prayers were put up for your happiness, when I gave her your present;
one may easily see the woman has known better days, she has such decent notions.

I shall be dull on the 10th, with the recollection of all the amusement I lose
by being here. I shall expect you will write to me next day, and will long for
the arrival of the post.

I think it is quite right in Emily to discourage any declaration from James
till she has changed her mourning, at least; there is something very indelicate
in a woman listening to a lover, while in her weeds; even though she had no
reason to lament her husband: but in a proper time I hope she will lay aside
her reserve, and that her father will not object, though James has but a
thousand a year, and she has four, besides all the money he can give her; yet
the qualities of his mind ought to be considered. I shall be much concerned if
he is disappointed.

My mother joins me in wishing Gertrude all the happiness she can expect or
desire; as well as in affectionate regards to you.

I am, Dear Louisa, Unalterably yours, ELIZA FITZGERALD.

LETTER XXXIII. Miss MORTIMER, to Miss FITZGERALD.
Feb. 11. --
IT was a most unconscionable task you imposed on me, Eliza, to write the day
after a wedding, when all the folks are crouding to pay their compliments, and
I as mistress of the house ought to be ready to receive them; however as I
feared the disappointment might be too much for you, I have left the bride to
do the honors to her own company, with Mrs. Rochfort to assist her: and I
assure you, Gertrude looks very matronly today, and becomes her title
extremely. I have quite provoked her, by saying, her ladyship when I spoke of
her, or to her; you may think it was to make her laugh I did it, as you know I
am not much dazzled by titles: but I must tell you about yesterday; for to hear
of a wedding is the delight of all females, from fifteen to fifty. Gertrude, by
my advice, was dressed early, and in the drawing room before the company came,
as I thought it would distress her less than coming in where they were all
assembled; she had only a white satin nightgown and petticoat, trimmed with
ermine, gauze apron, and blond cap, and robbins, with a very fine net tippet,
no jewels, except three brilliant pins in her cap, which there was no being
without, but she wore as few as possible, because she did not wish to be
glittering. My gown was off the same piece, trimmed also like hers, but I had a
lay-lock satin petticoat, elegantly quilted; the rest of my dress quite in her
style, except I had a beautiful painted gauze shawl, instead of a tippet: her
cousins were as fine as hands could make them, in white and silver, and a
profusion of diamonds in their hair.

Captain St. George, and Mr. Fitzmaurice were bride's-men, as were Mr.
Fitzgerald, and Harry Maunsell.

The Count had a suit of pearl color tabbinet, with a slight pattern of
silver, and he really looked very handsome; but I have seen Gertrude look
better than she did; she was rather pale, and kept up her spirits very
indifferently: a woman cannot appear to advantage at her own wedding, unless
she is very thoughtless indeed.

The company were all assembled at seven o'clock, and the instant the teatable
was removed, the bridegroom stepped forward, and leading out the bride, the
ceremony was immediately performed, and she went through it much better than I
expected, but was very near fainting when it was over; she soon recovered
herself, and when cake and wine was handed about, we all sat down to cards,
till supper, except Mr. O'Neil, and your cousin James, who retired into another
room, and played back-gammon till ten o'clock, when the old gentleman went
home, but as a very particular compliment to Gertrude and me, permitted his
wife to stay as long as she pleased; and I assure you, that was a very great
favor to us, and a remarkable indulgence to her; had I been his wife, it is an
indulgence I would take without his leave, for I should not submit to be
treated like a child.

Supper passed over cheerfully, and about twelve, Mrs. Ponsonby, (being the
oldest matron in company) rose to withdraw, and was followed by all the ladies:
Gertrude, indeed, would have increased her own confusion, by being the last to
move, only I perceived her slowness, and pretending her chair was on my gown,
obliged her to rise, and putting her forward amongst the bridemaids, hurried
her off, before the gentlemen had time to observe her; when the young ladies
had got garter and pins to dream on, all the women went home, and the Count
quitting his company soon after, they were all gone by one o'clock. Today we
had several morning visitors, and the young folks that were at the marriage,
are to spend the evening with us. This week will be entirely taken up in
receiving compliments, and the next in returning them; for as Gertrude's stay
here will be very short, it is necessary for her to get that piece of ceremony
over as soon as possible: I shall be heartily glad when it is over, for I am
fatigued with the bustle we have had this while past; you know I am no friend
to a continual round of dissipation. I have not time now to take notice of your
last, nor does it require any particular answer. I give you joy of hearing from
Charles, and hope I shall soon see you both in Dublin.

Farewell, dear Eliza, Affectionately yours, LOUISA MORTIMER.

LETTER XXXIV. Mr. SKEFFINGTON, to Mr. MAUNSELL.
London, Feb. 12. -- DEAR MAUNSELL,
I HAVE been about three weeks in this center of Amusements, and so borne down
by the torrent of dissipation with which people here are overwhelmed, that I
could not find time to perform my promise of writing to you, till this day,
that a violent cold has obliged me to stay at home and nurse myself; I got it
by walking home late from a Tavern.

To confess the truth, raking does not agree with me, but it is scarce possible
to withstand the temptations that are continually thrown in one's way, in a
place where vice puts on the most alluring form, and covers her deformity with
the spacious appearance of pleasure, which one must be almost insensible to
resist; at least, till experience has taught us wisdom.

You cautioned me against Sharpers, and I was on my guard; but you did not tell
me, I might be in as much danger from those whose birth entitled them to be
called Gentlemen; but perhaps you never met with such, I would hardly believe
it myself, if I had not purchased my knowledge at the extravagant rate of two
thousand pounds. I did not at first suspect, but latterly I perceived the
cheat, and rising, gave the gentleman a draft on my Banker for the money,
informing him at the same time, I did not choose to play any longer with one who
understood all the game; and instantly quit the room, expecting he would follow
to demand an explanation, as there was a deal of company present, who all heard
what I said.

It happened as I thought, for I had not gone ten yards when he came up with
me, and asking what my words meant, I answered, the meaning was so very obvious
it could scarely be mistaken; on which he drew his sword, and bid me defend
myself: I did it so effectually, that in less than a minute I wounded him in
the sword arm, and the weapon dropped from his hand; as he bled fast, I advised
him to return to the house we had just left, and send for a Surgeon; then
bidding him good night, stepped into a Chair I met, and went home very much
dissatisfied with myself.

I had no apology for playing so deep, because my fortune is already too large
to receive any advantage from winning that sum, and though the loss is no way
material to me, yet since I had it to spare, I might have disposed of it in a
way that would have made several happy: the event too, might have been fatal,
and duelling, you know, I greatly disapprove; but when his unfair practices
were so plain, that I must see it, I should have been looked on either as a
fool or a coward, if I had not taken notice of it.

I took great care, however, not to wound him in a dangerous place, for I soon
perceived he had very little skill: he is recovering fast, but I shall always
choose to avoid his company, as I must dislike the man; besides, I am determined
never to play again, but for a few guineas, which will not be worth any one's
while to cheat for.

My intercourse with the other Sex has been more agreeable; for affairs of
Gallantry have offered every day without my seeking. I should be sorry my
lovely Eliza knew how I have been led astray, though they were only venial
transgressions, in which the heart was no way concerned, and indeed, the man
must be void of all passion that could withstand such temptations.

The women have such a fund of vivacity, that they are the most agreeable
mistresses in the world; but for a wife, I would prefer the more reserved
cheerfulness of my pretty country-women. That, perhaps, may be prejudice; for
it is likely an Englishman would think them insipid.

I have paid pretty high for my amusements in this way, though I assure you, it
was not with those who set their charms to sale; but presents must be made, and
of value according to the rank of the fair one.

In all my dealings here, I find money is the Idol of the place, and the whole
force of the people's genius is turned toward the different methods of
obtaining it.

I often think if a medium could be struck between the English and the Irish,
it would just produce a proper standard whereby to regulate our economy; for
one loves Gold too much for their eternal welfare, the other too little for
their temporal peace; as their total disregard of it keeps their domestic
affairs in continual embarrassment: I speak of the general character of the two
nations; for I know there are many exceptions in each.

I made an acquaintance in Sussex, with a Miss Freeman, who was in a visit with
a family where I was intimate; she lives in London, and when she was coming to
town, a few days before me, gave me an invitation to her aunt's house in
Jermyn-street, where she lives. I availed myself of it, and have passed several
agreeable evenings there.

They are genteel people, and very pleasing. Miss Freeman is a pretty lively
girl, about nineteen; her aunt's daughter something younger, and handsomer, but
more serious than her cousin. I find the former has a large fortune at her own
disposal: I believe the aunt gave me that hint with some view, but my heart is
already fixed, and if Eliza's sentiments remain unaltered at my return, I have
nothing more to wish for, except being at age, as I cannot marry till then; but
I have a very short time to wait for that.

I shall not expect to hear from you, since I mean to set out for Ireland in
less than a week, and hope to find you and all those I most wish to see, in
Dublin.

My best compliments to Miss Mortimer, but do not tell her I am indisposed, for
I shall write to Eliza this post, and will not mention it, lest she should be
uneasy.

Tell Fitzgerald, I have just received his letter, and will answer it if I have
time, before I quit London.

Adieu, dear Maunsell: Yours, C. SKEFFINGTON.

LETTER XXXV. Miss FITZGERALD, to Miss MORTIMER.
Feb. 14. --
I HAD the pleasure of my dear Louisa's letter, with an account of the wedding,
and beg you will make my mother's compliments of congratulation, with mine,
acceptable to Madame La Comtesse. Seriously, no one can wish her happier than
we do; and I hope to have an opportunity of telling her so in person, before
she leaves Ireland, as we are to set out for Dublin in ten days, which has
raised my spirits more effectually, than a large dose of ASSA-FAETIDA. Indeed
there is no one inducement here, to make me wish to stay; for though the place
is beautiful in Summer, at this season I can find nothing pleasing in the
country, especially when every one is gone to town, except a few old ladies and
gentlemen, that are kept prisoners by the Gout, or else are past all
inclination for amusement; and them you may think cannot be very agreeable
companions for me.

Mr. Boil, who returned a few days ago, is the only one that keeps us alive;
he left his daughters in Dublin, and brought me a letter from the eldest,
requesting, if I was not to be in town very soon, I would give her some excuse
to make you a visit; for she longs of all things to be acquainted with you: and
though she could be easily introduced, by some who visit you, yet, as an
intimacy is what she wishes for, she says, that would be sooner accomplished if
she brought her credentials from me; these are her own words.

I have wrote, to inform her, I shall soon be in town, when I shall perform the
part of Sir Clement Cottrel, and introduce her to your presence. Mean time, if
you should meet her in company, as probably you may, I flatter myself, you
will, on my recommendation, make some advances toward an acquaintance; and I
am very sure you will like her, and her sister too, though not so well, for the
reasons I mentioned. She is equally desirous of being acquainted with you.

Their father will be in town again shortly.

I have not heard from Charles since. Little as he says he relishes amusements,
I find they engage a good deal of his attention, else he might have wrote to me
more than once, since he has been in London.

I expect you will answer this, as I have still ten days to stay here; and my
next will be just to tell you, what day I set out for Dublin.

I am going with my mother to take an airing; must, therefore, conclude
abruptly.

Yours, affectionately, ELIZA FITZGERALD.
I hope Gertrude has recovered her spirits, now the awful day is over.



LETTER XXXVI. Miss MORTIMER, to Miss FITZGERALD.
Feb. 17. --
MY dear Eliza's letter has given me infinite pleasure, by informing me I may
soon hope to see her. Gertrude too, is quite joyful, for she began to fear she
should be gone before you arrived.

Yes, she begins to lay aside her melancholy, except at times, when she thinks
of leaving us; and I assure you, it is well you have had a letter from your
Swain, who he supposes has left London ere this; but you will hear from him by
this post, for he says, at the conclusion of his, to Harry, he was going to
write to you.

He mentions a Miss Freeman he is acquainted with there, and her cousin, as
pretty agreeable girls; and says, he passes some of his hours very pleasingly
with them; you need not, however, be alarmed, for he, in the same paragraph,
speaks of you as the mistress of his heart.

Mr. Maunsell read all those extracts to me, but did not offer to show me the
letter, from which I guess he gives some account of his Adventures; and I
believe the adventures of young men in London are not always fit for females to
hear; so I would not ask to see it.

I hope this is the last I shall write to you for this season, as I expect the
return of the post will inform me that you set out in a day or two. What
delightful news that will be!

Adieu, dear girl. Commend me to Mrs. Fitzgerald, who I hope will get well
through her journey; and be assured, I am,

my dear Eliza, Affectionately yours, LOUISA MORTIMER.

LETTER XXXVII. Miss FITZGERALD, to Miss MORTIMES.
Feb. 22. --
I HAVE the pleasure to acquaint my dear Louisa, we shall begin our journey the
24th; but as my mother is still weak, and cannot bear fatigue, we shall be four
days on the road, so the 28th in the evening I expect to find you waiting for
me, that we may lose no time, in once more enjoying each other's society.

The same post brought me your letter, and one from Charles; as you supposed he
will not leave London till the 27th; and as he does not mean to travel post, I
shall be in Dublin some days before him. He does not mention Miss Freeman to
me, but I assure you, I am not a bit inclined to be jealous of her, or any
other person; I am rather apt to fear my uneasiness will arise from Mr.
Skeffington's having too much affection for me, than too little; but I hope his
going more into the gay world than he used to do, will cure him of any little
defect in his temper, for people who have confined themselves much to their
study, are apt to fall into some particularity, which they grow ashamed of when
they see more of life.

I wish Mr. Maunsell had shown you his letter, for his not doing it, makes me
think there was something about me in it, that he was unwilling you should see:
though upon consideration, I believe it is more likely to be as you imagine;
for as Harry knows how much you interest yourself in my happiness, he would
hardly conceal any thing that was material to it from you.

I am obliged to you for your intention of taking notice of the Miss Boyles, if
you meet them before I arrive, I would not request it of you, but I am sure you
will find them agreeable, and I expect we shall be very happy together, while
they stay in town, which I dare say will be till the Parliament is up, for
their aunt stays till then.

I have no doubt but you will cure Harriet of her affectation, for I never met
with any one that had the art of making one ashamed of their own foibles,
without giving offense, equal to you; your raillery is so void of satire, that
it both pleases and instructs.

I do think it is best for Mr. Maunsell to be absent from you; for though I
have no idea he can ever cease to love you, since his attachment is of so long
a standing, yet I dare say, variety of objects will amuse his mind, and keep it
from dwelling so incessantly on a subject that must distress him, as he has not
the most distant hope to support his spirits with; and I agree with you, that
some variation of place and company, is absolutely necessary to make life
pleasing: a love of society is natural to us, and without enjoying it in a
moderate degree, every one must sink into gloominess, and, like your friends,
will grow peevish and dissatisfied, for it is impossible that three or four
people, living constantly together, retired from the rest of the world, can
always find a fund of conversation or entertainment in each other. I know it by
experience, when I am in the country with my mother and Charles, who I need not
tell you, are two of those I love best; yet when we are any time without
company, or going abroad, I find myself grow stupid, and tired of every thing
about me; to tell truth, I am at this instant in the very state I am
describing, as I think my letter will convince you.

I am very glad I do not belong to the comfortable family you mention; what a
treat your company must be to the young people, for I suppose they are not much
delighted with the comforts of being shut up from society, though their parents
may have outlived all taste for earthly enjoyments; very thankful am I that my
mother is not of that disposition.

Farewell till the 28th, when I shall have the happiness of telling you in
person, how affectionately I am

Your own, ELIZA FITZGERALD.

LETTER XXXVIII. MISS MORTIMER, TO THE COUNTESS ROUSILLON.
May 6. --
THE receipt of my dear Gertrude's letter, relieved me from great uneasiness,
which I suffered by not getting an account of your arrival in France; but the
round you took, and all the visits you made to the Count's relations, on your
journey, is sufficient reason for my not hearing from you sooner. I am happy to
find they all received you so kindly; for politeness alone would be only what
you had a right to expect; one wishes to meet with something more from the
family they go into; and it gives me much satisfaction, that you have met with
that tenderness and affection, which I am sure you will merit from them.

Your departure made us all melancholy; and each morning when Emily and I met
at breakfast, we renewed each other's concern, by observing how lonely we were
without poor Gertrude; and indeed, if I was inclined to forget you, Wilson
would not let me, for she laments you daily, when she comes to take my orders,
and brings her accounts for my inspection, always observing how good you were,
to spare me that trouble; and I must acknowledge I have a loss of you in that
respect, though she is so careful and exact, that I find it less disagreeable
than it would be, if I had a different sort of person in her place; but she is
faithful and honest, and I esteem such a servant to be invaluable.

I have had several letters from Harry, since you left him in London, and think
he is recovering his usual cheerfulness; the first to be sure was filled with
lamentations and regrets, and all the etcetera's of soft nonsense; but I have
absolutely prohibited that subject, on pain of returning his letters
unanswered: he murmured a little at my cruelty, but was obliged to comply with
the restriction; and now he writes like a rational creature, and is a very
pleasing correspondent. Your CARO-SPOSO did him no good, for he encouraged him
in all his romance and folly, and only for this fortunate call to England, I
should have had him sighing, and dying at my feet, till both for his sake, and
my own, I would have been under a necessity of quarrelling with him; when he
goes to France, I beg you will not indulge him in talking of certain
circumstances, that had better be forgot.

Mr. Hamilton has been in town this month; Charles and he are on the most
friendly terms, without any appearance of the suspicions his presence formerly
raised; so you may judge how happy Eliza is: I suppose matters will soon be
brought to a conclusion there, as Mr. Skeffington will be at age early in June,
and then I think there will be nothing to prevent it.

Miss Freeman, that you heard him mention, has been in Dublin some weeks, and I
have a strong idea, that it is an attachment to Charles has brought her over.
She says, she was ordered seasickness for a disorder in her stomach; and as she
had a desire to see Dublin, she thought she might as well come here as any
where; the story is plausible, and I fancy is believed by every one but me:
however, if she was ill, the remedy has been very effectual, for she has not
the least remains of any complaint whatever; besides, I think it very
extraordinary, that her friends would let her come to a strange country, in
such ill health, without any companion but her waiting-maid.

She has brought letters of introduction to some genteel families here, who of
course pay great attention to her; but I observe she takes great pains to
cultivate an intimacy with Eliza, who went to visit her, on account of the
civility she and her aunt had shown Mr. Skeffington, for she sent to him the
day after she arrived, and had first fixed herself in a lodging next street to
him.

Eliza gave her a general invitation, to come to them whenever she was
disengaged, and she avails herself of it in a manner that shows she means to be
quite on free terms with her; all these things make me very observant of her,
as I fear she has some scheme of supplanting Eliza in Charles's affections; I
do not, however, think that would be easily done, unless she should discover
that tincture of jealousy in his temper, by which he might he wrought upon.

She is rather pretty, and uncommonly lively. In my opinion, if her vivacity
was a little tempered with discretion, she would be much more agreeable, for at
present it borders upon levity.

I know the English women are of a more sprightly disposition than the Irish;
but I never met any of them that could not set some bounds to it, but this
young lady, who quite over-powers me with her amazing volubility, and you know
I have a downright horror of being talked to death. One happiness to her
hearers is, she does not talk nonsense, and though I am not much delighted with
her, she is generally thought agreeable.

I can perceive I am no great favorite with her, notwithstanding she effects
an esteem for me to Eliza; but I am sure she would not wish I was so often at
that house, for she has said (more than once) she believed I had a deal of
penetration.

I have said perhaps too much on surmise, (for I acknowledge it is nothing more)
except so far as relates to her liking Charles, which I have no doubt about;
but my suspicions arose from observations I have made on her behavior.

I shall, however, be well pleased to lose my character for penetration in this
particular. -- Mr. Fitzgerald has declared himself in form to Mrs. Rochfort;
and she has positively refused to listen to him again on that subject, during
the first year of her widow-hood; a pretty hint that, for him to renew it at
the expiration of that time. When she told me what passed between them, I said,
very seriously, (but with a significant look) it was really kind of her to
limit his time of probation. She had not been aware of the inference I would
draw, and it threw her into the utmost confusion; when she could speak, she
said, no one would think of such a thing but myself: if, said I, Mr. Fitzgerald
does not think of it, he is more dull of apprehension than any lover I ever
heard of; but do not be uneasy, for you know widows are privileged to give a
modest hint of their intentions. She blushed so excessively, and seemed so
distressed, that I pitied her, though I could not help laughing at her being so
affected; but she has an uncommon degree of bash fullness: I relieved her, by
saying, I owed her that teizing for her reserve to me on that affair; for she
constantly denied her partiality for James, though it was very visible, and I
was determined to mortify her for it.

I allow it is not delicate to make open declaration of our favorable opinion
of a man, however worthy he may be; but to deny it so positively to a
particular friend, that one was living in the house with, looks, I think,
either like prudery, or distrust.

When she found I had taken it amiss, she apologized, by assuring me, it
proceeded only from a wish to conceal her sentiments from every body, (even
herself if possible) till she knew if her father would approve of Mr.
Fitzgerald, as she meant to be guided by him. I could not help saying, I
thought it would be carrying her obedience too far; though I have as high a
notion of the duty we owe our parents as most people; but as she had once made
herself unhappy to oblige him, I did not think it necessary to consult his
caprice in a second choice, when we knew his love of money, and that inequality
of fortune, was the only objection could be made in the present case. She
certainly ought to inform her father of the affair, but if he objected merely
on the grounds I mention, I did not think she was under any obligation to
comply with an unreasonable humor, considering she was now her own mistress:
if she was still under her parents authority, I should think her right extended
no farther than to refuse a person she could not be happy with, but not to
marry any one against their consent.

She seemed to join in my opinion, but said she had been used to obey so
implicitly, and besides was of such a timid disposition, she doubted if she
would have resolution to follow her own inclinations.

I hope she will not be put to the trial, as Mr. O'Neil professes a most
violent friendship for James, and sets him up as a pattern for all young men
that he knows.

I shall continue to write to you an account of all our proceedings here,
without the formality of waiting for an answer, since the war prevents a
regular intercourse between the two countries.

The Miss Boyles and I are become intimate; you were prejudiced in their favor
by the little you had seen of them before you left us, and if you had known
more of them, you would like them still better, as they improve on an
acquaintance; particularly Harriet, whose good sense is a little obscured by
affectation, which however she is throwing off very fast; you cannot think how
much I made her ashamed of it, so much, that it is only long habit makes her
ever practice it, and the least look from me corrects her.

I think Mr. Hamilton begins to attach himself to Miss Boil, but I do not find
it is observed by any one else, nor am I quite sure of it, but I wish it may be
so, since it would remove all causes of uneasiness from Charles, as he is the
only one he ever seemed to fear would rival him.

Mr. Boil is my CE CISBEO, and flirts most delightfully, considering he is old
enough to be my father. I am a prodigious favorite of his, and indeed I return
the compliment, for I think him the most cheerful, pleasing man, I ever met
with; of an elderly one, I mean.

You must suppose a million of compliments and good wishes, from all your
friends and acquaintances here, for it would fill a sheet of paper to enumerate
them. -- Do not be jealous that I desire my love to your husband. Are not you
shocked at such an obsolete epithet?

Believe me, Affectionately yours,.LOUISA MORTIMER.

LETTER XXXIX. Miss FREEMAN, to Miss VERNON.
Dublin, May 8. --
SINCE my arrival in this metropolis, I have wrote three letters to my dear
Charlotte, and have received but one from her; but as the packets are kept out
by contrary winds, I take it for granted, your answers to my other two are
detained by that means, and shall proceed to give you an account of my Irish
acquaintances.

I have already informed you of the polite, or, I may rather say, kind
reception I met with, from every family to whom I brought letters; and I have
now to tell you, their civility rather increases every day; indeed I think
there is no end to the attention a stranger meets with in this land of
hospitality, which has in spite of all my prejudices, reconciled me to a people
of whom we are taught to entertain the most unjust ideas; for I assure you, I
find them the very reverse of every thing our country folks usually imagine
them to be: and I begin to see, it is very illiberal to suppose merit is
confined to any one particular clime or kingdom.

I told you Miss Fitzgerald, (Skeffington's intended) had paid me a visit, and
given me a genteel invitation to go to their house, whenever I was not
otherwise engaged, as they live in the next street, for I took care to fix
myself near them. She has since showed, she meant more than mere compliment,
for she came herself several times and took me with her, after taking me
airing, or to such places in the town, as she thought worth my seeing; so we
were now as free as if we had been acquainted this twelve month.

She is a pretty gentle soul, entirely composed of the tender passions, and has
too much sensibility for her own peace of mind, which I am very sorry for,
since there is a great deal of uneasiness in store for her; I wish it was
otherwise, but I never was used to put any person's happiness in competition
with my own; a stranger cannot therefore expect that compliment from me;
besides I really think I shall do them a service in separating them, for were
two such quiet mortals as Skeffington and she, to go together, they would
inevitably fall into a lethargy, by the perfect sameness of each other's
temper: now if I take him, I believe I may engage to keep him from that
disorder, by the continual variety of my disposition; not to say any thing of
my spirit, which I flatter myself is sufficient to keep any man awake, for
though I love him to distraction, and will go any lengths to obtain him, I do
not mean to be the same turtle, when married, that his Eliza would be: it is
necessary to rouse them sometimes, that they may set the higher value on your
good temper, when you choose to treat them with it.

There is a Miss Mortimer that stands very much in my way, for she is Eliza's
bosom friend, and chief adviser, she is very civil to me, and asks me to her
parties; but she has quick discernment, and, I think, observes me with a
penetrating eye; for which reason I am in awe of her, and of course do not like
her; but that I keep to myself, for I find she is a general favorite, even
amongst the women, though very much the taste of the men. -- Is not this odd?
She is not handsome, but has great expression in her countenance, and is by no
means ugly; her disposition is exceedingly lively, and a vein of humor runs
through her conversation, that makes it vastly pleasing; however, her vivacity
never leads her into an impropriety, for her understanding is in the superior
degree, and she conducts herself with the same prudence you might expect from
her grandmother. I have been particular in my description of her, because I
think her rather an extraordinary character for a woman, not above four and
twenty: but do you know, I hate those pieces of infallibility; their manners
are a tacit reproach on us, who are too volatile to be restrained by dull rules
of decorum.

The women here, would, in general suit your taste better than mine; for though
very cheerful, they have a sedateness in them, that would be just the thing for
you, who are a good deal in that style yourself.

I have this instant got a piece of intelligence, that is of the utmost
importance to me: Skeffington has a spark of jealousy in his bosom, which if I
do not blow into a flame, I deserve to lose him. It never broke out till within
these few months; the person who raised it is a Mr. Hamilton, a most
accomplished young man; he is at present in town; is very intimate at Mrs.
Fitzgerald's, and seems to be on the most friendly terms with Charles; however
since he once looked on him as a rival, there can be no great difficulty in
placing him in the same light again, for suspicions of that nature may be
revived with very little address.

Letty, whom I ordered to make an acquaintance with Miss Fitzgerald's maid, got
this information from her; but as she is not in her mistress's secrets, she
could not tell how he was convinced there was no cause for his fears; it was
from some unguarded expressions of his own, she discovered his foible; she said
she told her lady of it at the time, who bid her not mention it, and she never
heard more of it after, though she perceived her very low-spirited at times,
till of late she seems quite easy: be that as it may, I think I cannot fail of
succeeding, now I know his weak side, as I shall direct all my attack against
that; but how I shall proceed, I cannot at present inform you, since my
operations must be determined by the circumstance of the moment.

I never gave you a more convincing proof of the confidence I place in you,
than by letting you into my intention of going such lengths to accomplish my
wishes, since I know you will not approve of it; but I also know, your
affection for me, will prevent your taking any steps to frustrate my designs,
as your knowledge of my disposition must tell you, such a measure would
inevitably be attended with fatal consequences.

Whatever I do, must be done soon, for he will be at age in a few weeks, and
they are to be married as soon after, as he can go through some necessary forms
of law, to enable him to make proper settlements; for notwithstanding they have
loved, and been intended for each other from their infancy, she has patiently
waited till all these matters could be done regularly.

So important do the ladies here esteem the security of their fortunes, that a
girl who would marry without that precaution, would be looked on as a prodigy
of imprudence, while we give away thousands, without asking any return but
love. Surely the Irish women must have very cold constitutions, or very great
command of their passions, else their reason could not act so powerfully.

What has reason and love to do with each other! The association is unnatural,
and never entered into a breast truly occupied by that tender passion, as I can
vouch from experience.

I would not venture to speak so openly, but that I know your mother cannot be
returned to town yet; if you should find she means to come sooner than we
expected, let me know, as I would not for the world one of my letters should
fall into her hands: no doubt she was greatly astonished when you informed her
I was gone to Ireland.

You must not expect I shall write frequently now as I have done, because my
mind will be otherwise employed.

Adieu, Dear Charlotte, Yours, CAROLINE FREEMAN.

LETTER XL. Miss FREEMAN, to Miss VERNON.
Dublin, May 21. --
I HAVE a whole packet of my dear Charlotte's letters now before me; and as
Skeffington and the Fitzgeralds are gone to dine a few miles from town, I take
the opportunity of answering them, for when they are at home, I am generally
with, or expect them to call on me.

Chance has been favorable to my design, and put it in a train, that perhaps
my own ingenuity could not have so easily brought about: Miss Fitzgerald, and
Mr. Hamilton have accidentally met at my lodgings, on morning visits, two or
three different times, when by the greatest good fortune that could happen,
Charles luckily called in, and sound them there; the first time, he did not
seem to mind it; but the second I saw, made an impression on him; and the last,
which was yesterday, they all looked embarrassed. Hamilton soon took leave;
(you must know I encouraged an intimacy with him, in hopes it would some way
answer my purpose) Charles and Eliza sat a while, and then I went home with
them, being engaged to pass the day there.

He continued very serious, and she very badly affected cheerfulness: in the
evening, however, we were set a little to rights; two Miss Boyles, who are
frequently there, came into tea, which roused them from their thoughtfulness,
and when tea was over, we all went to the Rotunda, where we were joined by Mr.
Hamilton; but as he attached himself to the eldest Miss Boil, whom I think he
admires, Charles's good humor rather increased; the music too, of which he is
very fond, seemed to compose his spirits, and he went home much easier in mind
than he had been all day; but as this meeting by chance affects him so much, I
shall take the hint, and improve upon it: I cannot now be more explicit as my
plan is not thoroughly digested.

You ask how I can be so barbarous as to make an amiable girl wretched, who has
showed me such friendship? I answer, because my own happiness is dearer to me
than that of any other person; and as to the civility she has shown me, she
would do the same to any other stranger that was introduced to her; it is the
natural disposition of the people here, therefore I do not esteem it any
particular compliment to me; so my conscience is easy on that head, and I beg I
may have no more of your preaching; it comes mighty ill from a girl of eighteen.

My aunt, you tell me, is much displeased at my expedition; I guessed she
would, which was the reason I took the opportunity to come off while she was in
the country; I was determined, and there was no use in having an argument upon
it. If she knew my purpose, I suppose she would come over express to prevent
it; and if she was not two hundred miles from London, and likely to be detained
there, till as I hope my business will be accomplished, I would not have given
you the smallest item of it; but I caution you to dread the consequence of
betraying me.

If I can but succeed, in making a quarrel between Skeffington and his fair
cousin, I have no doubt but I shall easily obtain her place in his heart, and
then you shall* see how good, how religious, and all that, I will be the rest
of my life.

I wish I was rid of this Miss Mortimer for a while; I think she perfectly
keeps guard over Eliza, and there is no having her to one's self, long enough
to get into her confidence, which I am sure I would have done long since, if
her friend was out of my way; and that would be of great use to forward my
scheme, for I am sure I could draw her into things that would confirm his
suspicions, if she was without the advice of one who is so well acquainted with
her disposition, and so interested in her happiness; besides that, I have
reason to think she suspects my attachment to Skeffington, and is therefore
more anxious, to prevent Eliza from being too open in her communications to me;
for neither of them has ever dropped the least hint of his jealousy: however, I
believe all her wisdom and precaution, will be insufficient to obstruct the
success of my plan, which I look upon as certain, now that the knowledge of his
temper gives me such a sure foundation to work upon.

You ask me of Miss Mortimer's family, and situation, and seem wonderfully
taken with her character; she is descended from one of the oldest families in
England, and I think values herself on her pedigree, though she is at the same
time exceedingly complaisant and affable to every one. Her father and mother
are dead; but I suppose her fortune must be quite easy, since she has a house
elegantly furnished; visits, and is visited by all the fine folks here, and is
treated with all that respect and attention that is usually paid to those who
are totally independent: in short, she ranks in the upper class of life, but
will not be a slave to particular forms, and empty ceremonies, which, she says,
is the very reverse of true politeness; how she manages, I do not know, but
every thing she does pleases, and she is set up as a pattern to all young
ladies, as soon as they are brought into company; and as I told you, much
admired by the men. To all that I have ever seen with her, she behaves with
such perfect equality, that I cannot guess which of them she prefers; yet it is
scarcely probable that she has not some attachment: besides I have heard hints
among them that convinces me she has, but I believe there is some mystery in
it, that I cannot fathom; and the ladies here are very reserved on those
subjects: I am dying to find it out too, for I should have great satisfaction
in knowing she had an imprudent intanglement; but no matter, I shall triumph
over her sagacity yet, notwithstanding all her endeavors to watch me, for I
see plainly her suspicions of me increase.

When, you hear from me next, probably something decisive will be done, for the
time advances fast. -- Till then farewell.

Believe me, Ever yours, CAROLINE FREEMAN.

LETTER XLI. FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.
Dublin, June 6. -- Dear Charlotte,
I HAVE separated them I hope, for ever; but it has produced a consequence I
was not prepared for; he went off to England in the first transports of his
jealousy, and I fear he may take the fancy of going abroad to amuse his mind;
but I am hastening after him, and if I can but keep him in England, his going
there will be much to my advantage, because it will effectually prevent their
coming to any explanation, and baffle all Miss Mortimer's cleverness.

I write while Letty is packing my things, and you may expect me in a day or
two after you receive this, when I will tell you how I brought the matter about.

Yours, in a violent hurry, CAROLINE FREEMAN.

LETTER XLII. Miss MORTIMER, to HENRY MAUNSELL, Esquire;
June 7. --
WHAT poor weak mortals you men are! borne away by every gust of passion, and
with all your boasted wisdom, incapable of conducting yourselves with
propriety, in the common occurrences of life! -- Any girl just escaped from the
nursery, can, if she sets her wits to work, make you believe improbabilities.

Excuse me Harry; I have no reason to accuse you of those follies, but I am
angry with the whole sex, and vexed to death, that it should be in the power of
any of you to make my poor Eliza unhappy.

Your friend Mr. Skeffington, is flown off to England in a fit of jealousy; and
upon the credit of an anonymous scrawl he received, has accused the sweet girl
(whose heart he has possessed from her infancy) of inconstancy, and I know not
what nonsense. Mr. Hamilton is still the object of his suspicions, though he is
actually paying his addresses to Miss Boil, and that any body might see, that
did not choose to shut their eyes against conviction. He will certainly avoid
you, and I do not wish you to seek him out; it could be of no use at present,
besides our pride forbids it.

I am certain that Miss Freeman he mentioned to you, is at the bottom of it
all; I told you she was here, and that I thought she liked Charles; every day
convinced me I was right, and I have now no doubt of it, for she set off for
England this morning, which was as soon as she could go, after she heard of his
departure, and she had never mentioned her intentions before. She lives with
her aunt, a Mrs. Vernon, in Jermyn-street, and I should be glad you would keep
a watch on the house, to see if he goes or sends there; he has taken Will Lacky
with him; the fellow you know is his foster-brother, and I am sure has his
master's happiness at heart; so if your James could meet with him, I dare say
he would give some intelligence how he means to dispose of himself.

I do not suppose he will continue in England, unless that little witch
contrives some stratagem to detain him; and I would wish to know where he is,
or is likely to be, because Mrs. Fitzgerald, who loves him nearly as well as
she loves Eliza, is quite miserable about him; besides one would choose to know
his motions, as something may yet happen to set matters right again, and make
him ashamed of a weakness that causes so much unhappiness to those, whose
felicity I know he would wish to promote.

I make no apology for the employment I give you, as I know your regard for the
parties concerned, exclusive of the pleasure you will have in obeying my
commands. -- You see I have said that for you, just to save you the trouble of
repeating what you have so often told me.

Adieu, Yours, LOUISA MORTIMER.

LETTER XLIII. MISS MORTIMER, TO THE COUNTESS DE ROUSILLON.
June 8. --
I PROMISED to give my dear Gertrude, an account of all the occurrences among
us that were worth relating, and I have now to inform you of one that I believe
will give you much concern; Charles Skeffington departed abruptly for England,
four days ago, in a paroxism of jealousy, which I am certain has been roused by
the machinations of that Miss Freeman, of whom I hinted my suspicions in my
last; they are confirmed by her setting out for England as soon as she found he
was gone, on a pretense of being wrote for on material business, though there
had not a packet arrived in the time; for as I suspected her, I sent to enquire.

Eliza bears it surprisingly; she is hurt by his behavior, and her pride
supports her for the present, but I fear that will not continue long; she is
too gentle, and loved him too well, not to regret her disappointment. I do my
best to keep up her resentment, but I know it will not do; tender recollections
will obtrude themselves on her mind, and interrupt, if not totally destroy her
happiness.

Her mother too is greatly to be pitied, for she loved Charles as if he had
been her own son, and you cannot imagine how much his present conduct affects
her: add to that, she has terrible apprehensions for Eliza's health, which
indeed, I think, likely to suffer from the shock she has received.

I shall advise them to go to Montpellier; changing the scene may be of use to
her, and as you mean to leave Paris this month, you will be at Rousillon before
they could reach it, and I am sure would contribute all in your power to amuse
the dear girl; if I possibly can, I will accompany them, but that is at present
uncertain.

It is time for me to tell you how the affair happened, at least as much as I
know of it: I told you in my last, I was sure Miss Freeman liked Charles; as I
observed her closely, I was every day more convinced of it, as well as that she
must have some scheme in coming over; for which reason, I gave her as few
opportunities of being alone with Eliza as possible; for being extremely
artless herself, I feared she would be too unreserved, and lay herself open to
the other's cunning to take advantage of.

I was constantly uneasy for her, though I did not know precisely what to fear;
and was much more so when I found Mr. Hamilton and Eliza had met by accident,
at Miss Freeman's lodgings several times; Charles had found them there, and
showed strong symptoms of returning jealousy; when Eliza told me what had
happened, I mentioned my suspicions of Miss Freeman, and cautioned her to guard
against her artifices, and not to go to her without Charles. She promised she
would not, but seemed to think I wronged the girl very much, who she said, was
too volatile to manage any deep laid plot. She however look my advice, and
seldom went to her, but invited her to their house as usual. Matters were in
this way when Mrs. Rochfort got a violent cold which confined her, and you may
think I would not leave her.

Mrs. Fitzgerald was also indisposed; so that I had not seen Eliza for three
days, when I was much surprised at receiving a note from her at twelve o'clock,
Monday night, requesting I would go to her immediately, and prepare for staying
till morning, as an accident had happened which greatly affected her; to
prevent delay she sent the carriage for me.

I showed the note to Emily, in whose chamber I was sitting, begging she would
excuse me, if I should not be at home at breakfast, and ordering Jenny to put
my night clothes into the chariot, went off, very much alarmed, as both Emily
and I had concluded it to be something relative to Charles.

When I stepped into the hall, the servants all looked sad and silent, Kitty
met me, with her eyes quite red from crying, as she was lighting me up stairs,
Kitty, said I, what ails your mistress? Oh! ma'am, Mr. Skeffington; and
bursting into tears, was unable to say more, but conducted me in silence to
Mrs. Fitzgerald's bedchamber, who sat in her easy chair weeping. When she saw
me, you are very good, Miss Mortimer, says she; my poor girl wanted such a
friend to comfort her, looking toward Eliza, who sat leaning her elbow on the
dressing table, her hand supporting her head, in the other she had two letters
open, which she held out to me, saying, read them Louisa; they will explain our
present situation better than I am able to do, and be my excuse for bringing
you out at this late hour. I took them, and read as follows:

Madam,
When you receive this, I shall for ever have quitted a house, where once my
chief happiness was centered. I will not endeavor to raise your compassion, by
describing what I feel at parting; for since I have lost your affection, I will
try to set myself above your pity, and will, at least, convince you, your
felicity is infinitely dearer to me than my own, by relieving you from that
restraint, which my presence must have laid you under, and leaving you at
liberty to give your hand to him, whose shining qualities, I am not all
surprised, should rob me of your heart. It is not in woman, to withstand such
perfections, and I have no right to expect a miracle should be wrought in my
favor.

To show you I am not actuated by mere suspicion, I enclose a letter that was
put into my hand this morning, as I was stepping into my carriage; I followed
the writer's directions, went to the Rotunda, and was convinced of your
inconstancy.

As you wished to deceive me, you should have been cautious who you trusted
with your secret; no doubt you will know the hand, and remove that person from
your family.

I know, and grieve for what my aunt will feel on this occasion; but I hope Mr.
Hamilton, will, by his attention, reconcile her to the event, and make you as
happy as I would have rejoiced in doing, had the pleasing task fallen to the
lot of your still

Very sincere friend, C. SKEFFINGTON.


The letter alluded to, was badly wrote, and worse spelt, it contained the
following lines:

Sir,
Knowing how long, and tenderly you have loved Miss Fitzgerald, and that you
are now flattering yourself, with the pleasing hope of being soon united to
her; I could not bear to see you any longer deceived; and therefore (from a
perfect knowledge of her intentions) assure you, she only wishes to stand fair
with you, during her mother's life, which from her ill health, she thinks
cannot be long.

You soon perceived the growing attachments between her and Mr. Hamilton; but
so high was your opinion of her, you persuaded yourself to discredit the
evidence of your own senses, rather than think she could be guilty of so much
baseness.

If you choose to be convinced of the truth of this information, go to the
Rotunda, about nine o'clock tonight, where (though you fancy she is confined
to her mother's apartment) you will find her in company with the present object
of her affection. She thinks herself secure, as you were to stay at Lucan till
tomorrow, but I presume, this will be sufficient to bring you back.

I remain, Sir, Your humble servant, An unknown FRIEND.


You will observe, this was calculated to make him suppose it wrote by some one
in his own family; accordingly his suspicions fell on Kitty, for she says, when
he was quitting the house, he called for her, and giving her the letter for
Eliza, put five guineas into her hand, saying, he believed he was under an
obligation to her; though if her mistress confided in her, she did wrong to
betray her secrets. He forgot he had once endeavored to tempt her to do the
very same thing, he now disapproved. The girl did not know what he meant; she
must be innocent of it, for she could not possibly tell her mistress would go
to the Rotunda, before she knew it herself: that could only be told by the
person who was determined to take her there.

Having read the letters, I asked Eliza, had she been at the Rotunda that
evening? she answered yes; but begged I would not condemn her, till I heard her
story. She then proceeded to tell me, that in the morning Miss Freeman had come
to breakfast, as she often did, but would not stay the day, though much
pressed, alleging, she was geting a beautiful fancy trimming on a gown, and
must go home to show her maid how to put it on, for she would not let the
mantua-maker do it, lest it should not be to her taste; but said if it was
done, she would come in the evening, as she knew Charles would be out of town.

She left us soon after, and we heard no more of her till six in the
afternoon, Letty came seemingly in a great hurry, with a request from her
mistress, that I should go drink tea with her; I answered, she knew I could not
leave my mother. Ah, ma'am! she bid me tell you, she is in the utmost distress,
for Mr. Harman is come to tea, and she does not think it prudent to entertain
gentlemen at her lodgings, without having some other lady with her, and she
cannot make so free with any one but you, as to expect they would come on such
short notice.

As Mr. Harman is reputed to be an admirer of Miss Freeman's, my mother was
charmed with her discretion, and insisted I should go, saying, she was now well
enough to amuse herself by reading. I therefore told the girl, I would follow
her as soon as the horses could be put to, which I did. Miss Freeman met me on
the stairs, and in her own rattling way, said I was the best girl in the world;
if I had not come she would have been ruined, for there was two of them with
her now; but bid me not say any thing of being just sent for. We had by this
time reached the drawing room, where I found the gentleman already mentioned,
and Mr. Hamilton; I would rather he had not been there, but as Charles was not
likely to know of it, I was the less concerned; be it as it would, I would not
go away again. We had tea immediately; and a great deal of wit and repartee
passed between Miss Freeman and her admirer, who seemed to think it incumbent
on him to follow her lead, and she was remarkable lively, even for her that you
know is always so.

All of a sudden, she proposed going to the Rotunda, which I readily assented
to, thinking it more eligible than staying at home; the evening was so fine, we
agreed to walk, and I ordered the carriage there at ten. It was very full, and
rather warm, so between the acts we walked in the garden; when we returned to
the room, Miss Freeman complained of fatigue and thirst; the forms were all
filled; but the gentlemen proposed going into a recess, and having coffee;
which she accepted, saying, she was choked with dust, and we went into one
that a set of company had just quitted. Coffee and several other refreshments
were soon brought, and we were sitting making our observations on the variety
of figures that were moving in a circle before us, when Miss Freeman cried in a
tone of astonishment, there is Mr. Skeffington; instantly he turned his head,
and when he saw it was us, stepped in; I said, I was surprised to meet him
there, as I did not expect him to town; he answered, I am sure you did not, and
seemed to lay a particular emphasis on his words; I hope, says I, nothing
extraordinary has happened; yes, madam, said he, something very extraordinary.

I was silent, perceiving at once what he meant, though I could not conceive
how he got intelligence of my being there: the gentlemen pressed him to take
coffee, but he declined, saying, he had some material business to transact, and
had only called in to look for a person he had heard was there.

He cast a look full of indignation at me, and bowing to the company, withdrew,
leaving us all looking at each other, as if we did not know whether we should
take notice of his behavior or not; till Miss Freeman said, laughing, she
thought we looked as if we had got anger, and were afraid to speak.

To be sure Mr. Skeffington's temper was much ruffled at something, or he would
not have behaved so odd: then turning to me, he will make an agreeable husband,
my dear, if he has frequent returns of those humors. -- I was confused at her
directing the speech to me, but answered, the woman would deserve to be
unhappy, that knowingly subjected herself to such caprice.

Mr. Hamilton, whom I saw, guessed he was the cause of what had passed, looked
concerned and serious; but as for me, I was so full of resentment, that it kept
up my spirits, and I was determined to speak to him when I came home, and put a
final end to the affair; for since he has no confidence in my affection, it is
impossible we could be happy.

It seems he was of the same sentiments, for he was gone before I came in.
Kitty gave me a letter, saying, Mr. Skeffington left it for me, when he was
going away. -- Away where? she answered to England, ma'am. I asked no more
questions, but came to my mother's chamber, who I found so cheerful, that I
knew she had not heard of it; so I went to my dressing room, (as if to undress)
and there I read the letters. I immediately ordered the carriage to go for you,
and then returned to my mother, and broke the matter to her as gently as I
could, by telling her of the first commencement of Charles's jealousy, which I
never mentioned before, wishing to save her from uneasiness, and still hoping a
little reflection would cure him of that weakness; the hope I find was vain,
aded she, sighing, but my greatest concern at present is, to see my mother so
much afflicted by his ingratitude. She wanted me to send after him, as he could
not have got down to the packet when I came home; but I begged her not to
insist on it, as I never would condescend so far, to a man, who upon such
slight foundation could suspect my sincerity; I said, I thought her right, for
it would probably be to no purpose, since he did not now seem capable of using
his reason; it was therefore better to let him alone, till time and
circumstances might open his eyes to conviction.

Mrs. Fitzgerald agreed with me, saying, she had not considered the matter
properly at first. I asked them had they no suspicion of the author of that
letter? Eliza said, she had no doubt it was Miss Freeman had it wrote; perhaps
by her maid, but the words she was sure were her own, as the style did not suit
the writing and spelling, which were both of the vulgar kind. She said, she had
not asked any particulars about his going, but would call Kitty now, for she
had heard the chariot return since I came in.

When Kitty came, she was asked where John had left his master? she answered,
he had staid to see him in the wherry, and the sailors said, the wind was so
fair, he would be at the Head to breakfast. I then asked her, what had passed
before he left the house; she said, the servants told her, for she was not
below, that he came in soon after nine, which surprised them, as they did not
expect him that night; he went to his study, and called for Will, who found him
walking back and forward in great discomposure; he took no notice of him for
some minutes, then bid him pack up all his things, with what haste he could,
for he was setting off immediately for England; and Will, if you choose to come,
you may pack up your own things too; but probably I shall not return these
twoor three years, therefore take your choice. Will said, to be sure he would
attend his honor, as long as he would give him leave, and went to do as he was
ordered, but first stepped into the hall to tell the servants the news.

Mr. Skeffington came down in about half an hour; desired one of the men to
call me, and when I came, bid me deliver that letter to my mistress; she then
repeated what he had said to her; adding, he charged her not to mention his
departure to his aunt; her young lady would tell it when she returned. He left
directions for Will to follow with the trunks, as soon as possible, and drove
off, leaving them all in great consternation; and for her, she said, she had
been crying almost ever since, for though she did not know directly what the
words meant, she guessed some mischief was between him and her mistress, and
that he suspected her to be the cause of it; Eliza bid her not be uneasy, for
she was convinced of her innocence, and then dismissed her.

We all retired to bed soon after, but I cannot say to rest, for Eliza and I
talked over the affair the remainder of the night, which was already far
advanced; and I took care to place his treatment of her, in such a light, as
should raise her resentment, for I found her several times inclined to melt
into tears. We determined if Miss Freeman came next day, to say Charles was
gone to England on business of importance, and watch her looks and behavior,
to see if they would confirm our suspicions, which in my opinion did not want
confirmation, since it is impossible any one but her could know Eliza, and Mr.
Hamilton would be at the Rotunda together, as it was by her means the thing
happened.

She came as we expected, in the forenoon, just as sprightly, and to all
appearance as thoughtless as usual; but she is not what she seems to be in that
respect: she had not sat long before she asked for Charles; and Eliza made the
answer we agreed on; she looked astonished; and exclaimed, to England! you
quite surprise me. Why should it surprise you, says I, that Mr. Skeffington,
who has a large estate in England, should have business there? she was
disconcerted at first, but recovered quick enough, and replied, because ma'am,
I thought a certain event, (looking toward Eliza) was to take place so soon,
that he would defer every other business till that was over. Eliza blushed, and
was silent; but I made answer, Miss Fitzgerald was in no hurry about that
affair. Here the subject dropped, and we talked of indifferent things till she
left us, which she did very shortly, saying, she had a hundred visits to pay.

I went home to see Emily, and tell her what had happened, but returned again
to stay the day with them; it passed over very well, as several friends had
called in to see Mrs. Fitzgerald, and the Miss Boyle's came to tea; they always
come early, so we had a good deal of time for chat; and I thought it best to
tell them the real truth in regard to Charles's sudden departure, for it will
be certainly talked of, and reserve to them was unnecessary. They immediately
fixed on Miss Freeman as the cause; and I found Mr. Hamilton had told them what
passed at the gardens. We were still talking it over, and had sat down to tea,
when Miss Freeman arrived; she told us, she was come to take leave, for since
she saw us in the morning, she had received a letter with some news, which made
it necessary for her to go home directly, and she meant to sail in the next
packet; we all cast a look at each other; and I said, it was a sudden call
indeed, that put her in such a hurry; she made no reply to that, but chatted
away in her usual style about two hours, and then took leave, making a
profusion of acknowlegements to Mrs. Fitzgerald, and Eliza, for the many
civilities she had received from them; which provoked me so much, I could
scarce forbear giving her a hint of my suspicions; but I considered it best, to
say nothing, as it could not answer any purpose, since she certainly would not
own it.

After she was gone, we agreed there could be no doubt of what was taking her
back; and I mentioned to the Boyle's what had been my opinion of her all along,
and my reasons for it.

Eliza said, she would never dispute my penetration again; but she had thought
her too giddy to be so designing. I have wrote to Harry Maunsell an account of
Mr. Skeffington's behavior, and begged him to have a watch on Miss Freeman,
perhaps something will come out that will be of use to us, for I think, if his
eyes were effectually opened, by a discovery of her artifice, it would cure him
of his foible, and they might yet be happy.

Mr. Hamilton's marriage with Miss Boil, when that takes place, must go a good
way toward undeceiving him.

Mr. Fitzgerald does not abate the least bit in his attention to our lovely
widow, and she receives them very graciously.

When I freed my heart from its fond prepossession, I thought I had done with
love, and all its attendant perplexities, but I find I was mistaken, for I am
now as much affected with the soft distresses of my friends, as I could
possibly be with my own; I think rather more so, because if any of the follows
took such airs with me, I should discard them at once, without a moment's pain.
I wish I could inspire Eliza with a little of my spirit, for it is such tender
souls as you and she are, that make the men so saucy.

Do not call this a letter, it is quite a volume; by the time you have got
through it, perhaps you may hear from me again.

The best wishes of your friends here, waits on the Compte, and your ladyship.
-- None more sincerely, than those of my

Dear Gertrude's, Very Affectionate, LOUISA MORTIMER.

LETTER XLIV. Mr. MAUNSELL, to Miss MORTIMER.
London, June 21. --
I DEFERED acknowleging the receipt of my dear Miss Mortimer's favor, till I
could give some satisfactory account of my unhappy friend; unhappy I call him,
though I think him blameable, but I must feel for him, since I too well know
what he suffers, who loses all hopes of being united to the object of his
fondest wishes. But I forget myself, and am transgressing against your cruel
commands, not to mention that subject, which is, and will ever be nearest my
heart; yet surely Louisa, you will pardon me, as you must at least allow there
is some merit in my endeavors to obey you, when I find the task is so
difficult.

I was under the necessity of letting James into the whole secret, as I should
want his assistance, and have no doubt of his fidelity, I then gave him proper
instructions, and sent him to Jermynstreet, where he took a lodging, nearly
opposite Mrs. Vernon's, so that he must see who went in and out there: it was
in the evening, and as his landlady keeps a shop, he bought some tea, and
begged leave to try it in her apartment, and sent for cakes to treat her and
the children; she was much pleased with his civility, which made her very
communicative, and in the course of conversation she gave him the history of
every family in the street, and told him all the genteel female servants
frequented her shop, and often made parties to drink tea there, and be merry,
just to help her, because she was a poor widow. James requested she would
introduce him to some of them, as opportunity offered, which she promised;
telling him, Miss Vernon's maid was the prettiest girl in the street, and she
would invite her next evening: it was the very thing he wanted; so giving her
to understand, he would provide the entertainment; he took his leave, telling
her he should sleep there next night, and came to inform me of his proceedings.

I was well pleased at such a beginning, not doubting but he would so manage
matters with the pretty damsel, as to get into the secrets of the young ladies,
so far as would be useful to us. I sent him next day, that he might watch if
Mr. Skeffington went there, and told him I should not expect to see him that
night again.

Accordingly, he did not return till morning, when he informed me, he had the
greatest hopes of succeeding to my wishes; for the girl he had been introduced
to, was sister to Miss Freeman's maid; that she told him, that young lady had
met with an accident by the overturning of the carriage, on her road from
Ireland, which rendered her unable to travel, and her young lady was to go to
her in a day or two, to stay with her till she recovered.

Finding he was an Irishman, she enquired if he knew Mrs. Fitzgerald's family;
being answered in the affirmative, she asked several questions about them and
Charles in a manner that convinces him she knows the whole affair.

I have therefore laid a plan by which I think we shall come at the truth.

James is a well-looking lad, and the girl seemed pleased with his company; by
treating her with a little gallantry, it is more than probable he will learn
all she can tell him. He is already become a favorite, and is frequently with
her, for her mistress is gone to attend her cousin, who still remains too ill
to be moved; and Mrs. Vernon has been out of town some time, by which means
he will have great opportunities of getting into her confidence.

As you guessed, Charles did not come near me, but I made private enquiries,
and found he was at his house in Sussex; however, I could get no knowledge of
his intentions till yesterday, James luckily met Will Lacky, who had been sent
to town on business; they were rejoiced to see each other, and stepped into a
public house to take a glass; where William told him his master had some
unfortunate misunderstanding with Miss Fitzgerald, and had left Dublin in a
huff, was determined not to return this long time, and was now preparing to go
abroad, he believed to Germany, and from thence to Italy.

He lamented greatly what had happened, saying, he was sure the young mistress
was not to blame, but his master would not hear reason.

James expressed his sorrow on the occasion, and having obtained a promise from
Will to keep up a constant correspondence, they parted, and James came to tell
what he had heard; and that he proposed corresponding, that I might have always
intelligence of Mr. Skeffington's movements, which it seems he did not intend
to make any of his friends acquainted with.

I approved what he had done, and commended him highly for his attention to the
business.

I hope my proceedings will meet the approbation of my lovely Louisa, and
obtain her good opinion of one, at least, of that sex, against which she is so
justly incensed by the folly and ingratitude of another.

I sincerely wish your fair friend had some share of that fortitude of which
you exhibit such an example on all trying occasions: indeed, I should do well
to wish for it myself too, since I have even more need of it than Miss
Fitzgerald; because it is most likely resentment will keep her from repining;
but I have not that to support me, and am, I think, more unhappy than if I had
been ill used by the woman I adore.

Why will these ideas perpetually recur? I shall not fail to inform you of
every thing material that passes, and have no doubt but matters will yet take a
happy turn, if Mr. Hamilton marries Miss Boil. Sure that alone will be
sufficient to convince Charles of his error.

I will not now give you room to laugh at me by repeating what you have already
anticipated; so shall only say, I wish you may ever retain that charming
vivacity which so exceedingly becomes you.

Adieu, my dear Miss Mortimer. Assure yourself I shall always be, Unalterably
yours, HENRY MAUNSELL.

LETTER XLV. FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.
London, July 1. --
TWO days after I wrote to my dear Miss Mortimer, I received a short letter
from Mr. Skeffington, apologizing for not calling on me, as his mind was in too
distracted a state since he came to England, to make him a pleasing companion
to any one; before that would reach me, he said, he should have set off with an
intention of quitting these kingdoms, till the memory of some late events,
which no doubt I had heard of, were so far worn out, as to enable him to return
to his own country with some degree of satisfaction, when he hoped we should
renew that friendship which had ever afforded him so much pleasure.

James same time received a note from William, informing him, they were just
setting out for Harwick, there to embark for Helvoetsluys; and promising to
write to him from the first place, where he should find they were likely to
make any stay: if he keeps his word, we shall not be at a loss where to find
him; and as I am to go to France, I shall certainly make whatever place he is
in my way, if he is not lost to reason.

I have now such a proof as must convince him the whole plan was laid by Miss
Freeman; but I think it best he should suffer awhile; as the torments he feels
from jealousy, will, when he finds how groundless it has been, be the most
probable means of effecting his cure: and if Mr. Hamilton is married before I
leave England, it will be a strong testimony in our favor. -- But to the most
material point; James continued his visits to Mrs. Betty, but quit his lodging,
informing her, his master was returned from Ireland, where he had said I went
on business; and that he found I had heard something very particular about Mr.
Skeffington, who she had been speaking of, and who was his master's very
particular friend.

This raised the girl's curiosity, and she made it a point that he should find
out what it was; her young ladies were expected in a few days, and I suppose
she was desirous of having what intelligence she could against they came.

James told me what had passed, and we agreed he should not go to her for two
or three days; he then paid his visit with a face of great concern, and when
she questioned him in regard to what he had heard from me, he evaded answering,
and seemed unwilling to enter on the subject, which made her more anxious to
know, till at length he suffered himself with great difficulty to be prevailed
on to tell her, I had by some means discovered that there was mischief made
between Mr. Skeffington and the lady he was going to marry, by a scheme of Miss
Freeman's; that Mr. Skeffington was gone abroad in consequence of it, but he
found I was determined to lay the whole matter before Mrs. Vernon, and insist
on her using her authority with her daughter, (who he knew was privy to the
affair) to produce all her cousin's letters from Dublin, by which means he
said, I hoped to effect a reconciliation between the parties concerned; and
concluded by saying, he flattered himself she had nothing to do in it, for if
she had, she would certainly lose her place, besides being greatly exposed, as
they all would, who had entered into such a wicked plot,

The girl was terrified, and said it would be the ruin of both her and her
young lady, if his master should acquaint Mrs. Vernon of the affair; though she
declared, neither of them had any farther to do with it, than by knowing there
was such a plan, and how it was carried on; of which her sister constantly
informed her by letter, as Miss Freeman, she was sure, did her mistress; for
she had often heard her wish, her cousin had never gone to Ireland, as she
feared it would have bad consequences.

She then asked him, could he think of any way to prevent his master telling
Mrs. Vernon; for if it was done, she did not see how either her mistress or she
could stand the anger they would get for not discovering it at first; for her
part, she was determined to run away, though she did not know where to go,
since she had neither father nor mother living, and must earn her own bread;
here she cried bitterly, and James affected much uneasiness for her, she
pressing him all the time to think of some expedient that would save them from
being exposed to the old lady's wrath.

After much pretended consideration, he told her he had just thought of one,
which if she consented to, he believed would not fail of satisfying me, as all
I wanted was to lay open to Mr. Skeffington and Miss Fitzgerald, the art that
had been used to separate them, and if that could be done without applying to
Mr. Vernon, he was sure I would at once give that up.

She was earnest to know what she could to do; and he said, if her sister's
letters to her contained sufficient information, and that she would part with
them, he was certain he could prevent all farther enquiries, and perhaps obtain
a reward for her besides; as he could put her behavior in the best light to
his master.

Betty who was most hearty, readily complied with his proposal, making no other
terms than those, that he should get my promise never to make the affair known
to Mrs. Vernon; for she was sure them letters contained every thing I wished to
know, and she believed more than Miss Freeman's.

She delivered a parcel of letters to him, which he brought in triumph to me,
mightily elated with his success. I immediately sat down to examine them, and
found a long account of her mistress's attachment to Mr. Skeffington, and her
Intention to seize the first opportunity of creating a quarrel between, him and
his intended bride; and says in one of them, she had discovered by Miss
Fitzgerald's maid, that he had been jealous of a Mr. Hamilton; and her mistress
had given her a silk gown for the information: she observes, the girl that told
her meant no harm; but she was a simple innocent body, and was not aware of the
consequence.

The last letter is however the most material, as it contains the whole plan,
which was to be put in execution the day after it was dated, and mentions her
having wrote that note, dictated by her mistress, that was to be delivered to
Mr. Skeffington just when he was going out of town.

The whole collection is wretchedly spelt and wrote, so that I could scarce
decypher some of them; however as it was the same hand wrote the anonymous note
which Charles gave such credit to, I think he must believe his own eyes when he
compares them together, for I hope that is not destroyed.

I sent the girl a few guineas by James, and my promise not to mention the
transaction except to those it concerned; for I find by her sister's letters,
she advised her not to have any thing to do with such a wicked scheme, and had
great scruples of conscience about it.

The young ladies are come to Town, but Miss Freeman is confined to her chamber
after the journey: the hurt she got was in her head, and the effect will not,
(as the surgeons say) be speedily removed.

She ought to have remained where she was, at least a fortnight longer; but her
impatience to get home in hopes of finding Charles, was so great, she could not
listen to advice; and she now makes herself worse with fretting, lest he should
go from England before she is able to see him.

At present she supposes he is in Sussex, as Betty tells James, and she on her
own account does not pretend to know any thing about him.

I am exceedingly happy in being able to dive so far into this contrivance, as
will I think bring matters to a pleasing conclusion between our friends, at
least, my endeavors shall not be wanting for such a desirable purpose.

I hope to be favored with a line on the receipt of this; and am,

My dear Louisa's, Most devoted servant, HENRY MAUNSELL.

LETTER XLIV. MISS MORTIMER TO HENRY MAUNSELL, ESQUIRE
July, 5 --
I Cannot express how much you have obliged me by interesting yourself so
heartily in the affair I mentioned to you; and Eliza to whom I communicated
your success, is quite ashamed at the trouble you have had, attended with some
expense; she is however a good deal pleased that the truth will be brought to
light; for though she has not now a thought of marrying Mr. Skeffington, she
wishes to be cleared of the imputation of jilting him; which she looks on, (and
so to be sure does every one of common delicacy) as a most scandalous blot in a
female character; indeed I who know every secret of her heart, can venture to
affirm she never had the smallest tendency to any kind of levity.

The anonymous epistle is safe in my possession; and you will shortly have the
happiness of receiving it from my fair hand -- now I know you are overwhelmed
with joy and surprise, and can scarce believe you have read it right; but you
may, for so it is.

I have promised to accompany Mrs. Fitzgerald and Eliza to Montpellier; the
late shock they received, has had a bad effect on their spirits, and I advised
them to this jaunt, but they would not go without me; so I have consented to be
of the party; for beside the pleasure I shall have in being with them, I long
to see Gertrude, and I know she and her agreeable Count are now at Roussillon;
I shall write by this post to inform her of our intention, and get her to
secure accommodations for us in the town.

Now I mention that, will you be so good to take a lodging for us for a week,
against we reach London, where we stop merely to rest, for this is not a season
for making any stay there: two floors will do us.

We mean to set out in two days, and will go to you when we arrive, to know
where you have fixed us.

But pray now moderate your transports, when we meet; for positively those
raptures, which were pretty enough when we were eighteen, are mighty silly at
four-and-twenty.

Mr. Hamilton and Miss Boil are certainly to be married. -- Farewell till I
see you,

LOUISA MORTIMER.

LETTER XLVII. MISS MORTIMER TO THE COMPTESSE ROUSSILLON.
-- July 6. --
I Believe my dear Gertrude will hear with pleasure that I shall set out in two
days from this date on my way to Montpellier, in company with Mrs. Fitzgerald
and Eliza, whom I have prevailed on to take the journey, which I hope will
recruit both their health and spirits, at present very much affected by Mr.
Skeffington's behavior.

I must trouble you to secure apartments for us in the most agreeable part of
the town; our family will consist of ourselves, Eliza's waiting damsel, and
mine, one man servant we take with us, and we must certainly get a French valet
de chamber for the time we stay, so you will provide accommodations accordingly.

Mrs. Fitzgerald does not take her woman, because she has her town housekeeper,
and being a trusty body, can be depended on to take charge of every thing in
the house, and the furniture you know is very valuable; therefore Eliza's maid
is to supply her place.

I know you would wish to have us at the Chateau; but it will be more agreeable
to Mrs. Fitzgerald to have a lodging in the town; besides there is too many of
us to go to you, who are not in a house of your own; however, as we shall be so
near you, we can be every day together.

Miss Freeman was, as I suspected, the author of all the disturbances I
mentioned to you in my last: Harry Maunsell has letters in his possession that
prove it past contradiction; how he came by them is (in the language of auction
bills) too tedious to insert, as I have still several little things to do
preparatory to my journey; but the story will serve us for conversation when we
are traversing the shady walks of Roussillon together, which I hope we soon
shall.

We mean to go through Holland, and make as little delay on the road as
possible.

The first of August is fixed for the marriage of Mr. Hamilton and Miss Boil;
they are to set off for Belle Park next day, where they make a short stay, and
then go to Hamilton Hall for the remainder of the summer, but will be in town
every winter: he has taken an elegant house in Merrionsquare: they will be an
amiable couple, and I am pleased on every account they are to be so soon
married.

Mrs. Herbert informs me her sister-in-law is just on the eve of matrimony with
a young man of large fortune in that country; Patty is very happy on the
occasion, as she feared her brother would absent himself a good deal from her
house while Miss Herbert remained single; for as he knew her prepossession in
his favor, and could not return it, it certainly would not be agreeable to him
to be much in her company, and she was frequently at her brother's.

Patty tells me Mr. Herbert is determined to come to Dublin in about a year,
their eldest girl will by that time want proper masters, and he is so fond of
her, he cannot bear sending her to a boarding-school, nor does she much like
that mode of education if it can be avoided; she chooses to have her daughters
under her own eye; but Mr. Herbert is so fond of the country, she feared he
would never consent to living for any time in town; but to her great joy he
made the proposal himself.

they have got a large addition to their fortune by the death of a distant
relation.

How happy shall I be to have this dear companion of my childhood settled near
me once more; for to be sure, on the child's account, they will stay in town at
least six or eight months in the year.

Emily left me yesterday; she is gone with her father and mother to the
country, but they will all return early in the winter: Mr. O'Neil has taken a
house, so Mrs. Rochfort must be there when next she comes to Dublin; but I
fancy it will not be for any long time, as matters between her and Mr. Fitzgerald
are, I find, most likely to be concluded to the satisfaction of all parties,
her father being quite content.

I have told you a deal of news, and reserved as much more for our meeting. --
Till then adieu,

Believe me Sincerely yours, LOUISA MORTIMER.

LETTER XLVIII. MISS MORTIMER TO MRS. ROCHFORT.
Montpellier, Aug. 14 --
AS I am persuaded my dear Emily is anxious to hear of our safe arrival, I
seize the first leisure moment that has offered to inform you we performed our
journey surprisingly well, and Mrs. Fitzgerald bore it to a miracle, scarce
complaining of fatigue till the last day or two: We made but three days stay in
London, for as she found herself quite able to proceed, there was no occasion
for delay, nor did we stop longer than was necessary amongst the high and
mighty Lords, so could make no material observations on the people, except
those obvious ones of their cleanliness and industry, which are threadbare
themes, they have been so often expatiated on already.

I think indeed they excel their English neighbors in both those qualities; as
for the former, they are downright slaves to it, since they debar themselves
the use of their rooms for fear of dirtying them; which is carrying the point
to excess, and excesses even in virtue border on vice.

We have been here some days, and are settled very agreeably in the midst too
of acquaintances, for here are several of our country people that we had some
knowledge of, who paid us their compliments as soon as we were known to be
here, and we are now quite sociable.

Gertrude, though prepared by my letter to expect us, was very near fainting
when we met, her joy so far overcame her. She is somewhat increased in size
since you saw her, and is nearly as much ashamed of it as if she was not
married; it is surprising that she has not conquered her bashfulness in this
country, where I believe she is herself the only example of it; but she seems
not one bit altered in that respect.

The Count's affection is, I think, rather warmer than before she was his wife,
and she says all his family treat her with the greatest tenderness, so that I
have the satisfaction of seeing her happy; only she now and then wishes to be
in Ireland amongst her own friends, but as she will come over some times to see
us all, and will also see many of them here at times, she will by degrees be
reconciled to the necessity of living in France.

Next to my own country it is the place I would choose; the disposition of the
people here being very like the Irish in kindness and attention to strangers;
and if their present Monarch goes on as he has begun, they bid fair to be
restored to their natural rights, liberty I mean; for he is daily loosening the
bands of oppression and slavery; while our Rulers are only studying how to
rivet the chains with which they have been loading the people as long as I can
remember.

Poor Eliza tries to be cheerful, but her heart revolts against the attempt,
and it does but make the settled languor that has overspread her countenance
more visible; her forced smiles make my heart ach, and bring the tears into her
mother's eyes, who anxiously watches every turn of her features.

I grieve that the dear girl cannot combat her tenderness for one who, I fear,
would never make her happy, but I am not surprised at it, for in a temper so
gentle as hers, that cannot long harbor resentment, one might expect ill usage
would have just the effect it appears to have on her; you know it was what I
feared, and was the the reason I wished she would change the scene; as every
object at home would revive some idea it was necessary she should forget.

I am in hopes that time, and the agreeable variety she meets with here, will
in some degree restore her peace.

The letters Mr. Maunsell has are exactly in the same hand as the anonymous one
sent to Charles; therefore he must be convinced, when he sees them; but unless
it could make an absolute change in his disposition, I would never advise her
to marry him; for a jealous husband would be misery indeed.

Well, and how goes on your affair? Do you still keep up that matronly gravity
with which you used to receive Mr. Fitzgerald's attentions? for I dare say he
has paid you a visit in the country before now; do tell me all about it, that I
may amuse Eliza with the recital. -- You shall hear soon from me again; mean
time, believe me,

Affectionately Yours, LOUISA MORTIMER.

LETTER XLIX. THE SAME TO THE SAME.
Montpellier, August 30. -- Dear Emily,
I HAD the pleasure of yours within these few days; and am much obliged to you
for writing, without waiting to hear from me; there is however a letter of mine
on its way to you, which I suppose you will soon receive, and which contains an
account of our health, and so forth, I am sorry I cannot tell you that Eliza is
better, but indeed I cannot as yet perceive the least amendment, though I do not
think she is any thing worse.

Mrs. Fitzgerald has received great benefit from the air and exercise she takes
here, if Eliza was well I believe her mother would have no complaint.

I hope little Emily is quite recovered from the smallpox, and congratulate
you on her having it so favorably, and while she is so young; it is best
early, let the event be what it will: for if they recover, there is a deal of
anxiety over; but if it pleases Heaven to take them, the affliction cannot be
so heavy for an infant, as if they were taken from us at a later period of
their lives.

I had yesterday a letter from Henry Maunsell; he tells me Miss Freeman's
health is in a most dangerous state; she was pretty well, and sent down to
Sussex to enquire about Charles, but when she received for answer that he was
gone abroad, disappointment and vexation, threw her into violent hysteric fits,
which continued, with short intermissions, for two days, and have left her so
weak and low that the phisicians apprehended a galloping consumption will be
the consequence, as medicine seems to have little or no effect; to be sure it
cannot have much, as the cause of her disorder lies in her mind, and not likely
to be removed.

What a dreadful thing it is to be governed so absolutely by our passions; for
it brings on the worst kind of bodily complaints, which one would think
sufficient to deter people from giving the reigns to their headstrong
inclinations, supposing they have no regard to religious precepts, which
however ought to be the first motive with a christian to correct the wild
sallies of an impetuous disposition.

Nature had been liberal of her endowments to Miss Freeman, both as to person
and understanding, which had she made a proper use of, would have enabled her
to make a pleasing, if not a shining figure, in life; but by forsaking the path
of moral rectitude, she has lost both her health and her peace; the gentle
heart of Eliza is grieved for her, though she is herself suffering from the
unhappy girl's misconduct.

You cannot form an idea of any thing more beautiful than the situation and
improvements of Roussillon; I think the very air that blows there inspires one
with the softest, most pleasing serenity imaginable, and I am not at all
surprised that Gertrude should learn to love, and even be prevailed on to
acknowledge it, in these delightful bowers; for doubtless external objects
operate powerfully on the disposition of the mind; especially of Women.

Place a pair of lovers on a barren rock, the wind and sea roaring round them,
and I think the dreary prospect would extinguish every wish but that of finding
shelter from the jarring elements; at least I will venture to answer for the
damsel, that the tenderest eloquence would be lost on her in such a place; but
change the scene, and place them in a blooming arbor, a gentle rivulet
murmuring by, and all nature smiling round them, there let him tell his soft
tale, and I think he need not doubt a kind reception; for me, I am so convinced
of it, that I am arming my heart with all its insensibility against Harry
Maunsell comes; for I think it will require no small degree of stoicism, to
remain unmoved by the soft language of his speaking eyes, joined to the
love-inspiring scene around me.

I fear if I was not fully prepared for the danger, I should, forgetful of my
promise, and even of my own disinclination to matrimony, step to the next
church and present him with my fair hand.

I think I hear you say, this girl's pen runs faster than her wit; but consider
child, though I rattle a great deal, there is many a true word -- pardon me, I
had like to write a whole proverb, in defiance of Lord Chesterfield.

The old Compte and Comptese and their daughters arrived at the Chatteau four
days since; their son-in-law is to follow soon; they are most agreeable people;
as for Madame St. Variolle I am quite charmed with her; and delighted to see
the tender friendship that subsists between her and Gertrude; she is exceeding
sprightly, but does not give into the gallantry that is usually practiced here;
I mean, she does not encourage any particular gentleman to attend her; as to
the men in general, the custom of the country permits a degree of familiarity
with them, that appears odd to us, whose manners are more reserved; it would
throw us into the utmost confusion to have our male visitors ushered into our
bedchambers before we were up, or to our toilet, while we were dressing: yet so
powerful is custom; it is done here without the least idea of indelicacy by
women who, I am convinced, are as perfectly virtuous as any woman in Ireland;
and that I think is saying every thing for them: even amongst those married
ladies who fall in with the fashion of having a particular admirer, (which most
of them do) I am satisfied the greater number of them are as chaste as
Lucretia^.

I know several of them, who from the justness of their sentiments, and the
whole tenor of their conduct, I am persuaded, would not deviate from the right
path, in so material a point; be it as it may, they are more refined in their
gallantry than the English ladies, who are gross enough to stoop so low as
their footmen and grooms, of which we have had several instances within these
few years.

Gertrude cannot be brought to comply with any of the customs I have mentioned,
and is a good deal rallied for her bashfulness, even by the Compte: I dare say,
she will in a while admit gentlemen to her toilet; it is almost impossible to
avoid it, without being impolite and singular.

We have thoughts of taking a trip to Paris, that is Eliza and I, accompanied
by Gertrude and her Lord, and Madame St. Veriolle, who has invited us to her
house, and was indeed the first proposer of the jaunt; I had it in
contemplation before, as a thing that would amuse Eliza, but had not mentioned
it: she seemed pleased when it was spoke of, and Mrs. Fitzgerald consented at
once; saying, she could never want company, there were so many of our
acquaintances in town.

I fancy we shall set out in day or two; our stay will not be very long; so you
need not expect to hear from me again, till after we return'; by that time,
perhaps, I shall have some interesting intelligence from Henry, who I imagine
is ere now on his way to Geneva, where he was informed Charles meant to make
some stay.

We are going to dine at Roussillon, and I am yet to dress; I shall therefore
bid you farewell, for I must take a little more time than usual, to make myself
very lovely, as there are to be three or four young Dukes, and as many
Marquisses (nothing under to be met with here, who are all candidates for my
favor.

Do you know that I am the admiration of the French Men quite eclipse Eliza,
who is acknowledged to be infinitely handsomer; they say, if she had Miss
Mortimer's vivacity, she would be but too charming; indeed I wish I could give
her a little cheerfulness; I would willingly share my conquests with her, if
that would blot Charles from her memory -- but it will not be.

Compliments to Mr. and Mrs. O'Neil: -- believe me,

Affectionately Yours, LOUISA MORTIMER.

LETTER L.
Montpelier, Sept. 15. -- Dear Emily,
A Sudden illness which attacked Mrs. Fizgerald put a stop to our intended
jaunt to Paris; for though she was well again in two days, we would not venture
to leave her, as from the symptoms we feared it was the gout in her stomach,
which might return, and we could not have enjoyed ourselves under that
apprehension, if we were three hundred and fifty miles from her: we therefore
contented ourselves with making short excursions of two or three leagues, and
have visited several of the nobility and gentry, who are relations or friends
of the Roussillon family, and were every where received with that pleasing
attention and politeness, for which this nation is distinguished, and which
makes it such an agreeable residence for strangers.

The adjacent country is very delightful; but not near so populous as England
or Ireland; it is impossible it should, if we consider the thousands of both
sexes that are buried in Convents; besides their clergy being condemned to
perpetual celibacy.

I will not dispute about the piety of shutting up their youth from the world,
though, in my opinion, our duty to God does not consist in secluding ourselves
from society; but putting religion out of the question, it is certainly the
most impolitic custom, that was ever allowed by any government, since it must
depopulate, and consequently impoverish the country.

Spain and Portugal, where this religious phrenzy is carried to the highest
excess, are melancholy proofs of it, for at least half of each kingdom lies
uncultivated and uninhabited, while their convents and monasteries are crammed
with people, who, were they exercising their different talents in the world,
might be useful members of the community.

France is not so bad in this respect, as there are some bounds set here to
superstition, and I think some limitation to the number of those houses; they
begin to see how destructive these institutions are to the prosperity of the
kingdom in general.

I have given you a dissertation upon Convents, as it is a subject England or
Ireland does not afford us, and I thought you would expect something new from
France.

I have had a letter from Harry Maunsell; he is yet at Geneva, and ledged at
the same house with Mr. Skessington.

The first night he arrived he stayed at the house where he set up; but you
shall have it in his own words as follows:

I went next day to a Coffee-house, where I thought it likely I should meet
him: He was not there when first I went, but there were several Gentlemen of
the town, with whom I had been acquainted when on my travels, who all came up
to compliment me, and I had been conversing with them about half an hour, when
Charles came in; his countenance showed his mind was not at ease, for he
appeared pale and languid, and much altered for the worse since last I saw him.
He spoke to some Gentlemen near him, and then took a seat, without once
perceiving me, and seemed so lost in thought, that when I went up to him, the
sound of my voice made him start.

He however expressed great pleasure at seeing me, and asked was I going to
Montpellier, as he knew I intended? Having answered him in the affirmative, he
said he should be glad to accompany me, if I would wait till he got letters
from England.

You may guess this proposal was instantly complied with on my part, as he
could not have made a more agreeable offer.

At his request I then walked to his lodgings, and as we went he apologized for
leaving England without seeing me, saying, he was at that time in a situation
of mind not to be described; he was now better, and hoped time and proper
reflection would restore his peace; but added, sighing, it is hard to break the
cord of affection that has been for years twining itself round the heart; I
believe, Harry, that is a truth your own feelings will make you acknowledge. He
touched a tender string; I too sighed assent to his observation, and the ideas
it raised kept us both silent till we were seated in his apartments.

He then insisted I should dine with him; and said if I was not already fixed,
I could be accommodated in that house, and it would make him very happy.

I soon agreed about it, and sending James with my Trunks, took immediate
possession of my chambers.

In the evening we went out to pay some visits, and did not return until late,
so that nothing farther passed that night on the material subject; but I
determined to introduce it the first convenient offer he gave me, as I thought
it necessary the affair should be thouroghly discussed before he and Miss
Fitzgerald met.

But I do not mean to tell him she is at Montpellier; shame would certainly
prevent his going there, for he has declared he never can bear to see her,
after the unpardonable folly he has been guilty of, as he cannot expect
forgiveness*

I had soon an opportunity of entering on the subject, by his mentioning Miss
Freeman.

You are possessed of a happy insensibility, Charles, said I, that can speak
with so much indifference of a woman that is dying for you.

He looked very serious, and said, he was not now in a disposition for joking:
I assured him I did not mean it as a joke, then replied he, excuse me Mr.
Maunsell, if I disapprove of your seriously affirming such an indelicate story
of a young lady I highly esteem; though I am not coxcomb enough to suppose she
loves me. -- If, answered I, you really did not see her partiality to you,
which I find other people did, I am not surprised you should be displeased at
my mentioning it, as a woman's delicacy ought to be sacred; but when she
herself departs from it, and goes such unwarrantable lengths to gratify her
passion, surely she has no right to expect others will speak of her with much
tenderness.

He looked astonished, and saying, he did by no means comprehend me, begged I
would explain myself.

I immediately went for a small box, in which I kept the letters, and laying it
on the table, told him, he would find in that a full explanation of the matter,
and also of some disagreeable circumstances, which I believed would appear to
him in a quite different light, after he had read those papers, from what they
had done.

Being engaged for the evening, I left him to peruse them at his leisure, and
make his own reflections on them.

I did not return until late, so went directly to my chamber, though James told
me, Mr. Sheffington was not in bed, but had been walking about his room for
some time, as if under an agitation; but as that was not an hour to enter on
the topic, I retired to rest, and did not see him until we met at breakfast.

He looked embarrassed, and continued silent, seemingly at a loss how to begin
the subject, until I led the way, by asking, had he looked over the letters? he
replied, I have, and am ashamed of my own folly and ingratitude in affronting,
by my unjust suspicions, the sweet girl who was incapable of giving me any real
cause for them, though I have been so industrious in seeking out imaginary
ones; but, said he, I have suffered severely for it, and shall continue to
suffer even more from reflecting on the happiness I have wantonly flung from me.

I expressed a hope that matters might still be made up between him and Miss
Fitzgerald; but he declared he could never bring himself to appear before her;
or if he did, to what purpose would it be, for though the gentleness of her
disposition might prevent her harboring any violent resentment against him,
yet he could not expect she would hazard her peace by uniting herself to a man
who had given such proofs of a jealous temper; for notwithstanding I feel
myself perfectly cured of that foible, how shall I convince her that it would
not break out again: No, Maunsell, she never can so far forget the unkind
treatment she has met with from me; and I must bid adieu to all the felicity I
once promised myself.

He ceased speaking, and was so much affected, that I was moved at his
affliction, especially as I thought his fears were well founded, and that it is
very probable, though Miss Fitzgerald may pit and forgive, she will not marry
him; unless she can be brought to believe, (as I really do) that he will never
again yield to a passion which caused him so much uneasiness.

It was not for some time that he thought of asking how I came possessed of
those letters? I told him James had some how got acquainted with Miss Vernon's
Maid, who let him into the secret, and he knowing how much I was interested for
your happiness, persuaded her to give him these papers, which would lay the
whole scheme open; but I must tell you, Charles, your friends saw at first
there was a plot in it, and as Miss Freeman immediately followed you to
England, concluded it was concerted between you; till your going abroad, and
the intelligence James gave me of the effect it had on the lady's health,
convinced us, it was all her own contrivance.

He said he had no right to complain of our suspicions, since he must own
appearances were much against him, especially to Eliza, who was conscious of
her own innocence.

I took occasion from thence to preach to him on the folly of trusting to
appearances, and not giving our own reason fair play; it was that hastiness in
judging had caused all this misunderstanding, and interrupted his own peace as
well as that of his dearest friends.

He acknowledged the justice of my observation, and said, he was so perfectly
sensible of his error, that he hoped he was quite secure from falling into it
again.

Indeed I hope and believe so too; if my Louisa should be of that opinion, will
she not become his advocate with her fair friend? I have since told him all I
had heard of the accident Miss Freeman met with on the road, and the very
precarious state she is now in; for when I left England there was very little
hopes of her: but I did not think it necessary to tell him it was I employed
James to dive into the affair, since he did not seem to suspect it.

He made some pertinent remarks on the impropriety of the young lady's conduct,
as well as her ingratitude to his Eliza, who had shown her so much friendship.

We are now only waiting for the letters he expects from England, which I hope
will not detain us much longer; as I have the utmost impatience till I again
view that enchanting face, and hear the music of those accents, which vibrate
to my heart, and cause such pleasing sensations, as none but those who love as
I do can feel."


So far Harry Maunsell; you see I have given you the conclusion of his epistle,
least you should imagine he was so stupid as not to be affected by our
approaching meeting, or so impolite as not to tell me so: -- Besides, I know
young widows like to hear soft nonsense, whether said to themselves or others;
not but I suppose you have sufficient entertainment of that sort from your own
swain, now that all impediments are removed.

I charge you do not think of marrying till I return, for I intend the same day
shall serve for you and Eliza, and then I can perform the part of bride-maid to
you both; as I foresee my mediation will not be necessary to bring about a
reconciliation in that quarter.

Harry knows little of the matter, if he thinks his friend has need of an
advocate; but I do not mean to tell him so; for it gives these men such
consequence in their own eyes, when they find their influence is so powerful
over our fond hearts.

Instead of pleading for the offender, I am endeavoring to fortify Eliza with
resolution to keep up some degree of dignity on their meeting, and to take at
least a few days before she suffers herself to be persuaded to sign his
absolute pardon.

But I fear all my good lessons will be forgot, when the loved youth appears;
unless the sense of his own demerits may make him too humble to ask a complete
restoration to her favor.

Harry's letter threw her into the prettiest agitation imaginable, when she
found they were coming to Montpellier; but the idea of Charles's sufferings
melted her to tears; in short, she was quite fluttered, and affected a hundred
different ways; but that I am not surprised at, for her mother was not much
better, though the affection she bears him is only that of a parent, while her
daughter's are of a much tenderer kind.

Her health mends apace, and her countenance begins to wear its usual serenity;
even the country seems to have new beauties for her; at least she had hitherto
passed them over unnoticed; so true is that line of the song,

" We only can taste when the heart is ease.
Well, these sensitive plants may boast of their exquisite feelings, but for
me, I am content to be only moderately happy, on condition of never being
supremely miserable; and for that purpose took pains to suppress those violent
sensibilities that would not be controuled by reason, and are therefore always
dangerous, and frequently fatal, to the person who possesses them.

A letter from Harriet Boil to Eliza, informs her of her sister's nuptials
with Mr. Hamilton; I wonder how Charles will look when he hears of it; for
Harry does not say he had mentioned any thing of that to him.

Mrs. Fitzgerald begins to long for home; however we shall not leave this for
some time yet; it would be foolish to make so short a stay, after so long a
journey.

I shall not write to you again till I can inform you how matters are
accommodated between Charles and Eliza.

Yours, LOUISA MORTIMER.

LETTER LI. MISS MORTIMER TO MRS. ROCHFORT.
Montpellier, Sept. 28. --
I AM sure my dear Emily will be full of impatience to know how our lovers
quarrel has ended; why, as all love quarrels do end; in an increased affection
for each other.

As I foretold, she signed an act of oblivion, as soon as he could assume
resolution enough to ask it, which was not for two days, such a just sense had
he of his high crimes and misdemeanors.

I am provoked that she could think more lightly of them than he did; I would
have taken one little week's beseeching, at least, before I would have suffered
myself to be prevailed on; a pardon so easily obtained may encourage him to
farther transgressions; but Eliza has no art, and as her heart forgave, she
could not keep her tongue from acknowledging it: to tell truth, I believe she
will have no cause to repent; for he seems so perfectly convinced of his fault,
that I think it impossible he can ever fall into it again -- But I must tell
you how matters were conducted to bring them together.

Harry never gave the smallest hint of our being here, and contrived not to
come in till night, least they should by any accident meet us or our servants;
he then made some excuse for going out, and came himself to inform me of their
arrival.

Fortunately Eliza was in her mother's chamber; and it was agreed between him
and me he should bring Charles in the morning, as if to visit a friend of his;
and I was to prepare the ladies for the interview.

When he left me, which was not till I positively insisted on his going, I went
to Mrs. Fitzgerald's room to communicate the matter to them, having first bid
Kitty withdraw; but I was soon obliged to recall her; for I had but just said
Mr. Maunsell was with me, when Eliza dropped on the floor in a fainting fit,
which put us all into a hurry and confusion for some minutes, when she began to
revive, and soon after, by proper applications, was perfectly recovered.

Her spirits, which were always weak, have been still weaker this while past,
and sunk under the sudden mention of Harry's arrival, knowing who accompanied
him.

When we were once more left to ourselves, I told her, if she had not
resolution to support the idea of seeing Mr. Skeffington, I feared she would
never stand a meeting next morning, so I had better write a note to forbid his
coming, as such another fit might have a bad effect on her health.

She begged I would not teaze her, but tell her was he really to come, since
she found some preparation would be necessary to enable her to receive him with
any degree of composure.

I then informed her how we had settled it, and advised her to retire to rest,
and try to conquer the flutter she had thrown herself into, else Charles must
have a physician for his gentleman usher; as I supposed his palpitations would
be as great as here is, some of the faculty should certainly be at hand to apply
proper restoratives.

I was obliged to talk nonsense, to prevent her making such a serious matter of
it, and when I had set her and her mother laughing, at the ridiculous
description of what I suppose their meeting would be, I bid them good night,
and went to my bed, where I slept very comfortably, till disturbed by Eliza,
who, I dare say, had not closed her eyes.

I arose, and was but just dressed, when our French Valet informed me two
gentlemen enquired for me. -- I instantly went to them, and soon as I entered
the room, Mr. Skeffigton approached with a rueful countenance, and with great
humility kissing my hand, said, will Miss Mortimer receive a penitent, and
deign to intercede with her lovely friend for a man who has so high a sense of
his faults, that he is incapable of pleading his own cause!

I told him, smiling, his sex were seldom so humble; therefore, as I loved to
encourage good dispositions, and had beside a proper state of the case laid
before me by Mr. Maunsell, I had ventured to become his advocate, and had so
far succeeded, that his aunt and cousin had promised to receive him as a friend
that had been absent, without any retrospect to former disagreeable
occurrences, which I believed it would be best not to mention as yet.

He was full of acknowledgments for my kindness; and I conducted him to his
audience.

His color went and came as he approached, and his voice faultered so, he
could not articulate a word, which Mrs. Fitzgerald observing, stepped forward to
meet him, and kindly taking his hand, said, my dear child, I rejoice to see
you, (indeed she loves him as if he was he own) then turning to Eliza, will not
you welcome your cousin my love? The dear girl, who was little less agitated
than he, held out her hand, which he pressed to his lips, and then ventured to
salute her; while she was utterly unable to speak, as a tear stood trembling in
her eye, which would have overflowed its bounds on the least attempt at speech:
their silence however was sufficiently eloquent, since it plainly discovered
how their hearts stood affected to each other.

I thought it high time to put an end to the pantomine, which was likely to
become too distressing, so hurried them into the breakfast room where Harry
was; who, advancing to pay his compliments, relieved them all from a very
awkward situation.

The conversation then became general, till the gentlemen left us, to pay a
visit at Roussillon; being first invited to dinner by Mrs. Fitzgerald.

Harry told me after, he had informed Mr. Skeffington, when he got him near our
hotel, who he was to meet, and it was with the greatest difficulty he could
prevail on him to proceed; not till he assured him, I would interest myself in
his favor, and knowing my influence over Eliza he had no doubt of my success.

They continued on these terms for two days, not a hint of past transactions
dropping from either party; when being all engaged to pass the day at the
Chateau, every one, as is usual there, disposed of themselves as they found
most agreeable.

Eliza, it seems, had retired to that arbor, where the Compte first declared
his passion to Gertrude, and was followed by Charles, who had observed where
she went.

I also was straying in the garden, and passing in sight of the place; she came
out and joined me, not thinking I saw him there: but if I had not, the blush
still mantling on her cheek would have betrayed her: I just patted it saying,
well Eliza, that blush is not for nothing; Charles has pleaded his cause more
effectually than the ablest advocate could do; is it not so, she said, I was a
provoking girl, and she would not tell me; she knew I would blame her, and she
could not help it now.

Indeed, Eliza, you wrong me; I never blame any one for consulting their own
happiness; and I suppose, my dear, you are the best judge of what will
constitute yours.

Fie Louisa, said she; there is no standing your looks, no more than your
expressions, when you choose to be teizing. -- Just then, to her great relief,
we were joined by Madame de St. Veriolle, which prevented our pursuing the
subject.

I am sure she was heartily glad of the interruption, for I dare say, she could
not have brought herself to tell me, she had consented to give her hand to
Charles as soon after our return to Ireland, as matters could be settled for
the purpose; which I was informed of by Henry, the first opportunity he had of
speaking to me alone.

He was full of joy at his friend's success; and asked if Eliza had told me;
no, I replied; but I knew something of the kind had been the consequence, when
I saw she had been with him in the arbor, for arbours are of all other places
the most dangerous to female resolution; he laughed at the idea; and clasping
me to his bosom, wished, if that was the case, he could find me in one. -- When
we get home, you will be all marrying and giving in marriage; I only shall
remain in the singular case.

I don't however find myself a bit uneasy at the reflection: the epithet of old
maid, is not at all formidable to me; for as I at present meet as much respect
as most of the matrons I know, I suppose that will not be lessened, when
increase of years makes me wiser and better than I am now. -- I tell you,
Emily, I shall retain my good humor, when you and Eliza are fretting over your
squalling Infants.

Charles means to set off in a few days, as he had a good deal of business to
do, preparatory to making settlements, and so forth; and wishes to be in Dublin
before November.

We shall remain here till the latter end of October, and Mr. Maunsell stays to
be Eliza's Cecisbo: as for me, I have about a dozen lively Frenchmen at
command, amongst whom I dispense my smiles so equally, that one cannot be
jealous of another, and I reign sole Empress of them all.

Eliza's ideas are so totally engrossed by one object that she can find no
amusement in the agreeable gallantry she would receive here, without their
having the least design on her heart; but she would not take it on her
conscience to encourage it, fearing least any of them should think her serious,
and be hurt when he found she was engaged.

I cannot persuade her that those things are mere matters of course here, and
meant only as politeness; it is impossible to argue her out of romantic notions.

Harry takes up his abode at Roussillon as soon as Charles goes, according to
invitation, the old Compte and Comptesse return soon to Paris, and their
son-in-law accompanies them: their daughter stays till Gertrude and her lord
goes, which will be immediately after we leave this; as she would shortly be
unfit for traveling.

You need not expect to hear from me again; for I do not intend writing any
more while I am here: and I hope to find you, and most of my friends, in
Dublin, by the time I get there.

You are very idle, or rather you have more agreeable amusement pour passer le
tempts, their writing to me; I have had but one letter from you yet: Had I
thought of that sooner, I would not have said a word about Charles and Eliza,
and that would mortify you.

Perhaps you will say, it would be no loss since I have so bad a hand at
describing love scenes; true, but I have given you the outlines, and as I dare
say you are now pretty conversant in them, you may supply the deficiency by the
power of your own imagination. -- And so, in the true royal style, we bid you

Heartily farewell, LOUISA MORTIMER.
P. S. I forgot to tell you the news of Mr. Hamilton's marriage, which I took
an opportunity to mention, seemed to strike Charles with great surprise; and
when I observed to him, it was a thing guessed at by most of their
acquaintance, before he left Ireland; he looked in some confusion, and said,
indeed, Miss Mortimer, I think I was under infatuation, for many circumstances
now come into my mind, that might have convinced me it was so, if I had not
been blinded by that unhappy passion. -- But I hope it is for the best; as the
misery I have endured, has most effectually cured me, and since my gentle Eliza
pardons me, I am once more happy.



LETTER LII. MISS MORTIMER TO THE COMPTESSE DE ROUSILLON.
Dublin, Dec. 12. --
HERE we are, my dear Gertrude, after four months ramble, enjoying ourselves
under our own vines, and under our own fig trees: No, that will never do in a
city. -- But what is far more comfortable at this season, and in our climate,
we are snug at our fire-sides, talking over the pleasing hours we spent with
our kind friends at Roussillon.

As I wrote to you on our arrival at Harwick; I have taken a little time to
rest since I came home, before I would take up the pen again; for I assure you,
our journey from London was very fatiguing and disagreeable; the weather being
extremely severe; at least we found it so, we had been so long used to the mild
air of Montpellier, where none but gentle breezes fan the rosy bowers,

While we were in London, James brought us the account of Miss Freeman's death
-- she had languished in a wretched state, from the time she heard that Charles
was gone abroad, mostly delirious, in which way she died, a martyr to her own
ungovernable passions.

There is something* shocking in a woman's so far departing from the delicacy
of her sex, and all the rules of decorum, as this unhappy girl did, I think her
friends may rejoice that she is no more; for had she lived, with so little
regard to religion, or rectitude, as appeared in her conduct, it is more than
probable, she would have brought a reproach on herself and them.

I found Mr. and Mrs. Herbert in town, and all their little ones; they have
five lovely children; and the best behaved babies I ever saw.

Their mother, without any harshness, has let them see they must obey her,
therefore it is a point they never dispute, and a grave look from her, is more
effectual, than correction from one who only indulges or chides her children
rather according to her own caprice than their deserts.

Mr. Herbert is very partial to his eldest girl, though Patty frequently
remonstrates against it as unjust; and in her own behavior, takes care to show
equal affection to them all, when they equally deserve it, which prevents their
little hearts from being filled with jealousy and animosity against each other.

You may guess how happy it makes me, to have Patty once more in the fame
street with me, as she now is we call to remembrance a thousand pleasing
circumstances that occurred in our childish days, and enjoy over again our
early friendship.

Harry, who tenderly loves his sister, and has, as you know, some small regard
for your humble servant, is quite delighted to get us together, and joins in
recollecting past pleasures: but then he is too apt to dwell on those incidents
that made the deepest impression on his heart; however, his tranquillity seems
restored, which adds much to my satisfaction.

It is quite distressing to see our friends repining at disappointments that
cannot be remedied; and refusing the happiness within their reach, because some
one thing they wish for is withheld; perhaps if it was granted, the
acquisition might make them miserable, a thing we have frequent examples of:
yet we are not to be convinced that Providence is wiser than we are.

Mrs. Rochfort is come to town with her father and mother; her marriage is
fixed for the 16th; Eliza's the day after.

She insisted on Emily taking the lead, as she was determined to be bridemaid;
I would not say any thing against it, because I was glad to see her in such
good spirits; but I have a notion she will repent placing herself in such a
conspicuous light, the day before her own wedding. She must probably stand many
jokes on the occasion, but that to be sure has never occurred to her.

She looks, and is as well as ever I saw her; the cause of her illness, which
was uneasiness of mind, being removed, the effect has ceased.

Mr. Skeffington has given James Grady fifty guineas as a reward for the part
he took in bringing those letters to light; and I find this increase of fortune
has encouraged him to offer his hand to my Jenny; (his heart has long been
here is) and Jenny has condescended to accept it, with my approbation. -- You may
be sure I shall make some addition to her portion; and I assure you, she has
saved a good deal in my service.

They mean to go into business, linen and haberdashery they have fixed on.

I shall certainly countenance them; for I think it but right to promote the
interest of servants who have been honest and faithful; though I totally
disapprove of making them confidants, or allowing them any influence over us:
their education renders them unfit for advisers, and we often see the bad
effects of young ladies placing confidence in their waiting-maids, who always
encourage them in whatever they know to be their inclination, as they are sure
of being rewarded for any assistance they lend; or even where they mean well,
ignorance often leads them into errors; they do not foresee the bad
consequences that may attend their repeating what they hear, as was the case
with Eliza's Kitty; for I am sure the girl loves her mistress; yet Charles
incautiously betraying his temper to her, was near proving fatal to the peace
of the whole family.

Eliza has talked to her a great deal on the subject, and intimated an
intention of parting with her, lest her indiscretion might hereafter create
disturbance; for as she exposed the only defect she had discovered in Mr.
Skeffington's disposition to a stranger, she was no longer to be trusted.

Poor Kitty came in great woe, to request my interest with her mistress not to
discharge her, promising never to commit such a fault again; and she is
accordingly reinstated in Eliza's favor.

You shall hear from me when the weddings are over. I am anxiously expecting an
account of your being safe and well; faite me baisemens a Monsieur La. Compte:
and pray present my best respects to all his agreeable family, particularly his
amiable sister.

Your friends here joint in the most affectionate wishes for your health and
happiness, none more sincerely than

Your LOUISA MORTIMER.

LETTER LIII. FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.
-- Dec. 18. --
At length, my dear Gertrude, Eliza's novel is concluded, like most other
novels, with the serious catastrophe, matrimony.

The ceremony was performed yesterday evening, in what we call a private
manner; that is, quite in the family way; but in such a family as theirs, you
know what a crowd they make when gathered together on these occasions.

Eliza did not behave quite as well as your ladyship in the same circumstances;
for it was with the utmost difficulty she could say, "I will" loud enough to be
heard by the Clergyman, and as to the rest, we could only perceive her lips
moved to the words; the good man, however, who saw her heart was consenting,
took the will for the deed, else I think she would still have remained a
maiden; indeed he espoused the cause of his sex so far, as to insist on her
pronouncing the word obey, pretty audibly: now had I been in her place, that of
all words never should have passed my lips; I whispered that to Harry first
opportunity; he replied, smiling, he would venture to take me even on them
terms, if I would say I loved: No, said I, for if you would dispense with my
promising obedience, I should fear you meant to enforce the doctrine by some
more powerful argument: he called me some fond name, saying, he must be a brute
indeed that would desire me to comply with any thing that was disagreeable to
me.

How mild and gentle those men talk before marriage, and how soon they change
their tone after; yet you can produce one that continues the same style, and I
have some little idea that Harry would have been like him.

I wish he could conquer an attachment that promises so little satisfaction;
for I want to make up a match between him and Harriet Boil, whose heart seems
perfectly disengaged, and she has wholly laid aside her affectation -- but it
is in vain to think of it, for he is quite determined.

How I wander from my subject: to return to it then -- Charles's behavior was
tender and attentive, but delicately so, endeavoring all he could to keep up
her spirits, in which Harry and I assisted him; for the rest of the young folks
were more inclined to amuse themselves at her expense.

Cards however relieved her from their raillery, beside some share of it was
directed to Emily and her bridegroom, who, as I told you, were married the
night before, and a good many of the same company had been at their wedding.

She too was much affected; though she had gone through all the ceremony
before; but her heart was now concerned, and she was agitated by all the hopes
and fears, so natural to those who love.

Doubtless the unhappiness she had already experienced in the state, must have
caused some disagreeable sensations, when she reflected on the possibility of
being again subject to the same, though there is all the reason in the world to
believe she has nothing of that kind to fear from her present choice, as there
does not appear to be the least defect in his temper, and she, you know, is all
sweetness.

They are to accompany Charles and his bride to Castle Skeffington; as will all
the bride men and maids; of which number are Mr. Maunsell, and your Louisa.

We spend the christmas there; then pay a visit, by invitation, to Mr. and Mrs.
Hamilton, and return from thence to Dublin.

I forgot to tell you Mr. Fitzgerald looked a little cool on Charles when first
they met, after our return from France, and not very cordial on Eliza; he was
displeased with him for his behavior, and with her for not resenting it; till
I laid the true state of the affair before him, which reconciled him to them
both, else it might have had unpleasing consequences, as he would have
certainly told Mr. Skeffington his mind, who would probably have been too high
spirited to enter into any explanation of the matter.

The prevalence of that most horrid custom, duelling, makes one tremble at the
prospect of warm words between men.

Eliza, who observed her cousin's coolness, was very apprehensive, till I
undertook to remove it: I was happpy in succeeding; and they are now just as
usual.

We shall leave town, the 20th, do not expect another epistle till I come back;
for I know we shall live in a perpetual hurry of company while we remain in the
country; as all the people will crowd to pay their compliments to the two new
married couple.

Mrs. Fitzgerald is, I suppose, the happiest creature now in the kingdom, in
seeing her two darlings united, after the great danger there was of their being
separated for ever.

She has forgot all her complaints, and is as young as any of us: I hope she
will long continue to enjoy her present satisfaction, which nothing can add to,
except living to see half a dozen grandchildren playing about her.

I expect my next will be a congratulation on the birth of a little Monsieur or
Mademoiselle; be it which it will I beseech you, Gertrude, do not dress it in
the French style till it is childish years are somewhat passed.

I think the children in France, so be powdered, and curled, have just the
appearance of a race of dwarfs; do let yours look like infants while they are
so; for you cannot make them like any thing half so pleasing.

The time employed in writing this, I have stolen from the hours of rest;
finding it impossible to obtain a moment for the purpose during the day, I am
so entirely engaged with the wedding folks, who will not excuse my absence.

They all desire me to assure you and the Compte of their kindest regards.

I kiss your hands: And am, My dear Gertrude's Very affectionate LOUISA
MORTIMER.

FINIS.
NEW BOOKS, Printed and sold by S. COLBERT, No. 136, Capel-street, opposite
Abbey-street.
I. EMELINE: a Moral Tale: By an IRISH LADY, Price 1 s. 7dh. sewed, 2 s. 2 d.
bound.

This Tale is written in a pleasing manner, and displays much merit and
literary talents, distinguished by many just and pertinent remarks.

II. THE TUTOR, OR History of GEORGE WILSON AND LADY FRANCES MELFONT, In a
Series of Letters, Price sewed 2 s. 2 d. bound 2 s. 8dh.

By the Author of LOUISA MILDMAY, etc.

"These Letters describe several characters and relate many interesting events
in a new and agreeable manner. Throughout them are interspersed many generous
sentiments and noble observations that do honor to the heart and head of the
Writer." REVIEWERS.



