A REMARKABLE CASE IN Surgery: Wherein an Account is given of an uncommon
Fracture and Depression of the Skull, in a Child about Six Years old;
accompanied with a large Abscess or Aposteme upon the Brain.

With other Practical Observations and Useful Reflections thereupon.

Also an exact Draught of the Case, annexed. And for the Entertainment of the
Senior, but Instruction of the Junior Practitioners, communicated

By DANIEL TVRNER.

Quamvis enim, si mentem serio applicuerimus, quid de facto agat Natura, and
quibus in Operatione sua utatur Organis deprehendere valcamus; modus tamen quo
illa operatur, Mortales, aut ego fallor, semper latebit.

Sydenham. in Dissert. Epist. ad Gulielmum Cole. LONDON: Printed for R. Parker,
at the Unicorn under the Royal Exchange. 1709.

To the Much Honored The GOVERNORS and Court of Assistants, such of them,
more especially, who in that Worshipful Company, profess the truly Noble,
Commendable, and (above all others) most Useful, the Art of Surgery, in the
City of London.
Gentlemen,
IT IS to You, as proper Arbiters of sound and artful Practice, that I address
the following Case: You who at present are placed at the Helm; and whose
peculiar Provinc^ it is to inspect whether or no this renowned Art be rightly
steered by it several Practitioners, will quickly see (as the following Diary
has been kept whether, or no the Practice therein observed, be every Way
conformable t^ the Rules of Art.

That it is truly stated, I dare appeal to one of you, Mr. Warden Herenden, who
was at several Time pleased to be an Eyewitness, at the Times of Dressing.

If it be objected, that my Patient at length dying, I might have concealed the
Case, as affording less Matter of Instruction to the young Practitioner: for
whom principally it was intended; I answer, and that without vain Boasting,
there is more of Art required to protract Life, under the most imminent Danger,
than there is to accomplish a Cure where that Danger is absent: And farther,
whatever it may appear to others, I dare say 'twill be no Paradox to you,
should I affirm that the remarkable and succesful Recoveries of some, have been
in great Measure owing to the rational, although succesless Attempts upon others.

The Dissection that has been employed upon Morbid Bodies after Death, has
enriched both Physic and Surgery, with many useful Improvements, and he who
thinks it not worth while to take Notice of any other Case, than where a Cure
has been completed: is least likely to be instrumental in the Performance of
any one that is extraordinary.

I pretend to no new Light in Surgery: Nor shall I by any means recede from the
old, unless that enlightened Gentleman Dr. C. -- can by Autopsy convince me,
that any considerably contus'd Wound is to be cured by other first Intention,
than that of Digestion or engendring matter: 'Till this be done, he is to
excuse me if I think him more in the dark than those who never heard of his
false Meteor, and quickly extinguished Light.

That Wounds of the Brain, and other Noble Parts, are inconditionately curable:
seems of a like Stretch with the former; yet want we not a late Blazing Star,
in Comparison of the lesser Light, from the other side the Water, to portend they
are so.

But if these Immortalisers of Mankind, could perform what they pretend to; how
comes it to pass that not one more surprising (if well attested Recovery) has
hen wrought by them, than we are able to produce in the Way of common Practice,
performed by Ingeniuos Artists, long before the World was fobb'd by these
arrogant Pretenses?

It Is evident there never wanted some bold and confident Pretender to work
Wonders in each Art or Science: Physic and Philosophy, as well as Mathematics
have had their Heretics equally with Divinity: Nor was there ever any thing
(how absurd so ever) started by Philosophers of differing Sects, but quickly
gained its Proselues, amongst unthinking and unwary Persons. Thus on the one
hand, no sonner does the Knavish or (at best) deluded Facio and his Crew sound
forth the Trumpet, but Herds of Fellow Prophets take the Alarm, and Men,
distinguished, as well by Sense as Title and Estate, are drawn in amongst the
beedless Rabble.

On the other, no sooner does the bold and cosening Quack, confidently avouch
that he can cure the most invetrate Clap in two or three Days, and a Pox of the
superlative Degree, in as many Weeks; but Shoals of fornicating Sinners
(neglecting Men of Art and greater Modesty) run after him to court their Ruin:
I need not tell you, how many of this Scandalous Tribe, our City affords, who
live great, and appear splendid, by the Spoil of these most shamefully abused
People.

Again, no sooner does the sly insinuating V -- (the Scandal of our Reverend
Clergy) publish to the World his Cures of the Kings Evil, where common Ulcers,
and as common Opthalmies make up the Number; and all Miscariages are hushed up:
but strait the bubbled Citizens caress the empty Idol, and fear not the Abuse
under a Religious Cassock.

Nostrums and Specificks, those Subterfuges of Ignorance and Baits for ^nwary,
are every where to be met with. But whilst their Owners are so shy of being
brought to the Test of Rational ^nquisition, whilst they shelter themselves
only under the Umbrage of (however honorable yet) incompetent Judges: we may
very well disregard them, nor need we be at the Pains of confuting them
otherways, than by (what they only deserve) our Slight and Contempt.

If common Fame, or the lying Tattle of the Multitude is to be taken for
Authentic Evidence: I can produce a Noonday Sun which will obscure these lesser
Lights at once: For if the Dr. finds his vouchers for his Cure of Wounds of the
Heart, Stomach, Liver, Guts, and what not; or the Dutch Nobleman who drives
Tenter-Hooks through Men's Heads, healing them in a Trice with his Consolidator.
I Will bring One to testify he heard a Person swear, that I had taken out some
of a Child's Brains (the same in the ensuing Narative) washed them in warm
Claret, and put them in again: after which, in in a few Minutes he was as merry
as a Cricket.

But leaving these Romantic Boasters, amongst Knaves and Fools, the bare
mentioning of whom I fear is a Trespass upon your Patience: I hope it is no
novel Assertion, if I do affirm, that the wounded Brain is conditionately
curable; had I not been able to produce Authorities, great Variety of which the
Judicious Mr. Young of Plymouth, has collected to my hand: I can assert it upon
my own Knowledge, in a little Girl I was called to many Years ago, who by
Accident, had an Iron Spike beat into her Brain, thoro' the midst of the Os
Frontis, accompanied with a Fracture, in which, upon Removal of the Scalp, one
Part of the Cranium ^as found shot under the other. The Wound had been treated
by a Barber, as Superficial; taking off whose Dressings, I perceived some of
the Brain mixed with his Balsam, and passing in my Probe, observed there was an
Admittance farther than I cared to venture; I dressed her up that Night,
believing the Case desperate: Next Day I traced the Fracture, and making Room
for the Trepan, called in Mr. Sergeant Bernard, perforating the first Time,
whilst he was by; the Membrane appeared fair and clean, but by this Perforation
we were not able to relieve that Part of it which was oppressed, by some Angles
of the fractur'd Bone; on which Account I made a second Bore, and sawed off the
Interstice, which contained the doubled Fragment of the offending Cranium. Our
Membrane, now lay bare a considerable Compass, yet notwithstanding, incarn'd as
kindly as I could wish, and gave no other Trouble, than that of keeping down
the supercrescing Flesh, to lie even with the other Parts of the Skull.

From the Seeds in the Forehead, we had daily some Portion of the Brain
discharged; I believe in all a moderate Spoonful, which at length ceasing to
work out: instead thereof, there ouzed forth a large Quantity of an insipid
Water, or clear Lymph, at least a Pint in each twelve Hours; which continued
till the Edges of the Seeds mouldred off, about which time, some Grains of
Flesh began to arise from within, soon after growing Callous, and bearing a
firm Cicatrix. The Patient is now grown a lusty Young Woman, a Wife, and Mother
of Children; and from the Minute she received her Hurt, through the long ^ourse
of my Attendance, was not other^ise affected, than with the Symptonatic Fever
and severe Headache. After this, and diverse Operations of the like Nature, though
I cannot say, all alike succesful: I thought my self capable, as well of
discovering a fissuf'd or fractur'd Cranium, as of releiving the distressed
under those Circumstances; but yet I could not escape the Censure of some
Gentlemen of the Fraternity, who admired I should overlook such a Case.

How justly this Reflection was made, I take this Opportunity of informing you,
and delivering the Business truly in as few Words as I can, shall leave you to
determine.

About two Years and half since, I was sent for to give my Judgment upon a
Child, who they told me had been bitten by a Mastiff Dog; when I came to
examine his Head, which was the Part affected, I found the Scalp had been torn
a considerabl^ Way over one Side: The Accident ha^ been received, as I
remember, Six o^ Seven Weeks before. The lacerate^ Part being laid down again,
was i^ some Places agglutinated; in others, where there had been Loss of
Substance, incarn'd and firmly cicatrised* So that all I had to overlook, was a
large and no unseemly Scarr; under which there was nothing at that time to be
apprehended, not so much as a Complaint upon the strictest Impression. The
Child upon the healing of the Wound, was seized with an Hemiplegia: the Eye and
Lip distorted, the Arm in a Manner useless; and the Leg drawing after him,
accompanied indeed with a partial Loss of his Understanding, faltering in his
^peech, and slavering like a Change^ng. I asked the Parents who had ^^en their
Surgeon; they told me one (...) their Neighborhood. Being willing to have some
Talk with him, they sent, and the Man readily came to ^e. I inquired what he
had observed at his first Dressing, upon the Skull, before he stitched the
Scalp to its disunited Parts: In his broken English (being a Frenchman) he told
me the Skin, meaning the Pericrane, was untouched, unless in those Places where
the Cur had set his Teeth or Paws; that he had been careful in examining, and
found the Skull to be no Ways injured: Upon which, having told the Child's
Friends, that taking this for a true Report, I could impute the Symptoms to
nothing more than a venomous Taint, impressed by the Slaver of the Dog, upon
the Lips of the Wound at this Time got into the Blood, and so affecting the
Nerves themselves. A Case of the same Nature I had observed, and communicated
to the Royal Society, which the deceased Dr. Tyson thought well worthy, and had
the same printed in the Phylosophic Transactions. Thus having told the Mother,
that I should be clearly for opening both the Scalp and Skull (which she I dare
say, will justify) did I apprehend their Surgeon might not not be depended on,
which put Monsieur into a little Passion, and made him swear that the same was
no more injured than the Back of his Hand: I then prescribed some Alexipharmic
and Anti-epileptick Medicines, ordered a Vesicatory for the Neck, and for
farther Relief of the Brain, directed the said Person, who ^^om the first had
been concerned, to ^^ply a Caustic upon the Top of the Head, at the meeting of
the Coronal ^ith the Sagittal Suture. I also ad^ised a Nervous Embrocation,
some^hat like that in the following Case, ^or the Spina Dorsi; after which, I
visited only five or six Days, 'till ^he Eschar separated, and the Ulcer kept
open as a Fontanel, with a Pea. Not meeting then with the Civility I expected,
nor the Child much bettered by what I had directed, I withdrew, and they called
in a Physician, of good Note and Repute: Meeting after with their Apothecary, I
inquired about the Child: He told me the Symptoms rather increased, and he grew
worse: that the Physician, with inconsiderable Variation, had fallen upon the
Course I had before directed, unless that in the room of the Embrocation, he
had ordered a Fomentation. Going some Time after upon Business, by the Door, I
had a Messenger who followed me, and entreated me to look in once more upon
him, whom I found a very pitiful Object. The Mother told me she had carried him
to some of our H -- l Surgeons, and that one of them had proposed a couple of
Issues betwixt his Shoulders: I did then indeed recommend the cold Immersion,
as believing, (if the Skull was no way damnify'd) the lost Tone of the Parts
might thereby be restored, and the Spring of the Nervous Fibers much
invigorated; besides, I knew our Authors, in Case of the venomous Bites of a
Dog, recommend the Salt Water dipping above all other Remidies; however this
Experiment was luckily omitted, and what ever after indicated the Fracture, and
consequently the Use of the Trepan, I am not certain: supposing that Mat^^r
might at length issue forth from ^^e Brain, and raise some pappy Tumor, or the
Bone growing loose, ^eing long steeped therein, might pro^ably give Way, and
discover some ^inching of the Child upon a hard ^^mpression of the Fingers: Be
this is it will, the next News I heard, was, that the Head was opened by one of
^he Surgeons, who had before seen him ^n the Company of a since deceased
Physician; where a Fissure or a Fracture ^as discovered, an Absces underneath,
^he Membranes rotten, (as I was ^nform'd) and the Child expired two ^r three
Days after the Operation. This, Gentlemen, is the Case truly ^tated; for which
I was censured by ^ne of my Brothers, who had but some Weeks before, discovered
nothing himself, or ordered any thing more than a couple of Issues inter
Scapulas. The sorrowful Mother, notwithstanding this Reflection, was so
sensible of my Care, and that her Frenchman only was blame worthy: that
sometime after, I received her promised Thanks for those few Visits I had made
her, with this Account of her Child's Death.

I mention not this I Will assure you Gentlemen, so much by Way of Recrimination,
as to give a Hint, how it behooves us, at all Times and in all Places, to be
very tender of each others Reputation. I am, much Honored Sirs (withal due
Observance)

Your Respectful Brother and Humble Servant, Daniel Turner.
From without Bishopsgate August 1st, 1709.
FINIS.
ERRATUM.
Page 58. l. r. read Quadrangular.

image of a human cranium together with skull fragments A View of a Fractur'd
Skull, taken from a Child of Mr S. R.s aged 6 Years; who was ^ounded on ye
24th. of Feb.y 1708/9. and li^^ ye 23d. of May following; 3 lunar Months and 4
Days: Most part of ye Time Brisk (...) Lively: at last died Convuls^^
T. Slater Sculp.


A REMARKABLE CASE IN Surgery, etc.
ON the 24th of February, 1708/9. I was called in much Have, to a Child about
the Age of Six Years, who was just then brought out of Moor-Fields, wounded by
a Catstick, as he was sitting at some Distance from a Cock, set to be thrown
at; where a young Fellow, missing his ^^m, unfortunately struck the Child over
the Head, and knocked him down. He was taken up for dead, and continued
speechless for some ^ime.

Upon examining the Head, I perceived a small Wound on the right Side, which
had bled freely, and laying my Fingers hard upon the Part, under a Sort of
Quagmire of grumous Blood, I found there must be a considerable Depression of
that Part of the Scull.

Whilst I was delivering my Prognostic of the Child's great Danger, and telling
them of the Necessity there was to make Way to the Fracture, by removing some
Part of the Scalp, the Boy began to cry and fell a vomiting. Having no
Assistant then by, nor Dressings suitable to the Operation: I contented my self
for the present with the common Restringents for staying the Flux: sending for
a Barber to shave that Side of the Head, whilst I opened a Vein in the Arm, and
took about Six Ounces of Blood; then applying a Defensative over that Part of
the Head, I rolled up the same, intending to proceed farther, (if Necessity so
required) the same Evening; at what Time I found my little Patient perfectly
sensible, but complaining of his Headache, still throwing up all he ^ook. I
ordered the following Julep ^o be taken two or three Spoonfuls betwixt whiles,
and left him for that Night.

Aq. Ceras. nigr. iiij.

Cinam hordeat. j.

Aq. Paeon. C. ss.

Sir. Caryoph. vj.

Misce pro Julapio.

The next Day I called in Mr. Blundel, and together visiting, we found the
Child had been hot and restless all Night. His retching to vomit having left
him: When we had taken him out of Bed, and placed him in a good Light, I took
off the Bandage and Dressings, and passing a Probe into the Wound, plainly felt
the Cranium for a great Compass, denudated of its Covering.

I began to draw a semicircular Line on the Outside of the Depression, as a
Direction for my Knife; and another perpendicular from the one Point to the
other; that we might feel the Extent of the Fracture, before we removed any
more of the Scalp. The^ whilst Mr. B -- kept the Head steady, I cut through my
half Circle to the Cranium, and found I was just beyond the Edge of the
fractur'd Bone; but drawing my Knife upon the straight Line, it slipped in a
considerable Distance from the Superfice unawares; which Mr. B -- perceiving, I
withdrew the same to make Way for his Finger, by which he discovered so great a
Vacuity, that we concluded the Bones were beat through both Meninges into the
Substance of the Brain.

Upon this, he approved of my making another Semicircle, and taking off the
Scalp on the opposite Side, by which we might have the whole Fracture in full
View, accordingly I dispatch' the Work, and took from the Scalp a Circle, in
all as large, or somewhat larger than a five Shilling Piece: when immediately
we discovered this vast Fracture and Depression (exactly enough delineated in
the following Table) of four Angles, sunk so low beneath the Surface of the
other Part of the Cranium, as to make a Cavity sufficient to contain near two
Ounces of Liquor.

The outward Table was broke all round, whilst the inward was only bowed: upon
which Account there was no room for an Elevator, or indeed any other
Instrument, by which we could hope to raise up the deprest Bones, without the
Help of the Trepan. The Terebra was proposed, but concluded insufficient as
well as hazardous; insufficient to lift up the Bones, unless we could go quite
through, and hazardous by going through, of wounding the Dura Matter; which if not
lacerated by the prodigious Stretch, must needs bear tight against the Infide
of the fractur'd Bone. The Trepan in so young a Child was thought likewise to
have its Danger: the Membrane in young Children lying high, and in a Manner
continuous to the Inside of the Scull.

However, here was no room for long Delay, the foresaid Part subjacent, being
so wonderfully oppressed by the Points of the Bones, through the Clefts of which
we might perceive a manifest Oscillation. Yet for the present we could do
nothing more, being disturbed in our Work, by a Flux of Blood from an incised
Artery, to the Mouth of which I clapped a small Button of Lint, dipped in equal
Parts of Bole and Vitriol, filled up the Cavity and Edges with dry Lint, and a
Compress wrung out of Oxycrate and Albumen Ovi, strow'd with Farina Tritici, to
be laid over all, and rolled the Head up again for this Second Dressing.

I visited in the Evening, and found a quick Pulse, Thirst and Headache;
especially toward the Forehead, but no Vomiting. He was very sensible, and
indeed bore up beyond Expectation, yet in Consideration to the Disturbance we
had given to the whole animal Economy, by that Morning's Work, I prescribed
for him as follows;

Aq. Ceras. nigr. j.

Paeon. C. ij.

Sir. de Meconio ss.

Misce, and exhibeatur hac nocte Hora Somni.

As a Preparative to this Draught, a Clyster was administered the same Evening.
Notwithstanding all this, the Child slept little and unquietly.

Next Day, which was the 26th, I called upon my Brother B -- who was himself
now laid up with the Gout. It was agreed for that Day, to defer taking off the
Dressings, in Consideration of the Flux, unless some more threatening Symptom
should appear, to obviate which, I directed thus;

Pull. e chelis Canc. C.

de Gutteta aa gr. X.

Misce sumat quamprimum, repetatur mane and vesperi, vel sepius pro re nata,
superbib. Cochl. ij. Julapij sequentis.

Aq Ceras. nigr. llss.

Paeon C. j.

Spt. Lavendul. ss.

Sir. Paeon. C. j.

Misce fiat Julap.

The 27th, I visited again by myself, found the Child somewhat feverish, but
without other ill Symptom.

Having his Head supported betwixt the Hands of an Attendant upon the Nurse's
Knee, I began to malax the Bandage and Dressings, (very stiff by reason of the
effused Blood) with a little Ol. Rosarum, and after some Time cleared all away:
taking Care to secure the Application upon the wounded Artery, which from the
first Dressing bled no more.

I now could plainly perceive the Extent of the Fracture, which lay all in
View, and finding it would be fruitless to attempt the Reduction of the deprest
Bones to their proper Places (which were so fast locked in) by any other Means,
resolved to make Way for setting on the Trepan.

Whilst I was making ready, I ordered a Stuph to be expressed out of the
following Decoction, and applied over the Wound.

Summit. Centauri

Hypericon. aa Mj.

Flor. Chamomel. Mss.

Betonic.

Rorismar.

Lavendul. aa P. ij.

Bulliantur in A. F. ad Consumptionem dimidij, addendo sub finem, Vini alb.
lbss. reservetur Colatura per fotu.

Having applied two or three warm Flannels, and filled up the Cavity with dry
Lint, I concluded the best Part for Trepaning, as likewise for the Elevator,
would be above the Fracture: which being seated on the right Bregma was bounded
forwards by the Coronal, backwards by the Lamdoide, upwards by the Sagittal,
and downwards by the Squammous Suture. And indeed so near to this latter (as
may be seen in the Figure hereto annexed) that there was not room for the
Trepan below. When I had therefore drawn a Circle above, within a quarter of an
Inch, or less of the broken Edge, I took out a proportionate Piece of the
Scalp, almost the Compass of a milled Shilling, which my Patient never winch'd
at: although he told his Nurse the Day before, he thought at his first cutting,
we would not leave him 'till we had taken off all the Flesh from that Side of
his Head. I had now no Occasion for any Restringent, so that dressing up the
Bones all dry, I applied a large Pledgit of Liniment upon soft Tow over the
Lips, and rolled up his Head for that Day.

His Drink, which was indeed his whole Diet, was Milk and Water boiled
together, Barley-Water, Watergruel, and betwixt whiles a small Sack Whey. A
Clyster was repeated also at this Time, and his Anodyne at Night.

This Preparation being made for the Work, I went to Mr. Warden Herenden,
stated the Case, and appointed a Consultation at Three next Day, after Dinner;
desiring he would not fail me; that I might be justified in the Operation.
Accordingly, on the 28th, being provided of a good Instrument, with a Bore of
the smallest Sise, and a suitable Apparatus for the Work: At the Hour appointed
he called on me, and ^^tring my Patient's Chamber, when ^e found him on his
Feet, walking about the Room, he seemed amas'd, ^s ready to surmize the Case
had ^een mis-stated, and that probably we might spare the Operation. I was not
in the least concerned hereat, well knowing he would alter his Sentiments, upon
a Sight of the Wound; and taking off the Dressings, he seemed astonished that a
Child, under such a violent Pressure of that most noble Part, (the Source of
all the other Membranes, if we may trust a late new System) from the forcibly
intruded Bones, should labor under no worse Symptom than a Headache, and be in
a Condition to walk about the Chamber.

Pleased with the Child's Courage, he placed him against the Nurse's Bosom, and
took upon himself to keep his Head steady, whilst I began to work with the
Trepan; observing that admirable Axiom, Festina lent, I gently turned the
Instrument, now and then taking it up to clean, 'till I had got to the Diploe:
when lifting it out again, brushing off the Sawdust, and laying the Pin aside,
I proceeded to work farther; examining with my Probe betwixt whiles, where I
was got through, and bearing down upon those Parts where I found I was not.

In few Minutes the Work was dispatched, and being willing to have it out as
clear as I could, without having Occasion to shiver off any Part that might
remain undivided by the Saw, I thought to pass gently a Turn more upon the
adhering Side, and so remove my Instrument; when at first somewhat surpised,
we mis'd the perforated Bone, and were ready to surmise, the Membrane being
somewhere lacerated underneath, had let it in, and returned by its own proper
Elasticity again to its Convexity; but looking into the Instrument we found it
in the Bore. I hint this as a Memoir for the young Artist: for 'twas not truly
my Intention to have taken it so out: Nor did I suspect, that one gentle Turn,
would have cut asunder that Part which just before ^^d seem to stick to fast,
to hazard ^^e breaking off.

The Warden was pleased however ^ith the Operation, the Edges of the ^one were
so exactly smooth and ^ven, that we needed no Lenticular to ^ome after, for to
polish the Work. The Dura Matter appeared fair, though somewhat storid from its
Inflammation: And now we immediately set about the lifting up the deprest Bones;
in order to which passing carefully my Elevator through the Perforation, and
heedfully observing that the Membrane might not slip between my Instrument, and
the fractur'd Bone I was about to raise; I began to lift, having placed the End
of the said Instrument under the Center of the largest and most likely of them;
when bearing up with considerable Force, I found it would not stir: on which
Account I drew back my Elevator, and arming its Shank with a soft Rag, placed
also a linen Bolster upon that Part of the Edge of the sound Cranium, which
was to be its Fulcrum.

Being thus provided, I conveyed it in once more, and with redoubled Force
perceived it began to give; continuing the same Force, it immediately flew up,
and shivered off the inner Table.

This Bone extracted, our Work was much facilitated, nor had we farther
Occasion to pass our Instrument through the Bore; for by shifting our Fulcrum, or
resting upon another Part we could command the other Pieces at our Pleasure.

There had been a Debate the Day before, betwixt Mr. B -- and my self, whether
after extracting one or two of the Bones, we should not leave the Remainder,
having raised them up to their Places, in expectation that they might
agglutinate, or unite by Intervention of a Callus; by which the Dura Matter
would be defended from lying bare so large a Compass, and our Work shortened,
in respect to the Cure, if such a thing might be accomplished. However finding
them all break upon their Elevation, and fearing some loose Angles might
irritate ^^e Membrane, creating to us more and greater Disturbance; it was now
^oncluded they should be all taken ^way, and very happily they were so, ^s
appears by the Sequel.

Having removed these four Pieces of Bones, of the exact Shape and Dimension
with those expressed in the annexed Scheme, the Dura Matter began to vibrate
strongly, and raised it self at the same Instant, to fill up the surprising
Chasm; which wiping gently with a Piece of a soft Sponge wrung out of a little
warm Claret, I presently covered that and the bored Part, with suitable Syndons
of white Sarsnet, dipped only in Mel Rosarum, continuing my dry Lint upon the
Lips, and having laid the Digestive over all, I rolled up his Head.

After the Work was over, he was carried to Bed, being refreshed with two or
three Spoonfulls of his Cephalic Julep.

From this Day our Work seemingly went on with a prosperous Aspect; the
Cephalalgye much abated, the Pulse grew calm and the Child lively; so
continuing for Four or Five Days. The Dura Matter, both in the Place of the
Perforation, as well as that where the Bones had been extracted, began to be
besprinked with little Grains of Flesh, only in the midst of this latter, there
appeared a kind of Slough, occasioned by the Points of the deprest Bones, which
by grating hard had rased the outward Membrane; to digest and hasten Separation
of which, I dressed those Parts with a little of the Balsam. Terebinth. added
to the Mel Rosarum.

No sooner was this Part mundify'd, and a Sort of granulated Flesh had clothed
the bare Membrane: but our Headache returned afresh with greater Extremity than
ever, the Symptomatic Fever and Restlesness also accompanied; so that on the
5th of March, about Five Days after the Operation, upon taking off the Bandage,
I perceived there had been a much greater Discharge than could be reasonably
expected from the outside Wounds; and removing the Dressings, to apply a Stuph
wrung out of the Fomentation, took notice of an offensive Smell, when looking
carefully upon the Membrane, thoro' a small Papilla, or Grain of the new
incarned Flesh, where the Slough had thrown off, there ouzed out a faetid
Matter from underneath.

Believing the Case to be desperate, I armed a small Pledgit with Linim.
Arcaei. dipping the same in the 'foresaid Mixture of Mel. Ros. and Bals. Tereb.
to apply on the Part, whence the Matter issued forth. The other Parts of the
Membrane I covered with the Syndons of Sarsnet, moistened only with the Mel.
Ros. and clapping the Edges of the Silk under the shivered Edge of the Cranium,
that the subjacent noble Part might not be offended thereby, I dressed as before
and rolled up the Head.

The next Day intending to make Apertion through the Meninx, and relieve the
Brain of the fluctuating Matter, I acquainted Mr. H --, told him what I had
discovered, and the Necessity of our farther proceeding.

March 6. we met in Consultation, where we found the Matter somewhat lessened
in its Discharge, though still abundantly too much. The Lips which, the Day
before were fallen, looking white and flabby, and the incarn'd Granules of
Flesh, upon the Membrane which were then sinking and of the same Color, had
now as it were revived, and put on a fresh Complexion; nor could we perceive
the least Drop of Matter, bursting through in any Part of the Membrane, or any
room for a Probe, where I had remarked it ouzing forth.

Upon these Considerations, though the Symptoms still kept up, without Remission,
I mean the Fever, Watching, and Headache, yet Mr. H -- surmising I might be
mistaken in my yesterdays Remark, or hoping the Matter (lodging only betwixt
the Duplicature) had made its Exit: persuaded me to dress up, and endeavor to
relieve the Child some other way; to which Purpose, upon further Consultation,
it was agreed, that I should presently open the Jugular on the same side, out
of which running briskly, and in a full Stream, we drew Six Ounces of Blood. A
Vesicatory was also applied to the Neck, and an Emollient Clyster thrown up in
the Evening. The Anti-epileptic Powders were repeated, with the Addition of two
Grains of Sal Vol. C. C. to each Paper: The Cephalic Julep ut antea. and if the
Headache did not remit by the next Day, Leaches were concluded to be set behind
the Ears, as also to each Temple.

The 7th, I called again, and understood by the Nurse the Child had a bad
Night; was then hot and restless, and cried out of his Head.

This Afternoon I took off the Dressings, perceived the Bandage and Compress
were fouled with the Matter, likewise the Pillow he had lain on, which
confirmed my belief that it was highly rational to make an Apertion through the
Dura Matter, and that without so doing, all other Endeavors would prove useless.

The Dressings taken off, I plainly observed from whence the Matter had come
forth, but could not find a Passage for my Probe, although there was a small Drop
of Matter in the Mouth of the Papillary Excrescens, the supposed Place of its
Vent. There being no Artist by to justify my Proceeding, I dressed up again as
before, the Warden having promised to meet me on the 8th, during which
Interval, so great a Quantity of the purulent Matter bad workt out, as to
afford some Relief to the Brain, so that the Symptoms grew milder: He tried at
this Dressing with his Probe, but could find no Entrance: The Wound looked
fresh, and the Incarning ruddy, though not much increased for 3 or 4 Days past.
However, (much contrary to my own Sentiments) I was again prevailed upon to
dress up, continuing my wonted Applications, and to wait a little longer, to
see what farther Time might produce, unless fresh Symptoms called for a
Penetration, of which I was to give notice.

Thus we continued to the 15th, the Pain 'twixt whiles remitting and returning,
a stinking Gleet with much Matter upon our Dressings: One Day we seemed to get
Ground, but the next lost it. The Lips again grew flaccid, and the Flesh upon
the Membrane loose and pallid; so that, resolving to wait no longer, I went
again to Mr. H -- and told him I should lose my little Patient, if he would not
comply with my dividing the Membrane: He readily offered me his Assistance, and
came according to his Appointment.

When we came into the Chamber, the Child was crying very dolefully of his
Head: There was a faetid Smell by the Bedside, from the putrid Effluvia,
arising from the pent up Matter: And though we were sensible there was far too
great a Quantity to proceed from the Wound, yet could we not, even at this
Dressing, discover the Orifice that had let it out. The Systole and Diastole of
the Membrane likewise hindering us, from apprehending any Fluctuation under our
Fingers: So that I cannot any ways blame, nor would I reflect by any Means upon
that Gentleman's Judgment and great Caution in this Affair; he having never
seen the Matter arising out of the incarned Flesh, as I had done, and might
think, perhaps, I was therein deceived.

I was at this Time extremely unwilling to dress again, 'till I had given a
freer Vent: and attempted the Search once more with my Probe, yet still without
Success: At last pressing hard down upon one Side of the strongly resiliating
Dura Matter, a small Drop of Matter blubbered out of the aforesaid Papilla,
which Mr. Warden perceiving, immediately took out a fine Probe from his Box,
and pressing gently down, got in; very readily giving Way to make an Apertion:
whilst his Probe which he bore up underneath, was to guide my Lancet: with
which Direction I passed the same in, and made a Wound about a Quarter of an
Inch in Length; when examining more narrowly with the Probe, we found (having
not the Discharge we expected) that it was got betwixt the Duplicature of the
Membrane; so that without Delay, examining again, he soon got under to the Pia
Matter, when raising up the Part as before with his Probe, I cut close to the
Side thereof, 'till I had made a Wound of half an Inch, by which we discharged
a vast Quantity of stinking Pus, interspersed with two or three small Globules
of the Cortex of the Brain.

By this last Incision, we were put to a Dilemma: a small Capillary Artery
being divided in the inmost Coat of this Membrane. Here was no Place for biting
Stiptics, nor indeed for the common Restringents; some Part of which, with the
utmost Care, must inevitably fall in upon the Brain, and there produce very bad
Effects, if not the most direful Symptoms: Nor was there, by any resisting Body
underneath, any hope that by Compression, we could stay the Flux.

The Moment of its spurting up, Mr. H -- with an armed Probe pressed close upon
the Mouth thereof, which did me double Service, by restraining its Bleeding and
dilating the Wound, whilst I conveyed a Dossil tied round with Thread, whose
End hung out for the secure Extraction, dipped in the abovementioned Mel
Rosarum, into a small Quantity of which, for correcting the Stench and
Putrefaction, I had beforehand instilled a few Drops of a Tinct: Myrh: drawn
in Whitewine. Clapping this down softly upon the tender Meninx, or rather upon
the Brain it self, the Pia Matter being here eroded, and having made up a second
Dossil somewhat tighter, and fitted to the Dimensions of the Wound, tied
likewise with a Thread as the other: whilst he took away his armed Probe, I
clapped it close upon the wounded Vessel, which being but Capillary, we were in
Hopes would be soon choked by this kind of Compression.

Being dressed up, he was carried to his Bed, Mr. H -- acquainting the Parents,
that his Case was truly doubtful, if not desperate absolutely: and I my self
indeed believing, I should not often dress him after. However considering with
the great Hippocrates, that there is a (...) in Morbis aliquibus, and having
found that there often occurs an aliquid Miraculi, in the wonderful Escapes of
these little Innocents: I resolved to leave nothing unattempted, justifyable by
Art, for this little Champion's Recovery.

Having no more to do at present, we took our Leaves, when I had first (for his
Refreshment) prescribed the following Julep.

Aq. Ceras. nigr. v.

Paeon. C.

Angelic. C. aa ss.

Sal. vol. oleos. gut. XXX.

Margarit. p. p. ss.

Sacch. albis. q. s.

Misce fiat Julapium perlat. cujus sumat Coch. ij. in languoribus, tempore usus
agitetur Phiala.

The next Day after opening the Membrane, the Fever and Headache did again
remit, our Patient was manifestly relieved: And what is a remarkable Instance
of the Truth of that grand Physical Axiom, Natura est sui Conservatrix: we
could perceive the Dura Matter plainly to do the Office of a Pump, throwing off
at every Systole a large Quantity of the offensive Matter, together with
several considerable Thrombi of the grumous Blood, which had been effus'd from
the bleeding Artery, and fallen inwardly upon the Brain.

At this Dressing likewise I apprehended some small Particles of the Brain,
mixed with the Matter and Blood aforesaid.

Thus we continued on the mending Hand: So that in few Days more our little
Patient began to call for his Play-Fellows, and walked sturdily about the
Chamber. The Matter daily lessened, grew perfectly sweet and well concocted:
although still some Quantity thereof (upon Removal of the Dressings) we could
discern to be lifted out by the Vibration of the Membrane, whose proper Elater
(as I just now hinted) well supplied the Place of the Antlia or Sucker in the
Pump or Syringe, casting off the offending Matter, so far as lay within the
Spheer of its Activity.

The same Applications were still continued leaving out the Tinct. Myrh. and
putting in daily a soft Dossil through the Wound, dipped only in the Mel Rosarum,
upon the Pia Matter; the Syndons being also moistened in the same, which were
laid upon the upper Membrane: 'till such Time as it was firmly incarn'd, and
the Flesh even with the Superfice of the Cranium; about which Time I left off
the the Mel. Ros. unless a small Pledgit upon the wounded Part of it: using
nothing but dry Lint, which however despicable, is surely the best of Dressings
at these Times, by which and a slight Touch of the Vitriol Stone, I kept off
the luxuriant Flesh (at sometimes troublesome, when improperly treated) and
disposed the Edges of the Bones for Desquamation, which in Seven Weeks Time was
accomplished: A small Part only, and that upon one Side, exfoliating visibly.

By the 10th of May, our incarned Flesh grew callous, the Pulsation underneath
but little perceptible, and a sound Cicatrix brought over to the very Edge of
the Apertion, which had been made upon the Dura Matter; and through which we had
still a Discharge of laudable Pus, though inconsiderable to what it had been.

We kept him all this while to his first Allowance of Water Gruel, Panado,
Barley-gruel, Milk, Pottage; his Drink chiefly Milk boiled with Water; but
growing brisk, and playing about as cheerfully as ever, when he had been purged
two or three times with Manna, he had the Liberty of a more free and airy
Chamber, and indeed trespassed so far as to get down Stairs, to eat (though
sparingly) fresh Meat every other Day; and could not be restrained from all his
usual Exercises and Diversions.

Our Business now was to contrive the keeping open the Wound I had made in the
Dura Matter, which was ready to close upon us, though of the utmost Consequence to
be kept therefrom, whilst there was any Matter to be dreined off.

Mr. B -- being got abroad, was easily prevailed upon to give us a Visit, and
having inspected the Work, passed in his Probe down to the Pia Matter. but
finding no slanting Sinus, on1y a direct one to the Brain, concluded there was
no dilating; for indeed, where could we cut, unless upon this lower Meninx, or
into the Brain it self. Our Work was all in the dark: Nor could we know the
Source of the Matter, daily discharging in small Quantity; so that all we could
do, was to prevent the Coalition of the Wound, hoping that in Time the said
Matter might be cleansed off, or insinuate it self up higher into the
adventitious Body that was there formed from the Vessels and Membranes
circumjacent, when we might with more Safety enlarge, and give a freer Vent.

For keeping the Wound open, which was the more difficult in Consideration of
the Part, I proposed a little Cannula, but he rather preferred a Bit of Sponge
Tent, which he thought would not only lie much easier, but imbibing the Matter,
discharge it at the same Time.

With this I complied, and put in a small Piece, fastened about with a String
on the upper Part.

Next Day, when I came to open the Wound, I found the Matter (as I feared) was
entirely pent in; nor had one Drop of it passed either by the Sides, or through
the Pores of the Sponge; but drawing the same forth by the Thread, a
considerable Quantity (collected in the Twenty Four Hours past) gusht forth,
and continued to be thrown off by the Systole of the Dura Matter, 'till it had
emptied the Cavity of all it could lift up.

The Orifice being now enlarged by the Tent: I applied a small Pledgit of
Liniment on the outside; having beforehand dropped in with a Feather, a Drop
or two of Mel Ros. and observed this Way of Dressing, still breaking asunder
the uniting Fibers, with my Probe, where they were ready to coalesce; and
dipping its End in Oil, besmeared the Lips of the Wound, by which Means the
Matter which became now again inconsiderable, made its Way without Obstacle.

And thus we continued to the middle of May; our young Gentleman growing
fleshy, and enjoying a better State of Health than he had done some Years
before.

About this Time, meeting my Neighbor Dr. Morton, and my Brother Blundel, in
Consultation at another Place; and passing by my Patient's House, I invited
them to walk in, where they saw him dressed, and took a View of the extracted
Bones. Mr. B -- had the Curiosity again to examine the Wound, and having the
Probe straight down for about half an Inch, discovered a slanting Sinus, not
before observed, as very likely but lately made: when drawing it forth, to bend
the End, he passed the same in again, and lifting up the Extremity, we could
perceive it near an Inch distant from the Place it entered.

Having made this Discovery, I resolved, if the Discharge continued much
longer, or any Symptom returned, to cut into this Cavity: For I had taken
Notice that several of our late Dressings had been disturbed from the Child's
Scratching: Insomuch that although the same Bandage was all along continued, yet
by the Disturbance from breeding of Lice, from Dandrif, or Humor under the
Cuticle some one or all these Causes, there grew so troublesome an Irching,
that in the Night he had got all off: The Wound was upon closing, and a dry
crusty Scurf, or caked Matter had choked up the Orifice.

The same Day the Bystanders had observed a Sort of Rigor had seized him,
which went off in a Moment. Whilst I was dressing him next Day, I perceived
somewhat of that Kind, and asked him what he ailed, he replied briskly enough,
he could not tell, nor could he help it.

The Wound was again opened by the Digestive I had applied the Day before; and
the scabby Crust cast off, with a small Quantity of Matter as usual. To prevent
the like Inconvenience of rubbing off his Dressings, I laid over my Pledgit a
more adhesive Emplaster, clipped the Hair close, and rolling up his Head,
carefully cautioned him to keep his Hands off.

I was very much concerned at these Rigours, and fearful lest the Matter
should have got into the Blood, or tainted the Nerves, by insinuating it self
through the Cortical Part of the Brain: but did not expect the Surprise so
sudden; for early the next Morning I was alarmed with the News, that the Child
was seized with a violent Convulsion. I hastened, and found him senseless, very
strongly twitcht on the contrary Side: The Tendons of that Arm and Leg
especially, perpetually relaxing and again contracting: Upon which, 'till they
thought fit to send for a Physician, I prescribed thus to their Apothecary.

Aq. Ceras. nigr.

Rutae aa iij.

Paeon. C. j.

Tinct. Castor. ss.

Sir Paeon. C. j.

Misce, and detur Cochl. ij. quam primum: repetatur tertia vel quarta quaque
hora.

Pull. de Gutteta j

Salis vol. C. C. gr. ij.

Fiat Pulvis, exhibiatur mane and vesperi.

Spt. Lavend. C. ij.

Sumat. gut. x. in omni haustulo Liquoris appropriati.

Decoct. com. p. Clyster. Ilss.

Ol. Chamomel.

Rutae aa j.

Misce, injiciatur statim. Applicentur vesicatoria Brachiis internis, and pone
utramque aurem

Having made this Provision, the best I could surmise, for his Relief; whilst
the Medicines were preparing, I had him taken out of Bed, and strongly
supported upon the Knees of an Attendant. I took off the Dressings, which were
in a Manner dry, and passing a Probe, (there being no Room either for Scissars
or Directour) into the Sinus discovered two Days before, and turning in the
same, I felt the End as formerly: taking out my Knife, I carefully cut through
upon my Probe, and let out the same: In doing this we lost no Blood; nor can I
say indeed any Matter was let out; so that filling up the Wound I had now made,
with a Dossil armed with Liniment, and moistened with the warm Bals. Terebinth.
with a Pledgit of the same over it, and the usual Plaster, Compress and
Bandage, he was laid again in his Bed, where presently after I perceived the
Spasms grew milder.

Returning to him in the Afternoon, I heard they had held him in the Manner I
left him, for near an Hour; that he had been seized with two or three Fits
since, but from the first Paroxysm they observed a Palsy on the Arm of the
Side affected, which was thereby become incapable of Motion; for the Relief of
which I thus directed;

Ol. Lumbricorum j.

Spt. Lavend. C.

Aq. Regin. Hungaric. aa ss.

Ol. Succin.

Petrol. aa. ij.

Misce, and inungatur Spina Dorsi, tepide, mane and vesperi, a Nucha ad Coxygem
usque.

In the Evening I returned again, found the Child sensible: his Fits had been
off and on, at two or three Hours Distance: He then complained of being sick,
and retcht to vomit; his Headache also was very troublesome.

May the 18th, which was the Day after these Convulsions, I undrest his Head,
and found all things had an ill Aspect: The Wound was indigested, the Lips
puffed up, and risen to a considerable Height above the rest of the Parts,
discharging only a bloody Serum.

I fomented again as I had done through the whole Course of my Attendance,
ordering each Time the Fotus was taken from the Fire, two Spoonfulls of the Aq.
Hungaric. to be put therein, applied several warm Stuphs, and with my Digestive
made up as before. At this Time I observed a Lypothumia, on which Account, I
hastened them to lay him down in his Bed, administering some Drops of the Sp.
Lavend. in a little of the Julep.

He continued sensible all that Day, still crying out of his Head, but at Night
was delirous at some Times.

The next Day I perceived the Wound was crude still, and no Sign of Matter: The
turgid Lips turning livid, and a very languid Oscillation underneath. The whole
Membrane, so far as had been bare, to the very Edges of the fractur'd Cranium,
was stangely huft up or elevated.

I passed my Probe down cautiously upon the Pia Matter, and could feel all
round, a pappy Excrescens, which had incarn'd upon the lower Membrane, or was
formed together with the upper and the adjacent Vessels, from whence arose
(upon drawing back my Instrument) a small Quantity of Matter.

I now ventured to drop in a little of my Bals. Terebinth. to the Bottom of the
Wound, and as to the rest made up as the Day before

May the 20th, he grew comatose, crying faintly now and then, his Head, and
dropped asleep. That Night his Spasms returned, with which the Paralytic Arm was
chiefly and severely handled, The Wound tending to gangreen: which I
scarrify'd, snipping off some Part of the Lips at the same Time, but had little
or no Blood following either my Scissars or Lancet.

Seeing now no Advantage to be gained, but only Disturbance to the Child, I
dressed him for that Time, with a somewhat warmer Application, on Account of the
Gangreen; concluding to give neither my self, nor him, any more Trouble.

That Day and next the Convulsions were seldom off; and when they were, he was
perfectly stupid: Sometimes indeed he would attempt to speak, but could not.

However, on the 22d, finding him still alive, I thought it would be deemed an
Omission, if I did not inspect his Wound: And as he lay along, I took off the
Dressings, found the Lips flabby and subsiding, so far from appearing to
digest, that every thing tended to a suddenly approaching Death. Having covered
up his Head again, I took my Leave.

The next Day, which was the 23d of May, I had Notice given me, he was dead.

Thus did this little Hero, of truly Manly Courage, who had struggled under,
and got through so many Difficulties, and seemed now in vulgar Estimation, to
have been well and out of danger for a long Time past, at last decease, after
Fourscore and Four Days. And indeed had there been nothing more than the
Fracture and Depression (how desperate soever they might seem) yet his Cure had
been completed in a much shorter Time. But considering the large Abscess upon
the Pia Matter, its Rupture or Erosion, from whence there issued (as Mr. H --
can testify) some of the outward Substance of the Brain, 'twas little Wonder
Nature should succumb and baffle Art: But very surprising, that for three
Months Time, whilst Matter lay upon this noble Part, neither Palsy, Spasm,
Sopor, nor so much as a Vertigo should invade; but on the contrary, that the
Child should eat, drink and sleep, as actively tumbling about with his
Companions, and as ready (if he had not been prevented) to stand upon his Head,
as any of 'em all.

I am very confident, I should not have magnified my own Judgment, had I
succeeded in this Cure, which the Gentleman aforesaid was pleased to allow
would have been one of the greatest had been performed in England; and if so, I
think I may say, Elsewhere. As it was, I thought there would intervene somewhat
worthy of Remark; and accordingly (as I generally do of rare Cases) I made this
Ephemeris; which if it should not furnish Matter of Instruction, as I hope it
may, to my younger Brother; yet will it let him see, how near he may come to
the Accomplishment of his Work, and at last meet with Disappointment.

The Day after his Death, I took with me a small Capital Saw, and a dissecting
Knife, and placing the Head to my Advantage, I divided the Scalp from the Base
of the Occiput, close by the Sagittal Suture, to the Top of the Forehead; then
turning it down, together with the Temporal Muscle, which I raised at the same
Time, over the Ear of the wounded Side of the Head: With the back of my Knife I
cleared off the Pericranium: And with my Saw, (guided by a Line of Ink I had
drawn beforehand, on the Top as well as on that Side,) I got through the Skull;
which being removed with the End of my Spathula, the right Hemisphere of the
Brain, I found would come into View, by only clipping off the Dura Matter. But
before I began to meddle with this latter, having raised up the Side of the
Skull, I took special Notice of that Part of the Membrane which I had formerly
divided or cut into, and of the subjacent Pia Matter and Cerebrum.

I perceived there had been engendered a fibrous Substance, but whether
springing from the tender Meninx, or complicated together of both Membranes and
Vessels, was not so easy to determine. Two or three Days before, it seemed to
be an Inch thick, but after Death, growing flabby, it parted upon the least
Touch, and was fallen off from the upper Membrane, though here and there
continuous with the under one.

When I had removed this interposing Body, I expected to find some latent
Abscess upon the Substance of the Brain, at least upon the Pia Matter: Where all
that was conspicuous (an Indication there had been such) were the larger
Ramifications of the Sanguiferous Vessels, upon the Surface of the Membrane,
whose Cavities, instead of their naturally contained Cruor, were implete with a
transparent Pus: More especially those upon the anterior Lobe, under the Os
Frontis, where the Headache was at first, as well as at the last, continually
pointed to.

Cutting into the Cortical Part of the Brain, I found all free and clear, as in
a sound State: The Ventricles likewise, the Oblong Marrow, also the Cerebell
were firm, and to the Eye untainted.

Being now minded to take a View of the other Side, I divided the Falx, and
(without sawing off that Part of the Cranium) with my Hand, brought out the
left Hemispheer: The Vessels on whose Surface, in like Manner with the right,
were conspicuously turgid with the same Matter, a little of which, here and
there, was shed upon the Cortex of the Brain: At the first Sight, I thought it
might lie on the Outside of the Pia Matter; but going over gently with the Back
of my Knife, and wiping also with a soft Sponge, I found it not removed: So
that in several Places, opening the Membrane with the Point of my Lancet, I
perceived it lay immediately upon the Substance of the Brain, and issued out
through each Apertion.

Having thus far satisfied my own Curiosity, I placed the Brain where I found
it, and fitting to, the divided Skull, drew over the Scalp: which stitching up,
and with the Point of my Needle raisingthe short Hair, to cover the said
Stiches: 'Twas no easy Matter for the nicest Surveyor, to perceive that the
Brain had been taken out and inspected, or the Cranium meddled with: But this
only by the bye.

It may be now expected, I should descend to the AEtiologye, and rationally
solve, or mechanically explain the foregoing Phenomenon: But as to this, I
think I may as well in general confess my Ignorance, as pretend to unfold that,
for another Person's, which I never could elucidate to my own Satisfaction.

'Till the Business of Sensation is better unravelled, than hitherto it has
been, or I fear will be; die Disorders of the Nervous System may be
conjectured, but not clearly demonstrated.

Whither there be any such Bodies as the Animal Spirits, is not yet universally
agreed on: That the Source of these Disorders lies somewhere in the (...), and
that the Nervous Bodies, thence arising, are some how or other the Causae sine
qua, of Motion and Perception, seems incontestable. Thus far we may go, and
trace out many Appearances: Thus also from the bare Motion of the Particles of
Matter, as they happen to be this or that Way modified, may we by Mechanic Laws
account for sundry Observables in the Animal Structure: But how mere Matter,
which Way soever figured, can at first give, guide, and govern the Impetus is
unaccountable. It Is here that the poor. Twilight of Humane Understanding is
truly nonplust. And what we argue must be still a posteriori: We may judge,
having aforehand discovered the Effect produced, that the like under similar
Circumstances, will be brought forth again: Thus, the Quod sit, is apparent,
but the Quomodo, out of Sight.

It Is manifest the Blow upon our little Patient's Head, was the remote Cause of
his Death, by occasioning a Rupture of some of the Vessels upon the Brain,
which shedding forth their Blood upon this noble Part, did there (being not
discharged) produce an Aposteme: And when the purulent Matter, was, afterward,
imbibed or absorbed by some of the said Vessels; it might in the Way of
Circulation, raise a Febrile Effervescence: And it is very rational to believe,
that the same Matter also did impress a Taint upon the Nerves, exciting
together an Orgasmus, to the Subversion of the whole Economy.

But what these putrid Bodies are, which did the Mischief, or in what their
Essence does consist, how, or after what Manner, and why they came chiefly to
affect the Arm on the contrary Side, how after a few Minutes they brought on a
Paralysis, or how the Nervous Fibers with the Tendons of the Muscles, in that
Arm and Leg, came so regularly and alternately to be haled by the direful
Spasms, is what I know little or nothing of.

It Is true, I might make some Noise, and talk of venomous Exhalations, or
malign and poisonous Miasmata, which insinuating into the Fibers, like so many
Stimuli, must needs twitch and convell those exquisitely sensible, the Nervous
Bodies. With some I might denominate them Acids: With others, Atkelyes: Or with
our curious Mathematical Gentlemen, I might essay to investigate the
Configuration of their Parts, whether Cubes, Cones, Prisms, etc. and so let you
into the Way of their Operation upon the Animal Spirits, or the Nervous
Filaments: And when I had gone thus far, a judiciously learned Man would see I
had harrangu'd to very little Purpose: And that I might as well have owned, it
was some how or other the Effect was brought about, but which Way I could not
tell.

Let the Adept in Atheism, here strut and pride himself in his Recourse to a
Mundane Soul, or his Omnipotent Nature: Let him take up with those
unintelligible Terms of his Archaeus, or his Plastic Powers, whilst I, who
never yet shook off the Sacred Ties of Religion, and am self conscious how
great a Debtor I am to His Munificence, look up to the prime Architect, the
great (...), and cordially, as well as orally, acknowledge, that it was HE that
made me, and not I my self, that Man is fearfully and wonderfully formed, being
perfectly ignorant of the How, and when he was so.

In this Confession, I have the Suffrage of the greatest Men of the Faculty:
Such, I mean as the renowned Harvey, and the famous Lower: The latter
ingeniously acknowledging that it was the Prerogative of God only, who
searches the Secrets of the Heart, to know the Reason of its Motion also.

To these, I may well add, that incomparable Benefactor to Medicine, and
therein, to Mankind, the judicious Sydenham: who on this Topic, thus expresses
himself;

Neque hoc mirum est, cum long (imo supra omnem humanum captum long)
credibilius sit nos Misellos homunciones, ab illustri vitae lucisque Regione
exulantes, Methodum qua in fabricanda Machina usus est sapientissimus Artifex,
capere millatenus posse; quam fabrem ferrarium rudem prorsus and imperitum,
nescire quo pacto concinnetur Automaton horarum rarum index, cujus Structura
and Motus exquisitissimam Artis Elegantiam prae se ferunt. Sicuti de facto
constat Cerebrum omnis tam Sensus quam Motus fontem esse, tum etiam and
cogitationum and Memoriae Officinam, and tamen non est possibile a
diligentissima ejus inspectione contemplationeve mentem usque adeo illumitrari,
ut intelligere possit quo pacto Substantia ita crassa and quasi Pulpa quaedam
neque operis, ut videtur, usque adeo affabre elaborati, usui ita nobili and
facultatibus tam praecellentibus queat sufficere, neque exinde assignare quis
potis est, qua ratione ex Naturae ejus vi and Structura partium, sive haec sive
altera ista Facultas necessario fuerit exerenda. Epist. ad Gulielm. Cole.

I hope this Excursion will be deemed pardonable, in which I was willing to
take Notice of the vain Arrogance of such as fancy nothing to be insolvable by
their (supposedly) unbounded Comprehension.

I must confess, I would not willingly by any Means, discourage that most noble
and useful Study of the Mathematics, whose Improvements are so advantageous, so
great and profitable to the Public, as well as satisfactory and pleasant to
each Proficient. But yet I cannot see, that Medicine, strictly speaking, will
be much advanced thereby: Nor how the Fluids or Humors of the Body, (from a
Thousand imperceptible Accidents diversifying their Texture) are at all
compatible with the strict and plain Rule of Lines or Figures.

I am not unacquainted how many pretty Hints are given, how many probable
Truths unveiled, for this and future Ages to build some farther Discoveries
upon, in that most excellent Baglivian Tract, De Motrice Fibra. Yet surely
those who have been entirely ignorant of Baglivi's System, have done excellent
Service to their Country in the Faculty of Physic: And truly for my own Part,
I never expect to find more real Advantage accruing to Mankind in general, this
Way, by the whole Clan of Phylosophic and Mathematical Physicians,
(notwithstanding some Modern Flourishings) than has already, by that most
diligently observing and heedfully reflecting, the last of the 'foremention'd
Authors. Whatever others may opine, I neither know, nor am solicitous, being my
self well satisfied, that nothing short of Omniscience, will ever be able to
bring Medicine to bear strictly with Mathematics.

How improvable the Humane Intellect may be in its new Clothing, Futurity must
determine: It is at present manifestly bounded, and that (in Spite of all our
proud Pretenses) to a narrow Compass: So that the most knowing amongst us,
knows truly only this, that the all powerful and immense Being, who has
geometrically fabricated these Bodies of ours; and observed a just Number,
Weight and Measure in his Works: or in other Words, the supreme (...), who gave
Life to Man, the undoubted Masterpiece of the Sublunary Creation, fitted the
great Spring of Motion, and set all the lesser Wheels a going in the most,
wonderful Automaton: That it is He, I say, and He alone who can, and does
foresee the Result of all the several Particles of Matter, traversing the
Machine, under the Variety of each or all their several Combinations.

Some Inferences by Way of Corollary, from the preceding Discourse.
1. THAT Wounds into the Brain, are not always Mortal.

2. That so far as the Pia Matter circumvolves, or enters into the Gyrations of
the Cortical Part, there is a Medium of Unition, or a Basis to incarn upon: So
that although this Part of the Brain be shed, the sick or wounded may recover:
Nay that although great Portions of the same work out, we must nor desperately
forsake the Patient, since the shattered Edges of this Membrane may fortunately
(however unexpectedly) concide and coalesce, to prevent the farther Eruption,
and afford the said Medium to incarn upon. This conceded, it follows,

3. That Wounds upon the Dura Matter, how dubious soever, are by no Means to be
accounted desperate, and that it is justifiable Practice, after the Use of the
Trepan, the dreadful Symptoms not remitting, and the Membrane outwardly
discovering no apparent Cause, to make Apertion through for the Timely Discharge
of the extravasate Blood or Matter, underneath: The Want of this Apertion,
having rendered these Accidents, too often fatal.

4. That neither the Fracture, nor deprest Skull, how extraordinary soever they
might appear, were to be surmised, as the proper Causes of the Child's Death,
in the foregoing Narrative, much less the Solution of Continuity made by the
Lancet on the Dura Matter.

5. That the shedding some Portion of the Brain, as hinted by the first
Inference, was none of the deadly Causes: But,

6. That his Death was owing to the effused Blood, from some Vessel upon the
Pia Matter, which had been ruptur'd by the Concussion or Shock of the said
Vessel, from the Force of the Blow: Which Blood pent in (for Want of a
Discharge) had formed an Abscess, thereby deluging the Surface of the Brain
with Matter: And this, though continually dreining of, through the Orifice in the
upper Membrane, yet some Part thereof lying beyond the Elastic Power of the
said Membrane to raise up, and out of the Reach of Medicine to deterge and
mundisie, was at length imbibed by the Vessels, where missing the Salutary
Crisis, sometimes observed in the Empieme and Pluritic Cases, it was conveyed
by the Circulation to the Heart, and at length we are to suppose, some how
affected the Nervous Systeme, bringing on the fatal Spasm.

7. That the Brain (justly supposed the Fountain as well of Motion as
Sensation) is a Body senseless: That its Parts are not Homogeneous: That its
Substance is not strictly glandulous, nor properly medullary: That we may call
it Substantia sui-ipsius, vel proprii generis, or speaking plain Truth, we may
say, it is something, we know not what.

8. That we are very little acquainted with the Modus of Sensation, or Muscular
Motion, neither are we agreed, whether there be an Intromission to, or an
Emission from the Organ of the Species, to the Object, or vice versa: We know
as little how the same is conveyed to the common Sensory, or the Idaea there
formed by the Soul: Nor is it uncontroverted whether Sense in the common
Acceptance, is not better accounted for by simple Contact, after the Manner of
a Stroke upon a Line extended, which is no sooner given at the one End, than
felt at the other: Than by the Medium of those subtle Bodies, we call Animal
Spirits; which how fine soever, yet is so instantaneous a Motion by them, to
communicate the apprehended Object, altogether unintelligible.

9. That our Knowledge of the Causes and Effects of some nervous Distempers,
arrives but to a well grounded Guess or Rational Conjecture, and in Likelihood
will continue as inexplicable to the Humane Understanding, under its present
limited Condition, as is the Essence of the Soul it self: On which Account it
is more becoming a modest Man (however learned) to act the Skeptic rather than
the Dogmatist, with Relation to these obscure and intricate Phenomenon.

10. And lastly, that we must despair of bringing Medicine; under exact
Mathematic Discipline, 'till the Primordia, or 'till the intime Nature of the
Corpuscles, that make up the Body, are more clearly discovered to us: And that
we can foresee the several Ways that Matter may be impressed by a differing Turn
or a new Modification: Which will scarce fall out, 'till we our selves are got
into a higher Class of Beings than that of (too much self-conceited) Men. In
the mean while, though we decry neither Philosophy nor Mathematics, when employed
upon their proper Subjects, without which we are sensible no Improvement is to
be made in the Liberal or in Mechanic Arts: Yet can we not believe they will
stand either Physicians or Surgeons in so much Stead, as some fine spoken
Gentlemen, would induce us to believe, when they come to downright Practice.

FINIS.
An Explanation of the Table.
a. THE Fracture, with a Quandrangular Depression, as it appeared in Situ, when
the Scalp was removed by a Circular Incision. b. The Part on which was set the
Trepan. c. The fractur'd Bones contiguously placed, after they were raised by
the Elevator. d. e. f. g. A View of the same Bones separately, according to
their true Dimensions. h. The perforated Piece taken out by the Trepan, for the
more commodiously raising the deprest Bones. 1. The Os Frontis. 2. The right
Bregma. 3. Part of Os Occipitis. 4. Os Temporale. 5. Processus Mastoides. 6. Os
Jugale. 7. Os primum Maxillae Superioris. 8. Orbita Superior Oculi. 9. Orbita
ejusdem inferior. 10. Os Nasi. 11. Os Malae seu quartum Maxillae superioris.
12. Maxilla superior cum Dentibus. A. Sutura Coronalis. B. Sutura Squammosa. C.
Sutura Lambdoides.. Meatus Anditorius.


An Advertisement to the common Reader, for rectifying as common an Error.
WHereas it is usually reported, that after boring a Hole in the Skull, which
the Surgeons call Trepanning, there is a Silver or Gold Plate fixed into the
Hole, out of which the Bone was taken; this is intended to satisfy (if
possible) those over credulous People, that the same is a notorious Abuse on
their Belief: And if such a thing was ever seen in the Perforation, it was
after presently removed, by the Person concerned in the roguish Fraud.

It might seem amongst the more reasonable Part of Mankind, there should be no
Need of such an Information: Nor had I given my self a Trouble of this Nature
(for which I hazard being laughed at by every Artist) had I not frequently met,
as well with those of a discerning Faculty enough in other Matters, who had
swallowed this Delusion, as with the more easily deceived vulgar Apprehensions.

Whilst I was treating my Patient in the preceding Narration, a Person of more
Figure indeed, than Capacity, asserted to my Face as the most assured Truth,
that she had seen one of these Plates in a Skull just bored. A Second (as
cunning as the former) strenuously avouched that her own Husband, upon an
Accident having undergone this Operation, had a Plate she see put in, and which
many Years after, he carried with him to his Grave.

A By-stander looking over others Shoulders, whilst I was laying a Piece of
white Sarsnet, into the Hole made in the Child's Skull, which we call a Syndon,
(and which I verily believe has often contributed to this vulgar Error) went
away, and reported he had seen the Plate fixed in.

Now if they consider what Disturbance they meet with, if any extraneous Body
be thrust into the Flesh, which has no Quiet 'till removed, or 'till the Place
apostemates or festers, and throws it out: They would see the Impossibility of
this Plate's uniting with, or growing to the Bone, where it cannot lie long,
without putrefying the Flesh, rotting the Skull, and dropping in upon the
Brain: But if some Practitioners have been so base, as to contribute to this
egregious Imposition on Mankind, it is not strange that the People should spread
the Rumor, and deceive one another.

Thus I was told by a Surgeon used to the Sea (too many of whom are apt to take
the Traveller's Authority) who openly acknowledged, that under the Necessity of
a Gold Plate (which he put in, and after conveyed away) to fill up the Hole in
his Patient's Head, he had got more from him, than he could afterward, for his
Cure.

Farther, that we-may see the Nature and Prevalency of spreading Error. One of
my own Patients, as I have been informed, that she might appear the greater
Object, of their Wonder, though she knew every Time she told her Story, she was
telling a Lie of the first Magnitude: would often assert, she carried one of
these Plates in her Head; neither wanted she for Vouchers, amongst such as
fancied they could plainly feel it.

To put a final Stop therefore to this Error, so far at least as this
Publication reaches, and farther to gratisie the Inquisitive, who may want to
be informed how the Hole is filled up: They are to conceive, that a new Flesh
is engendered after few Days upon the Skin that covers the Brain: and raises
it self up even (by the Help of Art) to the outer Edge of the Skull, where soon
after it hardens into what the Surgeons call a Callus, the said Callus skinned
over, in some longer Time, becoming as hard as any other Part of the Skull it
self. For the Truth of which, let the still doubting, apply, themselves to
their own Surgeon.

ERRATA.
In. the Dedicatory Address,

PAge 3. l. 6. read Recoveries. P. 5. l. 7. r. Heretics. P. 6. l. 21. r.
Specificks. P. 16. l. 19. r. Remedies.

In the Case.

Page 2. l. 8. r. Skull. P. 5. l. 25. r. Ibid. P. 26. l. 22. r. Antlia. l. 25.
r. Sphere. P. 34. l. 3. r. ij. P. 47. l. 1. r. Alkalyes. l. 10. r. harangu'd.

These with some few other Mistakes of the Press in Pointing and Orthography,
the Reader is courteously requested to correct.

REmarks upon Mr. Martin's Account of the Venereal Disease, with some uncommon
Observations on that Distemper; particularly concerning the Gonorrhea, and
several unusual Ways of receiving that Infection.

To be had of Mr. R. Parker, at the. Unicorn under the Royal Exchange.


