THE PLAIN DEALER: BEING SELECT ESSAYS ON SEVERAL CURIOUS SUBJECTS, RELATING TO
FRIENDSHIP, LOVE, and GALLANTRY, MARRIAGE, MORALITY, MERCANTILE AFFAIRS,
PAINTING, HISTORY, POETRY,
AND Other Branches of POLITE LITERATURE.

Published Originally in the YEAR 1724. And now first Collected into TWO
VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

LONDON: Printed for S. Richardson, and A. Wild: And sold by A. BETTESWORTH,
J. OSBORN and T. LONGMAN, and J. BATLEY in Paternoster Row; W. INNYS, J.
KNAPTON, and C. RIVINGTON, in St. Paul's Churchyard; J. CLARKE, in Duck-Lane;
and J. LEAKE, at Bath. M.DCC.XXX.

THE PLAIN DEALER. No 58.
VOL. II.
Vulnus alit Venis and coeco carpitur igne.
VIRG. Connubio jungam stabili, propriamque dicabo.
Ibid.
FRIDAY, October 9. 1724.
A GREAT many are pleased, to be very rigid against Ladies, who appear first in
the Declaration of Love, as if acting against Custom, was sinning against
Right. As many make it their Tenet, that Men, if they but know a Woman loves
them, will, ungratefully shun her, and play Tricks of an unnatural Disdain. I
doubt not but the Gentleman, who is concerned in the following excellent
Letter, will give a Refutation to these mischievous Opinions; and show, for the
Honor of one Sex, and the Ease of the other, that they ought hereafter, to
sink among vulgar Errors.

To the PLAIN DEALER.
October. 8. 1724. SIR,
I AM an unhappy Young Woman, that want a little of your Plain Dealing, and
good Advice, to help me out in an Affair of the utmost Consequence to my Peace.
I am in too much pain, to make a long Introduction; therefore hope you will
excuse me, if I only send a short Sketch of my Misfortune, without staying to
pay my grateful Thanks, for your agreeable Weekly Entertainments; which I can
never enough Admire. I hope you will not think me troublesome, if I relate the
exact Situation of Life, I at present am in. I live in a fine Old Seat in
Surrey, which wants nothing to render it delightful, to a Person of my Temper.
Our Family consists of my Father (who is a Widower) an old Maiden Aunt, two
Sisters, and my Self. My Father is a very good Man, and employs himself mostly
in his Study. My Aunt is of a reserved Temper, therefore suffers us to keep but
little Company, especially with Gentlemen. There is only one Person allowed
that fatal Liberty! Whose Character I must make you acquainted with: But how,
alas! shall I do that? Yet if there is such a Thing as Perfection in Mankind,
he certainly is Master of it. He has so fine an Understanding in all Arts and
Sciences (allowed by his own Sex) so great a Knowledge in every thing that is
Polite and Agreeable, and, withal, so sweet a Disposition, that I only wonder,
I kept my Heart so long free from his irresistible Charms! I have been pretty
intimate with him these Three Years, but did not know, 'till within these Three
Months, that my Happiness or Misery, depended entirely upon him. In short, I
feel so violent a Passion in my Breast, that unless I have some speedy Relief,
Death will soon put a Period to my Sorrow! How often have I sat contemplating
his Virtues and Charms, 'till my Soul has almost dissolved away in Tenderness
and Love! I sigh, I die for him; while he views me with Cold Indifference, or,
at best, but Lukewarm Friendship: Tyrant Custom, and innate Modesty, forbid my
Tongue to utter the Tortures of my Heart. He sometimes laughs, and says, I am
all Charms; Oh! what would I give to have him really think so! He behaves
exactly alike to my self, and Sisters, and yet I cannot help being jealous, if
he speaks or looks at them. I am all Madness and Despair! I have not the Vanity to
think I can ever please a Man of his Sense and Judgment, and yet I go on to
love! Sometimes I think my constant Passion will be rewarded, and that he will
like me for my good Nature, which some People flatter me, and tell him, I have
a great Share of: And as it is a Qualification he very much admires, I strive
every Day, to improve it, and to command all those little Passions that are
incident to our Sex. Was I suffered to plead for my self, I could tell him,
What an obedient Wife I Would make him! How my Duty and Inclinations would both
concur, to please him in all Actions of my Life! When he was absent, I would
entertain my self with his dear Idea! and when he returned, meet him with
inexpressible Raptures! I could dwell for ever on the enchanting Subject: But
fear I should grow tiresome. This opening of my Grief has been some Relief. I
almost fear to have this published: I wish, yet dread, he should discover me. I
don't know what to do: Therefore rely wholly upon your Advice. If you print it,
correct the bad English; if you burn it, Remember and Pity

The poor LUCINDA!


WHAT constant Companions are Merit and Humility? How does this Lady conclude a
Letter that must charm every Reader. If you print it, correct the bad English.
It is too good to be corrected. Sincerity, and everlasting Tenderness shine
forth, in every Sentence. That Person who does not plainly perceive, that what
Lucinda has written, flowed from her Heart, must have his own Heart ill placed,
and removed out of the Way of Nature. If Men could write thus, no Woman of
Sense would be ever courted in vain: When she signifies so plainly that she
loves him from her Heart; how cordially does she labor to make that Plainness
still plainer, if possible, as she proceeds still farther in her Letter. These
plain Phrases are the Master-touches of Nature, and put Art out of Countenance.
This is the natural Simplicity, that makes the proud Scholar's Ornaments look
poor. Any body, that knows what Love is, will not barely read, but feel this
Lady's Letter. Old as I am, my self, how am I warmed, when, she expresses her
Tenderness. And, if every unconcerned Person be her Well-wisher, what Emotions
must this Letter be able to raise in the Bosom of that happy Man, whom it
concerns. Will not her Prudence, her vowed Obedience, her Study to please, her
Humility, and being unconscious of the greatest Worth in her self; her whole
Pride placed in admiring him, her Adoration, almost, of his superior Merit; her
desiring, and yet diffiding, to deserve him: Will not all these win over his
Soul to her? Where she describes to him, how she will behave in his Presence,
and how in his Absence; what a Figure must she make in the Imagination of this
admired Man? Must she not be as much admired, as she admires? Does she not
force him to what she so earnestly wishes? The God of Love lives, breathes and
acts, in every Line of it, and nothing less than THAT VERY MAN, who, as she
says, If there be such a thing as Perfection in Mankind, is certainly Master of
it, can be a suitable Prize, for her Merit.

IT has been reported concerning the finest Orator, of the present Age, that
the Lady, to whom he was married, grew his Wife, by being his Client. He had
long been acquainted with her Patience, Temper and Spirit, by her Manner of
soliciting her own Cause: He knew her Fortune, which depended upon it; she gave
him such full and elegant Instructions, as few professed Lawyers could have
Penned, and as scarce needed his own powerful Assistance and Amendment. He
asked her, who had drawn them? and being informed her self had been the
Compiler, it is no wonder, that so much Wit, in so agreeable a Person, made
that greatest of Orators, whose Addresses no Lady could withstand, from that
Moment, her Suitor, and, consequently, her Husband. --

I HAVE often wished, to be fully satisfied of the Truth of this little
beautiful Piece of Secret History. -- But whether it be true in all its
Circumstances, it was not invented by one, who meant to malign the Fame of that
Lord, or the Merit of his Lady, since a more glorious Accident could not well
be assigned, to have brought about the Marriage of so illustrious a Pair.

THE Letter, which now lies before me, is the most exquisite Plea that ever my
Eyes beheld. I know some who understand not what Love is, will be offended at a
Woman's first declaring her Passion. How sensible is the Fair One of this, when
she cries out, Tyrant Custom and innate Modesty, forbid my Tongue to utter the
Tortures of my Heart. -- By Lucinda's Leave, she herself, is too rigid and
severe against herself. Custom, indeed, does forbid it, and a Tyrannical Custom
it is, because, though pretendedly grounded upon the Colors of Modesty, it is
unjust, it is unnatural, and irreligious at the Bottom. -- Is it not modest, as
well as natural, to have an Inclination to be honorably married? She that has
not an Inclination, before she is asked, can hardly, with Truth, declare
Inclination: And if it was an Inclination virtuous and honorable from the
Beginning; it must have been equally virtuous and honorable from the Beginning
to have owned it. A dull and obstinate Concealment of the Truth, 'till it
happens to be extorted, is a Triumph given to Folly over Nature, for the Sake
of a mistaken Modesty. Both Sexes, if they will but reflect, must agree in this
Truth. --

WHAT Bachelor of good Sense would not be overjoyed to discover a Lucinda,
thus opening in his own Favor? The Man who disliked a Woman for declaring her
Approbation of him, would be like one, who secking for a Silver Mine, and
discovering by chance, a Golden one, should desert it, for no other Reason, but
because good Fortune had put it in his Way. --

THERE is a vast deal of Delight in contemplating the Beauties of a Woman's
Mind, who could write thus delicately. How happy would she make her Husband?
She would sooth any Sorrow that could reach him, and exalt his Pleasures into
Raptures; she would be his Comfort in Adversity, and gild and adorn his
Prosperity; she would gladden his Youth, and cherish his Age; give more Warmth
and Joy to the Summer of his Life, and yield Gaity and Refreshment to his
Winter; she would give Wings to his Business Abroad, and divert him at Home,
with her Conversation; she would fill up the Vacuities of Solitude, with
Discourse, that was preferrable to the Company of Wits; no Nights could be
tedious by her Side; and Daylight would be made more cheerful by looking upon
her.

BUT I draw toward a Conclusion as fast as I can, for fear of hindering any
longer, what I would speedily unite. I fancy my self to be this Minute, with my
Paper, in the Parlour of that fine Old Seat in Surrey. Lucinda and her Lover,
have both hold of the Plain Dealer, who tells them his Sentiments like the
Father of them both. -- I hear him reading, I see her wishing, and yet dreading
to be discovered. -- I wish the Discovery my self -- Methinks I see it, and
hear him say -- You are Lucinda; I have often told you, You are all Charms.
There wants nothing but your Consent to make us the happy Couple here described
-- Lucinda, trembling, holds the Paper as she would let it drop -- Now, if I
could make my Paper speak, it should say, Do, drop me from between you; join
Hands over a more Sacred Writing -- It is so promising a Match, that the Plain
Dealer is to act the Father in it -- If you have not immediate Opportunities --
If you apprehend any Hindrance -- Stay not a Moment where you are -- Take a
Tour to Blunt-Hall together -- The Clergyman of our Assembly, shall join your
Hands, and bless your Wishes, and you may keep your Wedding at the ancient Seat
of the Blunt 's, since it will be so happy an Example to many Maids, who have
been scared so long, by a silly groundless Custom, from speaking their Minds in
an Affair, on which depends all their Felicity.

The Plain Dealer. No 59.
Cur in Theatrum, Cato severe, venisti?
MART.
MONDAY, October 12. 1724.
IT is the Duty of a Patriot to mourn for those growing Evils, which seem to
threaten, either the Safety, or the Honor of his Country: And, for this
Reason, I have often been, irresistably chagrin'd, at the Corruption of our
Public Theaters. -- But I was, lately, enlivened into Hope, upon this Subject;
and am glad, I can assure my Reader, that there is a Spirit of Improvement at
Work, to sustain our sinking Taste, and set Examples for our present Stages.

THERE is a generous Boldness, as well in the Design itself, as in the Time of
putting it in Execution. But nothing is more certain, than that it is formed
upon a Plan, which if it meets with the proposed Encouragement, will go a great
Way toward keeping the Hearts of the Gay World from breaking, should so
dreadful a Misfortune happen, as that the God of Wit revenges himself upon the
prostituted Theaters in Fashion, by making People ashamed of appearing, where
they ought to blush at their Entertainment.

I AM transported to this Pitch of Joy, upon having Landed at Westminster
Stairs, in my Way from Barbican, to the Abbey Cloisters (where I often muse, on
Subjects which, a long Time hence, may fill Plain Dealers) and met, in the
King's Highway, a Party-colored younger Brother, of the justly-celebrated Mr.
Lun. -- He was ushered along in great State, with a sounding Drum in his Front,
and a Trumpet, and French Horn, placed like Wings, on either Flank; while the
Rear was brought up by a Body of scattered Velites, the flying Fragments of
Humanity!

THE Checkered Nuntio, as I passed him, stopped; and nodded his loose Head at
me: Snatching off his Pigmy Hat, by the Rabbit's Tail which was annexed to it:
And, tripping toward me, with a wanton Waviness, like the Curling of a Ship's
long Pendant, when it dances in a Breeze, slipped a Billet into my Hand; and,
retreating, with a merry Shrugg, or two, resumed his Post as before, and gave
Continuance to the Procession.

FROM the ludicrous Turn of his Figure, I opened the Paper he gave me, with
very humble Expectation: But was struck with no small Reverence, when I beheld
the Royal Arms, magisterially displayed at the Head of it: And These surprising
Particulars promulg'd, under the Stamp of such a known Authority!

By His MAJESTY's PERMISSION. For the better Accommodation of Gentlemen, Ladies
and Others:
AT the White-Hart, in St. Margaret's Lane, is to be seen, in a Manner never
Performed before, The whole Play of HERO and LEANDER; with a LIVE PUNCH.
Performed by a Company of ARTIFICIAL ACTORS, whose Diversions are very
Changeable, and Consistivarious.

THE Figures, being Five Foot high, perform with that Nicety, that they can
hardly be distinguished from the Live Players; and give an Equal Satisfaction.

LIKEWISE, you will see the Dancing of Jigs, Masquerades, and Sarabands. --
Likewise, the Royal Court of Foreign Kings, Queens, and Princes. Every Figure
dressed according to their own Country Habits. -- Likewise, the Rising and
Setting of the Sun. Also CUPID's Paradise. -- Likewise, Cupid descending out of
the Clouds, to the Front of the Stage, and speaks the Prologue to the Play.

BEFORE the Play begins, there is a High German Artist, that takes an empty
Bag, and turns it inside out, that you may see, there is nothing in it, and,
then, conveys Showers of Gold and Eggs out of it.

THE Prices are from Two Shillings, down to Sixpence. And we begin, at the
Quality Hours.

THERE are very good Seats for Gentlemen; and Places, for Coaches and Chairs to
stand in.

Note -- Any Gentleman and Lady, may have a Play in Private, any Hour of the
Day; giving Notice beforehand.

VIVAT REX.
I FOUND myself not a little delighted, upon perusing this Notification, to be
assured, in so Authentic a Manner, that we have His Majesty's Permission, to
be better accommodated than we have been. For, from this, intentional, Royal
Grace, I grew sanguine enough to expect, a very sudden Revocation of certain
Grants, for Monopolizing the Art of Conjuring; and of bewitching the King's
Liege People out of all sober Use, as well of their Money as their Senses. -- I
entered, therefore, with Pleasure, on the Divisions of my printed Billet: And
began, with a Critical Eye, to examine what Likelihood there was, that Hero and
Leander, should be too hard for the Devil, and his Double Favorites.

THE Live Punch, though they seem to build much upon him, I could consider as
no great Rarity. -- Not that I would derogate, in the least, from that Respect,
which is due to his Character: But he has Brothers upon both Stages, as much
alive as himself, with the Advantage of being more incomprehensible. -- Punch
will be understood, with so little Difficulty, that our People of Polite Taste,
will never be able to bear him. -- But, when I had read about half a Line
lower, and came to that Part of the Declaration, which promises, That the
Actors of this new Company, shall be ARTIFICIAL, I was presently at Ease again:
For, in that Case, I saw, most certainly, that there must be Novelty in their
Design; since nothing is more generally allowed, with Regard to the other
Companies, than, That, for One of their Actors, who is Artificial, Six are
absolutely Naturals.

I GATHERED much Consolation too, from that other welcome Assurance, That the
Diversions of this Royal Company, are to be very Changeable, and
Consistivarious. The Town has, Annually, for some Years past, been dieted, by
the Playhouse Doctors: And gone through a Regular Course of Bitters, with a
most laudable Spirit of Meekness, and true Christian Resignation -- Their Wit
was fallen Sick, and submitted to Quack Potions: Because Mountebank Stages, by
being Licensed, had the Reputation of College Practice: (And, to poison by
Authority, has the good Fortune to be no Felony). -- So that nothing is more
certain, than that the Wooden Company, will have the Advantage of our Brazen
Ones, in this important Point, the Changeable.

BUT, as for the Consistivarious, the old Workmen, I am afraid, will be more
than a Match for the new Ones. -- I am not, indeed, so able a Critic, in the
Language of these Wooden Orators, as to decide, with any absolute Sufficiency,
the Signification of a Word, so Derivative and Complex, as Consistivarious:
But, if I am fortunate enough, to have rightly broke in upon so impregnable a
Decomposite, then, I am sure, I may safely affirm, That our Stage's Conduct,
ever since I can remember it, has been truly Consistivarious, in the most
remarkable and surprising Manner. -- Nay, a Triumvir of that detached
Administration, the accomplished Author of a Tragedy, which we are to be
admitted to the Honor of admiring, in the Front of this happy Season, is, I am
sure, so renowned for his Consistivariousness, that one would almost be induced
to swear, That the very Word was of his own making, and coined, on Purpose, for
his New Tragedy.

BUT, here let me correct a false Report, which this Great Writer suffers
under, by the Means of some, who envy him the Honors which are due to his
undoubting Genius: -- It is said, the Name of his New Tragedy is to be Caesar
in Egypt. But I assure all Christian People, that though Caesar, may stand, in
Capitals, on the Title Page, yet that should only be considered as an Error of
the Press; which the Buyer may correct with Ease, by reading CIBBER in Egypt,
instead of CAESAR: And, with that small Alteration, every Thing in this
Tragedy, will be found extremely Natural; and stand directly, as it should be.

THE Spirit, however of our new Undertakers, at the White-Hart, is inflamed
into an enterprizing and smart Emulation! And I was very much taken with the
Turn of this brisk Defiance -- That, though they may pass for Nobodies, because
they are made of Wood; yet, since they have the Good Luck to be five Foot high,
they see no Reason to suppose their Adversaries to be more than their Match;
and will, therefore, perform with such Nicety, as not to be distinguished from
them; and doubt not in the least, to give an equal Satisfaction.

AS for the next Paragraph, I fear it was purposely embroidered over, with
those Likewises, and Also's, for no other Reason in the World, but to cover a
conscious Deficiency in the Sense, by the Eloquent Glare of the Expression. --
For, who does not observe, That Dancing of Jigs, Masquerades, and Sarabands,
are Improvements in Learning, which the happy Genius of our Nobility, and the
vast Encouragement they give to Wit, have brought, already, to their full
Perfection? -- I cannot see, therefore, what Novelty can be expected, in this
Particular: Unless, when they give Notice, That All their Performers are to be
Wooden ones, they would have us understand it, that, by Aid of some third
Faustus, their Fiddles are to fall a Dancing, and keep Time to their own Music.

THE Rising and Setting of the Sun, I have very little to say for, with Regard
to its Newness. -- Cupid's Paradise may please at first, but will flatten, if
they show it often. -- The Court of Foreign Kings is no such Rarity as they
think it. -- But, for every Figure to be dressed, according to their own
Country Fashion. -- That, indeed, is a Stroke of Decorum, which out-soars, at
one Flight, Patent, License, and Charter! And it will be reasonable to hope,
after the Public Taste has been so refined, by these Chips of a new Block,
that we shall see no more Intermixture of the Ancient, with the Modern Dresses:
Where the Order of Things is so capriciously reversed, that the Courtiers of an
English Monarch shall stand round him, like Beaux of Yesterday; and the
Sovereign himself strut about, in Trunk Breeches, and be dressed, as old as a
Patriarch.

THERE is, in the next Article, an odd kind of Mystery, which I own I could not
fathom: And, I frankly confess, I was, once, afraid, there might be a Plot in
it. -- I puzzled my Imagination, till I was weary of imagining. -- But, the
more I mused upon it, the less I was able to make, of that strange High-German
Artist, who was to shake an empty Bag, inside out, that we might see, there was
nothing in it: And, then, rain Gold and Eggs out of it.

IT was easily to be discerned, that the Scene was shifted in this Place. --
The Play Houses could have nothing to do with the Paragraph: None of Their
Bags, for some Years past, having been Empty enough to turn inside outward. So
that I was greatly perplexed, by the Knottiness of this Difficulty: Till I,
luckily, bethought myself of a Friend of mine, a Decypherer; whose surprising
Dexterity, levelled every Rub in his Way, and made it as plain, as a
Demonstration, That the empty Bag was the South Sea Scheme. -- That the Golden
Showers were the sudden Sallies of that Stock: And, that the Eggs were the
sucking Bubbles, that were hatched under the Warmth of it.

I SHOULD have been lost, in this Desert, if I had not returned, to make a
Remark, concerning the Modesty of our new Comedians. -- How praiseworthy is
their Generosity, and the Disinterestedness of their Spirit! Who, after putting
themselves to the twofold Charge of building, both their Stage, and their
Performers, propose to act, notwithstanding, at Lower Rates, than their Rivals;
which Last go on to demolish, as fast as their Competitors can build up: And
yet, have the Courage to raise their Prices, because they fall their
Entertainments.

THEN, how just, and how Sympathetical, is another Care of our Wooden
Reformers! -- Being perfectly acquainted with the Talents of a Modish Audience,
they have judiciously determined to provide Room for the Coaches and Chairs, in
the same Paragraph with the Gentlemen. -- Their Thoughts were more upon Merit,
than upon Good Breeding; -- And since they knew that their Kindred Vehicles
were as able Judges, as their Owners, and (which is of more Consequence) as
well-dress'd too; they, therefore, thought it but reasonable to treat 'em with
equal Reverence.

WHAT kind of Play, that may be, which any Gentleman and Lady, who give Notice
beforehand, are to be diverted with in Private, I must make a Personal Search
into, before I undertake to consider it. -- But, upon the Whole, I believe,
there can be no manner of Doubt, but that The White-Hart, in St. Margaret's-
Lane, may bid as fair for Fine Audiences, as any of the Rest of our Theaters;
where, though the Actors are not of Wood, they have usurped the Province of
Wooden Actors.

The Plain Dealer. No. 60.
-- Pictoribus atque Poetis.
HOR.
FRIDAY, October 16. 1724.
WHEN I read, with Admiration, the great Actions of an Alexander, a Caesar, or
a Tamerlane; or an charmed by the more powerful Writings of a Homer, a Virgil,
or a Cicero, I am fired with an impatient Longing, to conceive their Turn of
Person, Air, and Features. And when my Fancy (forced to travel without a Guide)
has tired itself with vain Endeavors to grasp Ideas, that are thin, and
fleeting, I lament that the Materials of the Painter's noble Art, are not as
lasting as the Painter's Fame is. For, in that case, Two Sister Arts, uniting
their different Powers, the one transmitting Souls, the other Bodies, (or the
outward Form of Bodies) their combining Influence would be of Force to
frustrate Death itself: And all the Ages of the World would seem to be
Cotemporaries.

BUT, here, the Poet triumphs. His Works outlive the Painter's, though the
Painter begins much sooner to be famous, than the Poet does: And has also
commonly the Advantage over him, with Relation to Fortune: The strongest
Reasons of which Difference, I have lately read, with Pleasure, in the
following Letter, from an excellent, and learned, Critic, whom I spoke of, in
a late Paper, and whose Encouragement, I am afraid, is (to the future Reproach
of our Age) most shamefully disproportioned to his Merit.

THERE is something extremely new, in the Subject, as well as the Sentiments,
of this Letter: And I will, therefore, take the Liberty to publish it, for my
Reader's Entertainment; though the Author, when he writ it, meant it only for
the private Satisfaction of a Gentleman of his Acquaintance.

October the 7th. 1724. SIR,
I KNOW not whether I should return you Thanks for your last Visit or not,
because I know not whether I am indebted to Fortune, or to You for it. But I am
obliged to take Notice, in a particular Manner, of the Desire you expressed,
during our being together, that I would have my Picture drawn.

AFTER I have omitted it so many Years, I would not have it drawn at last by a
Bungler, and I am not in a Condition at present, to satisfy one who is a
Master; nor do I know whether we have any Master, who would make me a Present
of it: Though a Painter is much more able to give, than a Poet to buy; which
has put me upon considering, what are the Reasons which make the Painter so
successful, and the Poet so unfortunate; that make the Art of Poetry, and the
Art of Painting, which are Sisters, so very Resembling, by Nature, so very
Different, by Fortune.

A great Poet, for the most Part, neglects and affronts Fortune, by making his
Court to Fame; but Fame and Fortune are Rivals, that contend with each other,
which shall heap most Favors upon the deserving Painter. All the great
Painters that have appeared among us, have had Justice done to their Merit
while they lived, and no Sign-post-Painter has ever yet passed for a great
Master. All the Painters, whom our Kings have delighted to employ, have been
Masters, as Holbin, Rubens, Vandyck, Leeley, Ryley, Kneller, and Thornhill.

BUT the contrary of this has happened with Regard to Poets. Several good ones,
nay, several of the best, have been neglected during their Lifetime, as
Spencer, Milton, Butler, Otway, among ourselves, and among the Ancients, Homer;
while the most contemptible of all Scriblers have been Esteemed and Honored.
Our Kings themselves have, more than once, had such vile Scriblers for their
Poets, and have, like Fortune, taken a Pleasure in exalting Fools. But though a
King can give a Man Title and Place, only GOD can give him Genius. It Is the
Prerogative of a King to make a Knight, but only GOD can make a Poet.

THE Reasons of the Difference which we sometimes find, in the Fortunes of
great Poets and Painters, appear to me to be chiefly these which follow:

The First is, That the great Painter, for each of his Masterpieces, has but
one Original, and no Copy can come up to the easy Grace and the natural Force
of a beautiful Original; whereas, of masterly Poems, there are as many
Originals, as there are true Copies; and all of them have equal Force, and
equal Grace and Beauty; and this is none of the least Things that render the
Works of the Painter so precious, and the Artist himself so fortunate. A Man
may buy the Works of Homer or Virgil for a very Trifle, whereas those of
Raphael are above any Value. But this multiplying of Originals gives the great
Poet, at least, one Advantage over the famous Painter, which is, that it
renders what he writes perpetual. Homer and Virgil are immortal in their Works,
but Zeuxis and Apelles are only so in their Fame.

ANOTHER Reason of this Difference, is, The Universality of the Language in
which the Painter delivers his Art: The great Painter speaks to all Countries
as intelligibly, as to his own, nay, more intelligibly, more gracefully, and
more forcibly, to those Countries which are polite; and, therefore, his Fame
keeps equal Pace with his Merit; and wherever he goes, both Fortune and Fame
attend him. The more his Pieces are known, the more they are desired, and the
more dearly purchased. The greatest of Kings are ambitious to be Masters of
them, and ambitious to possess the Painters, as well as their Works. What
modern Poet, during his Lifetime, was ever read by so many Sovereign Princes,
as were drawn by the Hand of Titian? What Prince ever heaped those Honors on a
Poet, that Charles the Fifth did on Titian? Did the renowned Augustus himself,
with all his Capacity, and all his Greatness of Mind, so Honor Horace or
Virgil? Now, while the Painter's Fame and Fortune are unconfined, those of the
greatest of our English Poets are restrained to the Islands of Great Britain
and Ireland, that is, to less than Twenty Millions of People, of which,
perhaps, there are hardly Five hundred which have a fine Taste of Poetry.

ANOTHER Reason of the Difference in the Fortunes of great Painters and Poets,
with regard to Painting after the Life, is the darling Interest, and the
darling Passion of both Sexes, and especially of the Women; no Motive is
generally so predominant, as that of Self-Interest, no Passion so vehement and
so ardent as Self-Love. Now the Generality of both Sexes look upon their
Persons, as their very selves. It is their Persons, then, which they ardently
desire should be advantageously known, and fairly distinguished, and should
remain after them. This the great Painter alone can perform, who is sure to
draw the best Likeness, and yet, at the same Time, to distinguish a Face, from
all other Faces whatever, which it is impossible that the greatest Poet in the
World, can ever do, by Description.

ANOTHER Reason of the foresaid Difference, is, That few Persons pretend to
decide sovereignly in Painting, but they who are acquainted with the Rules of
the Art, and who, besides the Reading Ancient and Modern History, understand
Geometry, Perspective, and Anatomy; whereas the Rabble of Mankind pretending to
judge of Poetry, sovereignly, and without Appeal, wretched Poetasters have been
often applauded, and excellent Poets neglected, because the former write most
to the Capacity of the Rabble. And there is one Thing, which I have formerly
mentioned, and which I have often observed, and always with fresh Surprise,
That the Rabble, by their Noise, their Clamours, and their Obstinacy, have
often drawn in Men who have passed for Men of Sense, to affirm their
unrighteous Decrees; whereas the Men of Sense, with all their Judgment, and
with all their Perseverance, have never been able to draw in the Rabble,
without the Assistance of Time.

THERE is still another Reason of the foresaid Difference in the Fortunes of
great Poets and Painters, which is this; Most Men are very sensual; and
Pleasure of Sense affects them, more than Pleasure merely Intellectual. They
love to have their Understandings informed by their Senses, because that
Instruction gives them Pleasure, without any Mixture of Pain, which always, in
some measure, accompanies Labor and great Attention. And of all the Senses,
they love chiefly to be instructed by the Sight, because the Instruction that
comes that Way, is attended with the least Labor. And if it be true, that
there are no innate Ideas; if it be true, that there is nothing in the
Understanding, but what was in the external Sense before, then the Method of
Instruction used by the Painter, is the very Method which God and Nature have
taken to instruct us. And this is the Cause of that extraordinary Pleasure
which Men receive from Painting, as Aristotle has observed in the Fourth
Chapter of his Art of Poetry. And, in this, the Painter has infinitely the
Advantage of the Poet. The Painter informs the Understanding, and warms the
Imagination, by striking the Sight strongly, and giving it the Height of
Pleasure; while all that can be done, of that kind, by the greatest Poet that
ever lived, is to make us vainly imagine, that he sets Things before our Eyes.

THUS have I laid before you some of the chief Reasons of the Difference that
is found in the Fortunes of Great Poets and Painters; and, now, to end with the
Business with which I began, If he whom you propose to draw my Picture, is not
a Master, I shall be unwilling to give him any Trouble. If he is a Master, he
is Rich, as cercertainly as I am not so: I therefore expect, That he shall do
it entirely gratis; For as Painter, and Poet, we are Sisters Children, and he
is worse than a Jew, who, being Rich himself, will take Money of a Poor
Relation.

I am, SIR, Your most Humble, Faithful Servant, A. B.


The Plain Dealer. No 61.
Labor Improbus omnia vincit.
VIRG. Otium cum dignitate. --
CICERO.
MONDAY, October 19. 1724.
THERE is not a more delightful Way of conveying useful Knowledge into the
Mind, than Copying the Allegories of the Ancients: The following Genealogy of
LABOR and PLEASURE, is a modern Performance of this kind, which shows the
Author a Person of lively Fancy and sound Judgment.

IT was sent me in a well-written Letter, subscribed J. F. which, when I
suppress, I must own, I give my self some Mortification.

SATURN, the Son of COELUM, after having made a Separation of Body and Goods
with his Wife CYBELE, married NECESSITY the Daughter of DESTINY and FORTUNE.

Old Father DESTINY gave this poor Girl of his, her Education among the MUSES,
and trained her up in the Company of Poets and Philosophers. She was blessed,
from a very Child, with a strong, and enterprizing Genius, quick and ready at
Invention, fruitful of mighty Projects, and ever intent upon proper Ways and
Means, to give a finishing Stroke to her Undertakings. But though she was
ingenious, she was homely in her Person; she, poor Thing! had none of those
Charms to boast of, which might draw the Eyes of Lovers upon her; her Mien
carried with it as little Temptation as her Face; and her Fortune was low, and
still less inviting than either; so that she was no Body's Taste, and not any
Individual breatheing had the least Thought of her for a Wife. The MUSES found
the Charge grow heavy upon Them, and, sensible of their Inability to go through
with the Expense of keeping her much longer, the begged DESTINY, by all means,
to take her out of their Hands, and think of making proper Provision for her in
some other Way. This put DESTINY on trying to bring about a Match, between his
Daughter, and his old Friend SATURN, whom he persuaded, that since he was so
far gone in Years, and parted from his Wife, without any Appearance of their
coming together again; it was not possible for him to do better, than marry
some honest careful Body, who would be tender in looking after him: And then he
took Occasion to name his own Daughter, as a Person well qualified for that
Office; assuring the old Gentleman, at the same Time, of her Inclinations to do
every Thing, that would be most pleasing in his Eyes.

THE Truth is, NECESSITY was a good toward Girl, and followed her Father's
Counsel, so well, and behaved herself with so much Docility, Humility, and
Diligence, that she entirely won the old Man's Heart. That which prevailed with
him, most of all, to come to this Resolution, arose from this Consideration,
That all the Uneasiness between him and CYBELE, was occasioned by her too great
Riches, which made her presumptuous enough to slight and despise him, and use
him so ill, as to carry on a secret Affair with PLUTO, a Commerce, the most
displeasing in Nature to him, and which he could never forgive. Hence he became
persuaded, it would be doing very wisely, to marry a Woman of Birth, who having
nothing of her own, would think of no other Enjoyments, but those which she
shared in common with him, which he knew to be sufficient to render her
eternally happy.

PRELIMINARIES were all settled, the Treaty concluded, and the Marriage
consummated, between old SATURN, and his poor Spouse NECESSITY, whose whole
Portion consisted in her Vigilance, her Obedience, and Humility.

THE only Issue of this Marriage was VIRTUE, who from her Cradle, gave Promises
of her Beauty. As soon as she grew up, the mature Virgin drew gazing Crowds
after her, and the Eyes of the admiring World was fixed upon this Object. There
was not that single God in Olympus, but was fond of her Acquaintance: However,
as she happened to be of a high and overruling Temper, and would take the
Liberty of telling People their Faults very plainly to their Faces; she was not
over-welcome to many, where she went.

THEN, again, her Mother NECESSITY, whose Company she was seldom out of, was,
by Nature, bashful, and little used to frequent the Palaces of the Great. She
went always very plainly and simply clothed, after the old Fashion, which made
her not a little timorous of visiting the modish Gods of Quality.

THIS manner of Life becoming troublesome to them, they went often to pay their
Respects to the MUSES, and to see the Poets and Philosophers, their old
Friends, with whom they always found a more friendly and grateful Reception.
This made them think of returning to the MUSES, and there to live for ever: And
this NECESSITY got her Husband to consent to, who approved of this Retreat the
more willingly, because he very justly judged, that the good Qualities of his
Daughter VIRTUE, might help a great deal, in that Place, toward correcting the
Vices and reforming the Errors of Mankind.

ACCORDINGLY they returned to Parnassus, and the MUSES obliged them with fine
Apartments, where VIRTUE made herself known more and more, and was admired by
every Eye that could get a Sight of her. The MUSES did all they could, to exalt
the Merit of their new Tenant; they left nothing unsaid, that might enlarge her
Reputation; they had a mighty Mind to captivate some suitable Person, and
engage his Affections to her: But all in vain; there was not one Ear rightly
open to these repeated Praises and Admonitions. Whole Crowds indeed would
throng, to gaze at her, every Spectator Admired her, and even every Hearer,
when she spoke, was forced to allow, That she had Reason for the Reprimands she
made; but not one of them would have any Concern with her, or join themselves
for ever with a Person, whose Manner of Living was so extraordinary and
uncommon.

THUS she remained a long Time unprovided for, 'till a venerable Sort of
Gentleman, oldish, but not very far in Years, who had the Reputation of great
Capacity, Observation and Experience, and whose Name was WISDOM, happened to
light upon her. To him this tart Humor of hers, which was always as just as it
was severe, was not at all distasteful: On the contrary, he liked her for it;
he made his Court to her, and having addressed her Father and Mother for their
Consent, and obtained it, married her, to the universal Joy of Parnassus.

THIS excellent Couple had Issue, but One Child, named LABOR, who, in his
Infancy, gave them Trouble enough, in all Conscience, to rear him. As soon as
he approached the Age of Manhood, he gave the most apparent Signs of a working
Head, and appeared never easy, but when in Action.

ONE Day, above the rest, having closely employed himself upon an Undertaking
of great Moment, a Task which his Mother VIRTUE had been pleased to set him; he
saw RECOMPENSE, the Daughter of MERIT and of REASON, and became passionately in
Love with her. Her Youth was blooming, her Beauty exquisitely charming; her
Humor powerfully bewitching; her whole Person irresistably ravishing: All she
looked, or said, or did, was so engaging, that it was natural in her to please,
and there was nobody but loved her, nobody but longed to possess her.

LABOR, who was nearly touched with so many agreeable Qualities, resolved with
himself to do every thing that should be requisite to gain her; and, as she did
not want Lovers, he judged he should meet with many Difficulties before he
could attain his desired End: But having received some joyful Assurance, that
the Figure he made in the World, did not displease her, he resolved to omit
nothing, that might make him still more grateful in the Eye of his Mistress.
After infinite Pains, innumerable Hopes and Disappointments, the Treaty was at
length concluded with MERIT and REASON, the Parents of RECOMPENSE, who gave
their Consent with great Alacrity; and the more, for that VIRTUE herself did
very heartily interest herself in that Affair. Nay, farthermore, Advices came
to the Parents of RECOMPENSE, that the Marriage was APPROVED and DESIRED by
COELUM, the Great-Grandfather to LABOR.

IN Effect, LABOR and RECOMPENSE were so exactly matched, that one may say,
they were born one for the other; their Marriage was perfectly happy, by the
good Understanding in which they lived; For LABOR continuing toward his Wife
the same Affection, desired to be everlastingly in her Company; he could not
bear her a Moment out of his Sight, by his good Will; and would scarce be
persuaded, at Times, that he had seen her, when he really had. His Wife was no
less fond, on her Side; she observed a Conduct so regular, and so judicious,
that she never gave him Reason of Complaint, and would favor nobody with her
Presence, where her Husband was absent.

THIS Marriage was rendered still more prosperous by its Fruitfulness. For,
they had Issue Three Children, Two Girls, and a Boy. The Boy, who was the
Youngest, was called REST: He was well made in his Person, agreeable,
insinuating, welcome wherever he went: His noble Birth, and engaging
Qualities, made him regarded and coveted by all the World, and chiefly by the
Rich. He was not of so high a Spirit as his Sisters: He visited none but
Persons that were peaceful, and little enterprizing. His Father was angry at
it, and did all he could to render him more active, but he fled out of his
Sight, because continual soliciting him to do something, disturbed his Quiet,
and interrupted his Beloved Repose.

THESE repeated Solicitations grew, at last, so insupportable to REST, that,
his Humor being no longer able to bear that of his Father, which was so
opposite, he harbored Malice against him, and joining in an Association with
IDLENESS, with whom he had contracted a strict Friendship, they plotted
together to take away the Life of the Parent of REST. But honest Father LABOR,
being vigilant, was not long without discovering this Conspiracy, of which
being but too certain, he drove this unnatural Son from him, nor would ever see
him more: REST, touched with Repentance, or pushed by some other Motive,
retired to the Service of the Gods, where he has, ever since, taken up his
Residence.

THE Two Daughters of LABOR, were GLORY and PLEASURE, both of them fine
Persons, entirely like their Mother, so very like her, that they were often
taken for her, which made her extremely fond of them. LABOR loved them dearly
too, as well on Account of their Merit, as for that near Resemblance of
Features which made him remember, when his Heart was first smitten with Love.

THE Children, on their Side, dutifully answered this Affection, and hardly
ever quitted their Father and Mother, wherever they went, whether to private
People, or Princes, where they most delighted to make their Abode, and where
they were very welcome, being significant Persons in War and Peace, and shining
as well in the Cabinet, as the Field.

IT is true, that PLEASURE, was not so lofty and proud of Heart, as GLORY, her
Sister: For whereas GLORY thought of nothing but great Things, and would
frequent none but People of great Genius, despising all other Considerations;
PLEASURE, on the contrary, could amuse herself with any thing, loving as well
Business of little Account, as that of Importance; the People of a midling, as
well as of the sublimest Genius; low, as well as high Life, caressing all
alike; which won her the Hearts of all the World: As she was, by Nature, very
curious, she diverted herself with making little particular Journies to People,
who were glad to have her in their Company, provided she was not with her
Father and her Sister, the Austerity of whom, put them under too great a
Restraint.

THESE little Sallies gave a Stain to her Reputation, it not being possible to
see so fine a Girl familiarly visit so many People, without speaking of it. But
what had like to have ruined her entirely, was, that at the same Time a
debauched Girl, who had something of the Air of PLEASURE, but much Affectation,
took it in her Head to go by the same Name, in order to find the easier Access
in all Places. She was the Daughter of LEISURE and DEBAUCH, despicable People!
and, as she had neither Birth nor Honor, she mingled indifferently with all
Sorts of Persons, leading an infamous Life, and so disorderly, that she passed
for one lost.

THIS Identity of Names, made them attribute to the true PLEASURE, all the
Disorders of the false, which obliged her to clear up the Matter with her
Father LABOR, who was deceived, like the rest of the World, by this
Appearance. But above all Things, her conscious Innocence, which they accused
her to have violated, gave her great Confidence in her own Justification. She
made known to her Father, that the greatest Part of those she frequented, were
the best Friends of Him, and his Ancestors, VIRTUE and WISDOM; That she was
cherished by a whole Sect of Philosophers; and, in short, That she saw none but
People, whose Manners were Praiseworthy.

The Plain Dealer. No 62.
-- Nos animorum
Impulsu and caeca magnaque cupidine ducti
Conjugium petimus, partumque Uxoris; at illis
Notum qui pueri, qualisque futura sit Uxor.
JUV.
FRIDAY, October 23. 1724.
I, WHO Pride my Self, in nothing, more than when I can be personating the good
old Man, that is to say, Acting the Part of a Father toward the Youth of
either Sex, must naturally have a singular Regard for those worthy Matrons, my
Co-temporaries, whose approved Wisdom and Virtue, induce prudent Parents, to
consign Children to their Guardianship. -- The Truth is, That whenever I light
upon the least Commerce with this beneficial Set of People, I am willing to
improve it, both for their Sakes, and my Own, that we pick out of one another,
sometimes a lucky Hint, that has been useful in conducting one Child to its
Welfare, and by pushing it in the Education of another, make it the Happier,
its whole Life after. -- For this Reason, I was resolved to dispatch the
Request of the following Letter, as early as possible, and because, as the
careful Writer of it has young Ladies under her Tuition, I not only consider
Her as a common Correspondent, but have for Her that fraternal Regard, which is
felt by an Affectionate Brother.

October 12, 1724. SIR,
HAVING the Charge of two young Ladies of Fortune lately devolved upon me; I
cannot but think it needful to call in the Assiststance of the PLAIN DEALER to
enable me to perform this important Task, with that Justice and Prudence, which
I am convinced it requires.

I therefore beg you will give me some Rules for Education; and, that they may
the better Adapted to my present Necessity, I must tell you, as concisely as I
can, the different Dispositions I have to deal with.

THE eldest is about Fifteen, very Bookish, but her chief Study has hitherto
been in Romances, and Novels. I think it not proper to discourage this Taste of
Reading in her, but would rather lead her, insensibly, into the Perusal of
Books really Useful; which to such a One, ought to be entertaining too. What
they must be, I submit to your Judgment, who, I hope, will Recommend some
Authors that may be safely put into their Hands.

MY younger Charge, not quite Fourteen, is so far from reading Romances, that I
can fix her to nothing; She promises fair to be the very Counter-part of your
Patty Amble; And I believe has been a Coquette from her Cradle; She is
good-natured, but giddy, and I fear it will be a difficult Matter to make her a
reasonable Woman, though She certainly has good Sense.

THIS will be no Paradox, when we consider how many People loose the Benefit of
a fine Understanding, for want of fixing it upon a proper Basis.

YOUR Thoughts upon this SUBJECT will be a Public Benefit, and a Particular
Favor to

SIR, Your constant Reader, and humble Servant, ASPASIA.


IT is Nobly and Generously observed by an Excellent Poet of the present Age,
that, To do one good Actio^, is preferable to the writing, however sublimely,
the most Glorious Deeds of others. But methinks, on the other hand, it gives an
unspeakable Pleasure to deliver in writing, what may give occasion to good
Actions. The honest Inclination of Aspasia, and her earnest Desire, That I
would give her a Word of Advice, concur to raise in me this Expectation, and
therefore, while I shall lay down some cursory Observations, which may be of
Service to young People, I am not ashamed to own, That the little
Entertainment, which I offer to that Class of my Readers, is a kind of Feast to
my Self.

ASPASIA very well knows, the first and most important Point, which consists in
studying their Tempers, and the Bent of their Inclinations. The Knowledge once
obtained, the next Step is, to improve and heighten their good Qualities, and
artificially to transform the Defects and Errors of their Nature, into Graces
and Ornaments. As we must naturally Love those, whom we desire to instruct;
and, as it is natural not to love those, who obtrude Instruction upon us, but
to listen with Attention to those whom we Love, and to gather Instruction from
them, as it were without their Knowledge; It is, for these Reasons, methinks
Necessary, that the Method, generally observed in these Cases, should be
Reversed; that is to say, The Instruction of the Child should be the
Consequence of a Tutress's Love toward it, and not her Love be the Consequence
of its taking her Instructions: These Directresses of Youth should begin, where
they generally end. They give their Advices plainly and bluntly, and as those
happen to take Root direct their Affections or Resentments: But they should,
first, Practice upon the Affections of their Wards, gain their Hearts, and make
their own Love seen, and afterward steal their Admonitions into them, under
the Covert of Art, keeping them as much as possible, unseen. Instruction thus
Politically couched, will have a Power, that is Irresistible, and make an
amazing Progress in tender Minds. Advice, not seen by, will be sure to be seen,
in them.

TO descend to Particulars, in our present Case: Looking over those Romances
and Novels, which her eldest Ward delights in, too much, Aspasia will certainly
find some Heroic Examples of Virtue. These she would relate to some Friend, in
the Secret, with very great Applauses, so as to be Overheard by her fair Pupil,
who will be prejudiced for a Judgment, that seems to favor her own, and that
she would be glad should do so. She will be charmed to hear this, and
remaining, as it were, perdue, listen greedily to it, as the Commendation of
her self. When her Mind is thus strongly prejudiced in Behalf of her Guardian,
when it is warmed, and just ready to take the Impression; then, just then, the
Guardian has an Opportunity of pressing down the Seal of Virtue. A little
proper Female Oratory, in Commendation of the like Passages, still more
beautifully expressed, in such Books, as she would have her read, will make her
long, and beg, of her own accord, to see them. As for Example; Aspasia might
say: Such a noble Quality is eminently conspicuous in the Hero of this Romance;
but then he appears defective in such other Points: The Hero of such a Novel
Revere for such a Part of his Conduct, but he is greatly to blame in other
Respects: The principal Character in such a Book of Memoirs, would be a
Favorite, and a shining Character, but for such and such Blemishes and
Imperfections. Such a Gallant, in such a Play, behaves himself well throughout
the whole Action, and makes me love him at my very Heart; but such a Gallant
has a villainous Design at Bottom, upon his Mistress's Honor, and is my mortal
Aversion. After having thus remarked upon Texts, out of the Lady's own
Scripture, it is Inexpressible, what an Effect it might have, if growing into a
sudden Rapture, Aspasia should go on as follows: How does it charm and
transport one, to find all these Virtues, and none of the opposite Vices; all
these Beauties without Deformities, united in that one Favorite Character of
mine, the Christian Hero, described with all the Force, with which Virtue can
be described, and painted with all the Beauties with which Beauty can be
painted? -- This Method, or such a Method as this, would prompt the listening,
bookish Ward to a Desire of seeing that Tract; she would long for it, she would
enquire after it, she would beg to read it; she would set to reading it already
prejudiced in its Favor; It would gain upon her, in the Reading, till she
gained, what her Guardian would wish, from reading it. As she has true Taste,
this just Picture, would beget in her a Contempt of those coarse Daubings of a
Novelist's grosser Hand. The same may be said of the Heroines, celebrated in
her favorite Romances. How much more charmingly is the fine Lady, described in
the Marquess of Hallifax his Advice to a Daughter, and so of others. -- What
Fruit may not be hoped and expected: -- Reading that little Book, called, The
Advice to a Daughter, and the Lady's Library, is enough to make young Women
learn to Know themselves: STEEL 's Christian Hero, and the Gentleman
Instructed, teach them abundantly to know Men. A Knowledge of themselves, will
be the Preservative of their Honor; and a true Knowledge of Men will fortify
them against the Treacheries, that are used by artful Deceivers, of that Sex,
which is almost sure, one Time or other, to be either their RUIN, or their
ORNAMENT.

N. B. There not being Room in this Paper, some Hints upon Education shall be
occasionally added, wherein ASPASIA's Elder Charge shall be further considered,
not forgetting the Younger, who may be a fine Woman bred, notwithstanding she
is born a COQUET.

The Plain Dealer. No 63.
-- Aliena Negotia Centum
Per caput, and circumsaliunt latus.
HOR.
MONDAY, October 26. 1724.
I INTENDED in this PAPER, to have proceeded upon some Hints concerning
EDUCATION: But I am forced to break off the Thread, and defer it to another
Day. I have many entertaining LETTERS by me, from Edinburgh, and Bath; and two,
that I must particularly mention from Covent Garden, with Relation to my late
Discourse on the Playhouse Management; One is written by Mr. Sock, in a sad,
and lamentable Style, and the other by Mr. Buskin, filled with such Heroic
Rants, that, however they excite no Terror, will as well answer the End of
being exhibited to public View; and move Diversion, like some Modern
Tragedies. With all these I should be glad to oblige the Public, as soon as
possible; but the following EPISTLE, seems intended to Redress, in some
Measure, an injured Person, and I think it a Part of Duty to quit other
Speculations, though never so inviting, where it lies in my Power to assist,
toward rescuing an honest Man, out of real, or even imaginary Distress, since
the latter is often equally painful with the former.

To the PLAIN DEALER.
SIR,
IN One of your PAPERS concerning DETRACTION, you justly observed, That Persons
guilty of it, in a great City, ought to have some Distinguishing Signs to
discover them, as Crosses are placed on the Doors of the Diseased, in the Time
of a Pestilence.

THAT happy Way of Reasoning (inseparable from Truth) which shines in all your
Writings, on whatsoever Subject employed, carries Conviction in every Line,
that gives the Good Man Pleasure, and the Envious and Detracting, Pain.

THEN to whom shall I apply for Redress, but to the PLAIN DEALER, who, though
above flattering the Great, thinks it not unworthy him, to do Justice, even to
the Lowest Degree of Merit.

WAS I to draw the Man I mean, in the Character of Husband, Father, or Friend,
in each, he would please and satisfy; but as those distinguishing Characters,
are Private, though Undisputed, I will beg leave to tell you, He has, in Active
Life, a Fame, that gives Uneasiness to some malignant People, while it does
Good, more widely than they would wish him able to extend it.

IF an indefatigable Industry, with his allowed Skill, and Humanity, crowned by
the Blessing of the ALMIGHTY, with un-interrupted Success, can recommend a Man
to Esteem in the useful Profession of of Surgery, you will allow me to name Mr.
Coltheart. Methinks I see him, (as I have often seen him) going to the Relief
of some miserable Object, with his usual Cheerfulness and Smiles (with that
Regard however to the Cause, which the Greatest could wish for, the Unhappy
seldom find) as if he was going to some Great Man, whose Cure must make his
Fortune; though he is certain to have no other Recompense than the Thanks and
Prayers of his unfriended Patient.

INNUMERABLE Instances of this Kind the Grateful Many he has served, would
give, who, though willing, are not allowed to do him the Justice he deserves;
which induces me to believe, if ever Man took Pleasure in doing Good, he does;
as also to think him a proper Subject, and Excuse, for my troubling you with
this, who am,

SIR, Your most Obedient, Humble Servant, Z. Y.


WHEN I reflect upon the many Advantages arising to Mankind, from the Skill of
a True Professor of the Surgeon's Art, he appears so Useful a Member of the
Commonwealth, that he makes no inconsiderable Figure among the most
considerable, like Machaon among the Heroes in Homer. The Person, this Letter
relates to, far from meriting to be spoken ill of, deserves that respect, which
the best of all Books requires to be paid to the Physician, if it was for
nothing else, but having, not long since, preserved the Life of a Member, of a
very noble Family, in which Wisdom and Eloquence have been a long Time
Hereditary.

AS I am brought once more, unwillingly, to touch upon that hated Subject,
DETRACTION, I think I cannot do better, in order to deter People, from it, than
to place before their Eyes a Picture of its Deformity, as it was drawn by that
Great Master APELLES, and Described by an excellent old Author.

AT the Right Hand, was drawn Sitting, a Man, with long Ears, putting forth his
Hand to DETRACTION, who seemed from afar off to come toward him. About this
Man stood two Women, that is to say, IGNORANCE and SUSPICION: On the other side
came DETRACTION, a Woman dressed in great Pomp and Magnificence, but in a
mighty Passion of Anger, having her Aspect like Fire. In her Left Hand, she
held a burning Torch, and with her other, she drew, by the Hair of his Head, a
young Man, who held up his Hands toward Heaven, calling God, to Witness his
Innocence: With Her, came a Woman, Pale and Evil-favoured, beholding the the
young Man attentively, like one that had been consumed with long Sickness, whom
you might easily conjecture to be ENVY.

THERE followed two other Women, who made it their Business to adorn
DETRACTION: One was TREASON, the other FRAUD: After, followed a Woman in
Mourning, Black and Ragged, called REPENTANCE, who turning her Back, and sore
ashamed, beheld TRUTH, who then came forward.

IT is thus, APELLES described DETRACTION, by which he himself was brought into
extreme Danger, having been falsely accused to King Ptolomy, of Egypt, who,
upon his refuting the Accusation, ordered him as many Talents, as would amount
to Twelve Thousand Pounds Sterling, and that his Accuser should be his
perpetual Bonds-man.

IF some curious Engraver would form a Plate, upon this Model; the best Method
would be for Persons this way Injured, to purchase a Ptint, and fix it, like a
Play-Bill, at the Door of any noted Offender; after which, it should be a Rule
for the Neighborhood, never to believe a Report that came from that Quarter,
whether in Praise or Dispraise of any Body.

BY this Means, the TONGUES of Evil-Speakers, and the PENS of Evil-Writers,
would become Useless, and Unregarded; and Innocence, having nothing to fear,
might look, untrembling, upon Slander.

The Plain Dealer. No 64.
Quid enim sors est? Idem propemodum quod micare, quod talos jacere, quod
tesseras. Quibus in rebus temeritas and casus non Ratio nec Consilium valet.

CICERO Lib. 2. de Divin. Ista Veneficii est via. --
OVID Remed. Am. Inveni germana viam (gratare sorori)
Quae mihi reddat eum, vel eo me solvat amantem.
VIRG.
FRIDAY, October 30. 1724.
AMONG a Thousand shining Proofs of the Capacity of Woman's Wit, I have met
with no Instance more extraordinary, than the SUBJECT of the following LETTER:
Which I therefore publish, in Honor of the Advance of Feminine Learning. Though,
when I consider the Force of the Sex's Natural Magic, I observe with some
Jealousy, their Pretensions to the ART of CONJURING.

A Common Council Man of this Great City, writes to me, with much Impatience,
to be informed, Whether there is no Statute, in Force, against the Study of the
BLACK ART? I was at a Loss, what Art he meant, 'till he went on to inform me,
That he can never make his Visits, to a certain Lady, of his Acquaintance, but
his Wife knows where he has been; and shows him, for Proof of it, a Man and a
Woman, in a China Cup, discovered, closer than they should be, by means of
certain Tell-tale HIEROGLYPHICS, in the settling of her Coffee-Grounds.

APPLICATION has been also made to me, by the Husbands of some foreseeing
Ladies, who go to Bed, to take Counsel; and are as Wise, when asleep, as
waking. -- One poor Gentleman, in particular, has been kept at Home, these six
Days, upon a Dream which his Wife had, That an Owl flew out of her Bosom, and
met with a Jack-Daw, that picked his Eyes out. This has absolutely convinced
her, that her Spouse will receive some Mischief, the first Time he ventures out
of her Company. -- In fine, our Women are become a Nation of Sages! And Men
must shortly be Dependant on them, not for DELIGHT only, but INSTRUCTION.

SIR,
YOU were pleased, in a late PLAIN DEALER, to threaten the Male-World with an
Inundation of Female-Wit. Before we are so happy as to have this comfortable
Tide break in upon us, I conceive it to be the Duty of every married Christian,
who is honesty conscious of his Wife's Superiority, to furnish you with fit
Materials; by confessing, as far as in him lies, the Blessing, that has
befallen him.

I THINK it a wise Man's Part, to be humble, in the midst of Preferment, and
would, therefore, be understood to speak without boasting, when I inform You,
That I am able to read my own Name, among the Worshipful, The Commissioners for
Conservation of His Majesty's Peace. -- But I have a Wife! who, not to praise
her, more than she really deserves, would have made a better Justice than I am.
-- Her Understanding blazes out, to the Admiration of All, who know her; only,
like Wood, that is too vigorous, she is apt to snap, a little, in her flaming:
For which, in order to be Even with her, I have given her the Name of SNUBSY.

THE worst of it is, She confines her Talent to one Science: And, so, her
Qualities, which, if divided, might have adorned a hundred Arts, are, All,
profusely lavished, for Improvement of that single Purpose.

MY Spouse, good Sir, to be plain with you, is far gone in Palmestry: But Greek
and She, being intimate Acquaintance, Her own Name for it, is Chiromancy. -- If
Longitude lay in her Palm, she could not fail to discover it; and be paid for
her peeping. -- My Brothers, of the Bench, you know, are not without some Wit
their Way; and most of them can crack a Joke, when we meet, over a Bottle. -- I
venture now and then, to push a Pun, upon these Occasions: And they All know,
as well as I do, That I have no close-fisted Wife, though she makes a good Hand
of me.

I ALLOW her a Study, to herself, at the End of a long Gallery; where when I
walk, and take my Pipe, I am sure, If I but peep through the Keyhole, to see her
Thumbs as high as her Eyes; and half a Score reverend Philosophers, who Treat
on this Deep Mystery, lying spread, on a Table, before her. -- She has Fortune,
at her Fingers Ends! and never Sybil prophesied, with such unwearied
Application.

IT gives me no small Delight, to observe how busy she will be, in looking
over my Line of Life: And really sometimes she hits Things strangely! One would
almost believe, she has more Help than she should have! -- My CEPHALICA,
(which, you are to know, is my Head Line) has, it seems, a Forkey Figure, in
the midst of it, that points, with both Horns, against my Linea Vitalis. -- I
don't know why it is, but she always laughs, when she sees this Mark; and says,
She is sure some Good will come of it, because the But-end of the Fork points
from the Dragon's Tail, to the Mount of Venus.

THOUGH I believe her at my Heart, yet I pretend to make a Doubt of it; because
there can be no prettier Diversion, than to see how she frets, and what a deal
of goodnatur'd Pains she will take, to convince me of it! -- I must own, I
stand amazed at the Improvement of her Natural Parts, by the Benefit of
frequent Practice, upon Secrets, I am utterly a Stranger to!

WE have a New Minister in our Parish, and, the first Time he came to dine, at
our House, I shall never forget how he star'd, when SNUBSY began to show her
Learning! -- She no sooner looked in his Hand, than she told him, He would be
made a Bishop. He is counted a Man of Letters, and yet he was not able to
disprove it; though he owned, indeed, It was unlikely: For, she reduced it to a
Demonstration, little less than Mathematical; by Squares, Trines, Circles,
Stars, Spots, Tokens, Signs, Lines, and Figures, of a thousand different Sorts,
Direct, Transverse, and Parallel: Pursuing every Argument, with an invincible
Force of Reasoning, through the Cavea Martis, to the Via Solis; and unravelling
all the Crosses, in the Tuberculum, on the Mons Saturni; 'till she came within
reach of the Via Lactea, under the Girdle of Venus: And there the Doctor stopped
her, and made Acknowledgements of his Satisfaction.

WE went lately to show Bedlam, to a Country-Cousin, who came up to visit us:
And, in the middle of the long Room, my SNUBSY took a Fancy, to let her
Kinswoman woman see how fine a Skill she was Mistress of: In order to which,
she fell to reading us a Lecture, over the Palm of a silent Lunatic; who, with
a Rugg about his Shoulders, very quietly gave her his Hand, through the Grate
he was standing at -- She had just pointed out, How his Mons Mercurii became
afflicted, by an Evil-line, from his Mons Lunae, when the Patient besprinkled
her Face, with a Bowl-full of a certain Ill-scented Liquor, of his own making,
which his other Hand had concealed behind him. We were, all, in good Measure,
made Partakers of his Bounty. But my Cousin, and I, were beginning to quit some
Part of it, which we thought we should have no Use for, when we were
interrupted by our dripping Chiromancer, who ran between us, all in Transport,
holding her Hands as high as our Eyes, and crying out, with great Vehemence,
That Her Fears were now over; -- For she had foreseen, by a Combust-Line,
between her Pollex and her Cardiac, That she should be in Danger of a Violent
Death, either by Drowning or Suffocation!

IT is not in my Power to explain to you All the Benefits, which I receive from
this Profoundness of my Spouse's Foresight. -- Other People, when they take New
Servants, are forced to send, and enquire their Character: But my little
Conjurer, does but peep upon their Palms, and satisfies her self immediately.
-- I had a very strong Partiality for a smiling Country, Girl, that came, last
Week, to offer her Service, in the Quality of a Chambermaid. But upon the very
first Inspection, my Examiner charged her Home, With Three Favorite
Sweethearts; and then whispered something in her Ear, which she staid not to
return an Answer to; but ran, blushing, out of Doors, in the utmost Hurry and
Disorder. And this Discovery, my Cassandra assured me, was grounded merely upon
Palmistry; the Girl having a manifest Triangle, on the Bottom of the Mount of
Venus, which extended so far downward, as to make a Cleft in her Restricta.

I WAS, once, in some kind of Danger to have been drawn into a Plot; but my
SNUBSY found it out, in the Palm of my Hand; and in Presence of a Minister of
State, who, I can assure You, made no small Use of Her, convinced me, beyond
Dispute, that I should bid fair for being hanged, by Virtue of a crooked Line,
that crossed my Via Combusta. This frighted me from my foolish Purpose: But, I
remember, I was strangely comforted, to discover, at the same Time, upon the
Minister's opening his Hand too, That his Lordship had a Combusta, as
dangerously marked, as mine was.

AFTER so happy a Deliverance, by Interposition of Her Art, I grew desirous to
be taught it; and with a great Deal of Good Success I got over the Heathen
Names of her Planets; and knew what Parts of her Hand they kept House in. I was
wonderfully pleased with VENUS, when I found, in my Primmer of Palmestry, That
she signified Womankind, Kisses, and Ladies Curiosities: But I could never
away with MERCURY; For her Books were pleased to inform me, That he held his
Influence over Pages, Pimps, and Lawyers; Justices of the Peace, and
Astrologers. I thought it, from that Time forward, unbecoming my Honor and
Gravity, to apply my self to an Art, that had treated my Office with such
Indignity. And, as often as I cast my Eye upon these Venerable Words, Justice
of the Peace, and saw them mixed with such Ill Company, I closed my Fist in a
Fury, and would study Palmistry no longer.

YET, in the Way my SNUBSY practices, Truth compells me to confess, It is an
inexhaustable Fund of Benefits, both to my Self, and to the Public. -- If I
happen to be sick, she consults not my Pulse, but, my Palm. And, when Persons
of less Learning, feel Change of Weather, in their Toes, she reads it, under
her Fingers. In short, it is impossible for any Body, but One, who knows as
much of her as I do, to imagine what strange Sings and Tokens, she carries
about her; and what Great Things they signify.

To such a powerful Pitch of Perfection has she raised her surprising Skill,
that she saved a poor Man's Life, lately, who was brought before me, by a
Neighbor's Daughter, in Order to charge him, upon Oath, With having done no
less than ravished her: But SNUBSY, who was for beginning the Examination, in
her own Way, no sooner saw the Inside of their Hands, than she convinced the
Sufferer, very seasonably, That the Accident was unavoidable; having been
foretokened, by a plain Incisure, on the Center of her Via Lactea: So that
being decreed, from Both their Births, this Misfortune became a Fate; and it
would have been in vain to have struggled against it. -- The poor Girl wept,
and thanked her; and, with charitable Change of Purpose, told the Prisoner,
That she forgave him heartily; for she thought it Hard, To have a Man hanged
for doing Nothing, but what he was born for.

IN Justice to the Merit of a Wife, so deeply learned, I could do less than
desire you to acquaint the World with my SNUBSY's Character, when you come to
lay open the Genius of our English Ladies.

I am, with due Regard, SIR, Your never-failing Reader, And your humble
Servant, WALTER WORSHIPFUL.


The Plain Dealer. No 65.
Per varios Casus, per tot Discrimina Rerum,
Tendimus --
VIRG.
MONDAY, November 2. 1724.
To the PLAIN DEALER.
Edinburgh, October 8, 1724. SIR,
IN my Last, I laid before You a short Character of the present Magistrates of
this City; and some Account of the Factious Spirit, that too often disturbs
Them, and their Laudable Undertakings. I am not at all surpised to hear, That
many of your Readers, among my own Countrymen, have taken Offense at my Free
Correspondence, notwithstanding the Sanction of your Judgment, under which it
is published.

PREJUDICE will always make the World Uneasy: Whatever Cause it proceeds from,
it never fails to govern the Understanding, in a very shameful Manner. And,
though it is often no more than the imbibed Sense of a second Person, which a Man
makes use of as his own, it is rarely, and with great Difficulty, restrained
from producing innumerable bad Consequences in Life, with the Face and
Appearance of something that is Good; it mixes it self with every Circumstance
and Action, and has every where a powerful Influence. One Man calls it
Religion, another Principle; and he who dares be Blunt, owns it by its plain
Name of Party. Whatever is done, or said, upon this Foundation, though never so
Faulty, shall find Advocates; and, however Praiseworthy, Condemnation. What a
Shame is it to Reason, to hear it avowed, That such a Set of Men can do
Nothing Ill, because on our Side? And such another, Nothing Well, because they
Vote with our Enemies? -- But Enough of this Subject. -- If, as it is generally
owned, The Public Good should be the Point most in View, of each Individual, I
ought to rest satisfied, and may despise the Spleen of my Censurers.

BUT, Sir, I am inclined to construe favorably, and, perhaps, the Indignation
that some People express against good Persons, and good Things, is not so much
the Effect of Vice, as of Ignorance. As when a Scheme is proposed for Public
Benefit, Blockheads may innocently decry it, because they cannot comprehend it.
This I take to be the present Case, from the dull Opposition, that I have
wondered to see made against several highly generous and profitable
Undertakings. Men, whose Souls are short-sighted, love to walk in Old Ways,
because they are in no Danger of being lost, while they have a Hedge at each
Elbow. Thus the Hotentots adhere to their Hereditary Dirt and Nakedness: Thus
the Irish too, were formerly instigated to rebel against the Yoke, in Defense
of their ancient Privilege of drawing Ploughs by their Horses Tails, with all
the Wit of a freeborn Stedfastness. And, I am sorry I have Cause to say, That
for a Reason of this goodly Sort, my Neighbors love stinking Streets, and hate
the Innovation of Necessary Houses.

IF in this Part of the World, we chance to hear of a Project to make us
Cleanly, we wonder at the crack-brain'd Whimsie, and guard our Hearts against
Vanity. If it is undertaken at the particular Expense of the Proposer, we
discourage the Guilt of so presuming a Generosity. Nay, let a Thing be actually
executed, and completely done to our Hands, we have still Spirit enough to rail
at it, with the most masculine Inflexiblity. In this, and other Respects, I
have Instances in my View; and my Neighbors will take my Meaning, though not my
Counsel.

IT were easy, SIR, to expatiate upon the Ignorance, and Partiality, that
prevail among our People, were I inclined to write Satyr, and expose the
Weakness of my Countrymen. But, as I am unwilling to spread their Defects, I
beg Leave, on the the other Side, to lay before you several more of the
Blessings and Ornaments our City boasts of!

YOU have done us the Honor, to distinguish the Genius and Virtue of some of
the rising Generation, in one of your PAPERS; and my last begins an Account of
the FAIR ASSEMBLY here in Edinburgh, which, notwithstanding the Opposition of
our Clergy, is one of the best Nurseries of Politeness in SCOTLAND. By Means
thereof, our Youth of both Sexes, learn a Habit of Briskness and Freedom,
which, till of late, were less frequent among us. That Restraint, and Stiffness
of Air and Address, which distinguished us from People of more generous
Education, by Decrees, wears away; and Conversation, which was formerly so
confined, and so dull, grows open, free, and easy: Ladies find they may speak
to Gentlemen, without Violence to their Modesty, and Gentlemen may entertain
Ladies, without Designs upon their Virtue. It is now no more a Sight, when a
Lover waits on his Mistress Home, or takes a Walk with her in a Garden. Nay, we
have Husbands, who, without Jealousy, can hear Batchelours invite their Wives
to an Entertainment. In short, we exchange the Spanish Affectation and Gravity,
for the English Liberty and Free Spirit; and, in Place of Narrow Minds, and the
vilest Hypocrisy, we are growing Profane enough to assert the Dignity of
Humane Reason, and the Innocent Privileges of Nature.

PERHAPS I am not mistaken, when I affirm, That this Conversion (I beg Leave of
the Clergy to make Bold with the Word, because I have as Good a Title to it, as
they have) is, in a great Measure, the Effect of the Union of the Two Kingdoms.
But, when I consider it is an Advantage, I would not be thought to mean, that
either Nation is yet too Happy under the Effects of their Incorporation. It may
be allowed us, I presume, to wish, that however strictly they are united, they
may never be bound so close, but that one Hand may be loose enough to assist
and unite the other, if it is not quite impossible, there should arise, in some
future Age, such a Miracle, as a Corrupt Ministry; or a Prince, less watchful,
than our present Glorious SOVEREIGN, for the Defense of his Peoples Liberties.

BUT I am no Politician; nor will I attempt to Enlarge upon a Subject that fits
not the Purpose of your PAPER; though I promise my self, That the PLAIN DEALER
will not scruple, when Occasions rise, to assert the Rights, as well as the
Sense of a True Briton.

I PROCEED to Remark, That as the Correspondence and Communication between the
now United Kingdoms, has, in a great Measure, improved and polished the Taste,
the Air, and the Fashions, of both the Gentlemen and Ladies of my Country; so
it has also refined our Language, in a very sensible Manner. I do not mean the
Accent and Pronunciation, when we speak it -- For these are hardly to be
naturalized without much Time, and continual Converse; there being, in England
itself, a Shibboleth, peculiar to every County. No wonder then, that Scotsmen
find it difficult to come up to their Standard.

BUT, if you will allow, that we make some Progress in the Substance of the
Language, we will readily give up our Pretensions to the Graces of it. Yet our
way of pronouncing the Vowels has Advocates in Foreign Countries: And, perhaps,
the Authority might deserve a Review with the English.

I have wondered, to say Truth, that we are such Proficients in the Language,
considering we have neither a Court, nor a Theater, which are the acknowledged
Fountains of its Refinement.

WHEN I look into the Writings of Mr. DRUMMOND of Hathornden, in the Reign of
King JAMES I. Sir GEORGE MACKENZIE, in the Reign of King CHARLES II. The Earl
of LAUDERDALE, in the Reign of King JAMES II. Bishop BURNET, and Mr. FLETCHER
of Salton, in the two last Reigns; and of a certain noted Writer, in the
present; when I compare their Style with the Style of some of their
Cotemporaries in England, I am tempted to think my Countrymen not so very far
inferior, as that Critics should depreciate our Pretensions to the Language.
But, when I consider too, That whatever Elegance, or Mastery, of that Sort we
arrive at, is as much a Virtue in us, as it is Nature in You, I am vain enough
to imagine, that we merit no less Praise; at least should meet with fair
Indulgence.

ONE Thing more I beg leave to Remark, with Respect to our Language. Many of
our Words, that seem Uncouth, and are not understood by Englishmen, are,
notwithstanding, of English Origin; and are not less Emphatical, and Worthy,
for being Obsolete among You. I find few old Words in DOUGLAS's VIRGIL, that
are not also to be found in CHAUCER: And, perhaps, our ALLAN RAMSAY, a living
Versifier in Old-Style, uses few that are not to be met with in SHAKESPEARE,
SPENCER, etc. -- except, when he coins Words, by virtue of his extra-judicial
Poetic Privileges, that never were, and never will be, used by any Mortal,
besides Himself.

LIVING Languages, are like living Trees; they have their Summer and their
Winter. The Words of the One, like the Leaves of the Other, fall off, and are
succeeded by a new Generation. It is, however, Discretion's Work, in this Case,
to Naturalize none, at the Expense of better.

YOU see, Sir, with what Freedom I write my Sense both of Persons and Things to
you. I own, I observe no Order in the Form of my Letters: Nor do I believe That
would recommend me more to your Regard. What I chiefly aim at, is, A natural
Simplicity in my Expressions, and a Truth in my Facts, becoming a Correspondent
of the PLAIN DEALER.

'I HAVE the Honor to be with due Veneration,

SIR, Your trusty Intelligencer, and most Obedient Servant, FERGUS BRUCE.


AFTER having thanked my Correspondent, for the Continuance of his agreeable
Intelligence, I shall close with a short Remark on on what he says, concerning
our Language.

I AGREE with Him entirely, that many of of our old Words had the same Original
with theirs; for all that Part of Scotland, to the the Southward of the Frith,
was as much Saxon as we were: So then the Foundation of our Language being the
same, it is not so reasonable, as I wish it were, to allow this ingenious
Gentleman the Claim he makes, in Behalf of his Country -- That the Elegance and
Mastery, which are by Nature in Us, are a Virtue in North Britain.

THE Nature is certainly alike to both Nations: The Virtue is most due, where
the Improvement was first made. The Nobility and Gentry of Scotland have, at
least, for Ages past, been as learned as the English, and much more accustomed
to foreign Travel and Correspondence. These are the great, and indeed the only
Causes of Refinement in a Language -- For Trade and Luxury are much more likely
to corrupt it, by the Confusion they introduce, mixing Degrees and
Distinctions, and contracting our Care to regard nothing so much as INTEREST.

SINCE then the Scotch Language was once the very same with the English; and
since their People have been more intimately Conversant, than ours, among
Foreign Nations; and have always enjoyed the same Assistance of Learning, and
yet have been behind us in the Improvement of our common Tongue; it follows by
Necessity, That the Praise of Virtue is in ours -- But it is a Birthright,
which, like Kentish Gavel-Kind, we must equally divide with our Brothers, in
the next Generation: for, though they were slow Setters out, they have proved
Themselves as good Runners, and will be abreast with us, in the Race, and lose
no Ground for the Future.

The Plain Dealer. No 66.
Credula res amor est --
OVID MET. -- Tormentis gaudet Amantis.
JUV.
FRIDAY, November 6. 1724.
THE Complaint of AMANDA in the following LETTER, is of a Nature as New, as the
Foundation of it is Just. The Guilt which it speaks of, is frequent enough: But
this fine-spirited, and discerning Lady, has placed it on the Person who has,
hitherto, been looked on as most Innocent, and deserving Pity. -- The Truth is,
there are a thousand Resemblances of Virtue, which if unmasq'd, by so
distinguishing a Hand as AMANDA's, would assume their proper Faces, and be
known for Vices, and Follies. -- I will entertain my Readers, with this Lady's
Excellent LETTER, just as I received it, and afterward, in Obedience to her
Command, consider the Complaint, which is the SUBJECT of it.

October 17, 1724. SIR,
WHEN Parents have so much Zeal for their Childrens Promotion, and so little
for their Happiness, as to force them to Marry the Person they have an Aversion
to, How is the World moved, with a Tenderness of Concern! And Nature shocked
with the Violence!

SUCH a Constraint has always met with its just Discouragement: And your
Predecessor in PLAIN DEALING took it under his Care. But, Whether it is from
the Pride of one Sex, who are fond of the Reputation, even, of a Lover whom
they Hate! Or, from the unjust Partiality, of the Other, The much greater
Offender, in my Opinion, passes uncensured. -- Such Parents are stigmatized
with Inhumanity, and well they may! But what shall we say of Him, who continues
to teize the Woman, who abhors him? who would force her to make a Prostitute of
her Love? To enslave herself to Interest? And, when her Refusal has drawn down
the Resentment of her Parents, lays it, all, on his Excess of Love.

IS Love then so base a Passion? So void of Tenderness? So unlike itself, and
all its generous Pretenses? that it can feed on the Quiet of the beloved
Object! and steal from it the Joy which it has not Power to give it! No, no,
The real Lover knows not how to Offend. -- His Happiness must rise, and fall,
with Hers, who inspired his Passion. -- But if, on the contrary, His Desires
run Counter to her Happiness, It is not Love; It is Brutality! And, if He, who
is thus possessed, supposes Himself in Love, He is deceived, and would deceive
Others.

BUT, even granting, All This were the real Effect of Love, on the Part of the
Pursuer, where can a Woman find That dedelightful Harmony, That inexhaustible
Spring of Bliss, which we are taught to expect, in Loving? Can the Constancy of
an unlov'd Lover ever win her to a Compliance? No -- rather Prepossession will
guard the Passes of her Heart, nor suffer it to be bribed by Obligations; And
Time does but add to our Hatred: For Opportunity finds out Faults, and
furnishes Reasons for our Refusal. -- In short, such a Lover shows more
Extravagance, than Constancy; more Inhumanity, than Passion.

THIS, Sir, is my own Misfortune, to be miserably haunted, by the Man, whose
Sight is Odious to me: One, whom no Words can convince! No Denials satisfy! No
affronts affect! Insensible of my Uneasiness; and Indefatigable, in creating
it! -- I would fly him, but I cannot, unless I would fly my Friends too, and my
Parents: Nor have I any Intimate left, whom his Diligence, and Insinuations,
have not made his Own.

IT IS of YOU, therefore, I must beg, to say something, that may give me Ease,
and have some Effect on my troublesome Pursuer: And, if, in any Thing I have
said, I am Mistaken, in my Sentiments, or unguarded, in my Expressions, be
pleased to Correct it; and think, That a Woman cannot be always on her Guard,
who has so just a Cause for Resentment, as,

Your Unfortunate, Humble Servant, AMANDA.


IT the Admiration, which is due to such a Merit as this Lady's, did not place
her above Pity, I could be sorry for that Persecution, which she Laments, in so
Elegant, and Pathetic, a Manner. The Gentleman, who is so unhappy as to be the
Subject of her Complaint, will be the last, that feels the Force of it. --
There is a Love of ourselves, deeply rooted in human Nature, that imposes on
us, first, and, then, emboldens us to impose on Others. We do not approve the
Faults, which we are guilty of; But, which is almost as bad, we cannot see
them: -- We join heartily in, with those, who condemn the very Follies which
are most remarkably our own; and are all the while insensible how ridiculous we
appear to Others, by adhering publicly to the Practice of what we, as
publicly, continue to Censure.

IT is, I must confess, the hardest Lesson of Nature, to correct the
Extravagancies of Love. -- Where this Passion is Real, It will be the Sovereign
of the Mind. It moulds the Soul to its own Purposes; and lends its own Eyes to
the Understanding. Neither does it depend, for its Violence, or Moderation, on
the Capacity of the Lover, but on the Proportion, in which it actuates him. The
Wise Man, in this Case, has no Prerogative, above the Fool. It is in Love, as
it in Madness, The more Exalted the Genius, the more unbounded the Raging! -- A
Wise Man may much better defend himself, than a Fool can; But, when He yields,
there is no Difference; because Opinion, in this Passion, always stands in the
Place of Reason.

THIS being the Case, AMANDA has small Encouragement; who, by appealing to what
is Reasonable, would dissuade her Lover from what is Necessary. -- Her Charms
have deprived his Life of every Comfort, but what She gives it; and, while He
loves, at the Rate she says he does, it will be impossible for him, to think
himself so much in the Wrong, as she finds him.

IT would, certainly, be a Great Happiness, if Men, who love, without Hope,
could desist, without Misery: For, besides that AMANDA's Argument has thrown an
Air of ungenerous Selfishness, on the Obstinacy of such Addresses, there is
This further Mischief in it, That a Lover, whom an avowed Hatred cannot
repulse, in his Application, cuts off his Right, when he becomes a Husband, to
complain of, or return, Ill Usage, -- Is she too Cold, too Unkind, too
Disdainful, for a Wife? -- How much greater is His Fault, who foresaw all This,
and, yet, would make her one? -- He loved Her, before She pitied Him, and
consented to become His, notwithstanding the most open Profession of her
Insensibility! And how Base, and Ungenerous must it be, To make the Continuance
of that Insensibility his Pretense for treating her Ill, after she has put her
self under his Protection; which, while she refused, and detested him, had no
Power to move his Resentment!

EITHER, He ought, with a manly Fortitude, to tear himself from the Remembrance
of an Object, so insensible of his Torments; or, in Gratitude, for a
Compliance, that was Involuntary, and the Effect, rather, of Compassion, than
of Love, He should resolve to support himself under the Misfortune of her
Aversion, without permitting his own Sentiments to be imbittered, by the
Effects of it; till, by a Progress of persuasive Softness, He shall have
touched her reluctant Heart, and prepared it to receive Impressions, as well of
Love, as of Gratitude.

BUT, how Monstrous is the Brutal Figure, which I have seen some Husbands make!
who, when Lovers, were the Poorest, and most Abject, of all Slaves! -- When
they should be Defenders, they are Tyrants; and when it was reasonable for them
to have been Provoked, they were stupidly Submissive! -- How contemptible is
their unmanly Weakness! A morose and restless Peevishness, makes up the
Behavior they expect to charm by! They contract a surly, sower Habit, from the
Disappointments they meet in Life; and, instead of softening the Edge of
Affliction, toward the Woman, who is bound to share their Sufferings, they
double them on her Head, from whom, (in Honor, and Humanity) they ought to
ward off Sorrow, by a noble Sweetness, and endearing Tenderness in their whole
Behavior!

BUT the pleasantest Stupidity of all, is, That when, by a Length of Savage
Cruelties, they have made themselves completely Odious; they are impudent
enough to wonder, How it happens that their Wives appear no fonder of them?

THERE is no Part of our Life that requires a nicer Conduct than our Choice of
the Person, with whom we are to vow an inseparable Union; and, yet, there is
Nothing, which we venture on, with more Rashness; or which we examine, with so
little Foresight! -- And, hence it is, That MATRIMONY, with equal Satyr, and
Justice, has been compared, by one of our Old Poets, To a Crowd in the Street,
which excites a Curiosity, in every Passer-by, to add one Fool to the Number:
But, they are no sooner in the midst of the Press, than they grow uneasy at
their Situation, and are as Eager to elbow out again, as they were, before, to
gain Admission.

MARRIAGE is like unto a Rabble-Rout;
They, that are OUT, would fain get IN;
And They, that are IN would fain get OUT.
MANY are the Pleasantries, which the Truth, and Frequency, of this unlucky
Observation have given Occasion to, among Men of Wit; who, having laughed, a
while, at Others, grow silly enough, themselves, to be also laughed at, in
their Turns. -- But, in all the Multitude of Sarcastick Fancies, which I have
met with, upon this beaten Subject, I remember none, that is so uncommon, and
founded on so humorous a Piece of Extravagance, as an EPITAPH, which I saw, at
Rome; where a Man, and his Wife, who were buried, together, are represented
quarrelling, in their Grave. -- The Original is in Latin, but I will translate
it, for the Service of Coquets, and Old Maids, who cannot fail to make Good Use
of it, on a THEME, which they delight in handling.

STAY, Bachelor! if you have Wit!
A Wonder to behold!
Husband, and Wife, in One dark Pit,
Lie close, and never Scold!
Tread softly, though, -- for Fear she wakes:
Hark! She begins, already!
You Have hurt my Head, -- My Shoulder aches.
These Sots can never move steady.
Ah, Friend, with happy Freedom blessed!
See! how my Hope's miscarried.
Not DEATH it self, can give you Rest,
Unless you die, Unmarried.
The Plain Dealer. No 67.
Provehimur portu, terraeque, urbesque, recedunt.
VIRG.
MONDAY, November 9. 1724.
BY this Time, I suppose, I pass for an Out-of-the-Way Old Humourist, who has
Nothing in him, but a few odd Whimsies, which he takes Delight to be noted for.
But, now the Town begins to fill, I design to take more State upon me: And
before the Winter is half out, I shall cause it to appear, pretty Plainly, That
I can make free with Trade and Politics, as well as with Wit and Impertinence.

I WAS walking, the other Day, near the Royal Exchange, and took up a little
Pamphlet, that lay in my Way, at a Bookseller's Shop, Entitled, New, and
Accurate Observations, on the Coast of GUINEA. -- I was pleased with this
Subject: For, though I informed my Reader, my first setting out, That I was an
Enemy to the East India Company, (by which hangs a Secret, that may be
disclosed in some future Paper) yet I am a Lover of THE ROYAL AFRICAN: And have
good Reasons, for both Opinions.

THE Gentleman, who is Author of the abovementioned Treatise, is a Physician,
newly returned from the Coast he writes of. -- He seems to be a Person of
Learning and Experience; and expresses himself with a Warmth of Spirit, that
carries in it a Generous Plainness, and a rough, but Manly, Integrity. -- When
I began to peruse his Book, I thought He appeared too Angry: But, before I had
read it out, the ill Usage He complains of, seemed incapable of being
remembered, without an Agitation of such Passions, as must leave him fully
acquitted. -- The Abuses and Mismanagements, which this Gentleman enumerates,
are such, as I am sorry to hear of, because their Consequences must affect the
Company, in too sensible a Manner.

I HAVE often reflected, not without the utmost Amazement, from what strange
Causes it should happen, That the Credit of that Company has been sunk, to so
low an Ebb; since nothing can be more demonstrable, than that It has
Advantages, beyond Comparison, above all others, to make it self the most
Flourishing! -- If any Deficience, within themselves, with Regard to Stock, or
Encouragement, is the Prevention of their Good Purposes, methinks, their
Complaints could be no sooner heard, than they would be sure of a Remedy! For,
even as they, now stand, no Company exists, that is of such Importance to the
Nation. -- If the Interest of England, in Respect to Trade, depends most, as it
certainly does, upon her American Plantations, those Plantations do, as
certainly, depend on the Slave Trade from AFRICA. A Trade! that strengthens us,
in the very Vitals, and first Principle of Government: For it is perpetually
adding Increase to the Numbers of our useful People; far beyond the progressive
Growth of our slow, and Natural Multiplication.

THE Nation, too, (in Point of Wealth, as well as Power) is, to an infinite
Degree, more advantaged than The Company, by Effect of this Negro Traffic.
When the Company have sold a Slave, That Profit, which they once make, is All
the Benefit, which he can, ever, bring them. -- But, for the Benefit of the
Nation, there is no computing what may be gained, by him. Not only the Wretch,
himself, but his Children's Children, after him, down to the latest
Generations, are, for ever, doomed to Work; and All their Product is the
Nation's. -- The Difference is Vast, and Infinite!

THE Extent of Country, comprehended within the Limits of This Company's
Charter, is Prodigious and Astonishing! For above Thirty Degrees, on one Side,
from the Line, and about Twenty, from the other, all the Coast is within their
Limits: So that they have all the Good, Variety, of Soils, and of Latitude,
which the whole World can afford them. -- They have, consequently, within their
Bounds, a proper Earth and Climate, for every rich Product, that we pick up
here and there, at the remotest Distances, from one Side of the Globe to the
other. -- They have not, it is true, a Claim of Property to the Lands: But, how
easily might they purchase it, as far as could be necessary, at Rates too
inconsiderable to deserve the naming? -- They have Islands too, and
Settlements, never subject to the Natives Insults. -- Why might not these be
cultivated? Why not Rice, Sugar, Indigo, Cotton, Ginger, and Tobacco, brought
hence, as well as from America? And how much sooner, and easier?

IN one short and comprehensive View, may be seen a Demonstration of the
Difference, as to the Company's Profit, between the Slaves they transport to
America, and those whom they might employ, if they pleased, to raise Products,
for their own Benefit.

TO say nothing of the Charge of Shipping them, which would be saved, upon All,
so employed, in Africa; nor to insist on the mafest Advantage, of cheaper
Freight, and shorter Voyages, what can be plainer than this Way of Reasoning?
-- Compute the Company's Profit, by the Sale of a Negro, to be Equal with what
might be Gained by him, in a Year's Work, over and above his Maintenance, and
the Interest of his Prime Cost, (which it certainly never is) yet, the Negro,
that WORKS for the Company, costs no more, than One, who is SOLD, for them:
Whereas this Last is wholly Lost, from that Day forward, to their Interest;
while the First, returns them Yearly, the same Profit, during Life, without new
Charge, to Balance it.

I SPOKE, just now of Products, which are commonly raised, by our Planters in
America; and might, as certainly, be raised in Africa; But there are Eastern
Harvests, of much greater Consequence, which Time, I hope, will teach This
Company to reap, without more Difficulty, than may gradually be surmounted! --
Why not the richest of the East Indian Spices, Pepper, Nutmegs, Cloves, and
Cinnamon, procured and planted there? They have Soil and Climate exactly the
same, with those in which they grow: Nay, they have wild Spices, rising
naturally, under their Agent's Eyes, to be as it were, an Indication, and push
'em forward, to Attempt it!

BUT, if they will not be persuaded to transplant Advantages, at least they
might possess themselves of those, which lie before them. They have Gold, which
the Natives gather and bring down to their Forts and Factories. I know what
Difficulties attend the View, I am about proposing: And I know too, that though
they are Considerable, they are far from Unsurmountable. What hinders, then,
but that the Uplands might be discovered; and perhaps the Gold Mines found, and
worked upon, by the Natives themselves, for the Company's Benefit, in Exchange,
for what those Natives value more, but which would cost little to their
Furnishers? And this Attempt, though peaceably established and pursued, might,
for more certain Safety, be protected by the Awe of an Armed Force: A very
small one, were sufficient here, where Numbers are of little Strength, for want
of Courage or of Order.

HOW much more Useful, than some of their present Factories, would Forts and
Settlements be, a Hundred Miles, or more, in Distance, One above the Other,
along the Niger, or some other of those Prodigious Rivers, which flow a Course
of two or three Thousand Miles, through the Heart of this vast and unknown
Continent? How easy were it for the People in these Forts, to possess and
cultivate, a large Tract round them? To discover the Bordering Country and
Trade, and make Leagues with the Neighboring Princes? To maintain a regular
and frequent Correspondence with each other, by means of Light Vessels, with
flat Bottoms, adapted to the Navigation properest for those Rivers: And once a
Year, or oftener, to send down their General Stores, to the Company's Ships, at
the Entrance, and receive back, with the Return of their small Vessels, what
should be sent them from Home, either for their Support or Traffic! -- What
new, and numberless Nations might the Company thus Trade with, at first Hand,
to their unspeakable Enrichment? -- And were such an Entrance once opened to
them, by expert and resolute Adventurers, what popular Increase of Consumption,
would it not occasion, in our Woollen, and many other, Manufactures?

THERE are no Impossibilies, in Designs, of this Nature, but to narrow and
confined Understandings; and to Spirits of a heavy Fabric. But this Company
has the Honor to be assisted by Great Genius's, Wise, and Enterprizing enough
to mark out the Way, to Measures that might soon recover them from the present
Ill Prospect of their Affairs, and make the Memory of the ROYAL AFRICAN COMPANY
Dear and Glorious to all Posterity.

IT is a Work of too much Length, for such a Paper as mine is, to prove how
practicable these Things are; But I shall, sometimes, occasionally, touch the
Subject, with the Brevity I am confined to: Because, when I consider into what
Hands my Hints may fall, I flatter my self, they may grow Fruitful, and become
a Service to my Country.

THE Duke of CHANDOS, in the Head of These, has so Fine, and so Enlarged a
Spirit; and is so Great, and so Acknowledged, an Honor to our Nation, That it
is scarce possible to express, in his Praise, so much as every wise Man must
Think of him! -- I dare not, therefore, attempt so hard a Task as his full
Character: But, while I mention him, I am on Fire, with such an Admiration of
his Generous Qualities, that I cannot forbear to close my Paper, with such
faint Out-lines, as can be Sketch'd, by One who draws at too much Distance.

IT is not alone, in the Princely Grandeur of his Economy, that this
Illustrious Lord reflects a Brightness on his Honored Order, and points out to
us, in a shining Light, what a Nobleman was meant to be. Appearance, He well
knows, can be no more than the Shadow of Substantial Glory. -- He looks inward,
therefore, and draws out, into Practice and Example, such a surprising Train of
Virtues, That, instead of supporting his Distinction upon the Title, which was
so justly due to his, He has added to it much more Honor, than some, who wear
it with a Colder Spirit, have been able to borrow from it.

THOUGH Descended from a Noble Line, one of the most Ancient of the Kingdom! He
disdained to owe his Greatness to the Grandeur of his Ancestors: Nor ever
thought of his Fore-Father's Honors, but as an Archer raises his Eye to the
Point of some high Steeple, when he would shoot his Arrow over it.

HOW Inconsiderable, in so Generous a Taste as His, are all the Glitterings of
a Dependant Greatness! How much Nobler, after His, more than Imperial, Manner,
to adorn and serve this Country, his own unbounded Expense, than to be more
busy, to perhaps less Purpose, and be Paid, for his Want of Liberty, at the
Head of an Administration!

THE World lies open, to his Eye, and All its Interests are exactly known to
him: But nothing can he see, in any Part, or happy Corner of it, more beloved
and worthy, than he himself is! -- There is this too, Peculiar in him, That his
Mind, with all its Vastness, is serenely Centrical and Regular: His Purposes
are as Rational as Great. His Understanding is Clear. His Penetration is
Boundless. His Resolution is Ardent; and his Applications are Calm and Steadfast!

HE knows, and marks, the nicest Difference between Dignity and Pride,
Generosity and Ostentation; Condescension and Weakness! -- He reconciles State
with Easiness; and teaches Reverence to Freedom! How Extensive is his Wisdom!
How Unwearied his Industry! How Magnificent his Liberality! How Enlarged are
his Idea's! How Unrestrained by Prejudice! How Unconfined to Party! -- What
Astonishment would it produce, in the Minds of ordinary Men, could a a History
be given the World, of the Immensity of those Princely Expenses, which might be
charged to his Humanity! -- The Charity of the Common World would blush, and
hide it self at the Comparison: For the Munificence of this prodigious Spirit,
would swallow up all other Benignity, as the Enlivened Rod of Moses devoured
the Serpents of the Egyptians.

THESE are his Known and Public Beauties! But, what Amiable Private Qualities
must there be, in so exalted a Mind! which are hid from the distant World, and
appear only to those Few, those very Few, of his Friends, who not alone are
conversant with him; but have Souls sympathetical enough to conceive the
Glowings of his untold Purposes.

UNDER the Influence of such a Power, what may not the Gentlemen, of the
African House expect, would they Resolve upon such Measures, as may suit the
Glory of a Company, of whom it will be said hereafter, as was once said, of
TIRE and SIDON, Whose Merchants were Princes, and whose Traders, The Nobles of
the Earth!

The Plain Dealer. No 68.
Scribendi recte, sapere est Principium, and Fons.
HOR.
FRIDAY, November 13. 1724.
THERE is no kind of Wit, which requires a livelier Force, or more
comprehensive Turn of Spirit, than That which we inscribe on Monuments, to
express the Characters of the Dead: And I am sorry I have Reason to observe,
That almost every Church, in England, is a Witness of our Deficience in it. --
The Fire of Fancy should, on these Occasions, be extremely Intense, and
Subtle, because, wanting Continuity, it has all its Effect at a Flash; and can
therefore have no Medium: It must be either piercing or contemptible.

WHEN I stand before the Tomb of Mr. Dryden, in Westminster-Abbey, I am in
Debate with my self concerning that Delicacy of Veneration, which was the Cause
of its being inscribed with no more than his Immortal Name. -- The Noble
Founder thought it Superfluous to add any Thing, after that: Because there
scarce lives a Reader, who can be unacquainted with his Character. -- Yet,
methinks, on the other Hand, the Expression of a Decent Gratitude, may be held
Due to a Benefactor, however raised above the Want, or Expectation of our
Benevolence. And, to carry it yet farther, though no Profanation could be more
unpardonable, than the Product of a Vulgar Genius, on a Subject so exalted,
there is, at least, One Spirit, in the Nation, greatly Equal to the Labor! And
This, the Founder of the Monument must have known, more certainly than any
other Person, because more nearly conversant with, and more sufficiently a
Judge of, him.

I WOULD not, after this, say, I mean Mr. Pope, but that, in the Course of my
Papers, I shall let him perceive, that I am no Flatterer. -- I have wished to
see His Soul do Honor to his Father's Dust, and animate a Marble, which can
never be more dignified, than it is, unless His own Remains should visit it! --
When my Passions feel his Force, in Eloise's struggling Conflicts, I attend
him, through the Depths of Nature, with the Reverence which is due to God-like
Wisdom and Philosophy! And, while my Fancy flames, and glitters, in the
sportive Vastness of his Levity, where Belinda's Hair attracts him, I am
transported at his Wit, and Gaiety, and grow in Love with his Good Breeding!
Yet, Five Parts in Six, I doubt, of all that Admiration which has been paid to
these inimitable Flights of Genius, is Implicit, and mere Accident: For there
are Strokes, so fine and delicate, that like Angels, they must be invisible to
the Eyes of Common Mortals, and seen only by those happy Few, whom Heaven
vouchsafes a Visit to!

I HAVE been shown an EPITAPH lately, which is said to have been written by
this Gentleman, for the Tomb of a Friend of his: The Thought, on which it
turns, is very happy, and extremely Natural. -- It has been published, in some
of our Weekly-Papers; but not so full as I here give it.

To this sad Shrine, whoever thou art, draw near,
Here lies the FRIEND, most wept, the SON most dear,
Who never knew Joy, but Friendship might divide;
Nor gave his Father Grief -- but, when he died!
How vain is Reason! Eloquence, how weak!
When POPE must tell, what HARCOURT cannot speak!
Yet, Let thy once loved Friend inscribe thy Stone:
And, with a Father's Sorrows, mix his own.
Ah, no! it is vain to strive -- It will not be.
No Grief, that can be told, is felt for THEE!
THE Manuscripts, of this fine EPITAPH, which are handed about Town, have,
already, various Readings: And in some, the two last Lines are wholly omitted.
But, I can never suppose a Castration, of that Importance, Genuine; because the
Close, at the first Break, has a Strength, so full, and distinguished, that it
left an absolute Necessity, for a vigorous Turn of Thought, in the Conclusion
of that which follows it: Whereas nothing could appear more languid, and
unequal to its Author, than to have ended, after so fine a Stroke, with saying
no more, than this: Let your Friend write your Epitaph; and tell the World,
that he is as sorry for your Death, as your Father is.

I HAVE not, I think, at home, read any Piece, of this Kind, more striking, and
strongly raised upon the Force of its touching Simplicity! But I remember to
have seen two Epitaphs, both, Foreign; which gave me a Delight, of the same
Nature. -- I shall translate them, as near I can, into English. This, first, is
by a French Poet, on the Death of Cardinal Richlieu: And has in it, a certain
Mixture of the Great, the Natural, and the Surprising, which is very rarely to
be met with.

Stay, Traveller! -- for, All you want, is near,
Wisdom, and Power, I seek. -- They, both, lie here.
Nay, but I look for more, and raise my Aim,
To Wit, Taste, Learning, Elegance, and Fame.
Here ends your Journey, then: For, here, the STORE
Of RICHLIEV lies. -- Alas! repeat no more.
Shame on my Pride! What Hope is left, for Me,
When, here, Death treads on All, that Man can be.
THE Second, which now follows, is of Spanish Original; and was the Epitaph of
a beautiful Neice of the Famous Olivarez.

If (weeping Love!) Inquirers seek to know
Her Name, whose Charms enrich the Dust below;
Point up, and bid 'em read: -- But, say no more:
Nor strive, in vain, to count her Virtues over.
Scarce could the sweet Amount be justly sung,
Though Her Each Atom were an Angel's Tongue!
WHERE there is Justness, and Propriety, in these Rays and Beamings of the Wit,
they break out upon our Fancy, with irresistible Force and Luster! We are often
dazzled, for a Moment, even with the false Imitation of it, where the proper
Sense is mingled, and confounded with the Metaphorical. But we no sooner
examine it, closely, than the Counterfeit Colors vanish, and we despise our
own, and the Poet's Weakness: Whereas, when the Thought is just, as well as
shining; when it is founded on Truth, in Nature, and only raises our Admiration
by its Grandeur, Grace, and Nobleness, the Heat, contracted, and pointed
strong, upon a near, and single, Center, inflames and catches, like a Burning
Glass; and Stocks and Stones, are melted down by it, almost as suddenly as Gold
and Silver.

IT were a Work of General Use, and no unpleasant Entertainment, to make a
Muster of those False Thoughts, or affected Turns of Wit, and pass 'em, in
Review, opposed to such, as are True and Solid. -- The Common Taste would stand
corrected, and consent to give up their Favorites; for Few can want Good Sense
to distingush, when they see 'em together; and mark, that Truth, (which is
Nature represented exactly as she appears) is the Life and Soul, of Thinking;
and Greatness, Delicacy, and Delightfulness, the fine Dress, and Ornaments, of
it.

THE black Eyes of the Spanish Ladies, have a Jack-o'the-Lanthern Brightness,
that is very apt to mislead the Poets of that warm Country. The following
Sonnet is a Masterpiece, of its Kind, and may deserve to stand as an Example of
that False Wit abovementioned: As consisting, chiefly, of contradictory
Idea's, which are forced together, like Oil, and Spirit, by the Violence of the
Writer's Fancy; but separate, and distinguish themselves, as soon as they have
Time to settle.

I know, too well, my cruel FAIR!
Why those sweet Eyes have Sable Covers,
Mere Pity bids 'em Mourning wear,
To grieve the Fate of murdered Lovers.
Assist me, then, thou killing Maid!
I hate my Foe, and must defeat him:
Oh! lend me but those Eyes, in Aid,
And He Is Stone Dead, when next I meet him.
BUT though such Turns as These are unnatural, and therefore ridiculous, when
applied to any serious Purpose, yet there are Turns, both upon Words and
Thoughts, that, preserving the Truth of Meaning, are so far from being Faults,
that in all the lighter Kinds of Poetry, they are extremely graceful and
desirable. Thus in the famous Epigram of Ausonius, relating to Dido, who fled
from Phaenicia to Carthage, upon the Death of her Lover Sichaeus, and,
afterward, died her self, upon Aeneas's forsaking her, the Thought is just and
solid; and though it glitters, and is so full of Point, yet, it bears, without
diminishing, every Light that it can be viewed in. -- I will give both the
Latin and the English, because our Language has been judged incapable of
expressing it, without more Compass, and Weakness, than the Original.

Infelix Dido, nulli been nupta Marito!
Hoc pereunte fugis: Hoc fugiente peris.
Poor Queen! twice doomed disastr'ous Love to try;
You fly the Dying; for the Flying, die!
THERE is something too, of an elevated Smartness, and that will bear the
nicest Examination, in the Thought of a French Poet, concerning a Cardinal,
already named; who was accused of holding too great an Ascendant over his
Master.

Il est trop absolu, sur l' Esprit de son Maistre.
Mais son Maistre, per Luy, est le Maistre des Roy's.
Though he shadowed his Master, with arrogant Wings,
Yet, he made, whom he mastered, the Master of Kings.
IT is this Power, in the Conception! This comprehensive Grasp of Meaning!
where more than can be expressed, in Pages, is crowded into a single Sentiment,
and insinuated to the Reader, so as to swell, and expand it self, in his
Understanding! It is This, that is True Poetry! That makes up that illustrious
Art, which is therefore justly, called Divine, because it shakes, and moulds
the Soul, and bows to its Purposes; transports us out of our selves, and raises
a Creation, round us, which is wholly of its own establishing!

BUT how different from this, is Poetry, as it is commonly understood and
practiced! -- A trifling Skill in Measure, and an easy Sweep in Rhyming, are
no more what makes the Poet, than the Chimes can be called the Church, or the
Chariot makes the Doctor. He, who thinks, in a vulgar Manner, will be so far
from concealing his Emptiness, by the Verse, he pretends to charm by, that like
the dirty Fool, in the Gospel, who invited himself to the Marriage Feast, and
sat down, among the finest Guests, without a Wedding Garment, he will be put
pointed out, with the more Contempt; and serve to set off the vast Disparity,
between himself, and those he presumes to mix with.

WHOEVER does but reflect on the different Figure, France now makes among the
Princes of Europe, compared with That, which every Body remembers Her to have
made, within these Twenty Years, will, in Justice to a most Heroic Monarch,
divest himself of the ungenerous Littleness of Common, National, Prejudices,
and observe with Pleasure, That Great Prince's Influence, over the Wit and
Genius, as well as the Courage and Obedience of his People. -- When I read the
Birth-Day-Songs of our English Laureats, I see the Poorness of their Salary,
through the Slightness of their Sentiments. But the most light, and jovial,
Performances of our Neighbor Nation, when they had their King for their Theme,
seemed to glow, with a Warmth of Gratitude, as if Reason strove with Invention,
which should praise him with most Copiousness.

Qu'il regne ce Heroes, qu'il triomphe toujours:
Qu'avec luy soit toujours la Paix, ou la Victoire!
Que le Course de ses Ans dure, autant, que le Course
De la Seine, and de la Loire!
Qu'il vive, autant que sa Gloire!
May our Hero long reign, and still triumph in State!
And Conquest, or Peace, on his Purposes wait!
Let the Course of his Years, like the Loire and the Seine,
Flow with Fullness and Strength, above Time's deepest Drain!
For, while blessed with her King, what has France to implore,
But, that He may live, till his Fame lives no more!
I DESIGNED, when I began this Paper, to say a great deal more, than I have
left my self Room for, concerning Epitaphs, and Elegies; but I must refer, what
remains, to some other Opportunity: And will conclude, with one of the
Sublimest Pieces of Extravagance, that ever heated the Imagination of of a
Poet. -- The Author was a Portuguese, and, in describing the Assault of a
Fortress, by his Countrymen, speaks of the Ditch, in a Flight, at once so wild,
and yet so strong, that it is impossible to find a Proof, more pregnant, that
Genius without Judgment, can do nothing considerable, in Poetry.

The yawning Ditch declined, with dreadful steep,
And, from Days aching Eye, so backward fell:
That Saints might pass, through its unsounded Deep,
To scare the Devils, and let in Light, on Hell!
The Plain Dealer. No 69.
-- dare Jura Maritis.
HOR.
MONDAY, November 16. 1724.
PATTY AMBLE has many Friends, who will be glad to hear, That the COQUET is
come to Town; after two whole Months Absence. LOVE revisits me, at the Approach
of this wild Creature, like the Return of a Tertian Ague. -- So, my Readers, in
mere Pity, must be moderate, when they find me Dull. It Is a Rule among us,
LOVERS, to be either stark Mad, or Stupid. -- See! what an unaccountable Letter
the pert Baggage has sent me!

Dear SLAVY!
AT last, this sweet Town, which must for ever hold my Heart, has again
Possession of my Person. -- I left Tunbridge, a Hundred Years ago; and went a
Pilgrimage, in pure Compassion, to visit a poor Thing, in Marriage Trammels:
Where I have stuck fast, ever since, in the Dirt of your Dear Sussex.

WELL! though I have but half forgiven you, for setting That breathing Whirligig,
Ned Volatile, upon me; yet, I think, I am as much in Love with You, as with any
of your Rival Candidates for the Place I have to dispose of. -- But, if ever I
marry you, there is One Thing, I must positively insist on. -- You shall keep
me two Chairs, and a Chariot. -- I had scarce a Scruple of Brains, in my Head,
all last Week: For, after rumbling up, in a Stage-Coach, I was pounded to
Death, from the dreadful Borough, to Park-Place, in an odious Hackney Mortar.
-- You have History, I know, at your Finger's Ends: Pray send me the Name of
that Tragical Roman Tumbler, who was barrell'd up, by the Carthaginians; and
rolled, a Mile or two, down Hill, in a Butt, stuck full of Ten-penny-Nails?
Methinks, I pity him, from my Heart! For, I could not help thinking, while I
was bouncing up and down, in my Vehicle, like a Thimble full of Shot, in a
Quart Bottle, That my own Case was as bad as His. At least, if there was any
Difference, it lay only in a few Points, which I had rather give up, than stand
upon.

HEAVEN have Mercy on those poor Citizens Wives, who, when their hideous
Bedfellows have made them too big, to be able to go, are forced to be carried,
in these Town Tumbrels. -- It Is well I was not chose for a Knight of the Shire,
at our last Election! The Rogues, who contrived these Bolting Hutches, to sift
Peoples Bones through their Skins, should never have escaped Punishment, for want
of a Law, to reach them: I would have got an ACT passed, on purpose, to have
the Monsters galloped to Death, in their own unmerciful Torturing Boxes.

COME, and drink TEA with me Tomorrow. I know you don't love to be looked at:
And to humor that very out-o'the-way Taste, of yours, we will be as Retired,
as two Snails in a Wilderness. For, I have resolved to be at Home to Nobody,
but Jenny Ogle, and Gatty Gosling, and dear Lady Frightall, and Miss Jumper,
and Jack Scarecrow; and Jack, you know, is Nobody: -- Jack is like one of the
Family. Only if Sally Simple should chance to drop in -- or Fanny Prue, in her
new Equipage, there is no being denied to Them: For the whole Town says, That
Sally has had a Misfortune, since I went to Tunbridge: And Fanny is a Prude,
that has stooped as low as Matrimony. -- I long to see how they look, after the
Accidents that have befallen them. -- Don't, fail at your Peril, for we want
your Sage Advice, about a Project, that is newly come into our Heads; and I
shall never be at Rest, 'till I know, what you think of it.

THE Business, in one Word, is Freedom: WOMAN's Freedom. -- For, sure! if Men,
who are born to be Subjects, pretend to Liberty, and defy Tyrants; our Sex
must have high Pretensions; who, by Nature, were formed for Sovereignty; and
can make Slaves of those, who enslave Millions! -- In short, we are come to a
Resolution to issue Writs, and call together a Female Parliament. -- You allow,
that we have Wit; -- We, our selves, know we have Wisdom: And every Body has
Reason to know, that we cannot want Authority. -- So, the Thing it self is past
Dispute; we have decreed, to take Government upon us: But the Question is,
Under what Name, or Title, we shall exercise it.

WE are told, by an Experienced Sister, who is sole, Chamber Counsel, to an
Eminent Counselor, at Law, that the Word Parliament will be too Bold and
Ardent for our Purpose. And yet if another of our Members, who is Learned in
Law French, be but as good at Derivation, as she has always been at
Disputation, She will have Parliament to signify Prattlement; and in that
Case, who doubts, but we might make good our Pretensions.

HOWEVER, let it go. We aim at Nothing, but our just Prerogative; nor have any
Design, in the least, against the Privileges of the other Houses; whose
Members, for any Thing I see to the contrary, may be as Capable as We are.

YET, it were certainly no harder upon the Men, That the Women should usurp
their Offices, than it is mortifying to us Women, to see the Men interpose, in
Ours. And, what Truth can be more manifest, than, That there are Male-Members,
of more Houses than One, ungallant enough to invade us, in our very Essentials?
-- Some can Dance, as well as we can; some (though Fewer indeed) can even talk,
as well. -- Here, and there, one can manage a Family, as well. -- But an
infinite Number of them can wash their Months, as well; and vye Genius with us,
in Dress, and Diversion. -- Nay, I am credibly informed, by an Able
Committee-Woman, of our Assembly, That she is intimate with two of them, who
are so far gone, against us, that the first makes Shifts, and Aprons, with the
finest Work-woman of his Acquaintance: And the other can cut Paper, the best of
any Gentlewoman in the three Kingdoms!

IF such Wrongs as these must be tolerated, away with Order and Distinction. --
Shall any Body, after this, say, we ought not to assume a Title, because the
Nation has, already bestowed it on Our Representatives? What were the Nation,
without Us? And how are WE Represented, where none of our Sex are permitted to
sit, and vote, for Us? Is this Free Government? Is this to be subject to no
Laws, but those we have, first, given Cnsent to? -- Either, let us, as a
distinct Body, have a Right to govern our Selves; or, admit an Equal Number of
Us to sit, where Laws are made for Us: And, I believe I may venture to
undertake, for the Absent, That we will be modest enough, in that Case, to
content our selves with a bare Negative, upon All Bills, that concern Us.

BUT, what shall we do, about this Difficulty, of the Name? Old Lady Lofty was
for having us dignifie our Purpose with the awful Sound of The SENATE: But, her
Granddaughter, who can read Horace in Latin, said, That Title had an Air, too
Motherly, and would sit hard, upon Youth, and Gaiety. -- It was next moved,
That a Commitee of Virgin Elders should be sent, as far as Poland, to borrow
and bring Home, the Use of the Word DIET. -- Kitty Hoyden leapt out of our her
Chair, to second this Motion. -- She had been informed, she said, That Polish
Diets are often summoned to meet, on Horseback; and she was positive, That no
People could ride, more Learnedly, than the Horse-women of our Country. She
added, That little more seemed peculiar, to these Polish Diets, unless it were
their Art, of Quarrelling, without Interval: And, in that too, she saw no
Reason, why an English Woman might not equal them.

IT was now in a fair Way to be carried on this side the Question; when Suky
Shadely who is newly recovered from the Jaundice, turned the Tide of Opinions,
by crying out, That she protested against the Physical Sound of the Word; for
it put her in Mind of her Apothecary. -- What at last, we all inclined to, was
the Turkish Title, of DIVAN. I think, CONVENTION was whispered, faintly; but
none of us knew what to make of it: And as for CONVOCATION it was unanimously
rejected, upon the Insinuation of a grave Arch-Deaconess, That it would be
inconvenient to assume known Titles, which under Pretense of Custom and
Precedent, might reduce us to Subordination; and bring us to feel some Power,
we should not dare to disobey, and yet be heartily vexed, at submitting to.

DEAR SLAVY, don't look grim; but think for us, and help us out, as you wish
well to your Speculations. -- Come, for your Consideration, beforehand, I will
communicate to you the Material Heads, upon which we meditate our Institution;
as they were drawn up for us, by a Sergeant's Lady, who has often made it a
Moot Point, whether Her Style, or Her Husband's is most Remarkable for
Conciseness.

First, THEN, For avoiding Disputes and Contests, with certain Courts, already
Established, we renounce, discharge, and hereby openly disavow, and protest
against all Claim and Pretense, whatever, to Decisions, of Justice, or of
Equity.

Secondly, WE forego, quit claim to, and depart from, in like manner, all
Exercise, Right, Benefit, Interest, Property, and Demand, of, in, from, to, or
upon, Subjects, Religious or Ecclesiastical. PROVIDED NEVERTHELESS, That
Nothing, in the Article contained, shall extend, or be construed to extend, to
deprive us of our Claim, and Privilege, to hold, and avow, Jurisdiction, as
well Corporal as Spiritual, over All Forms, Matters and Things, which have
related, do relate, or shall or may relate hereafter, to Virgin Frailties,
Slips, Elopements, or any other Female Privilege, or Privileges, whether
Maidenly or Matrimonial.

Thirdly, THAT all Causes, Debates, Laws, Doubts or Customs, touching,
concerning, importing, appendant, or relating to Love, Honor, Dress, Duty,
Wit, Breeding, and Domestic Authority and Discipline, in all its Parts,
Degrees, and Divisions, shall lie, in their last Appeal, before US and US ONLY.

Fourthly, THAT All and Every the Members of our Assembly shall have, hold,
take, occupy, exercise, and enjoy the same Exemptions, Freedoms, Personal
Rights, Distinctions and Peculiarities, which have at any Time been occupied,
or enjoyed, by any the Member, or Members, of whatsoever other Assembly, of,
in, or belonging to these Kingdoms. And in particular, that All and Every their
Person, or Persons, shall be, and for ever remain, free from all Arrests,
Touch, Seizure, Detainment, Restraint, or Attachment, whether by Father,
Husband, Guardian, or by, or under, any other Authority, or pretended
Authority, whatsoever. Any Law, Act, Grant, Matter, or Thing, to the contrary,
in any wise, notwithstanding.

Fifthly, THAT for the surer Dispatch of Business, under the Multiplicity of
Debates, that may, and questionless, shall and will arise, in so able, and so
numerous an Assembly, the House shall choose SIX SPEAKERS (of whom, however, no
more than Three shall speak at once) that so there may be, at all Times a
Reserve, for due Succession; in Case of One Sett's wholly tiring, under such
incessant Application.

Sixthly, THAT the First Session shall be held, in the Great Masquerade Room,
at the Opera House, in the Hay-Market; where All the Voices of that House,
whether Women, or Other than Women, shall be admitted to sit with the Members.
But no absolute Men shall be capable of holding Office, within Doors, SAVE ONLY
our Trusty, and Well-beloved John James Heidegger, whom in Regard to his Good
Will, and Past Services, we constitute sole Bearer of our Mace, and of all
other, our convenient Utensils.

THESE are all our determined Articles: But it was as good as Resolved, at our
last Meeting, That for the Safety of our Assembly, proper Application shall be
made, for a Company of Guards, to mount upon us, and continue to do Duty, as
long as ever we sit. The Officers of this Company, as high up, as the
Lieutenant, may, as usually they are, be of the Masculine Gender: But the
Captain must, always, be a Woman. -- If the Lieutenant happens to be Married,
his Wife will Command of Course. But if not, the Nomination will be by Majority
of the Members Voices.

YOU see, now, Dear Servant, the Great Importance of this Affair: And since I
am sure, your Head is stored, with Models, Schemes and Systems, concerning
Power, and Rights of Government, drawn from Latin, Greek and Gothic; nay, and
for any thing I know, from Arabic, and Egyptian: Do but aid our generous
Purpose, with your Experience, and grave Counsel, and you shall see, as soon as
we are married, with how much Gentleness I will hold the Reins, which your
Wisdom will have contributed to put into the Hands of, -- I was going to say
your Affectionate; but, in sober Sadness, of

Your obliged, and not insensible, Humble Servant, MARTHA AMBLE.


The Plain Dealer. No 70.
Quicquid praecipies, esto brevis: Ut cito dicta
Percipiant animi dociles, teneantque fideles.
Omne supervacuum pleno de pectore manat.
HOR.
FRIDAY, November 20. 1724.
WHEN I was Young, I remember, among many other Follies, I was very vain, and
tenacious of my own Way of Thinking. I was particularly delighted with the
Notion I then had of Eloquence: And made no Manner, of Dispute, but I was, my
self, a wonderful Proficient in it. I was ravished, with the flowing Swell of a
long-winded Period. I had formed my Taste of Style, upon Cicero; and treated
the Commentaries of Caesar with an Extraordinary Air of Contempt, when I
compared them with the most frothy Flourishes of That ever-abounding Orator.

I HAD not learnt to consider, That there is a Difference, in the Effect of the
same Words, when they are spoke, and when they are written. -- When we see, and
hear, a powerful Orator, our Reason is betrayed, and dazzled, by the
Interposition of our Senses. -- The Grace, and Majesty, of his Person; The
never-resting Variety of his Motion; The Aptness of his Looks, and Gesture; The
Rise and Fall of his Voice, insinuating, softening, accusing, repeating,
urging, impressing, and enforcing, with a Gradation of the strongest Passions:
All these combine, to charm, and cheat, us, into Admiration. -- But, when,
divested of these Prejudices, we come to read, with a steady Judgment, what we
heard, with so much Emotion, the cold, and languid, Oratory, depending now on
Sense, and wanting all its Aid of Emphasis, and Utterance, lies tasteless on
our Understanding; and Repetition, and Change of Lights, are found to fill up
the Place of Richness, and Variety in the Conception.

ONE of the first, who made me bold enough to break out of my Roman Bondage,
and resolve, for the future, to think, all Words, which give a Discourse no
Progress in its Meaning, rather Burdens, than Embroidery, was Montaigne, where
he is speaking of Authors.

AS to Cicero, says this free-spirited Frenchman, to confess the Truth frankly,
His way of Writing appears to me very tedious. His Prefaces, Definitions,
Divisions, and Etimologies, take up the greatest Part of his Work. There is
Life indeed, and noble Life! but it is smothered in the dressing. When I have
spent an Hour, in reading him, I recollect what Substance I have gathered from
him; and find, for the most Part, I have got nothing but Wind: He is not, yet,
come far enough, to be Entered upon his Reasons. -- Now, for Me, who only
desire to be Wise, not Eloquent, I would read nothing, but what is to the
Purpose. -- I know well enough, without being told, What is meant, by Death and
Pleasure: Why then do they give themselves the Trouble of Anatomising them? I
am for Reason, and Argument, at the first Dash, and would be instructed how to
withstand, rather than talk quaintly of, my Passions. I am for Charging at
once, into the Heart of the Doubt, and not Approaching it, by Way of Siege,
with Logical Lines, and Trenches. -- The Subjects of Cicero languish, by his
Delaying our Expectation. His Way was very well for the Bar,; or might do,
perhaps, for the Pulpit; and since it is so common to Nod, at a Sermon, Men, in
this Case, might have Leisure to take a Nap, and wake, a Quarter of an Hour
after, Time enough to find the Thread of the Discourse. Men may speak, in this
Manner to Children, or to ignorant People: But I can never be made Attentive,
by an Author's Elocution, where his Matter is too weak to hold me. BEFORE I had
the Cood Fortune to meet with this Censure, (which carries with it no more
Boldness, than Reason) I had ventured to appear, in Print, and sent some
Treatises into the World, which I have never thought of, from that Time
forward, without blushing at my Conscious Weakness, in the Affectation of a
Style, so Wordy, that it moves my own Indignation, very strongly, against my
self, for what I have, formerly considered, as no small Part of my Merit.

IF my own Works were of Importance enough, I would light 'em up, as a Beacon,
to warn Others of the Danger: But, since That Honor is more than they deserve,
I disclaim it, with due Modesty; and will borrow an Example, of like Nature,
from an Author of more Dignity.

THE Gentleman, I mean, is a Reverend and Learned Professor: In whose Preface,
to an excellent Translation of Virgil, we are told, after, at least, as much
Instruction, as could, reasonably, have been expected, That He has, not, yet
done with us: For something, more, still, remains, behind.

NOW, though much may be said, for this Gentleman's Generosity, from the
Profusion of his Desire to satisfy us; yet a less Degree of Praise will be
sufficient, for his Discretion: Since it was not kind enough to whisper in his
Ear, that He, who tells us the same Thing, Six Times over, will rather provoke
us to Indignation than to Gratitude; because it argues an Opinion in him, That
he is talking to Persons, who have a Deafness, in their Understanding. -- When
he had assured us, He had not yet done, There could be no Reason in the World,
but the over-obliging Liberality of his Rhetoric, to take the Trouble of
adding, that There was something more: Much less, That there was something
more, still! -- But, when he goes on, with so unhop'd! so unexpected! a Flow of
Bounty, as to add, That there was something, more, still, that remained, The
Obligation was enforced to so surprising a Height, that it must have been
judged Impossible to raise it more, if we had not found, immediately after,
That not only something, more, still, remained, but, that it remained, behind,
also!

I COULD wish to see it established, as a Rule among Writers, That every Word
should be a Fault, which, being taken out of a Discourse, left no Void in the
Sense: For, to what End should we use Expressions, which may be cut off,
without Maiming, or let stand, without Beauty?

WHEN the Pen of One, who attempts to write History, happens to be thus,
dropsically, disposed, He never fails to drown his Facts, in a Deluge of
Affectation. -- We have then, long Speeches of great Generals, made to their
Armies, in Line of Battle, and just on the Point of Engagement; In which the
monstrous Absurdity of supposing such a Time fit for formal Harangues, or that
they could be Audible to the Hundredth Part of the Numbers they are addressed
to, is not sufficient to deter these Orators from displaying all their Tropes,
with so much Fullness and Variety, that, when the Armies come to Charge, the
Historian has not Spirits enough left him, (after the Fatigue of his War of
Eloquence) to observe, or explain to us, How the Battle, it self, was formed,
and fought; or by what Conduct, on one side, or Mistake, on the other, The
Fortune of the Day delcared in Favor of the Victorious.

TACITUS, of all Historians, was least guilty of using Wordiness, or
Circumlocution, in his Relations. -- On the contrary, when he errs, it is in
the much nobler Extreme, of too Rich, and Delicate an Excess of Sense. -- He
refines not on Words, but on Things; he speaks less for his Great Persons, than
They spoke, for Themselves: But he thinks for them much more delicately than it
is probable They ever thought. -- When Galgacus, at the Head of his Britons, is
about to charge the Roman Army, what Number of Eloquent Pages could have
inspired his Followers with Reflections, more apt to inflame them with Heroic
Sentiments, than what He flashed upon their Imaginations, in this comprehensive
Encouragement. -- Fall on, my Friends, and, in the Shock, think of your
ANCESTORS, and your POSTERITY!

ANTIQUITY can scarce produce an Instance of more persuasive Eloquence, than
This Oration, in a single Sentence! -- But I have the Pleasure to see, before
me, the Speech of a Modern Leader, which, as it had an End very different, so
its Influence was much more powerful. -- Caesar, and many Generals, before, and
after him, inspired faint-hearted Followers, with Courage: But This is the only
Instance, I have ever met with, of a Commander, who had Rhetoric enough to
talk Brave Fellows, into Cowardice.

THE Hero of our Story (which is, sincerely, a true one) was at his Studies, in
One of the Universities of a Neighbour-Nation, when the late Rebellion broke
out, and allarmed the Care of the Government. He was Young, and designed for a
Pillar of his Mother Kirk. -- Grace and Sanctity, had therefore, been more in
his Thoughts, than Arms, and Slaughter: But some of his Friends, who claimed a
Power in raising, and disposing, the Militia, took a Fancy to dignify the young
Kirkman, with the Command of a Company, and gave him Orders to march them to a
Rendezvous, that was appointed, a few Days after.

THE New Captain (as He tells the Story, Himself, with a great Deal of Humor,
and Frankness) thought Safety more his Business than Valor: Yet was ashamed to
appear Fearful, when Every Body, round him, looked as big, as a Bajazet. -- He
resolved, therefore, To have Recourse to his Oratory, and try, if it was not
possible, under Pretense of Encouraging his Men, to frighten them into
Desertion. -- In Pursuance of this Hope, He drew them on the Morning appointed
for the March, into a Ring, at the Foot of a little Mount; and, placing himself
on the Top of it, addressed them in the following Oration; which he gave me, in
his own Handwriting:

Friends! Brethren! Countrymen!
WE are marching against Enemies, who are marching, against God: For they fight
against our King; and our King protects our Kirk: and our Kirk is the Care of
God. -- So, our Enemies are God's Enemies, and our Cause must prevail against
them.

AS an Officer of Command, and a Leader, who knows No Fear, It is my Duty to
speak to You, in a Style, that may inflame your Courage. -- But, as I am a
Christian, as well as a Soldier; -- A Man of Humanity, as well as Mettle; I
dare not conceal from You, That there is a Danger, which I, my self, am afraid
of; I, who, to speak in the World's Notion of Fear, am so resolved, that I can
fear Nothing. -- I mean, my Fellow Soldiers! The Danger, which some of your
Dear Souls may be in, of rushing Headlong upon Damnation.

IN all Probability, there will be an Immediate Engagement; -- I am confident,
we shall (I mean, All, who survive the Battle, shall) suceed in the Event. --
But, alas! which of us knows, whose Lot it will be, to Fall, in the Field of
Slaughter? And, since there is Odds against your Lives, Are Ye prepared for
approaching Death? -- It is, indeed, an unseasonable; but, ah! my Friends! It
is a necessary Question. -- Are ye prepared, I say, to die? -- Have ye
Assurance of Salvation?

I acknowledge, That your Piety, your Loyalty, and your Bravery, may entitle
you to Hopes of Glory: But, if you want the Inward Token, the Assurance, the
Testimony! -- If you are not positive, my Friends, Ye are DOUBTERS: And He who
doubts, (says Holy Writ) is Damned.) -- Mark That, Brethren! -- He, who
doubts, is damned!

AH weigh this important Question, before I lead you a Step farther. Knock, at
your Bosoms. Ask your Consciences, If ye are Doubters? And, if ye find, ye are
Upright, and Steadfast, -- If ye have clear, and unquestioned, Evidence: -- If
your Lives have been Pure; and your Bodies Undefiled. -- Your Credentials for
Heaven, are Good; -- and ye may follow me, undauntedly; -- for Nildesperandum
est Teucro Duce, and Auspice Teucro, (That is, (being interpreted) King GEORGE
for Ever. Amen.

BUT, If you doubt, If ye Faint, If your Inward Man is not Strong, -- I desire
none none of your fruitless Aid. -- I shall be more Triumphant without Ye.
Neither would I have your Blood upon my Head; since, if ye die, you will be
damned. -- But my Christian Concern for your Souls, has made me forget that ye
are Soldiers. -- I come down, to put my self before you, and let you see, by my
Example, in the horrid Bloodinesses of this Day, What an Assurance there is in
the Accepted, when they fight against the Doubtful. -- I leave the Rest to your
Consciences. They, who doubt not, will follow me.


N. B. -- They ran away, to a Man, from behind their Commander! -- What an
Instance was here, of the powerful Effect of Oratory!

The Plain Dealer. No 71.
-- furens quid Foemina possit.
VIRG.
MONDAY, November 23. 1724.
Mr. PLAIN DEALER,
I COMMENCED TOAST, about the Beginning of Last Season; and among some Six
Dozen of Lovers, (who could, All, see, as clearly as any Old Cynick, in
England) I never heard it observed, That Black Eyes were Jack of Lanthorns,
'till I read it, in your PAPER, Number lxviii. -- I must needs tell you, I
don't like some Things, in That PAPER: And, in Particular I make War against
your odious Partiality, in preferring a Musty Jyngle, of and old Cardinal, and
Queen DIDO, to one of the prettiest, and wittiest, Copies of Verses, that ever
was seen or heard of!

WOULD, I knew where to find That Dear! Genteel! Gay! Spritely! Charming!
Spanish POET, who was Author of the Verses, to which you have done the Honor
of finding Fault with them, for no Reason in the World, but because they were
made upon Black Eyes! -- I cannot help fancying, That you have, not only Gray
Hair, but White Eyebrows, with a Whey-coloured, Fat Face; and a sower, freckly
Forehead, with a pale, deadish, Look, as limy, and as wall-ey'd, as one of the
Watch-Towers of your own Barbican! -- Never go about to deny it; -- for I am as
sure, that it is so, as if I had been acquainted with you these Sixty Years.
And I will never believe to the contrary, unless you get some Body to draw your
Picture, after the Life, and have it Cut upon a Copper-Plate, to hang up like a
Sign, at the Head of your PLAIN DEALERS, for the Entertainment of your Female
Readers, in Place of your impertinent Motto's.

I know, too well, my cruel Fair
Why those Sweet Eyes have Sable Covers
Mere Pity bids 'em Mourning wear,
To grieve the Fate of Murdered Lovers.
WELL-BRED! Transporting, Creature! -- What Woman could look with Frowns, upon
a Lover, that could lay her Eyes under such delightful Obigation!

-- Pity, bids 'em Mourning wear!
To grieve the Fate of Murdered Lovers!
CALL you This, FALSE WIT? -- I had always an Aversion to a Critic, from my
Cradle: But from this Time forward, I shall never endure the Name of him: And,
if ever I should so lose my Way, as to fall into the Company of one of them, my
Eyes would ache, at the very Sight of them.

MY Grandmother, at her Country House, has an overgrown, old Turkey Cock, that
is the Plain Dealer, of the Family. -- He could never abide Red, because it is
the prettiest of all Colors; and therefore I bought me a Pink-colour Damask
Suit, and carried it down, with me, on purpose to shake in the old Gentleman's
Eyes, and set him a fretting, by Way of Diversion. -- I have searched, the
whole Town over, for an Opportunity to deal with You, as I did your Brother
SURLY, in the Country: And, at last, I met with the enclosed Copy of Verses, at
an ASSEMBLY, where Eyes of all Colors, Black, Blue, Gray and Hazel; -- Nay,
even the Green and the Yellow, agreed to smile, with Approbation, on the Wit,
and the Subject. And, because I would mortify you, I send you, What others
have been charmed by: And as far as all good Offices, of this kind, shall
remain, very heartily,

Your Humble Servant, NIGRELLA.


VERSES, To the Right Honorable, The Lady SOMERVILLE, on Her MARRIAGE.
WHEN Themes, unlov'd, invoke an absent Muse,
The unlist'ning Sisters Half their Aid refuse:
But, with full Force, the Vot'arie's Hopes inspire,
Whose Breast glows, conscious, with a favo'rite Fire.
Often, have I proved, that, when loose Flights we try,
From our weak Wing, the sweet Supporters fly:
The restive Numbers backen, on the Tongue,
And no bold Fancy nerves the languid Song.
Not so, when softer Subjects court their Aid;
Some new-bless'd Lover, or some brided Maid!
Then, All, at once, their tuneful Force combine;
Swell, in Each Thought; and, in each Cadence, shine.
The Stream of Verse, like Thames, untroubled flows;
And Strength, and Ease, a mingled Grace compose.
Devious, of late, amid too light a Strain,
Each, of the Adverse Nine, was sought, in vain:
But, soon as FAME relieved me, with the Sound,
That SOMERVILLE in YOU, His Heaven had found;
Raped, I resolved, the inspiring Choice to sing;
And Crowding Muses danced, on Every String!
Receive, Illustrious Charmer! the Respect
Your Poet pays; and, what He writes, protect.
While Others, Cold, and Formal, Zeal display,
And wish you Joy, the dull, Prosaick, Way;
Distinguished, from the Rest, The Poet's Prayer
Visits, in Verse, -- and hails, with livelier Air.
Reign, Wedded Love! on Reason, founded, strong:
Thou Source of Kindred! and Thou Soul of Song!
In Thee, the Lover meets no treacherous Smile:
No faithless Snares his managed Heart beguile!
What, though to One, Thou do Desire confine?
Thy Bounds are EDEN, a Restraint, Divine!
Sweetly associate, He sustains no Care,
That She disarms not, by Her Wish, to share.
Her Joys are heightened, by the Part, He bears;
And All Her Words are Music, to His Ears.
Dashed, on Life's Ocean, when the breaking Waves
Rise, over One, The assisting Consort saves:
'Till Each, at Anchor, 'midst the Tempest, rides;
Nor dreads the Surges, nor obeys the Tides,
How greatly blessed, must This bright Union be,
Where BODIES Emulate, and SOULS Agree!
Pride, of the blooming World! -- Your Eyes, and Air,
Have wearied Wonder, and awaked Despair!
Your Form seems made, to match your Heavenly Mind;
And, while, on Earth, to leave all Earth behind!
His Soul shines through, and animates his Face,
With Angel's Sweetness, softening Manly Grace.
His warring Race have triumphed, often, before:
But HE, in Conquering You, has triumphed more!
May lengthened Life your meeting Wishes Crown;
And rising Ages spread your wreathed Renown!
May no first Death your social Hearts divide;
But, late, together, be This Knot untied!
RESERVING, 'till another Opportunity, What I have to say, against NIGRELLA 's
Eyes, and her Pink-colour Damask Petticoat, I shall satisfy my self, (for
present Vengeance) with admiring, as much as she does, the Verses, which she
sent, to mortify me. -- How will she be able to support this Disappointment?
-- Nay, to nettle her still further, I admire, very much, too, the Lady, on
whom the Verses were made; and I have even heard it affirmed, by as many Men,
as there are Lines, in the Poem, That NIGRELLA 's Eyes are no more to be
compared with that Lady's, than Her Spanish Poet's Verses are as Good as This
Gentleman's.

BUT, because I would not be behind-hand with NIGRELLA, in a Readiness to
oblige, I will, in Return for her Entertaining me, at so agreeable a Wedding,
invite Her to a Funeral, which we owe to the same Hand. -- She may come,
without new-dressing her Eyes, since they wear Mounring, already. -- But,
(which will go very hard, with a Lady of so lively a Temper!) She must lay
aside Her Favorite Pink Color, and set her Face, to look sadly.

TO close, in a more serious Strain, -- The following Verses, and the
foregoing, are the Work of a North-British Muse, and have, for their Author,
the young Gentleman, who writ the ODE, On the Power of Music. -- It will be
needless to point out to the Reader, The unusual Excellence of these Two
Pieces. They both abound with the True, and Sublime, Poetic Spirit! And the
Subjects are so diametrically Opposite, to Each other, That to place them,
thus, together, will furnish a striking Contraste of Beauties, in the most
Joyful, and the most Melancholy, of all Humane Circumstances!

VERSES, Occasioned by the DEATH of the Right Honorable, The Countess of
GRANTHAM.
PARDON, O Shade Divine! the officious Verse,
That breaks the sacred Silence of thy Hearse!
The Muse's Tears, when for the Dead designed,
Flow but in vain, Impertinently kind!
Courtiers, and Poets, mix not, often, in Care,
Their Passions, and their Views, too different are!
But, to this mourned Occasion, All must owe
One social Utt'rance, of one, General Woe.
So, shall the distant Poles one Ruin share,
When the Last Trumpet wakes the World's Despair.
Oh! treacherous Ebb of Joy! that, thus, deceives,
And Hope's gay Bark on sudden Quicksands leaves!
The Smile of Loveliness lies, pale, in Clay;
And weeping Wonder turns its Eyes away!
Trembling, the Muse surveys the clouded Courts!
How damped their Converse! and how dashed, their Sports!
What gloomy Paleness deadens Every Face
What sickening Memory checks each rising Grace!
The ROYAL PAIR stand, fixed, in generous Pain:
And look a Grief, that makes all Language vain!
Round, in deep Silence, sad'ning Passions flow:
And Sighs, from Sighs, catch the contagious Woe!
Fancy, amidst the Funeral Pomp is led,
And waits, in solemn March, the Moving Dead;
Lodged, in cold Earth, Her Body sinks, resigned:
But Her Immortal Image charms Mankind!
Soft sleep, Thy Dust, to wait the Eternal Will;
Then, rise, unchanged, and, -- Be an Angel, still!
Ye, Loveliest, of Her fair Survivors! Come,
And, with sweet Sorrow, grace her sacred Tomb.
Fixed, over the Marble Mirror, leaning, see,
What Weak Defense, from Death, your Charms can be!
Think, what She was; and, conscious of Her Due,
Teach us, by mourning Her, to sigh, for You.
But, What wished Comfort shall the Muse afford,
To the sad Bosom of Her Widdow'd Lord?
Think, -- since not all your Love could Life retain,
How should your Sorrow charm her back again?
High, above Hope, or Fear, she, now, lives, blessed:
Where Nothing, but Your Woe can break Her Rest.
O, let her, undisturbed, those Blessings share,
Which cannot Greater be, -- 'till You are there.
The Plain Dealer. No 72.
Men's immota manet. --
VIRG.
FRIDAY, November 27. 1724.
AMONG the Beauties of Magnanimity, there is none, of a nobler Quality, than
the Power of forgiving Injuries. -- It throws a Majesty over the Mind, and
illustrates the Person, with an Air of Sweetness, and Serenity. -- We ought the
more to admire it, since, wherever it is found, It is in Company with the
Sublimest Virtues: There not being Room for it, in a narrow, vulgar, Soul;
because, overfill'd with Little Sentiments, such as have their Rise, and
Revolution, within the Circle of Self-Interest.

BUT the Brutal Passion of REVENGE, and a malicious Memory, for Mischief, is
become so Shameless, and Licentious, that it is common to hear Resolutions of
retained Malice avowed, coldly, and in general Expressions, Such as, Setting
upon People's Skirts, -- Finding a Time to be Even with them, -- and the like
malignant, silly, Phrases, whereby the Burnings of an inward Hatred seem to
struggle, for Eruption.

METHINKS, a sufficient Fortification, against so abject a Frailty, might be
drawn from such Natural Reflections, as These; -- That, In violently returning
Wrongs, we do Nothing but what Beasts can do, more readily. -- That, in Malice,
the most Exalted Noble, is but on a Level with the Lowest Slave: Whereas, to
Pardon, is an Act of Sovereignty; and, however Inferior we were, before, to the
Person, who has injured us, From the Moment, in which we forgive him, we
exchange Conditions, and become Superior.

BUT, since many, who have no Ambition to be thought Men of Virtue, would, yet,
gladly, be esteemed Wise, It may be an Argument, of more Persuasion, That This
Propensity to Revenge is a Mark, not of Mean-Spiritedness only, but of
Ignorance. -- The Man of Knowledge can never be enough surpised, at Common
Wrongs, to be inflamed into a Resentment, either too Malicious, or too Violent.
-- His Wisdom has instructed him, That wherever we find Men, we shall be sure
to find Injuries: And, That there is a Necessity of its being so, from the
incompatible, and opposite, Wills, Humors, and Interests, among Mankind.

SHOULD the Treacherous, the Suspicious, the Covetous, the Insolent, or the
Reproachful, behave themselves otherwise than we could have expected, from
their Natures, we might be justified, in our Wonder at it. -- But, why should
we express Amazement at what it was natural for us to depend on? Why be Angry
with the Inconsiderable? -- Most of Those, who provoke, and offend us, deserve
rather our Grief, and Pity; For They are no more in their own Hands, than a
Madman, or an Idiot, is: And we make a poorer Figure than our Pride allows us
to believe, when we disquiet our selves, on such weak Motives. -- When a Fool
throws a Straw at us, It were to seem light, to feel the Weight of it: And He
will never enjoy Rest, who is not Master of Resolution to forgive All Those
Injuries, which his Honor, or his Safety, does not compel him to defend
himself against.

NEITHER is there only a Wisdom, and a Nobleness; -- There is something, too,
of a generous Courage, in a Heart, that is above the Reach of these vindictive
Impressions. -- The Levity, that is shown, in being moved, at every Trifle,
carries with it an Air of Faintness, and may be mistaken for Pusila^ity. For,
the firm, and manly, Temper, apprehending Nothing, with Fear, receives all
Accidents, with Calmness: And, justly conscious of its Strength, to support it
self, against Danger, is Indifferent to the Indiscretions, or Animosities, of
malignant Natures.

THERE is a single, heroic, Word, in the History of the Life of Adrian, which
I could never read, without Emotions of the highest Admiration; and, which
carries in it the Instruction, and Sublimity, of many Volumes! -- After That
Great-Spirited Prince became possessed of the Empire, He met a Person, in the
public Way, who had been his most implacable, and bitter, Enemy. -- The
Wretch, whose Heart was as contracted, as His Malice had been extensive, began
to tremble, with Expectation of some severe, and sudden, Punishment, -- such
as, He knew, He would, Himself, have inflicted on Adrian, had the Emperor's
Power been His. But Adrian, with the serenest Gravity, only whispered, as He
passed him, EVASISTI -- You have Escaped me.

ALL, that Largeness of Soul could inspire, or Eloquence adorn, and utter,
seems to have been expressed, in this ESCAPED ME! -- It laid open, to the View
of the World, the Mighty Heart of it is Great Speaker! -- It declared him nobly
sensible, That Justice would look like Malice, should He, now, when at the Head
of Empire, revenge, upon a Private Enemy, the Contempt, He met with, while a
Subject! -- That very Power, and Command of Punishment, which sordid Natures
would have used, with Greediness, to the Destruction of the Man they hated,
restrained, and tempered, His Resentment! -- He considered Himself, as no
longer on a Level with his Injurer. The Protection, which he owned his Subject,
disarmed the Hatred which he bore his Enemy! -- You have escaped, (He meant to
say, in That significant, single, Word!) You have escaped, by my becoming your
MASTER, the Vengeance which you should have felt, from me, had, I continued,
but, your EQUAL. -- That ADRIAN is, now, no more, from whom you could not have
expected Mercy; And This ADRIAN, who gives you Pardon, owes Compassion to His
offending Subjects, and remembers none of the Other 's Injuries!

IT is impossible, but a Collection of such amiable Examples as This, enforced,
by some persuasive Pen, must work strongly upon the Minds of Men, not depraved
into utter Tastlessness: For, by striking, even, Little Hearts, with a clear
Conviction, That the Precept contains Nothing, but what has been exceeded in
the Practice, It would leave them no Pretense for Evasion; and insinuate, by a
gradual Progress, out of their Memory, into their Imitation.

BUT Nothing furnishes more Occasion for Surprise, and Indignation, than to
observe our Places of Public Worship, filled with Outside Formalists, of all
Ranks, and of both Sexes; who, either with an impious Hypocrisy, or a
Stupidity, as dark as Ideotism, affront the Majesty of Heaven, by petitioning
GOD's Pardon, -- as They, Themselves, pardon Others. While, at the very Moment
of their Kneeling, in this empty Mockery of Devotion, It is known, to one Half
the Congregation, That the Hearts of the other Half are embittered with
malicious Purposes, and glowing with a painful Restlessness, till they can be
revenged, for, some slight Indignity. -- Could These People have a Sense of the
Signification of the Words they utter, They would tremble at the Apprehension
of having What they pray for, granted, literally; and the Mercy of That
dreadful GOD they dare to trifle with, refused, to their Unworthiness, till
they have learnt as readily to forgive, as to pray to be forgiven.

BUT, exclusive of those severer Arguments, which might be drawn from Grace,
and Virtue, There is One, which must be welcome; because we, all, agree to love
ourselves; and no Enemy is so Troublesome, as Malice to our Pride, our Health,
and our Quiet. -- We submit our selves, by this unmanly Passion, to the Humors
of the Men we hate. -- We empower them to afflict, and mortify, us. -- At the
Sight of a Person, against whom we meditate Revenge, our Spirits undergo a
Tempest: And, even when he is absent, our Memory goads, and tortures us. -- Our
very Dreams become embittered, and confound our Rest, with our Disquiet. -- We
wish the Evil to Another; but we inflict it on our Selves: And, contrary to our
own Intention, become Patients, where we design to be Agents. -- The Revenger
lives in Torment, and He, on whom He would be revenged, is at Ease.

IT is a grinding, gnawing, Passion, that preys inward, upon the Heart, and
mistakes the Means of its own Purpose. -- What Triumph can Revenge afford us,
but from a Reflection, That the Person punished, repents, and wishes the Wrong
unacted? This End can never be obtained by Mischiefs; for, by provoking new
Malice, they make the Memory of the old delightful: But it may be nobly
effected, by astonishing, disgracing, and confounding an Enemy, with Benefits
in return for his Demerit. And This is what the most Venerable of all Books
very strongly expresses, by heaping Coals of Fire, on His Head: That is, It
burns, and wounds, his Imagination, with a conscious Shame, at his Inferior
Figure, while He sees himself disgraced, by Services from That Person, of all
the World, whom he least deserved to be obliged by! -- The stubborn Virtue of
CATO, would have allowed him to submit to CAESAR; but that his Pride was more
afraid of a Pardon, than his Person was of an Insult.

MEN of Spirit should despise this Passion, because it is evident, That the
weakest Minds are most malicious, and revengeful. -- Children, Women, and Men,
less resolute than Women, sting, and fret themselves with sense of Slights,
Contempts, and Follies, which they mis-call Injuries; while the Rational, and
Steadfast Mind neglects, or smiles at, all such Accidents. -- Their Effects may
flutter round him; but, when they find no Place, to enter at, are lost, in
fruitless Murmurings; like a Tempest, that is repulsed, against the Firmness of
a Mountain. -- The Distasts, Aspersions, and Indignities, which appear so
formidable, to an Abject Nature, may be compared with Thunder and Lightning;
which are terrible, to our Lower World, but have nothing in them, worth the
Notice of those Angels, and superior Spirits, which inhabit the Caelelestial
Regions. -- SCIPIO, CAESAR, ALEXANDER; All the Great and Shining Characters,
which have made Antiquity Illustrious, have been so far from stooping, to
indulge Revenge, that, on the contrary, they have sought Occasions, to
overwhelm, with torturing Kindnesses, the most malicious, of their Personal
Enemies.

BUT, a Mixture of Shade, with Light, being necessary, to complete a Picture, I
will set them off, by one another, in a Comparison, between a MONARCH and a
MINISTER; out of Mirkond, a Persian Writer.

A POET whose Name was Delah, attracted by the Fame of Ogtai-Khan's
Munificence, undertook a Journey, on foot, from the remotest Parts of Tartary,
as far as to That Prince's Court, in China, for no other Purpose, than to throw
himself at the Foot of his Throne, and implore his Assistance, to discharge a
Debt, of Five Hundred Balisches, under the Weight of which he became
dispirited, and was interrupted, in his Studies. -- The Generous Prince,
conversing with him, and discerning his Extraordinary Merit, entertained him
very graciously, and ordered him a Thousand. -- His Chief Minister
remonstrated, That this was rather Prodigality, than Bounty, to give Double the
Sum demanded! -- Have you not considered, replied Ogtai-Khan, That the Poor Man
has traveled over the Mountains, and Deserts, merely on the Fame of our
Liberality? And, should we send him back with no more, than is just sufficient
to pay his Debts, by what Means will he be able to Defray the Charges of his
Journey? But your Highness, (answered the Minister) has not, yet, been
informed, That he presumed to write a Satyr, against ME, since his coming
hither, because I was unwilling to allow him Access, with so impertinent a
Petition! -- For which Reason, replied the Prince) You shall present him with
another Thousand out of your own Private Purse, That he may go back, and tell
his Countrymen, there is a Monarch, in this part of the World, who permits not
his MINISTERS's RESENTMENTS to be the Measures of his Bounty. JUST half as good
a Story we read, of Queen Elizabeth, and our Spencer; She had ordered him a
Hundred Marks, for some Piece of his Poetry: But the Frugal Treasurer, of those
Days, whose Wit was too Little, for his Wisdom, took upon him to tell the Queen
it was too much Money for an Idle Ballad. -- Give him, then, said She, what you
think he deserves, in Reason. -- He replied, he would consider of it; which he
delayed to do, so long, that, at last, he quite forgot it.

THE Queen, a Year or two after, dined, in one of her Progresses, at the House
of a Gentleman, where Spencer happened to be; who, in Presence of his Friend,
the Treasurer, put into her Hands these Verses.

I was promised, on a Time,
To have Reason, for my Rhyme:
But, from that Time, unto this Season,
I have had nor Rhyme nor Reason.
THE Queen (says the Story) was highly pleased with the Humor, and commanded
the Treasurer to pay him Double the Sum, first ordered. -- Had She added, That
he should pay it out of his own Private Purse, we should have found no Occasion
to mend her deficient Example, by a Better, in that of Ogtai-Khan, just
mentioned.

The Plain Dealer. No 73.
Proprium humani ingenii odisse quos laeserit.

TACIT.
MONDAY, November 30. 1724.
MAHOMET the IId, That victorious Turkish Emperor, who took Constantinople from
the Christians, had a very great Genius for Poetry, and was so warm in its
Encouragement, that He is reported to have offered Rewards, for every Fault,
that could be pointed out, in the Works of his Court Poets, and made Good
against the Arguments, which should be brought, in Favor of the Defendants.

HEAVEN be praised, That His Majesty of GREAT BRITAIN has no such partial
Opinion of the Poets of our Age, and Country! Such a Proclamation would drain
his Exchequer, more effectually than a Ten Years War, with the strongest Power
of Europe!

BUT, I believe, we may live at Ease: The Encouragement of the Poet's Art, in
this present Generation, will occasion no Profuseness, that can be dangerous to
the Revenue. And, as for our Great Men, They are Patrons, for the most Part, as
They are Doctors, and Masters of Art, rather by Accident, than by Purpose; and
think themselves under no Obligation to pay for Compliments which their
Conscience tells them, They have No Right to.

THE Truth is, when Any Thing, so Extraordinary, falls out, as, That A Man of
Quality is Witty Himself, and an Encourager of Wit, in Others; The Poets are so
Unmerciful, in their Assaults on his Liberality, That His Equals, in Dignity,
have found much Safety and Comfort, in the Fame of Dullness. And there never
was a livelier Proof of the Soundness of That Common Maxim, that Honesty is the
best Policy; than the Success of the fashionable Expedient, (at once so frank,
and so ingenious!) of returning the Dedicator's Gilt Book, with this short
Apology for not accepting it -- My Lord gives his Service, and says, He does
not UNDERSTAND these Matters.

FOR Want of some such dext'rous Stroke of Art, The Grandees, of That Turkish
Emperor's Court, whom I named, at the Head of my Paper, were, often, reduced to
a Nonplus. It was, particularly, the Case of Ali-Basha, His Favorite
Treasurer. He had learnt to Read, and cast Accounts; But Wit being out of his
Way, He had one, regular, Method of rewarding All who addressed their Writings
to Him: He put the Book into one Scale, and dropped Gold into another, and,
having adjusted the Balance, gave the Weight of the Work, as a Gratuity, to the
Author. -- The worst Effect of this General Rule was, That it was common for
the lightest Discourses to bring with them the heaviest Bindings. There was
nothing, more Substantial than the Covers of this Great Patron's Books! -- But
one Poet, above the Rest, had contrived a pleasant Scheme, to make the most of
his Ingenuity. He composed a Copy of Verses; and, instead of Writing them, in
the usual Manner, caused them to be Engraved on a Block of Marble, that was
large enough for a Tombstone! -- He loaded a Cart with his Compliment, and went
to wait on the Basha with it; who, having Notice of his intended Present, sent
out the Master of his Buildings, to examine the Size, and Workmanship, of the
Stone, and pay for it, according to its Value -- The Poet went away very much
surpised, and dissatisfied, and writ his Patron a Complaint, How contrary to
His Greatness's Custom, His Officers had presumed to Treat him: To which the
Basha answered, gravely, That it arose, from a Change, in His Manner; -- For,
whereas he had, formerly, rewarded, by WEIGHT, He should, hereafter, do it, by
MEASURE.

WE have some, among our Nobility, who are equally Illustrious for their
Learning, and their Patronage of Learning: But they are so Poetically
persecuted, by the Swarms of Little Creatures, who have no End, in Writing, but
the Profit they propose to draw from it, That they meet with daily Provocations
to repel the Avarice of Flattery, with a Spirit, and Sharpness, like the
Basha's, abovementioned: And, This, no Doubt, is one Reason for the Neglect,
which Works of Genius often meet with, when addressed to Men of Quality.

BUT, if Contempt is due to the Mercenary, The Modest deserve Encouragement:
And They, who are truly Generous, should never wait, till Occasion offers it
self; but seek, and make, the Opportunity. For, as the Sharpness of our Sight
is best proved by the Remoteness, in which we distinguish Objects; so our
Judgment appears, most strongly, when we discern Merit at Distance, and invite
it, to aproach us.

I AM always pleased with the Prospect of Any Work, from which the Public may
promise It self, either Entertainment, or Instruction: And I hope, The
Gentleman, who has sent me the following Verses, and Letter, will have no
Reason to complain of the Reception, His Design shall meet with.

The HAPPY MAN.
HIGH, over the Winding of a cliffy Shore.
From whose worn Steep, the back'ning Surges roar:
Freeman, -- Sweet Lot! -- in quiet Plenty, lives,
Rich, in the unbought Wealth, which Nature gives.
Unplanted Groves rise, round his sheltered Seat,
And self sown Flowers attract his wandering Feet:
Lengths of wild Garden his near Views adorn;
And far-seen Fields wave; with domestic Corn.
The grateful Herds, which his own Pastures feed,
Pay their asked Lives, and in due Tribute, bleed.
Here, in learned Leisure, He relaxes Life,
'Twixt pratt'ling Children, and a smiling Wife.
Here, on dependent Want, He sheds his Care;
Moves, amid Smiles; and All, he hears, is Prayer.
The World lies round him, like a Subject Soil;
Stored, for his Service, but beneath his Toil.
Hence, in a Morning Walk, His piercing Eye
Skims the green Ocean, to the circling Sky;
And marks, at Distance, some returning Sail,
Winged, by the Courtship of a flattering Gale:
The fearless Crew, concluding Danger over,
With glad'ning Shouts, salute the opening Shore:
Fore-think how, best, They may their Gains employ;
And antedate thin Scenes of promised Joy!
Till a near Quicksand checks their shortened Way;
And the sunk Masts point through the rising Spray!
Freeman starts, sad! -- revolves the changeful Sight;
Where Misery can, so soon, succeed Delight.
Then, shakes his Head, in Pity of their Fate;
And, sweetly conscious, hugs His happier State.
Mr. PLAIN DEALER,
THE Enclosed is one Copy of Verses, of a great Number, which my Friends have
been kind enough to savor me with, in Order to furnish out a Collection of
Miscellaneous POEMS: Concerning which, you may, possibly, have met with a
Proposal in the Hands of some of your Acquaintance, for their being published,
by Subscription, in the Name of Richard Savage, Son of the late Earl Rivers.

I AM, Sir, That unfortunate Richard Savage; the peculiar Circumstances of
whose uncommon Treatment, from a Mother (whose fine Qualities make it
impossible to me not to forgive her, even, while I am miserable, by Her Means,
only) induced You, some Months since, in your Twenty Eighth Paper, to publish a
Few ineffectual Lines, which I had written, on Her surprising Usage of me: To
which your Humanity was pleased to add certain Reflections, in my Favor, which
I remember with due Gratitude; and am encouraged, by That Instance of your
Goodness, to make the present Application.

WHEN you shall have perused my Extraordinary Case, and Those convincing
Original Letters, which I have entrusted with the Gentleman, who brings you
This, I shall need say no more, to satisfy You, What Right I have, to
complain, in a more Public Manner, than I have, yet, allowed my self to
resolve on. -- The Papers, in the Order you will see them, are prepared for a
Hand, too Just, and too Powerful, to to leave me the least Distrust of being,
shortly, less oppressed than I have been: But I judged my self obliged to lay
them under your Eye, That you might be sensible, you said less, of my Wrongs,
and my Sufferings, than the unhappy Truth could have justified.

AS to the mentioned Collection of POEMS, They are, some of 'em my own: But
many more the Works of Eminent Hands, for the most Part, never before
published. -- The Subscription will be Half a Guinea: And, as I can solicit
Nothing, with Importunity, in which (though a small one) I have a visible
Interest, my Subscribers will be only Those, who, if They think They see any
Thing, in me, or in my Design, worth their Notice, or Encouragement, can have
Generosity enough to save me the Confusion of applying to them, and send their
Names, and the Number of Books they subscribe for, to Button's Coffee-House, in
Covent Garden; where Receipts will be given.

THE Book is now in the Press, and will be published, as soon as it can be
printed off. -- If you find, among the Poems, which my Friend has desired he
may show you, What you think worthy of your Aprrobation, In That Case, (and in
That only) I shall hope your favorable Interposition in Behalf of,

SIR, Your most obliged, humble Servant, RICHARD SAVAGE.


I HAVE, purposely, left out, much of This ingenious, and unhappy, Gentleman's
Letter, which was very new, and surprising; and affected me with the most
touching Grief. -- If I apprehend His Case clearly (and the Proofs He sent me,
are too strong, to be easily mistaken) It is, in some Measure, to be
considered, as That of an Injured Nobleman, -- But of This, the World will
judge, for it self, when the Particulars shall be more public, -- That is His
own immediate Concern, and will, I suppose, be His own Care: -- But His
Proposal is What Every Body ought to take Part in; because the Book, in itself,
has a very uncommon Merit: And Both Merit, and Ill-Fortune, join, to recommend
the Proposer.

I THINK it was finely said, by a Gentleman, whose Writings, and Humanity,
were, for many Years, the Admiration of the Kingdom. -- That it ought to be the
Care of All, in whose Power it lay, to lift Mr. SAVAGE above a Sense of his
MOTHER 's Cruelty; because a Misery, so undeserved, had entitled him to a Right
of finding Every Good Man his FATHER.

BUT, when, to a Misery so undeserved, we add a Design, so full of Reason, It
is impossible, but there must be Many, who will feel a noble Delight, in
distinguishing their Zeal, for so modest a Proposer; and send their own Names,
and Those of Others, whom they can Influence, as so many Examples, when the
List comes to be published, That we have Spirits, who can discover Genius,
before it rises into Noise: and dare promote it, without waiting till the Way
has been led, by Others.

The Plain Dealer. No 74.
-- Fuit haec Sapientia quondam,
Publica privatis secernere, sacra profanis.
HOR.
FRIDAY, December 4. 1724.
MY Devotion, I am afraid, is not so Pure, and Simple, as it ought to be. There
is a Niceness, in my Taste of other People's Behavior, at Church, which ill
agrees with the Duty, which I my self am there, for the Discharge of.

I discovered this Defect of Grace in the Constitution of my Zeal, by a kind of
Reprobate Contempt, which I found my self affected by, last Sunday, against
that plain, and humble, Aukwardness, with which the mangled Psalms of David,
were vociferated, by the Congregation. -- A Gentleman, of my Acquaintance,
unluckily whispered me, (in the midst of what they call their Singing) That he
knew a Dutch Painter, who had drawn the liveliest Grotesque Piece, in Europe,
by an Idea, that he brought out of Church with him, from a Gallery of Country
Psalms-Singers.

MY Eyes, and Ears, took his Hint; and I shall never forget the Group of Living
Imagery! -- The Rolling Eyes, Raised Faces, Hanging Heads, Oblique Chins,
Stretched Mouths, and Distorted Muscles! -- The Voices too were as provokingly
dissonant, as the Looks were ludicrously penitential! -- Instead of finding my
Thoughts exalted, by the Spirit of transporting Harmony, I became ashamed, at
the presumptuous License, with which the Coarsest, and most unskilful Roarers
took upon 'em to bear Part, in Music, Sacred to the Praises of the ALMIGHTY.

THIS brought to my Reflection, with how much Reason, as well as Reverence, The
Choirs of our Cathedral Churches preserve the Dignity of their Religious
Harmony, by excluding the Unskilled; and aiding the Attracted Heart, by all the
sweet, and melting Force, of Vocal and of Instrumental Music; in its most
moving Elegance, and Perfection.

BUT, It is not only the Manner in which Psalms are commonly sung, that I
consider as an Indecency: The Psalms Themselves, as we have them in the old
English, Version, are a Disgrace to our our Learning, Language, and our
Religion! -- Who, that forms his Notion of David's Genius, from his Poetry, as
This Translation gives it us, could possibly believe Him the Sublimest, of All
Human Writers? Who, that should read these Lines, as they run, in the Exalted
Original?

Lord, Let not All, alike, Thy Mercy share,
Strike the PRESUMPTUOUS, but the LOWLY spare.
WHO, I say, could suppose He had found them, either in the Sense, or the
despicable Expression, of This, which follows, from our Vulgar Version?

O Lord, then, be not Slack;
Nor draw thy Hand a-back:
But pluck it forth, from out thy Lap,
And give thy Foes a RAP!
THE Sectarians, who are (too frequently) exceeding Rigid, and Narrow, in their
Adherence to imbibed Prejudices, seem rather to affect, than discourage, Cant
and Dullness, in their Religious Eloquence: And, it is a very Extraordinary
Reason which some of those Gentlemen have been pleased to give us, in Print,
for the want of Taste, and Incapacity, with which the Noblest, and most
Elevated, Strokes of David's Sacred Poetry, have been debased into Low, and
untuneable Jargon; -- God's Altars need none of our Polishing! As, if to write
poorly, were a Merit, in Religious Treatises; and it were possible to find a
Subject, more adapted to the Fullness of Art, than the Praises of That GOD, who
formed Both Art and Nature!

THERE is Nothing so Rapturous! Nothing so strongly painted, in all the noblest
Warmths of Fancy, or of Judgment, which have immortalized the Ancient Poets, as
most of the Hebrew Descriptions of the Power, and Majesty of GOD! And, among
These, The CIVth Psalm, and especially the First Part of it, is a Collection,
in one View, of the most Dreadful and Amiable, of the Almighty's Attributes: So
glowingly conceived, and represented in such lively Fullness; that all the
Greek and Latin ODES, are faint, and languid, in Comparison with it.

IT is impossible to Translate the Images of This prodigious Poet, without
doing them some Injustice: But, having lately been presented with an Essay,
upon the mentioned Psalm, in which an Eye has been, Every where, kept to the
Sense and Dignity of the Original, rather than to its dead Letter, I will
publish it, as a Proof, That Nothing can be more unlike the Thoughts of David,
than what we sing, as His in most of our Churches.

I.
NOW, while my Heav'n-tun'd Harp is rightly strung,
Soar, my winged Soul! And let Thy GOD be sung.
Clothed with embodied Light, He reigns, sublime;
And grasps Eternity, -- and governs Time!
From His feared Wrath, the Sun's fierce Blaze retires:
And dark Convulsions shake his sickening Fires.
Conscious of Beams, which dazzle Nature's Eye,
And, which, but once, to View, were, then, to die;
Kindly, the unequal Sight of Man to skreen,
God, like a Curtain, drew out Heaven, between.
Dreadfully known, in aweful Fires, He glides:
Or, veiled, in Clouds, His Self-roll'd Chariots, rides!
He walks upon the Wings, which guide the Wind:
Steps, beyond Worlds, -- and leaves even Thought behind.
II.
Myriads of Angels His Commands fulfill;
Angels! the Heralds of Almighty Will!
Lightnings, in Millions, sweep His fiery Way:
And, round His Paths, in blue Maeanders, play!
The firm fixed Balance of the pendant Globe,
To neither Bias, partial, swayed,
Poised, at His Word, has, from Time's Birth, obeyed.
III.
The covering Deep drew off the World's wet Robe,
Gave back -- and filled the Channels, He had made:
But (towering as, the Hills!) reluctant, staid;
Displeased with its New Bounds, -- and, yet afraid,
It Is old to re-invade!
The stubborn, and disdainful, Flood, -- no more
High-licens'd, as before,
Often, with bold Vengeance, would devour the Shore:
But, when the Rebel Surges swell, too high,
And sprinkle Heaven's Eternal Eye;
Sudden -- the watchful Prohibitions rise:
The starting Flood hears -- shakes -- and flies:
Down sink Her watery Mountains, from the Sky;
And, hushed in humble Flatness, lie!
Yet, at the Sovereign Will, They quit their Beds:
And climb, above the Mountain's loftiest Heads!
Thence, called, again rush down, at God's control,
And, over broad Kingdoms, in wild Tempest, roll!
Loose, as they are, They feel the Almighty's Check:
They know the appointed Bounds; and watch the imperious Beck!
IV.
To Life's cold Treasury; the briny Deep,
Through Earth-form'd Laby'rinths taught to slide,
Fruitful of Springs the winding Currents creep;
Thence, trickling, into Rivulets, they glide:
Slow traveling, to trace their mazy Way,
And 'twixt the enamored Hills, delightful, stray!
Sweet, and exhaustless, Stores, of limpid Drink,
For each wild Thirst, that seeks the smiling Brink,
And, in the Groves, that, bord'ring, rise,
Sit, housed, the warbling Songsters of the Skies.
But the proud Mountains, which, ambitious, grow,
And, viewing Heaven, disdain the World below;
Nor will to humble Brooks Refreshment owe;
Sip the moist Clouds; and cool their Heads, in Snow.
V.
Amazing Goodness! -- where is the smallest space,
Which does not feel His powerful Grace?
The Herds, luxuriant, crop the flowery Mead;
Fruit was for Man's superior Taste decreed:
For Him, the inspiring Grape was taught to bleed.
Bread-bearing Corn supports the Labou'rers Toil
And his rough Skin relents, with softening Oil.
VI.
Called, at fixed Times, up rolls the changeful Moon;
And shoots her Shado'wy Gleam, through Nights black Noon!
Swift, though the Light, from its high Source, descends,
It dares not dart its Way, one Thought too soon.
Yet, at God's Word, the Flag of Day is furled;
And licensed Darkness rises, over the World!
Then, does the gloomy Forest shake;
And summoned Savages their Sallies make:
The painting Herds creep, terrified, away;
While the stern Lion, hungry, roars for Prey!
God suffers him His meant Support to take,
And, then, new-wakes the Day!
VII.
The Sea's wild Herds, as well as Those, on Land,
Rough-moulded Sons, too, of Thy formful Hand!
All! live, and move, by Thy Command.
That horrid Scene fatigues the aching Eye!
There, canvas'd Ships the opening Depths defy:
Captive the Winds -- and diffe'rent Courses ply.
There, does Leviathan, wide wallowing, lie!
And, while his Sports the finny Nations fly,
The unweildy Monster sucks in Seas; and spouts them at the Sky!
On Thee, Great Maker! All Thy Creatures wait;
And, in due Season, All, by Thee, are fed:
Thy All-deciding Pleasure is their Fate!
They seek but what Thy ope'ning Hand has spread.
Soon, as thou hid'st Thy Face, we fall away,
To unformed Dust; -- and, old, paternal, Clay!
VIII.
Time shall have End: But God, shall, still endure!
The self-rais'd Pillars of Thy Power stand sure!
The Mountain Tops would smoke, -- if touched by Thee:
And EARTH flow, liquid, and overwhelm the SEA!
The Plain Dealer. No 75.
-- Artem Experientia fecit:
Exemplo monstrante viam --
MANIL.
MONDAY, December 7. 1724.
I DECLARED, in a late Paper, that my Speculations should sometimes, extend to
Politics. This Day's Entertainment shall be an Introduction, to that Purpose;
which I shall, occasionally, pursue, with the open Spirit of a PLAIN DEALER:
asserting, and making free with All the Liberty I was born to: -- A Liberty,
which does not alone entitle us to a Property in our Estates, but in our
Thoughts also. It is the great Charecteristick of every Freeborn Briton, That
He may speak, as He thinks, and think, as He pleases.

WHILE, like the Provinces of the declining Empire of Old Rome, we are
fretting, and disturbing ourselves, (under the Notion of Reason, and Principle)
to support the factious Avarice of a few aspiring Men, who find their Interest
in our Divisions, the GOTHS are at our Gate; and we are apprehensive of no
outward Danger. -- There seems to be rising, near us, That NORTHERN LION, which
has, so often, been prophesied of: And I believe, in the Course of my Papers, I
shall make it sufficiently visible, that, if early Measures are not taken, by
Way of Prevention, against the threatened Evil, the UNIVERSAL EMPIRE, which
Spain and France, have successively alarmed Europe with a fruitless Dread of,
seems, in Reality, to be coming upon us, with all the Terrors of a Fifth
General Monarchy.

IF it is supposed, That such a Fear concerns Us, less than other States, which
may be thought to lie more exposed, I doubt we deceive Our-selves, by a Vanity,
common to all Nations, in over-rating the Hazard of an Enemy, who should
presume to invade us. -- Our Ships, (powerful, and numerous, as they are) are
more formidable by the Reputation of their Terror, than by the Danger of their
Opposition. For, to expect that a Fleet will, at all Times, be able to keep
Danger at a Distance, were to give our Protection to the Winds -- How many
Caveats, against so unstable a Security, cannot our own History furnish us
with? -- Neither ought it to be considered, as a Remote, or Chimerical,
Prospect, That we may be matched in our Marine Pretensions -- We cannot
possibly have more Advantage, in the Fame, and Practice, of Dominion at Sea,
against any of our Cotemporary States, than the Carthaginians had against the
Romans: And the Success which crowned the Industry, and unconquerable Spirit,
of these Last, in Defiance of all Obstacles, as well of Nature, as of Art, is a
Lesson, which may may teach our Statesmen, That there is infinite Difference,
between Things difficult, and Things impossible.

NOT to insist on, the memorable Surprise, with which France, in a few Years
Application, convinced us, with how little Reason we had indulged a Notion,
That there were natural Impossibilities to prevent that Great Nation from
becoming Powerful, at Sea; All which were found mere Shadows, when the Genius
of her Ministers turned their Thoughts on attempting it! -- The prodigious, and
enterprizing, Spirit of the present Czar of Russia has, at once, established,
in the Baltic, a Third Maritime Power, Superior to Both its old Ones: And,
now, while I am Writing, has a Fleet of Sixty Ships of the Line, besides
Frigates; -- and Galleys without Number.

AS to natural Advantages, whether for building, equipping, or maintaining a
Navy, this Prince has the Start of us, beyond all Comparison. -- And since,
when his Ships are as Many, and as Strong, as ours, (which judging by what has
been done already, they may be, in Three or Four Years) our whole Pretense to
Superiority must be placed in our Skill, and Experience, in Sea Fights, how
dangerous would the Consequence be found, should he hit upon some New Method of
improving his Vessels, in their Strength, Defensive, or Offensive? Many High,
and Arduous Attempts toward which, have busied, some Years past, the unresting
Genius of that Monarch.

WITHIN the Memory of Numbers, yet living, the Muscovites were considered, as a
People, so far from Dangerous, that they were even Contemptible: And the
precipitate Advance of their Reputation in Arms, and Policy, is a Proof, that
no Vanity is more weakly founded, and unjust, than the Common Practice of all
Nations, to esteem Themselves more Valiant than their Neighbors. -- Mankind is
every where the same, by Nature, till a Difference is produced, by Custom. --
What Nation braver, than the Persians under Cyrus? Yet, what Nation baser, when
they opposed the Arms of Alexander? -- What People, under Heaven, have more
enriched the Histories of former Ages, than the Ancestors of those degenerate
Greeks, who are, now, the Disgrace of Christendom? Contented Slaves, under a
Tyranny, a thousand Times more insupportable than the worst of Those, in scorn
of which their ancient Orators have filled the World with Noisy Declamations,
in the boasted Cause of Liberty! ITALY, the imperious Mistress of the Universe!
has been sunk, for many Ages; and parcell'd into petty, and almost
inconsiderable, Jurisdictions! -- And, to bring the Proof quite Home, what
People ever seemed to hold a clearer Superiority over their Enemies, than the
English Armies, which our First Edward, led to War against the Scots? And, yet,
what Truth more undeniable, than the shameful Cowardice, and downright
Baseness, of the Sons of those very English, drawn out, against the Sons of the
same Scots, in the next succeeding Reign of Edward the Second.

COURAGE, when considered nationally, is not the Effect of Nature, but of
Discipline! Skill, and Practice, teaching an Agility in the Use of Arms, excite
a Pleasure in their Exercise: And, abating, by Degrees, that Fear of Death,
which is natural to all Men, convert it into Hope of Victory; and a proud, and
restless, Thirst of Glory. -- Arms therefore, and a dexterous Superiority in
the Use of them, should be esteemed the Sinews of War; and not MONEY, as is,
commonly, pretended. -- An Army, capable of conquering, will always find Means
of subsisting: But Money, though it subsists an ill-disciplined Army, can never
qualify it for conquering. -- The Helpless Indians, of Mexico, were infinitely
Richer, than their Plunderers, -- the Goths, when (from that very Country,
which the Czar now governs) they overran, and ruined Europe, brought them only,
Iron; they knew, That would make them Masters of all the Gold, they should have
Occasion for.

PRINCES, whose Authority is absolute, and uncontrolled, by Privileges, Rights,
or Customs; whose Dominions are vast, and populous, and whose Subjects are
laborious, hardy, and obedient; and acquainted with no Learning, but what is
sufficient to aid their Industry, without inflaming their Pride. -- Such
Princes, become dreadful, as soon as they appear ambitious, and exert
themselves in Preparations for War. -- But, when it happens, too, that a
Prince, in so tempting a Situation, has a Genius capable of Improving the
Art-Military, It is difficult to put Limits to the Consequences, which may
attend His Fortune.

THOUGH the Study of the Art of War has been carried to a great Perfection, yet
there is Room enough left to give Scope to the Force of Genius, this Way: And
it would, perhaps, be found, upon Trial, That the Modern System,
(notwithstanding the Use of Gunpowder, which was unknown to the Ancients) is as
subject as the old was, to be trampled on, and overpowered, by some new, and
unforeseen, Discoveries, on those Sides, most especially, where we believe
ourselves securest.

THE measured Lines of Humane Foresight, which are, so proudly distinguished,
by the Name of Policy, are vain Amusements, and mere Cobweb Subtleties. --
Their narrow, busy, Schemes, of balancing the Power, and Interests of Nations,
are often insufficient for the Purposes of their Designers, because these
Highway Statesmen found their Maxims upon Error, in the first Concoction. --
The Force of a Prince is, by their Rule, to be calculated, from his Revenue,
and his Revenue, from the Wealth of his Subjects: But This Argument depends
entirely on the general, mistaken, Notion, That All Equal Numbers, will be of
Equal Weight, in War; which is so far from being true, That, should the Poorest
Prince in Europe, fall upon the Richest, with a Skill in Arms, as much
Superior, as He is Inferior in his Numbers, the Disparity would be reversed,
immediately.

THE Romans, who never conquered, in order to prolong a War, but to make it
bear its own Expenses; and increase, as well their Treasury, as their
Reputation, were so far from this new Way, of computing an Enemy's Strength, by
his Riches, that Their Judgment was directly contrary. And this Opinion of
Ancient Times appears strongly in that magnanimous Answer, which was given by a
Gaul, to a King of Macedon, who showed him his Heaps of Gold, in order to
excite Terror; and, then, asked him, What He thought of His Condition? The
rugged Soldier replied, sharply, That as to what concerned His Condition, a
Stranger could be no Judge: But His BOUNTY, He could perceive, Extraordinary,
-- since he had taken such unusual Pains to let his Enemies be convinced,
clearly, That his Kingdom was worth their Conquering.

WHERE a Prince is really strong, -- To be held Weak, in the Opinion of the
World, is rather a Benefit, than a Disadvantage. -- His Preparations alarm no
Body; and the Blow, he designs to strike, will as soon be felt, as apprehended:
Whereas the Fame of Power, and Riches keeps Jealousy awake; and attracts Envy,
and Opposition, from all Quarters. -- The Fortune of the late French King had,
possibly, kept Pace with his Ambition, if it had not been watched, and checked,
upon this single Consideration. -- On the other Hand, Gustavus Adolphus was so
happily despised, by the Austrian Grandeur, which took it for granted,
according to the modern Reasoning, That the Poverty of such an Invader would be
a Curb to his Courage, that, boldly entering Germany with an Army of but Seven
Thousand Men, he carried every Thing before him, like a Torrent; broke the
whole Scheme of the Emperor's Designs; and had ruined, in all Likelihood, the
Interest of that Family, if he had not been killed, in the Battle of Lutzen.

DESIGNING, in some future Papers, to speak of Things, a little out of the
common Road, and draw Conclusions, which I judge too new, to venture on,
without a previous Notice, That I propose not to deduce my Arguments from the
Principles of Modern Politiques, and therefore refuse to be tried by them; I
have, for that Reason, thought necessary to publish these few General
Reflections, as a Preparative, for what I intend, hereafter, to consider, in a
more distinct, and peculiar, Manner.

The Plain Dealer. No 76.
Quos Ego -- Sed motos praestat componere fluctus.
VIRG. Age, si hic non insanit satis sua sponte, instiga.
TEREN. AND.
FRIDAY, December 11. 1724.
WHILE I was preparing to make good my Promise, in a late Paper, concerning the
AFRICAN COMPANY; I received the following Letter; which has thrown me under a
Necessity of Suspending the Execution of my Purpose, 'till I can argue the
LADIES into a Humor of Supporting the Burden of something, very Grave, upon
the Comfort of its having been preceeded by something that was very Whimsical.

Mr. PLAIN DEALER,
I HAVE been One of your Female Readers, ever since your first Appearance; and,
having begun to take a Fancy to you, was much concerned, for your sake, when I
saw you venturing upon African Stock. Take my Word for it, You and I shall be
both Losers? Only I have lost Money: And the PLAIN-DEALER will lose, but Labor.

YOU may spare your self the Trouble of Instructing the knowing Gentlemen, who
manage our Affairs, in that Country, how to get, all that is to be gotten: And
since no more than All, can be hoped for, away with your Schemes to improve
Trade, and enable us to improve Conversation. -- I remember a Story in one of
your Papers, of a Widow, at Wapping, that had brought over an Elephant, from
Guinea, that could dance, Moll Peatly, Overturn Apple Baskets, and play a
cleverer Circle of of Tricks than a whole Set of Managers, put together. -- I
remember, too, there was a Russian Bear, in the same Paper, who came over to
offer his Service among the Italian Fiddlers, of our Haymarket Orchiestra: But
was rejected, as I since heard, on the Remonstrance of some of their Singers,
-- That his Strokes were too Masculine, for their Measure. -- Now, never trust
me, if I was not a Thousand times more pleased, with your Account of these two
wonderful Curiosities, than I am like to be, with your expected Essay, for the
Improvement of our African Traffic.

BUT, if you can prevail with the Royal Company to Trade in something, which we
Women, may find our Interest in; If, in their Exports, for Example, you could
include our Husbands, and disagreeable Lovers: And, enrich the Bills of Entry,
with any Privileges, Rights, or Benefits, imported Custom-free, for the Use of
the SEX, at home: In this Case, I could read, with Patience, the most profound,
of your Commercial Dissertations, and so, might come, in Time, to get Gravity,
and Breath, enough to peruse one Moiety of an Act of Parliament; or begin, and
end, a Church History. -- I am (in no small Terror, and Apprehension.)

SIR, Yours, at all Points, proper, LAETITIA GAMBOL.


AS there is nothing, more easy, than to satisfy the Demand of this Lady; and
I am, naturally, inclined to do every Thing in my Power to promote the
Pleasure, or Interest, of the SEX, I shall postpone, what I mean to say,
further, on the Improvement of that Company's Trade, in general, 'till I have
opened a Prospect to this ungovernable Member of theirs, Mrs. LETTY GAMBOL, of
the many Great, and Glorious Advantages, which may be imported, as she desires,
out of Africa, to our Seaport Towns; and thence, spread themselves, in due
Time, over the Heart of this happy Kingdom; for the Ease, Emolument, and
Distinction, of the Women, its best MANUFACTURE.

I SHALL not confine my self to any single Part of Africa, but boldly, ransack
that whole Continent, for a Purpose, so Meritorious. -- It is the same Thing to
me, whether the Commodities I enquire after, are the Products of Wappo, of
Popo, or of Ekke Tokki; Provided only, That the Goods are as polite, and
elegant, as the Names, I shall load as willingly at Boffow, or Juffer, as at
Quaqua: Nor shall I make any Difference, as to the Value I rate Laudable
Customs at, from the One's having been the Prerogative of a Bossum, and the
Other the Quality of an Arompo Note. An Arompo is a Man-Eater; whence, no
doubt, our English Word, ROMP: A private Remark, by the bye, for the particular
Use and Instruction of the Lively Mrs. Laetitia Gambol!
.

THE Sable Toasts of those Sunny Climates have such Choice of Tempting
Privileges, that I shall have Room, in this Paper, to recommend but a very few
of them: I will, therefore, select the Best; and begin with this ARCH-CLAIM of
Virginity, within the Tropicks, that Girls, at Nine Years old, commence Women!

THE Young Ladies, too, in most Places, are at Liberty to dispose, freely, of
whatever may be called Their own: And, when, afterward, they think of
Marrying, their Credit, like that of other Traders, is rated the higher, by how
much wider, and more publicly, They have carried on their Dealing.

I THINK, no Doubt can arise, concerning the Welcome with which These Two
valuable RIGHTS will be received: But, not being altogether so clear, in my
Opinion, concerning the following, I shall leave it to be weighed, maturely,
How, far it may be of Use AMONG US, it is a Privilege to retire, from the
Fatigue of Man's Society, after having been Mothers of Ten Children.

THE Ancient Trial, by bitter Waters, has been more generally heard of, than
approved, among our Women here at home, who, if not, perhaps, the Deepest, are,
unquestionably, the prettiest Casuists, in the Universe. But the Duskier
Beauties, of Negroland, when under Accusations of too much good Nature, have an
Appeal, to sweeter Waters, in Justification of their Innocence: For, in order
to discover, to a jealous Husband, whether the Wife has been guilty, or not,
she is thrown, headlong, into a River: And if she drowns, she was a Sinner.
But, it is a Remark, of great Consolation, That there never was found a Woman,
who had not Lightness enough to Swim; and escape the Malice of her Accusers.

THERE is something, too, in their agreeable Manner of Mourning, for the Death
of a Husband, which deserves to be offered to the Consideration of the SEX, in
these more Phlegmatic, Northern, Regions: And one would wonder, indeed, how
any thing, so extravagantly Polite, should have got Footing, among People, who
never Subscribed, to an Opera. -- The whole Term of such Mourning is included
within Fourteen Days: And the Ceremony consists of Cries, which are modulated
by the Tunes of Musical Instruments; and accommodated (with a certain Equitable
Dexterity) to the Ease of the Performer, and more lively Entertainment of the
Audience; by large, intermediate, Pauses, during which they drink Brandy, and
smoke Tobacco, 'till their Spirits are duly raised, to expect when the Music
begins again, for another Act, of the Obsequies.

BUT, above all their agreeable Customs, I contemplate, with most Reverence,
the vast Extent of their Charity! There is, in it, an uncommon Profoundness;
and a Tenderness of Heart, beyond Example! -- It is a Practice, among the Rich
Negro Ladies, on the Gold Coast, to give Orders, on their Death Beds, for
buying up a Number of Female-Slaves, to bestow on the Public, as Living
Legacies, whose whole Business it is, to be at Every Body's Service, in One
sole Employment, (which they are, All, equally, capable of) for the Price of
Three Periwincle-Shells. -- They consider This, as a Work, of great Mercy, and
Compassion; and, conscious of their pious Purpose, close their Eyes, and die,
satisfied.

I COULD add an infinite Variety of such uncommon Commodities as These: But the
Foregoing will serve, as Samples, of what Rich Goods may be imported, for the
Uses, which my Correspondent hints at, if, in Right of her self, and the Ladies
she acts for, she could propose any Scheme of Engraftment, by virtue whereof,
the Assistants of the Royal Company might cooperate with the Sisterhood.

IT is not to be questioned, but, when such a Scheme comes to be seen, the
Directors of some other, of our more thriving Societies will stir against it,
out of Envy, and propose their own respective Bodies, as most Capable of, or
more adapted to, the mentioned Incorporation. But the Ladies will, I hope, have
Honor enough to keep close to their first Engrafters: And, least their natural
Disposition to think too meanly of Themselves, and their own Reasonings, should
expose them, without Defense, to the Force of Arguments, they cannot Answer, I
will conclude this Essay for their Service with the Example of a ROYAL AFRICAN;
His Majesty, the King of Boffoe; who, when his Conscience was a little puzzled,
brought himself off, by his Resolution.

KING Yagou, the abovemeant, was a Lover of the Female Sex; but being a Prince
of great Frugality, contented himself with Ten Wives only, when many of his
Subjects had Forty; and out of that small Number, of Ten, would, now and then,
for mere Good Husbandry, bestow One, on his Son, Joost. -- A Portugueze Friar,
to whom he was boasting of these Great Qualities, represented to him the
Wickedness of the Action; and assured him, That no civilized Part of the World
allowed it. -- At which, he laughed, very heartily, and returned him this
Answer -- Must I be a Fool, because the White Men of your Country, are Fools?
-- My People are better informed; -- and we act, in both Places, according to
our different Understandings! The Plain Dealer. No 77.
Misce stultitiam Consiliis brevem.
HOR.
MONDAY, December 14. 1724.
I REMEMBER a Passage, in some Eastern Writer, which carries a sharp, and
instructive, Moral. An Emir, of great Sanctity, had a Custom, every Night, to
call his Family together, that they might sit round him, with due Gravity, to
hear his Son read some Chapter of the Alcoran, which the Father would take
Pleasure in opening, and enlarging on, to his Domestic Congregation. It
happened, one Night, that, in the midst of the Sermon, the whole Audience fell
asleep; except the Preacher, and his Son: Which last, as soon as he observed it,
interrupted his Father, with this Remark. -- See, Sir, the Fruits of your Good
Purpose! There is not one, of them All, but sleeps, as soundly, as if God's
Word deserved no Reverence! -- The Emir looked round the Company, and shutting
up his Spectacles, in the Book, against a fitter Opportunity, drew his
Discourse to a Conclusion, with this Reply, to his Son's Intelligence -- You
had, your self, been better employed, in adding One to the Number of Sleepers,
than in waking, not so much to correct your own Faults, as to observe the
Faults of Others.

I received a Letter, the other Day, which brought this Story to my
Remembrance, and is one Proof, among many, how difficult a Province he
undertakes, who assumes the Office of a PLAIN DEALER, at a Time, when People
are so vigorous, in the Censures, which they make Themselves; and so languid,
in their Approbation of Those, which others make, with the same Liberty!

The Author of this Letter is, so kind, as to let me know, "He is one of my
Best Friends; he will not therefore insist on my Disingenuity, to fall foul of
-- a single Sentence, -- in one of my late Papers; and, dwell on one Error, in
a voluminous Author: But he is so good as to be in Pain for my Veracity; having
carefully (he says) examined every single Paragraph of Mr. Trapp's Preface to
his Translation of Virgil, and not being able to discover, what I charge him
with. -- He closes all, with a Hint, that he writes, in Vindication of that
worthy and Reverend, Author; and would not have Offense taken at every Trifle."

THE VERACITY of the PLAIN DEALER being the Side he will be sure to be most
defensible on, it was unskilfully done, for a Lover of the Muses, as my
Correspondent subscribes himself, to bring on his Attack, so rashly, on that
Quarter. -- He ought, first, to have been very careful, and confirmed, in his
Discoveries. -- But, to remove the Cloud from his Sight, if he pleases to turn
to Page 382, of the first Volume of the mentioned Translation; in an Essay, on
moving the Passions, previous to the Remarks on the 4th Book, he will find a
Paragraph ended thus, -- We have not -- as -- yet -- indeed -- completed the
Explication, proposed: -- For something -- more -- still -- remains -- behind.
-- If this differs from what it appeared in my Paper, it is only by being a
little worse than I made it.

THUS much, to the Charge, in that only Part, which carried any Appearance of
Reason with it. -- The other Articles have no Weight, at all, but from the
Regard that is due to a mistaken Goodnature; which has misled the Gentleman,
whoever he was, to apprehend, as a Trifle, an Error of the first Magnitude, in
Writing. -- It is certainly the Business, and the Aim, of every Author, to
explain, and illustrate, his Argument: But this tedious Redundance obscures,
and perplexes it. -- Where a Man should imprint Idea's, he distracts and erazes
them: And, instead of awakening the Passions, affects the Spirits with
Drowsiness. -- Such a TRIFLE is this Fault, which my Correspondent is for
passing over, with so tenderhearted a Blindness!

THE censured Passage, then, is no Error, of such small Importance, as the
Animadvertor had thought fit to imagine; but he falls, next, into another
Mistake, of considering it, as a Place, picked out by the Inquisition of a
malicious Eye: Whereas (if he had been as attentive to the Argument, of the
Paper, where he found that Censure, as he was to the Censure Itself) nothing
would have been more easy, than to have observed Numbers, of the same Kind of
Amplifications, which might, with equal Effect, have been borrowed from that
work: And, thence, he must have drawn this natural and obvious Conclusion. --
That one Error, only, was dwelt on, not because it was all that could be found,
but because it was all, that could be admitted in that Paper.

AS to the Worthiness, or Reverence, of the Author, the Letter-Writer himself
can wish no less Ill to him, than the PLAIN DEALER does. But this is a Matter
entirely out of the Question. The Person has nothing to do, where what he has
written, and published, is the Ground of the Argument. -- For a Friend,
Partiality is Weakness: And, against an Enemy, it is Baseness. The Merit of a
Cause lies above the Level of such low Motives; and they, who would reach it,
as they ought, must be listed in their Attempt, between Justice and Resolution.
-- There is nothing, which the PLAIN DEALER has a sincerer Detestation of, than
Personal Reproach or Defamation: But then, on the other side, he who dares not
speak out openly, whenever Occasion offers it self, concerning the Miscarriages
of the Greatest Men, or the Virtues of the most Unprosperous, has a Soul, below
the Duties, of one, who writes, that he may deserve Reading.

BUT, to make a Transition to a Subject, which I have, for some Time (in vain)
been expecting an Opportunity to resume, with a Spirit less ludicrous, than
That, in which I touched it, not long since: I am raised, to such a Height of
Wonders, by the triumphant Posture, in which the Wit of this Generation is
visible, almost every Night, at one or other of our Theaters, in the Genius of
our Actors Limbs, that there is nothing, which I cannot promise my self, from
the Readiness of their Elastick Capacity; and the Humor, which the Town is in,
of listening, to the Voice of their Muscles!

I HAVE noted, for this Reason, what I discovered, not without due Transport,
as I was perusing a certain Venerable HIGH GERMAN Compiler, ( CAMERARIUS his
Historical Meditations!) -- It is a new, and unbroken Mine, of Theatrical
Treasure! which I shall recommend, with the stronger Hope, to the Contention of
our Rival Stages, because, the never-to-be-forgotten, the Triumphant FAUSTUS
HIMSELF was of Happy High German Original!

I HAVE oftentimes, says this Grave and Authentic Sage! (for I reverence him
too much to vary a Word, from his Text) seen, with wondering, in the Prince of
Bamberg his Court, a certain Peasant of Germany, nourished, and brought up, as
himself avouched, in the Mountains, among Beasts; who was so active, and
nimble, of his Body, that all that saw him were astounded, and thought he used
Enchantment, which, yet, I do not, verily think he did! -- And that, which was
most remarkable in him was, That he showed his Agility, not standing, but
walking upon his Hands, and his Feet, prone and flat-back'd, like a Dog, or a
Cat!

IN that same Court, was a Dwarf, who would get up, upon this Peasant, as upon
a Horse; making him to turn, and wind, all manner of Ways, as a Rider would do
a Spanish Genet; But, when the Peasant listed, he would easily throw his Dwarf,
for all that ever he could do to sit fast. -- Sometimes he was baited, with
very mighty Mastives, and with English Dogs, that the Prince had: And, by a
certain Barking, which he counterfeited naturally, and a furious snarling, like
a Dog, would give them the Chase, and make them run apace, out of the Hall. --
That done, he would set himself to leap, upon his Hands, and Feet, forwards,
and backwards, with a Nimbleness incredible! and would scramble up, by the
Coins, toward the Roof of the Hall, faster than an Ape could do! albeit,
otherwise, he was a rustical Fellow, heavy, and of a gross making.

I SAW him twice, as I was at the Prince's Table (after he had thrown his
Dwarf) and driven away all the Dogs that were in the Room) leap upon the
Shoulders of one of the Guests, and thence upon the Table, without overturning
Dish, or Cup: And then cast himself with such a Spring upon the Floor, that one
would have said, It had been a Squirrel, or some wild Cat. -- He did use to
skip as fast upon the Tops of Towers, and of Houses, built Point-wise, as our
House-Cats would do: And so many other PARTS of a Cat, and an Ape, HE PLAYED,
that his Tricks were the Talk, and the Wonder of all Men!

I WAS so pleased with this Fancy, that I could not forbear communicating it,
for the future Entertainment of our People of Fashion: And I am so firmly
convinced of the imitative Spirit, and Genius of the Hostile Harlequins of the
Two, Comic, Houses, that I question not, in the least, but by the Second Week,
after Christmas, we shall see a Dozen, or two, of Bull-Dogs round the Tail of
Shepherd, on Drury-Lane-Stage, without being able to bite him, while he curvets
and barks with his Back up, and wheels safe, in their Center; -- And Mr. LUN,
at the other House, crawling up the Edge of one of his Scenes, and sticking to
the Roof, like a Spider over the Heads of a shouting Pit! where he will spin
himself into their good Graces, 'till their Necks are half broke, with the
Sublimity of their Entertainment!

The Plain Dealer. No 78.
Quo me cunque rapit Tempestas, deferor Hospes.
HOR.
FRIDAY, December 18. 1724.
LIKE, a Ship that is compelled, by Tempest, to decline, from her due Course, I
am, sometimes, driven out of my Way, by the Letters of my Correspondents; None
of which beat so violently upon me, as Those from the Feminine Quarter.

I BEGIN to find it Impracticable to work any Good, on that perverse, and
malapert, Sex, by the Weight of Age, and Experience. -- If I had not confessed,
at my first setting out, that I was, then, in my Grand Climacterick, I am
verily persuaded I might have applied my self to them, with more Success. --
Under their Sense of my Weakness, they despise the wholesomest of my Lectures;
and go on, in open Defiance of the utmost I am able to do to them! -- Not a Day
passes, but I have new Intelligence brought me, of their persisting in
Mischiefs, and Enormities, which reach, and involve, all Men, from the Canopy
to the Cottage.

THE Epistles, which this Paper shall be filled with, will be some small Proof,
how hard a Task he takes upon him, who would oppose himself against an
Influence, which bears down every Thing before, it! -- In fine, I see there is
much more han I once imgain'd, in this Observation of an honest Mohammedan. Five
Things, in the World, will always be found useless: A Candle, in the Sunshine.
-- -- Beauty before the Blind. -- Rain, that falls, in a Desert. -- A Feast, to
those who have no Stomach. -- And, Sage Advice, when it is given to a Woman,
who has no Inclination to follow it.

To the PLAIN-DEALER.
Oh! Prodigious!
FLESH and Blood can bear it no longer! Twenty, and Twenty, Times, I have been
provoked at you, before; But, in your Paper, of last Friday, there is such an
intolerable Piece of Impudence! such an Affront to the whole Sex! that it is
not possible for us to live, silent. -- MANUFACTURE, quoth he? A Woman a
MANUFACTURE! -- Had you called us Products, or Merchandise, or Things, or
Commodities, we could have born it, with some Patience: But, MANUFACTURE
insults us, with an abominable Insinuation, That we are but the WORK of our
Women's Hands! like a Machine, that is Empty, in its Inward Parts, and whose
Value consists, not in the Matter it is made of, but in the Curiosity, with
which they pin it together!

OH, that some Body would direct me, how to find out Mrs. Patty Amble! -- If I
don't do your Business, there, never trust Woman more. -- I Will warrant, she
shall die, a Spinster, rather than put herself under your MANUFACTURING; most
facetious PLAIN DEALER! -- And, so, no more, at this present Writing, but that
I am, with a great Deal of Truth and Obligation,

Any Body's, rather than yours, PRISCILIA SPARKLEY.


THE two next LETTERS (the First from a Lover in low Life, writ in simple
Honesty of Heart; and the second in a Strain, and from a Condition, very
different) having really been sent me, in one, and the same, Day; I publish
them, as a Proof, that All Degrees, and Capacities, Sink in the soft Captivity
together.

High-Holbourn, Nov. 27. 1724. Mr. PLAIN DEALER,
I AM like a Man, in the middle of a Bogg; the more he struggles to get out,
the Deeper he sinks in. -- To tell you the Truth, I am in Love: Only I am but
an Apprentice, and have not served quite Four Years of my Time. -- Therefore,
what I would desire, of you, is, to learn me how I shall be able to have done
Loving: For, 'till that is brought about, I shall never mind my Business. --
And my Fear is, That my Mind being half toward Love, and the other half
toward Business, that, between Both, I shall gain Neither. And what is a Man
without a Business?

My Case being, therefore, of great Importance, and my Livelihood depending on
my Business, I do not, at all doubt, but that, when you have taken it into
Consideration, it will, likewise, be of great Benefit to many Hundreds, besides
myself. -- Good Mr. PLAIN DEALER, pardon This, my Presumption; and be pleased
to correct what I have writ amiss, being not right in my Senses. -- But tell me
what I had best do: For one had better be an humble Servant to a whole Army,
than be, what I am forced to write myself,

CUPID's Slave.


SIR,
WHEN I read the Letter, in one of your late PAPERS, signed Amanda, I was but
too well assured of its Author. That Delicacy of Sentiment, and beautiful
Propriety of Expression, alas! how how often have they charmed me! Never was
Eloquence so persuasive. -- Never was Eloquence so vain! -- While she begs me
to desist, in so Enchanting a Manner, I am only ten Times more her Slave -- Her
Repulses, like the Struglings of a beautiful Virgin, serve but to heighten her
own Charms, and inflame the Desire of the Ravisher.

I know, Rochefocault says, If a Man fancies, he loves his Mistress for her own
Sake, He is mightily mistaken. -- But, alas! He never saw AMANDA. Heaven be my
Witness, if I thought, that in those exquisite Raptures, which I hope, one Day,
to owe her, she would not be an Equal Sharer, by all those Hopes, I swear, --
sharp, killing, Thought! I swear, I would Foregoe her. -- With so sincere, so
disinterested, so artless a Passion, I am,

AMANDA's Everlasting Lover.


To the PLAIN-DEALER,
SIR,
IF you would do a Piece of Service to the Young Men of the World, whose
warmest Ambition it is, to recommend themselves to the FAIR, without
considering what Virtues, They, whom they love, are possessed of -- Let me give
them, through your Means, the following true Relation.

Olivia is a Lady, of genteel, and fashionable Education; for her Mother took
early Care to show her the World, as they call it: That is, To teach her,
through the most contrary Appearances, to intend Nothing, but her Pleasure, and
Interest. -- Pamphilio is a Gentleman, of good Estate, in the Neighborhood. --
The Lady's Reputation was unsullied, He saw her often; and, every Time he saw
her, saw new Marks of her Wit, and Good Humor; her Freedom and Sincerity;
'till from admiring, he fell to adoring her.

HIS Love was inflamed, by the little, innocent, Encouragements, which Olivia
knew how to give, without incurring the Imputation of Forwardness: and which
Pamphilio regarded, as so many modest Overtures, to the Advantage of his
Passion. -- His Visits were more frequent, and more open. He could, no longer,
conceal his Love; he declared it, at once, to, both, Olivia, and her Mother --
for her Father was dead: And they, Both, gave him Hope, of succeeding, in his
Wishes.

Pamphilio's Affection growing stronger and stronger; he became impatient for
their Marriage; in the near Prospect of which, all the Neighborhood rejoiced,
and did their Utmost to advance it. For they observed, how his Soul doated on
her; and darted itself into his Eyes, whenever she approached him. -- Olivia
declined marrying. -- She was too young, she said, to be Mistress of a Family;
and insisted on a Year more, in which she might fix her Resolution. -- Though
this Year, to Pamphilio, was a Lover's Eternity, he was to submit, on any
Terms; and the Time, required by Olivia, at last, drew near its Conclusion. --
The Lady, then, grew cooler, and the Lover more transported. -- She declared to
him, very frankly, That It was impossible for her to love him. -- Neither Love,
she said, nor Hatred, were Things in our own Power: And he ought not to take it
ill, that she could no longer deceive him.

POOR Pamphilio had no Voice to reply. But a sudden Tear, or two, spoke for
him! -- He trembled, grew pale, and gazed on her -- and sighed, at length this
faint Hope -- That she could not, sure, be in Earnest. -- She answered, He had
no Reason to give himself the Air of so much Surprise. -- She had never
promised him Marriage, -- and was, yet, at her own Disposal. -- Pamphilio,
bowed, and left her; and has, also, left Society. He shuns all his former
Companions: And is sunk, in the deepest Melancholy! His Affairs are neglected,
his Health is destroyed; and his Friends are enraged and astonished!

ABOUT a Quarter of a Year ago, Olivia was married: and with so extraordinary a
Success, that her Relations are already upon suing out a Divorce. -- What ought
to render the Condition of this Lady Inconsolable, if she has either
Generosity, or Reflection, is, -- That Her hard Fortune afflicts Pamphilio, to
a sharper Degree than His own did!

SUCH a Jilting Temper, may, perhaps, be consistent with Chastity, but it can
have neither Honor, nor Tenderness. -- She was formed to inspire Love, and
very capable of it, by Nature: But she was hardened, by Education, to become
unsusceptible of it. -- She exposed Charms to Sale, which she intended not to
part with: And, then, like a covetous Tradesman, who has lost his best Market,
she resolved, as a pretty Revenge, to throw herself away, upon the First Bidder.

Yours, PAMPHILIOPHILUS.


The Plain Dealer. No 79.
Incertam frustra Mortales funeris horam
Quaeritis, --
PROPERT. Tum vero in curas Animum diducimus omnes.
HOR.
MONDAY, December 21. 1724.
I NEVER met with any Accident, which more touchingly surpised me, than the
Death of my Friend, Sir Portly Rufus, under Circumstances, with Regard to his
Fortune, much inferior to the Figure, he had maintained in the World; and which
made such Impressions on his departing Soul, as served, at once, to excite my
Pity, and inflame my Admiration.

I VISITED him, during his Sickness, and found his Family in great Disorder:
The cheerful Faces, which were formerly worn, by his Servants, as the lively
Signals of his Hospitality, were quenched, and sadden'd by a Sorrow, that
proved its Deepness, by its Silence. -- He was fallen into a forced Sleep, when
I came down to his House in the Country; and it being late in the Evening, I
went to Bed, with a Resolution not to disturb him, 'till the Morning. -- I lay
awake, and heard the Clock strike One, indulging my Thoughts, under the
Solemnity of the Midnight Darkness, with a Thousand busy Reflections, on the
Instability of our Health and Pleasures; when, from an Old Tower of the
Parish Church, which was almost contiguous to my Chamber-Window, I heard the
Toll, of a Great Bell, sound out, many Times, distinctly, with a deep, and
mournful Fullness, which left an unusual Vibration in the Air; and had scarce
ceased, when I found the whole Family alarmed; and the House filled with
Shriekings, and the most distracted Cries of Sorrow.

I ROSE, and dressed my self, in much Amazement; and, following the Clamor,
found it, collected in the Sick Man's Chamber: -- I was assured, at the crowded
Entrance, That Sir Portly was a Dying Man. -- That the Bell, which had tolled
out, at Midnight, always did so, of it is self, before every Death, that was to
happen, in the Family: -- That it was a Warning, which had never failed: --
And, That Sir Portly, who had been waked, by the Sound of it, was, himself, of
the Opinion, That he could live but a few Hours.

I FOUND my Friend, sitting up, in his Bed, very faint, and scarce able to
speak; and looking round him, with a Mixture of Wildness, and of Sorrow, on the
Distraction of his Assembled Family. -- As soon as he saw me near him, He gave
me his Hand, with a Glimpse of Cheerfulness, which seemed to brighten, through
his Anguish: And, insisting, with much Earnestness, That I should be left, for
some Time, alone, with him, the rest withdrew, and I sat near him, on the
Bedside. -- He continued silent, for several Minutes, fixing his Eyes on me,
very steadfastly, and with much inward Commotion; till at last he spoke to me,
as follows.

YOU have timed this Visit, kindly; for it is the Last, you will ever make me:
It is a sensible Comfort, that I have this Opportunity to communicate my dying
Sentiments, to a Friend, who will be capable of doing me Justice, where the
World may speak of me with a mistaking Liberty -- HERE he put a Key into my
Hand, and directed me to find a Paper, which I have now in my Possession; and
from the Subject of which, I shall take Occasion, some Time hereafter, to draw
more Observations than One, for the Use of Men of Business, who may receive
Entertainment, and Advantage, from it. -- He said something, concerning his
Private Affairs, in which my Advice he believed, might be of Service to his
Family: And, then assumed a Discourse, on the Tolling of the Parish Bell, and
proceeded in it with much Composure.

I HAVE neither Learning, said he, nor Leisure, to enter upon an Examination,
concerning the Causes of these Praeter-Natural Notices. It is enough for me,
that It is thus: And you will soon be convinced of the Consequence, with Regard
to my approaching End. -- But, Let not any Thing, so common as Death, be an
Affliction, or Surprise to you. I have enjoyed my Bed of Sickness, like a
Study. It has given me an Opportunity of retiring into my self, without
Partiality or Interruption! -- The Danger of my Condition drew a Curtain
betwixt the World and me, and contracted all my Business into the Compass of
this silent Chamber. Here I have seen Things, as they are, and learnt to judge
of them, without Prejudice.

TO forsake the World, gives me no Pain, from any Attachment to its Pleasures.
It can tempt me with Nothing New; for I have, already, seen it all. -- Though I
die (as I shall) to Night, Tomorrow will be like to Today: The same Sun will
rise upon it; and leave it, in the same Darkness. -- The Seasons will come
round again, and be called New; but they will be no other than the Repetition
of what I have, so often beheld already. -- Why should it startle me, to be
called back to the Place, from which I came hither? I rose, from Uncertainty,
into Life; and I am now but returning, out of Life, into Uncertainty. Can any
Thing be more reasonable, than that Others having given Place to Me, I should
give Place to others, in my Turn? -- Either I have not made the proper Use of
Life, which I have enjoyed so long already, and therefore deserve to hold it no
longer: Or, having reaped the Profit of Living, to what End should I wish Life
lengthened?

I HAVE many Hopes, it is true, which, it grieves my Soul, to leave imperfect:
But, if I would live, 'till I am completely Happy, I seek what is never to be
found. It were to act, like those foolish Indians, who run themselves out of
Breath, to catch the Sun, when it seems to set, so near them: -- So might I
travel on, for ever, and weary my self, to no Purpose: The Object of my Pursuit
is not in the same World, where I am!

YET there is one Thing, which makes Death terrible, and triumphs over Reason,
Reflection, and Philosophy! It is, That we are torn from our Friend's Society.
-- That we are divided, by, perhaps, an Everlasting Separation, from what Love
has made dearer to us than our Life is! It is that Blending, -- That
Liquefaction -- or Confusion, of Two Hearts, in one Will, Desire, and Interest,
which is the Spirit of all human Blessings! Light is Darkness, without it; and
Prosperity not enjoyed, but possessed, without Relish.

IN this View, of our Soul's Union, here on Earth, with some kindred Spirit,
which it delights to mingle with, Death is dreadful, when it strikes between
us! -- How many unfinished Purposes may it interpose it self, to the
Disappointment of, with Regard to the Comfort, or Service, of Those, who are
thus Dear to us, when we are cut off, by a sudden Summons, and allowed no Time
to complete our yet but intentional Gratitude, or give Perfection to our
unripen'd Labors! Can a Husband sit Easy within, when he is straining his
dying Eyes, for the last, afflicting, Sight of a Wise, who deserved his
Tenderness, and was entitled to his Protection; but, whom he is, that Moment,
compelled to leave, to struggle with the Bitterness of Want; and acquaint
herself with the Licentiousness of Reproach, Contempt and Insult! -- Or can
there be a Strength, in Wisdom, to sustain a dying Father, whose Heart is
tortured with the burning Uncertainty, of what shall become of his helpless
Children, exposed Orphans, to an unpitying World, without Guide, Support, or
Prospect?

HERE, my Friend was interrupted, by the Impatience of his Family, who broke in
upon us, with a Grief, which soon appeared to have too just a Ground: For Sir
Portly died, in less than a quarter of an Hour after. -- There were many
Circumstances, in the Manner of his Death, which will deserve to be described,
in a future Paper: But the melancholy Impression they have left me under, will
at present be best indulged by an Abstract of some Excellent Verses, from a
POEM of Mrs. ELIZABETH SINGER's, on the Death of Her Husband. -- I am not sure,
that I remember them right; for it is long, since I read them: But there is so
much of Beauty, Nature and Passion, in them, that the Reader cannot fail to
discern, and admire, the Author's Genius, through whatever Injury they may have
suffered, by any Injustice, I may, perhaps, have done them.

IN what soft Language shall my Thoughts break free,
My dear Alexis! when I talk of Thee?
Nor Nymph, nor Grace, of all the fancied Train,
Nor weeping Loves, shall aid my pensive Strain:
True Passion has a Force, too strong for Art;
She needs no Muse, who can invoke her Heart.
Tasteless of Forms, and from all Comfort torn,
The Husband -- Lover -- and the Friend, -- I mourn!
All, that to Worth, and Tenderness, was due;
Whatever Excess the fondest Passion knew,
I felt! -- My Prayers to Heaven, were, All, for Thee:
And Love inspired me, first, with Piety.
Oh! Thou were all my Triumph, and my Pride:
My Hope, my Peace, my Shelter, and my Guide!
Thy Love (sweet Study!) busied all my Days:
And my full Soul's Ambition was Thy Praise!
Why has my Heart this fond Engagement known?
Or, why would Heaven dissolve the Tie, so soon?
Whence had the Charmer all his Power to move?
Or, why was all my Breast so turned, for Love?
Oh! he could talk! -- 'Twas Ecstasy to hear!
The listening Soul hung, trembling, on the Ear.
Musick's whole Power dwelt, artless, on his Tongue;
Awefully soft, like some kind Angel's Song!
Pain, that but heard Him speak, was charmed to Rest:
And Mercy melted down the Miser's Breast!
Hours, Days, and Years, unheeded, took their Flight:
For Time was only measured by Delight!
Fancy, still, paints him, fresh, in every Grace;
But, the thin Shade eludes my lost Embrace:
The shrinking Vision melts, in shapeless Night,
And a cold Horror blots my blasted Sight!
Then, the past Mis'ery rises, to my View,
His Death (sad Scene!) will be, for ever, New!
Then, with the quickest Sense, his Pangs I feel:
And his Last Accents over my Silence steal.
"My Wife! -- my sharpest Pain! my fondest Care!
"Heav'en, for Thy Sake, will hear a Dying Pray'er:
"Will lead, and comfort Thee, when I am dead;
"When, from these aching Eyes, thy Form is fled:
"When these cold Hands, which, now, thy Grasp implore,
"Shall tremble, at the Touch of Thine, no more;
"Oh! where shall my unsocial Spirit stray!
"How, Err, unblest, along the Eternal Way!
"From all Engagements, here, I now am free;
"But That, which keeps my lingering Soul with Thee.
"How I have loved, thy bleeding Heart can tell:
"And -- we MAY meet! -- 'till which dear Time -- Farewell.
He ceased -- and waiting Angels caught his Breath:
And his quenched Eyes dissolved their Beams, in Death!
But oh! what Words have Passion, to express,
What Thought can feel, the Rage of my Distress!
Why did they tear me from the breathless Clay?
I should have stayed, and wept my Life away.
Yet, gentle Shade! -- where ever thou now may dwell,
Wherever thy Spirit does the Rest excel,
If thou can listen to my Grief, oh! take
The softest Vows, that Love, and Truth, can make.
"For Thee, my Thoughts all Pleasure shall foregoe:
"My Tears, for Thee, shall stream, in secret Woe.
"Far, from the busy World, I will retire;
"Where mournful Mem'ory feeds the silent Fire.
"First taught by Thee the noblest Flame to prove,
"The Force! the Life! the Elegance of Love!
" Sacred, I will to Thee thy Gift confine:
"Grasp Thee through Death, -- and be for ever, Thine.
The Plain Dealer. No 80.
-- Populus me sibilat, at mihi plaudo.
HOR.
FRIDAY, December 25. 1724.
IT has been justly observed, by our Writers, in Defense of the Stage, That It
is a GLASS, in which we see, what we, ourselves, are, by the Image of our own
Actions, represented in the Persons of Others. -- Commend me then, to the Wit,
or the Satire, of one of our Theaters, where they have brought Newgate, into
their Mirror, and taught our People of Quality, the elegant Art of breaking
Jayl, by Way of Diversion and Improvement.

TO Treat this Subject, if possible, with some Appearance of Gravity, either
the Taste of our Audiences must be depraved, to a Degree of Horror; or the
Judgment of our Master-Players corrupted, to a Degree of Pity! -- Too long,
indeed, have the most Successful of our Theatrical Entertainments been Low and
Contemptible; but I never observed, before, That they were Ungenerous, and
Inhumane! -- What Idea will Posterity conceive of the Present Age, when they
shall read, among a thousand living Records, to our Infamy, That our Nobility,
and People, of the First Figure, in Life, could descend to be Partakers in an
Insult offered to the Memory, and Misfortune, of a poor Wretch, a Felon, who
had, just before, been Executed, at Tyburn; by sitting, contented Spectators,
to observe his Crimes, and his Miseries, acted over again, for their Delight,
and Instruction.

BUT, If (as Lucan says of Nero) the Gods could make Way for CAESAR, by no
other Means than those dreadful Things which preceded him, -- If Nothing less
could induce the Town, to bear with the insupportable CAESAR in EGYPT, than
their acting it immediately after SHEPHERD in NEWGATE, the Players have, at
least, One Good Argument for permitting it: -- They made Way too for a
Brother's Tragedy, whose tender Heart might, have been broke, if he had, twice,
write dismally, to no Purpose. -- King JOHN, the Dramatick Abortive, of last
Winter, was a pusillanimous Prince, and could condescend to hear Reasons, why
it was necessary to submit, for Fear of a forcible Deposing: But CAESAR was a
Hero, and too resolved, to shake at Danger! -- Though all the Serpents, of
Africa, should have hissed in his Face, he would have regarded them, as little,
as he did, the Boxes, the Pit, and the Gallery.

THIS Tragedy is so provoking, and copious a Field for Satire, that it is with
Difficuly, I restrain my Pen, from the severest License of just Invectives. But
I soften my Indignation, when I turn my Eye, from the Play to the Author: --
The Exemplary Candor, Humanity, Politeness, Affability, and Generosity, of that
Gentleman's indulgent Behavior, with Regard to the Works and Interest of other
Writers! But, above all, his prodigious Modesty! These, his extraordinary and
well-known, Virtues, overbalance a thousand Absurdities in his Tragedy; and
determine me to continue silent.

THE Theater, to confess the Truth, is a Subject of too much Consequence, from
its Effect on the Morals, and Behavior of the Public, to leave it either
decent, or reasonable, to omit Defects in the Stage's Constitution, and descend
to the Actor's particular Failings. -- But we have Persons on the Stage, who
want not some Graces, and Generous Qualities, as well of Body, as of Mind,
which might have adorned, even the Best of those Characters, which they are
accustomed to represent: And of These I shall speak seriously, and with
Pleasure, on Occasions which will offer themselves, when I come, in a little
Time, to consider the Present State of our Stage, and what Justice there may
be, in those Pretenses to its Improvement, which we have heard so very much of,
under its Management, as it now stands.

BUT, TO return to my first Subject: There have not been wanting, public Marks
of Disapprobation, as often as those ill-chosen Entertainments abovementioned
have been exhibited: Yet, they went on, with an unmovable Steadiness of
Resolution, which, in a Cause, the Reverse of theirs, might deserve to be
called a Virtue; and, even as the Case really stands, it is an Accomplishment,
very new, and Extraordinary, and must be allowed not unworthy of the highest
Admiration! -- That heroic Roman Spirit, which Horace speaks of, in the Motto
to my PAPER, went no farther than a private applauding himself, at home, in
Return for the Hisses, which he met with, when abroad: But our English Firmness
of Face, can look Reproach in the Teeth, and persevere, with as much
Negligence, and Satisfaction, as if we suffered for our Excess of Wit, what is
levelled at our Want of Judgment.

I WAS favored many Months since, with a Sheet or Two, of Excellent
Reflections, which were lost, by some Accident, and have been but lately
recovered. The following Observations, seem so applicable to my present
Purpose, that I cannot do better than borrow them, for Reproof of a barbarous
Custom, which had spread itself, too broad, among us, before it appeared on one
of our Theaters.

AT Paris, and at Amsterdam, there is scarce a Week passes, without some
Public Execution; and yet, though there are Newspapers in Abundance, we seldom,
or never, find any Account of that Sort, in them. -- They think, and perhaps
justly enough, That it is a Point of National Credit, to conceal, with as much
Decency as they can, the Enormities of their Countrymen. -- On the contrary,
our Writers for the Day, and the Week, watch with Earnestness, for the
Opportunity, and are sure to pass by no such Subject. -- It often makes a very
Glaring Paragraph; but is sometimes unhappily situated. I have frequently
known a Change at Court yoked with a Remove at Tyburn; and both followed, close
in the Rear, by an Account of some Church-Advancement; or new-drawn Matrimonial
Tie, among People of Quality.

I ONLY hint at these Liberties, and desire to deal gently with my
Contemporaries. -- There are other Wretches among us, who attend the Gibbet,
like Ravens, or Vultures, and expect their Subsistence from it. -- Not a poor
Criminal can be hanged, but they break open his expiring Lips, and rob him of
his Last Words. When he has suffered the Sentence of the Law, he is condemned,
afresh, to a Libel: And is far from being at Rest, even after he has
surrendered his Life to the Halter, his Clothes to the Hangman, and his Body to
the Surgeons! For, then, come the Scribler, the Pamphleteer, and the Biographer
of Newgate, who draw out his Good Name, and quarter it; and hang up his
Reputation, in Effigy, They give him a Quarto, or an Octavo Shroud; and
fringe, and flourish it with his Birth, and Parentage. -- Hence, the Ordinary,
to preserve his Perquisites, is driven upon the Necessity of advertising
against Counterfeits; and, has, sometimes, no better Expedient, than to publish
the Posthumous Works of his Communicants, even before they are yet departed!

TO be half-hang'd, has been the Case of one or two Sufferers; but to be twice
hanged, is a very great Hardship: And when a Criminal's Account of Himself is
supposed to be true, it seems a Mifortune that They, who wilfully, belie, him,
should be permitted to survive him. -- If the Sufferer can write and read,
then, besides his Birth, and Education, his Trial, and Confession, we have his
Last Works, and Compositions. If he is married, we have his Widow's
Lamentation. If he dies, troubled, and unsatisfied, we have his Ghost: And if
his Life has been at all remarkable, we have His History, and Adventures. --
Some ready Compiler of Newgate, bundles up his Memoirs, and describes his
Exploits, in so discreet, and adapted, Style, That the Pleasantry of the
Relation is more apt to prevail, on the Young, and the Giddy (who are the
common Readers of such Tracts) to imitate a Life of so much seeming Heroic
Extravagance, than to take Example, from the fatal End of it.

I KNOW not whether such Exposing Methods as These, are not suffered to take
Place, by Way of Advance upon the Lenity of our English Executions; and as a
Counterballance to the Foreign Severities of Torture, and Mutilation. If there
is any such Depth of Politic Refinement, in the Indulgence, which is shown
this Practice, the Dead feel nothing that relates to them; and the Living, I am
persuaded, are very little the better, for such Paper Executions. But, of This,
I can venture to be positive, That should some Drudge for the Bookseller's
Benefit, make a Collection of all Works, of this kind, and some mercenary
Translator dress it out, in a Foreign Language, our Neighbors, and our
Posterity, might be tempted to believe, That the present Generation of
Englishmen were a Nation of Thieves, and Pick-pockets.

The Plain Dealer. No 81.
Diversos diversa juvant, non omnibus --
Omnia convenient. --
GAL. ELEG.
MONDAY, December 28. 1724.
IT is a Rule, in Conversation, that he, who keeps all the Talk to himself,
never pleases, so much as one, who listens, in his Turn, to what is said, by
the rest of the Company. -- The same Observation will hold good, with Regard to
such a Paper as the PLAIN DEALER; I must, sometimes, fall civily back, and give
Way to my Correspondents; or I shall incur the Reproach of Writing rather to
entertain My-self, than to delight, or oblige my Readers.

Mr. PLAIN-DEALER,
I HAVE such a Veneration for the FAIR, that I am sorry, I should have Occasion
to exhibit any Complaint against them; but I am, once a Week, so whimsically
treated, by some of them, that I am resolved to speak out, and spare not.

THERE are many young Ladies, and, what is worse, many old Ladies, within the
Bills of Mortality, that, every Saturday, while their Houses are cleaning, take
a Fancy to have Business with Me, for no other Reason in the World, but because
they cannot tell how else to dispose of themselves: -- For, you must know, That
I am a Mercer. -- They swim into my Shop, by Shoals, not with the least
Intention to buy, but only to hear my Silks rustle, and fill up their own
Leisure, by putting Me into full Employment. So they tumble over my Goods, and
deafen me with a Round of Questions, 'till, having found nothing in my Shop, to
their Fancy, as they call it, they toss themselves again into their Coaches,
and drive on the Persecution, to the Terror and Disturbance of most of the
honest Shopkeepers, from one End of the Town, to the other.

LAST Saturday was three Weeks, at Two, in the Afternoon, I sent out my
Servant, to watch a Couple of these Silken Strollers, and keep, if possible,
within Ken of them. They undressed about a Dozen Shops, without stripping
themselves of a single Shilling; and, at six, my Man returned, out of Breath,
and told me, That he had left them, cheapening Sugars, beyond Norton-Falgate.
-- But, presently, they came back, and saw my next Neighbor, a Linen-Draper,
at his Door. They pulled their Coachman by the Thumb, and broke in upon my
Friend and Acquaintance, though his Shop was shut up, and empty. -- They had
bethought themselves, that they must see some Cambricks. My Neighbor knew
them, for they were his Customers of five Years standing; during all which
Time, he had never taken any of their Money -- But they had done him the
Honor, to lean over his Counter, find Fault with every Thing he could show
them; Exclaim, at his frightful Prices, and make it a Rule with them, To bid
Nothing -- He turned over his whole Variety of Cambricks; and had the
unexpected Good-Fortune, after the prettiest Doubtings, and Hesitations, in the
World, to fix their Determination; for they pitched upon a particular Piece,
about half an Hour past Seven, and ordered him to cut off enough for a Tucker.

The worst of all This is, That these unprofitable Wayward Visiters keep
Buying-Customers out of our Shops. -- Pray, Mr. PLAIN-DEALER, reprimand them,
for the Good of Trade; and the Ease, and Deliverance, of

Your afflicted Corespondent, J. H.


SIR,
A GREAT many useful Lectures were levelled, heretofore, against the Enormities
of certain Fashions, which had taken Possession of the Female World. -- The
Reduction of the Stays. The Exaltation of the Petticoat -- and the Lightness,
and the Transparency of the Modesty Piece -- (as that SEX had peceluiar Views,
in each of these Modes) have been Topics, for Admonition, and Stature. -- The
LADIES have even been told, That the obsolete Relics, of their
Great-Grandmother's Scarecrow Wardrobes, were less Fantastical than the modern
Whimsies! But those wholesome Severities suffered the Common Fate of such Good
Purposes, They diverted for a Week, and were forgotten.

ALL Arguments, which would be successful, must adapt themselves to the
Understanding of those in whom they expect to operate. -- The WIT of a Woman is
her Dress. To move genteely, is her JUDGMENT: And, to Govern herself, with full
Freedom, is her BIRTH RIGHT, as an English Subject; who renounces, and protests
against, all absolute, and unlimited, Monarchy.

BUT, pray, whisper (if you dare) to these pretty Free-Thinkers, That there is
a a Country, in the World, called Turkey; where Women are secured against the
Danger of Sun-burning, by being kept out of the open Air, and locked up, like
other Jewels, in Places where no Mischief can reach 'em. -- A Side-Glance, once
a Year, from a Window, or an imperfect Random-Shot, through the Hedge of a
Gauze Muffler, is the utmost Danger a Man can be exposed to, in those safe and
silent Regions; where they have an unaccountable, savage, Notion, That there is
Temptation, in a Woman's Eye, and that it is possible for a Pretty Fellow to
stare himself into Fornication!

A LITTLE private Rumination, on such laudable Customs as These, may have
Influence, perhaps, to moderate some of our Fine Ladies well-bred
Exorbitancies. If not, we have at least this Remedy: It is but to turn Turks,
and we new model our System of Government, with Regard to this Female Freedom.
-- Such a Resolution would furnish Business, not at all disagreeable to

Your most humble Servant, The Black EUNUCH.


Mr. PLAIN DEALER,
ORACLES have been delivered in Dreams, and I see no Reason why Truth may not
be as well nodded over by us Moderns, as by the much more wakeful Ancients. --
Our Senses being too gross, and our Minds too much prejudiced, to receive
Truth, for its own sake, it must approach us obliquely; that, being couched
under sensible Representations, it may be brought nearer to our View, and make
its Way into our Apprehension.

UPON this Account, therefore, (not to keep you in Suspense any longer, least
you may think me dreaming already) I have sent you my last Night's Vision;
which if it meets with your Approbation, may encourage me to close my Eyes
again; for I am, both sleeping, and waking,

Your constant Admirer, EUGENIO.


AFTER having reflected on my Mistress, and on Marriage, I fell asleep, and
found my self in a Myrtle Grove, where several Ways ran together into one Great
Path, that led to the Temple of Hymen. -- The Flowers, most of which were
Violets, and bleeding Lovers, exhaled a delicious Odor: And the Birds, that
warbled round me, helped to fill the Scene with Transport.

I OBSERVED Crowds of Travelers, passing onward; but none, to my great
Surprise, repassing. -- Upon looking a little nearer, I discovered Troops of
flying Boys with Silver Wings, that hovered before them, for their Guides.
There were Persons of all Ranks, and of both Sexes.

I TOOK particular Notice of some, who though they seemed to make more Haste then
the rest, were, at the End, the farthest behind-hand. These, I heard, were
called Coquets, in the Language of the Country. They seemed, to do nothing but
sport, and flutter about; without gaining any Ground, or desiring to gain any.

THE next, I was told, were Prudes: And these had taken a Bye-Path, and moved
onward, toward the Temple, very slowly; and, to all Appearance, unwillingly;
with their Necks fantastically reverted, and their Eyes looking back, upon the
Country, they had newly passed through. Yet These were the First that came up;
and slipped, silently into the Temple!

AMONG the Men, was a Troop, which seemed composed of the most expert
Travelers. My Guide informed me, They were called Hibernians. They did many
Things, I perceived, very differently from the rest: For, while others led up
but one Companion, to the Temple, these had several, in several Paths; and were
the only Persons, who, after lodging One, went out again, to conduct Another.
-- It was easy to distinguish them, however mingled in the Crowd, by the Shine
of a certain Metal, which had burnished their Cheeks, and Foreheads, and cast a
Gleam, like a Corinthian Vizard.

I WAS called off, by a confused Noise, at some Distance; and made toward it,
as well as I could; but found such an Alteration in the Air, that I could not
stir one Step, without sneezing. This was a Troop of Sword-Knots, and Cockades,
displaying a powerful Instrument, that glittered much, and was called a
Snuff Box. The Scuffle of Tongues was so great, that I staid not long, among
the Pretty Gentlemen, (for that was the Name they went by) but passed on, to a
Part of the Grove, whence there issued a delightful Harmony.

COMING thither, I observed a Number, apart from the rest, with Harps in their
Hands, which they touched, with transporting Melody. Nine Goddesses were mixed
among them: all most ravishingly beautiful! These happy Gentlemen, I found,
were the Favorites of the Grove; but they made no Haste to the Temple; rather
wandering up and down, and making Sallies into every Path, with an Air of
agreeable Indifference.

I LEFT them, and came up with a Troop of Clowdy, Haughty, and Erect, Movers,
distinguished by peculiar Head-Pieces, which, at Distance, looked like Diadems.
All the Female Travelers, they chanced to meet with, received their Whispers
with a kind of Triumph; and listened to them with more Rapture, than even to
the Voices of those Divine Musicians! -- This Train was under the Care of two
Goddesses, whose Names were Insolence and Privilege! I was now within the Sight
of the Temple; but taking an Aversion, in my Sleep, to the affected Struttings
of this Company, I waked fortunately out of my Dream, and resolved to send it
to the PLAIN-DEALER.

The Plain Dealer. No 82.
Segnius irritant animos demissa per aurem,
Quam quae sunt Oculis commissa fidelibus, and quae
Ipse sibi tradit Spectator. --
HOR.
FRIDAY, January 1. 1725.
AN Evil Spirit had taken Possession of one of the Villages, in Lapland, and
turned the Inhabitants into Bears: By which Means, being deprived of the
Discretion of Humane Creatures, and unable to provide for Themselves; the King
of the Country committed them to the Keeping of two or three of his
Beef-Eaters; who took the Office, with no other Prospect, than to live at their
Ease, on the Perquisites of it; and were consequently, more inclinable to
provide Diet, to their own Taste, than to that of the Metamorphos'd Animals,
which had been delivered into their Custody. -- They had, however, so much
Gratitude, for the Profit, accruing from their Grant, as to resolve, That the
poor Creatures should want nothing, that was Strong and Savoury: But they had
not the Judgment, to consider, That a Man, when he becomes a Bear, requires a
coarser Kind of Nourishment, than he was accustomed to, while a Rational
Creature! -- They gave 'em nothing to drink but Brandy; and fed 'em with
Cock-Broth, and Forc'd-Meats; 'till they, All, grew giddy, and lightheaded,
and were taken with a dangerous Vertigo.

A YOUNG Shepherd, who had been brought up a little wildly; and, who, by living
much among Beasts, had acquainted himself with the Nature of Bears, undertook
to Board 'em Cheaper; and built, and opened, to that End, a New House of
Entertainment; where, for the same Rates which were paid his Rivals, he treated
the Animals, in their own Way, with raw Horse Flesh, instead of Ragousts; and
Spring Water, in the Place of Brandy. -- The Bears were strangely delighted, at
a Change, they were, so able to relish; and flocked, in Transport, to their New
Ordinary; where they grinn'd, and grew fat, upon a Diet, which was adapted to
their Palates: So that, in a little Time, not a Cub, of any Quality, could make
a Meal, upon their Old Commons. And the poor Shepherd, who provided for them,
so judiciously, had all their Custom, for the future, and became Richer, than
the King's own Bear-Wards!

How such an odd Story as this came in my Way, I know not; But I will leave it,
as I found it: For I am in a Humor to talk of the Theaters.

THE Royal Company of Comedians differs from the South-Sea-Company, the Bank,
and other Acting Companies, of this City, in this one Point, among more, That
It has Directors, but no Governor. -- It is certain, however, that those
Gentlemen, whom they call their Managers, have had all possible Advantage on
their Side. The Court-Authority, and Countenance, went with them. -- The Noble,
and the Ignoble, joined in a long, and unreasonable Partiality, to support
them, without Rivals; in direct Opposition to the Interest of their own
Pleasure; which is, undoubtedly, best provided for, when Rival Theaters
contend, which shall, most deserve Encouragement. -- It is worth while, then to
examine, how they lost this Advantage. And I take the Fact to be thus.

THE good Old Patentee, of the New Theater died, under a Length of Oppression;
and left his Right, and his House, to his Son; an Unfear'd, and Friendless
Youth! of whom it might then have been said, as of Chamont, in the Orphan. His
Hopes were all his Fortune!

HE Opened, against a Tide of Prejudice; and acted many Years, not only,
without Favor, but almost without Notice, at least from the Fashionable World.
-- He tried every Reasonable Art of Pleasing, without Success! -- He revived
the best old Old Plays, and brought on several New Ones! but had, often the
Mortification to oppose his own Industry, and the sublimest Scenes of
Shakespeare, to the cold Encouragement of Empty Boxes! -- What should he do, in
this Case? -- The Torrent of Opinion was against him. Good Sense, and solid
Thinking, were as Useless to him as his Boxkeepers! -- At last, by a Quickness
in his Natural Wit; and a Satirical Sharpness in his Observation, He perceived
he had nothing to do, if he would have the Game played into his Hands, but to
lay aside his Judgment, and abandon Himself to his Fancy.

IN Pursuance of this lucky Discovery, He composed a New Species of
Entertainment, which had an infinite deal of Sense in them; but it was only the
Sense of Seeing. -- It is scarce possible to conceive the Ease, which this
Reformation of the Stage gave the Bulk of our Genteel Audiences! -- They,
could, now, laugh out, without Restraint; for they were no longer in Danger of
being Merry, in the wrong Place! They felt no Weight of Words, which had
formerly lain heavy upon their Understandings: And, the Burden of their
Attention being, so commodiously, lightened, they came, and saw, and were
satisfied.

THE old Managers were indiscreet enough not only to envy, but to imitate him.
-- They made That their Choice, which, in their Rival, had been Necessity. But,
attemping it, with inferior Genius, they appeared so awkward, and ungraceful in
it, that they compelled their partial Admirers to take Notice, That they were
excelled -- And, so taught 'em, from that Time forward, to believe it probable,
That, since in one Point, they had, so manifestly, the Disadvantage, they
might, in Others too, have been rather Fortunate, than so Deserving, as they
had concluded them.

THUS, the Young, and Oppressed, became a a Match for the Old and Prosperous.
-- He has continued, ever since to maintain the Ground he won; 'till the
Current is, now, turned, and disposed to run, in his Favor.

SO far, his Wit has carried him. We are to look out for his Judgment
hereafter. But, for my Part, I am of Opinion, That, when he shall have toy'd us
into Good Humor enough to forgive him a little Reason, he will have Courage
and Generosity, to restore the Stage to its Dignity; and exchange our Juleps
for Substantial Diets, as soon as our sick Stomachs shall have recovered
Strength enough to digest it. -- There is scarce a surer Proof, That a Man has
Worth, than the Respect, which he shows the Worthy: And I was delighted, the
other Day, with the Praises, in which I heard it told, at an Assembly, That the
OLD BACHELOR is, by this Gentleman's Voluntary Offer, to be acted, next
Monday, at the Theater in Lincoln's End Fields, for the Benefit of so Learned a
Benefactor to the Stage, as Mr. DENNIS.

UPON my expressing some Concern, That it was not rather a Play, of Mr.
Dennis's own Writing, I was informed, That the Master of that Theater, who
sought all Opportunities of showing his Esteem of so Excellent, and so Injured
a Judge of Wit, and Learning, had left the Choice of the Play to Mr. Dennis
himself; who had pitched upon the abovementioned, because it was a Work of his
old Friend Mr. Congreve. -- I acknowledged the Generosity of the Master of the
Theater, and the Modesty of the Gentleman, whom he treats with so well-judg'd a
Humanity: But I could not avoid indulging a Fit of talkative Spleen, against
that Malice or Ignorance, which has more than once, appeared in the
Discountenance of some Writings, from which the Name of Mr. Dennis, will, long,
continue to receive Honor, after his Body shall be Dust and Ashes!

THE Stupidity which follows Prejudice, has made Thousands of his Cotemporaries
insensible of his Great Merit, which, if they allowed their Reason to examine
it, they would be charmed by, and take a Pride to encourage. -- The Terror with
which young Writers have accustomed themselves to hear, and to talk of, his
Austerity, and of his Aversion against Scriblers, has spread abroad a false
Opinion, that he is Ill-natured, where he is only impartial: And, that he is an
Enemy to Wit and Learning, while he is only such to the Prophaners of them.

IT is pleasant to observe, to what a whimsical Degree this Dread of Critics
has been propagated; and how far down, into Low Life, we may trace the Effects
of our Poet's mistaken Outcries, who, by giving their Shepherds the Name of
Wolves, have taught the Clowns to set their Dogs upon 'em, and cut off the
Defense of their own Fold. Honest Mr. David Cook, the ingenious Bell-Man of
Pye-Street-Corner, is, I find, against the Opening of the New Year, under
terrible Apprehensions, from the Impressions he has been filled with of the
Dangers, all Good Works are exposed to.

" Great Sirs! my Muse has You, her Guardians chose,
"Against the railing Malice of her Foes;
"For, she perceives, these well-meant Lines must bear
"The CRITICK's Censures, who will Nothing spare!
I WAS visiting, where one of honest Mr. Cook's GREAT SIRS asked him, Why he
was afraid of Critics? and was much edified by his Answer -- One Mr. Pope,
Sir, an ingenious Member, of OUR Fraternity, knows much, of these Matters; and
has said it, in Print, That " Critics proceed, without the least Remorse,
"Seize on our Fame, and put their Laws in Force.


THOUGH I smiled at the Turn of this Reason for the Fears of so safe a Muse as
Mr. Cook's, yet I cannot help wishing, that no great Writer had ever allowed
himself to join the common Cry against Critics. -- If the Poets have no Art,
they are a Race of Contemptible Triflers! and if they have Art, they have
Criticism. -- Whoever is a good Poet, is, and must be, Himself, a Critic. --
To be afraid of a Judge, is the Mark of a criminal Conscience. -- But the
severe, and manly, Censures, which are peculiar to Mr. Dennis's Writings, have
increased the Number of his Enemies, by a piercing Sharpness, which they carry
with them? Such Arguers, if they had lived with Cato, would have made War upon
that noble Plainness, which distinguished, and supported, his Character: And
refused the Reverence, due to his Virtues, because His Manners were not supple
enough, to fall in with their Notions of Politeness.

THE best Way to become acquainted with a Writer is, to look for him in his
Writings: -- His Soul, which is his Noblest Self, lives there, and is, there
discovered. -- How often have I remembered (with Pain, for the Infamy it must,
one Day bring us) That the most generous, and extensive Design, that ever was
conceived by Man, with Relation to the Groundwork of Criticism, in Poetry, was
once, undertaken, by this Gentleman, and a Subscription for it proposed, upon
the most moderate Terms, with so disproportioned a Success, that after a Year
or two's fruitless Application, he published a Specimen of his intended Work,
with an Apology for not proceeding in it: Because, after so long a Trial, he
had been able to procure no more than Seventy or Eighty Subscribers, whose
NAMES he printed, to their Glory! For, they will be read, an Age or two hence,
with a Veneration, not unlike That, with which the Athenians engraved those of
the Three Hundred P^triot Greeks, who defended the Straight of Thermopylae,
against the Fury of the Persian Army. -- So, would those Noble Few have
defended the Honor of their Country's Judgment, against an Inundation, of
Ignorance and Presumption.

WHAT will make this Fact more wondered at, is, -- That it happened at a Time,
when a boundless Profusion of Encouragement was poured out, upon all
Pretensions, but Those of Learning, and of Modesty! -- But it will not, I hope,
be believed, That the Tragedy of APPIUS and VIRGINIA was acted, Three or Four
Times, and forgotten, in spite of those powerful Passions, and strong Pictures
of transported Nature, which it every where abounds with: Or, that Shakespeare's
CORIOLANUS could be altered, by such a Hand as Mr. Dennis's, and so strikingly,
to its Advantage, and yet brought on, without Success, where Shakespeare's
RICHARD THE THIRD, racked, and mutilated, by a barbarous Player, ran into Fame,
and Applause, and drew Audiences, every Season!

BUT I can never expect Room, in such a Paper as the PLAIN DEALER, to touch the
Merits of this Gentleman's Writings, for whose Benefit, as above, the Play of
Monday next, is to be acted: And, who, now, descending apace into the Vale of
Years, ought to find his Way made smother for him; and lose Sight of these
malignant Enmities, which his stronger Days have grappled with. There can be
nobody, who is a Friend, either to Learning, or Humanity, and who has his
Heart in the right Place, but must feel a generous Delight, in being present,
for His Benefit, whose whole Life has been taken up, with Essays, for the
Benefit of Others. -- The Brave and the Beautiful, will agree, in a Resolution,
to Shine out, upon this Occasion, where They will be known to appear in the
Cause of Wisdom: And, where, to be seen, is to be honored, Themselves, for
doing Honor to unrewarded Excellence.

The Plain Dealer. No 83.
Numquam adeoque pudendis
Utimur exemplis, ut non pejora supersint.
JUV.
MONDAY, January 4. 1725.
I HAVE somewhere, met with a Story of one of the ancient Princes, of the East,
I think, it was ANTIOCHUS. -- He was hunting, and lost his Followers; and Night
coming on, after a tedious Wandering, over Heaths, and Forests he came at last,
to a little Cottage, where the Poor People were at Supper, and entertained him,
very cheerfully, as a Traveller, who had lost his way. The chief Subject of
their Discourse, was concerning the King, and his Ministers. -- As for the King
himself, they accused him of no Vices. -- They spoke of him with much Duty; and
agreed, That he meant well, and was desirous of his Subject's Happiness: But he
was not, they said, so absolutely, the Monarch of his Ministers, as of his
People: Submitting his own Sense of Affairs, and the Authority of his
Determinations, to Men of less Virtue, and Understanding, than Himself; and
giving Way to Ease, and Indolence, while he devol'd the Power of his Office, on
Wretches, whose Hearts were too narrow, and their Passions too violent, to
deserve any Government at all; much less That of a Kingdom!

THE King said little to all This; but laid it up, for his Use, and Benefit:
And, in the Morning, when his Guards, and the Great Men, of his Court, having
followed the Track of his Horse, were come to him, at the Cottage, he received
them with this Declaration. -- You are mistaken, if you suppose, I have been,
all Night, out of my Way. -- I have sat in Counsel, with an Assembly of the
only Honest, and faithful Advisers, I met with, since I became your Sovereign.
Nor did I ever hear a Word, of the True Condition of my Affairs before I learnt
it, in this Cottage.

THE Condition of a Nation, where Minions have their Prince in Pupilage, is so
vastly the Reverse of Ours, That a Discourse, on such a Subject must be forced
to draw Examples, either from the Histories of Foreign Countries, or from our
own, removed, far backward. -- But, as the Blessing of a perfect Health is
never better understood, and valued, than while he who is so happy as to enjoy
it, employs himself in reading the Symptoms, of some dangerous, and dreadful
Disease, so the Comfort, which we, Free Britons must receive, from a
Comparison, of our own Happiness, with the Misery of Others, is an Argument,
which convinces me, that no Theme deserves, more justly, the Consideration of a
PLAIN DEALER.

I WILL venture to lay it down, as a Maxim, That, where the Soul of a Minister
is not Great enough, to overlook, and forgive, and to drown all Personal
Regards, in the Ocean of his Public Cares, let his other Virtues, and good
Qualities, be never so numerous, and so shining, he will confound his Prince's
Interest, with his own private Resentments. Instead of healing Divisions, he
will inflame them; and, by a Thousand passionate Extravagancies, draw upon
himself a Universal Hatred; and upon his Sovereign, a Contempt, that is the
most dangerous of all Motives to Sedition; and, what wise Princes have been
careful to guard themselves against, by a Spirit, and Activity, which, even
where they have not been loved, served, at least, to make them feared; which is
the next sure Anchor of Obedience.

THE Best of Princes have had their Favorites: But, it is the easiest Thing in
the World to distinguish the MINION from the MINISTER. The MINISTER is his
Prince's Instrument; The MINION makes an Instrument of his Prince -- Under a
MINISTER, the common Themes, of all public Conversation, are his Great
Designs, for the Ornament, or the Interest of the Kingdom -- Benevolence,
Mercy, Wisdom, Generosity, and Magnificence, flow down upon the People, in a
Current of new Laws, and Benefits. -- On the contrary, under a MINION, nothing
is talked of, but his Subtlety, his Malice, and his Avarice! -- Little
Weathercock Artifices, and temporary Shifts, and Expedients, stand in Place of
a steady Policy, and a manly Course of Equanimity. -- Oppression, Pride,
Suspicion, Faction, Bitterness, and Partiality, are the Products of his
Influence: And the Law, which should be the Measure of his Rule, is the Nose of
Wax, to his Ambition! -- The MINISTER takes Delight to inquire out Men of
Learning, or of Virtue, that his Bounty may raise them high enough to shine,
like Stars, upon his Administration! -- The MINION hates Discernment, because
he knows himself unfit to be looked into; and, therefore, appropriates Rewards,
and Preferments, to the Mercenary, and the Ignorant. -- In short, the MINISTER
is wise; But the MINION is only cunning.

IT is finely observed by Aristotle, in his Discourse concerning Government,
"That Monarchy, when its Power is wisely divided, among distinct Counsels, none
encroaching on the other's Boundaries, draws into it self all Advantages, which
are attainable by any of the Commonwealth Systems: But, is in nothing so weak,
and unstable, as in the Folly of partial Kings, who, ruling by their Passion,
instead of their Reason, remove Truth out of their hearing, and submit their
Will to the Guidance of some one, sole, Director; neither examining Things,
Themselves, nor allowing Others to examine them.

SUCH a Political Monster of a MINION, we read of, in the Annals of France, "In
the Year Nine Hundred and Nineteen, (says the Author, in his Second Book)
Charles lived, as it were, alone, in Soissons; despised, and forsaken, by his
Peers, on Account of one HAGANON, of Laon; a Man, of vulgar Extraction; but who
was, solely, trusted with the King's Secrets; and without whose Concurrence, no
Matter of Importance, could be done, either in the Court, or in the Kingdom.
But the Credit of this New Upstart was the Cause of the King's Ruin; for the
Great Men resolved, at last, no longer to endure, that such a base Scoundrel
should be exalted, over the Heads of the whole Nobility.

HAGI-JUSOUF, a Governor of Arabia, under the Reign of Caliph Abdulmelec, met
with a Stroke of unexpected Satyr, which gives a lively Representation of the
General Odium, these busy MINIONS are always destined to live under. -- He was
hated for his Cruelty, and Exactions; but carried, nevertheless, an Outside of
Charity and Religion. He met a Dervis, one Day, in the Street; and, having
stopped, to give him Alms, recommended himself to his Prayers. -- The Dervis,
lifting up his Eyes, to Heaven, cried out, with a loud Voice, Take him from us,
O Great God! Take him from us, I beseech Thee! -- Hagi-Jusouf was not satisfied
with the Turn of this Prayer; and began to murmur at the Dervis: But the Holy
Plain Dealer replied, with great Earnestness and Humility, -- It is good for
you, and for All the Mussulmans.

THE Truth is, there is an unavoidable Necessity, that Princes should be
assisted by such Subjects as they think fit to Favor: But it is happy, where
the Master has Spirit, and the Servant Moderation: For, in that Case, the
Mischief will be either prevented, or corrected, before its Progress is become
considerable. -- Opinion, and the Obstinancy of Reasoning, have made a mighty
Noise in the World, concerning the Differences between Arbitrary and Limited
Government: But, in the Nature of Things, there is neither Absolute Power nor
Freedom; taking them in their full Sense. -- Every Whale has its little leading
Fish, and follows it, with a Kind of unweildy Obsequiousness! This, in the Sea,
has been thought a Wonder, but few Things, on Land, are more usual, and
familiar. -- The most terrible, of the State Leviathans, have been managed, and
led along, by a Wife, a Mistress, a Favorite, or some other such dimunitive
Pilot: So that in an unlimited Signification, there is no such Thing as
Monarchy.

THE Grand Signior it is true, can cause any of his Subjects to be Strangled,
without assigning other Reasons for it, than his Imperial Will, and Pleasure.
But, how seldom is this done, at his own mere Motion; and how often, at that of
his Vizier's, and tyrannick Minions? -- I my self, (says a Writer of the last
Age) have known some Sovereigns, so far Strangers to what was convenient, that
they would scarce grant, or deny, any Thing, out of the Presence of their
Secretary.

THERE is but one Consolation, which can give Men Patience, while they are
suffering, under the Insolence of such Upstart Tyrants: And that is, their
reasonable Hope, that they shall live to see the Punishment, when the Guilt is
ripe enough for Vengeance -- It is long, before a Prince can break out of the
obscuring Mist, which an Evil Counselor will conjure up, and involve him in --
But, when by Accident, or Reflection, he comes, at length, to clear his
Eyesight, and see Things, in their proper Colors, the Minion, then first,
becomes a Benefit to the People he has injured; for he leaves them a
Protection, in the Example of his Fall, which may guard them, in Times to come,
against the Malice of a New Oppressor.

THE last Emperor of China, was one of the greatest Monarchs, of his Age, and
for nothing more celebrated, than the Vigor, and Strictness, of his Justice:
But he was warm, in his Pursuits of Pleasure, and impatient of Interruption,
when his Mind was intent upon it. -- The Viceroy of one of the Provinces, of
that vast Empire that lay most remote from the Imperial City, had wrongfully
confiscated the Estate of an honest Merchant, and reduced his Family to the
extremest Misery. -- The poor Man found means to travel as far as to the
Emperor's Court, and carried back with him a Letter to the Viceroy, commanding
him to restore the Goods, which he had taken, so illegally.

FAR from obeying this Command, the Viceroy put the Merchant in Prison; but he
had the good Fortune to escape, and went, once more, to the Capital, where he
cast himself at the Emperor's Feet, who treated him with much Humanity, and
gave Orders, that he should have another Letter. The Merchant wept, at this
Resolution, and represented how ineffectual the First had proved; and the
Reasons he had to fear, that the Second would be as little regarded.

THE Emperor, who had been stopped, by this Complaint, as he was going, with much
Haste, to Dine in the Apartment of a Favorite Lady, grew a little discomposed,
and answered, with some Emotion -- I can do no more than send my Commands: And,
if he refuses to obey them, put thy Foot upon his Neck. -- I implore your
Majesty's Compassion, replied the Merchant, holding fast the Emperor's Robe,
his Power is too mighty for my Weakness: And your Justice prescribes a Remedy,
which your Wisdom has never examined.

THE Emperor had, by this Time, recollected himself; and raising the Merchant
from the Ground, said, You are in the Right -- To complain of him was your
Part, but it is mine to see him punished. -- I will appoint Commissioners, to
go back with you, and make search into the Grounds of his Proceeding; with
Power, if they find him guilty, to deliver him into your Hands, and leave you
Viceroy, in his stead. -- For, Since you have taught me how to Govern, You must
be able to Govern for me.

The Plain Dealer. No 84.
Curae leves loquuntur --
SENEC. HIP.
FRIDAY, January 8. 1725.
MANY Writers, besides the Author of my Motto, have observed, That the Lightest
Griefs speak loudest! And, it is doubtful, whether there would arise most
Occasion for Mirth, or Pity, could we see, at one View, the numberless Variety
of little Accidents, which are magnified into Miseries, by the Impatience, with
which we kindle ourselves, upon every unwelcome Trifle, that runs counter to
our Wish, or Humor; or squares not exactly with our Interest.

IF People could divest themselves of the Prejudices of Self-Love, half the
Vexations, which imbitter Life, and rob Good-Fortune of its Tranquillity, would
be found to owe their Existence either to our Pride, or our Avarice. But I am
afraid, I shall touch this Subject, with very little Effect; because I have a
Thousand Times, observed, That there is a healing Quality in Vanity, which
cures the Wounds of good Counsel. Lady Low-taste finds SENECA so dull, where he
lays open a sordid Heart, and shames it, by a Comparison with the noble
Loveliness of Generosity, That she can neither relish, nor support him, but
falls asleep, over his Philosophy, as the readiest Way to be even with him! --
Yet, who so lively in her Attention, and so transported an Admirer of this very
Seneca, where he happens to speak kindly, of any Virtue, she is conscious of,
in herself; or severely, of of any Vice, which she can charge upon Her
Acquaintance! -- There are Two Ends to the Glass, through which we look into
ourselves, and others. One contracts Objects; and one enlarges them: And, it is
the pleasantest Observation in the World, to remark, how kindly Nature has
instructed the silliest, and blindest, of both Sexes, to apply either End of
this Perspective, so as to answer their particular Purpose, with as much
Readiness, and Sagacity, as if their Wit, were no less than it should be.

I AM overwhelmed with Letters of Complaint, against Fate, Ill-Luck, Blind
Fortune, and the whole Train of malevolent Chimera's, under whose Shadow it is
usual to hide the Effects of our own Miscarriages. -- Arietta, a brown
Coquette, in her Five and Fortieth Year of Fluttering, has filled Three Pages
of an angry Epistle, Falsehood, Traitor, and Inconstancy, against a Cousin of
Ned Volatile's, who loved her Four Months, and a Week, and then visited her no
more, upon a private Intelligence from Mrs. Lucy, that his Name was down, in
her Lady's List, as the Nine and Fiftieth, of her absolute Conquests!

WHAT shall we say to these insupportable Misfortunes? They must be submitted
to, with as much Resignation as the Nature of them will bear: And, for what
remains, I can do no more than provide a little Comfort for such afflicted
Virtue, by a Proof, That there are Others, almost equally wretched! -- If,
therefore, Arietta will let me know what Part of the Town she shines in, I will
wait on her, the Day after, and apply a Letter to her wounded Heart, which I
received from a Druggist's Wife, in the City, who had Threescore Tickets, in
the last Lottery, and was so strangely Unfortunate, that she cleared but about
Two Hundred Pound, over and above her whole Adventure, though an ordinary
Creature, over against her, that had but Three Tickets, in the Wheel, could
have Two of 'em come out such Prizes, that she sets up, truly, for a Fortune!

THE following Letter, I am afraid, must be numbered amonst the Curae leves;
though there is an Air of Concern, and Sincerity, in it, which persuades me, That
the Author is, in good Earnest, at a Loss, how he should act, in the Business
he writes about.

Fleet Street, December. 16. 1724. Dear SIR,
I CONTRACTED a strict Friendship, with a Gentleman: And we lived together for
some Time; during which he fell in Love with a Young Lady, between whose Body,
and Mind, there seems to be a perpetual War, which of the Two, shall appear
most beautiful! -- But she was promised, by her Relations, to one, whose
Fortune is much Superior to my Friends. -- Yet, he had frequent Opportunity of
Discovering his Passion, but wanted Courage to declare, what he, as much wanted
Power to conceal, and, so, was forced, in Search of Rest, to retire into the
Country.

BUT Absence, instead of lessening, inflamed, and rivetted, his Anguish. -- He
returned to me, in great Disorder; and delivering a Letter into my Hands,
pressed me, with the most moving Words, and Gestures, to convey it, privately,
to the Lady's.

NOW, Sir, you must not start, when I ask you this Question, -- Whether I ought
to deliver it? The Difficulty lies here -- I know, her Relations have a
particular Aversion to this Gentleman. -- And they are Persons, to whom I owe a
Thousand Benefits, and Obligations. -- My Friendship is dear to my Soul, -- and
my Gratitude is due to my Honor. I would not appear to betray Those who have
so strong a Claim to my Sincerity. -- On the other hand, I was tender of
shocking the Delicacy, and Refinement, of a Passion, so sacred as our
Friendship. Love is rash, and distrustful; takes Alarm at every Trifle; and
judges hastily, and without Reason. He would conclude, if I refused him, That
his Peace, and Interest, are of no Weight with me. -- Would he had thought of
another Means of conveying his Letter to the Lady! -- But, now, should I advise
him to it, it would look like Coldness in his Cause; and his Imagination would
take Fire, with so many false Apprehensions, That he could never preserve
Temper, to consider, That he has pushed me, where there is no Necessity for it,
on the surest Step by which I can incur the Hatred, and the Reproaches, of a
Family, to which I am indebted, for almost every Thing, that Fortune favors me
in!

IN this Struggle, between the Duties of Friendship, and of Gratitude, I can
come to no Resolution. I have Friends enough, on whose Advice, in other Things,
I set a very considerable Value: But, there is no Opinion, I would follow so
soon, in a Point of this Niceness, as that of the PLAIN-DEALER. It is the first
Request I have ever made to you; and, I hope, you will not refuse your Answer.
-- When I tell him whose Determination I act by, I am sure, it will satisfy
him: And, if you deny me, the Prejudice may be Infinite. -- Let me have but a
single Paragraph, to direct me: Or, if that be too much, give me a Yes, or a
No, at the Bottom of One of your Papers; and it shall be enough, for one of
your sincerest Admirers,

B -- B --.


'METHINKS the Difficulty, in this Case, is not so great, as the lively
Painting which describes it, makes it appear, upon a first View. -- Since the
Lover is so worthy of the Lady, (if he had no other Means of reaching, or being
recommended to her, but through the Hands of This Friend) my Correspondent,
without all Doubt, would have stood bound to deliver the Letter; and try the
utmost of his Influence, to render it successful: And the rather, because
Interest only, and not Merit, seems to have recommended the Rival. -- But,
since it is so easy to find other Means, as effectual; and the Favors,
received by my Correspondent, from the Lady's Family, are strong Motives
against his Friend's employing him, where there is no visible Necessity, that
confines the Choice to him only, he appears, to me, a little mistaken, when he
strips Friendship of that generous Freedom, without which, it can never
subsist; and punishes himself with such inward Conflicts, in Support of a
Delicacy;; which, though it beautifies the Face of Friendship, is rather the
Dress, than the Body, of it.

OF all human Passions, this, of Friendship, is the most refined, and I might,
almost, say too, the most ardent. But I would be understood to speak of the
Thing: For the Word is much more common, and less powerful. -- Most People,
when they say Friend, mean Companion, or Acquaintance. But, alas! what infinite
Difference! -- How Few can distinguish between Friendship, (which is a Parity
of Souls) and Affection, which is a Claim of Blood; or a Tie of mutual
Interests; or an Agreement, of Hopes, or Fears, or Principles, or Humors; or
any of these mistaken Fellowships, which are Parts of Friendship, but not
Friendship.

I SAID, it was the most refined, of all our Passions: And it is so, from its
Dis-interestedness, its Nobleness, and its Exemption from all Earthly Motives.
It is a struggling of the conscious Soul, to enlarge her Limits, in the Body,
and exert herself, in generous Sallies, into the Purlieus of Immortality! -- It
is, indeed, a Desire; but, it is such a Desire, as the Angels burn with! -- It
is an Exaltation of the Human Nature, by a powerful Mixture of the Divine: And
serves to give us an Ideal Foretaste of our Business, when we shall have
outsail'd Time, and launched into Eternity!

I had a Friend, says our immortal Dryden, in some, or other, of his Tragedies;
-- I forget the particular Place, but must, always, remember the Beautiful
Description!

I had a Friend, that loved me: --
I was his Soul: He lived not, but in me:
We were so lost, within each other's Breast,
That neither found himself, but in the other.
We mixed, like meeting Streams, that flow, together!
All knew us different, yet perceived us one;
Nor could again divide us!
BUT I am entering on a Subject, which should I do more, than barely touch it,
would carry me away with it, into a Length, in which I might lose my self, and
my Reader: And the best Way I can find, to prevent it, will be to put an End to
this Day's Paper, with two Excellent Stanza's, from Spencer, which are very
strong, and elegant, upon the Subject.

Hard is the Doubt, and Difficult, to deem,
When All Three Kinds of Love, at once, contend,
And cleave the laboring Heart, with wild Extreme,
Which, with most Power, the stubborn Will can bend!
Or dear Affection, which from BLOOD descends?
Or raging Fire of LOVE, to Womankind?
Or that sweet Tie of Souls, that fastens FRIENDS?
Yet, sure! the Knot, that joins the fellow'd Mind,
Should the associate Heart, with strictest Union, bind!
The Love of Kindred soon will feel Decay,
And shrink, or melt, in CUPID's scorching Flame:
But firmer Friendship bears its fiercest Ray,
And, bright'ning, in the Proof, its Rage can tame:
Inviting Trial, and despising Blame,
For, as the Soul inspires our moving Clay,
And gives the Body every Act, and Aim,
So, the Soul's LOVE does Love of Bodies pass,
Far, as the ripened Gold surmounts the cank'ry Brass!
The Plain Dealer. No 85.
Gratum est quod patriae Civem, populoque dedisti,
Si facis ut Patriae sit idoneus, utilis agris,
Utilis, and bellorum and pacis rebus agendis.
JUV.
MONDAY, January 11. 1725.
To the AUTHOR of the PLAIN DEALER.
SIR,
HAVING lately met with an Opportunity of looking back, upon a Complete SET of
your PLAIN DEALERS, the last Paragraph, in your Paper of Monday, the 9th of
November, puts me upon asking, Whether it would not be worth while, to bestow
an Essay to show the Honor, as well as the Profit of TRADE; in order to remove
that mistaken Motion, which possesses the Minds of the Indolent, and
Unthinking, Part of our Nobility and Gentry, That by engaging in TRADE they
degrade themselves?

YOU will easily prove the contrary, since not only our Credit at Home, but our
Power Abroad, is supported by it. Besides which, the Education, necessary to
qualify a Man for a complete Trader, is such, as becomes a Gentleman of the
first Rank. For he should be a Proficient in Languages, History, Geography, and
Mathematics: And, in order to be Master of the Improvements, which may be
made, in every Soil, and Climate, he should know something of Natural
Philosophy. -- He ought to be acquainted with the Policy and Government, of all
Nations: And, though he does not immediately concern himself in the Management
of State Affairs, yet he should be qualified for a PRIME MINISTER.

OUR Youth of Title and Gaiety, are generally taken with the Character of a
SOLDIER; and it must be allowed, a Noble Employment, -- Especially, when
assumed in the Defense of our Country. But then, it may be remembered, That the
Art of War, was introduced through the Corruption of Mankind, and is always
attended with Ruin and Desolation.

OTHERS, who would appear more polite than their Neighbors, breed up their
Sons to practice the LAW, -- but I am sorry to say, that This, considered as a
Profession, is is attended with Consequencs, as Fatal to Families, as That is
to Nations. -- For, though our Seats of Justice are filled with Men, from whom
we may expect All, that is equal and just; yet by the Turns, and Managements,
of the inferior Practicers in those Courts, our Approach to Them, is made so
Intricate and Expensive, that they who are obliged to sue for their own Right,
in the common Forms, are frequently undone, even though they obtain the
Verdict, in their Favor.

THUS the Properties of the People are rendered precarious, and many
Difficulties are put upon them, in their Pursuit of Justice, by those, who
pervert the true Intention of the Law; and make That a dark Mystery, which
being the Rule of every Man's Actions, should lie open, and plain to his
Understanding.

AND, here, I cannot help mentioning a Thing, which, though it seems but a
Trifle, much be allowed to look like a very unreasonable Hardship. -- The
Manner of making out, and serving a Subpoena in Chancery! -- This is a small
Slip of Parchment, rolled up, in a Lump of Wax, and may chance to be served, in
the Country, upon a Person, who can hardly read the plainest English: -- When
it comes to his Hands, perhaps, at first, he is afraid to break it open; but,
if he proves hardy enough to do that, he is not one Jot the wiser; for it is
wrote in Barbarous Latin, with odd unintelligble, Abbreviations; and, in a
Hand, more resembling a Set of Hieroglyphics, than the Letters of a Christian
Alphabet.

THE poor Man, thinking no Harm, lays it by, till his Convenience serves him,
to get it explained, by the first Great Scholar he happens to meet with. But,
in the mean Time, upon this Delay, out comes an Attachment, and so on, to a
Writ of Rebellion; for no other Reason than that a Man who was bred to
understand nothing but Husbandry, could not decypher a Summons, served upon
him, in a Language he never heard of, and a Character, which the Parson of the
Parish, might himself, have been equally puzzled by!

THERE are many other Proceedings in the Law, of a like Nature, which if truly
considered, have methinks, but an odd Appearance, in a Country of so much
boasted Liberty. -- But if, while we censure, what seems thus unreasonable, in
the Method of some of our Law-Practices, it should be alleged, That,
Notwithstanding all this, it has produced many Great, and Useful Men, I allow
it, -- only it may be worth considering, Whether we have not more Reason to be
ashamed we stand in need of them, than to boast that we have them. And I will
ask this plain Question, If that would not be esteemed a happier Climate, where
there is no Need of Physicians, than where the Uncertainty, or Unwholesomeness
of the Air has encouraged so many of them to settle, that you are sure of
finding a Good One in every Street?

I BEG Pardon for this Digression; but I was led into it by mentioning the Law
as a Profession, compared with that of the Merchant, in order to engage your
more able Pen to show, at large, how much One is preferrable to the other; as
well with respect to the Honor, as the Usefulness, that attends it -- since
All, who raise their Fortunes merely by the Practice of the Law, or the Success
of the Sword, must necessarily do it upon the Ruin of Families and Nations:
Whereas the Generous TRADER, while he enriches himself, is spreading Benefits
to all about him: From whence we may infer, That This is the Employment, most
agreeable to the Original Design of our Beings, which was, not to destroy, but
to comfort, and cherish each other.

MOSES was a great Lawgiver, and David was a Warrior: But SOLOMON, whom GOD
was pleased to honor, with still sublimer Marks of his Favor, and to whom He
gave the wisest, and most Understanding Heart; -- So that there was none like
him, BEFORE, neither should Any rise, AFTER, like unto him. This Solomon, the
Greatest King, the Chosen People of GOD ever had! was a MERCHANT; and sent
Fleets, by way of the Red Sea, to bring home Gold, from the East Indies: And
what Noble Monuments did this Prince leave behind him of his Wisdom and his
Grandeur:

BUT we have a living Example in the CZAR, a Prince, who has done more for the
Advantage of his Country, and his own Glory, by encouraing Arts and Sciences,
and improving every Branch of Trade, in his Dominions, than by all the Battles
he has ever fought. -- In fine, who has not observed, That our own most
Gracious SOVEREIGN, at the opening this present Session of Parliament,
recommended from the Throne, the Encouragement of TRADE, and NAVIGATION, as the
great Means, to Support, and Establish us.

IF you think any of these Hints can be of Service to the Public, you may use
them as you please.

I am, SIR, Your very humble Servant, PATRICIUS.
Jan. 5 th 1725.

I AM perfectly in the Sentiments of the Ingenious Gentleman, who sent me the
foregoing Letter; -- But, the Subject which he has recommended, can never hope
to succeed better, than under the Care of so able a Hand, as his own: And, for
that Reason, I am very desirous of the Continuance of his Correspondence.

THE Opinion, That Merchandising debases Blood, is a Folly, worthy only of the
Tribe, to whom this Gentleman imputes it. -- It is a Truth, too well known,
that the INDOLENT and UNTHINKING, Part, of our Nobility and Gentry, is a very
large Part of them: But (Heaven be praised!) not at all a considerable One. --
They are a Race of pleasant Creatures, who had the Honor to be born, for their
own Ease; but for the Entertainment of other People. -- They put me in mind of
the Innkeeper in the STRATAGEM, who was able at present, to produce none of the
Good Things, his Guests wanted, but had the Satisfaction of, remembering that he
could have furnished 'em, All, if they had dined with him, last SUNDAY: -- No
Matter how pur-blind a Man of Quality happens to be, since he had a Great
Grandfather, that was sharp sighted! He may be, a Fool too, (HIMSELF) -- but it
ought to be Scandalum Magnatum to laugh at him. -- For he has Proofs, in the
Herald's Office, That his FOREFATHERS could act wisely.

WE have the Comfort, however, to know, that All our Lords, are not LORDS OF
TRADE: If they were, my Correspondent's Excellent Notions might be urged, with
an Effect, but ill-proportion'd to their Value; and fall under the Noble Eye of
not a Few able Ministers, of the same Stamp with a famous One, in a late Reign,
who, when a certain Knight, a Great Trader, presented him with a Scheme for the
Improvement of Commerce, threw it back to him, with a wise Contempt, and asked
him, Whether he thought, that Men of HIS QUALITY, had nothing to do but to read
Papers!

TO the just, and lively, Observation, That a Merchant ought to be qualified
for a Minister of State, I will add this Wish, of my own, -- That we may, never
have a Minister of State, who is not qualified for a Merchant! -- Not Trade
alone, but Politics, would soon feel the Benefit of so new a Regulation. --
Yet, there is a Happiness, still greater; and it is the Last, the warmest,
Hope, of those, to whose successful Industry we owe our Commerce! -- That the
Way might always lie open, to the Ear of our Princes Themselves, without
passing the narrow Posterns, which Truth is often obliged to wait at, 'till it
has wearied it self, to no Purpose.

THE First remarkable Start, in the Enlargement of the English Traffic, was
made in the Reign of our High-spirited Queen Elizabeth: And to what Kind of
Measures it was owing, may, I presume, be gathered, without much Difficulty,
from the following little Story, which I have taken out of Sir Walter Raleigh's
Discourse, concerning the Prerogative of Parliaments.

QUEEN Elizabeth would set the Reason of her meanest Subject, against the
Authority of her greatest Councellor. By her Patience, herein, she raised the
ordinary Customs of London, above Fifty thousand Pounds a Year, without any new
Imposition. -- The Lord Treasurer Burleigh, the Earl of Leicester, and
Secretary Walsingham (All Three PENSIONERS to Customer Smith) joined, to set
themselves against a poor Waiter of the Custom-House, called Carwarden; and
commanded the Grooms of the Chamber not to give him Admission. -- But the
Queen, sent for him, on a Petition, which he delivered, into her Hands, and
gave him Countenance against them all. -- It would not serve the Turn with Her,
to be told by her Great Officers, that she disgraced Them, by allowing her Ear
to the Complaints of busy Heads; and that she dishonored Her own Dignity. --
She had always This, to answer -- That, If Men should complain, unjustly,
against her Ministers, she knew well enough, how to punish them -- But, if they
had Reason for the Complaints they offered Her, She was Queen of the SMALL, as
well as of the GREAT; and would not suffer Herself to be BESIEGED, by Servants,
who could have no Motive for wishing it, but their Interest in the Oppression
of others The Plain Dealer. No 86.
Audit iter numeratque dies spatioque viarum
Metitur vitam. --
CLAUD.
FRIDAY, January 15. 1725.
I THINK, I have already informed my READERS, That I am a great Lover of
Walking: But I don't know whether I have, yet, acquainted them with a Custom I
have, to look back, from every Rising Ground I meet with, in my Perambulations,
and examine the Change of Prospect; and the Face, and Situation, of the
Country, I have left behind me.

I HAVE transplanted this good Custom, from my Body, into my Mind; which I
have, for some Years past, inured to make Pauses, now and then, in Life; and
reckon over its past Stages, and the Uses I have adapted them to: And This I
sometimes do, after a General, and, at other Times, in a more particular,
Manner. -- The Distinction of Ages, by Solon, into Divisions, of Seven Years,
is an Example of the First Kind; and has something in it, that is just, and
natural; and uncommon enough to be worth translating.

The Seven first Years of Life, (Man's Break of Day)
Gleams of short Sense a Dawn of Thought display.
When Fourteen Springs have bloomed his downy Cheek,
His soft, and blushful, Meanings, learn to speak.
From Twenty One, proud Manhood takes its Date;
Yet is not Strength complete, till Twenty Eight.
Thence, to his Five and Thirtieth, Life's gay Fire
Sparkles, burns loud, and flames, in fierce Desire.
At Forty Two, his Eyes grave Wisdom wear;
And the dark Future dims him over with Care.
On, to the Nine and Fortieth, Toils increase;
And busy Hopes, and Fears, disturb his Peace,
At Fifty Six, cool Reason reigns, entire,
Then, Life burns steady, and with temperate Fire,
But Sixty Three unbinds the Body's Strength;
E're the unwearied Mind has run her Length.
And, when, from Sev'enty Age surveys her Last,
Tired, she stops sho t -- and wishes, All were past.
OF the second, and more particular Kind, I have met with no livelier Example,
than That of the illustrious Paulo Paruta, a Noble Venetian; who was sent
Ambassador, from his Republic, to Pope Clement the Eighth; and composed the
following Soliloquy, during his Residence at Rome; wherein he briefly Examines
the whole Course of his past Life.

WHERE am I? What am I doing? What am I designing? -- I am hastening already to
the End of my Life; and have hardly so much as thought upon the End of my
Being! -- I am transported with That which I am not sure to possess, a Day; and
neglect to acquaint myself with what I must carry with me, through Eternity! --
Age has, naturally, a Power to afflict, and mortify, the Body: Let it now
exert a nobler Influence, and exalt, and quicken, my Spirit! -- Summon, O my
Soul, thy strayed, and degenerate, Thoughts; Know the Dignity of thy Condition;
and let nothing proceed from Thee, but what may, truly, be worthy of Thee.

I FEAR, if I make a Scrutiny into the Conduct of my Life, I shall disgrace my
blushing Reason, by a Recollection of my Vanity. -- The Tenderness of my Infant
Years was too weak to afford Matter, that could merit my Age's Notice; and yet,
the Tears, methinks, which it was subject to, might have forewarned me, That I
was entering upon a Wilderness, of Misery!

IN the Boyish Years, which succeeded Childhood, I drew in Pleasure, at my
Eyes, and Ears; and gave my Soul a Tincture that prepared it for the
Impressions of future Levity. -- Riches, Honor, and worldly Greatness,
glittered on me, from a lovely Distance: And Retirement, when I heard it talked
of, seemed Stupidity or Madness. -- These Conceptions gathered Strength, as I
advanced into riper Life, from the Common Consent, of all Men, to practice, and
to praise, as I did: And That most among Those, who were reputed wisest, and
most happy.

AT my Entrance into Youth, I applied myself to Study. -- I delighted, chiefly,
in Rhetoric, and Philosophy; and, having the good Fortune to meet with
Excellent Masters, I made a swift, and unusual Progress. -- Yet I cannot help
confessing, That it added Fuel to my native Pride. It inflamed me with a Thirst
of Praise; and served to countenance that Self-Love, which stood in need of no
Incentive. -- Knowledge is apt to puff up its Possessors. -- I dare not say, I
possessed it: But, if I should be asked, What Fruit, I reaped, by my Studies? I
think, I might venture to answer, That Philosophy, if it did not teach me
TRUTH, awakened, and prepared me, to receive it.

FOR a while, I was very Earnest in the Study of Morality; and delighted in it
so much, that I published a Treatise, on that Subject: And, afterward, when I
was come to Man's Estate, I composed, in Obedience to my Father's particular
Command, an Elaborate History, of my Country. -- But, while I labored to
contribute toward the Glory of other Men, I pleased myself with a flattering
Prospect, That I too, by those my Labors, should have a Place, in the Temple I
was building; and, live, in my Fame, many Ages after my Death. Absurd
Extravagance of erring Vanity! -- As if, what is nothing, in Itself, could
gather an Existence, from the Opinions of Others!

NEXT, I gave myself wholly up to the Service, and Government of my Country;
and found my Way so plain, and easy, that I soon attained Great Honors, and
helped to fill the foremost Employments. -- But, alas! What Boast is This? --
Am I not sensible, that not only the most busy, but even the most pleasing, of
my present Thoughts, will vanish, like a silent Shadow? -- All these Dignities,
and Distinctions, these State Bustles, and Negotiations, with which my Mind is,
so gloriously encumbered, will dissolve, like Smoke into the Wind! or be
withered, like Flowers, by the Beams of that Sun, which cherished them! -- Yet,
unstable as these Phantasms are, and as I know them to be, I must meditate on
Them only. My Thoughts, however reluctant, must, at all Times, and in all
Places, give way to the imaginary Importance of these proud Chimera's; and
abandon the Contemplation of Things intrinsically Noble.

ALAS! how hard it is to serve Two Masters, of opposite Meanings! my Reason,
and my Pride, seem to have divided me, between them. -- Pride teaches me to
measure my Actions, with Regard only to outward Appearances, by which Men
rather seem happy, than are so. -- But Reason is always whispering me, that
Patience, Humility, Mediocrity, and Self-denial, are the Roads, which lead to
Felicity. -- As I approached to Old Age, I grew, more and more, sensible on
which of these Two Sides Truth lay: But I persisted, even against Conviction,
and sacrificed my Peace, and Rest, to Careful Power, and Splendid Misery.

WHAT, then, do I wish? -- What is it, that I am expecting? -- If I know, that
my Pursuits are Follies, what hinders but that I change them? -- If, after
having wasted the Vigor of my Life, without Advantage from such Applications,
I am less satisfied than when I began to live, Am I weak enough to hope, That,
while, I, myself, do not change, the very Nature of Things should alter? Shall
Disappointment turn to Delight, because I am fondly in Love with Pleasure? --
Or shall a World, that produces nothing but Cares, be taught hereafter to
abound with Comforts, That I only may be indulged, with new, and unnatural,
Satisfaction?

LOOK out, my Soul, upon these Ruins, that are every where spread round thee!
This was, once, That aweful ROME! The Queen of the dependant World! -- Where
is, now, her unbounded Influence? Where the Majesty of her Empire? Where are
Her Treasures? Her Triumphs? and the dreadful Consequences of a Thousand
Victories? -- Are they not the Prey of Death, and Time? Do they not lie buried,
in these Heaps of Ruin? -- And shall Thou be fond of Glory? -- Thou, who can
look down with Pity, on the Desolation of a Power, that drew a Chain about the
World; -- Shall Thou presume to pride Thyself in Honors, or Distinctions? or
grow vain, upon the little Preference of a light, and momentary, Dignity!

No, -- Thou, who have Duration, and Stability! Thou! who shall endure,
unwasting, through the Changes of Eternity! consider better the true Rate of
Things; and proportion thy Desire to their Value. -- If they are not of Real
Worth, why then, have Thou loved them? -- Why endeavour'st Thou to retain them?
Why art Thou shaken at a Prospect of thy losing them? -- Or, grant they have,
in them, any Thing, that may be called a Real Good, why, at least, is it not
remembered, For how short a Time thou can possess them?

A THOUSAND Ways, these worldly Benefits have it, in their very Nature, to
deceive us. -- While we suppose their Increase the only Means to make us happy;
we, insensibly, become miserable: For we fix our Minds, so intently, upon the
Little we, yet, want, that we continue Dead to the Enjoyment of All that we
were before possessed of. -- The Fear of losing, what we have already got, has
a Power to impoverish vulgar Minds, as effectually as if they really possessed
Nothing! And a greater Vexation than This, the Humane Soul is not capable of
being tormented by -- Because, as the Misery is imaginary, it is boundless;
and, as it drew its Evil from Depravity, it can receive no Cure from Reason. --
Strange Perverseness of our Nature! -- We have our Happiness, within ourselves,
and are always seeking it abroad: -- We have our Miseries, remote, and without;
and, yet, are, for ever, smarting inward; and transplanting Tortures, to
ourselves, which have no Roots, but in our Diligence, to excite, and nourish,
our own Mischiefs!

IF we feed the Soul with Meat, which is not proper to her Nature, what Wonder,
that she pines, and can never be satisfied? -- But, I perceive, while I praise
MARY, I am imitating MARTHA. -- I discern the right Way; But I choose to travel
in the wrong, till I have lost my self in its intricate Windings! -- I am
troubled, and busied with many Things; though I know, well enough, that there is
but One, of 'em, sincerely Necessary. -- I am birdlim'd by the tempting World.
-- I am given over to a Variety of solicitous, and grinding, Cares, which I
hug, like Blessings, to my Bosom; and am softened, more and more, into an
Affection, and Partiality, for them. -- The Love and Gratitude, I owe my
Friends. -- The Hopes, and Fears, and touching Tenderness, with which I think
of my Wife, and Children; -- Domestic, and private Economy; and the weightier
Concerns of the Government of the Commonwealth! press my Thoughts, on every
Side, and afflict me with Purposes, diametrically opposite to each other.

FAIN would I free my Soul, and restore her to her Liberty, from these
Passions, which confine, and torture her: But I neither know how, nor when, to
resolve it. -- Yet, am I comforted, however, That I feel, in myself, a strong
Desire, to exert the Prerogative of my Reason. Since I consider it, as a Sign,
that though I am not able to do well, I retain the Principles of well-doing.

The Plain Dealer. No 87
Hoc habet animus argumentum, suae divinitatis,
Quod illum divina delectant. --
SEN.
MONDAY, January 18. 1725.
To the AUTHOR of the PLAIN-DEALER.
SIR,
IF You think, This may deserve a Place, in one of your Papers, insert it; If
not, deal Plainly, and commit it to the Flames; and either way, you will oblige,

Yours, etc.


THE Wise Author of Nature gave us Passions for a noble End: And, to defend us
from Excess, our Understandings were conferred, to regulate them; And, least
All should prove deficient, out of His overflowing Goodness, He enriched us
with a Revelation.

THE Eternal Truths of the Christian Religion, cast a Shade upon the finest,
and most exalted, Productions of humane Literature: Which Remark has been
frequently brought, as a Defense of its Divine Original, and is really, a very
strong Argument; for who can imagine, that without supernatural Assistance, Men
of ordinary Condition, unassisted by the Lights, or Improvements, of Learning,
should be able, in various Languages, to lay down such invaluable Principles; a
Multitude of which, were vastly preferrable, to any that had been introduced,
by the most penetrating of the Heathen Philosophers.

SOCRATES, Plato, Epictetus, and several others, have thought, and written, so
well, that their Memories deserve to be highly respected; But what nobler, and
inimitable Morals! How Extensive, and yet adapted, to all Abilities, have
descended to us in the Divine Collections? -- I have often, with no small
Concern, lamented, that the Study of the Scriptures, is so little relished; I
had like to have said, so much despised, in in Comparison of the Pagan Writers.

IN the Schools, to open an Aquaintance, with the Politest of the Classicks, is
undoubtedly a commendable Outset. But to be taught, a greater Admiration of
them, than of the Prophets, and Inspired Writers, is an Extreme; and one, that
is, more than ordinary Criminal. -- How common is it, to hear Persons
expressing their utmost Fondness for the Former, whilst the Last is seldom
mentioned; or, however, with much Indifference. There are sublime Sentiments in
the Greek and Latin Authors; -- But there is something, too, which, I cannot
forbear to take Notice of, that their Characters were seldom suitable; -- One
Proof of which Assertion, we may borrow from Plutarch's Life of Cato; Even that
Cato who was famous for the rigid Stubbornness of his Morality! -- When his
Domestics were worn out with hard Labor, or grown past it, through Increase
of Age, he would dismiss them, and show no Tokens of further Regard or
Humanity: On which Plutarch has left us this Reflection, That we are not to use
unfortunate Wretches, who depend on us; as we do our old Shoes, or Platters,
and throw them away, when they are broken, and fall to Pieces in our Service:
-- But if it were for nothing better than to express the Respect, we have for
the Humane Nature, a Man ought always to cherish in himself a kind and
compassionate Disposition.

BUT, not to digress farther, There are infinitely Sublimer Sentiments in the
Sacred Writings, and the Lives of their Authors shone, illustrious Examples of
their Doctrine! -- How becoming a great Soul, is, The Lord gave, and the Lord
has taken away, Blessed be the Name of the Lord -- Again, What? shall we
receive Good at the Hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil? -- How Happy
would it be for Mankind? if they would feel, and apply, to their Practice, the
glorious Commands of our Redeemer, To do nothing, but as we would be done by;
to exercise our Benignity even toward those, who hate, and who persecute us!
This Proposition is contemned by too many, though we have it so strongly
recommended, not only by the Words, but by the Practice of Him, who died for
our Salvation! Besides, (as you have observed in one of your PLAIN DEALERS) a
Return of Good Offices, for Injuries, is, indeed, the sharpest Revenge; For by
such a Conduct, we triumph over, confound, and disgrace, a malicious Enemy: As
by a contrary Management, we seem to justify, as well as inflame him.

IN Fine, There are a beautiful Variety of Instructions, in Holy Writ, which
can never be paralleled; They manifest their Heavenly Original; And, if we
make 'em our Delight, will alleviate all earthly Calamity, and furnish an
infallible Remedy, for every Accident, that can befall Us. I designed now to
have ended; but Recollecting, that there are some, who have little Faith, in
Revelation, I Will go on, a Line or two farther; -- Suppose, we grant their
inconsistent Hypothesis: Yet, still, it is our Interest to direct ourselves, by
the Measures of Revealed Religion, because it is the truest Friend to humane
Nature, and promotes nothing which is not conducive to our Quiet, and
Well-being; so that, allowing it were not our Duty, it is, however our
Prudence, to comply with so excellent, and even so agreeable a Model.

SO far, I have entertained my Readers with some Reflections, for which I am
obliged to an unknown Hand, on a Subject, whereon much has already been
written; with less Effect than might reasonably have been expected, from the
Force, and Clearness, of the Arguments.

IF I am not mistaken, That Disrelish of the Sacred Writings, which my
Correspondent complains of (though I hope it is far from Universal among us) may
be imputed to the low Spirit, and flat, obsolete, Expression, of the coarse
English, they are translated in. -- I leave it (says an Excellent Modern
Critic) to our Prelates and Pastors, to consider, Whether, since they are
satisfied, That there is a Necessity for a Numerous Style, in some Parts of our
Public Worship, they ought to remain contented with the Vile Versions, now in
Use, and suffer the most lofty, and most pathetick Idea's of Religion, to be
burlesqu'd, in our Churches? -- which is all one, as if they should dress up a
Bishop, in some antick-Habit, and expose him, every Sunday, in That merry Garb,
to raise the Veneration of the People!

IT is finely observed, and indeed, undeniably demonstrated, by the same
Gentleman, in his Grounds of Criticism in Poetry, That, as the Great
Characteristick of Poetry, is Passion, and the strongest, and most moving
Passions flow most naturally, from Religious Idea's; For this Reason chiefly,
the Ancient Poetry (where their Religion had its most powerful Influence) has,
so visibly the Advantage over the Modern, (which is for the most Part light,
profane, and contemptible.) And, for the same Reason too, the Poetry of the
Hebrews, which the Old Testament is, every where, filled with, excelled That of
the Ancient Greeks and Romans.

THERE are numberless Instances, in the Psalms, and among the Prophets, and
indeed throughout all Parts of the Old, and New Testaments, of a Sublimity,
that exalts the Humane Soul, and shakes it, with a much stronger Degree of
Terror, and Admiration, than Any, the most noble Strokes of rapturous
Enthusiasm, which can be met with even in Homer Himself.

WHAT a Collection of dreadful Images are thrown together in the Eighteenth
Psalm, to describe the Majesty of GOD, descending in the Fullness of his Power!
-- The Earth trembles, -- The Foundations of the Hills are shaken, -- He bows
the Heavens, and comes down, -- and Darkness is under his Feet! All This is
animated, and wonderful! -- But, what follows, is a Conception, of so immense,
and terrible a Grandeur! that our vulgar Translation seems unpardonable, for
the manifest Injustice it has done the Meaning; Then the Channels of the Waters
were seen: And the Foundations of the World were discovered! -- But, see, how
This ought to have appeared, in the noble Dress which Mr. Dennis has given it.

Still Darkness ushered His mysterious Way,
And a black Night of congregated Clouds
Became the dark Pavillion of his Throne!
Earth, upwards, from the gaping Center, cleav'd,
And barred the fixed Foundations of the World!
A Sight! that blasted even the World's, Great Eye!
And made the starting SUN recoil,
From his Eternal Way!
WHAT comes nearest to This, is, That famous Passage, in the xxth Iliad of
Homer, to which also, the Gentleman just named has given the finest Translation
it ever met with, Mean while, Majestic Neptune, from below,
The reeling Globe with his huge Trident Struck.
Mount Ida trembled, from his hoary Top,
And from his nethermost Foundations shook.
Pluto starts, frighted, from his burning Throne,
And, striking his infernal Breast, cries out,
Least such another Stroke should rend the Globe,
And, on his pale Dominions, let in Day!


THE Hebrew Prophets abound, Everywhere with Idea's, so sublimely
Enthusiastic, that they transport and carry away the Reader, with a Power that
is resistless; and worthy of the GOD, who is honored by them! -- Among These,
the Description of That Desolation from the East, which was prophesied against
the Jews, by Habakkuk (as we see it, in his first Chapter) has something in it,
so strongly painted, and so terrible! that it strikes us, (through the most
un-ornamented Simplicity,) with a Force, that was never excelled, by all the
Elaborate Productions of Poetry!

I will raise up the Chaldeans, That bitter, and fierce, Nation! and They shall
march through the Breadth of the Land.

THEY are terrible! and their Horses are swifter than Leopards; and fiercer
than Evening Wolves!

THEY shall come on, and fly with Violence, as an Eagle, that hastens to eat!

THEIR Faces shall drink up, like the East Wind; and they shall gather the
Captivity, as Sand.

THE fourth Chapter of the same Prophet, is one continued Height of the
Divinest Elevation; and I shall insert the whole Succession of its matchless
Images, as a Proof how truly it has been observed, by the Gentleman who sent me
the foregoing Letter, That there are infinitely sublimer Sentiments in the
Sacred Writers, than in any of the most celebrated Classick Authors.

At Israel's Call, the Almighty's Thunder, hurled
From Paran's Summit, shook the Astonished World!
Frowning, provoked, his threatening Wrath flamed high;
And Earth's dim Regions gleam'd, beneath his Eye.
Poised, in his undetermined Hands, he bore
Judgment's heaped Horn, and Mercy's struggling Store.
Near him, Pale Death, in shad'owy Triumph, trod;
And pressed, with ghastly Signs, the doomful Nod.
Keen, from beneath his Feet, red Lightnings broke,
And the veiled Mountain shook, in Clouds of Smoke.
He stood -- and, while the measured World he eyed,
The starting Nations dropped their warlike Pride.
High-boasting Cushan struck her Tents, with Shame,
And Midian groaned, beneath repented Fame.
He stepped -- and, from their old Foundations, rent,
The Everlasting Hills before him bent!
He marched -- and all the up-rooted Mountains stray,
And roll, in Earthquakes, to escape his Way!
Fast-foll'wing, from their Chasms, a thousand Tides
Spout a wished Deluge over their frighted Sides!
Back swelled the roaring Sea, his Face to fly,
And, in O^e trembling Billow scaled the Sky!
Conscious of Wrath Divine, the Sun grew pale,
And over Distinction, cast a dusky Veil.
This when I hear, chill Frosts my Heart overspread,
And my Lips quiver, with the rising Dread.
Trembling, and sunk, my Limbs I faintly draw,
And my Bones crumble, with Ideal Awe!
I SHALL close my Paper with the Words of a Gentleman, whom I have, already,
once or twice, named in it, -- 'If Harmony, says he, is, of itself, so
Efficacious, what must it not be, when incorporated with a Religious Sense? --
There can, certainly, be no better Way to Reformation, than the Reading of
those Writings, which we believe to be divinely inspired: But it is equally
certain, that the greater the Pleasure is, with which we read them, the oftener
we shall discharge that Duty: And, to make us read them with more Pleasure,
They must have more of the Harmony, and Force, of their Originals. -- This
would attract the Gentry, and Persons of the most Extraordinary Parts, whose
Examples would influence the rest. For Persons of the most Extraordinary Parts,
being extremely delighted with Poetry, and finding the most exalted Poetry upon
Religious Subjects, would, by Degrees, become more used to be moved, by Sacred,
than profane Idea's; and, in Consequence, would be reformed.

The Plain Dealer. No 88.
Suave mari magno turbantibus aequora ventis,
Et Terra magnum alterius spectare laborem. --
LUC.
FRIDAY, January 22. 1725.
THE Sea is the most Vast, of all the visible Objects of Nature: And, when the
Wind adds Disturbance and Motion, to its Immensity, There is nothing, that
seems so Dreadfully proportioned to the Greatness of its Almighty Creator! --
Yet, as the Art of the Painter gives us a sensible Delight, from the
Representation of Prospects, of Creatures, or of Actions, which, in their
Natures, are Productive of Horror; so, we are never more pleased, by any
Descriptions, in Poetry, than by Those, which set before us the strongest, and
liveliest Pictures, of Shipwrecks and Storms at Sea: Whether it is, that the
Soul exults, and prides its self, in a Consciousness of its own Capacity, to
move and conceive so greatly? -- Or, That we derive a sharper Taste, and
Enjoyment, of our own Safety, from a Comparison, with those represented Dangers?

ALL the Poets, Ancient and Modern, have been fond of raising Tempests;
wherein, for the most Part, their own Time, has been castaway. For, they have
scattered and weakened, the Terror, they designed to increase, by throwing
together All the Images that occurred, rather than selecting the most Essential
and Impressive: By means of which perplexing, and inconsistent Variety, their
Reader's Imagination finds Relief; from not clearly discerning their Object,
through the Dust, which they have raised about it.

IT has been observed, by the Admirers of Homer, That there is a Similitude,
between His manner of Thinking, and that of David and Solomon, and others of
the Hebrew Writers, who owed their Excellence to the Inspiration of the Holy
Spirit. -- Meethinks, this Remark, which is much to the Honor of that immortal
Greek, may gather some New Force if we consider Homer's Description of a
Tempest, which Longinus was so justly charmed with, and compare it with that of
David, in the 107th Psalm, which has often been mentioned with Wonder, by the
Critics, of our own, and foreign Nations. -- Both the Versions are New: But
Both the Originals are inimitable. -- I begin with That of the Psalmist.

They, who in Ships, the Sea's vast Depths descend,
And, over the watery World, their Passage bend;
They, (more than All) their GOD's Great Works discern,
And 'midst the unfathomed Deep, his Wonders learn.
There, from smooth Calms, on sudden Storms, they rise!
Hang on the horrid Surge, and Skim the Skies!
Now, high as Heaven, they climb their dreadful Way:
Now, sink, in gulphy Slants, and lose the Day!
Giddy, they reel; to shoot the frightful Steep;
And their Souls melt amid the sounding Sweep!
Helpless, they cling to what supports them, first,
And over 'em feel the breaking Billows burst.
Then, to their last ALMIGHTY Hope, they cry;
Who hears, and marks them, with a pitying Eye:
HE bids the Storm be hushed -- The WINDS obey:
And the awed WAVES, in silence, shrink away!
NOW follows Homer, with a Terror, and a Majesty, which leave it almost
doubtful, to which of these Great Poets the Victory should be ascribed; but,
Certain, beyond all Question, -- That no other has equaled either of them.

Over the broad Sea the driving Tempest spreads,
And sounding Surges swell their sweeping Heads.
Upwards, Immense, the Liquid Mountains flow;
And shade the distant Ship, that climbs, below!
Down her washed Decks the white'ning Foam rolls over;
And the big Blasts through bursting Canvas, roar!
Back shrink the Sailors from the briny Grave:
And see pale Death, press close on every Wave!
WE see here no Time lost, in enumerating little Particulars. All the Great,
and Striking, Circumstances are thrown forward, in their proper Lights: But
nothing is added, That can either diminish or distract, the Apprehension. -- I
have placed these two admirable Descriptions thus opposite to each other, That
some of our fashionable Applauders of Homer, may see his Sublimity more than
matched, in the Works of a Poet they have seldom heard of: And that they, who
are, justly, his Admirers, may find Cause to esteem him, yet more, by observing
how near he comes, to One, whom ^OD was pleased, after a peculiar manner, to
inspire and delight in.

WHILE I am upon this Subject, it falls naturally in my Way, to recollect a
Letter, that was lately sent me, by a Gentleman, who writ the Particulars of
the Story from the Mouth of a Person, who was, himself, an Eyewitness.

To the AUTHOR of the PLAIN DEALER.
Will's Coffee-House, Cornhill. SIR,
YOU appear, by some of your Writings, to be so heartily a Lover of the Trade,
and Prosperity, of your Country, that I persuade my self you must of Necessity,
be a Well-wisher to the honest Sailors: A Set of Men, who at the continual
Hazard of their Lives, contribute their Toil, and their Skill, to the Power and
Grandeur of the Nation: And, who, allowing Themselves no Leisure for Luxury,
furnish Means, notwithstanding, to maintain the Luxury of other People. -- The
Sailors, to be short, are a Race of openhearted, gallant, Thinkers, who retain
the Plainness, the uncorrupted Sincerity, and blunt Species of Virtue, which
distinguished our Forefathers; and which Old England has, so often, triumphed
by, in Times, whose Customs we rather admire, than imitate. -- Whatever,
therefore, relates, in a very extraordinary Manner, to the Good or Ill Fortune,
of any of this useful, and worthy Race of your Kindred Plain Dealers, I promise
my self, you will take Pleasure to distinguish, by allowing it a Place in your
Paper.

THE Ship Bouevia, of London, of Burden about 250 Tun, Captain Brooks,
Commander; set sail, from the Coast of Holland, on the 25th of November last;
having two Pilots, one English, and the other Dutch: And his Wife was on board,
with him.

THE Day had been fair, and clear; but, in the Evening, about Six, it blew hard
at South and by West. The Gale increased, into a violent Storm, and continued
for about Seven Hours, veering to the West, and North and by West: During which
the Ship was stranded, off of Enchuysen, in the Texel.

IN order to save themselves, if possible, the Men all got into the Longboat,
and were just ready to put off: But, not having their Captain among them, they
called to him to hasten down; because the Sea ran so high, that it broke over
the Boat, and endangered her beating to Pieces, against the Side of the
stranded Vessel. -- The Captain, in this nice, and perilous, Point of Time,
recollecting that his Wife was Seasick, in the Cabin, could not bear the
ungerous Thought of endeavoring to save himself, without her, and was
earnestly laboring to bring her along with him. -- But, she, who had heard the
Men cry out, That the Boat would sink, under the weight of two Persons more,
embraced him passionately, and refused to go. -- She wept, and told him, in the
most moving manner, That a Woman, in such an Extremity, would prove a dangerous
Encumbrance. She implored him not to think of dividing his Care; but to employ
it all for Preservation of his single Life, much dearer to her, than her own
was.

FOR some Time, he pressed her, in vain; but prevailed with her, at length, to
come up with him upon Deck; where the first Observation they made, was, That
the Boat was out of Sight; having been beaten off, by the Force of the Swell,
that rose between her and the Vessel.

HE was Gazing, Speechless, on her Face, in a Despair, which he found no Words
to utter, when a Billow, breaking over the Midship, washed him headlong, into
the Sea; and left her, shrieking, and alone, behind him, in a Condition so far
less supportable than his, that, after a Succession of the bitterest Outcries,
she fell forward, in a Swoon, and sunk senseless after him.

THE Boat, in the mean Time, endeavored to return to the Ship; and passing,
providentially near their Captain, who was yet faintly Swimming, the Men
discerned him, in the Sea, and took him up quite Spent, and Speechless: In
which Condition, they laid him in the Bottom of the Boat; and coming along the
Ship's Side, one of the Sailors looking up, saw something like a Woman, with
her Arms and Clothes, entangled in the Shrouds.

THIS Woman was the Captain's Wife; who, in the Moment of her falling forward,
had been saved and supported against that Part of the Rigging! -- She was still
in a Swoon, and insensible; but so beloved by the Mariners, that they redoubled
their Efforts to get Aboard, that they might have it in their Power to save
her; And they were so Fortunate, in their Humanity, that they found Means to
lift her into the Boat: Where they laid her, Dead in all Appearance, by her
Husband, who was in the same Condition.

THEY put off, again; and, with great Difficulty, got ashore, upon one of the
Islands in the Texel; where the Captain, coming to himself, told his Men, That
they would have done more kindly, had they let him perish in the Sea; since the
Life, they had forced upon him, must for ever be embittered, by the Memory of
Her unhappy End, for whose Sake only, He had thought it worth wishing for. --
His Wife, was now recovering; and near enough to hear, and answer, this noble
Instance of his Tenderness. -- They flew, astonished, and quite lost in
Exstacy, into each other's Arms -- And it is easier to imagine, than describe,
what they thought, and said, on so transporting an Occasion!

LET me only add, That this Relation was faithfully taken, from the Mouth of a
Gentleman, who was an Eyewitness, of the miraculous, and providential,
Particulars. -- I am,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, G. -- B -- r.


The Plain Dealer. No 89.
Sed neque quam multae species, and Nomine quae sint
Est numerus --
VIRGIL.
MONDAY, January 25. 1725.
SIR,
SINCE my Misfortune arises only from my having succeeded, to the fullest Point
of my own, and my Friend's Wishes, I know not how, in Conscience, I can expect
your Pity; but, be that as it will, my Case is somewhat extraordinary; and I
shall fairly state it, with the Purpose of serving as a Buoy, for the Warning
of others: -- You must know, Sir, I was left an Orphan, under the Tuition of a
Rich Uncle, who promised to settle his whole Estate upon me at the Day of my
Marriage: And that he might not cramp me in my Choice (a Folly too frequently
attending the Caprices of Old Age) the only Article he insisted on, was a Woman
of strict Virtue: -- A Condition, so very reasonable, was sure to meet with an
easy Compliance: And I, so punctually, and exactly, observed it, that from the
overflowing of my Wife's Virtue, my Happiness lies under Water.

WHATEVER Mismanagement, or Folly, she happens to be guilty of, she can
immediately set to rights, by the Counterpoize of her Chastity: And I have no
sooner opened my Mouth, than she hits me in the Teeth with her VIRTUE, the
conscious Good Fortune of coming off, without Cuckoldom, is, it seems a Cordial
Preparative, that can defend a Husband's Palate against the bitter Taste of
Arrogance, Pride, Vanity, Ill Nature, and the rest of That long Catalogue,
which Female Purity is pleased, sometimes, to arm it self withal, against the
Danger of Worldly Temptations.

I SHALL content my self with mentioning a few Instances, that lately happened,
upon the Heels of one another. -- Amongst many Neighbors in the Country, I can
boast but of one Friend, with whom I live in the greatest Intimacy. -- He was
one Day at Dinner with me, and said, occasionally, in a laughing way, That
there might possibly be other Faults in a Wife, as insupportable as Adultery:
At this, my Lucretia's Chastity flew out, at her Mouth, and Eyes. -- The Spirit
of Honesty came upon her, and she threw the Spoons, and Salts, at his Head,
till her Virtue remained Triumphant, and she had driven her Antagonist from
Table.

WHILE this Storm was in the Air, there could be little Quiet under its
Influences; so, I judiciously retired to a Farm-house; where I had been
recovering my self, about a Week, when a Messenger came with Tidings, That my
spotless Spouse, having heard, as Ill-luck would have it, that the Nurse to my
only Child was a Bastard, had turned her away, at a Minute's Warning, and
killed the Child, in Three Days after, by persisting in a Resolu- to wean it,
from a Milk of so wicked an Original! Upon this melancholy Account, I hurried
Home, where I had the Comfort to be convinced, that I ought, by no Means, to be
sorry, for the Death of my Child, since my Wife's Virtue was yet alive, and her
Modesty preserved inviolate.

NOW, Sir, what is to be done in such a Case? -- I would tell her, if I durst;
(nay, I will, if you are so kind, as to stand by me), That the Virtue of a
Man's Wife, will never atone for the Loss of his Friend: And that her Chastity
is the worst Remedy, she could have thought on, to supply the Loss of a Son and
Heir. -- Nay, if she should not believe me, I am determined (if you think there
may be no Danger in it) to let her alone to try the Experiment.

SIR, I have fairly told you my Story, and beg you will expatiate upon the
Subject. Pray give a little of your seasonable Advice to these Professors of
Grace without Gracefulness. -- Persuade 'em, if you can, to consider, That a
Wife's Chastity, is in the Nature of Laudanum to her Husband; a just Quantity
promotes Rest: -- Too little occasions Restlessness, and too much gives
convulsive Ravings: -- Such a desperate Old Gentleman as you are, may venture
to say, too, That Continency, by Constitution, is rather a Happiness, than a
Virtue: And, that a Wife, who sets up her Chastity, as a Specific, to cure all
Uneasinesses, is more insupportable, than a Quack, who can cure, only, the
Toothache, and maintains (for that Reason) that the Stone, the Gout, and the
Consumption, are Distempers, of no Consequence.

YOURS, J. W.


INSTEAD of complying with the Request of my Correspondent, and coming in, to
his Assistance, against so impenetrable a Championess; I shall add to his
Complaint, as just a one of my own. -- That I, too, lose my Rest, by WOMEN. --
What they do, or what they suffer, is for ever invading, and overwhelming, my
Purposes. -- Their Charms, and their Mischefs, press in upon me, from Town, and
Country. -- The Post groans as we do, under the Burden of their Vanities. --
But, what I think ought to be reckoned among my Sufferings not deserved, is, --
That it often costs me a Groat, to read one of their Secret Histories, not
worth a Halfpenny. My Intelligencers, from remote Quarters, make no manner of
Conscience in their Correspondence, with me. -- For, while they charge the
Follies they acquaint me with, upon those to whom they belong; They take care
to charge the Postage upon a Person, who is wholly Innocent.

I WAS lately in Despair of working any Reformation upon Offenders, who possess
the Power of bewitching those who examine them: But there came to my Hands,
some Time since, a short Treatise, in Manuscript, subscribed by Seven Ladies,
its Authors; who entitle themselves The Order of Angels. Into this Order, they
tell me, they propose to admit all the BELIEVING Fair, (which, if they do, they
can never fail of a most comprehensive Establishment!) The Business, they are
to be admitted for, is, to learn, it seems, to CONCEIVE after a new Manner, so
as to be brought to Bed of themselves; and, by Virtue of such New Birth, be
made Kings, and Priests to God, and become what All the Best of them were, at
first, created by the Lord to be, Real, Blessed, Heavenly, ANGELS.

THESE being the Words of the Ladies Treatise, I am restored to some Degree of
Hope; and shall shortly form a Resolution to disburthen myself of a Care I am
unequal to, and deliver over the whole Sex, into the Hands of these Able
Undertakers. -- Mean while, here are Three Letters. -- The First is a
mortifying Proof, that Avarice can teach Women of Fortune, to think as poorly,
as the Lowest of their Species: And the Second, and Third, relate to a
Grievance, almost too common to be worth complaining of; I should not
therefore, have inserted these Two, but for the Sake of a Rhetorical Figure in
the Last, concerning a Snail, whereby I have been able to gather, That the
Person accused is less pardonable, for having no Money, than for having no
Conscience, or Generosity.

To the PLAIN-DEALER.
SIR,
I HAVE been so unhappy, for this great while, as to indulge a Passion for a
young Lady; in whom I thought I might reasonably promise my self an agreeable
Companion, and a virtuous Wife. But alas! how vain and uncertain are all our
Hopes! A near Relation of mine, who married her Sister, by Errors, and
Misfortunes, (which generally go together) is well nigh reduced, which, I am
too sensible has created a Prejudice to our Family. My present Circumstances
are such as I think could not well be excepted against; but am so well
acquainted with the Effects of Prejudice, that I dare not hazard revealing my
Mind; fearing it may totally debar me, the Satisfaction, which I, sometimes
(but alas! seldom) enjoy, of being in her Company.

AS She is your constant Reader, the incerting this in one of your Papers, may,
very possibly, incite her to pity him who loves too well to dare to offend.
Hoping Fortune may some time offer the happy Means of possessing her; the only
Object of my Desires. Excuse this Trouble.

I am Yours, etc.


Good Mr. PLAIN DEALER.
A DISTRESSED Kinswoman of mine, desires you would be pleased to insert the
Epistle enclosed (which I received from her by the last Post) in your next
Paper, if possible, for a public Warning to our unguarded Sex. And if you
would take upon you to warn these unthinking Monsters, the Men, by describing
the Heinousness of their Crime; you would do a laudable Act, and worthy your
self; for Men of this Complexion are become so daring of late, that none but a
PLAIN DEALER dare meddle with them.

I am, Your Constant Admirer, E. A.


Dear Cousin,
YOU might too justly have condemned my Folly, if it had not been too, too
severely punished already. I am therefore to entreat you to lay by your Anger,
least you still aggravate my too rigid Fate, and lend a compassionate Ear to
this doleful Tragedy, and consider withal, that it is I, -- your near Relation,
who bear the principal, and insupportable Part in it. No Hopes remain -- to
speak at once the unwilling Truth, and utter all my Disgrace -- I have been
betrayed! betrayed by gaudy Outside! expecting Wedlock and a wealthy Spouse:
But, Confusion seize him -- The Snail carries his all upon his Back! -- Nor is
this all: The upbraiding Consequence too plainly appears, -- The Consequence --
that swells the Tide of all my Woe. -- I can no more. -- Let others who are
free, learn from my Woes to shun the alluring Bait. And least such Treachery
should be any longer a Secret, Dear Cousin, let me, as a small Recompense for
this long Train of Evils, have the poor Pleasure of being a Warning to others;
and, to that Intent, I humbly entreat that you would get this publicly printed
the first Opportunity, and forgive the Error of,

Your much Afflicted till Death, But loving Cousin, Z. H.
* P.S. Do not forget to have this Printed.




The Plain Dealer. No 90.
Unusquisque sua noverit ire via. --
PROPERT.
FRIDAY, January 29. 1724.
To the PLAIN-DEALER,
SIR,
IN Return for that Pleasure with which I have read your Abridgment of PARUTA's
Soliloquy, in one of your late Papers, I send you an Abstract from a much more
modern Treatise, Entitled, An Enquiry into the Nature of Society, wherein the
Author has considered Hypocrisy, as it is the Effect of our Common Self-Love,
in a manner, that is equally new, and delightful; and with a Penetration, as
Remarkable as the Pleasantry of his Images. -- In short, His Descriptions
appear to me so full of Nature, Wit, and Liveliness, that I believe they cannot
fail to give great Pleasure to your Readers: And, for that Reason, I have
transcribed what follows, and send it you, for their Entertainment.

THEY (says this too near Observer) who have never taken Notice of the
Conversation of a Spruce Mercer, and a Young Lady, his Customer, who comes to
his Shop, have neglected a Scene of Life, that is very entertaining. -- HIS
Business is, to sell as much Silk as he can, at a Price by which he shall get
what he proposes: -- As to the Lady, what SHE would be at is, to please her
Fancy, and buy cheaper by a Groat or Sixpence a Yard, than the Things, she
wants, are commonly sold at.

FROM the Impression, the Gallantry of our Sex has made upon her, she imagines,
That she has a fine Mein, and easy Behavior, and a peculiar Sweetness of
Voice: -- That she is handsome; and, if not beautiful, at least more agreeable,
than most young Women she knows. -- As she has no Pretensions, to purchase
Things with less Money than other People, except those, which are built on her
Good Qualities, so she sets herself off, to the best Advantage her Wit, and
Discretion, will let her. -- The Thoughts of Love are here out of the Case: So,
on one Hand, she has no Room for playing the Tyrant; and giving herself angry,
or peevish Airs; And, on the other, she has more Liberty of speaking kindly,
and being affable, than she can have, on almost any other Occasion. -- She
knows, that Abundance of well-bred People come to his Shop; and endeavors to
render herself as amiable, as Virtue, and the Rules of Decency, allow of.

BEFORE her Coach is yet quite stopped, she is approached by a Gentleman-like
Man, who has every thing clean, and fashionable, about him: And who, in low
Obeisance, pays her Homage, and hands her into the Shop. -- There, immediately,
he slips from her; and through a Bye-Way, that remains visible, only for half a
Moment, with great Address, entrenches himself behind the Counter; whence,
facing her, with a profound Reverence, he begs the Favor of knowing her
Commands,

LET her say, and dislike, what she pleases, she can never be directly
contradicted: She deals with a Man, in whom, consummate Patience is one of the
Mysteries of his Trade. Whatever Trouble she creates, she is sure to hear
nothing but the most obliging Language, and has always before her a cheerful
Countenance, where Joy, and Respect, seem to be blended with Good Humor, and
altogether make up an artificial Serenity, more engaging than untaught Nature
is able to produce.

WHEN Two Persons are so well met, the Conversation must be very agreeable, as
well as extremely mannerly, though they talk, about Trifles. While she remains
irresolute what to take, he seems to be the same, in advising her: But, when
once she has chosen, he immediately becomes positive, That it is the Best of
the Sort. He continues to extol her Fancy; and, the oftener he looks upon it,
the more he wonders, that he should not, before have discovered the
Pre-eminence of it, over any Thing he has in his Shop. -- He founds her
Capacity, finds out her Blind-side; and, by Fifty little Stratagems, makes her
overvalue her own Judgment, as well as the Commodity she would purchase.

THE greatest Advantage he has over her, lies in the most material Part of the
Commerce between them, the Debate about the Price; which he knows, to a
Farthing, and she is wholly ignorant of: Therefore, he no where more
egregiously imposes on her Understanding. But, though he has, here, the Liberty
of telling what Lies he pleases, as to the Prime Cost, and the Money he has
refused, yet he trusts not to Them only. He attacks her Vanity, and makes her
believe the most incredible Things in the World, concerning His Weakness, and
her own Superior Abilities. -- He had taken a Resolution (he says) never to
part with that Piece, under such a Price. -- But she has the Power of talking
him out of his Purposes. He protests, must lose by her; but, since she seems to
have a Fancy for it, and is resolved to give no more, rather than disoblige a
Lady he has so extraordinary a Value for, He will let her have it. -- Only
begs, That another Time she will not stand so hard with him.

IN the mean Time, the Buyer, who knows, that she is no Fool; and has a voluble
Tongue, is easily persuaded, that she has a very winning Way of talking: And,
thinking it sufficient, for the Sake of Good-breeding, to disown a Sense of her
Merit, in some witty Repartee, she swallows, very contentedly, the Substance of
every Thing he has told her: And the Upshot is, That with the Satisfaction of
having saved Ninepence a Yard, she has bought her Silk exactly at the same
Price as any Body else might have had it for.

IT is possible, that this Lady, for want of being sufficiently flattered, or
for a Fault she is pleased to find in his Behavior; or, perhaps, in the Tying
of his Neckcloth; or, for some other Dislike, as Substantial, may be lost; and
her Custom bestowed on some other of the Fraternity. But, where many of them
live in a Cluster, It is not easily determined which Shop to go to: And the
Reasons, some of the Fair-Sex have for their Choice are often very whimsical,
and and kept as a Great Secret. -- Among the Mercers, a Fair-Dealer must keep
before his own Door; and, to draw in random Customers, make use of no other
Importunity, than an Obsequious Air; and a Bow, to every well-dress'd Female,
that offers to look toward his Shop.

BUT, I have seen another Method o^ Inviting Customers, the most distant in the
World from what I have been speaking of. -- I mean, that, which is practiced by
the Watermen, on those, whom, by their Mien, and Garb, they know to be no
Londoners. -- It is pleasant to see half a Dozen of these Tritons surround a
Man, whom they never saw in their Lives before, and Two of them, who can get
nearest, clapping Each an Arm over his Neck, hug him, as familiarly, as if he
was their Brother, newly returned from an East India Voyage: A Third lays hold
of his Hand, -- Another of his Sleeve, -- His Coat -- the Buttons of it -- or
any thing he can come at: While a Fifth, or a Sixth, who has scamper'd twice
round him already, without being able to get at him, plants himself directly
before the Man in Hold; and, within Three Inches of his Nose, contradicting his
Rivals with an open-mouthed Cry, shows him a dreadful Set of large Teeth, and a
Remainder of Bread and Cheese, which the Country Man's Arrival had hindered him
from swallowing.

AT all This no Offense is taken. The Peasant thinks they are making much of
him; and, therefore, far from opposing them, he patiently suffers himself to be
pushed, or pulled, which way they direct. -- He has not Delicacy to find Fault
with their Dirt, and Sweat; for he has been used to it, from his Cradle: And it
is no Disturbance to him, to hear half a Score People, some of them at his Ear,
and the farthest not Five Foot from him, bawl out, as if he was a Hundred Yards
distant. -- He is conscicious, that he makes no less Noise, when he is merry,
Himself; and is secretly pleased, with their boisterous Usage. The hawling, and
pulling him about, he construes, as a Courtship, which he can feel, and
understand: And he cannot help wishing them well, for the Esteem they seem to
have for him.

HE loves to be taken notice of, and admires the Londoners for being so Earnest
in their Desires to serve him, for the Value of Threepence: Whereas, in the
Country, he must first tell People what he wants, and though he lays out Three or
Four Shillings, he has hardly a Word spoke to him, unless it is in Answer to
the Questions he is forced to ask them! This Alacrity in his Behalf, moves his
Gratitude, to all the Watermen, and being unwilling to disoblige any, he knows
not which of them to pitch upon -- I have seen a Man think all this, or
something like it, as plainly as the Nose, in his Face: And move along, all the
while, very contentedly, under a Load of Solicitors, carrying down to the
Waterside, with a smiling Countenance Seven or Eight Stone more than his own
Weight.

THERE is something, so strongly touched, so picturesque, and so diverting, in
these Two Descriptions, that I could not resist the Temptation I was under to
send 'em you, with my Request, That you would publish them, in one of your
PLAIN DEALERS: Where, if I am not mistaken, they will make a very agreeable
Figure.

I am, SIR, Your constant Reader. and humble Servant, TERENTIUS.


The Plain Dealer. No 91.
-- Furit alter amore.
MANIL. Nascentes morimur, finisque ab origin pendet.
Ibid.
MONDAY, February 1. 1725.
IN the Decision of that Important Question, What is strongest? which we read
of, in the Sacred Writings, LOVE and DEATH, stand out, distinguished: And two
of my Correspondents have given me an Opportunity of placing both these
Invincible Powers in full View, near one another: A Position, which, like the
Contraste, observed in the Poetry or Painting, of Judicious Masters, sets off,
and throws forward, every Object, by its OPPOSITE; and rounds, and raises, to
the Eye, what (without such artful Disposition) might be lost; and lie too
flat, to catch the Notice of a slight Remarker.

I SHALL introduce the Lover's Letter by a Reflection, concerning the
Impossibility of describing Love, and the Benefits, which Society owes this
Passion; from a Poetical PICTURE of it, which I have more than once, made
mention of, in the Course of these Papers, The roughest Passions gently learn
to move,
And Savage Hearts are humaniz'd, by Love:
Love, in a Chain of Converse, bound Mankind,
And polished, and awaked, the rugged Mind.
Pity, Truth, Justice, Openness of Heart,
Courage, Politeness, Eloquence, and Art;
That generous Fire, with which Ambition flames!
And all the unsleeping Soul's Divinest Aims:
Touched, by a Beam from Love, burn up, more, bright;
Proud of the godlike Power to give Delight!
Thus, have I vainly tried, with Strokes too faint,
Love, in his known, and outward Marks, to paint:
Forgetful, that, of old, they veiled his Face;
And, wisely, covered, what they could not trace.
Lovely Creator of my Soul's soft Pain!
Pity the Pencil, that aspires in vain.
Versed in Love' Pangs, and taught his Power, by you,
Skilled, I presumed, that what I felt, I drew:
But I have erred -- and, with delirious Aim,
Would picture MOTION, and imprison FLAME!
He, who can Light'ning's FLASH to Colors bind,
May paint Love's Influence, on the Lover's Mind.


To the PLAIN DEALER.
SIR,
EVER since you have obliged the World with your Paper, I have taken a great
deal of Pleasure in reading it; such just Sentiments, and your peculiar Method
of Plain Dealing, must charm the intelligent, and give Satisfaction to every
one, who is susceptible of Tenderness and Good Nature.

AMONG the Subjects, which you have cursorily touched on, LOVE, that Heavenly
Passion, (notwithstanding your grand Climacteric) seems to claim a considerable
Share in your Composition; else, how could you so tenderly express your self
concerning the Affair of Lucinda? With what Energy did you Discourse! Humanity
appeared in every Word, and I believe it impossible for the most Ardent LOVER,
to speak of Love, with greater Emotion, than you did in that Beautiful PLAIN
DEALER.

I HAVE for some time been in Love, with a Woman, invested with all the Graces
which accomplish the Sex; And, as I am entirely devoted to that Passion, when I
read that Paper, of Lucinda, I felt within me something new, That argued still,
for Love; something, so natural, so moving! that it was impossible for one, in
my Circumstance, to withstand it. The Opinion I had already conceived of my
Beautiful Disturber, heightened by a growing and virtuous Passion, made me a
Thousand times delight my self with an Imagination, that my Emilia resembled
Lucinda! The Love I bear this most agreeable Woman, has so deeply rooted it
self in my Heart, that neither Time nor Accident, can eradicate it. -- All my
Thoughts center in her, and when absent from her, I have lost the Soul, that
animates my Life, and my Mind is as effectually Dead, as my Body will be, when
I am no more, and shall have learnt the Power of forgetting her.

MY Passion for this dear Creature has been sometime Dormant: About two Years
ago, my Affairs obliged me to go Abroad, when our Acquaintance was but little
cultivated; yet, an Infant Passion, even then made me solely her Admirer: Such
Beauty, Goodnature, Wit, and lively Conversation, as are rarely to be met with
in one Person, so captivated me, that I could think of nothing but the dear
Emilia. -- When I returned Home, my Passion increased daily, insomuch, that at
this Time I am a Stranger to every Thing in the World, but Love, and Emilia!
without her, I shall be the most unhappy Man alive. -- I dread the Thoughts of
her being unkind, and Heaven grant, they may be groundless! -- I have declared
my Passion to her, and, if I don't flatter my self, she appears to have some
regard for me; this you will readily conclude gives me Hope; but, alas! I fear
too, or I should be no Lover.

OUR Circumstances are very different, and we seem in this Case only, to be
Diffident in one another; As for my Part, a genteel Employment is the only
Fortune I have to trust to, and therefore, according to the laudable Custom of
Bargain and Sale, in the Affair of Marriage, I am afraid I have too little Plea
that Way; yet, she is entirely at her own Disposal, and can, without asking any
Body Leave, make me the happiest Man on Earth. -- Dear Mr. Plain Dealer, as you
have been an Advocate for Lucinda, I beg a little of your Assistance; What must
I do? without her I am inevitably lost, and am afraid it may be so, if you
don't intervene with your good Advice; I beg you to publish this, in your next;
it may have some Effect on the dear Emilia; I am almost persuaded she does not
hate me; And, yet when I reflect on the mercenary Ways of the World, I am
plunged into the utmost Despair.

SIR, As you are a Man of Reason, make not light of my Condition, but exert
your self to assist me; I am afraid I have exceeded the Bounds of a Letter,
pray correct the Mistakes in Sense. I forget every Thing but the dear Emilia.
-- Angels protect her, and make her kind! Your Advice, how to proceed, will be
very grateful, and your publishing This, save me a great deal of Confusion: For
she will know it comes from me, by a Declaration in it, which none else can
perceive.

I am, SIR, Your constant Reader, and humble Servant, C. K.


THERE is no Spectacle, more profitably terrible, than that of a Man, who lies,
expiring his Soul, on his Deathbed. -- To see how the Spirits shrink inward,
and retire to the Heart; which is beating with convulsive Anguish! while the
Hands and Feet, its most remote Dependancies, are first incolden'd to a
fashioned Clay, as if Death crept in at the Nails, and would, by Surprise, from
both Extremes, make sure of the vital Center.

THE Mind would fain utter it self, but the Organs of the Voice are so
debilitated, that it cannot. The Eyes now settle to a dim Fixedness; which but
a little before, was as swift as the Shoots of Lightning, as nimble as Thought,
and as bright as the polished Diamond! The Countenance (through which perhaps
there shined a lovely Majesty, even to the Captivating of admiring Souls, is
altered into frightful Paleness, and the Languor of a ghastly Stillness. -- The
Tongue is silent, which commanded a Family, nay, perhaps a Kingdom; and kept
every Thing in Awe, with the Importance of its Motion. -- The Form that was,
Yesterday, so graceful, is now become a Thing so full of Horror, that Children
are afraid to look upon it; and must, therefore, be transmitted from its
Pleasures, and its Passions, -- from all the Scences of its enchanting
Blandishments, to a dark and silent Grave.

THERE is even the Difference of two several Worlds, betwixt a King, enameled
with his Robes and Jewels, sitting in his Imperial State; and his Posture,
Figure and Condition when consigned to his Six Foot of Royalty, to his Box of
everlasting Obscurity. And yet this Change is without any visible, substantial,
Diminution: All the Limbs remain perfect, as they were, without Dislocation, or
Contraction. -- Whence Scaliger defines Death to be but the Cessation of the
Soul's Functions: As if it were rather a Restraint, than a Dissolution. What
seems wanting, is chiefly Color, Heat, and Motion; yet, that gross Object,
which is left to the Spectator's Eyes, remains remains now but a Compound of
the two ignobler Elements, Water and Earth; while the two purer, Fire and Air;
are winged away, as fitter Attendants on the Soul, than on the extinguished
Body.

WHEN this happens to one, whose Conversation has indeared him to us, when we
see his Eyes put on Death, and hear the tolling Bell give public Notice of it,
what Soul can then lose a Thought on the fugitive Joys of Pleasure! What a
Bubble, what a Puff, what a Wink of Life is Man! And with what a general, and
sure, Success, does Death stand over Humane Nature, always striking, here and
there, and exercising an unbounded Triumph!

I HAVE, lately, from such a Sight as This, learnt both Humility and Elevation:
-- The One, to lower my Esteem of a Body, which must, one Day perish in
unlovely Rottenness. -- The other, to Reverence a Soul, which after having
lived here but as a Sojourner, reascends, when its House of Flesh is
demolished, with a Vigor as unrestrained, and an Essence as refined and
glorious, as the un-imbodied, and celestial, Angels!

Mr. PLAIN DEALER,
IF you think these few foregoing Hints of mine worthy to fill up a Corner of
your Paper by incerting them, you will oblige your constant Reader,

AULUS MARTIUS.
Inner Temple, January the 16th, 1724. 25.

THERE are Descriptions in Spencer's Writings, much more bold, and strongly
figured, than those of almost any other Poet, Ancient, or Modern; His Fancy was
quick, penetrating, vast! and his Conceptions so clearly possessed, that he
seems to have embodied his Idea's; and, given us, instead of his Thoughts, the
very Substance of the Things he thought of. -- There is, in his Works, an Image
of DEATH so dreadfully drawn, and painted in such glowing Colors, that (having
got it by Heart, when I was a Boy) it made so lively an Impression on me, that
I never failed for a long time after, to see it, at, my Bed's Foot as soon as
the Candle was carried out of the Room -- and met it, in every Churchyard, I
passed over, after Sunset.

Death, with a Bow, in his Left hand, was seen,
And his long Arrows, slanting from his Side;
All, naked, dangerous, and deadly keen:
With Feathers, in the Blood of Millions died,
Such the fierce Indians in their Quivers, hide!
These be shot, careless; ever, changing Place;
Strait, to what Mark so e're he next him spied:
Nor was there Pow'er in Art, to shun his Case,
Or cure the eternal Wounds, he makes in Human Race,
As pale, and wan, as Ashes, was his Look,
His Body lean, and meagre, as a Rake;
Shrunk was his Skin, like a dry, withered, Root:
Cold to the Touch; and dreary as a Snake!
T^, as the quivering Air, he seemed to shake!
His Dress was Canvas, strained, and girded, tight,
With an uncomely Belt, of twisted Brake,
And, on his Head, he wore a Helmet light,
Made of a Dead Man's Scull, a strange, and ghastly Sight!
The Plain Dealer. No 92.
Nos Numerus sumus --
HOR.
FRIDAY, February 5. 1725.
Mr. PLAIN DEALER,
HUMANITY has instructed me, That he who lets a Secret die with him, from the
Knowledge of which the World might receive Benefit, is an Enemy to the Good of
Mankind, and a Dishonor, and Misfortune, to his Country. -- Physicians may
boast, as they please, of the Virtues of their Simples, I know a Compound,
called Flattery, that is a better Remedy than any of 'em.

I AM one of Those, whom Fortune has the least Kindness in the World for. This,
however, she did for me. -- My Father Dying, while I was a Child, she put it
into my Uncle's Head to take Care of me; and he sent me to the University;
where I have now been (at his Charge) about two Years, and a half. -- I come up
to London, every Christmas, to pass a Month at my Uncle's, who is a Rich
Merchant, in the City; and give him an Account, as he calls it, what I have
learnt, during the other Eleven. His Education has tinctured him with that
infallible Mark of a narrow Spirit, -- The Destroying Half the Merit of his
Purposes, by an ungraceful Manner of Executing them. -- And he has so often,
taken Delight to put me, coarsely, in mind of his Charity, That he robbed me,
even of the Comfort, which He laid out his Money to procure me.

THIS last Christmas, being seized by a violent Fit of the Gout; he was roaring
out, one Day, in Extremity of Pain, and Peevishness: -- He could not, he said,
imagine, how so temperate a Man, as He was, should come by such a Distemper as
the Gout! If he had been a Glutton, or a Drunkard, he should not have wondered
at it! -- But, for a Small-Beer-Drinker! One, who had always been remarkable
for his Self-Denial, to fall under the Torture of such a Disease, as the Gout!
-- It was very hard! -- It was very strange! -- And he could not, for his Part,
tell, how it was to be accounted for.

IT was my Good-Luck, at that Time, to have been newly reading a Collection of
Miscellaneous Poems; and I bethought my self of something, that I met with, in
it, which had pleased me very much; and made an Impression on my Memory. -- I
ran, and fetched the Book, and opening it to the Place, put it into my Uncle's
Hands, and told him, He might there, find the Reason, of that Misfortune, he
had been complaining of. -- He desired me to read it to him, and I did it, as
follows.

"THE Learned Sydenham does not doubt,
"But PROFOUND THOUGHT will bring the Gout:
"And, that, with Back on Couch, we lie,
"Because our Reason soared too high.
"As Cannons, when they mount vast Pitches,
"Are tumbled back upon their Britches.
MY Uncle smiled, and said, 'Twas pretty. He made me read it so often, that he
has got it by Heart: And repeats it Twenty Times a Day, in all Companies, as a
Proof of his Nephew's Ingenuity. He never could abide Poetry: But, is now grown
very fond of it. -- He could not have believed, he says, that there was so much
GOOD REASON in Rhyming. In fine, I am grown a Favorite; and he allows, I have
a great deal of WIT, ever since I proved his Distemper to be the Consequences
of his JUDGMENT, and profound Thinking. -- I could not forbear sending you this
Intelligence, as a Hint, to some of your Readers, who may benefit themselves by
the Example.

I am, SIR, Your most humble Servant, FAVONIUS.


I AM obliged to the Zeal of a Friend unknown, for the following Good Counsel;
which I take very kindly; and give him my Word, (in his own Phrase) That I will
follow it, as far forth as I shall be able.

My FRIEND,
FORASMUCH as Thou art lifted up, as a PLAIN DEALER, among thy Brethren, and
have taken an Office upon thee, which it behooves thee to discharge with
Wisdom, Moderation, and Integrity: Verily, therefore, I am moved to warn thee,
that thou becomest heedful, so far forth as thou shall be able, that thou
neither deridest the Unhappy; nor hold the Meek Man in Scorn. -- When thou
art moved, by the Sharpness of the Wit which works within thee, thou ought
to shoot thy Arrows at the Mighty. -- Yea, at the Men, who pride themselves in
the Strength of the Flesh, and have no feeling of the Spirit, that labors
within them. Take Heed, also, that thou slidest not into Vanity, when thou
hear thy self well spoken off; neither inflamest thy self into Anger, when
thou chancest to be rebuked. -- Verily, Friend, this Great City may be liken'd
unto a Field, which has rank Weeds: If, by thy Writing, thou can root them
forth, and throw them, on a Heap, from among the Wheat, thy Name shall become
Exalted, in the Mouths of the Brethren. -- If thou art, even as thou seem to
be, thou will deliver forth a Reproof, against the Scorn, which light Men, of
thy Persuasion, make of the Habit of us Friends. Thou know, the Corn of the
Field is not so BEAUTIFUL, as the Butter-Flower; neither is the Pomegranate so
alluring to the Eye, as the John-Apple. -- Nevertheless, the Corn of the Field
is more USEFUL, than the Butter-Flower: And the Inside of the Pomegranate more
delicious, than the John-Apple. -- Lo, Thou may make the Application, thy
self.

Thy loving Friend, (And Reader, while thou writest with Prudence) AMINADAB.


Mr. PLAIN-DEALER.
SIR,
AM a plain Man my self; but have, to my Wife, a young Woman, that is so far
from being plain, that she is the likeliest, of our whole Parish. -- She sings,
dances, and talks French; and, in short, has a great Deal of to'ther End of the
Town Breeding in her. But here is an Impudent Young Dog, that comes to my
House, whether I will or no; upon no other Account, truly! but because I have a
handsome Wife! I would have believed him, though he had not told me so; for he
takes very great Liberties with her, before my Face! -- I am informed she came
by him, at the Masquerade. She says, She cannot tell how to get rid of him, -- I
desire, therefore, to know, Whether I ought not to take some Measures with him?
And, in particular, Whether I might not, (with a safe Conscience) swear the
Peace against him? For, without some such Security, I am afraid to forbid him
my House, myself: And if my Wife does it, she says, He will not mind Her. -- Am,
in no small Trouble,

Your Friend to serve you, HEZEKIAH HORNEY.


To his Reverence, (the most Profound, and Impartial) The PLAIN DEALER, for the
Liberties of LONDON.
The Humble PETITION of LUKE THOROUGHSTITCH, Colonel of the City Militia.
SHOWS,
THAT your Petitioner is a freeborn Englishman, and has a Stomach, that loves
Liberty. But, being obliged to eat, (since he left off Housekeeping) among a
Set of She-Tories, he can never dine, without a Restraint, that he takes to be
an Abuse of our happy Constitution; and which was never known, but in a State
of Nature, before Kings were (by mutual Compact) deputed to execute Laws for us.

THAT they persecute him, ever and anon, with Much Good may do you, -- I Am glad
to see you eat so heartily, -- A good Stomach is a Sign of Health, -- and such
like Exorbitant Encroachments. -- And, that, Yesterday, for Example, after he
had eaten, at most, but six Slices, and was, (peaceably, and without Cause of
Offense to any of the Company) preparing to enter upon the Seventh; he saw the
Eyes of the whole Circle, most tyrannically fixed upon him, with an Air of
arbitrary, and unreasonable WONDER; to the manifest Abasement of your
Petitioner's Courage; and the Violation of his UNDOUBTED PRIVILEGE, to eat, as
long as he finds himself hungry.

HE, therefore, most humbly prays, That your Reverence would condescend to take
this Grievance into your Consideration; and acquaint these Invaders of the
Peoples Rights, that there was a Reserve, either expressed, or tacitly implied,
in the ORIGINAL CONTRACT, That every Man should have Property, in his own
Appetite; and eat, and drink, to please himself; and not to humor the Taste of
his Company.

And your Petitioner (as in Duty bound) shall pray, as heartily, as he eats,
etc. LUKE THOROUGHSTITCH.


To the Author of the PLAIN DEALER.
SIR,
I HAVE seen the first Part of a Satire, which is just published, under the
Title of THE UNIVERSAL PASSION. Though the Author's Name is not before it, it is
easily distinguished to be the Work of some considerable Genius. -- And the
Delight which, I observe, you take in Praising whatever has real Merit,
convinces me, That I shall contribute to your own, as well as your Reader's,
Pleasure; by having transcribed a few Verses, from this Satire, which (unless I
greatly deceive deceive myself) carry with them the most shining Marks, of a
Spirit, that is truly poetical. -- Speaking of a Kind of People, called LORDS,
he observes, with a great Deal of Good-Breeding, that the first Place (in his
Satire) is Due to Quality: And accordingly makes Way for them, like a Person,
justly conscious of the Respect which ought to be shown them; I mean the
Generality of them; -- for some are far from deserving the Distinction.

My Lord comes forward, -- Forward let him come!
Ye Vulgar! at your Peril, give him Room:
He stands for Fame, on his Forefather's Feet,
By Heraldry proved valiant, and discreet.
With what becoming Pride he throws his Eyes
Above the Man, by THREE DESCENTS less wise!
For Men, like Figures, pass for high, or base,
Slight, or important, merely by their Place.
If Virtues at his noble Hands you crave,
You bid him raise his Fathers, from the Grave.
Men should press forward, in Fame's glorious Chase,
Nobles look backward; and so, lose the Race.
Since Titles ought to mark the Just, and Wise,
The Knave or Fool, who wears a Title, -- LIES.
I CANNOT forbear following this very agreeable Guide, so far, down Hill, as
'till we meet with a Rural Squire, a Hunting; and in Company with a Pack of
Dogs that run sweetly, and with great Vigor, as well as Harmony!

The Squire is proud, to see his COVRSER strain;
Or well-breathed BEAGLES sweep, along the Plain.
-- Say, dear Hippolitus! -- whose Drink is Ale,
And whose whole Learning is a Christmas Tale!
Whose Mistress is saluted with a Smack;
And Friend received, with Thump upon the Back!
When thy sleek Gelding nimbly leaps the Mound;
And Ringwood opens, over the tainted Ground;
Is That THY Praise? -- Let Ringwood's Fame alone:
Just Ringwood leaves each Rival Beast his own. -- etc.
I shall make no Apology, for having troubled you with so long a Letter,
because Pleasure, the more it is lengthned, is the more welcome to the Receiver.

I am, SIR, Your most humble Servant, GRACCHUS.


The Plain Dealer. No 93.
Somnia, terrores magicos, miracula, sagas,
Nocturnos lemures, portentaque Thessala! --

MONDAY, February 8. 1725.
To the PLAIN DEALER.
Cambridge, January 23, 1725. SIR,
THE only Account I shall give you, with Regard to myself, is, -- That I am a
Fellow of one of the Colleges, in this University; my chief Design in Writing,
bing to strengthen you, with some new Materials for the better Performance of
that Promise, you were once pleased to make us, of proving, that the Women are
a great deal wiser than We are.

MY Father, very lately, sent me down, into the Fens, to make Love to a young
Lady, who is Mistress of a considerable Fortune: Where I discovered, to my no
small Mortification, That All my Learning, hitherto, has taught me Nothing,
that deserves Comparison, with the Universal Knowledge, which I met with, in
that discreet, and profound, Family! -- Not Heaven alone, but Earth, Air, Fire,
Water; Birds, Beasts, Stocks, Stones! -- Every Part of the still, or moving,
mute, or speaking, Creation, has contributed to the Erudition of my more than
accomplished Mistress! -- All Things been laid open, to her, if not in their
Natures, I am sure, I may say, in their Meanings.

IN short, after Three Days unsuccessful Endeavors to fathom my Fate, with
Regard to this infallible Lady, I am come back to my College, almost too humble
to wish for the Possession of a Blessing, so uncommon. -- I saw a female Dwarf,
in my Mistress's Neighborhood, and could not help thinking, while I was
looking on her, and listening to a little History, of her having been served up
in a Goose-Pye, That this Pocket Abridgement of Womanhood might as modestly
pretend to incorporate Herself with one of the Giants, in the King of Prussia's
frightful Regiment, as I, to match my Mind with one, whose Comprehension is, so
vastly, too big for me! --

AT my first coming, I was received, by an old Maiden Aunt, who is Mistress of
the Ceremonies to the Lady I was recommended to; she surpised me with a
Declaration, That she knew of my coming, before she received my Father's
Letter, I said, I thought it had been a Secret: but she assured me. That I had
been hanging, for a whole Week past, upon one of the Bars of the Kitchen
Chimney. -- Not being entirely Enlightened, as to the Authority of this dark
Prognostic, I was preparing to ask a Question, or too; but was scared out of
the Intention, by a melancholy Denunciation, That my Father would not live to
see the Match come to Perfection; for this Good Lady had (the Night before this
Letter was brought to her) seen it coming, in Both her Candles, with a
Winding Sheet just over against it!

I BOWED, with a becoming Sorrow; and received the Prophecy with all that
Reverence which was due to so extraordinary a Reason! This won her to a Warmth
in my Interest; and she would carry me, without Ceremony, to surprise her
Neice, in the Garden, where she was visiting her Orange Trees, in the
Green-House: -- We were got as forward, on this pleasing Journey, as to the
outside of the Garden Door, when some or other of those busy Powers who envy
Lovers their proposed Enjoyments, put it into the Old Lady's Feet, to stumble
over the Threshold! upon which she turned back, in a Fright, and pushed me in
again, with such Care and Kindness, that I can never sufficiently thank her;
since, if I had gone on, (after such an ominous Warning) and met my Mistress,
in an unlucky Minute, All the World, it seems, from that Time forward, could
never have made it possible for me to come near her, in a LUCKY one.

SHE overtook us, however, as soon as we were got back, into the Parlor; and
broke in upon me with such a Flash of Charms, that, as I saluted her, I was
struck dumb with Rapture, out, of which I recovered in Time to over-hear her
tell the Old Lady, as she was passing round her, to a Chair, That it was not I,
that had drawn open her Curtains, when the Bride-Cake was put under her Pillow.
-- I was not, yet, skilful enough to know what Good, or Ill, this boded me:
But, before we were fully seated, a new Misfortune had befallen us. -- My
Clarinda's Chair tumbled backward, upon which she declared to me, with the
prettiest Resignation in the World, That she was not to be LADY-MAYORESS, this
Year; but had Patience to support herself, under all such Disappointments.

BEING now got into perfect Composure, I began to find, that I was looking
silly, -- So I sighed three Times, and informed her, as well as I could, of the
Great Respect my Father had, for the Family; And Clarinda, on her Part, had
opened her Fan, to its full Extent, and was looking down upon it, in the proper
Attitude; and telling the Sticks, with both Fingers, when the Aunt interrupted
me with a Groan, (that had been unluckily mentioned by my naming my Father) and
confirmed her former Remark, of the Winding Sheet, by a Death's Head, she had
found out, in the Fire! -- As Great Misfortunes rarely come single, a malicious
Coal, in the Shape of a Coffin, flew, just then, to Clarinda's Feet; who turned
pale, and took it up, betwixt a Finger, and Thumb, and after throwing it behind
her, over the left Shoulder, corroborated her Aunt's Evidence, by a
Death-Watch, that had kept her waking; -- By the howling of a Dog, all Night
long; -- By a deep Grave that he had scratched up, at the Foot of a Rosemary
Bush, exactly under her Window!

AND, now, their Eyes being turned on Me, as if they expected my Opinion; I
gave it them, very gravely, That these Things had somewhat in 'm! -- and it was
happy for me, that I said no less for an Old Family Servant, with a sober,
mournful, Face, having heard Part of the Discourse, while he was busy about the
Fire, very dismally confirmed our Terrors, by Three Proofs, which were stronger
than all. -- First, by the squeaking of a Weasel, that had met him upon the
Cellar-Stairs; Secondly, by a Hole, that the Rats had gnawed, in the Back of
his best Livery: And, Thirdly, by a strange Dream, that Mrs. Susan, the
Chambermaid, had been almost frighted out of her Wits by, about Wet Clothes,
-- Three Ministers, -- Ripe Fruit, -- and Roses in Blossom! -- After all which,
to put it absolutely out of Doubt, and convince us, That somebody would die
shortly, he showed us on one of his Hands, a dirty yellow Spot, which the
Thumb, of his other (as he shook his Head, and observed to us) was not broad
enough to cover; and this, they all agreed, was no better than a Death-Mould,
and must mean something.

IN the midst of these Miseries, I had very little to say for my self, having
been put out of a premeditated Speech, which I had been inventing during my
whole Journey; but as Good-Luck would have it, the Tea came in, to my Relief;
and the first Dish, that had the Blessing to approach Clarinda's Lips, was so
richly covered with Money-bags, floating in white Circles, all over the
Surface, that Gayety took Place of Melancholy. -- A little Spider too, was so
kind as to spin down Good-Luck, into her Lap, (which, methought, meant me no
Harm) Nay, I became, on a sudden, so happy, that her Elbow declared in my
Favor; and her Aunt put her to the Blush, by observing, she must change her
Bedfellow.

BUT let no Man be too much in Haste, to conclude, that He is happy. -- My
Triumph was dashed at once, by a Discovery That this was Childermas-Day: After
which my Mistress said no more, but that Nothing would come to Good, that was
begun on that worst Day of the Week: So her Teeth ach'd most prodigiously? She
was sorry she could be no Company; and took her Leave of us, till next Morning.

NEXT Morning came; -- and the first Person I met, was Mrs. Susan; whom I
discovered, cross the Hall, spitting seriously in her Hand, and shutting it
close, with a great deal of Caution, for Fear of letting slip (as she
afterward told me) a Sign, she had felt, in her Palm, that a handsome Gift was
very near her. -- I was glad of this favorable Opportunity, to confirm the
Truth of that Token; and she was so obligingly Communicative as to entrust me
with two great Secrets, One, That, I had trod upon her Lady's Toe, last Night,
in the Hurry of waiting on her to the Stair-foot; whence a Conclusion had been
drawn, in my Favor, That I should come, ever long, to her Bedside. -- The
other, that Mrs. Susan having discovered, this very Morning, That one of her
Lady's Stockings had been put on, wrongside outward, was forbid pulling it off
again, for Fear of turning some Good-Luck, that was meant her.

Mrs. SUSAN, in Return for her kind Intelligence, was very Earnest to know,
whether I had dreamt of no Body? -- I told her, I had had the Happiness to be,
all Night, in Her Lady's Company: And I could perceive, that this Information
was no more than had been expected; which led me into some probable Guesses,
concerning the Purpose of a Case-Knife, in a Common Prayer Book, which, when I
got up, in the Morning, I had found, under my Bolster. -- While, I held this
Conference with my Fellow Servants, we had the Pleasure of bidding our Mistress
Goodmorrow, and of hearing (to my no small Comfort) That her Foot, as she came
down Stairs, had given her the Signal, That she was to tread upon strange
Ground.

IN fine, Sir, it is impossible for you to conceive what an infinite Variety of
Notices, Impulses, and Prognostics, outward, and inward, these Ladies direct
their Conduct by. -- In my Three Days stay, (which I thought enough for my
first Visit) I could learn nothing, with any certainty, of what I chiefly
sought to know; but was edified, above Measure, in the Occult Sciences of the
Family. -- My Mistress called after me, when I had taken Horse to come away,
that she was afraid I should have a wet Journey; for Puss was washing her Face,
and carried her Paw above her Ears; which, she assured me, was a Sign, that had
never been known to miscarry. -- Whether she meant this as a Display of her
Art, or of her Inclination to bring me back again, is a Mystery; which,
notwithstanding the great Advance I have made in guessing, I am, yet, unable to
disclose, with any positive Dependence.

BUT, I would not, (for all that) have you think slightly of my Skill in
Tokens; since I could astonish you, if I thought fit, with a Profusion of
portentous Mysteries. -- I am absolutely Master of that oraculous Secret, which
is kneaded up, in the Dumb Cake. I am instructed in the aweful Ceremonies,
which are sacred to the famed Saint Agnes, to the Purity of whose mysterious
Worship Three Fasting Virgins must concur, with so strict an Abstinence, That a
KISS, during those restrictive Rites, would be as Undoing, as a RAPE, after
they are over. I can foretell the most agreeable Things in the World, by Six
Pea-shells over a Door: And anticipate Consequences, which would puzzle a
Southsayer, by turning Three Times round, in my Shirt, and falling into Bed,
backward. -- I know who will die, an Old Maid, by the Help of a Gray Goose
Wing, a Clean Hearth, and a Seive full of Ashes!

BUT I should never have done, were I I to let you into the Virtues of Roses
gathered on Midsummer Night -- of Hempseed, sown, and mow'n, in the Dark, upon
the Graves of a Country Churchyard -- of patching a pretty Face with
Apple-Kernels -- of Cutting the Nails, fasting -- of twisting a Garter, in Nine
Knots, round a Bed-Post -- of a Certain Hair, that you may find in your Shoe
the first Time you hear the Cuckoo -- and a Thousand other deep Discoveries,
which I have made, in this delightful Journey: And, which have put me quite out
of Conceit with my former Studies; since, after having labored to be wise, so
many Years, in a College, I found my self, (notwithstanding) little better than
a Fool, as often as I came into my Mistress's Company.

PRAY, Sir, favor me with your Opinion, how far I may prudently venture my
self, with a Lady, so much wiser than I am. Your Advice will have its weight,
with

Your humble Servant, AEMILIUS.


The Plain Dealer. No 94.
-- Non quicquid turbida Roma
Elevet, accedas --
PERS.
FRIDAY, February 12. 1725.
WE had once a Species of Opera, called Dramatic, in which the Dignity of
Reason was not sacrificed, as it is now, to the Dissoluteness of Sound; but the
Force of Words and Meaning, was increased by Music, and Decoration, and
impressed upon the Soul, by the Mediation of the Senses.

I HAVE heard, with a Pleasure, which, I hope, was not groundless, That there
is a Design on foot, in one of our Theaters, to restore these manly, as well as
delightful, Entertainments, with an Elegance, and Magnificence of Ornament,
which we have not yet been accustomed to. -- The Success, which Dioclesian has
met with (an Opera, of this Kind, but far short of the Perfection, which I am
told it is proposed to raise to them to) will serve, it is to be hoped, as an
Encouragement, to keep the Gentleman, who is Patentee of that Theater, firm and
vigorous, in his Intention. -- His Genius is admirably turned to those
Embellishments of Show and Scenary, which will always have a surprising, and
powerful Effect, on the Stage; but most where they are aptly, and
significantly, introduced: -- And, there are not wanting Writers, who can
contribute Subject, and Occasion, whereon to exhaust, in the most rational, as
well as agreeable Manner, the sprightly Copiousness of his Invention. So that I
am almost led to flatter my self, That our emasculating present Taste, of the
Italian Luxury, and Wantonness of Music, will give way to a more Passionate,
and animated Kind of Opera, where not only the Eye and Ear may expect to be
charmed, but the Heart to be touched and transported.

IT will be received as the Effect of Spleen, or Affectation, to insinuate,
That the Martial Spirit of our Nation, is effeminated, and gradually relaxed,
by the Influence of this softening Siren: And yet Cicero (who was at least as
good a Judge as most of the Members of our ROYAL ACADEMY for Encouragement of
TRIFLING) has not scrupled to say plainly, (in his Tract de Legibus) -- That
the Good or Evil, in a State, depends greatly on the MUSIC, that is most
encouraged in it: For, if it be too Light, and Wanton, the People are
insensibly rendered foolish, and disorderly; and, on the contrary, if it be
Grave and Masculine, they become modest, by its Influence.

THE Spartan Plainness and Austerity, have been celebrated in every Age: And
Histories are full of Instances of that Wise People's Rigor, against
Innovation, in Particulars which seemed to threaten them (at what Distance
soever) with the modish Luxuries of their Neighbors: But the strongest
Impression which was ever made upon me in their Favor, was from the Decree
they passed against Timotheus, the Milesian, for an Improvement he had
introduced in Music, much like the admired Concerto's of our Italian
Benefactors. But these Grave Men of Foresight, discerned the Consequences of
such pretended Refinements, and provided against it, by this timely Edict, with
Lylius Gyraldus has inserted, as he transcribed it, from Boethius.

FORASMUCH as Timotheus, the Milesian, (received into our City) holding in
Contempt the ancient Music, and rejecting the Harp with Seven Strings, has
introduced an Harmony of many Voices, corrupting the Ears of our Youth, by a
Multiplicity of Strings, and a Music hitherto unknown, Dividing the Simple
Notes, into a Variety of Feints and Quaverings, We do therefore Ordain, That he
shall be impeached, and that his superfluous Strings shall be broken: To the
End, that Strangers, from his Example, may be wary of bringing among Spartans,
the light, and unmanly, Amusements, which are practiced, in less modest
Countries. WHEN I reflect on the Power of Music, as it was practiced among the
Ancients, and consider the miraculous Instances of its Effects, on the Passions
of some Princes, who were most inflexible in their Resolutions: And, when, at
the same Time, I consider, That the Music, which had this prodigious
Influence, was the Reverse (as I shall presently prove) of That, which now
prevails in Europe, and which produces none of those transporting Effects, What
less can I conclude, than that All our boasted Additions to this heavenly Art,
are rather Enlargements than Improvements: -- There is a little Piece, of
Randolph's; which, of all his Poems, I am most pleased with; and which gives
us, as it were in Miniature, the whole, that can be said, of Music!

Music! Thou Queen of Souls; -- Arise, and string
Thy powerful Lute; and some sad Requiem sing:
'Till Rocks re murmur an awakened Groan,
And listening Tempests catch the mournful Tone!
Then, on a sudden, with excursive Hand,
Fly over the sounding Chords, with Light command:
'Till Oaks, and struggling Elms, uprooted, bound;
And a charmed Forest lives, and dances, round!
Then, -- in the midst of the transporting Strain,
Strike a sad Note, -- and fix 'em Trees again.
I SAID, above, That the strange Effects, reported of Music in former Times,
were the Influence of a Practice, very different from the modern; and I cannot
more effectually strengthen that Assertion, than by observing I am confirmed in
it, by the Opinion of Dr. Wallis, communicated, on this Subject, to the Royal
Society.

THE Music of the Ancients was more extensive than ours: For Poetry and
Dancing (or measured Motion) were then accounted Parts of Music. -- Now, we
know, that Verse, if harmonious, and passionate, set to a plain Tune, and sung
by a natural Voice, with some soft Instrumental Music, such as not drowns, or
obscures, but heightens the Emphatick Expressions; will work strangely upon the
Ear, and move all our Passions, in Proportion to the Tune and Subject; but
especially, if attended with suitable Gesture and Action. For, it is evident, on
the Stage, that proper Acting gives great Life to Words. Now, all this
together, (which made up the Ancient Music) must needs operate strongly on the
Fancy and Affections. -- For, if the deliberate Reading of a Romance (if it
happens to be well penned) will produce Mirth, Tears, Pity, Anger, Indignation,
according to the respective Intents of it, much more would it do so, if
accompined with all those powerful Assistants.

WHY may not all This be now done, as well as then? -- No Doubt it may, and
with equal Effect too, if the Words were but elegantly adapted to the Argument,
and disposed in Places, proper for their Emphasis, pronounced with a tuneful
Voice, and inlivened by expressive Gesture, painting naturally the Passion, or
Condition, of the Mind; and graphically delineating, as it were, to the Eye (as
well as addressing to the Ear) the Bounds, Distinctions, and peculiar
Attributes, of Joy, Grief, Wonder, Fury, Jealousy, Compassion, Fear, Love,
Hatred, and the rest of those Emotions, which the acted Mind is subject to. --
This would, as certainly now, as then, produce extraordinary Effects; and
especially upon a Surprise, where Persons are not prejudiced, or pre-engag'd;
and, so lie open to the meant Impressions.

OUR modern Music is no more than what the Ancients called Harmonick, which
was but one Part of Theirs, whose Music, as I said above, consisted of Words,
Verse, Voice, Tune, Instrument, and Action. -- A very powerful Combination! --
And can we expect, from One Piece, the same Influence, as from the Whole? --
The Design of Music, among Us, seems to aim at exciting no particular Passion;
but, in general, to please the Ear; and, by a tuneful Intermixture of different
Voices and Parts, with Cadencies and Concords, produce an elegant Sound, which
only those Persons can discern, who have distinguishing Judgment in Music;
while That much larger Part of the Audience, which consists of Those who have a
rude, and uncultivated Ear, remains only amused, and confounded, with a great
Noise, which has Nothing distinguishable to their Capacity.

IT IS true, indeed, that even this Compound Music admits of Characters, very
different: Some are brisk, elate and airy; some sedate and grave; others soft,
resigned and languid: -- But, still, That kind of Harmony which is most
powerful to excite particular Passions, or Dispositions, in the Mind, is the
simple, natural, and uncompounded. -- How often have I been forced to go abroad
when I had no mind to it, or fall asleep, in the middle of the Day, by a
Nurse's languid Tune, lulling her Babe to rest, in a Room, within my hearing!
-- Nay, continual Reading in an even Tone, -- the soft Murmur of a pebbly
Brook, -- the falling of Rain upon Trees, -- shall have an irresistible Power
to induce a Repose upon the Spirits. -- And, on the contrary, an derman who is
lame of the Gout, shall feel himself grow light, and wanton, at the briskness
of a Jig, on a Kit, or Violin, exciting a Disposition to dance, that is almost
too hard for his Pain and Gravity. -- Nothing is plainer, therefore, than that
simple Harmony is more operative on the Affections, than an elaborate
Composition of Full Music.

SO that, if it is the Aim of Music to please the Ear, the Compositions of
Italian Masters may deserve to be preferred, as forming sweeter Consorts than
were known to the Ancients; among whom I find no Footsteps of what we call
several Parts or Voices (such as Base, Treble, Mean, etc. sung in Consort)
answering each other, to diversify, and fill up, the Music. -- But, if we
mean, by Music, to excite Passion, and, move the Heart, to any moral, or solid
Purpose, we must apply a more touching Simplicity, and endeavor to act upon
Nature, in a more natural, and unaffected Manner. And This, I doubt not, a
judicious Composer may so happily effect, that (allowing for those Hyperboles,
with which the Ancient Writers set off their Music) our Modern may be found
capable of producing as extraordinary Effects as theirs. -- And, This,
methinks, is a Mine of Pleasure, yet unopen'd, and may deserve to be thought
on, with some Attention, by Those, whose Profit would be the certain
Consequence of introducing a Novelty, so powerfully attractive. But I shall say
more, concerning these Things, upon some future Occasion.

The Plain Dealer. No 95
O Imitatores, servum pecus!
HOR. -- veteres -- miratur, laudatque poetas --
Idem.
MONDAY, February 15. 1725.
To the PLAIN-DEALER.
SIR,
THERE is a dishonorable Kind of Practice, among the Men, who style themselves
the Wits, which I can no longer forbear complaining against, as an Abuse that
deserves the Notice, and Correction, of a PLAIN DEALER. -- You must needs have
observed, that our Poets are, like our Politicians, divided into opposite
Parties; and draw their Pens, with great Sharpness, to the Defiance of each
other's Muses. -- Among these Warriors, (on both Sides) there are a turbulent
Set of People, not Soldiers, but Engineers, who are known by the Name of
Cannon-Turners: They never trouble themselves to provide Wit, of their own, but
are sure, by some Stratagem, to steal That, of their Enemies; and apply it to a
Purpose, the Reverse of what it was intended for. -- The only Difficulty, they
are at, is to substitute the Word TORY, in the Place of the Monosyllable, WHIG,
without Detriment to the Measure of the Verse; or to crowd the unpliable
Stubbornness of PRESBYTERIAN, into the passive Compass of JACOBITE: For, when
these little Difficulties are once happily adjusted, they have turned the
Malice of their Adversary's Meaning directly against Themselves; and by
killing, with this good Husbandry, save the Expense of Artillery.

BUT it were well, Mr. PLAIN DEALER, if these Cannon-Turners would confine the
Exercise of their invertive Talents to our private, and Domestic, Factions; --
On the contrary, They are never so active, as when we are at War with any of
our Neighbors. The French, in particular, have been very great Sufferers by
them; and have complained, That these Cannon-Turners are the only unfair
Fighters, that this Nation ever sent against them.

I SHALL better clear to your Apprehension, what Justice there may be in their
Complaint, by producing one Example, of many, where the Wit, of their own
Magazines, has been purloin'd, in a most unsoldierly Manner, and discharged
upon them, to their no small Damage.

MONSIEUR Maynard, a French Writer, in the Time of Cardinal Richlieu's
Administration, found himself forgotten, or neglected, (having been a
Favorite, in the former Reign) though this great Cardinal was nobly liberal, in
the Encouragement, which he gave to Men of Merit: Monsieur Maynard had a
Spirit, too exalted to importune, with personal Addresses, a Minister, whose
Levees were so over-crowded; and to whom he was no otherwise known, than by the
Fame of his Writings. He, therefore, sent him, (in the following Verses) a
Memorial, so full of Praise, without Flattery; -- Satyr, without Malice, -- and
Submission, without Meanness; that I have never met with a Mixture of so artful
a Wit, with so delicate a Severity; and it was impossible for it not to have
produced the Effect, which was expected from it, even though it had been
addressed to a Chief Minister, by many Degrees, duller than Cardinal Richlieu.

I.
Sick of a Life, possessed in vain,
I soon shall wait upon the Ghost
Of our late Monarch, in whose Reign
None, who had Merit, missed a Post:
II.
Then will I charm him with your Name,
And all your glorious Wonders done!
The Power of FRANCE! -- The SPANIARD's Shame!
The rising Honors of His SON!
III.
Grateful, the Royal Shade will smile,
And dwell, delighted, on your Name:
Sweetly appeased, his Griefs beguile,
And drown Old Losses, in New Fame.
IV.
But, when he asks me, in what Post
I did your wished Commands obey;
And how I shared your Favor most?
-- What would you please to have me say?
BUT now Sir, almost a Century after the Death of both Poet, and Patron, comes
a famous English Cannon-Turner, or Abettor of Cannon-Turners, named Bernard
Lintot; and, from a Magazine, called A Miscellany, discharges all this Wit
against the Honor of it is Author's Country. -- The first Part, being general,
it will be needless to trouble you with it; but the Three last Stanza's run in
this Manner.

IV.
The Warrior Ghosts will round me come,
To hear of Famed Ramillia's Fight;
While the vexed Bourbons, through the Gloom,
Retire, to inmost Realms of Night.
V.
Then, I, my Lord, will tell, how you
With Pensions every Muse inspire,
Who Marlbro's Conquests did pursue,
And to his Trumpets tuned the Lyre.
VI.
But, should some drolling Sprite demand,
Well, Sir! -- What Place had you, I pray?
How like a Coxcomb should I stand,
What would your Lordship have me say?
I SHALL take up none of your Time, with Observations on the Lower Turn, and
more ungenteel Spirit, with which the Application of this borrowed Wit is made;
which, in the Original, is so nobly graceful! All I would say farther, on the
Subject, is, That since he, who makes bold with another Man's Money, will
naturally be supposed to have had none, of his own, I am in Pain, upon these
Occasions, least, when the French Wits observe the Freedom we have taken with
Their Property, they should conclude us All to be Poor, rather than some of us
Ungenerous.

I am, SIR, Your very humble Servant, FRANCIS FAIRPLAY.


To the AUTHOR of the PLAIN DEALER.
Mr. PLAIN DEALER,
I HAVE seen with a great deal of Pleasure some Excellent Specimens of the
ancient Hebrew Poetry distinguished in your Paper, with the Applause which is
so justly due to them: For every Body, who weighs these Things with Judgment,
must agree with a late Writer, That there is nothing, so soft, so tender, and
pathetick; and, at the same Time, nothing so grand, so majestic, so terrible,
and so harmonious, as the Poetic Part of the BIBLE.

I SEND you one of their Lyrick Odes (which is the Song of Moses, on the
Overthrow of the Egyptians, in the Red Sea) and I believe it will be readily
allowed, That there is more of the Sublime in this Hebrew Ode, than can be
found among the Writings of any Greek, or Roman Poet.


Temples, and Altars, let us raise;
Our Father's God is Ours, and claims our Praise.
God is our Strength. -- Be then that God our Theme;
At length, proud Pharaoh wakes, from his long Dream!
Wakes -- and feels a Warriour's Hand,
Who boasts a Power, more vast than His; and lords it over His Land!
In vain the following Foes our God defied,
Their rapid Wheels in vain tore up the Strand:
In vain they mocked the waving Wand.
Not all their Strength could the fierce Sea withstand,
The watery World flowed fearless over their Pride:
The drowning Army beat the involving Tide:
On Sea-wash'd Chariots, half sustained, the trembling Captains ride!
The uplifted Horses paw their Liquid Way!
And, round 'em, over the foaming Flood, the floating Legions lay.
There, while they vainly felt for Sands below,
For Sands, where watery Mountains flow;
Sinking, like Rocks, they choke the Deep with Prey;
High-covering, rose the briny Surge, and swept their Rage away!
Thy glorious Hand, O God! was forceful, here,
Thy Power protects us, and forbids our Fear:
Threatening aloud, the thundering Legions rose,
And, at thy Chosen, shook the extended Spear;
Behind, amazed, we saw the o'ertaking Foes!
And felt our Hearts anticipate their Blows,
But, while the Blast of cold Despair blew keen,
Safety, from Heaven, shot down between:
Dreadful in Wrath, thy lifted Arm but shone,
And all the un-number'd Thousands melt away;
Consumed like Stubble, when broad Fires roll on,
And sweep the blazing Fields, with crackly sway.
The Almighty 's Voice but spoke a loud Command,
And, strait, the unlinking Surges, backward, rise!
Reluctant Waves in quivering Mountains stand,
And hang their billowy Horrors in the Skies!
With murmuring Climb, the obedient Deep yawns wide,
And, shadowing, lowers aloft, from either Side!
Down, through the horrid Road's dark Concave, led,
Safe, over the emerging Vale, bold Israel trod:
Refreshful Pools, in their cool passage spread,
Sprinkled their Feet, rock-fester'd and unshod:
And Israel, rescued, smiled again, and felt her Guardian God.
See, from the Mountains, cried the unwary Foe,
Twixt the dividing Waves the Cowards go!
Their Sorcerer cleaves the Sea, with magic Skill,
Follow, for Vengeance; and overtake, and kill,
-- The raging Host obey the mad Command:
The shouting swarms, descending, hide the Strand!
Wheel within Wheel, the Chariots, locked, gore wide the encumbered Sand,
Mixed Horse and Foot, in glittering Squares descend;
And, in broad Pomp, their waving War extend.
The Oose, new-peopled groans beneath their Weight:
And the Deep sickens at the unusual State!
But hark! -- The rolling Thunder gives Command!
Disperse, ye Waves, your watery Ranks disband.
Down, the hoarse-sounding Sea, let loose, pours dark, from either Hand
Hills, over Hills, devour the vanished Sand!
Together, the encountering Uproar flys:
And battling Waves in mixing Mountains rise.
Helpless, -- Engulph'd, the Egyptian Squadrons roll;
With vain Resistance would the Deep control:
Mixed, in the covering Spray, a while they strive,
Then like sunk Plummets, to the Bottom dive!
Of all the Gods, what God, like ours is found?
So Just! and for such dreadful Power renowned!
The Plain Dealer. No 96.
-- Cum vini vis penetravit
Consequitur Gravitas Membrorum, praepediuntur
Crura vacillanti, tardescit lingua, madet men's,
Nant Oculi, clamor, singultus, jurgia gliscunt.
LUCRET.
FRIDAY, February 19. 1725.
THE following Letter, from the same learned and ingenious Hand, to which I am
indebted for that which was published in a former Paper (No. 60) concerning the
Difference observable in Point of Fortune, between the Professors of Poetry,
and of Painting, contains so useful a Lesson, against a Folly, that is become
too common among us, That no Subject could be more seasonable, or stand more in
need of a PLAIN DEALER. The Letter, in its Original, was directed to a
particular Friend of the Writer's: But Produced an Effect which renders it
deserving, of a more Extensive and Public Notice.

SIR,
I SHALL now according to my Promise, which I made you on the Seventh of this
Instant, and which I hope came to your Hands, give you some Account of the
strange Ravage which is made by Excessive Drinking, in the Bodies and Minds,
and Affairs of those who are addicted to that Barbarous Vice.

NATURE has contrived it so, That all her Children, as long as they retain
their Reason, are fond of Life, and at the same Time, they all believe that
Life it self of which they are so fond, is a grievous Burden, without the
Benefit of Health; but though all Men are satisfied of the unspeakable Value of
Health, yet few are frugal Managers of it: But the Drinking Part of Mankind are
as Prodigal of it, as the Squanderer is of Money: For no Vice whatever does so
much Harm to the Body, or lays the Foundation of so many Diseases, as Excessive
Drinking, Gout, Stone, Cholick, Fevers, Consumptions, Vapors, Asthma's, with a
long et caetera.

A CERTAIN Friend of Ours, whom we love very well, has drunk himself into no
less than Three of them, viz. Gout, Asthma, and Vapors; and yet he goes on in
his old Course, as if the Juice of the Grape, like that of the Scor^on, could
expel the Venom which before it infused; but here I think my self obliged to
declare, that I mean, by excessive Drinking, a constant, daily, or frequent
Drinking, to a greater Quantity than is sufficient to cherish Nature.

ALL the rest of the Vices together, are not so often punished by sudden Death
as excessive Drinking alone is, which sometimes happens by the Malignity of the
Vice it self, oppressing and stifling Nature, and sometimes by the fatal
Accidents which attend upon it as false Quarrels, etc.

OUR Friend whom I mentioned above, has no less than Twice, to my Knowledge,
very narrowly escaped sudden Death, which had like to have happened both Times,
by Excessive Drinking, once formerly in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, and another Time
lately at S -- Now, as a Death that gives no Time for Repentance, ought to be
looked upon as the greatest of all Punishments, Excessive Drinking, ought to be
regarded as the greatest of all Vices, because we ought to believe, That Divine
Justice has proportioned Punishments to the Crimes for which they are
inflicted; and because there is no Vice, by which he who uses it, so
immediately Defaces or so totally Destroys, in himself, the Image of God, which
is Reason, I hope that upon reading this, you will have the Goodness to
admonish our Friend, who has so narrowly escaped twice, to beware of a third
Time.

AS the State of the Mind depends upon that of the Body, and the Motions of
that Particle of Heavenly Fire, upon the Motions of the animal Spirits, which
in time of Health, move Vigorously, and Regularly; and Weakly, and Irregularly,
in time of Sickness; it must necessarily be, that That Vice which is the
Occasion of most Diseases in the Body, must be likewise the Cause of most
Disorders in the Mind. And there is no Vice that is so great an Enemy to the
Understanding as excessive Drinking, or that so often entirely Overturns it.
Indeed, Drinking to Excess while the Fit continues, sometimes strengthens the
Imagination; but, by the same Degrees by which it raises the Imagination, it
Depresses the Judgment, the former of which is common to us with Beasts, and
the latter with God and Angels. But then the Day after Drinking, the very
Imagination languishes with the Judgment. And Drinking to Excess never fails,
in time, to Quench the Imagination, to impair the Memory, and to drown the
Judgment.

I DESIRE that you would admonish one of our Friend's Capacity to take Notice,
That Bacchus is often a great Leveller, that he levels the Understandings of
Wise Men and Fools, of the Blockhead, and the Man of Sense; and that therefore,
as it is the Interest of Fools to carry on this Vice, it is the Interest of Men
of Sense to avoid it.

I DESIRE that you would likewise put Him in mind that the same Drunken Deity
is often worse than a Leveller; that he is often a Subverter of the Order of
Things, and pulls down the Rich, and exalts the Poor; that is, he gives
Understanding to Fools, and makes Men of Sense Madmen. For Fools having
generally stronger Nerves and less volatile Spirits, than Men of great
Understandings, or of Beautiful Imaginations, the same Quantity of Spiritous
Liquor that will set Fire to the Phlegm of Fools and by that Means rouse their
Capacities, will make Men of Sense either stupid or frantic.

AS there is no Vice, which more impairs the Understanding and weakens the
Reason, there is none which more inflames the Passions, and disorders the Will.
Several other Vices are Solitary, and each of them shuns the Company of the
rest; but excessive Drinking is attended with the very worst of them, that is,
with those which have the directest Tendency to the Misery and Destruction of
Men; as Gaming, Quarrels, Riots, Murders, etc.

MOST other Vices are compatible with several Virtues, but Drunkenness runs
Counter to all the Duties of Life: A great Drinker, is, for the most part,
neither a good Husband, nor a good Father, nor a good Son, nor a good Brother,
nor a good Friend.

BUT it is not Virtue only that Detests Drunkenness; it is often abhorred even by
Vice it self, as by Avarice, Hypocrisy, Ambition, Bigottry and Lust. As this
unnatural Sin of Drinking is attended with several that bring Misery and
Destruction on those who use them, as has been said above; it is often shunned
by that Human, Natural Vice, which tends to the Propagation of Mankind, as much
as it is by Virtue. For there is nothing so Inconsistent or Incompatible with
excessive Drinking, as the Cleanness, Elegance, and Delicacy, of a Courtly
Gallantry.

AS the Right Management of Human Affairs, requires Health of Body, and Vigor,
and Serenity of Mind, we ought not to wonder, if a Vice that breaks the Rest in
him, impairs the Understanding, destroys the Memory, inflames the Passions, and
debauches the Will, entirely unqualifies a Man for doing what the World calls
Business. And therefore hard Drinking has ruined more English Families, than
all the rest of our Vices, put together; not by the immediate Expense which
attends upon the Vice, but by altering the very Natures of the Heads of
Families who use it, and making them unfit for the Management of their Affairs,
of which they were very capable before: For other Vices, indeed make Men worse,
but a Habitude of excessive Drinking often alters Men, to that Degree, That
they become the very Reverse of what they were before, and differ more from
their former Selves, than from their present Companions. Such a Habit, when it
has been long contracted, has often made the Ambitious indolent, the Prudent
inconsiderate, the Active idle, and the Industrious slothful and negligent: So
that their Affairs are ruined for Want of Application, or, by being entrusted
in the Hands of those, who turn them wholly to their own Advantage, and to the
Ruin of those who employ them.

AS Personal Vices are the Cause of private Calamities, so National Vices are
the Grounds of National Sufferings. And as no Vice does more Harm to particular
Constitutions, than frequent Drinking to Excess, or lays the Foundation of more
Diseases, and of more ill Humors, in them; there is none of our public Vices,
which does more Harm to our National Constitution, or occasions more Corruption
in it than this pernicious Habitude. And as this Custom in particular Persons
causes them to neglect their private Affairs, and either to leave them wholly
undone, or to leave them to be done by those, who will make their proper
Advantage of them, though to the Ruin of those who entrusted them, as has been
said above; the same Thing is not unlike to happen to this Drinking Nation.

TO be satisfied of this, if we may judge of the Future by the Past, we need
only cast an Eye back upon our Elections, in which Thousands of Englishmen (as
far as in them lay) have sold their own Liberties, and the Liberty of their
Country, for Liquors. Esau sold his Birthright for a Mess of Pottage; but then
He sold only his own Birthright, and he sold it to his Brother; and he sold it
to support Nature, in the Extremity of Hunger. But Thousands of our Electors,
have sold, (as far as in them lay) not only their own Birthrights, their own
Liberties, but the Liberties and Birthrights of their Brethren, for nauseous
Loads to oppress, and destroy Nature. I know, indeed, very well, that upon
those Occasions, in order to corrupt People, there is a little of the Solid
made Use of sometimes, as well as a great deal of the Liquid. But I have a
better Opinion of some of my Countrymen, than to believe, That they would sell
their Wives, their Children, and all their Posterity, for a Song, if, at the
Time when They did it, They were cool enough to consider, What it is they are
about.

THUS, my dear Friend, have I endeavored to show the Mischief, which excessive
Drinking does to particular Persons, in their Bodies, Minds, and Affairs. I
should say something of the unreasonable Apologies which the Disciples of
BACCHUS make, for themselves: But, having run into more Length than I first
intended, I shall defer what I had to say farther, 'till I have heard how you
relish what I have already writ.

I am, etc.
London, September 15, 1724.

The Plain Dealer. No 97.
-- Modo Vir, modo Foemina.
VIRG.
MONDAY, February 22. 1725.
SIR,
AS I have taken Notice, in the Course of your Plain Dealing, That you are
perfectly appriz'd of the General Disposition among Those, whom we call People
of Quality, to patronize, and distinguish, Merit, I flatter my self that you
will contribute what Assistance may be in your Power, to the Encouragement of a
Work, I am at present engaged in; and which the World may expect to see
published, very speedily. -- I intend, in short, To compile a HISTORY of
DEDICATIONS; containing a particular Account of all Addresses, of That Kind,
which have been made to the Noble Patrons of the present Age: Whether Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Simple Barons, or under what Name or Title,
soever known, and distinguished: Together with certain Edifying Remarks, upon
their graceful Manner of Receiving, and judicious Liberality in Rewarding, such
Addressers! From which a reasonable Judgment may be formed, concerning the
unusal Encouragement, Polite Learning is like to meet with, throughout the
Course of the present Generation.

GREAT Numbers have already sent me in Memoirs of their own particular
Experience: And I doubt not in the least, but that I shall be able to compose a
Volume, which will not only do Justice to the very extraordinary Times we live
in, but astonish, and inflame Posterity. -- If you, Mr. PLAIN DEALER, or any of
your Friends have wherewithal to oblige the World, on so illustrious an
Occasion, be communicative, for the Honor of your Country, and confirm me,
still more,

Your Friend, And constant Reader, HUMPRHY PICKTHANK.


I MUST be plain, with my industrious Correspondent, Mr. Pickthank, and let him
know, without Ceremony, or Circumlocution, That I have an irreconcileabe
Quarrel to the Subject of his History: And shall contribute no Memoirs, to its
Ornament. -- If he is desirous to know my Reason, I shall give it him in the
Words of a merry Friend of mine, who took Occasion, some few Years since, to
dedicate, to a Great Man, his Thoughts concerning Dedications.

YOUR Dedicators, says this Wag, are a sort of intellectual Tailors, that cut
out Clothes for a Great Man's Mind, without ever taking Measure of it. -- They
have but Two Rules, and Those they never depart from: First, The Dress must be
Gaudy: And, Secondly, It must never Fit. But they must make it of a vast
Dimension, and cover it all over with Tinsel. METHINKS I should congratulate
the Men of Quality, on this Advantage, which it must, of Necessity be, to them,
to have their Characters drawn only by such as do not, or dare not, know them:
And will, consequently, be sure not to put their Graces, their Lordships, and
their Ladyships, out of Countenance. A convenient Piece of Good Breeding! For
which I hope, They are thankful.

AS for my self, when I see a long Drift of Excellencies and Talents, crammed
down the Throat of an Innocent Nobleman, who has done nothing to deserve such
Ill Usage, I am not at all surpised at it, Because I am assured it is not
meant to the Disadvantage of the Person of Honor it is addressed to, but is a
mere Declaration of the Author's Wants, and a heavy Complaint, against Hunger,
and Nakedness.

THE only Dedications, therefore, which I am for encouraging, are Those, which
may instruct the Receiver, that he is to consider them as Bills of Exchange,
drawn by the Witty upon the Great, and payable at Sight. -- And, least the
Offering should be misunderstood, or not recompensed, as it ought to be,
through the deplorable Ignorance of some People, whose high Quality has placed
them above the Reach of Knowledge, and the Impulses of Humanity, I have, for
the Benefit of my worthy Companions, in the Labors of the Standish, drawn up a
Form, which I would have annexed to all future Dedications, where the Fortune
is, in any considerable Degree, more Elevated, than the Understanding.

The Right Honorable Dives, Earl of Widefield Debtor, To Paul Poorwit, for the
following Goods, Sold and Delivered.
l. s. d. Imprimis, FOR a large Stock of Learning very much wanted. 02 10 00
Item -- For a Bail of powerful Eloquence, admired by all the World, but never
yet used 05 00 00 Item -- For as much Honor and Justice as a Great Man has
Occasion for 00 00 01 Item -- For a Hogshead of Courage not at all the worse
for using 10 00 00 Item -- For a Pound of Wit, and Humor 01 00 00 Item -- For
a long Line of Lineage, Dog Cheap, and not a Farthing a Yard, by Measure 05 00
00 Item -- For praising your Lord's Ancestors, unknown 1 10 00 Item -- For
admiring your Lady's Beauty, unseen 00 10 00 Item -- For a Graceful Person,
entirely of my own making 02 10 00 Item -- For a Nail of a Yard of Generosity
00 02 05 Sum Total 28 02 06

My LORD,
I HAVE sent you the Goods abovementioned; being the Best, my Warehouse
affords, and at the very lowest Prices. -- I hope they will please you. You
will find, in the large, several Parcels, which I have not Item'd: Which will
raise the whole Value to, at least, even Thirty Pounds; and I have drawn a Bill
upon your Lordship, accordingly, which I hope you will pay at Sight. -- I might
have found Chapmen for these Goods, among others of the Quality, as unprovided
as your Lordship: But out of pure Respect, I was resolved, you should have the
Refusal.

I am, My LORD, Your Lordship's most obliged, Most obedient, most devoted,
Most, etc. PAUL POORWIT.


IN this plain Manner, says my ingenious Friend, and old Acquaintance, would I
have Authors treat their Patrons. The said Thirty Pounds may, probably, be the
Poet's whole Stock; and Wits dealing the least upon Credit, either in buying,
or selling, of any Trading People in the World, have the more Occasion for
Ready Money.

A LITTLE Reflection on the foregoing Particulars, will convince the laborious
Mr. Pickthank, that nothing is more unreasonable than his Expectation of my
Assistance, toward setting forth a History of such Dedications, as I can, by
no means, approve the Examples of: But am desirous to see suppressed in Favor
of a Juster Method, which I have therefore recommended.

To the Gentleman that writes the PLAIN DEALER.
SIR,
I AM a young Woman, just turned of Fourteen; and my Father is a Doctor of
Physic. But he loves Poetry mightily: And we have a great many Wits come often
to dine with us. For my Part, I have no great Skill, yet, what Difference there
may be between one sort of Men and another: But I listen, when any of these
Wits are talking with my Father, because he says, They can teach me Things,
That I shall be the wiser for, as long as I live.

ONE of the prettiest of them all, was reading to us, yesterday, some ingenious
Copies of Verses, out of a Book of Poems, that is just come out; and I think he
told us, it was writ by a Gentleman whose Name is Baker. -- They were
particularly delighted with one little Poem, among the Rest, at which They all
laughed, as if they were mad: And said, it was one of the Cleanest Turns They
had met with: And my Father could not rest, till he had taken a Copy of it.

I OBSERVED, that my Mother, and my Eldest Sister, blushed, while they were
laughing at it: But I (though I stole it out of my Father's Pocket, the same
Night, and have read it, over and over, till I have got it by Heart) can make
nothing of it, and am vexed, because I want Understanding to find out the
Meaning of something that my Sister (who is but three Years older) pretended to
look learnedly at, as if she knew, forsooth! as much of the Matter as Anybody.

I AM ashamed to ask Questions about it at home, for Fear of being found out to
be Sillier than I should be at my Years. -- And, therefore, I bethought my self
to beg the Favor of you, to show where the Cleanness of That Turn lies, that
my Father, and his Wits, were so highly diverted with. -- I know a Place where
they take in your Paper, and where I shall see your Answer, without any Body's
knowing that it was I, who writ to you about it. -- I never writ to a Man
before, but my Father, and therefore pray don't wonder at any Ignorance, or
Mistake, in

Good SIR, Your Admirer, and humble Servant, NOVINDA.
The FEATHER.
IN his Forimel's Arms, as if quite out of B^eath,
I Will kiss thee, my Charmer! I Will kiss thee, to Death!
Cried Thirsis, in Raptures -- But, soon on her Breast,
He sunk down his Head, and composed him to Rest!
Not long had they lain, thus unactive together,
E're the Wanton plucked out, from the Bolster, a Feather:
And, grasping him hard, 'till he opened his Eyes,
In a Tone of Derision, the witty One cries; --
To prevent being killed, in the Manner you said.
I resolve, with THIS FEATHER to chop off your Head.

P.S. There may be Wit in this, for any Thing I know; but, if a Man was for
Cutting my Head off, and had nothing in his Hand but a Feather, I should think
my self a Great Fool, to be afraid, of what he could do to me.




MADAM,
WHEN a young Lady, of so lively, and industrious, a Curiosity, becomes
desirous to learn Meanings, she makes much swifter Advances, than you can
easily imagine. -- Not to rob you, therefore, of the Honor of a Discovery, you
cannot fail to make shortly by Virtue of your own natural Genius, Please only
to wait, till the Week after your next Birthday, and if by That Time, you
shall not be as knowing in this Point, as the young Lady your Eldest Sister,
Command all Instruction, in the Power of,

Your most obedient Servant, The PLAIN-DEALER.


The Plain Dealer. No 98.
-- Quid non Mortalia Pectora cogis,
Auri sacra Fames! --
VIRG.
FRIDAY, February 26. 1725.
THE Force of Avarice is never so conspicuous, and so much to be wondered at,
as when it taints the Minds of Persons eminent in Quality and Circumstance,
secured, as one would think, against all mean Temptations, by the large
Revenues of a State Employment. It is no such great Matter of Surprise, when we
see this Tincture of Covetousness prevailing in a Mechanic, one whose Birth
and Education are upon a Level; one, who has undergone a State of Servitude,
who has learned to be scraping and penurious by Habit and Example; and who, by
a Conversation with Dirt and servile Gain, makes the amassing a Fortune to be
the chief End of Life. But we expect from a Generous Birth, and a Liberal
Education, Sentiments suitable to their Dignity.

WE see, it is true, this dirty Passion often blotting the Escutcheons of the
Noblest Families: And we find at the same time our Respect for their Quality
turned into a Contempt for their Persons. But how much more despicable does
this Vice appear, when we find it lodged in the Breast of Him, whose supposed
Merit, and the Favor of his Prince, have raised him to preside in Justice? We
attach Idea's of Veneration to their Characters, who are Oracles of Law. We
look upon them as the Storehouses of Wisdom, and the Fountains of Integrity:
And were they, as it is said of the old Persian Emperors, to appear in Public
but once in Seven Years, the Vulgar, no doubt, would carry up their Respect to
the Pitch of Adoration.

BUT our Deference for these Great Men is taken off, when we see Frailties
breaking through their Grandeur: When they prostitute the Sanctity of Honor and
Conscience, to Wealth, and unworthy Extorsion. My Lord COKE, I remember,
somewhere speaking of Extortion in a Judge, says, It is there worse than
Robbery: For Robbery is apparent, and has the Face of a Crime; but Extortion
puts on the Visor of Virtue, for Expedition of Justice.

IT is a very fine Aphorism, and worthy the Consideration of all Ages and
Countries, That a Judge ought to be seasoned with two Sorts of Salt; the Salt
of Wisdom, lest he should appear a Fool, and the Salt of Conscience, lest he
should appear a Devil. I cannot help recollecting, upon this Occasion, a
Passage of AELIAN, who speaking of the Egyptians, tells us, 'That they boasted
to have received their System of Laws from Mercury: And that their Judges,
whenever they sat upon the Decision of Causes, wore, hanging upon their
Breasts, by a Chain of Gold, a Sapphire Image, which was called Truth: But, says
the Author, I should think it better, that, instead of the material Image
dangling at their Bosoms, they had the Essence of it stamped on their Souls.

I WAS led into this Trace of thinking, by Perusal of those Pamphlets which
have lately been published, concerning the famous Lord BACON; and of another I
met with in the Window of a Member of Parliament, which is called, The CASE of
ORPHANS, considered from Antiquity.

THE Title Page tells us, That a Part of of its Subject is, On the Court of
Chancery, having the Disposition of Orphans Money. As I observed some Passages
in it, concerning the unreasonable Trust which has been put in the Masters of
Chancery, I shall take the Liberty of transcribing a few, and making them a
Part of this Day's Entertainment.

I MUST freely confess, (says this Author) it is always my Opinion, That a Lord
CHANCELLOR was a most proper Trustee, and Guardian, of the Interests of
Orphans, and Widows. I have not altogether retracted this Opinion, but I am so
diffident of my own weak Judgment, that strong Clamor, and strong Arguments,
persuade me often not to be too positive or tenacious of my Sentiments. I am
not so perfectly, methinks, reconciled to a CHANCELLOR, and his Masters, having
too intimate an Understanding with Each Other: And I begin to suspect it a
Degree of Harmony, in no wise essential to the Promotion of Equity.

IT has been, as I am told, but by a very modern Order, that the Suitors Moneys
have been lodged in the Hands of the Masters; and it may be to be wished that
too many have not Cause to be sorry an Order of that Kind ever took Place.

THOUGH there be a loud Cry of Deficiency in the Suitors Money so lodged, I am
not taking upon me to impeach the Characters of those Gentlemen, but only to
observe, That that Order seems to have been as absurd and unreasonable, as it
has proved unhappy in its Consequences. The Posseson of large Sums of Money,
and the discretionary Power of approving what Securities they shall be placed
out on, is a Trust of such a Kind as might debauch the Principles of Minds, not
the most strongly entrenched in Honesty, against the Assaults of Avarice and
Advantage. It gives a Liberty, which I hope was never taken, of making Interest
of that Money in which they have no Property, and for which they are, barely
Trustees; and at the same Time of not paying One Shilling of its Produce to the
right Owners, under Color that they have not had any proper Security proposed,
upon which they could certify it safe and fitting to place it out.

WERE there not the unhappy Deficiencies, which are at this Time talked of, I
think several Cases of Conscience might arise upon the Possiblity of the
Masters Conduct, with Regard to this Trust. Suppose only, for Example, during
the late unaccountable Fluctuation of Stocks, when the South Sea Frenzy was at
the Height, and Money yielded the Interest of a whole Year for the Loan of a
few Hours, any immense Fortunes had been made by the clandestine Application of
those very Moneys, for which no Securities could be found; or those very Moneys
had been lost in an unwarrantable Venture for private Profit: What Reparation
should have been made to the Suitors, or Orphans, whose Estates, in either
Case, were so happily, or unhappily, employed? Would they have reaped the
Benefit of the first Stock-jobbing; or was there the least Reason that they
should sit down with the Loss of the Latter? I make this but a Case of
Supposition; and as it is scarce probable that the same Frenzy should ever
again possess us, yet should it, the Wisdom of our PARLIAMENT is providing,
That the Moneys of Orphans and other Suitors, engaged in Chancery, shall not be
subject to such Hazards.

BUT so much for Quotation. As I have abovementioned the Name of the Lord
Chancellor BACON, who was accused by the Nation of Bribery and Extortion, I
shall add a a few Words here with Regard to his Conduct under that Accusation.
It has been reckoned very singular in his Case, and He has been looked upon as
a Man of many Fears, that he should desert his Defense, and, by a Submission
and Confession of his Guilt, throw himself on the Favor of the Parliament. But
my Lord BACON, who, as it has been observed, knew that all Wounds ache with
laying open, and that Circumstances are sufficient to blast a Reputation, was
resolved to avoid the Hazard of a public Examination. It may very often be
wiser to carry Defects private, than to stand too peremptorily on a
Justification; wherefore I look upon the Saying to be of great Weight, That no
Man has so many Faults, as he that takes upon him to have none at all.

THIS puts me in Mind of a FABLE, that I read in my younger Years, and which I
shall relate here, because I am resolved not to end with too much Gravity.

THERE was a Knot of good Companions that entered into a Club, under certain
Rules and Orders for the Government of the Society. One Article among the rest,
was, "That whoever should enroll himself a Member of that Brotherhood, with any
corporal Maim, or Blemish about him, should forfeit a Crown to the Board; and
for so many Defects, so many Crowns." It fell out, that one Man in the Company
was observed to go Limping, and they called upon him for his Forfeit. The Man
put himself upon the Test, and was found, in the Search, to have not only one
Leg longer than the other, but a Scurff all over his Body. Upon this Discovery
they demanded another Crown, and then another, for a Glass-Eye he had. They
pressed him in the End so hard for the Money, that it came to Stripping, and
upon that Struggle, they found he had a Rupture: So that the further he pushed
his Defense, his Contest become more Chargeable. The Plain Dealer. No 99.
Animum curis nunc huc, nunc dividit illuc. --
VIRG.
MONDAY, March 1. 1725.
To the Author of the PLAIN DEALER.
SIR,
YOU were pleased, in a late Paper, to thank Heaven, that All our Lords are not
Lords of Trade: For my Part, I wish, heartily, that Eight, or Nine Gentlemen of
my Acquaintance, were All Lords! They fall, so naturally, into Airs of
Grandeur, and are already so adroit in the Exercise of Authority, that They
would strangely become the Dignity I wish 'em possessed of, and I shall never
be truly Easy, till I see 'em preferred, to Offices of much less Trouble than
their Present, and more proportioned to their Merit, and Abilities.

YOU must know, Sir, that I am Agent, for one of our American Colonies, and owe
to the Duties of that Station the Opportunity of being perfectly well
acquainted with the Patience, the Experience, and indefatigable Application, of
most of Those Fast Friends to the Plantation Interest, to the Ease, the
Welfare, add (above all) to the Good Government of their Dear Brethren in the
Western World! -- I have received a thousand Proofs of the surprising
Tenderness, and Moderation, with which They act, in Matters, which carry any
Severity, in their Appearance: And, on the other Hand, of the kind Vigor, and
Resoluti- with which They forward every Motion, that but tends to the
Encouragement, or Satisfaction, of their Countrymen in those remote, but
important, Settlements. -- I am not able, therefore, to express the Gratitude,
I feel, for Benefits, too long, and too many, to enumerate. -- But because we
see Things clearest, when opposed against their Contraries, Indulge me but so
far, as to tell the World a Story for me, which will teach the Enemies of these
Great Promoters of the Public Good, to value them, as they ought, and see what
Differences there is, between Them, and other People.

ONE of the Turkish Sultans, whose Name I have forgot, taking into his
Consideration the Great Fertility of Egypt, was resolved to give Encouragement
to the Trade, and Plantations of That Country; To this End he sent over to the
Bashaw of Grand Cairo a SET of SAGES, with great Salaries, to whom References
were to be made upon all Transactions, of that Nature: And by whose Reports He
was to guide himself, in Mercantile and Commercial Cases.

IT happened, soon after their Arrival, that a Petition was presented to the
Bashaw, by the Planters of Cotton, whose whole Year's Expectation had been
destroyed by an unusual Inundation of the Nile: In Commiseration of which
deplorable Accident, They humbly prayed a Remission of the Tax upon Cotton, for
That one Year only. -- The Bashaw (according to His Orders) referred This
Petition to the Sages, who were, with all convenient Speed, to examine its
Contents, and report their Opinion, what might fitly be done, upon the Occasion.

THE Sages, justly mindful that the liberal Salaries, which were annexed to
their Office, entitled the People, for whose Encouragement they were appointed,
to the most affectionate Proofs of their Favor, and Good Nature, were not
wanting to lay hold on this inviting Opportunity, to convince the Petitioners
how Greatly the Establishment of so able a Board of Counselors was like to
conduce to the Interest, not only of the Cotton-Planters, but of all the
Plantations, in general. -- They, therefore, most humbly certified, to the
Bashaw, That the Loss of the Cotton appeared indeed to have been very
considerable: But seemed rather an Effect of the Planter's own Negligence, than
of the River's Inundation, since they could not but know, there were many
Seeds, and Grains, not liable in their Growth, to receive Damage by
Inundations: And, in particular, Wool they said was Water-proof. -- They were
therefore humbly of Opinion, That it would be for the Good of the
Plantation-Interest, that no Regard should be shown to the Prayer of the
Petitioners, since they ought, instead of Cotton to have SOWN WOOL, and
thereby secured themselves against the Misfortune, which had ruined them.

I KNOW, Mr. PLAIN DEALER, That You are a Man of Business, and will, therefore,
take up no more of your Time, at present: But referr to another Occasion what
Observations I intend to make, on the Story, which I have here sent you.

I am, SIR, Your never-failing Reader, And humble Servant, COLON.


To the PLAIN DEALER.
SIR,
IF ever there was such a Thing, as the most Charming Woman in the World, I
have found her out, and am in Love with her, beyond all Meaning, Thought or
Description: I had, naturally, no Genius to Poetry, but what cannot Love make
possible? -- My Mistress, whose Wit is as amiable as her Beauty, is a great
Friend of the MUSES, and used often to reproach me, That I had never writ
Verses upon her. -- She went so far, at last, as to tell me, downright, That
she would never be married to to a Man, who had not loved her, to some Tune. --
I readily guessed at her Meaning, and presented her the next Morning, with the
following SONG, which, I assure you, was of my own making.

I.
AS Damon sat by Sylvia's Side,
And watched her Eyes, with amorous Pride;
He gently bowed his leaning Head;
And while It pressed,
Her charming Breast,
Thus the transported Shepherd said:
II.
Thou smiling Cause of Rest, and Pain!
The Youth who loves not, lives in vain?
What Charms have Eyes, where Wishes meet!
Where Souls combine,
And Two Hearts join,
Hope is unbounded, -- Joy complete.
III.
No Lamb, of all thy bleating Care,
Looks softer than Thy Passions are:
Possessing Thee, -- By Thee possessed,
I fear no Pain,
I wish no Gain,
Who, that is in Heaven would MORE be blessed?
NOW Sir, the Occasion of my troubling You is only to know, Whether you can
teach me any Method of finding out, what a Woman has a Mind to hide? I cannot,
for my Life, guess, Whether she likes me, or my Song either. -- Before I made
it, she was for being loved to some Tune: And now, All I can get from her, is,
That she will be admired beyond Measure. In my Opinion, these two Things are
Inconsistencies; but one that is in Love, is so apt to be mistaken, that I
will not take upon me to be positive, till I know what You think of it. And, so,
in Hopes of hearing from You, very speedily, I rest, -- Ah! no -- I mean, I
remain,

SIR, Your most obedient Servant, MYRTILLO.


The Plain Dealer. No 100.
Nam dolor and morbus Lethi fabricator uterque est. --
LUCAN.
FRIDAY, March 5. 1725.
To the Author of the PLAIN DEALER.
SIR,
A DEAR Friend of mine having lately lost a hopeful and beloved Child, and
remaining inconsolable thereupon, I beg you will please to insert for the next
Paper, the following Abstract of PLUTARCH's Letter to his WIFE, on a like
Occasion. The sorrowing Parent is your constant Reader, and I know no better
Way to calm the Violence of her Grief, than by conveying to her, by Your Means,
and under the Sanction of your Authority, so many excellent and familiar
Things, as flowed from that Great Man on this melancholy Occasion: Which may,
at the same Time, inspire our Sex with an Ambition, to imitate the Virtues of
PLUTARCH's Wife, and so to deserve the Applauses he gives Her. I am,

SIR, Your constant Reader, and Admirer, ARTEMISIA.


PLUTARCH to his WIFE: All Health.
THE Messenger you dispatched to tell me of the Death of my little Daughter, it
seems missed his Way as he was going to Athens: But when I came to Tanagra, I
heard of it by my Niece. I suppose, by this Time, the Funeral is over. I wish,
that whatever happens, as well now, as hereafter, may create you no
Dissatisfaction. But if you have designedly let any Thing alone, depending upon
my Judgment, I pray let it be, without Ceremony and timorous Superstition,
which I know are far from you. Only, dear Wife! let You and I bear our
Affliction with Patience.

I KNOW very well, and comprehend, what Loss we have had; but if I should find
you grieve, beyond Measure, this would trouble me more than the Thing it self:
For I had my Birth neither from a Stock, nor a Stone; and you know it full
well; I having been assistant to you in the Educacation of so many Children,
which we brought up at Home under our own Care.

THIS much lamented Daughter was born after Four Sons, which made me call her
by your own Name; therefore, I know she was dear to you; and Grief must have a
peculiar Pungency in a Heart tenderly affectionate to Children; especially when
you call to Mind how witty and innocent she was, void of Anger, and not
querulous: She was naturally mild and compassionate to a Miracle; and gave
Specimens of her Humanity and Gratitude toward any Thing that had obliged her;
for she would pray her Nurse to give suck not only to other Children, but to
her very Play-things; as it were, courteously inviting them to her Table, and
making the best Cheer for them she could. Now, my dear Wife, I see no Reason
why these and the like Things, which delighted us so much when she was alive,
should, upon Remembrance of them, affect us when she is dead.

IT is but just, That the same Arguments which we have oftentimes used to
others, should prevail upon ourselves at this so seasonable a Time; and that we
should not supinely sit down, and overwhelm the Joys we have tasted, with a
Multiplicity of new Griefs. A virtuous Woman ought thus to think with herself,
That the Tempest of the Mind in violent Grief must be calmed by Patience; which
does not entrench on the natural Love of Parents toward then Children, as many
think, but only struggles against disorderly and irregular Passions. For, we
allow this Love of Children to discover itself, in lamenting, wishing for, and
longing after them when they are dead. But the excessive Inclination to Grief,
which carries People on to unseemly Exclamations and furious Behavior, is no
less culpable than luxurious Intemperance. Yet Reason seems to plead in its
Excuse; because, instead of Pleasure, Sorrow is an Ingredient of the Crime.
What can be more Irrational, I pray, than to check excessive Laughter, and yet,
give a free Course to Tears, which flow from the same Fountain?

FORMERLY, you discovered, on a like Occasion, great Constancy of Mind, when
you lost your Eldest Son: And again, when the lovely Ch^ron left us. For I
remember, when the News was brought me of my Son's Death, as I was returning
Home with some Friends and Guests, when they beheld all Things in Order, and
observed a profound Silence every where (as they afterward declared to others)
they thought no such Calamity had happened, but that the Report was false: So
discreetly had you settled the Affairs of the House at that Time, when no small
Confusion and Disorder might have been expected. And yet you gave this Son suck
yourself, and endured the lancing of your Breast, to prevent the ill Effects of
a Contusion.

THESE are Things worthy of a Generous Woman, that loves her Children! Whereas,
we see most others receive them in their Hands as Play-things, with a Feminine
Mirth and Jollity, and afterward, if they chance to die, they drench
themselves in excessive Sorrow. Not that this is any Effect of their Love (for
that gentle Passion acts regularly and discreetly!) it proceeds from a Desire
of Vainglory, mixed with a little natural Affection, which renders their
Mourning barbarous and extravagant. Which Thing Aesop knew very well, when he
tells the Story of Jupiter's giving Honors to the Gods: For it seems Grief
also made her Demands; and it was granted, That she should be honored, but
only by Those who were willing, of their own Accord, to do it.

AND, indeed, this is the Beginning of Sorrow: Everybody first gives her free
Access, and after she is once settled, and become familiar, she will not be
forced thence with their best Endeavors. Therefore, she must be resisted at
her first Approach, nor must we surrender the Fort to her by any exterior
Signs, whether of Apparel, or shaving the Hair, or any other such like Symptoms
of mournful Weakness; which, by Degrees, so enervate the Mind, and reduce her
to such Streights, that, quite dejected and besieged with Grief, the poor
timorous Wretch dare not be merry, or see the Light, or eat and drink in
Company. The Inconvenience is accompanied by a Neglect of the Body, with
whatsoever relates to the Elegance of Humane Life. -- Whereas, on the contrary,
the Soul, when it is disordered, ought to receive Aid from the Vigor of a
healthful Body. For the sharpest Edge of the Soul's Grief, is rebated, when the
Body is in Tranquillity, like the Sea in a Calm. But, where from an ill Course
of Diet, the Body becomes dry and hot, so that it cannot supply the Soul with
commodious and serene Spirits; but only breathes forth melancholy Vapors,
which annoy her with Sadness; there, it is difficult for a Man (though never so
willing) to recover the Tranquillity of his Mind, after it has been disturbed
with so many evil Affections.

BUT that which is most to be dreaded in this Case, does not at all affrighten
me; to wit, The Visits of foolish Women, and their accompanying You in Your
Tears and Lamentations; by which they sharpen Grief, not suffering it either of
itself, or by the Help of others, to fade and vanish away. For, I am not
ignorant how great a Combat you lately entered, when you assisted the Sister of
Theon, and opposed the Women who came running in with horrid Cries, bringing
Fuel, as it were, to her Passion. When Men see their Neighbor's House on
Fire, every one contributes his utmost to quench it: But when they see the Mind
inflamed with furious Passion, they bring Fuel to nourish and increase it.
When a Man's Eye is in Pain, he is not suffered to touch it, though the
Inflammation provoke him to it, nor will they that are near him meddle with it.
But he who is galled with Grief, sits and exposes his Distemper to every one,
like Waters that all may poach in; and so that which at first seemed a light or
trivial Smart, by much Fretting and Provoking, becomes great, and incurable.

I WOULD have you endeavor to call to Mind that Time, when our Daughter was
not, as yet, born to us: Then, joining that Time with this, argue thus with
your self, we are now in the same Condition as then: Otherwise, dear Wife, we
shall seem discontented at the Birth of our little Daughter, if we own, that
our Circumstances were better before it. The Two Years of her Life are, by no
means, to be forgotten, by us, but to be numbered amongst our Blessings, in
that they afforded us an agreeable Pleasure. Shall we not esteem a small Good
because of a great Evil? or, Shall we ungratefully complain against Fortune for
what she has actually given us, because she has not added what we wish for? --
Certainly, to speak reverently of the Gods, and to bear our lot with an even
Mind, without accusing Fortune, always brings with it a fair Reward. And he,
who in such a Case, calls prosperous Things to Mind, and, turning his Thoughts
from dark and melancholy Objects, fixes them on bright and cheerful Ones; will
either quite extinguish his Grief, or, by allaying it with contrary Sentiments
will render it more feeble.

TRUE Happiness consists in the right Counsels of the Mind, tending to its own
constant Establishment; and the Changes of Fortune are of no great Importance
to the Felicity of our Life: if we are governed by exterior Things, and, with
the Vulgar, have a Regard to Casualties, we suffer any kind of Men to be Judges
of our Happiness, it will certainly ill become us, to accuse our Life, if, like
a Book, it has but one Blot in it, and all the rest be fair and candid.

DO not You, therefore take Notice of the Tears and Moans of such as visit you,
at present, condoling your Misfortune; for their Tears and Sighs are but of
Course. Rather consider, How happy every one of them esteemed you for the
Children you have, the House you keep, and the Life you lead. For it would be
an ill thing, while others covet your Fortune, though sullied with this
Affliction, that you should exclaim against what you enjoy; and not be
sensible, from the Taste of Affliction how grateful you ought to be for the
Happiness which remains untouched. Or, like some, who collecting all the
defective Verses of Homer, passed over at the same time, so many excellent
Parts of his Poems: So shall we peevishly complain of, and reckon up the
Inconveniences of our Life, neglecting the Benefits thereof? Or, Shall we
imitate Covetous and Sordid Misers, who having heaped together much Riches,
never enjoy what they have in Possession, but bewail it inconsolably, if it
chance to be lost.

BUT, if you lament the poor Girl, because she died unmarried, and without
Offspring, you have wherewithal to comfort your self, in that You are defective
in none of these Things, having had Your Share: And these are not to be
esteemed great Evils where they are wanted, and small Benefits where they are
enjoyed. So long as she is gone to a Place where she feels no Pain, she has no
Need of our Grief: For, what Harm can befall us from her, when she is free from
all Hurt? And, surely, the Loss of great Things abates the Grief, when it is
come to this; That there is no more Ground of Grief or Care for them. But thy
TIMOXENA was deprived but of small Matters; for she had no Knowledge but of
such; neither took she Delight but in such small Things. How then can you say,
That that is taken from her, which she never was sensible of, and which never
so much as entered into her Thoughts?

As for what you hear Others say, who persuade the Vulgar, That the Soul when
once freed from the Body, suffers no Inconvenience or Evil, nor is sensible at
all; I know, that you are better grounded in the Doctrines delivered down to us
from our Ancestors. For the Religious Symbols are well known to us, who are of
the Fraternity: Therefore, be assured, That the Soul, being incapable of Death,
suffers in the Body, in the same Manner as Birds that are kept in a Cage.
Wherefore, Even when we first receive our Breath,
'Twere good to pass the Gates of Death;
Before too great a Love of Earthly Things be engendered in the Soul, and it
become soft and tender by being used to the Body; and, as it were, incorporated
with it.




The Plain Dealer. No 101.
Lectorem delectando, pariterque monendo.
HOR.
MONDAY, March 8. 1725.
To the Author of the PLAIN-DEALER.
SIR,
WHILE I intended to have sent you an Essay on Plain-Dealing, I fell into a
Conversation, which furnished me with it, and the Narrative will be thought a
more lively Entertainment. The Society was composed of some of your old
standard Friends, whose agreeable Characters gave Life to your Understanding.
-- I was carried thither to have the Honor of being introduced to the Plain
Dealer; but, it seems, you were taking Observations from your Watchtower of
Barbican, concerning which, I make no doubt, we shall hear something to our
Advantage; and so, as it happened, I missed the Pleasure which had been
promised me. However, as your Admirer, I beg to be admitted into the Number of
your Correspondents, while I inform you, That the Company I met, were the
Clergyman, the Critic, Major Steadfast, Ned Volatile, and your own dear Patty
Amble.

THE good Gentleman in Black, took Occasion, from our Speaking of the Title of
your Paper, to distinguish a Plain Dealer from a Rough Dealer: That is, a Man,
whose Knowledge and Generosity inspire him with a Delight in befriending
Mankind, from the brutal Impertinent, whose Ignorance but affects Meaning, and
prompts him to suppose he appears Wisest, when most insufferably Shocking. The
Virtues of Plain Dealing, said he, are, by awkard Imitators, debased into
Ill-Manners, and Inhumanity. The Brute, who boasts of his Bluntness, is a loud
Censurer of other Men's Conduct, and never right in his own. -- His Eloquence is
a Froth of Expression, without Depth, or Perspicuity. -- While his Depravity
mistakes Brutalities for Beauties, the Graces of human Life are rejected by him
as Frailties! Because his own Nature is impenetrably obdurate, he calls
Obstinacy Magnanimity! Compassion for the Afflicted, is a Weakness in the Mind;
and a Readiness to forgive Injuries, an Affectation, or Deficiency of Spirit.

The Plain Dealer, refining Nature, by Principle, acts the Inquisitor within
himself, and throws out a Light of Example, as well as Instruction, upon the
World. -- The Former insults the Unfortunate with Censure; but the Latter,
reproaching only the Proud and Prosperous, corrodes not the Wounds of the
Afflicted, by insisting on past, and irretrievable Miscarriges. Yet, by some
gentle Allusion to their Actions, he awakens a Reflection, that can arm them
for their future Safety. -- We judge of Things impartially upon a Surprise, by
such Comparison; and, condemning our own Faults in others, are forced to stand
self-convicted, when the Recoil is made upon our selves.

But the Barbarity of a profound Pedant is still worse, if possible, than that
of a shallow Impertinent. The Ignorance of the one, can only move us to
Contempt; but the Learning of the other, provokes our Detestation. Though Envy
may hurt Genius, by urging it, in the Disguise of Flattery, upon too ardent and
improper Essays, yet, in the dogmatizing Pedant, it has shocked Worth much more
fatally at its first setting out; and extinguished a Spirit, which no
Encouragement could re-kindle. A Pedant ungratefully turns that Force to the
Discouragement of Learning, with which Learning has armed him to make War
against Ignorance. -- While the Plain Dealer reproves, he sets Merits against
Errors, and the Luster of the one, deepens the Shade of the other! To display
but the dark Side a Man, either damps him with a Terror, that incapacitates him
for Action, or disgusts him into a stubborn Indulgence of those Follies he
would otherwise have grown ashamed of. Roughness in Conversation, being like
Persecution in Religion, Proselytes are gained soonest by a gentle Manner of
Persuasion; and I am pleased with a Saying that is recorded of King Henry the
Fourth of France. -- A Drop of Honey draws more Flies, than a Spoonful of
Vinegar.

IN short, the Force of a fine Instruction ought to strike like a Flash of
Lightning! As the Subtilty of the one, is said to dissolve the Bone, without
bruising the Flesh; the other, with a Surprise of Influence, shoots Remorse
through the Heart, before the Temper can be ruffled into a Disposition to repulse
it. In this Light, a Plain Dealer is a Father, or rather a Friend, which is yet
dearer. -- A Father may leave us Wealth and Titles, from which we may derive
Authority or Distinction; but such a Friend, can teach us to be wise, and
Wisdom illustrates Obscurity, and adorns Dignity with an Eminence superior to
that of Fortune; it vests us too with the noblest Power, for it enables us to
govern our Passions. -- Alexander justly preferred his Master Aristotle to his
Father Philip. The King, said he, but made me a Prince, the Philosopher made me
a Man.

I OBSERVED, That your dear Patty Amble, delighting to talk much, took little
Pleasure in giving Attention. But that Lady urges her Sex's Privilege, when she
declares an Antipathy to Plain Dealing. Ah! cried the charming Coquet, how
preferable is Flattery to Plain Dealing? I know, that, in the common Cant,
Flattery is said to be gross; that it is called, The Craft of the Courtier! The
Seducer of Beauty! and, The vain Promiser of a Happiness, which it never means
to bestow! But, let me tell you, they had done it more Justice, had they called
it, The Soother of Discontent! The Refiner of Fancy! The Imbellishment of
Conversation! The very Inspirer of polite Pleasures! -- What a Delicacy of
Delight should we lose, were that odious Plain Dealing to prevail? Mr. Volatile
would no longer give the Tattling of a Lady, the complaisant Term of
Liveliness; nor the Major soften our Sex's Levities with the pretty Title of,
Innocent Amusements. Our Expense in Dress, Equipage, Masquerades, and Opera
Subscriptions, would lose the agreeable Name of Taste, for that hideous one of
Extravagance; so that our darling Modes of Thinking, which we have so long been
told, are owing to our Reason and Discernment, would then be forced to wear a
much more mortifying Title, and be called, Our downright Vanity.

I WAS willing to take the Advantage of this Pause but could not resist the
Pleasure of listening to that ever-rambling, ever-agreeable Tongue! What Lover
(continued the enchanting Trifler) would not rather be flattered into Hope,
then abandoned to Despair by Plain Dealing? The Coxcomb delightfully deceives
himself, by fancying our very Denials to be Tokens of our future Favors. The
Man of Sense (who, when a Lover, is, of Course, to be mistaken) believes the
Charmer, he admires, has a Wit as penetrating as her Eyes; and, vain of the
real Worth he possesses, becomes Fool enough, in his Turn, to think Merit a
Recommendation to the Ladies! -- Thus, when you flatter Us, you appear
agreeable, when we flatter You, we secure our Conquests; and when we Both
flatter Ourselves, we consult and preserve our Quiet. These are Pleasures,
which Plain Dealing would entirely deface, and abolish.

BUT, Madam, cried Ned Volatile, as Beaus and Ladies admire Things for their
Novelty, we Men of Speculation, approve them most for their Antiquity. -- A Man
of Dress, is pleased with a Sword-Knot and Cane-String, after the newest
Fashion; while a Virtuoso prefers a rusty Roman Javelin to the White Wand of a
Lord-Treasurer. -- The Herald derives the Honor of Families from their
Antiquity: And since there can be no Doubt, but Flattery is more ancient, it
must therefore be more honorable than Plain Dealing.

Plain Dealing, interrupted the Critic, had been more gracefully drawn, in the
favorite Character of Mr. Wicherley's Comedy; if his good Qualities, remaining
equally strong, had been softened, to appear more amiable. But his Judgment is
mixed with Partiality, and his Wit with Ill-manners. He Is impatient of
Contradiction, and exceeds, in Self-conceitedness, the very Coxcombs he
contemns. -- As a Lover, his Indecency checks our Regard, and seems to justify
the Ill-usage which he meets with.

COULD Plain-Dealing (observed the Major) be forgiven among the Great, it would
both adorn and defend them. On the contrary, Double Dealing, which is an
Accomplishment they are fond of, has been more dangerous to Princes, than the
most open Rebellion. Had Tarquin never trusted the Dissimulation of the First
Brutus, the Expulsion of his Race had been prevented: And, I think, it may
easily be determined, by the Unprejudiced, how far the admired Last of that
Name deviated from his boasted Honesty, when he conspired against the Man whose
Interest he espoused, and whose particular Affection had pardoned, promoted,
and confided in him; when, in the Person of that God-like Caesar, he
assassinated his Father, his Friend, and his Preserver.

I HAD now an Opportunity to offer my Sentiments, in my Turn; and ventured to
interpose as follows. -- Were Plain Dealing a Court Virtue, it would free great
Numbers from the Misery of a vain Dependence, and avoid the Resentment of
those, whom Double Dealing disappoints, or makes Instruments of. Greatness
proves often too weak a Protection; for the meanest Adversary may become
considerable in Mischief. However an angry Multitude may vary in their Tempers,
their Passions, like different Arrows, carry all the same Sharpness, and are
commonly pointed at one Mark. -- Upon the Whole, If Wisdom is better than
Cunning, if Honesty may be allowed the safest Principle of Policy; there is
then this Difference betwixt Double Dealing and Plain Dealing; The one,
confounds Families and Kingdoms, and renders the Guilty, when discovered,
detestable, even in the Grave: The other confirms Justice, banishes Distrust
from Correspondence, strengthens Friendship in Private; and in Public, is the
Mark of a Patriot; and will transmit the Possessor's Memory to the Affection of
future Ages.

I am, SIR, Your most humble Servant, R. S.


The Plain Dealer. No 102
Vilius Argentum est Auro, Virtutibus Aurum.
HOR.
FRIDAY, March 12. 1725.
To the PLAIN-DEALER.
Middle Temple, March 1. 1725. SIR,
I AM a Young Fellow, left by my Parents without any Provision, besides that of
a good Education; nor have I any Prospect of Fortune, but what I may, by the
Assistance of that, hope to raise in my Profession. You will certainly think I
had other Business to mind, than being in Love; and yet, Sir, that is the Cause
of my present Application. -- I must own myself not able to withstand the
Charms of a certain Young Lady, who is one of your Readers. She is at once,
Mistress of the greatest Sense, Knowledge, Wit, and Sweetness of Temper;
Qualities, each of which by itself (possessed to that eminent Degree, she now
enjoys them all) were sufficient to make whomsoever she honors with her
Choice, completely happy! She has, for some Time, admitted me to the Favor of
visiting her, and treats me, on all Occasions, with the greatest Civility. I
have heard her often say, She thought the Law (to which, by this Time, you
perceive I belong) the most Genteel, and Honorable, of all Professions; That
she never would marry for Money; -- And a Hundred such Things, that a young
Fellow, as I am, is naturally vain enough to construe into Encouragements. But,
Sir, she is a great Fortune; and you know what Ridicule a Young Man, without
any, meets with, who makes Addresses of that Kind, and comes off
unsuccessfully. -- I desire, therefore, you would take an Opportunity, in one
of your Papers, to let her know, That if she has any such Thoughts, as my
Wishes have flattered my Hopes into a Suspicion of, Her Advances ought to be a
great deal more, than is usually judged reasonable: For while I have the least
Doubt of her Inclinations, I had rather die a Thousand Deaths, than, by a
mistaken Presumption, run the Hazard of losing, what alone can make Life
valuable, to,

SIR, Your very Humble Servant, SYLVIO.


THE Case of my Correspondent is pretty nice, and as this seems to be a Matter
of the greatest Importance to both Parties, I think I cannot bestow a Paper
better, than in taking it into Consideration, and in giving some Advice, that
may be of Service to all, who are in the same Circumstances.

IF we consider the Affair of Marriage, as it is now generally carried on in
the World, there are innumerable Difficulties, which damp pursuits of that
Kind, in a Young Fellow, who, let him deserve ever so well in other Respects,
wants (what the World alone esteems Merit) an ESTATE.

SOME of these Difficulties arise from the Women themselves. -- There are few
among them to be found, who have any Notion of Enjoyments, beyond mere sensual
Gratifications. A Masquerade affords them infinitely more Pleasure, than the
brightest Conversation; a Diamond has more Charms, than any of the moral
Virtues; and, I doubt not, there are some, who, for the Sake of riding in a
Coach and Six, would Yoke themselves with a verier Beast, than any in their own
Equipage. Let any one Traffic with them for the dear Delights of Wealth, they
will buy, even at the highest Price; -- That is, They will pay the Purchase in
what they prize most -- Themselves. -- And, though hardly any Match, on these
Considerations alone, has ever yet proved happy, They still go on; --
Notwithstanding they are sure to repent, They never fail to make the Choice.

How wretched is the faithful Youth,
Since Women's Hearts were Bought and Sold!
They ask not Vows of sacred Truth,
Whenever they s^gh, they s^gh for Gold.
OTHER Women there are, indeed, whose Minds, of a less mercenary Cast, consider
only the Merit of their Admirers; who are capable of receiving that Love which
flows from Esteem, and of tasting Happiness from rational Enjoyments. But, how
few of these enjoy the Liberty of choosing for themselves? How many groan under
the Tyranny of an Avaritious Parent? who would no more part with his Daughter,
than his Land, to any but the best Purchaser. How would he Scoff at a Young
Man's Impudence? who, instead of paying Her Price, should pretend to talk of
Her Happiness!

FROM thus much of the Sex, then, Moneyless Merit seems entirely excluded. The
Woman who has Liberty, as well as Capacity, to make a prudent Choice, is the
only one with whom we can hope Success. And here arise new Difficulties, from
another Side; The Men are now our Hindrance, and one in my Correspondent's
Circumstances, must expect himself to suffer for the general ill Character of
his Sex. Men daily show themselves as little disinterested, in their Pursuits,
as Women. Age, Folly, and Ill Nature, are no Impediments to them, provided
there be but Money. -- Love, and Esteem, are so frequently used as Pretenses,
while the real Affection is only for the Fortune, that Women are alarmed at the
first Approach; and a Young Fellow dares hardly Love, where Prudence only
permits him to Love, without incurring the odious Title of a Fortune-hunter.

IF therefore my Correspondent sincerely feels, within himself, that
disinterested Affection, which he seems to act by, I would advise him to take
all possible Methods to convince the Lady of it; I need not direct him how;
for, if he is sincere, his Passion will discover it self in every Word and
Action. But by no means let him be hasty, in his Addresses. -- With a Lady of
her Sense, his Modesty will add much to his Influence. True Love springs not
upon a sudden, and should he urge his Wishes, too far, before her Inclination
has improved itself into Affection, she might rationally construe his
Forwardness to proceed from other Motives, than the genuine Effects of his
personal, and disinterested, Admiration.

ON the other Side, I must take upon me to remind the Young Lady, that Time is
more in haste, than she is; and I would advise her, if she is (as I presume) at
her own Disposal, and if she is satisfied of the Merit, as well as the
Affection, of our Young Lawyer (as one of the Sense he ascribes to her, may
soon be) not to demur upon his Want of Fortune. Happiness in Marriage, does not
depend on Suitableness of Estates, but of Tempers. If there be but a Competency
on one Side, no matter on which it lies. -- Love, indeed, should be reciprocal,
but there is no Necessity, that Fortune should. There is This more to be
considered, That, besides the Happiness of an agreeable Partner for Life, which
she will enjoy, in common with him, she will have the Addition of a superior
Satisfaction, in the noble, and ever-pleasing Reflection, That she has entitled
herself, as well to his Gratitude, as his Love, by exalting a Man of Worth,
into Eminence, and Prosperity; who, otherwise, for want only of That, which she
abounded in, might have had his Genius depressed, and been lost in Obscurity.

To the PLAIN DEALER.
Button's, Covent Garden, March 4. 1725 SIR,
THIS Place, which once, was the celebrated Seat of Wit, is now deserted by all
that Sort of Company, and transformed into an Old Bailey, in Miniature. The
Classics are elbowed out, by the Constables; and instead of Poems, or Essays,
nothing is heard of, here, but Warrants, and Commitments. Most of the good
Company is frightened away, to make Room for the grave, and those who dare
stay, croudle about the Fire, when a Magistrate enters, with as much Terror, as
if they saw a Ghost. I beg you would deal a little plainly with these Men of
Authority; and advise them to reflect on the Illegality of putting His
Majesty's peaceful Subjects into bodily Dread; if not on the Highway, yet in
Places designed to be as Public. For they strut about the Room, and shoot out
their Mittimus's, like Porcupine's Quills; so that unless, among other Poetical
Licenses, Wit can plead an Exemption from their Cognizance, they are unfit for
the Gay World's Society, and ought to live by themselves. And you may assure
them, if they provoke us much more, we will bring the dead Lion to Life again,
and doubt not, but with a few Days good Feeding, he will be able to treat
Masqueraders, who flant it in his Skin, as an Ancestor of his, did their
Predecessor, in Aesop.

I am, SIR, Your Humble Servant, TIMORET.


I find, among the Letters, which came to my Hand, in the last Packet, one
Epistle, of so extraordinary a Kind, that (to confess a plain Truth) it exceeds
my Capacity to judge rightly, concerning it. -- I am not a Stranger to the
Tradition, which carries so much Weight, with the Seafaring Part of His
Majesty's Liege-People, that the Apes, and Monkies, of Africa, can speak, like
Men, when they have a Mind to it: -- Yet I am, naturally, not over credulous:
But, since I am told there are (among the Directors of the Guinea Company)
PROOFS to be met with, which make the Truth of it unquestionable, I am almost
persuaded to give myself up to the Belief of a Thing which seems, indeed, to
be, very clearly, made out, by my underwritten Correspondent.

Worthy SIR,
I AM a Native of the Western Africa; a Subject of the King of Tombuto: By
Species I am no more than a Monkey,; but I am in a fair Way to be made a Man:
For a fine young Lady, of a great Fortune, is fallen desperately in Love with
me, and prefers me, in the most open Manner, before all her other Admirers. --
But, in the midst of this unhop'd Felicity, comes a Feathery Fool, called a
Parrot, to a House, that is just over against us, and has tattled himself into
such Eminence, that they talk of a Project on Foot, to remove him very shortly
into a HOUSE of much more Distinction.

THE Competition I have observed, among your great Men (or Persons of Quality)
who shall bid most, for this empty Prater, has provoked me to discover a
Talent, which is concealed, with all possible Caution, by the Laws of our
mimick Species. -- In short, I am forced to cry out Shame, on these People's
unreasonable Partiality. -- If my Fop of a Rival, was nearer a Kin to them,
than I am, I should not wonder at their Preference: But, since Nature has given
it on my Side, and my Shape, my Air, my Countenance, and, in particular, my
Parts, and Disposition, all concur to demonstrate my Affinity, to these unjust
Judges; while Poll, with all his Impertinence, can pretend to no other
Resemblance, than what lies in his fine Clothes, and everlasting Prattling,
without knowing a Word of his own Meaning; these Things, I say, duly
considered, you will not, I hope, impute to Envy, what arises merely from a
modest Consciousness of my own Virtues: But exert yourself in the Behalf of
overlooked (if not oppressed) Merit. I am,

Worthy SIR, Your most Obedient Servant, PUGG.
P.S. MY Mistress takes in your Paper, and likes you mightily. -- She had just
called for a Pen, and Ink, to write you a Letter, about the last Opera, when a
Lady came, and took her out, and has left me this Opportunity of sending my
Case to the PLAIN DEALER.




The Plain Dealer. No 103.
-- Falsis terroribus implet. --
HOR.
MONDAY, March 15. 1725.
AMONG many Letters, I have lately received, the Two following will furnish my
Readers with no disagreeable Entainment.

To the PLAIN-DEALER.
SIR,
I AM seldom negligent, in my Attendance at the Coffee-House, upon those Days,
when you favor the World with your Lectures; -- You very prudently entertain
us, with a great deal of Variety: Which is, doubtless, the most ready, and
infallible Means of Improvement. For, if you altogether treated about Religious
or Moral Duties, you would be disregarded by your gay Readers, and relished
only by your Rational. But as we are ignorant of what you will discourse, 'till
we take up your Papers, we may, out of Curiosity, be unawares catched, by an
Admonition in Masquerade, under the Disguise of a mere Amusement. --

YOU have indulged no obscene, or immoral Reflections: But have, on the
contrary, discountenanced Vice; and supported Religion, with Vivacity, and
Frankness of Spirit; consequently, the Inconsiderate may, by Degrees, be
awakened into an Exertion of the Thinking Faculty; by which chiefly we are
distinguished, and support our boasted Superiority, over the brutal Creation. A
virtuous Reader of your Paper can at worst but be rendered cheerful, without
Violation of his Innocence. -- And your Writings being generally pleasing, and
very often useful, I flatter my self, That Men are not so abandoned to
Ignorance, as we are ready to imagine, since they give such a kind Acceptance
to you Essays, which have no mean, or ungenerous Gratifications to recommend
them. --

I LEARN, from your Plain Dealing, to be inoffensive in Conversation; I observe
all that passes, wherever I happen to be; and endeavor, at the same Time, to
contract or extend my self, till I am grown fit for my Company. Though, by the
Way, we should resolutely preserve this most reasonable Steadiness, on no
Account whatever, to humor a Friend at the Expense of our Health, our
Reputation, or our Virtue. FRIEND, did I say? I retract the Appellation; -- For
certainly, if we think right, that Person who solicites us to Actions
inconsistent with Reason, with Honor, or with Decency, is undeserving of so
sublime a Character. -- But (this single Exception allowed for) we should
condescend to appear blind to the Weaknesses of those we converse with -- And
he, who acts otherwise, will justly incur the Censure of an odious, and
scornful Austerity. -- A Man's first Care should be to avoid the Reproaches of
his own Heart, and his second to escape the ill Wishes of other People.

WE learn, with Delight, from such Plain Dealing as yours, That a wise Man's
Business is to subdue the Roughness of Passion, into the Calmness of a tranquil
Humility; And that the more his Knowledge is enlarged, the more he will
perceive wanting, to be searched after. Tully tells us, The Mind of a wise Man
never swells, nor becomes elated. For my own Part, I fancied my self, when I
was young, to be acquaint- with every Thing: But now, I can perceive my
Learning contracted with a narrow Circle, and almost obscured in a dark Point;
when compared with that infinite, and inexhaustible Number of Subjects, to
which I am an utter Stranger. In a Word, I am convinced, That an ill-grounded
Conceitedness of our own Abilities is the most contemptible Weakness of Nature:
And, even where it may seem justified, by our real Merit, it renders odious,
and supportable, the very Virtue, which Occasions it.

BUT, to make a Transition, from what I learn from you, to an Information I
intend to give you; There is a pretty Maxim in the Guardian, to think with the
Wise, but talk with the Vulgar: Which occurred strongly to my Memory, upon
observing with what Pleasure your late Cambridge Letter, concerning some little
feminine Exravagancies, was received in all Places. -- Give me Leave,
therefore, to entertain you with a strange, and fearful Discovery, which, it
was lately my Fortune to make, upon passing a Night or Two, in a Country
Village. -- It was in a Ramble, last Harvest, I had the Honor to wait on a
Widow, (as well stored as the Fields were) in a kind of Progress, to visit her
Tenants. --

AFTER Dinner, one Day, I left the good Company, with their honest
Entertainers, the Farmer and his narrative Family, to accompany the Inhabitants
of the Yard; and enjoy the silent Serenity of a very beautiful Prospect; which
was bounded by the Shade of Trees and Hills, with ruined Buildings, at a little
Distance from the Cottage. -- I was envying the Happiness, and Quiet, of these
unbusy People; and had wandered, as it were insensibly, over half a Dozen
Styles, into the Remoteness of a hollow sandy way: Where I stood with great
Delight, to observe the Fall of a pretty Rill, which gushing out from among the
Rushes above, rolled down the sandy Bank, and shaped it self a Passage, along
the Bottom of the Road I walked in. The Gloominess that was spread all round,
had fitted this Place, above all I had ever seen, for the Abode of fantastic
Melancholy: And whilst I was busied in Thoughts of this Nature, I saw a
Country Woman hasten toward me, who waved her Hand, as she came forward, and
cried out to me, to walk on. -- For I was standing at Gooddy Hubbard 's
watering Place! --

AS soon as the good Woman came near enough to be asked, What she meant, I
found, that Gooddy Hubbard was a Witch, that lived in the Wood: And, that if
any Cow, Horse, or other Cattle, staid long enough in that Place, to drink of
its enchanted Water, All the Hay they should eat, from that Time forward, would
be turned into crooked Pins, and the poor Beasts must certainly die after it. I
begged she would go along with me, to show me the Witch's House: To which
Proposition she replied, with inexpressible Consternation, She would not, for
the World, be so presumptuous: She added, That it was about half a Mile off,
and shook her Head, and assured me, that the whole Village trembled at the
Sight of this Goody Hubbard. That, for her own Part very lately, as she was
Gleaning in a Field, by the Wood's Side, the Witch had appeared to her out of
the Hedge, in the Shape of the Leaf of a Tree: And ran along before her, and
played Gambols, over and over in her Path, all the Way, as she came home again.
-- I asked her, Whether she had found any ill Consequence, after so terrible an
Accident? And she answered, (with great Innocence and Gravity) That she had but
too much Reason to believe, she was bewitched, having many strange and wicked
Thoughts running ever Day in her Head, about Things she had never been troubled
with, (till that unfortunate Leaf fell in her way) since she was a Maid, or but
little better.

I COULD not resist the Temptation, which these silly Stories left me under, of
making a Visit to the formidable Gooddy Hubbard; whom I found, in a little
Hovel, which the Charity of the Lord of the Manor had ordered to be built for
her, in the Wood; because the honest People of the Village, having taken it
into their Heads to make a Witch of the poor old Woman, fell upon her, as often
as she came in their Way: And had two or three times endangered her Life, by
scratching her with their Nails, till every Body had fetched Blood of her, (as
the Phrase is) after which, it seems, no Witch, in England, has Power to hurt a
Hair of any Person's Head, who takes this effectual Way to disarm her,

I CAME off, with no other Damage, than the Loss of all the Money I had in my
Pocket; which the Influence of downright Compassion compelled me to leave
behind, for the Comfort of an afflicted Creature, whose unsupported Age, and
Wretchedness, instead of the Relief or Pity, which was due to them by Nature,
had procured her the malicious Rage, and Persecution, of unthinking Ignorance!
-- I returned to my Widow; and after a long and pleasant Conversation, on the
Subject of Witchcraft, agreed heartily with her, That there were such Things as
Witches; and took upon me to assure, with a Sigh, and a downcast Eye, That I
had, my self, suffered, so severely, by one of them, that I never expected to
become my own Man again; though I should live to the Age of a Patriarch. --

I am, Mr. PLAIN-DEALER, Your very humble Servant, PHILOTHEUS.


To the PLAIN DEALER.
SIR,
CASTING my Eye upon Horace, I found this excellent Piece of Advice, Leges and
Perscrutabere Doctos. As I generally put in Practice what I read, in Pursuance
to his Advice, I sent for a Set of your Papers, and am now carefully perusing
them. I take the same Method that Lawyers generally do with their Reports, read
the Modern Cases first, so go upward, till they come to the Fountainhead. But,
when I light upon some of your Female Correspondents, it puts me in Mind of the
Roman Ladies, of old; they resemble them so much in Spirit, and Passion, that I
verily believe, many of their Great Great Grandmothers lie buried in the Campus
Martius, or the Capitol. It Is not incredible, That, after Caesar had first
entered Britain, some of their Legionary Ladies, upon the Fame of the Britons
unwearied Courage, might make a second Roman Invasion, and with as good Success
as Caesar, after he had opened a Passage for them.

LIVY, some where, tells us, That when the old Gentlemen of Rome were
contriving a Scheme to have more of their Ladies good Company at home, the
Women rose up in Arms, to the great Surprise of the Roman State; That they
denied the Senators a free Passage to the House: And, that Cato by Name, had
like to have been carried off by the Mob. They claimed, as their ancient
Rights, and undoubted Privileges, almost as strange Things, as your Mistress
does, in her late Scheme for establishing a Female Parliament. However, upon a
Parley between both Parties, the Women submitted the Case to the Senate: Where,
they always carried the Majority, though it is well known, no Lady sat in
House. Nor was that at all surprising: For if we examine History, I believe, we
shall find, the Senate, at that Time, consisted more of Wits, than of Wise Men;
over whom, for the sake of Politeness, the Women must have most Influence; nor
is it less probable, that their being in Arms might frighten the old Gentlemen.

THE Use of Bribery likewise, had then newly been found out; and, I dare say,
there was no Lady, who had not about her, wherewithal to purchase a Vote. Such
was the Courage of the Roman Ladies of old: And how exactly our Moderns imitate
them, is, I believe, too plain to need describing: Happy, therefore it is, and
much for the Peace of Great Britain, that our Parliament has never attempted
the Moderation of their exorbitant Hoops, or the Abridgement of their
Pin-Money! For my Part I must frankly confess, I have no Objection to make
against Mrs. Patty Amble's Proposal. Other Men may have their Fears, from the
supposed Consequences of a Female Parliament: But, I think, they are out in
their Politics. -- If a Power grows always weaker, the more it is divided, Let
me be a Republican, in Love, and choose rather to pay Obebience to Five Hundred
of these pretty COMMONS; that live a Slave, to One, Sole TYRANT; and neither
enjoy, nor dare talk of, my Liberty. -- Alas, Sir! This is exactly the present
Case of

Your Humble Servant, POLITICUS.


The Plain Dealer. No 104.
Quid deceat, quid non; quo Virtus, quo ferat Error.
HOR.
FRIDAY, March 19. 1725.
I FELL lately into Company with a Class of young Poets, who affect to be
Admirers of Tasso, and were Extravagant in their Praise of a Simile, in his
Gierusalemme, where the Devil, maligning the Success of the Christian Arms, is
said, To bite his Lips, and spurn up the Floor of Hell, in bellowing Rage, like
a wild Bull, when the Dogs are baiting him.

THEY made me promise, That I would give them my impartial Opinion; and,
because they earnestly press to know it, I will borrow the Reflections of a
Friend, on the Subject of Similes, in general; which contain whatever I would
say, were I to speak concerning the Nature of this great Ornament to Poetry;
than which there is nothing more capable of being made either delightful or
ridiculous, according as it is used, discreetly, or at random.

THE Use, which a Poet ought to make of Comparisons, is to illustrate the
Object represented; that is, to enlighten and enlarge the Apprehension of the
Reader. The Nature therefore, of the Thing, which is compared, must correspond
exactly with what it is compared to: There must not only be an apparent
Resemblance, but a visible Proportion. A Thing low, and inconsiderable, may be
like enough to something great, and magnificent; but then, wanting Dignity to
appear in its Company, no Poet of Judgment should submit to make Use of it. --
I will give the Reader an Instance of a very remarkable Fault of this Kind; --
Sir Richard Blackmore, in his Prince Arthur, has been pleased to compare the
Devil, looking down from a Mountain, on the British Camp, to a Toad, on the
Border of a Walk looking up at the Gardener.

While, with malignant Eyes, the Apostate viewed
Their Host, with Octa's Message pleased, he stood,
Stung deep with Malice, and with Envy torn,
While all his Veins, like Aetna's Furnace, burn.
THE Veins of the Devil, I suppose, were not so much owing to Sir Richard's
Forgetfulness, that he was describing a Spirit; as to a politic Design of
reducing Satan to downright Flesh and Blood, that the Reader, conceiving a more
humble Opinion of him, than he had been taught in his Infancy, might be the
better prepared for the Toad in the Comparison.

And Streams of Fire, from his red Eye Balls flowed,
Like Lightning, breaking from a lowering Cloud:
As when a Toad, squat on a Border, spies
The Gardener passing by, his Bloodshot Eyes,
With Spite, and Rage inflamed, dart Fire around
The verdant Walks, and on the flowery Ground,
The bloated Vermin loathsome Poison spits,
And swollen, and bursting with his Hatred, sits:
So the fallen Angel, etc.
FALLEN indeed, if no abler to do Harm to Sir Richard's Hero, than his Toad to
the Gardener! Where is the terrible Power, the wily restless Malice, the
insatiate revengeful Application, of this dangerous Enemy to Mankind, in Sir
Richard's humble Simile?

A Toad may be poisonous, but then he may be trod upon, which is by no Means,
the Case of the Devil. If a Poet, who introduces Satan, thus enraged, would
imagine a Comparison, to aggrandize the Horror of his Reader's Conception, it
must certainly arise from nothing, which we are to look down upon; no little,
venomous, inconsiderable Creature; The Elements should War together, on such
Occasions, as these; the Skies should blaze with Lightning; the World reel with
Earthquakes; the Sea rise to Heaven; the Poles crack with Thunder; and all
Nature groan, with Variety of Convulsions. -- Toad, Poison, Squat, Bloated,
Spits, Vermin, Loathsome, Swollen, Bursting! What Image can arise from such
Expressions as these, which is either like, or agreeable?

TO say Truth, no Simile at all should have been introduced in the Place I have
been complaining against: The natural Conception of a Reader, can represent to
his Fancy the Idea of the Devil, looking angry from a Mountain, much better,
than any common Image, of Things known, can represent it to his Memory. A
Comparison is never to be made, but where the Object to be described is less
known, or less conceivable, than something else, which, being of equal Grandeur
and Importance, will also illustrate, and rivet it on the Understanding.

THE Descriptions, and Similes, which we meet with in Milton, give us quite
other Ideas of this dreadful Rebel-Angel.

Scarce had he ceased, when the superior Fiend
Was moving towered the Shore; his pondrous Shield
Behind him cast, the broad Circumference
Hung on his Shoulders, like the Moon, etc. --
His Spear, to equal which, the tallest Pine,
Hewn on Norwegian Hills, to be the Mast
Of some great Admiral, were but a Wand
He walked with, to support uneasy Steps
Over the burning Marl.
Again, Forth came in Order the infernal Peers,
'Midst them their mighty Paramount, who seemed
Alone, the Antagonist of Heaven! nor less
Than Hell's dread Emperor! with Pomp supreme,
And Godlike, imitated State, Him round,
A Globe of fiery Seraphim enclosed.


And again, -- Satan, above the Rest,
In Shape, and Gesture, proudly eminent!
Stood, like a Tower; nor yet his Form appeared
Less, than Archangel ruined; and the Excess
Of Glory obscured; As when the Sun new-ris'n,
Shorn of his Beams, looks through the misty Air.
Deep Scars of Thunder had intrenc'd his Face;
Care, on his faded Cheeks sat, under Brows
Of dauntless Courage, and considerate Pride.


HAVING named Mr. Milton, I am well enough aware, That Sir Richard may
endeavor a Justification from that great Poet's Example; who has made Use, in
another Place, of this very Simile of a Toad, when he also is describing Satan;
but, pray, observe with what Difference, as well in the Occasion, as the
Conduct.

SATAN, after having changed himself into many different Shapes, to avoid a
Discovery, by those Angelick Guards, which were placed about Paradise, is met
with, at last, by one of the Parties.

So saying, on he led his radiant Files,
Dazzling the Moon; These to the Bower direct,
In Search of whom they sought. Him there they found,
Squat, like a Toad, close at the Ear of Eve.
BESIDES his Necessity of providing against Discovery, (of which he was in no
Danger in Sir Richard's Poem) he takes the Shape of a Toad, as most proper,
while Eve was asleep, to approach her closely, concealed among the Flowers, and
sweet Herbs, on which she lay.

Assaying, by his Devilish Art, to reach
The Organs of her Fancy; there to forge
Illusions, as he lists. --
OBSERVE here, that the Devil is in no Rage, when thus compared; but, on the
contrary, under much Terror, and endeavoring to deceive and circumvent, and
therefore obliged in Policy, to assume that Form, which was rather suitable to
his End, than answerable to his Power. But, when he appears in his proper
Likeness, the very Angels are represented, as terrified, and starting back,
with Amazement.

Him, thus intent, Ithuriel, with his Spear,
Touched lightly, for no Falsehood can endure
Touch of Celestial Temper, but returns
Perforce to its own Likeness -- Up he starts,
Discovered, and surpised! As when a Spark
Lights on a nitrous Heap, the smutty Grain,
With sudden Blaze diffused, inflames the Air:
So started up, in his own Shape, the Fiend;
Back stepped the Two fair Angels, half amazed,
So sudden, to behold the grisly King.
NOTHING of this is little, nothing diminishing: The whole is natural,
terrible, majestic, surprising, and becoming the Dignity of the Subject, it
relates to.

A Simile, should, if possible, be alike, in all its Parts; It is enough, that
some one Quality of the Comparison resemble some one Part, or Nature of the
Object it is compared to. -- Homer has been infinitely guilty of this Error;
hurried, as it were, away with the Rapidity of his Imagination, he seldom staid
to weigh any more of a Simile, than that very Part of it, which suited his
Purpose; not mindful enough, that upon starting an Object, to which many
Qualities are common, the Apprehension of the Reader, is not, perhaps, at
Leisure to examine which particular Quality includes the Resemblance, and
therefore discerns not any Likeness at all, but with such Trouble, and
Application, as totally destroy the very End of a Simile. For if the Design of
this Ornament be to illustrate a Description, it ought not certainly to be
found obscure in itself.

THERE is, in the noble Greek Poet abovementioned, a famous Comparison of Ajax,
who retreats slow, from an overpowering Crowd of Trojans; to an Ass in an
Enclosure, surrounded and beaten by the Sticks of the Village, but walking
gravely, notwithstanding, toward the Gap, he came in at, and stopping very
frequently, to eat, in his Way: Monsieur Dacier, Bossu, and all the French
Critics, who are not Converts to Monsieur Perault's Observations, have taken a
great deal of Pains to justify this Simile of Homer's; But, in my Opinion, they
are all mistaken, not only in the Defense, but in the very Accusation: It is
not so much the Ass, that deserves Blame, since he was in those Days a Beast of
Great Quality: It is rather, that the Resemblance is partial, where it ought to
have been total. -- The stiff, reluctant, Receding of Ajax from his Enemies, is
certainly well hit, in the Obstinacy of the Ass; but where is that Part of the
Comparison, which should enliven to our Imaginations, his frequent Return to
Slaughter? His Impatience of Soul? That Fierceness, Indignation, and revengeful
Intrepidity, which the Poet's Description had also prepared us to expect in his
Simile? The Ass, without doubt, was loath to depart, as Ajax, but he was neither
so apt to be angry, nor so dangerous, if he became so.

COMPARISONS, to conclude this Reflection, can never be proper in Passions, or
violent Emotions of Mind; The Imagination is then too much transported, and
inflamed, to cast about for cool Resemblances. But in the Mouth of the Poet,
that is to say, in the Course of the Narration, and not in the Speeches, they
are beautiful, and necessary. They describe Passion well, though they do not
express it: And, to say all in a Word, Where Description alone appears too weak
to imprint an Idea on the Mind of a Reader, there the only effectual Remedy is
to have Recourse to a Simile.

The Plain Dealer. No 105
-- Est mollis flamma medullas
Interea, and tacitum vivit sub pectore Vulnus.
VIRG.
MONDAY, March 22. 1725.
SINCE Love, which, in both Sexes, is the most irresistible of our Passions,
has its strongest Influence on Woman; I could never observe That Cruelty and
malicious Savageness of Jealousy, which actuates the Ladies, against those whom
they consider as their Rivals, without inwardly lamenting the Weakness of their
Minds; who had rather be lovely, than happy; and while they torment their
pretty Hearts with a Thousand Alarms, and Suspicions, never take it into their
Heads to discover, That they hate the Object of their Resentment, for only
thinking, and loving as They do; and that what they are pursuing with Revenge,
ought, rather, to be met, with Compassion.

BUT the Honor of the Sex's Reason, Generosity, and Moderation, seems to be
redeemed, in this Particular, by the noble Spirits of Two Ladies, from One of
which I have had the Pleasure to receive a Letter, so entirely new, and writ
with so much natural Force, and Sweetness, that it is impossible the Reader
should not feel the same Effect from it, that I did. -- I suppress, for the
sake of Modesty, and not without some Reluctance, and Mortification to my
Vanity, an introductory Paragraph, filled with the most obliging, and gentile,
Praises of the PLAIN DEALER; and hasten, at once, into the Subject of the
Letter.

I AM led, (observes this charming Correspondent) to imagine Friendship the
Favorite Passion of your Soul, because your Sentiments seem finely turned for
it. -- Mine too, as far as its inferior Faculties permit, is truly sensible of,
and devoted to it. -- But I never felt it so forcibly, as I did the other Day,
in a Visit, which I made to a young Lady, a dear and intimate Friend, in the
Country.

SHE retired from me, not long since, to indulge a silent Grief, which I, and
every Body, had taken Notice of, but which she had endeavored to conceal from
her Acquaintance, with a Care, as earnest, as it was vain. For her Eyes, and
altered Complexion, made it evident to all, who loved her, and therefore
delighted to look on her, that there was something at her Heart, too melancholy
for Solitude, and yet too engaged for Society.

THE Privilege of our Intimacy introduced me to her Chamber, without Notice, or
Ceremony; where I found her, writing, and alone. -- The Subject, which her
Thoughts were filled with, had fixed her in so profound an Attention, that it
gave me Freedom and Opportunity, to stand a while, and observe the beautiful
Distress of her Mind, which was lost and labored in a meaning Sadness, and
prevented her from seeing, or supposing, that there was any Body so near her.

NEVER was Sorrow so Majestical! so sweetly Noble! -- Her lively Features were
softened into a Languishment, that was lovelier, than Health, and more
charming, than Transport! -- Her Eyes seemed to have conspired, against the
Purpose of her Hands: For they streamed down Tears upon the Paper, as if they
would efface the mournful Words, as fast as she had written them. And, now and
then, a Sigh, (such as Love alone inspires) swelled her conscious, and
distracted, Bosom.

AT last, she saw me, and trembled! -- She rose, in Confusion, and came
forward, to embrace me, which while she was doing, she pressed into my Bosom,
the Paper, she had been writing: And, with a violent Burst of Tears, breaking
suddenly from my Neck, flew, down a Pair of Back-Stairs, into the Garden; and
left me Speechless, with Astonishment!

I FOUND the Paper addressed to me: And I leave you to imagine, whether my
Surprise was at all abated, when I perused in it, the following Discovery of
the unguess'd Cause of my dear Friend's Retirement.

OH! my ever-lov'd! -- my faithful Friend! -- my Heart is flowing to you, with
such Shame, and confessing Penitence, as they who are serene enough to enjoy
the Comforts of Devotion, address all-pitying Heaven with. -- My Misery is so
truly great, that nothing but the Sin of having concealed a Thought from you,
could have given it the least Addition.

BUT, let me hasten to impart, to you, the only Grief, I could have had a
Reason for hiding from you -- I love -- Oh! how shall my Confusion preserve
Strength to go on? while I add -- That it is -- Your Husband! -- Let His
Perfection plead for me, if you start at this Declaration. -- And, oh! confess,
what you have experienced, so undeniably, -- That none could have seen him, as
I have, without being as guilty, as I am.

I WAS dull enough to imagine, That Friendship having possessed my Heart, would
have guarded it, against Love: But, oh! That Thought has lost me!

IT was the fatal Happiness of being near you, that discovered to me the
Beauties of his Mind, -- His respectful Tenderness, for You: His impartial, and
distinguishing Affection for his Children! -- His Contempt of the Proud, and
Ignoble; And his Compassion for the Friendless, and Unhappy! -- Oh! how fatally
is He accomplished! -- and how deserving your Affection!

CONCEAL from him, oh, my Friend! the Knowledge, that He has made me wretched:
For, yet, my Eyes, and my Actions have been so watchfully guarded, that He is
as much a Stranger to it, as all the World, but Yourself; from whom to have
concealed it, appeared to me as Criminal, as not to have concealed it from your
Husband.

THIS, only, dreadful, Cause should have torn me from your loved Society. --
Suffer me, here, to bury myself, in the Innocence of Solitude; till Absence, or
Death, shall have put an End to the Tyranny, with which Love has triumphed over
me.

I KNOW you are too generous to expect, on this sad Occasion, any dull, or
mean, Excuses. -- Where the Will is not guilty, the Misfortune is sufficient
Atonement. But, though you have no Pretense for Pardoning, I flatter myself, you
will weep for me; and, in Pity, now and then, see your ever faithful, unhappy,
Friend, etc.

I leave Her noble Letter, and the Influence it had, on my Soul, to your
beautiful Imagination, Mr. PLAIN DEALER, who may convert it to the Use, and
Pleasure, of your Readers. -- Truth itself takes new Graces from your Pen: And
even Trifles become of Importance, when you adapt 'em to your Purposes. -- Do
me the Honor of your Advice, on so tender an Occasion. And, when I hear how I
ought to have acted, you shall know, in a second Letter, how I really did act;
and its Consequences. -- I am, with all Duty, (for, methinks, there is a Kind
of filial Reverence, due to such a PLAIN DEALER as you are)

SIR, Your most Obedient, Humble Servant, ANGELETTA.


I CONFESS, there is something, so peculiarly refined! so great minded! and so
generous! in both these Ladies, that I am lost, in Admiration. -- All that I am
able to say, under my present Amazement, is, That the Man must be infinitely
Happy, who is so beloved, by Two, such, Lovers! -- He will become the Envy of
my Readers; and, I am afraid, He is mine, already. -- When I hear of such Women
as These, I own, I wish my self Young again -- There is a justifiable Delight
in the Admiration of Beauty, thus glorified! -- These are the delicate Spirits,
that adorn, and ennoble, History. The Virtues of such Charmers will flow down
and extend their Conquests over the Hearts of unborn Posterity.

LET Virgil, if he pleases, boast of his PENTHESILEA's, and CAMILLA's: and
Tasso of his CLORINDA's -- For my Part, I am no Admirer of those martial
Ladies, who have led Armies; and, instead of increasing, unpeopled Kingdoms. --
Let me adore the Female Greatness, that can triumph over Nature; despise the
Motives of Self-Love and Vanity; and smile at the Assaults of Malice,
Ingratitude, or Jealousy; Faults, which, sometimes, are to be met with, in the
softest, and fairest Bosoms!

I SHALL devote a future Paper to Reflection on these generous Friends: -- I
am, now, interrupted, by a Letter, of so different a Turn, that what most vexes
me concernining it, is, That This too, was writ, by a Woman.

To the PLANE DEELAUR.
SUR,
I MUST infoorm you, I am just mared to a Husband as will not let me dow as I
used, and as I will dow, in spite of his Noze. -- I wud have him to no, as I
guvern'd a Famuly, befour this illnater'd Man com'd cross me; Both Servants,
Mother, and Father. -- Bot their was alwase more adow with won Fool, than with
many. So, I desire, to no, if their is not sum way to be parted! For He is not
only Obstinacious, but a Papish besides, and a Non-jewrer; and caant indoor
KING GEORGE, in his Heart, thof He has swar'd to be true to the Guvarnmont. --
We keep a Shop, not sur from Poles. -- Prai wright some Advies to

Your unfartunent Sarvant, SHUTTLECOCK FLUTTER-WING.


THE Orthography of this Lady is admirable! -- I recommend to her immature
Understanding, the Study of Modesty, and Silence, which, I hope, will offend no
Party. -- I cannot but deplore the little Care, which our Marriage Adventurers
seem to take, of their Happiness. They are ready enough, in their shorter
Journies, to inquire, what Company? and would choose Solitude, rather than Bad.
-- What bold Man is there, who has Courage enough to travel with an Ape: Or a
Nurse, with three or four Children, loaded with Bells, Rattles, Drums,
Bird-Calls, and squeaking Trumpets! -- Yet, all These are Music, when compared
with the Voice of Mrs. Flutter-wing.

I WOULD not accompany her, one Mile, of the Stage of Life, for all the Gugaws
in her Shop. -- Though I am thought to be Old, for a Bachelor, I have the utmost
Honor for the Ladies: But, I hope, This cannot be called one. -- I am so angry
with her, that I can write no more!

The Plain Dealer. No 106.
-- Dei quantum instar in illo! --
VIDA.
FRIDAY, March 26. 1725.
THE CZAR of RUSSIA is dead! -- I tell it not, as News; but I speak it, with
Astonishment! -- The greatest Spirit, that ever glorified, and exalted humane
Nature, has stepped out of Time into Eternity: And yet the World looks still the
same! The Sun shines not paler! -- The Season advances and blooms out, with its
usual Regularity! And every Thing (above and below) wears the very Face, which
it was used to wear, before the Death of This, almost adorable Monarch, seemed
to call for a Night of universal Sadness, upon the Luster of Created Glory!

ALAS! how inconsiderable a Wretch am I, then! -- What imports it, how a
Million of us, common Thinkers, live! or where, or when, we die! -- Since this
Godlike Establisher, and Adorner, of Empire, can have left Nature as
unconcerned for him, as he found her: And the World, which seemed to tremble,
under the Weight of his living Pressure, bears no Changes in her Form or
Motion, to distinguish such a Death as His was!

WHAT a mortifying Check upon the Extravagance of humane Ambition, is the
Shortness of that Life, which must give Limits to our noblest Purposes! -- We
are sure to expire, by the natural Course of our Days, before the Event of any
vast Undertaking can have taught us, to what End we labored. -- While we
mediate the Superstructure, we sink, and die, upon the Foundation: And leave
Posterity the License of supposing, examining, and deciding upon, our Schemes
and Actions, with a Latitude, which, could it be foreknown, would curb the
Sallies of great Minds, and teach Heroic Virtue to be ashamed of a Reward, so
precarious, as Fame; and so dependant on the Disposition of Souls, too narrow
to take in Purposes, where Events are left imperfect.

HOW infinite had been the Progress of this prodigious Prince's Glory, could He
have looked forward on such a Length of Life, as was allotted to the Ancient
Patriarchs! -- But, in this, as in all Objects of Reflection, it is easy for us
to trace the Wisdom of Almighty Power, that proportions Blessings to
Necessities: And neither grants, nor withholds, in vain; but adapts, whatever
is, to that which ough to be. -- In the early Ages of the World, when Arts and
Qualities, were yet unknown, there was a visible Necessity, that Men should
live, those many Hundred Years, which, now, we think of, with Amazement;
because their Ignorance required a frequent Return of Observation; and
Connexions of re-iterated Experience, to establish even the Rudiments of all
that Variety of Knowledge, which served their Posterity as Scaffolding, to
stand upon; and, so (by lifting them, at once, the whole Height, which
themselves had climbed to) made their Business in Life so much less, that Life
required to be, proportionably, shorter.

BUT, be this as it will, the most sparkling Ornament of Mortality, is now
become immortal! -- The Soul of PETER the GREAT, perhaps associates and
compares itself with Those of CAESAR, and of ALEXANDER! -- There is Scope
enough, upon the Shoreless Ocean of Eternity, for all its Sails to spread
themselves; and make new Way for Ever, into Knowledge and Discovery! -- This
Earth (however large a Part of it, He honored with His Influence) restrained,
imprisoned and held short, his Genius: -- He seemed to struggle, like a close
cag'd Eagle, for Enlargement more proportioned to the Vastness of his
Qualities. -- He was, truly GOD's VICEGERENT, and irradiated the Human Nature,
with such lively Beamings of the Divine, that, as He obeyed, He resembled, the
Deity! -- He could not, indeed, create Men; But he new-moulded, and inspired
them.

DETACHED, and single Attributes of Virtues, which met, full and perfect, in
the Russian Monarch's Character, have eternized the Memory of Ancient Heroes;
and swelled History with their Praises: -- The Invention of New Arts, The
Establishment of New Laws, The Adornment, or Enrichment, of their Country; The
reducing Barbarism, into civilized Society: The Encouragement of Learning, The
Punishment of Oppression; The Deliverance of their own Country, or, The
Conquest of others: -- Each of these, seperately, has been thought sufficient
in all Ages, to make, and immortalize, a HERO. -- What Name, then shall the
grateful World invent, and bestow, to distinguish the Possessor of more than
all these Virtues, united!

LET us consider him, distinctly and impartially, in the varied Lights of His
Patience, His Application, His Wisdom, His Justice, His Generosity, His
aspiring Magnanimity, and the intrepid Firmness of His invincible Resolution!
-- In every one of these Views, we shall see him equal with the noblest Spirits
of Antiquity: And, in some of them, superior to all, who have been called
Great, before him.

WHAT he has done, can either, never be equaled, or, equaled only by what he
has suffered! -- To look back upon the Beginning of a Life of continued
Wonders! What Dangers, Reproaches, Rebellions, and Ingratitude, did He not meet
with at home? And ( abroad) what Insults, Contempt and Mortifycation? -- Yet,
such was the steadfast Patience and Moderation, of his Nature, that instead of
being inflamed by His Pride, into rash and sudden Resentment, He was only
stimulated by His Reason, into a generous Determination, to make himself too
dreadful for Scorn; and become the Protector of His Despisers. -- That arrogant
Contempt, which was shown (by the late King of Sweden's Permission) to the
Czar, when he passed by Riga, in the Beginning of his meaning Travels! let it
be weighed against the God-like Forgiveness, Generosity, and noble Compassion,
with which this very Czar interposed, afterward, (and even to the Check of his
own Victories) prevented the impending Ruin of that King of Sweden's Hostile
Country! -- Let One of these Considerations, I say, be weighed against the
other; and then, point out any Example, from History, of so amiable a
Greatness! so sincere, and sweet, a Magnanimity!

LET His Application be measured by the Success of His unwearied Labors! --
They, who look into Russia, as it now is, and remember what it was, within
Twenty Years past, will scarce believe themseves free from the Influence of
some Enchantment, when they see Cities of Sixty thousand Houses, covering the
Shore, where (so lately) a few Fishermen dried their Nets! -- When they behold
a Sea filled with His Ships of War, whom they can remember, when He was not
Master of One single Harbor! -- When they see Nature reduced by Art, to yield
Occasions, she was most repugnant to! -- Distant Seas taught to incorporate!
Mountains forced to give Way to Rivers! New Engines, and Arts of War, as well
offensive, as defensive! -- New Customs! New Trades! New Souls! And a Face of
universal Knowledge and Politeness, smiling in all Parts of a Land, which was
so lately overrun with the darkest Ignorance, and Barbarity! -- And, when they
shall be told, That all these astonishing Changes, are the mere Effects of One
Man's prodigious, and unbounded, Mind, what less can they say, in Answer, than,
That such a Man had been a God, could His Body have been rendered, but as
immortal, as His Fame is?

WAS there an Oppressor, in Europe, whom His Resolution did not mortify? or an
injured, or afflicted, Prince, whom His Generosity did not pity? The Wings of
His aspiring Eagle, shadowed both Extremes of the Christian World: And the
Turks looked, with Horror, on the Vengeance, which they saw so near them. --
And, in this only Particular, I am sorry to observe, that the Author of the
NORTHEN STAR, was less a Prophet, than he imagined. -- Death intercepted the
glorious Race, when the Goal was just in View, and left the GREEKS not, yet, so
happy, as that Writer had foretold them.

Grecia's lost Fame shall be restored, by Thee;
O Monarch! -- born, to set an EMPIRE free!
'Twill be -- Prophetic reece re-hopes Her own:
And hails her Caesar, on the Russian Throne.
ATHENS again shall teach -- CORINTH aspire:
And THEBAN Breasts glow with rekindling Fire!
Once more, Byzantium, destined, long, to shine,
Shall rear the ruined Name of CONSTANTINE.
BUT, that I may make the Author of the Poem some Atonement for the false
Prophecy I have charged him with, in the above cited Verses, I acknowledge,
that he was more truly a Prophet, in the Czar's Attempt upon Persia, by Way of
the Caspian Sea: -- As also in the present Design of Discovering the North-East
Passage: Nothing of which had been heard of, 'till long after that Poem was
written: The First Edition of which, was published in the Year 1716.

The Virgin Caspian this bold Lover woo's,
Nor vainly, for her envied Favor sues:
In Secret, won, she has her Love confessed,
And given him Leave to wander over her Breast.
Persia's heaped Wealth shall her vast Portion be;
And Eastern Kings, shall give her Lord the Knee.
Zembla's hige Cliffs, -- Eternal Hoards of Frost!
Where proud Discovery has, so often, been lost,
Through all the Ages of the World, 'till now,
Have checked the Keels, which would those Oceans plow:
Reserved by Fate, and for Thy Reign designed,
Thy piercing Eye, shall the wished Passage find;
Or, to the Western World, the Eastern join,
And see the Profit, and the Glory, THINE!
I perceive, by the Advertisements, that a Third Edition of this POEM is about
to be published. It is needless, therefore, to quote more of it, to the Purpose
mentioned: But I will take the Liberty, however, of concluding my Paper with
the End of it, because it speaks, but what I mean, when I meditate the Praise
of that great Monarch, whom I have the Honor to be writing of.

Thou! Russian Star! That make the Pole out shine
The torrid Brightness of the Burning Line!
Drawn by thy beamy Worth, I, still, would gaze,
But my Eyes ache, beneath the oppressive Blaze.
Descend, rash Muse, from the bold Theme retire;
Thy Fall were dangerous, if thy Flight were higher.
Forbear, Great Prince! nor with such Swiftness, BLESS,
Shook by our Fears, we wish Thy Glory less:
Lest Heaven should scarce Thy now mourned Absence bear,
When Earth yields no new Labor, worth Thy Care.
Hard the Decision, Which most Glory won,
Thy Actions? or the Speed, with which they are done?
When Rome, that glittering, that immortal Name!
Aspired to Rule, and panted after Fame;
Age, copying Age, strove, with progressive Will,
To push the same Design, with equal Skill;
And, when Eight Hundred laboring Years were past,
The late propitious Fortune smiled, at last. --
Not such slow Rise, O Prince! Thy Russia fears;
Thou see not Glory, through such Depth of Years!
At once resolved, at once the Columns rise,
Which lift Thy dreadful Fabric, to the Skies!
Forms and Degrees, let Earth-born Spirits need,
Thy Soul, excentric, moves with inbred Speed:
Makes Nature shake; -- and raises, in a Day,
What, with less Ease, in Ages shall decay!
So, when young Time, in Chains, Existence kept,
And huddled Nature, in dark Chaos, slept;
The Eternal Word, to set Distinction free,
But spoke the Almighty Fiat -- LET THERE BE!
Millions of Ways, the starting Atoms flew:
Like clung to Like; and sudden Order grew.
Struggling in Clouds, a while, Confusion lay;
Then died, at once -- and lost it self in Day:
The Plain Dealer. No 107.
Multa gemens, magnoque animum labefactus amore.
VIRG.
MONDAY, March 29. 1725.
To the PLAIN DEALER.
SIR,
THERE are none of your Essays, which more entitle you to my Esteem, than
those, which you have been inspired with, by the most generous, and gentle,
Passion, that acts on, and adorns Humanity. -- I need not tell you, after this,
that the Passion, I mean, is LOVE. -- You have eonfess'd yourself a Lover; and,
if you had not, I should have guessed it, by the Warmth, and Spirit, of your
Sentiments, when you attempt any thing, on that Subject. -- A Warmth, and
Spirit, Mr. PLAIN DEALER, which agree so ill, with your Grand Climacterick,
that (if it were not for the implicit Reverence, with which I conclude myself
mistaken, when you assert, what I find difficult to believe) I should suppose
your Age, as chimerical, as your Situation; and no more look for you, among the
Old, than upon the Watchtower of Barbican.

BUT, let that pass: No matter, whether you are Old, or no, since I will admit,
that you are Venerable. -- I reverence you, for that Reverence, with which you
speak of Love, and the Ladies. The light World, Mr. PLAIN DEALER, have no Taste
for the refined Ideas, which almost deify this sacred Passion. But, let me
perish, if I would exchange the Enjoyment of my Mistress's Soul, for the most
unbounded Property, in her angelick Body. The Blessing is fullest, I confess,
when both these go together: But the First, without the Last, can give me
Tenderness, Endearment, and the Delight of sweet Reflection; whereas the Last,
without the First, would (in spite of all its Transports) carry with it an
unsatisfying, and reluctant, Void of Thought, which would rob it, of its finest
Relish: For who would dare to think, at all, when (if he thinks) he must be
sensible, that he is receiving, from an unconsenting Heart, the last, and
dearest, Obligation, which can spring from Love, and Gratitude?

THE Cold, and Grave, perhaps, may think, That there is Levity in Loving, to
such sweet Excess, as I do: I, too, once, thought, as they think! -- But Time,
and the remembered Converse of a Woman, softer, than the First Idea's of her
Sex's Innocence! and wiser, and more solid, than their last Reflections, when
they leave a World that flattered them! have taught me, that there is no Joy on
Earth, so real, and so lasting, as the Union of a Soul, so charmed, as mine is,
with the Soul, that has so charmed it! -- Absence, Mr. PLAIN DEALER, and a
Thousand Obstacles, I dare not name, have interposed their cruel Influence: And
I have, almost, Cause to fear, my Tenderness, and Constancy, are doubted, even
by the lovely Object of them: And, yet, I never pass a Moment, which takes not
its Pain, or Pleasure, chiefly, from the Part, Her ever-present Image bears, in
the Occasion. The Memory of Her dear Interest in me, gives Spirit to my Hope,
Mitigation to my Sorrow, and Moderation to my Anger. If I fear, it is for Her:
And, if I wish, it is to make her happy. -- She alleviates all my Cares; and,
yet, she quickens, and increases them! She is my Business, when I have Leisure,
and my Leisure, when I am in the midst of Business. She is the Paradox, and
Riddle, of my Life! I have the Misfortune to live, absent from her, yet is she
never out of my Company! I am not -- must not -- cannot be Here Is; and yet, am
only Here Is, for Ever!

I REMEMBER, when, I had the Blessing of seeing her oft'ner, I once painted my
Soul's full Meaning, in the following Copy of Verses to her, or something, not
much unlike them. -- Be so good, as to insert them; she, sometimes, sees your
Paper, and they may awaken the Remembrance of a Passion, she, perhaps, relaxes
from. -- I hope, Her Soul does Justice to the Impression which mine glows with:
But, let Her Thoughts of Me, be kind, or less partial, than they have been, I
must never expect the Power, which, I am sure, I shall never wish for, of
redeeming myself from that sweet Captivity, in which Her Image holds the Heart
of,

SIR, Her faithful Lover, And Your Servant, CONSTANTIUS.


To the Lovely BELLADORA.
SWEET Enslaver! can you tell,
Ever I learnt to love, so well,
How my wishless Hours could move,
All unbusied, by my Love?
It Is Amazement, now, to me,
What could, then, a Pleasure be!
But, since You smiled, new Sense to give,
From that sweet Hour, I feel, I live.
OH! what Fires his Bosom warm,
Whom Soul, and Body, join, to charm!
Endless Transports, dance along,
Nobly soft! or sweetly strong!
Flaming Fancy, cool Reflection;
Fierce Desire, and awed Subjection:
Aching Hope; -- and Fear increasing;
Struggling Passions, never ceasing:
Wishing, trembling, Soul adoring;
Ever-blest, and still imploring!
TELL the Cold, the Dull, the Tame,
(Who these dear Disorders blame)
Tell 'em, That in Honor's Race,
Charmed by some such Heavenly Face,
Lovers, still, the foremost, ran:
Love's a Second Soul to Man!
EASE is languid, low, and base;
Love excites an active Chase:
Glory, Wealth, Ambition, Wit;
Thoughts' for boundless Empire fit!
All, at Love's Approach, are fired;
Ever bent, and never tired.
He, who feels not Love's sweet Pain,
Lives at Ease -- but lives, in vain.
LITTLE dream you, what is due,
Angel Form! to Love, and You!
It Is from You, I Joy possess;
It Is by You, my Grief grows less.
Sadly pensive, when, alone,
I the Shades of Life bemoan;
If some Voice, your Name impart,
Care lies lightened at my Heart:
Every Woe disarms its Sting;
And every starting Hope takes Wing!
WHEN my Fancy brings to View,
Works, which Wealth, or Power, could do;
All my spurred Excitements wake;
And Fortune charms me, for your Sake:
Oh! I cry, 'twere Heaven possessed,
To make her Great, who makes me Blessed!
IN the Morning, when I rise,
If the Sunshine strikes my Eyes;
All, that pleases, in its View,
Is my Hope, 'twill show me YOU.
WHEN the sable Sweep of Night,
Drowns Distinction from my Sight,
I no inward Darkness find;
You are Daylight, to my Mind.
ALL my Dreams, are Lives of Joy,
Which, in waking, I destroy:
You, a Slave to Custom made,
Are of empty Forms afraid;
But your happier Image, free
From fantastic Tyranny,
Independent, kind, and wise,
Shuns Restraint, and knows no Ties.
Oh! the dear, delightful, Pain!
Who, that sleeps, thus, would wake again?
IT is lucky, for this pleasant Spark, that his Poetry is more agreeable to me,
than his Purpose; -- An extraordinary Use, truly, he has found out, to put the
Gravity of the PLAIN DEALER to! If it were, not some Comfort, that he appears
to think, like a modest Lover, I should have been out of all Patience, to have
had my Sobriety so artfully made a stalking Horse to the amorous Plots of these
young Fellows, and their Sweethearts, who tell one another their Minds, under
Pretense of writing to the PLAIN DEALER! But, as it is, I forgive the
Stratagem, merely for the sake of the Poetry; which, I own, I am pleased with,
because it is natural, and seems to have flowed from the Heart, which is a
warmer Inspirer, than Helicon.

The Plain Dealer. No 108.
Justum and Tenacem propositi Virum. --
HOR.
FRIDAY, April 2. 1725.
DESIGNING to be grave to Day, on the sober Subject of RESOLUTION, I will bribe
my Reader's Attention, to a Discourse, less gay, than useful, by telling them a
short Story, in the very Front of my Paper.

SALADIN, the Sultan of Egypt, though he had Dominions enough, of his own, was
always ready, when Occasion offered, to make free with other People's. -- At
his Return without Success, from the Siege of Mosoul, in Syria, he seized into
his Hands the whole Lordship of Emessa, in Prejudice to the Right of Nasir
Eddin, the young Prince, who claimed it. And this he did, upon Pretense, That
the late Father of the Youth had forfeited, by giving Countenance to
Consederacies against the Soldan's Interest.

SALADIN, however, ordered, That proper Care should be taken, of the injured
Prince's Education: and being desirous to observe, what Progress he made in his
Studies, he was brought, one Day, before the Sultan; who asked him, with much
Gravity, In what Part of the Alcoran he was Reading? -- I am come, replied the
young Prince (to the Surprise of all, who were near him) to that Verse, which
informs me, That He who devours the Estates of ORPHANS, is not a King, but a
Tyrant.

THE Sultan was much startled at the Turn, and Spirit, of his Repartee; but,
after some Pause, and Recollection, returned the Youth this generous Answer. --
He, who speaks, with such Resolution, would act with so much Courage, that I
restore you to your Father's Possessions, lest I should be thought to stand in
Fear of a Virtue, which I only reverence.

SUCH an Influence has Firmness, even in Words, and Appearance! But, when
reduced into Practice, it is productive of innumerable Benefits: So that, were
I to be asked by a Man of Sense, Which would be his shortest Road, to Felicity;
My Answer should be, The Path, which leads through Constancy and Resolution: No
other Road, but this! and no other Guide, than Conscience, can carry him
through his Journey, and bring him safe to the End he aims at.

RESOLUTION in Life, is like Action in Oratory; as Demosthenes described it: It
is the First, Second, and Third Thing necessary. The Soul is endowed with Three
powerful Faculties; the Understanding, the Memory, and the Will; but, with
regard to moral Life, they all Three lie dead, without the Help of Resolution.
Resolution is their Parent, their Midwife, and their Nurse. It first
impregnates them with Activity; then delivers them in their Labors; and
nourishes the Effects of those Labors with Perseverance. What imports it, to
know either the Good or the Proper, if we forget or overlook that Knowledge?
Or, to what End do we remember, what is Great, and Heroic in others, if
Resolution does not conform our Will to cooperate with our Understanding!

RESOLUTION therefore is the spiritual Union of the Mind's best Faculties: and
may, not improperly, be called the Soul of the very Soul itself. -- It
exercises the Understanding into Meditation; Meditation gives Life to Memory;
and reduces Good Will into Habit; and Habitual Good Will inspires the Memory
and Understanding to break beautifully forth, into a Series of good Actions.

FOR this Reason I have often reflected, that we stand more in Need of being
reminded, than of being taught; and that, whoever would lead Men to be good,
that is, to be happy; should rather inspire them with Resolution to do what
they know to be right, than to learn, what it is to do rightly. Moral Arguments
should be chiefly applied to the Memory, and are Incentives to the Will, rather
than Aids to the Understanding.

THIS is evident, methinks, from the following Considerations; Wisdom, as it
regards practical Life, is no more than a Faculty of discerning what is Good,
from what is Evil; what is to be embraced, and what rejected. -- Now if the
wisest Man upon Earth, by the Dint only of Resolution, could bring himself to
practice, what a Man of the most moderate Faculties comprehends and
distinguishes, he would indeed, be a wise Man, according to the genuine
Signification. But, as the World goes, were we strictly to measure the
Capacities, even of the Wisest, by their Actions, we should be mortified into a
Necessity of considering this vast Globe, but as a Stage full of busy Fools,
with scarce a steady Purpose among them. And, however the Philosophers may have
declared a Vacuum an Absurdity in Nature; we should, plainly, discover one, in
Sense, among the Agents of the intellectual World: We must therefore conclude,
That the Fault lies not in the Understanding, but the Will; nor proceeds from
Want of Knowledge, but Deficiency of Firmness, and Resolution. Mr. DRYDEN,
speaking of Men in their thinking and contemplative Faculty, says somewhere, to
the Praise of the meanest Writers, That he never read any Argument so
indifferently handled, out of which a wise Man might not gather something that
was valuable: And Cardinal RICHLIEU, has observed, concerning active and
political Life, That he knew many, to whom the Direction of great Kingdoms
might be happily committed in the Morning, whom, yet, in the Afternoon, he
would scarce trust with the Administration of his Hen-roost.

A LITTLE common Thief knows he should not commit Injustice; and understands
well enough, when he commits it -- but, wanting Resolution to be publicly
needy, rather than privately dishonest, he deviates from the real Good; and
ventures upon the appearing. -- How often has the Judge acted the Felon upon
the Bench, and robbed before their Faces, who accuse Robbers at his Tribunal!
He dares commit the very Crime which he is seated there, to condemn; But he
wants Resolution to despise the Bribe, though he has not the Felon's Necessity
to plead in Excuse of it: The poor Thief in this Case, as silly as he looks at
the Bar, stands in Need of no Instructor. But the Judge himself, as wise as he
appears, in his Furs, wants a Remembrancer at his Elbow, to put him in Mind of
his Duty.

COMMON Gamesters, know so well the Ignominy of giving false Judgment, at a
public Hazard-Table, that they have generally Resolution enough to resist very
great secret Temptations that Way; and have seldom been found guilty, though
Custom, and not Conscience, is the Motive of their Forbearance. But, how little
History need we read, to know, That we have had Dispensers of Equity, who have
been in the utmost Necessity of Plain-dealing Monitors, not indeed to instruct
them; but to put them in Mind, that Equity was not Iniquity. -- We all of us
know, but few, or none of us think. -- We distinguish not the Things that lie
before us, through the Mistiness of Avarice, or any other intervening Passion.
It cannot be said, that we are unable to see: But that we see without
Discernment. -- The Understanding has Eyes, but Irresolution has jaundic'd them.

HOW does Ambition reduce and mislead those, whom we call wise Men, into
awkward Condescensions, which make them cheap in the very Eyes of the Vulgar?
How often have we seen Pride, and Insolence assume the Flexure of the sneaking
Candidate, in order to strut immediately after, in the Abuse of entrusted
Office? The Farce of DOCTOR FAUSTUS has been represented as light, and
ridiculous, because, its Plot is no more, than that, while the Conjurer enjoys
his Wand, he enjoys his Wishes: That Wand converts every Thing into the
Accomplishment of his Purposes: But no sooner is his Term, of holding that
White Staff, expired; than the Conjuration expires with it; and he is the
poorest, weakest, most despairing, and most abandoned Wretch alive. This, every
Spectator sees through, and laughs at; and yet, how happy might it have been
for some other Wand-holders, of this Kingdom, if that poor Farce had been acted
before them, instead of their duller State Interludes, in order to serve as a
useful Memorial, that they should not misuse those Wands like FAUSTUS; that is,
play Tricks, till their Time is out, and then be delivered up to the Devil.

AS little Men become great by Resolution, and great Men degenerate into little
ones without it; so Admonitions, to those Duties, which every little Man knows,
are necessary notwithstanding, to the Wisest; Of this ALEXANDER's Father,
PHILIP, demonstrated himself very sensible; That Prince's Servant, knew, no
doubt, as well as his Master, that a King was no more than a Man: But PHILIP,
mindful, that high Fortune had often made light Heads forget themselves,
commanded this Servant to wake him every Morning, by this well-known Lesson in
his Ear; -- Remember thou art but a Man. -- Now, many would be apt to imagine,
that little Profit could arise from such constant Repetition of this short and
needless Intimation: Yet Sir FRANCIS BACON, who knew well both the great World
and the little, has left us the following Axiom concerning it: "All (
monitorial) Precepts concerning Kings, are, in Effect, comprehended in these
Two Remembrances; -- Remember thou art a Man; -- Remember thou art GOD 's
Vicegerent. The one bridleth their Power, the other their Will." -- In Truth,
if ALEXANDER had affected to be no more than he was, the Son of PHILIP, instead
of aspiring to Divinity and the Title of AMMON; he would have more than
conquered the World; for he would have conquered the very Conqueror of it.

RESOLUTION then, is the only Means to make a Man completely happy; and
frequent Admonition serves to keep Resolution alive. The Lowest can scarce
stand in Need of a moral Instruction; but the Highest may be greatly indebted
for Admonition; and consequently, all young Men, who propose to make any Figure
in public Employments, should give Ear, to a Plain Dealer, who dares put them
in Mind of their Weakness. -- A Man who has Firmness enough to see the Worst of
his own Soul, will soon have the Satisfaction to find the Prospect much
bettered. He will learn Patience in ill Fortune, and Abstinence in good; He
will be fortified with Resolution, to be humble, just, and charitable, amidst
the strongest Inflations, and Indulgements of Prosperity: and disdain to be
found envious, dejected, or revengeful, amidst the bitterest Resentments, and
Solicitations of Calamity. Such a Man shall not only preserve an inward
Tranquillity; but, whatever the Color of his Fortune may be, he will owe a
Luster to Himself, and cast it round him upon Others. He will not only be
followed, but beloved in his Prosperity; and in his Adversity he will be
lamented.

The Plain Dealer. No 109.
Glaucumque, Medontaque, Thersilochumque.
VIRG.
MONDAY, April 5. 1725.
To the PLAIN-DEALER.
SIR,
IT is with no small Expectation, that I observe you, in some of your Papers,
making Excursions into the Province of Criticism: It is a Subject, not only
Entertaining, but Instructive: And there is no kind of Knowledge, in which
those gay Spirits, who are loudest, and most ready, in giving Judgment, are so
contemptibly and lamentably Deficient, as in the Art of Judging rightly.

TWO Improvements might be hoped for, in the Taste of most Readers, from a more
general Propagation of the Knowledge of distinguishing clearly: We should
neither be ashamed to praise the Merit of the Obscurest rest of our
Cotemporaries; nor afraid to censure the Errors of the most Popular among
ancient Writers.

HOMER's famous Catalogue, of Grecian Ships, and their Commanders, would, then,
I am apt to believe, cease to pass for one of his Sublimest, and most Poetical
Beauties. Its Geographieal Exactness would no longer be pleaded as a Balance,
against the Dryness, and Tediousness, of its Historical Enumeration: Since it
is no Part of a Poet's Business, to teach the Situation, Bounds, and Quality,
of Countries. Little, occasional Descriptions of that kind, it is true, may
sometimes, be necessary; and, being artfully introduced, and handled, might not
only diversify a Poem; but also render it delightful: Without which last
Quality, the whole Labor is lost. And nothing, certainly, can delight, that is
tiresom, and heavy.

BUT the Bigotry of a Succession of unpoetical Commentators, Men of Learning,
without Genius; has heaped upon this Catalogue, such profuse and ill-judg'd
Encomium, that the whole Herd of Imitators, from the Tasso's of Italy, down to
the Blackmore's of Britain, have lengthened out their hostile Muster-Rolls, to
the Terror and Provocation, even of the most patient of their gentle Readers.
And some of these have been fortunate enough to meet with Applause, more
extravagant, even than Homer's: For they have been compared with and preferred
to Homer's. Witness Ben Johnson's commendatory Vision, printed before the old
Edition of DRAYTON 's Battle of Agincourt.

There, Thou art Homer, -- Pray thee use the Style
Thou have deserved; and let me read, the while,
Thy CATALOUE of SHIPS, cxceeding his!
THE Catalogue, here meant, is of those Ships, which transported the English
Forces, in our Henry the Fifth's first Attempt upon France. -- I will entertain
the Reader with this (so highly applauded) Catalogue; because it may deserve to
stand, as a Proof, what poor Products we are to expect, from a servile and
implicit Imitation.

And, first, Seven Ships, from Rochester, are sent,
The Bonadventure, George, and the Expense;
Antilope, Henry, Elephant, Defense:
Bottoms, as good, as ever spread a Clue!
All having Charge, their Voyge having been,
Before Southampton, to take Soldiers in.
Twelve Merchant Ships, of mighty Burden all,
New, off the Stocks, that had been rigged for Stoad,
Riding in Thames, by Limehouse, and Black-wall,
That ready were, their Merchandise to load.
Eight goodly Ships from Bristol, ready made,
With Spanish Wine, which they for Ballast lade;
And, as these Eight the Severn Sea do stem,
Five more, from Padstow, came along with them.
From Plymouth next, came in the Blazing-Star,
And Fiery Dragon, to take in their Fraught,
With other Four, especial Men of War,
That in the Bay of Portugal had fought:
The Hare of Loo, a right good Ship, well known,
That twice, the Year before, the Streights had past;
Two wealthy Spanish Merchants did her own,
Who, then, but newly had repaired her waste:
And, from Mount's-Bay, Six more, that still in Sight.
Waited with her before the Isle of Wight.
Nine Ships, for the Nobility, there went
Of able Men, the Enterprise to aid;
Northumberland, and Westmoreland, in sent
Fourscore at Arms apiece, and themselves laid
At Sixscore Archers each; as Suffolk shows
Twenty tall Men at Arms, and Forty Bows.
Darcy, and Camois, zealous for the King,
Lovel, Fitzwater, Willoughby, and Ross,
Berkly, Powis, Burrel, fast together cling,
Seymour, and St. John, for the Business close,
Each Twenty Horse, and Forty Foot do bring,
More, to Nine hundred, 'mounting in the Gross,
In those Nine Ships; and fitly them bestowed,
With which the other fall into the Road.
From Holland, Zealand, and from Flanders, won
By weekly Pay, Threescore Twelve Bottoms came,
From Fifty upward, to Five Hundred Tun,
For every Use, a Mariner could name:
Their glittering Flags, against the radiant Sun,
Showed, as if all the Sea had been on Flame;
Then Skiffs, Crays, Scallops, and the like, why these,
From every small Creek, covered all the Seas.
THIS, though a bald, and unlovely Imitation of Homer, is better I think, in
one Sense, than the Original, by so much, as it is shorter; for no Man of
Reason will be persuaded to believe, that in a Poem of this kind, such a
tedious, and dry List of a Fleet, though it preserves a particular Piece of
Antiquity (which is the Commentators weak Defense for Homer) can stand
agreeably in the Place of Invention, Spirit, Fancy, and the Energy of Poetry.

SUCH a barren, and distinct Enumeration gives a wearisom Satiety to the Mind,
and drags too hard on the Attention. When I read, for so many Leaves together,
not what Persons do, but who they are, and whence they came; without any of
that enlivening Variety of Circumstance, or Description, which should relieve
the Imagination, it puts me in Mind of our Ancestors simple Epitaphs: Honest
People! who thought it Merit enough to have lived, married, and got Children,
without loading their Tomb-stones with the Weight of their Actions!

Of Wiliam Wilson, Joan his Wife,
And Alice, their Daughter dear,
These Lines be left, to give Report,
Those Three lie burid here;
And Alice was Henry Deacon's Wife,
Which Henry lives on Earth;
And is the Serjeant-Plummer unto Queen Elizabeth.
With whom our Alice left Issue here,
Her virtuous Daughter Joan,
To be his Comfort, everywhere,
Now joyful Alice is gone.
And again, Here the good Lady Margaret North
In Tomb does quiet lie;
Of Husbands Four the able Spouse,
Whose Fame shall never die:
One Andrew Frances was the First;
The Second Robert hight,
Surnamed Chartsey, Alderman;
Sir David Brook, a Knight:
But then comes he, that passed all,
And was, in Number, Fourth,
One, for his Virtue, made a Lord,
And called Sir Edward North.


AMONG all these copious Particularities, there is nothing, that deserved the
telling, if we except the great Rarity, that comes in the Rear; A Man made a
Lord for his Virtue! That, indeed must be owned to have been a Wonder worth
recording: It was considered too, it seems, as an Accident so unusual, that the
good Man appears, by the last Verse, to have been ashamed of his Singularity;
and rather chose to stick fast to his old knightly Title of Sir Edward, than be
pointed at, as he passed the Streets, for a kind of Miracle. But here follows
something, which no Poet's List among them all, can compare with, for Exactness.

This Life has on Earth no certain While,
Example by John, Mary, and Oliver Style;
Who, under this Stone, lies buried in the Dust,
And puts you in Memory, that all die must.
John Style, born 1582, the 22d of May;
Died 1583, June the 25th Day:
The 5th of October 1583, Mary Style born was:
August the 5th 1585, out of this Life she did pass.
Oliver Style the 25th of February 1584, this mortal Life begun,
And ended the same August the 9th 1585, his Course being then run.
NOW, Sir, bating, as is necessary, for the Difference between the Verses, a
Man is apt to conclude, That a Poet, too prolix in the Lists, I have been
speaking of, has as little to say for the Actions of the greatest Part of his
Captains, as these very exact Epitaphs, for the Oliver's, Alice's, Joan's, and
Andrew's, who occasioned them.

I am, SIR, Your Constant Reader, And Humble Servant, etc.


The Plain Dealer. No. 110.
Nos populo damus. --
SEN.
FRIDAY, April 9. 1725.
To the Author of the PLAIN-DEALER.
Oh Dear! Mr. PLAIN DEALER,
MANY a Lady has been charmed into a Passion for her future Lover, upon Sight
only of his Picture: But my Fate is the very Reverse of This; For, before I saw
the Picture of my Florello, I was almost in Love with the Original: Whereas,
now, I am fallen absolutely in Love with the Picture, and can scarce bear the
Sight of That odious Lover of mine, who sat for it.

THE Picture, you must know, is a Kind of Paradox: For it is drawn but in
Black, and White; and yet glows, with the liveliest Force; and most natural
Mixture of strong Coloring! It is One, of a valuable Collection, which was
exposed to Public Sale last Week; under Title of The UNIVERSAL PASSION, Part
II. -- Would to Heaven I knew the Painter! A Hand, so exquisite at Touching,
should take me, as often as I could possibly sit to him. Nay, I would sooner be
drawn by Him, than by Apelles, or Titian, or Lilly, or Vandike; or by any
Pencil ancient, or modern; except that only, to which we owe so many
envy-raising Pictures of my Friend Mrs. Arabella Farmor.

NOT but there is infinite Difference, between the Two Pieces; and the Lines,
indeed, are strikingly distinguished, in both: -- In the Lady's, They are
sweet, soft, delicate! In my Florello's, They are strong, bold, glaring!
Florello's very Life is not half so lively, as this fine Painter's speaking
Representation of it. -- See! the Figure, and the Spirit! the Grace! and
Passion, of the Picture!

OF late, at White's, was young Florello seen,
How blank his Look! how discomposed his Mien!
(In Grief Sincere, so hard it proves to feign!)
Sunk were his Spirits! for his Coat was plain.
NEXT Day, his Breast regained its wonted Peace,
His Health was mended with a Silver Lace!
A curious Artist, long inured to Toils,
Of gentler sort, with Combs, and fragrant Oils,
Whether by Chance, or by some God inspired,
So touched his Curls, his mighty Soul was fired!
The well-swoln Ties an equal Homage claim,
And either Shoulder has its Share, of Fame.
His sumptuous Watch-Case, though concealed it lies,
Like a good Conscience, solid Joys supplies.
He only thinks himself (so far from vain!
St -- pe in Wit, in Breeding, D -- l -- ne.
Whenever by seeming Chance, he throws his Eye,
On Mirrors, flushing with his Tyrian Dye,
With how sublime a Transport leaps his Heart?
But Fate ordains, that dearest Friends must part.
In active Measures, brought from France he wheels;
And triumphs, conscious of his learned Heels!
TO deal plainly with the PLAIN DEALER, just after I had been reading this
mortifying Description of the Man, whom I had been weak enough to feel some
little Tenderness for, His Evil Genius danced in with him; and I blushed, to my
very Forehead, to reflect, that I should owe to the lively Painting of a
Satire, my first Discovery, that the Florello, who had been so intimately my
Acquaintance, was the Reverse of a Fine Gentleman!

PRAY publish This Extraordinary Cure, in Justice to the Skill, and Reputation,
of the Learned Doctor, who effected it: And assist, thereby, the good Wishes,
and the Gratitude of,

Dear Mr. PLAIN DEALER, Your unknown, humble Servant, CLARASTELLA.


Friday, March 19. 1724. Mr. PLAIN-DEALER,
AS You are a Gentleman of Penetration, and capable of rendering every Thing
that is offered to You in a brighter Capacity than I am, (which occurred to me,
upon reading your Paper of Friday, March the 12th, in Relation to PUGG 's
Complaint, against that Feathery Fool, called a PARROT, in a House that is just
over against him) I I desire, that in your next, you would only give Caution to
a certain Lady, whose Lodgings are opposite to mine, That she does not indulge
PUGG, as I have seen her, in all that provoking and unmerited Freedom, of
pawing her upon the Mouth and Bosom. Flesh, and Blood, Mr. PLAIN DEALER, is not
able to bear it; and if we must not cast the Food of Man to Dogs, I am sure it
is much less lawful to bestow His Right upon an ugly Monkey. -- In short, I am
out of all manner of Patience; and if this Lady will not be so kind as to keep
my Rival out of my Sight, I must be forced to brick up my Windows, or remove to
a new Lodging: For I would not, methinks, be so unreasonable, as to quarrel
with PUGG Himself about it: Since, He looks (to confess the Truth) as if He was
born to be the Lady's Favorite.

I am, SIR, Your afflicted Reader, P. A.


March, 25, 1724. SIR,
YOU will much oblige one of your constant Readers, and very great Admirers; if
you will but answer me this Quere, viz. In your Excellent PLAIN DEALER, of
August the 24th, 1724, No 45, treating of Love, wherein is contained, part of
that lovely POEM on the same Subject, I find these Lines; Absent from Her, in
whom alone we live,
Life grows a Bankrupt, and no Bliss can give:
Friends are IMPORTUNATE, and Pleasures lost, etc.


NOW all the Question is, Whether that is not a Mistake of the Printer's;
putting Importunate for Impertinent? or, Whether I, in Justice to you, for
giving this Trouble, should not write myself,

Want-of- WIT?


TO a Lover, who retires to Solitude, for a quiet, and uninterrupted,
Indulgment of his Passion, the very Civilities, and good Offices, of
Friendship, are unwelcome; and the Pressure of them is Importunately
troublesome; and this was doubtless the Sense, in which the Author of that Poem
made use of the Word Importunate. -- Impertinent had been less applicable, as
well as less elegant; because it is the Duty of a Friend to be solicitous in
advising, and comforting us, however uneasy he makes us, by the Effect of his
disrelish'd Intention. So that my Correspondent, will name himself more justly,
if, in the next Letter he favors me with, he changes his Subscription from
Want-of-WIT, only to Want-of-ATTENTION.

To the PLAIN DEALER.
SIR,
I HAVE perceived, quite through the Course of your Papers, that your Tendency,
is not only to Delight your Readers; but to Inform, and Refine them. Upon this
Consideration, I must persuade myself, you will set the following Subject in
the strongest Light; which, the more effectually to recommend it to you, I
assure you it is not fictitious, but real Matter of Fact. -- There is a certain
Widow, who has two Sons, and two Daughters, the former of which, are arrived to
the State, which writes them Men, both brought up to creditable Employments;
but neither of them capable of proceeding in their Business, without her
Assistance; which, though very able to give, she refuses them.

YOU will be more than a little surprised, when I tell you, there is a Person,
beyond Description, rustical, and unlovely, who makes his awkward Addresses to
the Wealth of this Widow: And that this is the Consideration which she prefers
to the Welfare of her Children, who have urged her, on their Knees, to regard,
not only Their Good, but what the World will say of herself. -- Deaf to all
their Intercessions, she continually repulses them, and is unalterably
determined, on her own and their Ruin.

NOW, I would beg of you, to tell me, What Motive can induce her to this? And
to account for it in a Physical Manner? Should not the moving Wants and
Dependence of her own Children, prevail more upon her Nature, than the
interested Addresses of a Stranger? For I am afraid, there are no Incentives to
Love, on either Side, and I am loath to give it its other Name. If, Sir, you
insert this as soon as you can in your Paper, you may do a real Good, and at
the same Time you will oblige one of your constanr Readers.

I am, SIR, etc.


MY good Friend, Tony Jyngle, whom I have not seen till lately, since the Death
of Sir Portly Rufus, of which I gave my Readers the melancholy History, in one
of my former Papers; was just come to visit me, as I had received this Letter,
from the Publisher: And, upon hearing it read, told me, with much Force of
Politeness, and Penetration, That there were certain Politic Reasons, against
accounting in a Physical Manner, for the Motive, which induces this
unmanageable Widow: But he was of Opinion, it might do as as well, if I
accounted for it Poetically: And, to that end, he favored me, within, Fifteen
Minutes, and a Half quarter, with the following Copy of Verses, which he
intitles, WOMAN'S RESOLUTION.
OH! -- cried Arsenia, long in Wedlock blessed,
Her Head reclining on her Husband's Breast;
"Should Death divide thee from thy doting Wife,
"What Comfort could be found, in widowed Life?
"How the Thought shakes me! -- Heaven my Strephon save,
"Or give the lost Arsenia half his Grave!
JOVE heard the lovely Mourner, and approved:
"And should not Wives like this, (said he) be loved?
"Take the soft Sorrower at her Word; and try
"How deeply rooted Woman's Vows can lie?
'Twas said, and done -- the tender Strephon died;
Arsenia, Two long Months -- to outlive him tried:
But, in the Third -- alas! -- became a BRIDE.


The Plain Dealer. No 111
-- Jovis omnia Plena --
VIRG.
MONDAY, April 12. 1725.
To the Author of the PLAIN DEALER.
SIR,
THE astonishing Structure, the immense, but beautiful, Extent, and Order of
Creation, demand, not the Notice only, but, the Veneration of every reasonable
Being. No less than infinite Wisdom could conceive the Plan; nor less than
Almighty Power erect the Fabric! Our Sight is struck with Amazement, when we
look but upon a stately Building, the mere Effect of Human Invention; And, yet,
(to the Shame of our Stupidity be it spoken) we can consider the Earth, we live
on, with Indifference; -- we can walk under the Lamps of Heaven, without being
enlightened by the smallest Glimmering of Divine Reflection! nor (to many) do
they argue any thing greater than Chance, which, in other Words, is Nothing.

YET, certainly, no Knowledge can be so delightful, to the Soul, as This, which
is, at the same Time, the noblest, and most useful, that can busy us, in our
short Pilgrimage through the Body. Nay, The excellent Mr. Ray has very
pleasingly imagined, that it may be Part of our Business and Employment, to all
Eternity, to discover still, deeper and deeper, into the unfathomable Works of
God; and contemplate the Glory of his Wisdom, Power, and Goodness.

I AM sensible, You concur with me, that the Honor due to God, should excite
the noblest of our Thoughts, and Actions; because You have endeavored to make
our Lives, in their good Purposes, and their Luster, resemble the Celestial
Bodies; and move, for their own, and for other's Benefit. And since you have
not refused to exert your Genius toward refining, enlarging, and advancing, our
Ideas of Divine Greatness: So, doubtless, you will oblige your Readers, in the
Sequel of this Letter, with a Trace of Reflections, for which we are indebted
to the Author of that excellent Discourse, The Religion of Nature Delineated.

I am, SIR, Your Humble Servant, PHILOTHEUS.


WHAT a vast Field for Contemplation is opened in those Regions of Matter,
about us, in which there is not the least Particle, but carries with it an
Argument of God's Existence; not the smallest Trifle but shows it; nor the
slightest Motion produced, the softest Whisper of the Air, but tells it. -- The
Frame and Constitution of the World, the astonishing Magnificence of it, the
various Kinds of Beings, and the Constancy observed in the Productions of
Things, and the Uses for which they are produced, do all show, that there is
some Almighty Designer at the Top of all these Things: Such Marks they bear of
his Power, and Wisdom.

IN order to prove, to any Doubter, the the Grandeur of this Fabric, we need
only bid him consider the Sun, with that insupportable Glory that surrounds it:
The vast Distance, Magnitude, and Heat of it! The Planets periodically moving
in their several Orbits, about it, with all their Regular Variety of Aspects,
guarded, some of them, by secondary Planets, and, as it were, emulating the
State of the Sun; and, probably, all These, possessed by distinct and proper
Inhabitants! -- Let him think of those surprising Visits the Comets make us;
the large Trains of uncommon Splendour, which attend them; the far Country they
come from, and the Curiosity and Horror they excite, not only among us, but in
the Inhabitants of the Worlds about us; who also may be up, as we are, to see
the Entry, and Progress, of these new Ministers of the Almighty: -- Let him
direct his Eye and Contemplation, through those azure Regions above him, up to
the fixed Stars, that radiant, and numberless Host of Heaven; and reflect but,
how unlikely it is, that they should be placed there, only to adorn, and
bespangle, our Canopy! He will, then, instruct himself, that they are so many
other SUNS, with their several Regions, and and dependant Planets, about them!
He will further discern, by the Help of Glasses, still more and more of these
fixed Lights, and exalt himself to an Apprehension of their unaccountable
Numbers, and of the Immensity of those Spaces, that lie retired beyond, not our
Ken only, but even our Imagination.

Here, on light Fancy's saily Wings, I rise,
Awed, and confounded, through deep Wilds of Air!
Millions of opening Wonders strike my Eyes;
And Reason's finite View is dazzled there!
Globes, behind Globes, un-number'd, hence appear.
The twinkling Stars, that from dim Earth, remote,
Seem heav'n-set Gems, and scattered Seeds of Day;
Here, (Buoyant Worlds!) midst Seas of Ether flote,
And, over blue Kingdoms, hold a fiery Sway.
In distant Orbits, round each reigning Star,
Huge Earths, and Moons, their cirly Homage pay:
Millions of countless Miles are lost between,
And sickening Thought grows tired, to stretch so far!
How brightly vast each concave Sphere is seen!
The enormous Vaults, with wheeling Worlds glow round;
Rolling oblique, yet none their Paths confound:
Their crossing Currents cause no clashing Jars;
Nor one the other's Progress bars.
Wide round their central Suns their Tours they make;
Yet no proud Planet dares his Line forsake:
Partial, an intercepted Ray to break.
They take, and lend, by Turns, the streaming Light;
And form, in solemn Silence, Day, and Night.
WE need only consider these Things, which are now known almost to every Body;
and, by them, we shall be taught, that a Structure, so infinite, must be the
Work of an infinite Architect. -- But, if we could take a particular View of
all that astonishing Compass, which we have thus hastily run over, how would
Wonders multiply upon us? Every Part of every World, is, as it were, made up of
other Worlds. If we examine This our Earth, what Scope is here for Admiration?
-- What Variety of Mountains, Hills, Valleys, Plains, Rivers, Seas, Trees,
Plants! What numberless Tribes of different Animals is it stocked with! How
unwearied are the Inventions, and Works of one of these; which is MAN! And yet,
when they are all surveyed, as nicely as they can be, whether by our unassisted
Senses, or the Help of Telescopical Glasses; the Assistance of Microscopes, in
the smallest Parts of Matter, will go on to discover as many new Wonders, as
those which have already been made known to us. New Kingdoms of Animals; new
Architecture, and Curiosity of Workmanship, and Economy. So that as, before,
our Conception fainted, in those boundless Journeys we were obliged to take
through the expansive Vastness of the Universe; here, on the other Hand, we
tire ourselves with fruitless Researches into the Principles and constituent
Parts of it. Both the Beginnings and the End of Things, the Least and the
Greatest, all conspire to perplex us: And which every way we prosecute our
Inquiries, we still fall in with fresh Subjects of Amazement, and fresh Reasons
to believe, that there are more and more behind, that will for ever escape our
eagerest and most successful Penetration. We have Philosophy, indeed, but, the
Misfortune is, it dwells but in the Surface of Nature. --

IT appears, then, plainly enough, in the Parts and Model of the World, that
there is a Contrivance, and a Respect to certain Reasons, and Ends. Why else is
the Sun posited near the Middle of our System; but for the more convenient
dispensing of his Influence to the Planets, moving about him? Why else does the
Plan of the Earth's Equator, intersect that of her Orbit, and make a proper
Angle with it, but in order to diversify the Year, and create a useful Variety
of Seasons. Many other Things of this kind, though a thousand Times repeated,
will be always delightful Observations to good Men and true Scholars: None of
whom can observe those Vapors which ascend from the Sea, to meet in Clouds
above, and fall back again, after Condensation, without understanding the
Purpose of this providential Distillation to be a Division of the Water from
its grosser Salts, that, by Rains, and Dews, it may return upon and supply the
Fountains, and refreshing Rivers, nourishing the Vegetables by Showers, which
therefore descend not in Cataracts, but kindly Drops, as from a Waterpot, upon
a Garden!

WHO can view the Structure of a Plant or an Animal; the indefinite Number of
their Fibers, and fine Vessels, their Dependence upon larger, and the several
Members upon them, and the apt Disposition of all these; the Provision that is
made for Reception and Distribution of Nourishment; the Effect of this
Nourishment, in Extension of the Vessels, stretching the Vegetable, or Animal,
gradually, to its full and determinate Growth; maintaining the Motion of the
several Fluids, repairing the Decays of the Body; and comforting and preserving
Life? Who can take Notice of the various Faculties of Animals, their Arts of
saving, and providing for themselves, or the Means by which they are provided
for; the Uses of Plants to Animals, and of some Animals to others, and of the
Generality of them to Mankind; the Propagation of the several Species out of
their proper Seeds (without Confusion!) the strong Inclinations implanted for
that Purpose; and the Tenderness, even of the Fiercest to their Young: Who, I
say, can view all this, and not confess a Design, and an omnipotent Designer?
The meanest Insect, which scarce appears, at all, to our naked Eye, will, when
viewed through a Microscope, present a Prospect, a Thousand Times more curious,
and surprising, than the finest Piece of Mechanism, that ever was made by Man!
For my own Part, as I cannot but acknowledge, that I am fearfully, and
wonderfully formed; I likewise believe, as firmly, that some superintendent
Hand has conducted and protected me, from my Birth, to this present Moment; or
that, in the Words of the most Sacred of all Writings. -- There is a God, in
whom I live, move, and have my Being.

WHO, then, that judges of this God, by his Works and his Mercy, will be afraid
of that Death, which must bring us one Stage nearer him? Nay, who knows, but
that what we call DEATH, may be our real, and proper, LIFE, and this, which we
think our Life, a kind of dark, and dreaming, Interval, which Death only comes
to awaken, and redeem us from? For my Part, I look forward on the Hour of my
Dissolution, with the Hope, and Expectation, of escaping Mariners, who having
been sinking all Night long, in a Rudderless, and Foundring Vessel, discover,
with the Dawn of the Morning, the opening Coast of some lovely, though unknown
Country! I support Life, as my Duty, rather than enjoy it, as my Wish: And will
borrow another Stanza, from the same Poem, whence I took that above to express
the Sentiments I feel in my self, after such a Trace of serious Reflections, as
those which compose this Paper.

But murmur not, proud Heart! if here delayed,
A wandering Pilgrim, through this Life's cold Shade,
I must not yet, in Heaven's wide Search rejoice:
O! be the Will of God, not mine, obeyed!
Wait, my impatient Soul, His wiser Choice:
Trust the strong Hand, by which those Worlds were made;
And to His Pleasure tune thy willing Voice.
If I not yet shake off this earthly Load,
Sure there is Business, worth my Life's best Aim;
And he who tires, though on a lengthening Road,
Is faintly Soul'd, nor Inn's, at last, in Fame.
For me, suffice it, to have taught my Muse,
The tuneful Triflings of our Tribe to shun;
And raised her Warmth, such heavenly Themes to choose,
As, in past Ages, Her best Garlands, won.
He who, beyond the Power of Man could WRITE,
Would, still, fall short of Him, who ACTED well:
To flow in Sound, or turn a Period right,
Is but in Fairy Towers of Praise to dwell.
But Wrongs to PARDON, or good Deeds REQUITE
Is, (in substantial Meaning) to excel,
What, though my WISHES strain beyond my POWER,
That should but urge my Speed, to reach its GOAL
Whence, on the Wretched I may Comfort shower,
And, with eased Pity, feast my hungry Soul.
Be ACTION, then, henceforth, my Life's wide Sphere;
Oh! there are Things, my Heart even burns to DO:
All has been SAID, that is worth a wise Man's Ear;
But much may be PERFORMED, that is greatly New!
The Plain Dealer. No 112.
Quid mentem traxisse polo? Quid profuit altum
Erexisse caput? Pecudum si more pererrant.
CLAUD.
FRIDAY, April 16. 1725.
I AM, though a great Lover of Trade, a declared Enemy to the Company of
Vintners; and profess, That my Indignation daily rises against them more and
more, in proportion as they daily deviate from their first laudable
Institution. Taverns were intended, at their primitive Erection, as public
Refectories, where Men, whose Business called them Abroad from their Families,
and single Gentlemen, who had no Familes at all, might resort for a cheerful
and necessary Refreshment. So that Taverns stood in this Town for much the same
End, as Inns are commodiously situated up and down the Country: But, by the Use
they are now converted to, Men are not refreshed there, but debauched, and
taken off from the Pursuit of their Business.

I WAS led into this Subject, on the Eve of a late drunken Holiday, when,
returning Home in a melancholy Disposition, at a later Hour than usual, I was
unexpectedly saluted with an unlucky Piece of News, that a Kinsman, who,
notwithstanding all that a famous Predecessor of mine had wittily remarked, in
Ridicule of that silly Practice, would try to drive to himself Home on the
Coach-box; when he was scarce able to get into the Coach, without the Help of
its proper Driver; had, by the Way, got so dangerous a Fall, that he was thrown
almost out of the World: And just as I was plunged into a profound Meditation
on this ill Accident, Word was brought me, That Literatus and Urbanus, two
Bosom Intimates, having drank together, to Excess, the latter lost his
Civility, and the former his Wits, so far as to push on a Dispute about a mere
Trifle, 'till one of them was killed, and his Friend and Murderer, left behind,
to imbitter his surviving Days with a Remorse, which the other's Death was
preserable to. -- I was lost in the startling Thought, how dreadful it must be,
to drop out of a Temporary into an Eternal Existence, in so deplorable, and
unprepared a State! which brought immediately to my Remembrance, what the old
King says to Hamlet in the Tragedy.

Thus was I --
Cut off, even in the Blossoms of my Sin,
No Reckoning made, but sent to my Account,
With all my Imperfections on my Head.
Oh Horrible! most Horrible!
THIS sensible and moving Complaint, so awfully placed in the Mouth of a Ghost,
strikes a considerate Auditor with Terror, and leaves him warned and
astonished: But, there is a Scene in a Comedy, called The Lying Lovers, That
comes more immediately to this Subject, of a Gentleman's Stabbing his Friend in
the Fury of his Drunkenness; and which, if it had been read or heard with
Attention, by Urbanus, would probably have prevented his own becoming a too
real Example of this unhappy Truth, That a Man, who in the present Moment, is
Master of the strongest Reason, Possessor of the greatest Honor, and adorned
with the finest Sentiments of Religion, Friendship and Humanity, may, in two or
three Hours drinking, be pushed forward, by the Rage of Wine, to act unheard of
Brutalities, in direct Opposition to the Impulse of all its Virtues. I
recommend this useful Scene to the Perusal of those endangered Adventurers, who
are apt to be quarrelsome in their Cups, and yet dare rashly addict themselves
to an habitual Intemperance.

THE Fatigue of so melancholy a Meditation, cast me into a disordered kind of
Sleep, in which it furnished me (as Shakespeare says) with the Stuff of which
Dreams are made. My Imagination, working busily upon the Traces of my waking
Thoughts, brought me into the Company of a Hoary and Venerable Matron, whose
Eyes were so piercing bright, that they seemed to have increased by Age, their
Faculty of Penetration. She told me, That her Name was CAUTION, and bidding me
follow her, she conducted me, as the Prophetess did Aeneas, into one of the
Regions of the nether World, where the Shades of all those, who depart this
Life, in the Guilt of their Debauches, are doomed to inhabit.

I FOUND my self, without being able to describe the Method of my speedy
Conveyance thither, in a vast Place like an Island, encompassed with a Moat of
Liquid Fire, where different Crowds of People, were under the Torment of being
forced to drink, every Moment, till they were deprived of their Senses, and
betrayed into Extravagancies, which never failed to fill their Hearts with Pain
and Remorse, for some enormous Transgression or other, committed by them when
so disordered. -- Then the Fury that administered the Liquor, had a Power of
recovering them, by representing their past Actions, in a Glass, that served
them instead of Memory. -- When they had suffered the full Pangs of Sobriety,
and pained their Observation with what they might have been, and what they
were; the Fury drenched them afresh, with the Intoxicating Tide of Torture; and
this was the Repetition of a Life, whose Circle composed a Round of Misery,
that never was to know an End. Each Crowd was thus attended, by some Deputy of
infernal Vengeance,

THE first, I took Notice of, was a Company of Gentlemen, who, before they
began to drink, were of robust Make of Body; they had Sanguine Complexions, and
carried Health in their whole Appearance: Before these, a Devil, in the Dress
of a Drawer, had placed a vast Barrel of Liquor, of which when each had got his
Dose, the Effects of the Poison began to work differently upon these poor
Patients, that seemed lately in a State so florid. Some, that were of the most
gigantick Size, like Father Dominick in the Spanish Friar, sunk two Yards and a
Half in the Wetting. Others again, who were thin Men, were bloated by Dropsies,
into the Dimensions which the former had shrunk from. -- They, who just before,
had Vigor enough to out-voice their own Hunting-Horns, were, by a Dose or two
of that strange, alterative Liquor, brought to squeak like those Pipes, which
the Boys make of an Oat-straw. -- They, who used to leap Five-bar-Gates,
Quickset-Hedges, and Park-Palings, could not wag a Hand, or a Foot, without
crying out of the Gout, or the Rheumatism: These had been called in the World,
COUNTRY 'SQUIRES, and were active Men in their Time, at the Hunting down of a
Fox, or crying up of a Burgess. -- But it was dismal to behold, what Faces they
made now, when the Fury showed them their own Figures, in the startling Glass
of Reflection!

THE next Place, that old Mother CAUTION conducted me to, was a gloomy Walk,
which the farther we penetrated into it, was the deeper darkened with the Shade
of Juniper and Eugh Trees: In the midst, was a Little Thatched House, as full
as it could hold, of Earthen Vessels, stored with a Juice, that was but one
Remove from Poison: The poor Wretches, who frequented this dark Hovel, where
mostly English, and pleaded the Privililege of their Liberty, for getting rid
of their Senses, as freely, as their Countrymen, of higher Quality, who paid
dearer for the same Right, in proportion to their better Circumstances, and
dealt in Poisons of a slower Operation. Many Customers went in here but half
Dressed, and came out again Naked; Most of them labored under Miseries and
Diseases without a Name; and some of them endeavored to hang themselves on the
Trees that gave a Name to the fatal Liquor. --

BUT, I was transported in the next Place I came to, and flattered my
Imagination, that I was got out of the infernal Regions, into those, which were
formed for Delight, and, by the Ancients, called, The Elysian Fields. I was led
into a noble Edifice, adorned with the most magnificent Furniture, Gildings,
Sculptures, Paintings, Glass-Sconces, with hundreds of Wax Tapers lighted in
them; the Roofs ecchoed and re-sounded, with the finest Music, that could
arise from the most elegant Variety of the sweetest Instruments. Here was an
Assembly of the most active and fineshap'd Gentlemen, together with a Set of
the most seemingly modest and beautiful Women, that ever my Eyes beheld; --
when, immediately, two Devils, in Masquerade, appeared to the Company, with the
most complaisant and inviting Airs imaginable. -- One of them led the Gentlemen
to a luxurious Table, adorned with Crystals, replenished with the strongest and
richest Wines, of all Growths and Climates, and dealt Glasses round with
Profusion: The other, which was a She Devil, conducted the Ladies, in like
Manner, to another Table, richly ornamented with Silver Equipages, and Vases of
the finest China, which were filled, as she pretended, with Liquors, that
promoted Sobriety, but had really so different an Effect, that the Fumes and
Vapors arising from their Brimmers, forced me to remove to a greater Distance.

This drinking Scene being finished, the Word was given to Mask and Dance; --
But, instead of forming a regular Motion, the whole Company, Male and Female,
without Distinction of Sex, Age or Condition, fell, jumbled, into one
promiscuous Heap, upon which ensued horrid Outcries, and a confused Clash of
Swords, from Men, who were murdering one another, about Daughters, Wives and
Sisters: So that in a Moment, methought, like the shifting of a Scene in Dr.
Faustus, this fine Apartment was changed into an Hospital, distinguished into
little Closets, like Cells. -- In these unhappy little Cells, were Ladies under
a Course of Torment, (a Fury always holding before their Eyes, a Picture of
their departed Beauty:) I took Notice of One, whose Picture represented the
smoothest, Satin Skin, with the finest Tincture imaginable, while the
blubbering Original was melting away in Tears, with Cheeks swelled into
Carbuncles, and spotted over with purple Pimples: Another, whose Portrait
displayed a Loveliness, almost Angelical, was staring on it with bloodshot
Eyes, and a Face, so distorted with Convulsions, that she looked, methought,
more frightful than the Fury, that attended her. -- I begged of CAUTION to let
me retreat from this melancholy Mansion, because it filled me with more Horror
than I was able to support, to see the Effects of such seeming Pleasantry,
producing Despair and real Misery; and such alluring Beauty, betrayed into such
hideous and frightful Deformity.

CAUTION was so obliging, as to grant my Petition in Part; but told me, That as
I must carry Warning with me, when I returned to the upper Regions, she was
under a Necessity of conducting me to several other Places. This made it
impossible for me to hasten out of my Dream, and will not, I hope, expose me to
the Censure, which we old People sometimes lie under, of being tedious in our
Story-telling, and talking rather by Rule than by Measure. -- In short, I find
I must Dream on, 'till I come to the End of my next Paper.

The Plain Dealer. No 113.
-- Tollite Barbarum
Morem, Verecundumque Bacchum,
Sanguineis prohibete rixis.
HOR.
MONDAY, April 19. 1725.
The VISION continued.
I WAS as much deceived in the next Place, that Old Mother CAUTION conveyed me
to, as I had been in the last. -- A magnificent Square opened to my View, whose
four Sides were formed by the finest Architecture. Those Stately Palaces, my
Guide told me, were inhabited by Persons of the highest Rank and Fortune, and
who were reckoned to have the most delicate Taste of Living. She carried me
into one, that appeared the noblest in the Quadrangle; and, there, from a
Window toward the Garden, which is situated on an Eminence, that borders on
delicious Fields, and commands an opening Extent of Country, she showed me, by
the Help of a Prospective Glass, a Dozen fair Manor-Towns, all surrounded by a
pleasant Variety of Hills and Dales, Plains and Woods, Green Meadows and Corn
Fields, richly waving with a promised Harvest: Gardens, and sweet Parterres,
with Fish Ponds and Canals that glittered through the Trees; All which, she said,
was but a small Portion of the Earth, enjoyed by this Son of Fortune, who was
Master of that fine Palace we stood in -- This House had been, it seems, every
Day, in the Afternoon, and every Night, and all the Night long, crowded from
Top to Bottom, with People of all Sexes, Ages, and Countries; who, provided
they had the Merit of wanting nothing, were welcome to partake of all the
Abundance of this Place; where nothing appeared, but what was noble and
delightful. The Earth, from Pole to Pole, was ransacked (as were the Air and
Water) to supply this House with Delicacies.

BUT the Owner (who gloried in his Hospitality, without esteeming any one of
his Guests, but in proportion as he professed an Admiration of this
Ostentatious Magnificence of Living) valued himself most upon the Variety of
his tasteful Wines, which Merchants, from all Quarters of the World, were
Hourly emptying in upon him. They were distinguished by such different Names,
that it would require as much Study, as would make a Scholar in any other
Science, to Register, and do Justice to their Titles, Colors, Tastes, and the
happy Places which produced them. Different Companies in every Apartment, had
their Signals, and gave Fire together; and, by their Number, it was reckoned,
That every leading Glass, that was turned up by the gay Master, poured out
about a Tun, including Servants Computations, by way of Perquisite, and
Emolument.

CAUTION, at the Sound of every Health, bid me view the Manors from the Garden
Window; and I perceived a Man in a Black Gown, presenting a Roll of Parchment
to another, who was a Jolly kind of Fellow, and Steward, it seems, to the
Landlord, armed with a Letter of Attorney, to sign what Deeds he should find
necessary. -- No sooner was this Parchment returned to the Man in Black, but
immediately the Prospect shortened, by the Length of one whole Village, which,
vanishing from our Sight, left us no other Land Mark, where it stood, but a
vast and fruitful Crab Tree. -- The Healths went round so frequently, and so
merrily, that the Villages and Manor-Towns, disappeared like Mists, in a Sunny
Morning; till at last, the Gentleman in Black, with a Train of frightful
Monsters at his Heels, entered fiercely the Mansion House, whence all the
Company ran hastily away; and the louder the Master called after them, so much
the faster they continued running.

AS soon as we were got into the Square (alas! fuit Ilium!) I mean the Spot,
where the Square had stood; all the Palaces, were vanished; and turned,
methought, into an Orchard of Crab-Trees: With whose Fruit, a Crowd of fine
Gentlemen, who were running away in their Shirts, were pelted without Mercy, by
red Furies, to whose Favorites (a Number of Vintners and lucky Gamesters) they
had, but just before, transferred their Birthright.

IT is impossible to express the Anguish, the Despair, of these unlanded
Gentlemen; some tore down Branches, and accusing one another for the Seduction
of ill Example, formed a Battle with dismembered Crab-Trees: others hanged
themselves among the Boughs, at the Approach of ill-look'd Ruffians, who
surrounded them in their New Orchard.

THE next was an Assembly of Men of Wit; consisting of a Poet, an Orator, a
Philosopher, a Mathematician, a Divine, a Military Officer, the fine Gentleman,
who entertained them all, and an Eunnch, who sung in the Opera. -- The Poet
recited a Hymn to Bacchus of his own Composing -- The Orator, with great
Gracefulness, harangu'd upon the Force of Eloquence, which he attributed to the
Warmth of Wine -- The Philosopher set Cato's Virtue before them, as held
steady, by the Strength of Drinking. -- The Divine averred, That, Solomon said,
Wine made the Face of a Man to SHINE, and proved it very soberly, by showing
its Effects upon his own illuminated Countenance. -- The Mathematician produced
a Pun, and said, He loved a full Gage, because it was the Perfection of
Measure: And to measure exactly, was the Duty of his Prosession. -- The Officer
commended Wine, as a great Inflamer of Courage; and quoted a Dutch Author, in
Defense of the Use of Drinking, in Times of War: And the faithful Service of
Auxillary Brandy. -- The fine Gentleman expatiated on the Advantage to be
reaped by entertaining such polite Company, when assembled over a Bottle; and
ordered the Fury that attended them, to put round the Glass: At which the
Eunuch began to sing, and the whole Company clapped their Hands, and roared out
Encore, and Bravo.

NO sooner had the Glass gone round, but the Orator proposed Method to be the
Foundation of Argument; and insisted, that All should talk in their Turns;
which, as soon as any began to do, he broke in upon his own Rule; and galloped,
with a bawling Voice, through Divisions and Subdivisions, 'till he had
disunited the whole Company. -- The Poet, thought he had equal Right to the Use
of his Tongue, and rose to assert it, in an exorbitant Manner, just as he found
he had lost the Use of it. -- The Philosopher cried out, in vain, That Men must
labor to subdue their Passions; and, to convince them how easy it was, fell
into so violent a one himself, that he knocked down the poor Poet, with a Club,
called Argumentum Baccilinum; For, says he, there is no other Way of disputing
against those who deny first Principles; -- The Divine, seeing a Philosopher
turn Murderer, and talk, at the same Time of Principles, thundered out
Anathema's against Disputing at all, where the Business, they met for, was
Drinking. -- The Mathematician was muttering Problems, and tracing out a Globe
upon the Table, with his Fingers dipped in the Liquor that the Scufflers had
spilt upon it; and the fine-bred Gentleman to assist the Depth of his important
Designs, was pouring more Wine, to that which was spilt already, lest he might
want a Supply of Liquor; But just as the Figure was upon the Point of being
finished, the Officer swore it made dull Company, and rubbed it out with his
Sleeve: The Mathematician seeing his Globe defaced, cried, The World was at an
End; to which the Philosopher and Divine agreeing, and the rest of the Company
denying it, they fell all together by the Ears, and squeezed the Eunuch to
Death, while he was trying the Influence of his Music against Madness.

WHEN the Fury was just going to restore them to their Senses again, that they
might perform over the same Exercise, (which they do, it seems, every Hour,
just as strange Sights are shown in Fairs, or as Drunken Men renew their waking
Debauches, after a little Interval of Sleep in their Lifetimes) I left them,
with a pungent Regret, that there should be in Liquor such a Power of turning
Strength into Weakness, Health into Sickness, Beauty into Deformity, Riches
into Poverty, Friendship into Murder, Wisdom into Folly, and Wit into Madness!

I WAKED, with no small Wonder at this sleeping Ramble of my Imagination: But
turning over a Collection of Old Newspapers, bound up in Volumes, from the
Restoration, gradually downward, I found them filled with Yearly Proofs, that
Men act the very same Follies, waking in this World, that I had been Dreaming
were done in the other.

THERE I found Accounts of Men of great Estates, dead in a Prison, from the
Effects of Drinking: -- Quarrels every jot as fantastical as any I have been
describing -- There were Accounts of Men casting Lots, in their Liquor, which
should be hanged, and which the Hangman; -- Here were fine Histories of others,
who, in a ridiculous Bravado, had drank the Health of the Devil, in a
Punch-bowl seasoned with Opium, and launched down, while the Humor was on 'em,
to pay a Visit to their grateful Patron. -- I looked back as far as the Time,
when certain wild Beasts, called Mohocks, had broke loose, here in London; and
I found that it was no new Thing for Generals, and Common Soldiers, Lords,
Watchmen, and Drawers, Counts, Cobblers and Hackney-Coachmen, to engage in no
unequal Matches together, and fight with all the Triumph of Drunkenness; nay,
what is more, I found all this as duly repeated here, as I dreamt it to be in
the Lower Regions.

WHILE I was thus poring over my News Papers, and reflecting, that the Life of
Man, tallied exactly (as to its Extravagance) with the Dreams of his disordered
Fancy, I heard a Noise in the Street, as if all Barbican were in an Uproar, and
looking out of my Window, I saw Men with gilded Staves, and an Air of exerted
Magistracy, knocking down a Set of roaring little Heroes, with Leeks in their
Hats. -- Inquiring into the Matter, I was told, by an Arch-Wag (smiling, as if
he derided my Ignorance) That it was nothing, but a few Welshmen; who were got
Loyally Drunk, and did sober People a Mischief, in Honor of the good Saint,
their Patron.

I RESOLVED then (as extravagant as my Thoughts seemed to me before, and
perfectly removed out of Nature) to pen them down; since I found, such Persons
did really exist, as I had believed, Imagination could only shadow, in the
preposterous Inconsistence of a Dream. -- It may, thought I, be of Use, to show
Men, who are addicted to this Vice, their Pictures, placed in the fullest Point
of Absurdity: And, since most of them take Hell to be a Dream, it is natural
enough to expect, that a Dream of Hell may divert them.

The Plain Dealer. No 114.
Pulvis and Umbra sumus. --
HOR.
FRIDAY, April 23. 1725.
AMONG a numberless Variety of Similitudes, by which the Different Wits of
Poets, Satirists, Philosophers, and Divines, have endeavored to express the
Shortness, and Insignificance, of Humane Life, I am most pleased with that of
Lucian, where he compares it to those little Bubbles, which are made by a
Shower of Rain, that falls upon some Lake or River; where they are broken, as
fast as they are formed, and give way to others, that immediately follow them.

THERE is, in this Comparison, the Emptiness, the Smoke, and the Bustle, as
well as the Weakness, and Brevity of Life: It is, methinks, a very mortifying
Picture of that Step, half stridden, That Sporting-Field of Fortune, which St.
Augustine has, so comprehensively, explained himself upon, when he says, "It is
a Life, ebbing with Doubts, flowing with Hopes, and beaten by Miseries; puffed
up with Luxury, and made lean by Abstinence: Distracted by Wishes, sharpened by
Cares, and blunted by Indolence; arrogant in Youth, peevish in Age; restless in
Health, and impatient in Sickness: And, at last, so over-clouded by Death,
that, Ceasing to be, one would think, It never was,

I WAS insensibly attracted to this Subject, by my Perusal of Three Epitaphs,
widely different in their Designs: For the First excites Humility in High-Life,
The Second advises Retirement, and The Third inflames to Glory.

THAT which recommends Humility to the Possessors of Power and Dignity, is the
Translation of a Latin Inscription, on the Monument of a Duke of Brunswick, in
the Cathedral Church of that City.

Here, Great, and Good, Duke HENRY buried lies:
Over their dead Founder these proud Arches rise.
His pious Consort, too (the Poor's safe Guide)
Mixed with his Dust, clings closer to his Side:
MATILDA, Daughter to Great England's King!
Whose Virtues, spite of Death, still bloom in Spring.
King OTHO, too, their Son, here shares their Rest;
By both fond Parents Arms, again possessed.
And, here, -- O Grief of Beauty! near him, lies,
The Charmer of his Heart, and all Men's Eyes!
That lovely Form, whose Smiles inflamed Desire,
Here, Food for Worms, can no soft Woes inspire.
Thou, Passenger, whose Eyes this Marble view,
Learn to be Wise; nor fleeting Hopes pursue:
Life is an Evening Breeze; a murmuring Breath;
That blows, till Sunset, then grows calm, in Death.
THE Second Epitaph (which recommends, as I said, a retired Life) is that of
Similis, a Military Officer, of great Experience, in the Time of the Emperor
Adrian; who obtained Leave, with no small Difficulty, to retire, at last, into
the Country; and living there, but Seven Years, in a quiet and peaceful
Privacy, enjoyed more solid Satisfaction, than he had ever reaped before, from
all his long Life, spent in Hurry, Danger, and Distinction: So that, coming, at
last, to die, he appointed by his Will, this Epitaph.

Should Curious Readers wish to know,
Whose Dust their Feet are pressing;
SIMILIS, famed in War, lies low,
His Country's Boast, and Blessing.
Long did he Toil, and Grasp, and Strive,
Yet lost his Time, he fears;
For, though, till Seventy-Six, ALIVE,
He Lived, but Seven short Years.
THE Third Epitaph, to give it at once, the highest praise which can be given
it, is worthy its illustrious Subject, the Great CZAR of RUSSIA. It was sent me
by a Gentleman, to whose Hands it came, in Latin. But I was so justly charmed
with the Sublimity of the Sentiments, that I could not resist the Temptation of
giving it to the Ladies, and other English Readers, in their own native
Language; because I would have none of them robbed of the Pleasure, which I
received, in perusing it.

Hic jacent Hic Vir Maximus tibi nihil debuit: Here under Deposited PETER
ALEXIOVITZ: GREAT EMPEROR OF RUSSIA: ALEXANDER, CAESAR. SUN, He had taugnt them
to conquer, Germany. ART! NATURE! I will End with a short Collection of
Sentences, which a Writer, of the last Century, assures us, he had copied out
of the Pocketbook of an Elector, of the German Empire; where he found it
inserted, in That Prince's own Handwriting. -- LIFE is short, BEAUTY
Deceitful, RICHES Uncertain, DOMINION Invidious, VICTORY Doubtful, YOUTH
Restless, OLD AGE Miserable; DEATH, only, is HAPPY, and the FAME of WISDOM
Everlasting!

The Plain Dealer. No 115.
Scribimus indocti, doctique. --
HOR.
MONDAY, April 26. 1725.
THE Three following Letters being long enough to fill one Paper, it must be
referred to another, to say what may be necessary in Answer to them.

To the Author of the PLAIN DEALER.
SIR,
PERCEIVING, that it is customary, for you, to receive Letters from our Sex, I
am willing to throw myself into your Protection, in Hopes of meeting with a
favorable Regard from you, and that you may assist me in my Distress.

I AM a young Woman of some Fortune, and of no mean Extraction; and was, some
Months ago, the Happiest Woman in the World: My Story, in short, is this: There
was a young Gentleman, every way superior to myself, thought fit to make his
Addresses to me. At first I concluded, from the Inequality of our Fortunes,
that he did it purely for a little Diversion; but, by I know not what kind of
Infatuation, I was soon persuaded, to believe he was just and sincere in his
Pretensions. From hence, there sprang an Intimacy between us, which lasted a
considerable Time, and which, I never thought would have a Period, 'till Death
had separated us for ever: But, behold the Vicissitudes and Changes of Life!
the unexpected Turns of Fortune! which no Humnn Foresight can prevent: When I
thought myself almost arrived to the highest Perfection of earthly Happiness,
Strephon, the unkind Strephon! forsook me, and bereft me of all my Joys, and
Hopes, at once.

IT is to me very surprising, that so intimate a Correspondence, which was
carried on with so much pretended Satisfaction, on his Part, should now be so
irksome to him, as to make him avoid my Company, and even the very Sight of me.
I cannot pretend to penetrate into his Thoughts, but I am sure his Actions
always carried in them the Marks of a real and unfeigned Passion. He seemed
ever studious, to divert and please me; and treated me, with a Civility and
Respect, which is not common, even in the most passionate Lover. It is now, I
think, two Months since he paid me a Visit; nor have I heard from him, to let
me know the Reason of his Absence, which, together with some private
Intimations I have had from others, gives me sufficient Grounds to believe he
is false.

AND is it possible! after such an uncommon Behavior, he should abandon, nay,
despise the Person he once appeared so much to admire! Are these his
Protestations of eternal Love! Is this his Friendship? Has he so soon forgot
his Vows, of Constancy and Fidelity? Who, even of the most Wise and Prudent,
could have suspected, much less discerned Deceit, under the fair Appearance of
so much seeming Honor and Sincerity? I was so far from distrusting him, whom,
I thought, the Virtuous and Generous Strephon, that I put my whole Confidence
in him, and was innocently betrayed, by the irresistible Charms of his
Eloquence.

I HAVE wrote to him, several Times, since he has left me; but either my
Letters were intercepted, or he is wholly regardless of them; for I have not,
as yet, received an Answer; nor can I, by any Means, inform myself, what has
been the Cause of his unkind Separation. For this Reason, I take this public
Opportunity, both to ask your Advice, in so critical a Juncture, and to
convince him, of his disingenuous Treatment of one, for whom he pretended,
once, to have the most unalterable Veneration. If you think fit, to give this
Letter a Place, in one of your Papers, I know it will come to his Hands; and,
perhaps, such a Memorial, under your Authority and Protection, may have a
greater Influence over him than any common Epistle. I desire therefore you will
insert it, and oblige your most humble Servant,

DELIA.
Pray correct it before it is Printed.




To the PLAIN DEALER.
SIR,
IT is a common Observation, That Trees that Blossom soonest, are liable to be
soonest Frost nipt. As if Nature, by observing the full Growth of such forward
Virtues, mistook the Progress of Years, and measured Maturity not by Age, but
by Character.

I MOURN the Misery, Mr. PLAIN DEALER, of having lately lost a Friend, whose
Picture I will present you with, as it is drawn to the Life, in my Memory! --

IN Business there was a Pleasure, always triumphing over his Hurry; such a
Suavity and Complacence in his Behavior, as attracted the Heart, before the
Head could have Time to weigh him. He was subservient to no Passion, but Love,
which made him a Friend to all Mankind, nor could those narrow Limits of Soul,
which contract Men's Friendships to their Interests, restrain his boundless
Generosity, which made him Every Body's, who had Miseries, within the Compass
of his Easing. He had so feverish a Thirst of Obliging, that an Enemy would
have called his Liberality rather his Disease than his Ornament. He sought for
no Reward, but the Prosperity of those he favored; and if at any Time it was
not in his Power to grant, he was more ashamed, and unsatisfied, than the
Person whom he disappointed; and, by way of Atonement, injoined himself the
Penance of watching for some happier Opportunity, when he could meet the Wish
above half way, and prevent its Explanation.

NOR did this Benevolence of his Nature extend only to those within the Sphere
of his Acquaintance; whose-ever Misfortunes came to his Knowledge, made an
equal, and noble Impression; -- For he impropriated all Men's Griefs, till he
had lessened them, by Comforts.

IF there were any so Ungenerous as to make him their Enemy, he was as willing
to forgive, as they to offer the Injury. -- Judge, then, how happy must those
few have been, who were blessed with his Intimacy! Whatever Tenderness is
conceived in Nature from Mothers to their newborn Infants, may deserve to pass
as some faint Image of his Sweetness: -- His Faith, and his Friendships, were
as lasting as his Life was.

WITH all these Advantages, never had Man an humbler Opinion of himself; which
was an Armor that defended him, against the Flattery of Fortune, as his
Steadiness despised her Malice. To Him, to be High or Low, were Accidents
merely indifferent: The one could neither exalt, nor could the other depress
his Sentiments: And had Heaven thought fit to have exempted his Body, like his
Mind, from Infirmities, He had been as well Immortal as Inestimable. The
fashionable Vanities which allure and captivate young Hearts, could never get
Admittance into his masculine, and discerning Bosom, always guarded by Reason
and Virtue. He renounced, in the Pride of his Youth, those Enjoyments which
others content themselves with disclaiming, when the Power of possessing them
is either lost or abated; Oh! I am left in a Desert, without this Guide, that
my fond Soul hung upon! And nothing remains, but the Influence of his Example,
that can be worth the Wish of any Man, who had the Blessing to be acquainted
with him. --

IN Justice to his Memory, allow this little Specimen of my departed Friend, a
Place in one of your Papers, and you will much oblige,

Your Constant Reader, And Well-Wisher, NED MOURNFUL.


To the Worshipful Master PLAIN DEALER.
SIR,
I HAVE had such an Over-mind to see you, that I came to Town on purpose, being
a Kind of Plain Dealer myself. For tho'f I am a Country Fellow, and no Latin
Scollard, yet I reckon myself the wisest in our whole Parish, except (mayhap)
the Parson: And he is so churlish, that one dare not deal plainly with him. I
believe you to be no proud Man, and that made me so bold as to come to seek you
out, being in hopes to have told our Parson, that I had conversed, in my Time,
with as Learned a Man as he.

GOOD Master PLAIN DEALER, be so kind as to tell a Body, in your next Paper,
where you may be sound, and rather than lose the Sight of so good-natured, an
old Man, I will come once more on purpose, tho'f I should have no other
Business. When I enquired after you, I thought I should never have found you
out; but then, at last, I was told, by a very young Man, that you was to be met
with, at the Tower of Barbican. -- Z'lids, I was never so so glad in all my
Lifetime; but soon after I found I had nothing to be glad on, and I doubt the
Rogue put the City-Bite upon me; for I have searched every Crick and Corner to
find out such a Tower, and could get no News of it: Barbican I did find, and
the Tower I did find; but I could find no Tower of Barbican. I have worn out
two Shoes by the Bargain, that were as good as any two Pair I can get
hereabouts. Pray, if there be any such Tower, and you live in it, I beseech you
to order Matters so, that I may come to find it out.

I READ your Papers, and understand them as well as most other Folks, all but
your Top Sentences, which are generally so hard, that they puzzle all our
Parish. The best Scollards of us put our Heads together to find out their
Meaning; and, when we cannot agree about it, we go to consult our Parson; and, I
am sorry to say it, he pronounces a hard Judgment upon them. -- He does not
think it worth his Trouble (he says) to understand Heathen Authors, because
those Men were seldom good Christians. -- But this shall not prevent my Reading
your Papers, for I have a better Opinion of you, than to think so profanely of
any of your Friends and Acquaintance. Being in overgreat Haste for the
Country, have but just Time to put you in mind of me, and, wishing you in good
Health, as I am at this present Writing (blessed be God for it) remain,

Worshipful SIR, Your very Sincere Friend, George Gardener.


The Plain Dealer. No. 116.
Pro captu Lectoris habent sua fata Libelli.

MONDAY, May 3. 1725.
To the Author of the PLAIN DEALER.
SIR,
TURNING over the Works of Shakespeare, lately ushered into the World by an
extravagant Subscription, and finding the Six Volumes, though called Shakespeare's
Works, contained not his VENUS and ADONIS, his TARQUIN and LUCRECE, and
numberless other Miscellaneous Pieces, which, for Richness of Fancy, and the
many beautiful Descriptions that adorn them, are far from being inferior to
some of his more celebrated Labors; I thought my self obliged to become a
Purchaser of the Seventh Volume also, which appears to me, to have no Demerit
to occasion its Exclusion.

YOU, Mr. PLAIN DEALER, whose Lucubrations are so justly admired by all good
Judges of Wit and Taste, will indulge me the Transcription of a few of those
numberless natural Beauties, which shine every where through these charming
Pieces; and the rather, because I have been informed, That this Volume, which
is so necessary and essential a Part of the Works of that inimitable Author,
has not, by some of the Wits in Leading-Strings, been looked upon with equal
Favor; because this Edition of it was not midwif'd into the World, by the
great Names that have condescended, for the Emolument of the Public, to shine
in the Title Page of the First Six Volumes: But as this may take up more Room,
than you will have to spare in one Paper, I shall now and then occasionally beg
Leave, by your Means, to recommend to the Implicit Witlings of the Age, those
Beauties which might otherwise escape their Observation.

AND as it is impossible, where ever I open the Book, not to be surprised with
the Beauties of this great Genius, I will present your Readers with the first
that offered it self; the Exclamation the violated Lucrece makes upon
OPPORTUNITY and TIME, for contributing to her Undoing.

O! OPPORTUNITY! Thy Guilt is great;
It Is thou that execut'st the Traitor's Treason:
Thou sett'st the Wolf where he the Lamb may get:
Whoever plots the Sin, Thou point'st the Season:
It Is Thou that spurn'st at Right, at Law, at Reason;
And in thy shady Cell, where none may spy her,
Sits SIN, to seize the Souls, that wander by her.
Thou make the Vestal violate her Oath;
Thou blow'st the Fire, when Temperance is thawed:
Thou smother'st Honesty; Thou murder'st Troth;
Thou foul Abbettor! Thou notorious Bawd!
Thou plantest Scandal, and displacest Land:
Thou Ravisher! Thou Traitor! Thou false Thief!
Thy Honey turns to Gall, thy Joy to Grief.
Thy secret Pleasure turns to open Shame;
Thy private Feasting to a public Fast;
Thy smoth'ring Titles to a ragged Name;
Thy sugared Tongue to bitter Wormwood Taste:
Thy violent Vanities can never last:
How comes it then, vile OPPORTUNITY!
Being so bad, such Numbers seek for Thee?
When will Thou be the humble Suppliant's Friend,
And bring him where his Suit may be obtained?
When will thou sort an Hour great Strifes to end?
Or free that Soul, which Wretchedness has chained?
Give Physic to the Sick, Ease to the Pained?
The Poor, Lame, Blind, cry out, halt, creep for Thee,
But They never meet with OPPORTUNITY.
The Patient dies, while the Physician sleeps;
The Orphan pines, while the Oppressor feeds:
Justice is feasting, while the Widow weeps;
Advice is sporting, while Infection breeds:
Thou grant'st no Time for charitable Deeds:
Wrath, Envy, Treason, Rape, and Murder rages;
Thy heinous Hours wait on them, as their Pages.
Guilty Thou art of Murder, and of Theft;
Guilty of Perjury, and Subornation;
Guilty of Treason, Forgery, and Shift;
Guilty of Incest, that Abomination;
An Accessory, by thine Inclination,
To all Sins past, and all that are to come,
From the Creation, to the General Doom.
Misshapen TIME! Copes-mate of ugly Night;
Swift, subtle Post, Carrier of grisly Care;
Eater of Youth; false Slave to false Delight;
Base Watch of Woes, Sin's Pack-Horse, Virtue's Snare:
Thou nursest All, and murder'st All that are:
O hear me then, injurious, shifting TIME!
Be guilty of my Death, since of my Crime!
Why has thy Servant OPPORTUNITY,
Betrayed the Hours, thou gav'st me to repose?
Cancelled my Fortunes, and inchained me
To endless Date of never-ending Woes?
TIME's Office is, To find the Hate of Foes,
To eat up Error, by Opinion bred;
Nor spend the Dowry of a Lawful Bed.
TIME's Glory is, To calm contending Kings,
To unmask Falsehood, and bring Truth to light;
To stamp the Seal of Time on aged Things;
To wake the Morn, and sentinel the Night;
To wrong the Wronger, 'till he render Right;
To ruinate proud Buildings with thy Hours,
And smear with Dust, their glittering, golden Towers:
To fill with Worm-holes stately Monuments:
To feed Oblivion with Decay of Things;
To blot old Books, and alter their Contents;
To pluck the Quills from ancient Ravens Wings;
To dry the old Oak's Sap, and cherish Springs;
To spoil Antiquities of hammered Steel,
And turn the giddy Round of Fortune's Wheel:
Why work'st thou Mischief in thy Pilgrimage,
Unless thou could return to make Amends?
One poor retiring Minute in an Age,
Would purchase Thee a thousand thousand Friends;
Lending him Wit, that to bad Debtors lends.
O! this dread Night! would Thou one Hour come back,
I could prevent this Storm, and shun this Wrack!
WITH this admirable Flow of Fancy, and lively Imagery, does this unbounded
Genius, forgetful indeed of her unfit Condition for Oratory, whom he represents
as thus Copious, while he is forciby carried away by the Stream of his own
charming Imagination. I shall only mention, That the Description the Poet gives
of her Rising to the Morn, her Last Will, her Parley with her Maid, the Maid's
sympathizing Behavior; and his admirable Description of the Groom she sent to
Collatine, are Beauties, in their Way, that have no Equal, but in the same
Author. But I cannot forbear recommending his Description of the Picture he
makes the unhappy Lady turn her Eyes to, of Troy beleagur'd by the Greeks, to
avenge the Rape of Hellen; which, for Strength of Description, surpasses any
Thing of the like Kind; and shows the Excellency of the Poet's Art above that
of the Painter (as the Soul is to the Body) since it is impossible the Pencil of
the latter can come up to what follows.

A thousand lamentable Objects there,
In Scorn of Nature, Art gave lifeless Life:
Many a dire Drop seemed a Weeping Tear,
Shed, for the slaughtered Husband, by the Wife.
The red Blood reek'd, to show the Painter's Strife;
And dying Eyes gleam'd forth their ashy Lights,
Like dying Coals, burnt out in tedious Nights.
There might you see the laboring Pioneer
Begrim'd with Sweat, and smeared all with Dust:
And from the Towers of Troy there would appear
The very Eyes of Men, through Loop-holes thrust,
Gazing upon the Greeks with little Lust.
Such sweet Observance in this Work was had,
That one might see those far-off Eyes look sad.
In great Commanders, Grace and Majesty
You might behold, triumphing in their Faces:
In Youth, Quick bearing, and Dexterity;
And, here and there, the Painter interlaces
Pale Cowards, marching on, with trembling Paces;
Which heartless Peasants did so well resemble,
That one would swear, He saw them quake and tremble.
In AJAX and ULYSSES, O! what Art
Of Physiognomy might one behold!
The Face of either, cypher'd either's Heart;
Their Face their Manners most expressly told:
In AJAX's Eyes blunt Rage and Rigor rolled.
But the mild Glance that she ULYSSES lent,
Showed deep Regard, and smiling Government.
There, pleading, might you see grave NESTOR stand,
As 'twere, encouraging the Greeks to fight,
Making such sober Actions with his Hand,
That it beguiled Attention, charmed the Sight:
In Speech, it seemed, his Beard, all Silver white,
Wagg'd up and down; and from his Lips did fly
Thin, winding Breath, which purl'd up to the the Sky.
About him were a Press of gaping Faces,
Which seemed to swallow up his sound Advice;
All jointly listening, but with several Graces,
As if some Siren did their Ears entice;
Some high, some low, the Painter was so nice:
The Scalps of many, almost hid behind,
To jump up higher, seemed to mock the Mind.
Here one Man's Hand leaned on another's Head,
His Nose being shadowed by his Neighbor's Ear;
Here one, being thronged, bears back, all swollen and red;
Another, smothered, seems to pelt and swear;
And in their Rage, (such Signs of Rage they bear,
As, but for Loss of NESTOR's golden Words,
It seems, they would debate with angry Swords.
For much imaginary Work was there;
Conceit deceitful; so compact, so kind,
That for ACHILLES' Image, stood his Spear,
Gripped in an armed Hand, himself behind
Was left unseen, save in the Eye of Mind;
A Hand, a Foot, a Face, a Leg, a Head,
Stood for the Whole to be imagined.
And from the Walls of strong besieged Troy,
When their brave Hope, bold Hector, marched to Field,
Stood many Trojan Mothers, sharing Joy
To see their youthful Sons bright Weapons wield;
And to their Hope, they such odd Action yield,
That through their light Joy seemed to appear
(Like bright Things stained) a kind of heavy Fear.
I SHOULD transcribe the whole Piece, were I to give all the Beauties of this
admirable Performance. I shall only add, That the Description of HECUBA, and
that of the deceitful SINON, and the different Passions and Reflections of
LUCRETIA, on viewing the different Figures, are such Masterpieces that they
leave us without Words to express the Wonder they inspire at the Force of that
Genius, whose Production and Glory they are. Your Paper, Mr. Plain Dealer,
crowded as it generally is, with Beauties, will not be disgraced by these
Quotations; so that I have nothing by way of Apology to say; but only to assure
you, That I am

Your constant Reader and Admirer, R. S.


The Plain Dealer. No 117.
-- Pendent Opera interrupta. --
VIRG.
FRIDAY, May 7. 1725.
I AM sorry, after so kind a Reception as has been given to my Speculations,
that any Necessity should arise, for my parting, a little precipitately, with
my good-natured Readers: But Love, however fashionable it is, among sage
Writers, to call it a Weakness, is well known to act with a Strength, that is
irresistible: And I need not inform Those, who have perused me, long, or with
any tolerable Degree of Attention, that Patty Amble holds an Influence over me,
that is too hard for all my Gravity; and breaks, like a Butterfly, through my
Cobweb Resolutions.

NO longer ago than Yesterday Morning, there was nothing farther from my
Thoughts than the Discontinuance of my Weekly Labors: But, about an Hour
before Dinner, all my Purposes received new Colors; and, I am, now, no longer
what I was, before this short Billet metamorphos'd me.

Dear Slavy,
AT length, I have determined, to be only yours, for ever, and, in Gratitude
for all those, scarce deserved, fine Things, your Letter of last Week, obliged
me with, I will say after you, next Saturday Morning, whatever Words you wish
most ardently to hear me answer in. -- But this is absolutely, upon Condition,
that you put an End, immediately, to your Plain-Dealing. It is the most odious
Quality you have, and, you know, I could never bear it. -- I have given you,
perhaps, too short a Warning; but you must do as well as you can: For, pray
Heaven I hold in the Mind, if you take me not in the present Humor, of

Your Mistress, one Day more, And then, alas! your Servant, MARTHA AMBLE.


IT would be unreasonable for any of my Christian Readers to expect a better
Excuse than This, for my taking Leave of them, so abruptly. -- It is possible,
however, that, when our first Hurry of Business is a little over, I may have
Leisure, more than enough, to talk on, as I have done hitherto: But under what
Name, or Shape, I shall make my Appearance, is a Matter I am wholly dark in. --
This only I am sure of, and agree heartily with Her, in, That it must be any
Thing rather than a Plain Dealer; the Aversion, if I am not mistaken, of every
Wife, in Christendom!

BUT to soften as much as possible the Abruptness of my Departure, it may not
be amiss to spend a little Conversation upon those agreeable Correspondents,
and indulgent Readers, which, in the Course of this Work, I have met with: Next
to the Pleasure of doing Good, the greatest, is to meet with Approbation and
Assistance in our Attempts toward it: This has been my Happiness, and I hope
it cannot be attributed to any reproachable Weakness, when I confess I feel a
Pang at parting with it. Barely to acknowledge amounts to Gratitude in those
People whom Fortune does not enable to return a Benefit; that is, at present,
my Case: My approaching Fate will allow me to make no better a Payment than
Thanks, which therefore I desire may be heartily accepted.

WHEN I had written thus far, an Acquaintance, whom in some of the preceding
Discourses I have recommended to the public for a Pertness of Conceit and
Flippancy of Tongue, happened to come into my Room, and taking up the Paper ran
it hastily over, then throwing it down with a petulant Sneer, and a brisk
Voice, cried out, "Foregad, considering your Sentiments, and Circumstances,
grave Sir, I cannot help comparing you to a Criminal taking leave of the
Bye-Standers with Tears in his Eyes, before his Execution. -- Faith, I long to
see thee turned off, thou wilt make the prettiest Figure of a Dangler: ha, ha,"
-- Then, changing his Allegory, continued his Impertinence thus, "Matrimony, my
good Friend, is a long and tiresome Journey, and the worst Road that ever you
traveled in -- You seem uneasy, but sure you cannot in Conscience be
displeased that I should take up Plain-Dealing just where you left it off -- If
you are, to make you Amends, I promise never to imitate you in any Thing,
particularly your last Resolution of committing that dreadful Sin of Matrimony
-- Believe me, Friend, the Man that signs Marriage Articles, gives it under his
Hand that he is a Fool."

TO this I answered very gravely, That before I left off Plain Dealing
absolutely, I was resolved to give him one Lesson which might be of use to him
in his Practice. "You are to remember, continued I, that he who gives Advice,
should always take Care to do it in such a Manner, that his Advice may not
appear to be an Insult upon the Character or Understanding of the Person
advised: Good Breeding embellishes Good Sense; and True Politeness is no more
than civilized Plain Dealing."

BUT to pass by this volatile Spark, who if I divine aright, will in every
respect act like a modern fine Gentleman, that is, continue a Bachelor till
Sixty, to show his Wit, and then marry his Housekeeper, to show his Judgment;
let me return to the Conversation which he interrupted, though I must take so
much Notice of his Opinion, that I promise my Readers if ever I appear again in
Public, I shall amply and impartially consider it, by which Time perhaps my
own Observations and Experience will better enable me to make a clear and
satisfactory Comment upon it.

FAREWELL, then, Gentle Readers, be happy as I am shortly to be; I have, on my
part, endeavored to please; and you on yours have shown some Regard for my
Endeavors: Till I can again attend you, I wish you heartily a more agreeable
Instructor; but think not my persuading you to good Humor at Parting, an
Inconsistence in my Character; for though I always abhorred Flattery, yet I never
thought Truth the worse for being agreeably dressed: The common Forms of
Civility, though they are often the Disguises of Insincerity, are no Disgrace to
an honest Heart, and a good Intention. Where they are made use of to conceal
our Sentiments, they are wicked and abominable; where only to adorn, innocent
and agreeable: At worst you ought only to consider me as one, who without
losing his Sincerity, is by degrees ceasing to be

The PLAIN DEALER.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF THE Second VOLUME.
No LVIII. Page 1. LETTER from Lucinda, pathetically acknowledging a violent
Passion which too rigid Custom forbids her to discover to the beloved Object A
Discourse against that unreasonable Constraint, and in Praise of that moving
Epistle, each Line whereof speaks its Writer's Merit. No LXIX. p. 10. The
deplorable Corruption of the Theaters Observations on a Puppet-Show, etc with a
Parallel between the Natural and Artificial Actors, etc. Cibber in Egypt.
Notable Remarks on some Artists in Machinery, Actors of Wood, and Wooden
Actors. No LX. p. 20. Poets and Painters compared. Letter on that Topic. No
LXI. p. 28. The Genealogy of Labor and Pleasure. No LXII. p. 38. Letter from
Aspatia, dubious how to Educate two young Ladies, her Wards, of different
Dispositions. Rules for the Education of Youth. No LXIII. p. 45. Of Detraction.
Apelles's Picture of it. No LXIV. p. 51. Of Divination by Coffee Grounds, etc.
practiced by our Females Letter from Walter Worshipful, giving diverse
particular and amazing Instances of his Wife Snubsy's profound Skill in
Chiromancy. No LXV. p. 60. Letter from Fergus Bruce, relating to Edinburgh. The
ill Effects of obstinate adhering to some Opinions, etc. The Benefit of
Society. Advantages of the Union. English Language well understood in Scotland.
A Remark on our Language. No LXVI. p. 69. Letter, from Amanda, complaining of
the Persecution She undergoes from a hated Suitor, who is authorized to be her
Tormentor. The Folly and Ungenerous Unreasonableness of such Perseverance, and
the unhappy Fruits of a Man's insisting to make a Wife of a Person to whom he
is odious. Epitaph on a discording Couple in one Grave. No LXVII. p. 77
Advantages accruing to the Nation from the African Trade. How improveable it
is. Noble Character of the Duke of Chandos. No LXVIII. p. 87. Of Epitaphs.
Dryden, Pope, a fine Genius. Epitaph by him. Remark thereon. Version of an
Epitaph on Cardinal Richelieu. Ditto on a Spanish Lady. Remarks on both those
fine Turns of Thought. Odd, contradictory Flights and Ideas in a Sonnet.
Epigram on Queen Dido, with its Version. Another with its Version on Cardinal
Richelieu. What does and does not make a Poet. English Laureats; their
Performances adequate to their Salaries. On Lewis XIV. Its Version. Version of
an extravagant Flight of a Portugueze Poet. No LXIX. p. 97. Letter from Patty
Amble, merrily describing her Penance in a Hackney-Coach; inviting the Plain
Dealer to a private Meeting, and imparting her Project of a Female Parliament,
etc. No LXX. p. 107. Of Style and Oratory. Montaigne's Sentiments of Ciceronian
Elocution. Plain Dealer ashamed of certain of his youthful Attempts that Way.
Some Instances of Verboseness, censured. Conciseness recommended. Tacitus
applauded for it. The powerful Effect of Oratory; instanced in a Captain, who
fairly harangued his Men from their Colors. No LXXI. p. 116. Letter, from
Nigrella, severely rallying the Plain Dealer for criticizing on a Poet who
wrote in Praise of Black Eyes. Verses to Lady Somerville, on her Nuptials.
Ditto on the Death of the Countess of Grantham. No LXXII. p. 124. Arguments
against Revenge. Encomium on the Emperor Adrian's generously pardoning an
Enemy. That noble Example ill followed. None revengeful but the Proud and the
Pusillanimous. Ogtai Khan's memorable Reprimand to his mear-spirited Minister.
A Story, half as good, of Queen Elizabeth, her Treasurer, and Spencer the Poet.
No LXXIII. p. 134. Writers encouraged by a Turkish Emperor. No such Practice
among us. Dedication Books, being not understood, returned. Ali Basha's Method
of rewarding Authors. He rewards a certain unreasonable Poet by Measure, who
expected Weight. Of Authors and Patrons. These last not numerous, and why. The
Happy Man, a Poem, by Mr. Richard Savage, with a Letter from him, relating to
Miscellaneous Performances in Poesy, by him proposed by Subscription. Some
Remarks on the Author. No LXXIV. p. 142. The English sing not well at Church.
David's Psalms wretchedly Translated. A Quotation. Our Sectarians fond of the
insufferable old Version. A fine Version of the 104th Psalm. No LXXV. p. 149.
Northern Lion. The growing Power of Russia to be dreaded. Vanity of thinking
too well of one's Self, so as to contemn our Neighbor, with Instances.
Absolute Princes, whose Subjects despise Learning, most formidable. Who bids
fairest for Victory. A bold and remarkable Reply of a Gaul to a King of
Macedon. No Advantage to a Prince to be deemed powerful. No LXXVI p. 157.
Letter from Laetitia Gambol, intimating what more concerns her than the African
Trade, etc. Romp, whence derived. Females soon ripe between the Tropicks. Their
Liberties, and what most recommends them to Husbands. Too light to sink. How
they mourn. Their Charity. Moral Sentiments of a Negro Prince. No LXXVII. p
165. Saying of an Emir. Farther Discourse against Redundancy in Writing.
Wonderful Agility, etc. of a German. What Sights the Plain Dealer expects to
see upon our Stages. No LXXVIII. p. 172. The Plain Dealer, because Old, not
regarded by the Females. Five Things, says a Mohammedan, are useless. What they
are. Letter from Priscilla Sparkley, who is very angry at Women's being termed
Manufactures Ditto, from a Lovesick Apprentice. Ditto, from Pamphiophilus,
relating the Conduct of the jilting Olivia. No LXXIX. p. 180. Of a Bell that
tolls of it self. Dying Words of Sir Portly Rufus. Abstract of Mrs E. Singer's
Poem on the Death of her Husband. No LXXX. p. 189. Of our modern Theatrical
Performances. Shepherd in Newgate Caesar in Egypt, and its Author, remarked
on. English Firmness of Face. In what our News-Writers differ from those of
France and Holland Some subsist from Gibbets Our Criminals not suffered to
rest, even when the Hangman and Surgeons have done with them. Further Remarks.
No LXXXI. p 196. Letter from J. H. a Mercer, complaining of the troublesome
Impertinence of certain unprofitable Female Customers. Ditto, from the Black
Eunuch, animadverting on some indecent Liberties assumed by our Females. Ditto,
from Eugenio, communicating his Dream or Vision of Coquets, Prudes, Hibernians,
Pretty Gentlemen, etc flocking to the Temple of Hymen. No LXXXII. p. 204. An
applicable Story of Laplanders metamorphos'd into Bears. How they were Boarded
by their Keepers. In what our Companies of Comedians differ from the South Sea,
Bank, and other acting Companies. How the first came to have only Directors,
but no Governor. Consequences of the Death of Mr. Rich, the former Patentee.
Mr. Dennis chooses a Play of Mr. Congreve's for his Benefit. Of Prejudice, and
Dread of Critics. This last instanced in a Bell-Man. Unreasonable
Prepossession of some against Mr. Dennis. Exhortations to encourage that
deserving Gentleman. No LXXXIII. p. 214. Of an Eastern Prince, who never met
with Truth till he found it in a Cottage. Ministers and Minions, in what they
differ. Aristotle's Observation on Government. A Tyrannical Arab Governor dealt
plainly with by a Dervice. Further Remarks on Ministers, etc. Story of a
Chinese Emperor and his injured Subjects. No LXXXIV. p. 223. The Effects of
Pride and Vanity; which occasion out deeming every triffing Disappointment a
Misfortune. Letter from B. B. entreating Counsel in an Affair wherein in there
is a Struggle between Friendship and Gratitude. Of Friendship. Difference
between it and its Shadow. What is said of a Friend by Mr. Dryden and Mr.
Spencer. No LXXXV. p. 231. Letter, from Patricius, showing and instancing that
Trade is not only Profitable but Honorable; a Profession preferable to either
Arms or the Law; Defects and Abuses in the latter. Observations on some Persons
of Birth, who want nothing else. Reply of a Man of Quality to a Trading Knight.
What is to be wished. A remarkable and exemplary Passage of Queen Elizabeth,
from Sir Walter Raleigh. No LXXXVI. p. 240. Version of Solon's Divisions of the
Ages of Human Life. Notable Soliloquy of a Venetian Nobleman, concerning the
Vanity of Life, and all Worldy Affairs. No LXXXVII. p. 249. Excellency of the
Holy Scriptures, in Comparison with other Writings. Reflections on the bad
Versions thereof; and on the Majesty of the Hebrew Poesy; exemplified in Part
of the 18th Psalm, finely Englished by Mr. Dennis, The same compared with a
lofty Passage from the Iliad Farther Instances of the Sublimity of the Hebrew
Style, from Habakkuk; with Exhortations to read Divine Writ. No LXXXVIII. p.
259. No Theme to write on more lofty than Storms and Shipwrecks; a Subject
which has employed the most eminent Pens. Fine Examples from King David and
Homer. Letter, from G. B -- r, in Praise of Sailors, with a moving Relation of
a Sea Captain and his Wife. No LXXXIX p. 267. Letter, from J. W. grievously
complaining of the immoderate Virtue of his Wife, who, because she does not
Cuckold him, assumes the Liberty of using him outragiously. The Order of
Angels, a proj^ct^d Society of Ladies; what they aim at therein. Other
plaintive Letters. No XC. p. 275. Letter, from Terentius, including a Discourse
how they deal, and ought to behave toward their Female Customers; describing
also the Methods used by Watermen to get a Fare, particularly those they know
to be not Londoners. No XCI. p. 282. Verses on Love, showing that Passion to be
undiscribable. Letter, from C. K. being a Declaration of his Love for Emelia
Picture of Death's Approaches. Farther Description of Death. Ditto, beautifully
delineated by Spencer. No XCII p. 291. Letter, from Favonius, relating how he
got into Favor with his churlish Uncle; and how Folks get the Gout Letter, of
Advice, with an Application, from Aminadab. Ditto, from Hezekiah Horney, asking
Counsel how to proceed in a Case of Importance, Petition of Luke
Thoroughstitch, desiring a Course may be taken with some Females Remarkers on
the Goodness of his Stomach. Letter, from Gracchus, with satirical Extracts
from the Universal Passion, on worthless Lords, and rural 'Squires. No XCIII.
p. 300. Letter, from Aemilius, giving Account of the profound Knowledge his
Mistress has in Occult Sciences, with other remarkable Particulars. No XCIV. p.
309. Mr. Rich's great Genius in a Scenary Way. His Design in attempting to
restore Opera to its pristine Dignity applauded. Discourse on Music; with its
different Effects. Verses, on Music, by Randolph. The Extensiveness of the
Music of the Ancients, in Comparison with that of Moderns, according to Dr.
Wallis. The Subject continued. No XCV. p. 317. Letter, from Francis Fairplay,
treating of the unfair Practices of Cannon-Turners; with some notable
Instances. A beautiful Lyric Ode, being a Version of the Song of Moses, on the
Destruction of the Egyptians in the Red Sea. No XCVI. p. 325. The dire Effects
of excessive Drinking. No XCVII. p. 333. Letter, from Humphrey Pickthank,
declaring his Design of compil^ng a History of the great Success of Dedications
in this encouraging Age. The Plain Dealer dislikes the Subject, and why;
Dedicators defined. Some Thoughts on the same. Paul Poorwit's Bill and Letter
to the Earl of Widefield. Letter, from Novinda, desiring to know where lies the
much-talked of clean Turn of Wit, in a Copy of Verses entitled, The Feather.
Answer to the same. No XXVIII. p. 342. Avarice, in the Great, odious, but
Extortion in Judges most detestable. Sayings thereupon; with an Extract from a
Pamphlet, entitled, The Case of Orphans, considered from Antiquity. Some
Observations on Lord Bacon's Case. A Fable, which is not unapplicable. No XCIX
p. 349. Letter, from Colon, relating to Trade and Plantations; with a wise and
conscientious Report made to a Turkish Emperor by the Inspectors sent into
Egypt to improve and encourage the Growth of Cotton. Ditto, with a Sonnet from
Myrtillo, on his Mistress; with certain Queries. No C. p. 355. Letter, from
Artemisia, with Part of Plutarch's Consolatory Epistle to his Wife, on the
Death of their young Daughter. No CI. p. 365. Letter from R. S. acquainting the
Plain Dealer with a Conversation during his Absence, at his own usual Club;
what Company was there. A Parallel between a Plain Dealer and a Rough Dealer;
with entertaining Arguments, pro and con, upon that and other Subjects. No CII.
p. 373. Letter, from Sylvio, impatient for an Answer fom his Mistress, yet
dares not put the Question. Moneyless Merit disregarded by most of the Women of
this Age; such as think better have seldom the Liberty of making their own
Choice. Avarice of Parents. All these attended with the worst Effects. Advice
to young Ladies, whose Fortunes and Persons are at their own Disposal. Ditto,
from Timoret, of the deplorable Transformation at Button's Coffee-House. Ditto,
from Pugg, relating the Transmigrations he has undergone. No CIII. p. 382.
Letter, from Philotheus, relating the Superstitious Reports made him concerning
a reputed Witch, whom he visited. Ditto, from Politicus, showing the Roman and
British Women and Senates to be very analogous. No CIV. p. 391. Pictures and
Descriptions of the Devil, by Tasso, Sir Richard Blackmore, Mr. Milton and
Homer, remarked on. No CV. p. 399. The Origin of Jealousy. Part of a Letter
from an Anonymous Lady, enclosing one to her, from Angeletta, owning the
resistless Inclination she has toward her Friend's Husband; being a beautiful
Instance of Friendship's Triumph over a criminal Passion. Encomium thereon.
Ditto, from Shuttlecock Flutterwing; an Original; with proper Animadversions.
No CVI. p. 407. Noble Character of Peter the Great, late Czar of Russia.
Extracts of a Panegyric on that prodigious Genius, entitled, The Northern
Star, a Poem. No CVII. p. 416. Letter, from Constantius, with Verses, both in
rapturous Praise of the Perfections of his Mistress, the lovely Belladora.
Observation thereon. No CVIII. p. 423. Smart and resolute Reply of a young
Prince to Soladin, Sultan of Egypt, who had him absolutely in his Power.
Discourse in Praise of Resolution, and of the evil Effects of Irresolution. No
CIX. p. 431. Letter from an Anonymous Author, insinuating the Usefulness and
other Advantages of Criticism; that Homer's Catalogue of the Grecian Ships will
bear it, and why; what an ill Precedent he has given to his Successors;
instanced particularly in Drayton's Catalogue of an English Fleet sent against
France, which, though bald and dry, is in some respects preferable to Homer's;
compared with some old English Epitaphs; in one of which it appears, that Sir
Edward North was made a Lord for his Virtue! Another Original Epitaph, which
will very well bear Criticism. No CX. p. 438. Letter, from Clarastella, cured
of her growing Passion for Florello by reading his Character in the Universal
Passion. Ditto, from P A. complaining of the Freedoms a Lady he admires allows
to her Monkey. A Quere answered. Complaint against a certain Husband-wanting
Widow's Resolution. No CXI p. 446. Letter, from Philotheus, reflecting on the
amazing Work of the Creation, etc. with a fine Discourse on the Subject, from
the Religion of Nature delineated. No CXII. p. 452. The primitive Design of
Taverns. How corrupted. Some unhappy Fruits of drinking to Excess. An
applicable Vision. No CXIII. p. 460. Continuation of the Vision. No CXIV. p.
169. The Nothingness of Human Life. A Saying of St. Austin on that Topic.
Version of a Latin Inscription on the Monument of a Duke of Brunswick. Epitaph
of a Roman Officer, Englished. Ditto, in Latin, with its English Version on the
renowned Peter Alexowitz, late Emperor of Russia. Notable Sentences. No CXV. p.
475. Letter, from Delia, complaining, That her Lover has forsaken her. Ditto,
from Ned Mournful, characterizing his deceased Friend. Ditto, from George
Gardener, giving Account of his having traveled up to Town purposely to see
the Plain Dealer. No CXVI. p. 483. Letter in Commendation of Shakespeare's
Poems, which are not commonly sold with his Dramatick Performances. Two
beautiful Extracts from his Tarquin and Lucretia. No CXVII. The Plain Dealer
takes Leave of his Readers. His Reason for the same. Marrying Patty Amble.
Rallied thereupon by a pert Friend. His Advice to the Sneerer in Return. Usual
Conduct of our modern Fine Gentlemen, or Marriage-Haters. When the Common Forms
of Civility are Censurable, and when Laudable.
A CATALOGUE of BOOKS Printed for and Sold by A. Bettesworth, at the Red-Lion
in Paternoster Row.
l. s. d. A ATalantis, 4. Vol. 12ves. 00 09 00 Apuleius's Golden Ass, 2 Vol.
12ves. 00 06 00 Atlas Manuale: Or, A Set of small Maps. By Moll. 8vo. 00 05 00
Athenian Oracle, now in the Press, 8vo. Acta Regia: Or, An Abridgment of Mr.
Rymer's Foedera. Published Monthly, at 1 s. each. Apollo's Feast, 12ves. 00 01
00 Art of Pleasing in Conversation, in French and English. By Cardinal
Richlieu. 12ves. 00 03 00 Agreeable Variety, 8vo. 00 03 06 Art of Thinking.
Translated by Ozell. 12ves. 00 03 06 Arabian Nights Entertainment, Complete, 6
Vol. 12ves. 00 15 00 Abridgment Statutes, 6 Vol. 8vo. 01 10 00 Addison's
Travels, 12ves. 00 03 00 Addison's Works, 3 Vol. 12ves. 00 09 00 Addison's
Works, 4 Vol. 4to. 03 00 00 Accomplished Conveyancer, 3 Vol. 8vo. 00 18 00 B
BRidgman's Conveyancer, Folio. 01 10 00 Bishop Blackhall's Works, 2 Vol. Folio.
01 12 00 Bishop Burnet on the Thirty nine Articles, Folio. 00 12 00 Bishop
Burnet Abridgment of his History of the Reformation, 3 Vol. 12ves. 00 09 00 Dr.
Barrow's Works, 2 Vol. Fol. 02 02 00 Book of Homiles, Folio, 1726. 00 12 00
Boyce on the Thirty nine Articles, Folio. 00 09 00 Burnet's Theory of the
Earth, 2 Vol. 8vo. 00 12 00 Dr. Bates Works, Folio, 1724. 01 07 06 Burnet's
(Dr. Thomas) Sermons at Boyle's Lectures, for the Years 1724, 1725, 2 Vol. 00
09 00 Burnet's (Dr. Thomas) Essay upon Government, 8vo. 00 01 06 Burnet's (Dr.
Thomas) Scripture Trinity, 8vo. 00 02 00 Blackmore's (Sir Richard) Essays, 2
Vol. 8vo. 00 11 00 Blackmore's (Sir Richard) Creation, a Poem, 12ves. 00 02 00
Blackmore's (Sir Richard) Redemption, a Poem; being a Supplement to the
Creation, 8vo. 00 04 00 Buchanan's History of Scotland, 2 Vol. English, with
curious Cuts, 8vo. 00 11 00 Boyer's French and English Dictionary, 8vo. 00 07
00 Boyer's Telemachus, 2 Vol. 12ves. 00 05 06 Bailey's Etymological English
Dictionary 00 07 00 Bailey's Translation of Erasmus Colloquies. 00 05 06
Bruyere's Works, 2 Vol. Translated from the French, 8vo. 00 09 00 Betterton's
Life with the Amorous Widow. 00 03 06 Behn's Novels, 2 Vol. 12ves. 00 05 00
Behn's Plays, 4 Vol. 12ves. 00 12 00 Boerhave's Aphorisms, Translated into
English, 8vo. 00 05 06 Mrs. Barker's Novels, 2 Vol. 12ves. 00 05 00 Mrs.
Barker's Patchwork Screen, 2 Vol. 12ves. 00 05 00 British Apollo, 3 Vol. 12ves.
containing two Thoushand Answers to Curious Questions in most Arts and
Sciences, 12ves. 00 09 00 British Compendium: Containing the Descents of the
English, Scotch, and Irish Nobility, with their Arms curiously Engraven, 3
Vols. 12ves. 01 02 06 Builders Dictionary, 8vo. 00 04 00 Dr. Brown of Cold
Baths. 12ves. 00 01 06 Boileau's Art of Poetry, 4 Canto's, 12ves. 00 01 00
Boileau's Lutrin: An Heroi-Comical Poem. 00 01 06 Bulstrode (Whitlock) Essays,
8vo. 00 04 06 Bridges of Fractions, 12ves. 00 01 00 Bradley's New Improvements
in Planting and Gardening, 8vo. 00 06 06 Byshe's Art of Poetry, 2 Vol. 00 05 00
Blackmore's Ecclesiastical Antiquity, abridg'd from Bingham, 2 Vol. 00 11 00
Ball's Astrology improved 00 02 00 Burkett of the New Testament, Folio. 01 03
00 Beveridge's Private Thoughts, 8vo. 00 09 00 Beveridge's Ditto, 12ves. 00 01
06 Beveridge's Prayer, 8vo. 00 03 06 Beveridge's Ditto, 12ves. 00 01 06
Blackmore on Consumptions, 8vo. 00 03 06 Blackmore on the Spleen 00 05 06
Blackmore on the Gout and Rheumatism 00 03 06 Blackmore on the Vapors. 00 04
06 Bingham's Antiquities, 2 Vols. Folio. 02 10 00 Brown (Tho.) Works, 5 Vols.
12ves. 00 12 06 Bishop's Sermons at Lady Moyer's Lecture, 8vo. 00 05 00 Baynard
of Hot and Cold Baths, 8vo. 00 05 06 C CAssandra: A famed Romance, 5 Vols.
12ves 00 15 00 Cook of Forest Trees, 8vo. 00 03 06 Bishop Cumberland, De
Legibus Naturae, 8vo. 00 06 00 Cato's Letters, 4 Vols. 12ves 00 10 00 Cave's
Primitive Christianity, 8vo. 00 04 06 Calamy's (Benj.) Sermons, 8vo. 00 04 06
Clark's Body of Divinity, 2 Vol. 8vo. 00 09 00 Cocker's English Dictionary,
8vo. 00 02 00 Cocker's Decimal Arithmetic, 8vo. 00 03 06 Countess of Morton's
Devotions, 24s. 00 00 06 Dr. Comber's Companion to the Altar, 8vo. 00 04 06
Christian Pattern, Translated from the Latin of Tho. a Kempis, 24o. 00 01 00
Culpeper's English Physician Enlarged 00 02 06 Culpeper's Midwife, 12ves. 00 02
06 Culpeper's Dispensatory, 12ves. 00 02 06 Courtier, Translated from the
Italian. 00 05 00 Cap of Gray Hairs for a Green Head, 8vo. 00 01 06 Croxall's
Aesop's Fables, 12ves. 00 03 00 Cox's History of Carolina, 8vo. 00 02 06
Cruso's Life abridg'd, in a neat Pocket Volume, 12ves. 00 02 06 Cambray's
Private Thoughts upon Religion, 12ves. 00 02 06 Cornelius Nepos, Englished by
several Hands, 12ves. 00 02 00 Cockman's Tully's Offices, 12ves. 00 02 06
Christian's Companion to the Closet and Altar, 12ves. 00 02 06 Chevalier de
Vaudray, a Novel, 12ves. 00 02 00 Cole's Latin and English Dictionary, 8vo. 00
06 00 Caesar ex Recensione, Tho. Parsell, 12ves. 00 02 06 Caesar Cum Notis
Delphini, 8vo. 00 06 06 Constitutions, Canons, and Articles, of the Church of
England, 8vo. 00 02 06 Clark's Answer so the Religion of Nature delineated,
8vo. 00 01 00 Clark's Ditto, against Hutchinson's Ideas of Beauty, 8vo. 00 01
06 Clarendon's (Lord) History of the Rebellion, 6 Vols. 8vo. 01 10 00 Cases
against the Dissenters, 3 Vols. 8vo. 00 15 00 Clark, (Dr. Samuel) on the
Attributes, 8vo. 00 06 00 Clark, (Dr. Samuel) Seventeen Sermons at St. James's,
8vo. 00 06 00 Clark, (Dr. Samuel) on the Gospels, 2 Vols. 8vo. 00 11 00 Cheyne
(Dr.) on Health and Long Life, 8vo. 00 04 06 Congreve's Plays and Poems, 3
Vols. 12ves. 00 09 00 Critical History of England, 2 Vols. 8vo. 00 11 00
Cheselden's Anatomy, 8vo. 00 06 00 Cambden's Britannia, 2 Vols. Folio. 03 10 00
Churches no Charnel Houses, proving the Indecency of Burying in Churches and
Churchyards. 00 01 Carcase's Book of Rates, Folio. 1726. 01 05 Comical History
of Francion, 2 Vols. 12ves. 00 05 06 Chambers's Dictionary of Arts and
Sciences, 2 Vols. Folio. Chillingworth's Works, Folio, 1726. 00 12 06 Chandler
(Bishop) Defense of Christianity, 8vo. 00 05 06 Collier's Sacred Interpreter, 2
Vol. 8vo. 00 10 00 Cambray of the Being and Existence of God, 12ves. 00 03 00
Clarendon and Whitlock compared, 8vo. 00 05 00 Collier's Antoninus, 8vo. 00 04
06 D DOmat's Civil Law in its Natural Order, Translated by Dr. Strahan, 2 Vols.
Fol. 02 02 00 Dupin's Method of Studying Divinity, 8vo. 00 05 00 Dionis's
Midwifry, English, 8vo. 00 04 06 Devout Christian's Companion, 2 Vols. 12ves.
00 06 00 Dacier's Abridgment of Plato's Works. Translated from the French, 2
Vols. 12ves. 00 05 00 Drelincourt of Death, 8vo. 00 05 00 Dictionarium Rusticum
and Urbanicum: Or, A Dictionary of Country Affairs, 2 Vols. 8vo. 00 09 00
Defoe's Works, 2 Vols. 8vo. 00 10 00 Drexelius's Hourly Companion, 12ves. 00 01
00 Derham's Physico-Theology, 8vo. 00 06 00 Derham's Astro-Theology, 8vo. 00 04
06 Dupin's History of the Church, abridg'd, in four neat Pocket-Volumes, 12ves.
00 10 00 Dryden's Plays, in 6 Vols. 12ves. 01 00 00 Dryden's Miscellanies, 6
Vols. 12ves. 00 18 00 Dryden's Virgil, with Cuts, 3 Vols. 12ves. 00 11 00
Dryden's Juvenal, 12ves. 00 03 06 Dryden's Fables. 00 03 06 Ditton, on the
Resurrection, 8vo. 00 05 00 Ditton, on Fluids, 8vo. 00 03 00 Defense of the
Female Sex. 00 03 00 Dalton's Country Justice, with large Additions, by W.
Nelson, Esquire Folio, 1726. 01 05 00 Danois's Tales of the Fairies, 3 Vol. 12ves.
00 07 06 Dictionary of all Religions, 8vo. 00 04 06 Degolls on Worms, 8vo. 00
01 06 Ductor Historicus, 2 Vols. 8vo. 00 10 00 E ENgland's Interest: Or, The
Gentleman and Farmer's Friend. 00 01 06 English Liberties: Or, The Freeborn
Subjects Inheritance. By W. Nelson, Esquire 00 04 06 Essay on the Transmutation of
the Blood, 8vo. 00 01 00 Eutropius, in Usum Delphini, 8vo. 00 02 06 Echard's
History of England, Folio. 01 16 00 Echard's Roman History, 5 Vols. 8vo. 01 05
00 Echard's Ecclesiastical History, 2Vols. 8vo. 00 09 00 Echard's Gazetteer, in
Two Parts, 12ves. 00 03 06 Echard's Terence, 12ves. 00 02 06 Echard's History
of the Revolution, 8vo. 00 04 06 Eusebius's Ecclesiastical History, English,
Folly. 01 00 00 Etheridge's Plays, 12ves. 00 03 00 English Expositor, 12ves. 00
01 00 Echard's (Dr.) Works, 8vo. 00 04 06 England's Black Tribunal, 12ves. 00
02 06 Everard's Gauging, 12ves. 00 02 06 Eikon Basilike: To which is added, The
Life of King Charles the First, by Perinchief. 00 05 06 F FLavell's Works, 2
Vol. Folio. 02 00 00 Flavell's Husbandry Spiritualized, 12ves. 00 02 00
Flavell's Navigation Spiritualized, 8vo. 00 01 06 Bishop Fleetwood's Relative
Duties, 8vo. 00 04 06 Fisher's Arithmetic, 12ves. 00 02 06 Farrier's and
Horseman's Dictionary, 8vo. 00 05 06 Familiar Letters of Love and Gallantry, in
Two neat Pocket-Volumes, 12ves. 00 05 00 Florus in Usum Delphini, 8vo. 00 04 06
Frauds of the Romish Priests and Monks, in Two Volumes, 12ves. 00 05 06 Fable
of the Bees, 8vo. 00 05 06 Friend's History of Physic, 2 Vols. 8vo. 00 10 00
Freeholder, 12ves. 00 03 00 Fuller's Pharmacopoeia Extemporanea, 12ves. 00 03
00 Fuller's The same in English, 8vo. 00 05 06 Fidde's Sermons, Folio. 00 17 06
Farquhar's Plays and Poems, 2 Vols. 12ves. 00 06 00 G GOodman's (Dr.) Penitent
pardoned, 8vo. 00 04 06 Goodman's (Dr.) Winter Evening Conference, 8vo. 00 04
00 Goodman's (Dr.) Old Religion, 12ves. 00 02 06 Glanvill of Witches, 1726.
8vo. 00 05 06 Gordon's (Patrick) Geographical Grammar, 8vo. 00 06 00 Gordon's
(George) Introduction to Geography, Astronomy, Dyalling, and Chronology, 8vo.
17^6. 00 04 06 Gerhard's Meditations. By Rowell. 00 03 00 Ditto, small Edition.
00 01 00 Gentleman Angler, 12ves. 00 01 06 Gastrell's Christian Institutes,
12ves. 00 02 06 Gentleman Instructed, 8vo. 00 02 06 Guiilim's Display of
Heraldry, Folio. 02 02 00 Gentleman Jockey, 8vo. 00 01 06 Gibson's Farrier's
Guide, 8vo. 00 05 00 Gibson's Farmer's Dispensatory, 8vo. 00 04 06 Gibson's
Method of Dieting Horses, 8vo. 00 03 06 Gay's Pastorals, 00 01 06 Gedde's
Tracts, 3 Vols. 8vo. 00 18 00 Guardian, 2 Vols. 12ves. 00 05 00 Gardner's
Dictionary, 2 Vols. 12ves. 00 12 00 Gibson's Anatomy of Human Bodies, 8vo. 00
05 06 H HENRY, (Matthew) on the Bible, 6 Vols. 06 06 00 HENRY, (Matthew) Works,
Collected into One Volume. 01 07 06 Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity, 1724,
Folio. 01 01 00 Horneck's (Dr.) Crucified Jesus, 8vo. 00 05 06 Horneck's (Dr.)
on Consideration, 8vo. 00 04 06 Horneck's (Dr.) Best Exercise, 8vo. 00 04 06
Horneck's (Dr.) Fire of the Altar, 12ves. 00 01 00 Handley's Mechanical Essays
on the Animal Economy, 8vo. 00 05 00 Handley's Colloquia Chirurgica: Or, The
Whole Art of Surgery, 8vo. 00 02 06 Hawney's Trigonometry, 8vo. 00 06 00
Hawney's Complete Measurer. 12ves. 00 02 06 History of England, 4. Vols. 8vo.
With the Heads of all the Kings and Queens curiously Engraved. 01 02 00
Howell's (Lawrence) History of the Bible, 3 Vols. With 150 Copper Plates, 3
Vols. 8vo. 01 00 00 Howell's (James) Familiar Letters, 8vo. 00 05 00 Harris's
(Dr.) Lexicon Technicum, 2 Vols. Folio. 02 10 00 Hudibras, in Three Parts; with
a new Set of Cuts. 00 03 00 History and Present State of the Kingdom of
France, 2 Vols. 12 ves. 00 06 00 Hatton's Psaltar, 12ves. 00 02 06 Howard's
Newest Way of Cookery, 12ves 00 02 06 History of English Martyrs in Queen
Mary's Reign, 8vo. 00 04 06 Hatton's Comes Comercii, 8vo. 00 02 00 History of
Hungary, 12ves. 00 02 06 Hewit's Tables of Interest, engraven on Copper Plates,
12ves. 00 02 06 History of Trials and Attainders, 2 Vols, 12ves. 00 05 06
Hutchinson's Enquiry into our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue, 8vo. 00 04 06 Hanover
Tales: Or, The Secret History of Count Fradonia, and the Unfortunate Beritia,
12ves. 00 01 06 Henley's Hesther, an Historical Poem 00 01 06 Horatius in Usum
Delphini, 8vo. 00 06 06 Haywood's Novels, 4 Vols. 12ves. 00 10 00 Hook's
Experiments, published by Derham. 00 05 06 Historia Sacra: Or, History of the
Feasts and Fasts of the Church of England. 00 05 00 Hope's Complete Horseman,
Folio. 01 02 06 Howard's Plays, 12ves. 00 03 00 History of Herodotus, Englished
by Littlebury, 2 Vols. 8vo. 00 10 00 The Hive: Or, A Collection of Songs, 3
Vols. 12ves. 00 07 06 History of the Devil, 8vo. 00 05 00 J Johnson's (Samuel)
Works, Folio. 00 10 06 Jones's Poetical Miscellanies, 12ves. 00 01 00 Justinius
in Usum Delphini, 8vo. 00 05 06 Justinius Englished, by Brown, 12ves. 00 02 06
Jenks's Devotions on several Occasions 00 03 00 Juvenalis in Usum Delphini,
8vo. 00 05 06 Jenkins of the Christian Religion, 2 Vols. 8vo. 00 10 00 Journey
through England, 3 Vols. 8vo. 00 15 00 Inquiry into the Original of our Ideas
of Beauty and Virtue, 8vo. 0 04 06 Jackman de vi Conscientiae, 12ves. 00 01 00
Independent Whig. 00 05 06 Ibbot's Sermons at Boyle's Lectures. 00 06 00
Jones's Canon of the New Testament, 3 Vols. 00 15 00 Jurieu's Devotions, 12ves.
00 02 06 K KEttlewell's Works, 2 Vols. Folio. 02 00 00 Kettlewell's Most of his
Pieces single King's (Bishop) Inventions of Men in the Worship of God, 12ves.
00 01 06 Ken's (Bp.) Crown of Glory the Reward of the Righteous, 8vo. 00 02 06
Ken's (Bp.) Exposition of the Church Catechism. 00 01 00 Kennet's Roman
Antiquities, 8vo. 00 05 06 King's Heathen Gods, 12ves. 00 02 00 Keill's
Introduction to Astronomy, English, 8vo. 00 06 00 King on the Creed, 8vo. 00 04
06 King Constitutions of the Primitive Church. 00 04 06 Kidder, of the Messiah,
Folio. 01 00 00 Key's Practical Measurer. 00 01 06 Keill's Introduction to
Natural Philosophy, 8vo. 00 04 06 L LOCK's Works, 3 Vols. Folio. 02 15 00
Lock's of Human Understanding, 2 Vol. 00 09 00 Lock's of Education, 12ves. 00
02 06 Lock's of Government, 12ves. 00 03 00 Lock's Esop's Fables Eng. and
Latin, 8vo. 00 03 06 Lestrange's Josephus, Folio. 01 10 00 Lestrange's Aesop's
Fables, 8vo. 00 06 00 Lestrange's Erasmus, 8vo. 00 04 06 Littlebury's
Translation of Herodotus, 2 Vols. 8vo. 00 10 00 Ladies Travels into Spain, 2
Vols. 12ves. 00 05 00 Lee's Tragedies, 3 Vols. 12ves 00 09 00 Lives of the
English Poets, 2 Vol. 00 11 00 Leybourn's Dialling, Folio. 00 15 00 Leybourn's
Dialling, abridg'd and improved, by Wilson, 12ves. 00 03 00 Littleton's
Dictionary, English and Latin. 00 16 00 Life of the Count de Vinevit, 12ves. 00
01 06 Life of Madam de Beaumont, 12ves. 00 01 06 Life of Lucinda, 12ves. 00 01
06 Life of Charlotta Dupont, 12ves. 00 02 00 Ladies Library, 3 Vols. 12ves. 00
09 00 Lewis's Origines Hebraeae, 4 Vols. 8vo. 01 00 00 Life of Signior Rozelli,
2 Vols. with Cuts. 00 09 00 Lamb's Cookery, 8vo. 00 06 00 Life of Oliver
Cromwell, 8vo. 00 05 06 Law of Christian Perfection, 8vo. 00 05 06 Love's
Surveying, 8vo. 00 03 06 Lucas's Enquiry after Happiness, 2 Vols. 00 10 00
Lucas's Practical Christianity. 00 03 06 M MOLL's Complete Geographer, Folio.
01 01 00 Moral Virtue delineated. Translated from the French of Mons.
Gomberville 01 00 00 Manton on the 119th Psalm, 1723. 01 00 00 Montfaucon's
Travels into Italy, Folio, 00 18 00 Memoirs of Philip de Comines, 2 Vols. 8vo.
00 10 00 Memoirs of Anne of Austria, 5 Vols. 12ves. 00 15 00 Moyle's Works, 2
Vols. 8vo. 00 11 00 Montaigne's Essays, 3 Vols. 8vo. 00 15 00 Misson's Travels
over England, 8vo. 00 04 06 Mauger's French Grammar, 8vo. 00 02 00 Martial in
Usum Delphini, 8vo. 00 06 06 Miscellanea Aurea: Or, Golden Medley. 00 04 00
Medulla Historiae Anglicanae, 8vo. 00 06 00 Motteaux's Don Quixot, 4 Vol.
12ves. 00 10 00 Morgan's Principles of Medicine, 8vo. 00 06 00 Moreland's Vade
Mecum, 8vo. 00 02 00 Master-Key to Popery, 3 Vols. 12ves. 00 09 00 Milbourn's
Legacy to the Church of England, 2 Vols. 00 09 00 Mandey, of Measuring, 8vo. 00
05 00 Mashmer's Husbandry, 2 Vols. 8vo. 00 09 00 Mangey, on the Lord's Prayer,
8vo. 00 03 06 Musae Anglicanae, 2 Vols. 00 05 06 Moor (Bishop of Ely) his
Sermons, 2 Vols. 8vo. 00 09 00 N NIcholls's Conference with a Theist, 2 Vols.
with large Additions, 8vo. 00 10 00 New Voyage round the World by a Course
never sailed before, 8vo. 00 04 06 Nelson's (Robert) Works, Abridg'd and
Methodiz'd, 2 Vol. 12ves. 00 06 00 Noble Slaves, a Novel, 12ves. 00 02 00 New
Miscellaneous Poems, with Five Love Letters from a Nun to a Cavalier, and the
Cavalier's Answer, in Verse. 00 02 00 Nelson of the Feasts and Fasts of the
Church of England. 00 05 00 Nelson Practice of true Devotion, 12ves. 00 02 06
New Manual of Devotions, in 3 Parts. 00 03 00 Nuptial Dialogues and Debates, 2
Vols. 12ves. 00 05 06 Nelson's Abridgment of the Law, 3 Vols. Folio. 04 10 00 O
OZanam's Course of the Mathematics. Done from the French by Dr. Desaguliers,
and others, 5 Vols. 8vo. 01 02 06 Ovidii Metamorphoses in Usum Delphini. 00 06
06 Ovidii Translated into English Verse, and published by Dr. Sewell, 2 Vols.
00 05 06 Osborn's Works, 2 Vols. 12ves. 00 05 06 Ostervald's Causes of the
Corruption of Christians. 00 04 06 Orleans's History of the Stuarts,
recommended by Echard, 8vo. 00 04 06 Ovid De Tristibus in English Verse 00 01
00 Ogilby's and Morgan's Pocket Book of the Roads, 8vo. 00 01 06 Ovid's
Epistles, English, with Cuts, 12ves. 00 03 00 Ovid's Art of Love, with Cuts,
12ves. 00 03 00 Oldham's Works, 2 Vols. 12ves. 00 05 00 P PHilips's English
Dictionary, Folio. 01 00 00 Patrick's (Bp.) Devout Christian Instructed, 12ves.
00 03 00 Patrick's (Bp.) Christian Sacrifice, 12ves. 00 03 00 Patrick's (Bp.)
Mensa Mystica, 8vo. 00 05 00 Patrick's (Bp.) Sermons, on Contentment, 8vo. 00
05 00 Patrick's (Bp.) Help to Young Communicants, 24o 00 00 06 Patrick's (Dr.)
Psalms, 12ves. 00 02 00 Potter's (Bishop) Greek Antiquities, 2 Vols. 8vo. 00 12
00 Pembroke's Arcadia, 3 Vols. by Sir Philip Sidney, 1725. 00 13 06
Puffendorf's Introduction to the History of Europe, 8vo. 00 06 00 Pomfret's
Poems, 12ves. 00 02 00 Plurality of Worlds. Translated from the French of
Fontenell. By Gardner. 00 02 06 Postman robbed of his Mail: Or, A Collection of
Letters, written by the best Wits of the present Age, 12ves. 00 03 00 Prior's
Poems, 2 Vols. 12ves. 00 05 06 Parnell's Poems, 8vo. 00 03 06 Pope's Homer's
Iliad, 6 Vols. 12ves. with Cuts. 00 18 00 Pope's Odissey, in 5 Vol. 12ves. 00
15 00 Pope's Miscellanies, 2 Vols. 12ves. 00 05 06 Prideaux's Connection of the
Old and New Testament, 4 Vols. 8vo. 01 00 00 Prideaux's Life of Mahomet, 8vo.
00 03 06 Palladio's Architecture, 4to. 00 04 00 Pomet's History of Druggs, 410.
01 01 00 Persian Tales, 3 Vols. 12ves. 00 09 00 Patrick's (Bishop) Paraphrase
on all the Poetical Books of the Old Testament. 00 18 00 Patrick's (Bishop)
Commentary on the Historical Books of the Bible, 2 Vols. Folio. 02 08 00
Pearson, on the Creed, Folio. 00 12 00 Pitt's (Rev. Mr.) Poems on several
Occasions. 00 05 06 Q QUarles's Emblems, 12ves. 00 04 00 Quarles's Divine
Poems, 12ves. 00 03 00 Queen's Closet opened, 12ves. 00 02 00 Quiney's Pharm.
Officinalis, 8vo. 00 06 00 Quiney's Lexicon Medicum, 8vo. 00 05 06 Quiney's
Sanctorius Aphorisms, 8vo. 00 05 06 Quintus Curtius, 2 Vols. English. 00 06 00
R ROW's Callipoedia, 12ves. 00 01 06 Richardson of Painting, 2 Vols. 8vo. 00 10
00 Robinson (Dr.) on the Stone and Gravel, 8vo. 00 04 00 Robinson (Dr.) on
Consumptions, 8vo. 00 04 00 Royal French Grammar. 00 02 06 Robert's (Capt.)
Voyages to the Cape de Verd Islands. 00 05 00 Ray's Wisdom of God in the
Creation. 00 04 06 Ray's Physico-Theological Discourses, 8vo. 00 05 06
Ratcliff's Life, 12ves. 00 01 06 Religious Philosopher, 2 Vols. 4to. 00 16 00
Reflections on Ridicule, 2 Vols. 00 05 00 Ronayne's Algebra, 8vo. 00 06 00
Row's Lucan's Pharsalia, 2 Vols. 12ves. 00 06 00 Row's Sallust, English 00 02
06 S SElden's Works, 6 Vols Published by Dr. Wilkins 07 16 00 Stevens's English
and Spanish Dictionary. 01 01 00 Stanhope (Dr.) on the Epistles and Gospels, 4
Vols. 8vo. 01 02 00 Sherlock (Dr.) of Death, 8vo. 00 03 06 Sherlock (Dr.) The
same in 12ves. 00 01 06 Sherlock (Dr.) on Judgment, 8vo. 00 04 00 Sherlock
(Dr.) on a Future State, 8vo. 00 04 06 Sherlock (Dr.) on Providence, 8vo. 00 04
06 Sherlock (Dr.) of Religious Assemblies, 8vo. 00 04 00 Sherlock's (Dr.)
Sermons, 2 Vols. 8vo. 00 09 00 Secret History of Whitehall, 2 Vols. 12ves. 00
05 06 Select Novels, 2 Vols. with Cuts, 12ves. 00 06 00 Strother's Pharm.
Practica, 12ves. 00 03 06 Sydenham's (Dr.) Works English, 8vo. 00 04 06
Scrivener's Guide, 2 Vol. 8vo. 00 11 00 Salmon's Family Dictionary, 8vo. 00 06
00 Smith's Art of Painting in Oil, 12ves. 00 01 00 Symson's New Voyage to the
West Indies. 00 03 06 South's Maxims, 8vo. 00 01 06 Sylvius de la Bore's
Practical Physic, 8vo. 00 04 00 Sallustius in Usum Delphini, 8vo. 00 04 00
Schrevelii Lexicon, 8vo. 00 06 06 Spectator, 8 Vols. 01 00 00 Seneca's Morals.
By Sir R. Lestrange, 8vo. 00 05 00 Stanhope's (Dr.) Christian Pattern, 8vo. 00
04 06 Stanhope's (Dr.) Parsons Christian Directory. 00 04 06 Stanhope's (Dr.)
St. Austin's Meditations. 00 04 06 Stanhope's (Dr.) Epictetus's Morals, 8vo. 00
04 06 Salmon's Druggist Shop opened, 8vo. 00 07 06 Suetonius, English, 2 Vols.
00 05 00 Spinke's Sick Man visited, 8vo. 00 05 00 Steel's (Sir Richard) Plays.
00 03 00 Southern's Plays, 2 Vol. 00 06 00 Strother's Essay on Health, 8vo. 00
05 06 Salmon's Review of the History of England, 2 Vols. 00 10 00 Salmon's
against Burnet's History, 2 Vols. 00 10 00 Salmon's Essay on Marriage. 00 04 06
Shaw's Practice of Physic, 2 Vols. 8vo. 00 09 00 Shaw's Translation of
Boerhave's Chemistry. 00 18 00 Sutherland's Ship-Building unveiled, Folio. 00
15 00 Sydenham's Practice of Physic, English. 00 05 06 Shaftsbury's
Characteristicks, 3 Vols. 00 18 00 Stanhope's (Dr.) 12 Sermons on several
Occasions, 8vo. 00 05 06 Swinden's Enquiry into the Place of Hell. 00 05 06
South's Sermons, 6 Vols. 8vo. 01 10 00 Shaw's Edinburgh Dispensatory. 00 04 00
Sharp's Sermons, 4 Vols. 00 18 00 T TAylor's (Bp.) Life of Christ, now in the
Press. Taylor's Rules for Holy Living and Dying. 00 05 00 Taylor's
Contemplations on the State of Man. 00 02 06 Taylor's Golden Grove, 12ves. 00
01 00 Tyrrel's Bibliotheca Politica, Folio. 00 18 00 Tournfort's Voyage into
the Levant, 2 Vols. 4to. 01 10 00 Tatler, 5 Vols. 12ves. 00 12 06 Tacitus,
English, 3 Vols. 12ves. 00 09 00 Terentius in Usum Delphini, 8vo. 00 05 06
Terentius Englished by Echard, 12ves. 00 02 06 Travels of an English Gentleman
from London to Rome on Foot, 12ves. 00 01 06 Turretin of Fundamental Principles
in Religion, 8vo. 00 01 00 Turner's Surgery, 2 Vols. 8vo. 00 11 00 Turner's
Diseases of the Skin, 8vo. 00 05 06 Turner's Syphilis, 8vo. 00 04 06 Temple's
Works, 2 Vols. Folio. 01 12 00 Tillorson's (Bishop) Works, 3 Vols. Folio. 02 10
00 Tale of a Tub, 12ves. with Cuts. 00 02 06 V VAuban, of Fortification, 8vo.
00 06 00 Vida's Art of Poetry, in English, 12ves. 00 02 00 Vertot's Revolutions
of Rome, 2 Vols. 8vo. 00 10 00 Vertot's of Sweden, 8vo. 00 04 06 Vertot's of
Portugal, 8vo. 00 03 00 Vanbrugh's (Sir John) Plays, 2 Vols. 00 05 00 W
WHeatley on the Common Prayer, Folio. 00 18 00 Whitby, on the New Testament, 2
Vols. 02 02 00 Whitby, Disquisitiones Modestae, 8vo. 00 03 00 Ward's London
Spy, in 6 Vols. 8vo. N.B. Most of the Pieces may be had single. 01 07 06 Ward's
Nuptial Dialogues 2 Vols. 12ves. 00 06 00 Webster's Arithmetic in Epitome,
12ves. 00 02 06 Webster's Book-keeping, 8vo. 00 01 06 Wycherley's Plays, 2
Vols. 12ves. 00 05 00 Ward's Young Mathematician's Guide. 00 06 00 Woodward's
Essay toward a Natural History of the Earth, 8vo. 00 04 00 Wiseman's Surgery,
2 Vols. 8vo. 00 10 00 Week's Preparation to the Sacrament, 12ves. 00 01 00
Wood's Institutes of the Common Law, Folio. 01 04 00 Wood's of the Civil and
Imperial Law, 8vo. 00 06 00 Wake's (Abp.) Genuine Epistles. 00 05 06 Wake's
(Abp.) Commentary on the Church Catechism. 00 02 00 Warder's Monarchy of Bees,
8vo. 00 01 06 Well's Sacred Geography of the Old and New Testament, 8vo. 4
Vols. 01 00 00 Well's Course of the Mathematics, 3 Vols. 8vo. 00 18 00 Watts's
Astronomy, 8vo. 00 04 06 Watts's Logic, 8vo. 00 04 06 Watts's Sermons, 3 Vol.
12ves. 00 09 00 Watts's Psalms, 12ves. 00 01 06 Wingate's Arithmetic, 8vo. 00
04 06 Y YOUNG Clerk's Tutor, 12ves. 00 01 06 Young, (Dr.) on the Last Day,
12ves. 00 01 00 Young, (Dr.) Poem on Lady Jane Gray, 8vo. 00 01 00

Libri in Usum Scholarum.
BAiley's Ovid's Metamorphosis, 8vo. Bailey's Ovid De Tristibus, 12ves.
Bailey's Phaedrus, 8vo. Bailey's Cato, 12ves. Bailey's Exercises, English and
Latin, 12ves. Bailey's Exercitia Latina: Or, Latin for Garrerson's Exercises,
12ves. Busby's Greek Grammar, 8vo. Busby's English Introduction to the Latin
Tongue. Busby's Syntaxis Erasmiana Constrictior, 8vo. Busby's Ditto, Construed,
8vo. Beza's Latin Testament, 12ves and 24o. Clavis Homerica, 8vo. Clark's
Introduction to the making of Latin Clark's Florus, 8vo. Clark's Nepos, 8vo.
Clark's Eutropius, 8vo. All with Literal Translations. Clark's Erasmus, 12 ves.
All with Literal Translations. Clark's Corderius 12ves. All with Literal
Translations. Castalio's Latin Bible, in 4 neat Vols. Castalio's Latin
Testament, 12ves. Cornelius Nepos, 12ves. Celsar, 12ves. Demosthenes, 12ves
Dyche's Vocabulary, 8vo. Dyche's Youth's Guide to the Latin Tongue, 12ves.
Dyche's English Particles Latiniz'd, 8vo. Dyche's Phaedrus, 12ves. Electa
Majora, 8vo. Electa Minora, 8vo. Eutropius, 12ves. Epigrammatum Delectus,
12ves. Erasmus, Dublin, 12ves. Familiar Form, 12ves. Farnaby's Rhetoric, 8vo.
English and Latin. Garretson's English Exercises, 12ves. Gradus ad Parnassum,
8vo. Gregory's Nomenclatura, 8vo. Hederici Lexicon, 4to. Homeri Ilias, Greek
and Latin, 8vo. Helvici Colloquia, 12ves. Hoadley's Phaedrus, 12ves. Horace,
12ves. sine Notis. King's Heathen Gods, 12ves. Lock's Aesop Interlineary,
English and Latin. Leed's Greek Grammar, 12ves. London Vocabulary, by
Greenwood, 12ves. Leusden's Compendium, 8vo. Martialis Epigrammata, 12ves.
More's English Examples, for the Use of Bury School, 8vo. Pantheon. By Took,
8vo. with Cuts. Phaedrus Delphini, 8vo. Ray's Nomenclatura. 8vo. Royal Grammar,
12ves. Urmston's Help to the Accidence, 8vo. Urmston's London Spelling Book,
12ves. Walker's Art of Teaching, 12ves. Walker's Engl. Examples, 12ves.
Walker's Particles, 8vo. Wettenhall's Gr. Grammar, 12ves. Well's Dionysius,
8vo. Ware's Practical Grammar, 8vo. Xenophon de Cyri Institutione, Greek and
Latin.
Most of the Classicks in Usum Delphini.
BOOKS lately published.
I. THE Entertaining Novels of Mrs. Jane Barker. Containing, 1. Exil^us: Or,
The Banished Roman. 2. Clelia and Marcellus: Or, The Constant Lovers. 3. The
Reward of Virtue: Or, The Adventures of Clarinthia and Lysander. 4. The Lucky
Escape: Or, The Fate of Ismenus. 5. Clodius and Scipiana: Or, The Beautiful
Captive. 6. Piso: Or, The Lewd Courtier. 7. The Happy Recluse: Or, The Charms
of Liberty. 8. The Fair Widow: Or, False Friend. 9. The Amors of B^svill and
Galesia. The 2d. Edition. In 2 Vols. Price 5 s. II. A Patchwork Screen for the
Ladies: Or, Love and Virtue recommended, in a Collection of Instructive Novels,
related after a Manner entirely New, and interspersed with Rural Poems,
describing the Innocence of a Country Life. Price 2 s. 6d. III. A Lining for
the Patchwork Screen: Designed for the farther Entertainment of the Ladies.
Price 2 s. 6 d. These Two by Mrs. Barker. IV. The Life of Charlotta du Pont, an
English Lady, taken from her own Memoirs: Giving an Account how she was trapa^d
by her Stepmother to Virginia; how the Ship was taken by some Madagascar
Pirates, and retaken by a Spanish Man of War; of her Marriage in the Spanish
West Indies, and Adventures while she resided there, with her Return to
England; and the History of several Gentlemen and Ladies whom she met withal in
her Travels, some of whom had been Slaves in Barbary, and others cast on Shore
on the Barbarous Coasts up the great River Oroonoque; with their Escape thence,
and safe Return to France and Spain. A History that contains the greatest
Variety of Events ever yet published. By Mrs. Aubin. Price 2 s. V. The Tragical
History of the Chevalier de Vaudray and the Countess de Vergi. In Two Parts. To
which is annexed a short Novel, entitled, The Inhuman Husband. Done from the
French by Mr. Morgan. Price 2 s. VI. The Agreeable Variety: Being a
miscellaneous Collection in Prose and Verse, from the Works of the most
Celebrated Authors. In Two Parts, viz. Part I. Containing Instructive
Discourses on the most useful Subjects, for the happy Conduct of human Life. 2.
Characters of the most Illustrious Personages of both Sexes, of our own, and
other Nations, particularly the remarkable Manner of Life of the excellent
Princess of Parma. Written by herself, and found among her Papers after her
Decease. 3. Choice Poems, and Select Passages, extracted from the most
Celebrated Poets. Part II Containing Original Poems; Sixty familiar Letters
upon Education, Love, Friendship, etc. none of which ever before Published. The
Whole Collected and Published by a Lady. Price 3 s. 6 d. The 2d Edition. VII.
Miscellanea Aurea: Or, The Golden Medley. Consisting of, 1. A Voyage to the
Mountains of the Moon, under the Equator: Or, Parnassus reformed. 2. The
Fortunate Ship-wreck: Or, A Description of New Athens, being an Account of the
Laws, Manners, Religion, and Customs of that Country. By Morris Williams, Gent.
who resided there above twenty Years. 3. Alberoni: Or, A Vindication of that
Cardinal. 4. The Secret History of the Amors of Don Alonzo Duke of Lerma, and
Grandee of Spain. 5. The Garden of Adonis: Or, Love to no Purpose; being about
twenty Copies of Verses and Love Letters. By a Lady. 6. Mahomet no Impostor;
written in Arabic, by Abdulla-Mahunied Omer. 7. An Account or Bid and Good
Women, ancient and modern. With several other Epistolary Essays in Prose and
Verse. By Mr. Milton; the Lady W --, Mr. Philips, and several Others. In
Octavo. Price 4 s. VIII. The four Years Voyage of Captain George Roberts; Being
a Series of uncommon Events, which befell him in a Voyage to the Islands of the
Canaries, Cape de Verde, and Barbados, from whence he was bound to the Coast
of Guinea; the Manner of his being taken by three Pirate Ships, Commanded by
Low, Russel,, and Spriggs, who after having plundered him, and detained him ten
Days, put him aboard his own Sloop without Provisions, Water, etc. and with
only two Boys, one of eighteen, and the other of eight Years of Age; the
Hardships he endured for above twenty Days, till he arrived at the Island of
St. Nicholas, from whence he was blown off to Sea (before he could get any
Sustenance) without his biggest Boy and Boat, whom he had sent ashore; and
after four Days Difficulty and Distress, was Ship-wreck'd on the unfrequented
Island of St. John; where, after he had remained near two Years, he built a
Vessel to bring himself off. With a particular and curious Description and
Draught of the Cape de Verd Islands, their Roads, anchoring Places, Nature and
Production of the Soil; the Kindness and Hospitality of the Natives to
Strangers, their Religion, Manners, Customs, and Superstitions, etc. Together
with Observations on the Minerals, Mineral Waters, Metals, and Salts, and of
the Nitre, with which some of those Islands abound. Written by himself now
living at Shad-Thames, 1726. Price 5 s. IX. The Travels of an English Gentleman
from London to Rome on Foot: Containing a Comical Description of what he met
with Remarkable in every City, Town, and Religious House, in his whole Journey:
Also an Account of their ridiculous Processions, and Ceremonies, in their
Churches, through their Streets, and in the Woods. Likewise the Debauched
Lives, and Amorous Intriegues of the Priests and Nuns: With a pleasant Account
of the Opening the Holy Gate of St. Peter's Church. Also Reflections upon the
Superstition and Foppish Pageantry of the whole Ceremony of the last Grand
Jubilee at Rome. The 4th Edition. Now Published for the Diversion and
Information of the Protestants of England. Price 1 s. 6 d. X. Saducissimus
Triumphatus: Or, A full and plain Evidence concerning Witches and Apparitions.
In Two Parts. The First treating of their Possibility; the Second of their real
Existence. By Joseph Glanvill, Chaplain in Ordinary to King Charles II. and F.
R. S. The 4th Edition, with Additions. With some Account of Mr. Glanvill's Life
and Writings. Price 6 s. 1726. XI. The Works of the Honorable Sir Philip
Sidney, Knt. In Prose and Verse. Containing, 1. The Countess of Pembroke's
Arcadia. 2. The Defense of Poesy. 3. Astrophel and Stella. 4. The Remedy of
Love. 5. The Lady of May: A Masque. 6. The Life of the Author. The 14th
Edition. In Three Vols. 8vo. 1725. Price 13 s. 6 d. XII. The New Description
and Present State of the Kingdom of France. Containing, 1. An Historical
Account of its Kings, their Antiquity, Prerogatives, etc. With a Description of
all the Royal Palaces, and of the Paintings, Statues, and other Curiosities
therein contained. 2. Of the Parliament, and all Officers, Civil and Military,
belonging to his Majesty, and the Princes of the Blood. 3. Of the Bishoprics,
other Church Dignities, Monasteries, and Clergy; of the Universities, Faculties
therein studied, and of the French Academy. 4. The Peerage of France; the three
Orders of Knighthood; the Nobility and Marshals; and the Coats of Arms of each
respective Family truly Emblazoned. 5. A Description of the City of Paris, and
all the Public Buildings, Churches, Libraries, and Collection of Rarities, and
whatsoever else is remarkable. 6. The Roads from one Town to another, with the
exact Distances from Place to Place, not only in France, but from thence
through Spain, Italy, Germany, and the Netherlands. In Two Volumes, 12ves. The
2d Edition, 1726. Price 6 s. XIII. Mechanical Essays on the Animal Economy;
wherein not only the Conduct of Nature in Animal Secretion, but Sensation and
human Generation, are distinctly considered, and Anatomically explained; as
also the particular Manner of the Operation of a Medicine is accounted for, and
many other Curious and Uncommon Subjects are treated of; necessary for all that
study Nature, and particularly those that make Physic or Surgery their
Practice. By James Handley, Surgeon, Author of Colloquia Chirurgica, 8vo. Price
5 s. XIV. England's Interest: Or, The Gentleman and Farmer's Friend: Showing 1.
How Land may be improved from 20s. to 8 l. and so to 100 l. per Acre, per
Annum, with great Ease, and for an inconsiderable Charge. 2. The best and
quickest Way of raising a Nursery. 3. How to make Cider, Perry, Cherry,
Current, Gooseberry, Mulberry, and Birch Wives, as Strong and Wholesome as
French and Spanish Wines; and the Cyders and Wines so made to be sold at 3d.
per Quart, though as good as Wine now sold for 18 d. 4. Directions for Brewing
the finest Malt Liquors, better and cheaper than hitherto known. 5.
Instructions for Breeding Horses, Husbandry of Bees, and ordering Fish and
Fish Ponds. Lastly, Physic for Families; containing many useful Medicines for
several Distempers, particularly the Plague. By Sir J. Moore, 12 ves. Price 1
s. 6 d. XV. English Liberties: Or, The Freeborn Subject's Inheritance.
Containing Magna Charta, Charta de Foresta, the Statute de Tallagio non
Concedendo, the Habeas Corpus Act; with several other Statutes, and Comments on
each of them: Likewise the Proceedings in Appeals of Murder, of Ship Money, of
Tunnage and Poundage, of Parliaments, of the Three Estates, and of the
Settlement of the Crown by Parliament. Together with a short History of the
Succession, not by any Hereditary Right; also a Declaration of the Liberty of
the Subject, the Petition of Right; with a short, but impartial Relation of the
Difference between King Charles I. and the Long Parliament; of Trials by
Juries, and of the Qualifications of Jurors, their Punishment for Misbehaviour,
and of Challenges to them. Lastly, Of Justices of the Peace, Coroners,
Constables, Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors of the Highway,
etc. With many Law-Cases throughout the Whole. Compiled first by Henry Care,
and now continued with large Additions. By W. Nelson, of the Middle Temple, Esquire
The 4th Edition. Price 4 s. 6 d. XVI. A Crown of Glory, the Reward of the
Righteous: Being Meditations upon the Vicissitude and Uncertainty of all
Sublunary Enjoyments, viz. 1. Honor, Riches, and Pleasure. 2. The Nature and
Cause of Afflictions. 3. The great Benefit of Afflictions. 4. Of our
Resignation to the Will of God. To which is added, A Manual of Devotions for
Times of Trouble and Affliction; also Meditations and Prayers for the Holy
Communion, both before, at, and after receiving; with some general Rules and
Directions for our Daily Practice. Composed for the Use of a Noble Family. By
the Right Reverend Dr. Thomas Kenn, late Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells. Price 2
s. 6d. XVII. The Devout Christian's Hourly Companion: Consisting of Holy
Prayers, and Divine Meditations. Done into English from that Spiritual
Drexelius. The 3d Edition, in 12ves. Price 1 s. XVIII. The Gentleman Angler:
Containing short, plain, and easy Instructions, whereby the most ignorant
Beginner may, in a little Time, become a perfect Artist in Argling for Salmon,
Salmon-Peal, Trout, Pike, Carp, Perch, Barbell, Tench, Bream, Chub, Greyling,
Mullets, Flounders, Roach, Dace, Gudgeon, etc. With several Observations on
Angling, Angle-Rods, and Artificial Flies; how to choose the best Hair, and
Indian Grass; of the proper Times and Seasons for River and Pond Fithing. To
which is added, The Angler's new Song, the Laws of Angling, and the Form of a
License and Deputation for Angling. Together with an Appendix: Containing the
Method of Rock and Sea Fishing; an Explanation of Technical Words used in the
Art of Angling; choice Receipts for dressing Fish; and how to improve Barren
Ground, by turning it into Fish Ponds. By a Gentleman, who made Angling his
Diversion upwards of twenty eight Years, 1726. Price 1 s. 6 d. XIX. A Practical
Discourse of Religious Assemblies, under the following Heads: 1. Of Religion in
general. 2. What Religious Worship is. 3. Of Public Worship, and the Danger of
forsaking Public Assemblies. 4. The Seasonableness of this Discourse. 5.
Concerning Speculative Atheists. 6. The Inclination of Human Nature to
Religious Worship. 7. Atheists should not wholly forsake Religious Assemblies.
8. Nor intermeddle in the Disputes of Religion. 9. Concerning the Practical
Atheist. 10. The Danger of Irreligion, both with respect to this World and the
next. 11. Concerning Parochial Communion. 12. Concerning the Neglect of the
Public Prayers of the Church. 13. Concerning the great Neglect of the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. By William Sherlock, D. D. late Dean of St.
Paul's. The 4th Edition, 1726. Price 4 s. XX. Spiritual Communion Recommended
and Enforced from Scripture, from the Primitive Fathers and Councils, from
Reason, and from Experience, in an Examination and Defense of the Doctrine,
Worship, Rites, and Ceremonies of the Church of England. In Two Parts. By a Lay
Hand, 8vo. 1725. Price 2 s. 6 d. XXI. Arithmetic in the Plainest and most
Concise Method hitherto extant; with new Improvements for Dispatch of Business
in all the several Rules; as also Fractions, Vulgar and Decimal, wrought
together after a new Method that renders both easy to be understood in their
Nature and Use. The Whole perused and approved of by the most Eminent
Accomptants in the several Offices of the Revenues, viz. Customs, Excise, etc.
as the only Book of its Kind, for Variety of Rules, and Brevity of Work. By
Geo. Fisher, Accomptant. The 2d Edition, with large Additions and Improvements,
12ves. 1725. Price 2 s. 6 d. XXII. A new Method of treating Consumptions;
wherein all the Decays incident to Human Bodies are mechanically accounted for,
with some Considerations, touching the Difference between Consumptions, and
those Decays that naturally attend Old Age. To which are added, Arguments in
Defense of the Possibility of curing Ulcers in the Lungs; as also Reasons
demonstrating that the irregular Discharges of all the Evacuations in
Consumptions, arise from the Resistance of the Heart not decaying in a simple
Proportion to the Resistance of the other Parts. 8vo. Price 5s. XXIII. A
complete Treatise of the Gravel and Stone, with all their Causes, Symptoms and
Cures accounted for. To which are added, Propositions demonstrating that the
Stone may be safely dissolved without any Detriment to the Body, drawn from
Reason, Experiments, and Anatomical Observations. The 2d Edition, with large
Additions. 8vo. Price 4s. These two by Nicholas Robinson, M. D. XXIV. An Essay
toward a Natural History of the Earth, and Terrestrial Bodies, especially
Minerals; as also of the Sea, Rivers, and Springs: With an Account of the
Universal Deluge, and of the Effects it had on the Earth. By John Woodward, M.
D. Professor of Physic in Gresham College. The 3d Edition. Price 4s. XXV. The
Demonstration of True Religion, in a Chain of Consequences from certain and
undeniable Principles; wherein the Necessity and Certainty of Natural and
Revealed Religion, with the Nature and Reason of both are proved and explained;
and in particular the Authority of the Christian Revelation is established, not
only from the Natures and Reasons of Things, but also from the Relation it
bears to the Scriptures of the Old Testament. In 16 Sermons preached at Bow
Church in the Years 1724, and 1725, for the Lecture founded by the Honorable
Robert Boil, Esquire In two Volumes, 8vo. Price 9 s. XXVI. An Essay upon
Government: Or, The Natural Notions of Government, demonstated in a Chain of
Consequences from the fundamental Principles of Society. By which all the
nicest Cases of Conscience relating to Government, may be, and many of them are
here resolved, with respect to the Authority of Government in general, the End
and Manner of making and executing Laws, the Measures of Submission to Princes,
and the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of Revolutions; in a Method altogether new.
Price 1 s. 6d. The two last by Thomas Burnett, D. D. Prebendary of Sarum, and
Rector of Westhington in Wiltshire. PLAYS, on Elzevir Letter, at One Shilling
each. ABramule, All for Love, Anatomist, Ambitious Stepmother, Artful Husband,
Artful Wife, Beaux's Stratagem, Beaux's Duel, Beggar's Bush, Biter, Boarding
School, Bold Strike for a Wife. Bri^on, Busiris, Busy Body, Caius Marius,
Campaign, Careless Husband, Cato, Chances, Committee, Conscious Lovers, Country
Wife, Sir Courtly Nice, Cruel Gift, Devil of a Wife, Distressed Mother, Don
Sebastian, Double Gallant, Drummer, Duke of Gloucester, Earl of Essex, Aesop,
Fair Penitent, Fair Quaker of Deal, Fall of Saguntum, Fatal Marriage, Gamester,
Ha^ot, Hob, Humors of Purgatory, Jane Shore, Jane Gray, Inconstant, Ignoramus,
Island Princess, King Lear, London Cuckolds, Love and a Bottle, Love for Money,
Love makes a Man, Love's last Shift, Mariamne, Measure for Measure, Merry Wives
of Windsor, Northern Heiress, Northern Lass, Oroonoko, Orphan, Othello, Phaedra
and Hippolitus, Pilgrim, Plain Dealer, Provoked Wife, Recruiting Officer,
Rehearsal and Chances, Relapse, Revenge, Royal Convert, Rule a Wife, She
Gallant, Sauney the Scot, She would and she wou'd'nt, She would if she could,
Siege of Damascus, Sophonisba, Spartan Dame, 'Squire of Alsatia, Tamerlane,
Theodosius, Tunbridge Wells, Twin-Rivals, Venice preserved, Ulysses, Sir Walter
Raleigh, Wife's Excuse. Wonder.
With great Variety of Plays, Poetry, Novels, etc.

