THE LAW OF RETRIBUTION.

THE LAW OF RETRIBUTION; OR, A SERIOUS WARNING TO GREAT BRITAIN AND HER
COLONIES, Founded on unquestionable EXAMPLES of GOD's TEMPORAL VENGEANCE
AGAINST Tyrants, Slave-holders, and Oppressors.

The Examples are selected from Predictions in the Old Testament, of NATIONAL
JUDGMENTS, which (being compared with their actual Accomplishment) demonstrate
"the sure Word of Prophecy," as well as the immediate Interposition of DIVINE
PROVIDENCE, to recompense impenitent NATIONS according to their Works.

By GRANVILLE SHARP.

The People of the Land have used Oppression, and exercised Robbery, and have
vexed the Poor and Needy: yea, they have OPPRESSED THE STRANGER WRONGFULLY,
etc. Therefore have I poured out mine Indignation upon them, etc. Their OWN WAY
have I recompensed upon their Heads, says the Lord God. Ezekiel. xxii. 29 -- 31.

LONDON: Printed by W. RICHARDSON, For B. WHITE, at Horace's Head, in Fleet
Street; and E. and C. DILLY, in the Poultry.

MDCCLXXVI.

If thou see the Oppression of the Poor, and violent perverting of Judgment
and Justice in a Province, marvel not at the matter (or will) FOR HE THAT IS
HIGHER THAN THE HIGHEST REGARDS, etc. Eccles. v. 8. -- The Lord SAW (it) and
it displeased him that there was NO JUDGMENT, and he SAW that there was NO
MAN, and wondered that (there was) NO INTERCESSOR: etc. -- And he put on the
Garments of VENGEANCE for clothing, and was clad with zeal as a cloak.
ACCORDING TO THEIR DEEDS, ACCORDINGLY HE WILL REPAY, fury to his Adversaries,
RECOMPENSE (or Retribution) TO HIS ENEMIES, TO THE ISLAND'S HE WILL REPAY
RECOMPENSE, etc. Isa. lix. -- How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the
Persons of the Wicked? Defend the Poor and Fatherless: do Justice to the
Afflicted and Needy. DELIVER THE POOR AND NEEDY: RID THEM OUT OF THE HAND OF
THE WICKED. Ps. lxxxii. 2 -- 4. -- Remove Violence and Spoil, and execute
Judgment and Justice, TAKE AWAY YOUR EXACTIONS FROM MY PEOPLE, SAYS THE LORD
GOD! Ezekiel. xlv. 9.

THE LAW OF RETRIBUTION.
THE AFRICAN SLAVE TRADE has been publicly supported and encouraged by the
Legislature of this Kingdom for near a century last past; so that the monstrous
destruction of the Human Species, which is annually occasioned thereby, may
certainly be esteemed a National Crime of the most aggravating kind, which
(according to the usual course of God's Providence in the World) will probably
draw down some exemplary vengeance upon the unrepenting Inhabitants of this
Island! And, with respect to the British Colonies, the uncharitable practice of
Slave-holding, especially in the West India Islands and the more Southern
Colonies, is grown up into a more enormous and destructive Oppression (whether
we view the prodigious multitudes of the Oppressed, or the unconscionable
severity of the Oppressors) than perhaps ever disgraced any other Nation at any
one period of time!

The several attempts that have lately been made to justify these two branches
of abominable National Iniquity by the Holy Scriptures, and especially by the
permission therein granted to the Israelites to purchase and retain Slaves
among them, have induced me to collect, from the History of the Jews in the
several Books of Holy Scripture, some plain examples of God's Vengeance upon
that particular Nation, expressly for this kind of Oppression; which, I hope,
will sufficiently prove that Slavery was ever detestable in the sight of God,
and consequently that a speedy Reformation is absolutely necessary (as well
with respect to the African Slave Trade, encouraged in this Kingdom, as the
Toleration of Slavery in the British American Dominions) if we mean to
entertain the least hope of escaping a severe National Retribution, which (if
we may judge by our present Civil Dissentions and horrid mutual Slaughters of
National Brethren) seem ready to burst upon us!

I am well aware, indeed, how very unfashionable it is, nowadays, to quote
Scripture, when matters of Law, Politics, or Trade are called in question; yet
I flatter myself that the following examples, drawn from thence, are perfectly
suitable to my present point, and consequently must have weight to convince all
persons, who sincerely acknowledge the Truth of the Scriptures, that we have
the greatest reason to apprehend the infliction of some heavy Judgment from
Almighty God upon these Kingdoms, on account of the monstrous load of Guilt
which the British Subjects, on each side of the Atlantic, have incurred by the
Oppressions abovementioned.

In some former Tracts I have already shown that the Servitude which the Jews,
by the Mosaic Law, were permitted to exact of their Brethren (even when the
latter were sold to them) was very much limited; that they were not to be
treated as Bond Servants If thy Brother (that dwells) by thee be waxen poor,
and be sold unto thee, thou shall not compel him to serve as a Bond Servant:
but as an Hired Servant, and as a Sojourner, he shall be with thee, etc. Levit.
xxv. 39, 40.
but as Hired Servants; that the Servitude could not lawfully be extended
beyond seven years If thou buy an Hebrew Servant, six years he shall serve, and
in the seventh he shall go out free for nothing. Exodus xxi. 2.
unless the Servant loved his Master and Condition, and voluntarily demanded
And if the Servant shall plainly say, I love my Master, my Wife, and my
Children; I will not go out free: etc. Exodus xxi. 5. Thus it is evident that
the Jews could not acquire any right to the perpetual Service of their
Brethren, John or Thomas, except by virtue of a voluntary Contract, which is
something similar to that Clause in the Habeas Corpus Act concerning a
Contract, which I thought myself obliged to acknowledge in my former Tract as
an exception to the idea of Universal Freedom in this Kingdom. But in neither
case can the Contract for Service be implied; for in the latter the Contract
must be in writing, and the signing be clearly proved to be a voluntary act,
without the least suspicion of Duress; and in the former case it was necessary
that the Servant should acknowledge, in a Court of Record, that he was willing
to enter into such a Contract; for the Hebrew Servant could not be made a
Slave, unless he would plainly say, I love my Master, etc. I WILL NOT GO OUT
FREE: Then (says the Text) his Master shall bring him unto the JUDGES (which
answers to the public Acknowledgement necessary in the other case to be made in
a Court of Record) for without this the Hebrew Master had no authority to bore
the Servant's Ear in token of Bondage. Exodus xxi. 5, 6.


of him to continued in his Service; and that, in every other case, it was
absolutely unlawful to hold a Brother Hebrew in Slavery.

I have likewise shown, that, under the glorious Dispensation of the Gospel, we
are absolutely bound to consider ourselves as Citizens of the World; that every
Man whatever, without any partial distinction of Nation, Distance, or
Complexion, must necessarily be esteemed our Neighbor, and our Brother; and
that we are absolutely bound in Christian Duty to entertain a Disposition
toward all Mankind as charitable and benevolent, at least, as that which was
required of the Jews, under the Law, toward their national Brethren; and,
consequently, that it is absolutely unlawful for those, who call themselves
Christians, to exact of their Brethren (I mean their Brethren of the Universe)
a more burdensome Service than that to which the Jews were limited with
respect to their Brethren of the House of Israel; and the Slavery, or
involuntary Bondage, of a Brother Israelite was absolutely forbid.

These premises naturally lead us to consider the severe NATIONAL JUDGMENTS
which the Jews brought upon themselves principally by exceeding these very
limitations which I have here specified: and the inevitable conclusion to be
drawn from these examples is, that we are absolutely in danger of THE LIKE
JUDGMENTS, if we do not immediately put a stop to all similar Oppression by
National Authority: because an uncharitable extension of the said limits, by
those who call themselves Christians, will certainly be, at least, as heinous
in the sight of God as the OPPRESSION OF BRETHREN under the Law; and probably
much more so, if we consider the purity and benevolence which is required of
all Men under the Gospel Dispensation: and I have clearly proved (I trust) that
the permission to the Israelites, to keep Bondmen of the Heathen (or more
properly the Nations, (...)) that were round about them, and of the Children of
the Strangers that dwelt among them, cannot be extended to any other People
whatever except the Israelites themselves; and that even to them it was only
temporary, during the Dispensation of the Mosaic Law, whilst they possessed the
Land of Canaan, the former Inhabitants of which ( viz. the seven abominable
Nations of Palestine, expressly mentioned by name in the seventh Chapter of
Deuteronomy, where the same Heb. Noun (...), rendered Heathen in the former
Text, is properly expressed by the English word Nations) the Israelites were
expressly directed to drive out, kill, and destroy, without pity "Thine eye
shall have no pity upon them." Deuteronomy. vii. 16.
, and to make no Covenant with them Thou shall make no Covenant with them, nor
show Mercy unto them, etc. Deuteronomy. vii. 2.
: and I hope I have also proved that the remainder of these particular wicked
Nations, thus expressly doomed to destruction, were undoubtedly "the Heathen"
(or Nations) that dwelt round about the Israelites, and the Children of the
Strangers, whom (and whom alone) it was lawful to hold in perpetual Bondage;
for otherwise that permission cannot be reconciled to God's positive Commands,
given in the same Law, to love the Stranger. The Lord your God is God of Gods,
and Lord of Lords, a great God, a mighty and a terrible, which regards not
Persons (so that this was apparently a general Law, or Rule of Conduct, toward
all Persons, except the People of those particular Nations which were
expressly, by name, condemned to destruction by the hands of the Israelites, in
other parts of the Law, for their abominable wickedness) nor takes Reward: he
does execute the Judgment of the Fatherless and Widow, and loves the
Stranger, in giving him food and raiment. LOVE YE THEREFORE the Stranger (and
the Almighty inculcates a sympathetic concern for the welfare and happiness of
Strangers, by reminding the Israelites of their own unhappy situation formerly
in a strange country) "for ye" (says the Text) were Strangers in the Land of
Egypt. Deuteronomy. x. 17 to 19. See also Levit. xix. 33, 34. "Thou shall love him"
(that is, the Stranger) as thyself; for ye were Strangers in the Land of Egypt.

National Wickedness, from the beginning of the World, has generally been
visited with National Punishments: and surely no National Wickedness can be
more heinous in the sight of God, than a public toleration of Slavery and
Oppression! for Tyranny (in whatsoever shape it appears) must necessarily be
esteemed a presumptuous breach of that Divine Command, in which all Law is
fulfilled (Gal. v. 14.) viz. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thyself. Levit.
xix. 18.

The Histories of all Nations, indeed, afford tremendous examples of God's
Vengeance against Tyrants; but no History is so proper to illustrate this
subject (which now so nearly concerns us) as that of the Jews: for as the
Knowledge of the Divine Law was revealed in a more particular manner to that
People, and to others only through them, so the effect even of their
Disobedience was an exemplary demonstration, from time to time, of God's
Vengeance, as well as of his Mercy, for the instruction of all other Nations,
amongst whom they are now dispersed, as living monuments of the same to this
very day: and we have the authority of an Apostle 1 Cor. x. 11.
to assert, that all these things happened unto them for ensamples; and they
are written (says he) for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are
come.

One of the first and most signal instances of Mercy which the Almighty was
pleased to show that People, after they became a Nation, was, the restoring
them to their Natural Freedom from the deplorable Slavery in which they were
detained by a tyrannical Egyptian Monarch -- the Children of Israel sighed by
reason of the Bondage, and they cried; and their cry came up unto God by reason
of the Bondage: and God heard their groaning, etc. Exodus ii. 23, 24.

And the Lord said, I have surely seen the Affliction of my People which are in
Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their Taskmasters: for I know
their Sorrows, and I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the
Egyptians. Exodus iii. 7, 8.


: and the tremendous Judgments whereby this deliverance was effected ( viz.
the Plagues of Egypt) are so many signal examples of God's severe Vengeance
against Slave-holders, which ought to be had in everlasting remembrance, to
warn all Nations of the World against the unnatural and baneful practice of
keeping Slaves.

This deliverance from Bondage was frequently mentioned, even in the words of
God himself, by his Prophets, from time to time (as I have before remarked) --
"Thus says the Lord" ( i. e. Jehovah) God of Israel: I brought you up from
Egypt, and brought you forth out of the House of Bondage; ((...), more
literally from the House of Slaves") and I delivered you out of the hand of the
Egyptians, and out of the hand of all that oppressed you, etc. Judges vi. 8. --
I removed his Shoulder from the Burden; his Hands were delivered from the Pats
In like manner there are multitudes of poor people retained in a deplorable
Bondage, even to this day, in the Potteries of China.


: thou calledst in trouble, and I delivered thee. Psalm. lxxxi. 6, 7.

The Israelites themselves were also particularly directed to remember this
signal exertion of Divine Mercy and Power in the cause of Popular Freedom:
"Remember that thou wast a Servant" (viz. a Slave) in the Land of Egypt, and
that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence through a mighty hand, and by a
stretched-out arm, etc. Deuteronomy. v. 15.

It was surely for the moral purpose of stirring up in the Israelites a
sympathetic concern for the Sufferings of the Oppressed, and more particularly
of Oppressed Strangers, that they were so frequently reminded of their own
former deplorable condition in Slavery, and of their miraculous Deliverance
from thence; being expressly referred to their own Feelings and Remembrance of
the cruel foreign Tyranny, which they themselves had so lately experienced in
Egypt: -- thou shall not oppress a Stranger: for ye KNOW THE HEART ((...),
properly THE SOUL) OF A STRANGER, seeing ye were Strangers in the Land of
Egypt. Exodus xxiii. 9.

God also gave the Israelites due warning of the Danger of Oppression, by
declaring that he would SURELY revenge the Cause of the injured Stranger: Thou
shall neither vex a Stranger, nor oppress him; for ye were Strangers in the
Land of Egypt. Ye shall not afflict any Widow or fatherless Child. If thou
afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will SURELY hear their
cry (mark this, ye African Traders of this Island, and ye West India and
British American Slave-holders! for ye are all guilty of the like abominable
Oppressions, and God will SURELY avenge the Cause of the Oppressed) and my
wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword, and your Wives shall
be Widows, and your Children fatherless. Exodus xxii. 21 to 24.

And have not the careless Inhabitants of Great Britain and her Colonies too
much reason also to apprehend that the same God (who professes to hear the cry
of oppressed Strangers, if they cry at all unto him) will, sooner or later,
visit these Kingdoms with some signal mark of his Displeasure, for the
notorious Oppression of an almost innumerable multitude of poor African
Strangers, that are harrassed, and continually wearing out, with a most
shameful involuntary Servitude in the British Colonies! nay, and that by a
public Toleration, under the sanction of Laws to which the Monarchs of England,
from time to time, by the advice of their Privy Counselors, have given the
Royal Assent, and thereby rendered themselves Parties in the Oppression, and
(it is to be feared) Partakers of the Guilt!

Let us not forget, before it is too late, that the Almighty has not only
declared, himself ready to "HEAR THE CRY" of the oppressed Stranger, but has
deigned to add to his glorious Name, Jehovah, a brief Remembrance of his
merciful interposition in behalf of an enslaved Nation: "I am the Lord your
God" (or Jehovah your God, said the Almighty to the Israelites) which brought
thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage, Exodus xx. 1. Thus
the Almighty Deliverer from Slavery vouchsafed to set his own Divine Example
before the eyes of his redeemed People, to excite Benevolence and Thankfulness;
and the like Remembrance of that glorious Redemption from Slavery was very
frequently repeated from time to time; which the Scriptures sufficiently
testify: but alas! the Israelites profited so little by these wholesome
lessons, that it became necessary, no less frequently, to remind them of the
dreadful Vengeance which would inevitably overtake them for their notorious
Oppressions of the Poor; for their unjust Exactions of involuntary and
unrewarded Service; and for exceeding the limitations of Bondage (already
recited) which the Law expressly enjoined!

For the Oppression of the Poor, for the Sighing of the Needy, now will I
arise, says the Lord; and will set him in safety from him that puffs at him,
or that would ensnare him. Psalm. xii. 5.

The Princely Prophet Isaiah plainly declared to them, that their public Fasts
and outward Humiliations were not only vain, but even offensive to God, while
such notorious Oppressions continued among them. "Behold" (said he) in the day
of your Fast, you find Pleasure, and exact all your Labors. Sunt inter quos
Belgae, qui hic intelligunt Opera Servilia, quae a Servis and Ancillis hoc ipso
di^ rigide exigebantur, ut aliis diebus. (...) "(...)," Omnes Subjectos vobis
affligitis: quae lectio (says Vitringa) absque emendatione facile subsistit. --
And a little afterward he adds, Prior interpretatio de Operibus Servorum aut
molestis exactionibus Subditerum, magna se commendat specie, estque mihi in eam
pronior animus.


lviii. 3. And again, -- Is it such a Fast that I have chosen? a day for a Man
to afflict his Soul? is it to bow down his head as a bulrush? etc. Is not this
the Fast that I have chosen? -- to loose the Bands of Wickedness, to undo the
heavy Burdens (or rather the Bundles of the Yoke, (...) plainly referring to
the severe and unjust Bondage of the Poor) and TO LET THE OPPRESSED GO FREE,
and that YE BREAK EVERY YOKE? -- Is it not to deal thy Bread to the Hungry, and
to bring the Poor that are cast out (or rather to bring the Poor that are
reduced, or depressed, viz. as it were by Tyrants; for so the word (...) seems
more properly to signify in this place) "to thy House?" etc. Compare this with
Deuteronomy. xxiii. 15, 16. Thou shall not deliver unto his Master the Servant which
is escaped from his Master unto thee: he shall dwell with thee (even) among
you, in that place which he shall choose, in one of thy gates where it likes
him best: thou shall not oppress him. Deuteronomy. xxiii. 15, 16.


And he warned them of the Divine Justice that would pursue them for their
Oppression and tyrannical Treatment of the Poor.

The Lord stands up to plead, and stands to judge the People! The Lord will
enter into Judgment with the Ancients (or Senators) of his People, and the
Princes thereof: for ye have eaten up the Vineyard; the Spoil of the Poor is in
your Houses! What mean ye that ye beat my People to pieces, and grind the Faces
of the Poor? says the Lord of Hosts! Isa. iii. 13 to 15.

The wicked practices whereby the Israelites reduced their poor Brethren to
Slavery are described by the Prophet Amos: Hear this, O ye that swallow up the
Needy, even to make the Poor of the Land to fail, saying, When will the New
Moon be gone, that we may sell Corn? and the Sabbath, that we may set forth
Wheat, making the Ephah small, and the Shekel great, and falsifying the
Balances by Deceit? That we may buy the Poor for Silver Ideo ut ubi solvere
non poterunt, dent se nobis in Servitutem, ut mos erat illarum Gentium. Grotius
in locum.
and the Needy for a Pair of Shoes (that is, comparatively speaking, at a most
contemptible price! whereby we may presume that Slave-markets were not so
notoriously established at that time as at present; and that the Bidders were
few, though the Oppressed were many) yea, and sell the Refuse of the Wheat? The
Lord has sworn by the Excellency of Jacob, surely I will never forget any of
these works. Shall not the Land tremble for this, and every one mourn that
dwells therein? etc. Amos viii. 4 to 8.

Here is a solemn Appeal from God to the Human Understanding: Shall not the
Land tremble for this! that is, for this same abominable Oppression of the Poor
(the buying them for Slaves) in which Great Britain and her Colonies are
infinitely more guilty than the People to whom this appeal was made! and "shall
not the Land" (therefore) even our Land, tremble for this, and every one mourn
that dwells therein? etc. Surely God will never forget any of these Works, my
Countrymen!

The Prophet Jeremiah manifestly alluded to the like deceitful practices of the
Jews (whereby they reduced the Poor to Slavery) when he made a solemn protest
against them in the Name of God: -- "Your sins" (said he) have withholden good
things from you. For among my People are found wicked (men): they lay wait as
he that sets Snares; THEY SET A TRAP, THEY CATCH MEN. As a Cage (or Coup) is
full of Birds, so are their Houses full of Deceit: therefore they are become
great, and waxen rich. They are waxen fat, they shine: yea, they overpass the
deeds of the Wicked; they judge not the cause, the cause of the Fatherless, yet
they prosper; and the right of the Needy do they not judge. Shall I not visit
for these things? says the Lord! Shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation
as this? etc. Jer. v. 26 to 29. Here again the Almighty plainly appeals to the
Human. Understanding concerning the Propriety, or rather the Necessity, of
exerting the Divine Vengeance against such an Oppressive Nation!

And yet how inconsiderable was the crime of the Jewish Nation in this respect,
if compared with the numerous Bondage and with the unbounded Oppression of the
poor Negroes in the British Colonies? Have we not therefore just reason to fear
that God will visit for these things? Does not the Word of God, which cannot
change, appeal to us, my Countrymen, as well as to the Jews? -- "Shall not my
Soul" (says the Lord!) be avenged on such a Nation as this?

The same Prophet, in the next chapter, declares the Divine Vengeance to be at
hand: -- For thus has the Lord of Hosts said, -- Hew ye down Trees, and cast a
Mount against Jerusalem. This (is) the City to be visited! she is wholly
Oppression in the midst of her. As a Fountain casts out her Waters, so she
casts out her Wickedness: Violence and Spoil is heard in her; before me
continually is Grief and Wounds! Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem! lest my Soul
depart from thee: lest I make thee desolate, a Land not inhabited! Jer. vi. 6
to 8.

But in vain were the Warnings of the Prophet, till the Judgments themselves
began to appear in all the horrors of a hopeless War, which began in the ninth
year And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, in
the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon came, he and
all his host, against Jerusalem, and pitched against it: and they built forts
against it round about. 2 Kings xxv. 1. -- In the ninth year of Zedekiah King
of Judah, in the tenth month, came Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and all his
army, against Jerusalem, and they besieged it, etc. Jer. xxxix. 1. See also
chap. lii. ver. 9.


of King Zedekiah's reign, notwithstanding that the Monarch had previously
rendered himself secure (as he thought) by his military preparations (in
sending for Horses and Men from Egypt, to complete his standing Army) and had
also made Pharaoh (another presumptuous military Tyrant) his Ally, which
encouraged him to break his Oath and Covenant with the King of Babylon.

But when Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and all his Army, and all the
Kingdoms of the Earth, of his Dominion, and all the People, fought against
Jerusalem, and against all the Cities thereof -- then God ordered his Prophet
to remind Zedekiah of that dreadful Vengeance, Defeat and Captivity, which had
so often before been denounced as the necessary consequences of Oppression and
Injustice! -- Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel ( viz. to Jeremiah): Go,
and speak to Zedekiah King of Judah, and tell him, Thus says the Lord; behold,
I will give this City into the hand of the King of Babylon; and he shall burn
it with fire. And thou shall not escape out of his hand, but shall surely be
taken, and delivered into his hand; and thine eyes shall behold the eyes of the
King of Babylon, and he shall speak with thee mouth to mouth, and thou shall go
to Babylon, etc. Jer. xxxiv. 1 to 3.

The impending Vengeance being then become visible, and consequently more
tremendous, by the near approach of the Babylonian Army, that irresistible
instrument in the hand of God, by which the Jews had so often been subdued, the
King's stubborn heart began to relent, and his military confidence to forsake
him, which had before encouraged his Injustice; his firmness in Worldly
Politics was shaken, and yielded to a sense of Guilt! It was upon this return
of Conscience and right Reason that Zedekiah sent two Messengers, Passur and
Zephaniah, to Jeremiah, saying, Enquire, I pray thee, of the Lord for us; for
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon makes war against us; if so be the Lord will
deal with us according to all his wondrous works, that he may go up from us,
etc. See chap. xxi. ver. 1 and 2. But a very unwelcome answer was given to the
Messengers, to be returned to their Monarch; for the Prophet confirmed all the
heavy Judgments Then said Jeremiah unto them, Thus shall ye say to Zedekiah:
Thus says the Lord God of Israel; Behold, I will turn back the weapons of war
that are in your hands, wherewith ye fight against the King of Babylon, and
against the Chaldeans which besiege you without the walls; and I will bring
them into the midst of this City. And I myself will fight against you, with an
outstretched arm, and with a strong arm, even in anger, and in fury, and in
great wrath. And I will smite the Inhabitants of this City, both Man and Beast:
they shall die of a great Pestilence. And afterward, says the Lord, I will
deliver Zedekiah King of Judah, and his Servants, and the People, and such as
are left in this City, from the Pestilence, from the Sword, and from the
Famine, into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and into the hand of
their Enemies, and into the hand of those that seek their Life; and he shall
smite them with the Edge of the Sword; he shall not spare them, neither have
Pity, nor have Mercy! Jer. xxi. 3 to 7.


which had before been denounced, as well against the King, expressly by name,
as against the City and its iniquitous Inhabitants, whose notorious Oppressions
were now to be RECOMPENSED upon their own heads, MEASURE FOR MEASURE: -- Now is
the end come upon thee, and I will send mine anger upon thee, and will judge
thee according to thy ways, and will RECOMPENSE upon thee all thine
abominations, etc. Ezekiel. vii. 3. See also the 4th, 8th, and 9th verses, to the
same effect. And afterward, in the 11th verse, one of the principal causes of
GOD's Vengeance is mentioned: -- "Violence" (said the Prophet) is risen up into
a Rod of Wickedness: none of them shall remain, nor of their multitude, nor of
any of their's; neither shall there be wailing for them. The time is come, the
day draws near. etc. -- And again, in the 23d verse: -- "Make a Chain" (said
the Prophet); for the Land is full of bloody Crimes, and the City is full of
Violence. Wherefore I will bring the worst of the Heathen, and they shall
possess their houses, etc. -- Destruction comes; and they shall seek peace,
and there shall be none. Mischief shall come upon mischief, and rumor shall be
upon rumor, etc. -- The King shall mourn, and the Prince shall be clothed with
desolation, and the Hands of the People of the Land shall be troubled: I will
do unto them after their (own) way, and according to their deserts (or rather
their own judgments) will I judge them; and they shall know that I am the
Lord. -- Again, in the 12th chapter, the same reason is clearly assigned for
the pouring out of God's Vengeance: -- Say unto the People of the Land, Thus
says the Lord God of the Inhabitants of Jerusalem and of the Land of Israel;
They shall eat their Bread with Carefulness; and drink their Water with
Astonishment, that her Land may be desolate from all that is therein, because
of THE VIOLENCE of them that dwell therein. Ezekiel. xii. 19. The nature of this
baneful Violence, which occasioned their destruction, is more particularly
described by the same Prophet, in chap. xxii. ver. 7. -- in the midst of thee
(still speaking of Jerusalem) have they dealt by Oppression with the Stranger
(mark this, ye British Slave-dealers and Slave-holders); in thee have they
vexed the Fatherless and the Widow. Thou have despised mine holy things, and
have profaned my Sabbaths. In thee are men that carry tales to shed Blood: and
in thee they eat upon the mountains: in the midst of thee they commit lewdness,
etc. -- One has committed abomination with his Neighbor's Wife: and another
has lewdly defiled his Daughter-in-law, etc. -- In thee have they taken gifts
to shed Blood: thou have taken Usury and Increase, and thou have greedily
gained of thy Neighbors by Extortion, and have forgotten me, says the Lord
God. Behold, therefore, I have smitten mine hand at thy dishonest gain which
thou have made, and at thy Blood which has been in the midst of thee, etc.
Ezekiel. xxii. 7, etc.

Oh that the Subjects of the British Empire would seriously compare these
crimes with their own practices! they would then, surely, be sensible of their
danger; and that they have reason to expect the like, or rather much heavier,
Judgments, than those denounced against the Jews! For, besides the notorious
Adulteries, and other acts of Lewdness, which many amongst us (from the
frequency of such crimes) commit, even without shame or remorse, we have far
exceeded the guilt of the Jews, I fear, in many of the other points also which
provoked the Vengeance of the Almighty against them! What "Violence" amongst
the Jews, before their Captivity, was ever "risen up into" so destructive a Rod
of Wickedness -- as the AFRICAN SLAVE TRADE, now carried on chiefly by our
Liverpool and Bristol Merchants? What "bloody crime" among the Jews was more
notorious, and more wickedly premeditated, than the late Invasion and Conquest
of the poor innocent CARRIBEES at ST. VINCENT's? And what Nation has dealt by
Oppression with the Stranger so generally, so inhumanly, and in so great a
degree, as our BRITISH AMERICAN SLAVE-HOLDERS! -- Have we not ample reason to
expect that the same tremendous decree will, in God's Justice, be fulfilled
upon these Kingdoms? -- Destruction comes: and they shall seek Peace, and
there shall be none. Mischief shall come upon mischief, and rumor upon rumor,
etc. etc. etc. -- I will do unto them after their (own) way, and according to
their (own) Judgments will I judge them! etc.

Nevertheless, God was pleased to offer the Jews a Choice in their Fate, --
either to forsake their wicked King (who had forfeited all right to govern, by
his neglect of Justice and Natural Right) and to fall away to the King's
Enemies, the Chaldeans; or else to perish miserably in the City, and partake of
it is Destruction! -- "And unto this People" (said God to the Prophet Jeremiah)
thou shall say, Thus says the Lord; Behold, I set before you the way of Life,
and the way of Death. He that abides in this City shall die by the Sword, and
by the Famine, and by the Pestilence: but he that goes out, and falls to the
Chaldeans that besiege you, he shall live, and his Life shall be unto him for a
Prey, etc. Jer. xxi. 8, 9.

The Prophet, however, was directed to add to his message a word of advice to
the King and Court, which shows that a seasonable repentance might, even then,
have saved the State, and turned away the impending Vengeance.

It was such advice, too, as every other Monarch, who tolerates any unnatural
Bondage or Oppression in his Dominions, ought seriously to consider, because
the event proved it to be the best means of averting God's Anger, if the King
had but persevered in it. -- And touching the House of the King of Judah
(continued the Prophet) say, -- Hear ye the Word of the Lord, O House of David
-- thus says the Lord; Execute Judgment in the morning, and deliver him that
is spoiled out of the hand of the Oppressor, lest my Fury go out like Fire, and
burn that none can quench (it), because of the evil of your doings. Jer. xxi.
12. This is a manifest declaration that the Neglect of JUSTICE and RIGHT, and
the Toleration of OPPRESSION, were the principal causes of God's heavy
Vengeance against that Royal House!

The same advice was, by God's Command, repeated by the Prophet to the King
himself IN HIS PALACE (see the next chapter): -- Thus says the Lord; Go down
to THE HOUSE of the King of Judah, and speak THERE this word, and say, Hear the
word of the Lord, O King of Judah, that fittest upon the Throne of David, thou,
and thy Servants, and thy People that enter in by these Gates" (that is, all
Persons whatever that enter in by the Palace-gates, plainly including the whole
Court, before whom the Prophet was to deliver his message): Thus says the
Lord; Execute ye JUDGMENT and RIGHTEOUSNESS, and deliver the Spoiled out of
the hand of THE OPPRESSOR; and do no wrong, DO NO VIOLENCE TO THE STRANGER And
what "Wrong" or Violence to the Stranger can be more oppressive than that of
detaining him in an involuntary Servitude, WITHOUT WAGES, in a miserable,
wretched Bondage, worse than that of brute Beasts!


, etc. -- For if ye do this thing indeed (that is, if ye will execute Judgment
and Righteousness, deliver the Oppressed, etc.) then shall there enter in by
the Gates of this House Kings sitting upon the Throne of David (or rather "that
sit," i. e. reign, "for David upon his Throne") riding in Chariots and on
Horses, he and his Servants, and his People (that is, the Court should continue
and prosper). But if ye will not hear THESE WORDS, I swear by myself, says the
Lord ( i. e. Jehovah) "that THIS HOUSE" ( i. e. the Palace) "shall become a
desolation." Jer. xxii. 1 to 5. So that the whole Court were as much interested
to promote a speedy Reformation, as the King himself. Thus it is plain that the
King and Court had also a Choice given them of Life and Death, as well as the
People; and, consequently, that the Judgments denounced were only conditional,
in case the warning was neglected; for it is manifest that God mercifully
tendered to them (even at the eve of their destruction) a continuance of the
Monarchy (viz. Kings sitting upon the Throne of David) if they would but
resolve to execute JUDGMENT and RIGHTEOUSNESS; to deliver the Spoiled out of
the hand of the OPPRESSOR; and to do no Wrong, NO VIOLENCE, to THE STRANGER,
etc. But the Prophet also added much more advice to the King and his Court,
though he was not " made of the King's Council When a similar warning was given
by a former Prophet to a wicked and inconsiderate Predecessor of Zedekiah,
concerning God's impending Vengeance for his misconduct, the haughty Monarch,
puffed up with vain notions of his Royal Importance, arrogantly imposed silence
on the Prophet, because he had undertaken the office of an Adviser or
Counselor to the King without the etiquette or formality of a Court
Appointment: -- "Art thou made of the King's Council?" (said the Monarch:)
forbear; why should thou be smitten? -- Upon which the Prophet forbore
indeed to reason with him; but immediately pronounced upon him the severe
sentence of God's Condemnation, saying, I know that God has determined to
destroy thee, because thou have done this, and have not hearkened unto my
Counsel: and it is remarkable, that, after rejecting the Counsel of God, the
very next Counsel which this imperious Monarch was pleased to adopt was
attended with the most dangerous and humiliating consequences, both to King and
Kingdom, that could possibly have happened! nothing less than the delivery of
both into the absolute power of their Enemies! for after he had silenced the
Prophet, "then" (says the Text) Amaziah King of Judah TOOK ADVICE, and sent to
Joash, the Son of Jehoahaz, the Son of Jehu, King of Israel, saying, Come, let
us see one another in the face. -- The war was unjust and unreasonable; and,
providentially, the King and his wicked Advisers were punished by the effects
of their own unprincipled Counsel. See 2 Chronicles. xxv. 16 -- 24.


;" for he boldly warned the Monarch by the tremendous examples of God's
Judgments upon three of his immediate Predecessors in the Kingdom; two of whom
were his own Brothers, the Sons of King Josiah; and the third his own Nephew,
whom he immediately succeeded. They were all particularly mentioned by him in
the proper order of their respective reigns, as we find by the copy of his
Message or Remonstrance, preserved in the Collection of his Prophecies; and,
throughout the said Remonstrance, frequent allusions are made to the principal
causes of the failure and destruction of each of them, which afford a most
striking and interesting Lesson to Kings and Governors in general; but it must
have been more particularly affecting to Zedekiah, if we consider his critical
situation at the time the Message was delivered to him, and that the Examples
of Vengeance, to which the Prophet referred him, were actually accomplished in
the Persons of his nearest Relations and Predecessors, who were successively
deprived of their Royal Dignity, and carried away IN CHAINS into a slavish
Captivity; the very fate which, the Prophet assured him, was to be his own!

But before I recite the remainder of God's Message to the Court of Zedekiah,
it will be necessary for me to give some general account of that Monarch and of
his immediate Predecessors, in order that the Remonstrance, in which they are
all distinctly mentioned, may be more easily understood by the generality of
Readers. It will likewise be necessary for me to prove, that the whole 22d
Chapter of Jeremiah is included in that Message, or Remonstrance, which the
Prophet was then to deliver in the presence of the whole Court of Zedekiah. And
I propose to insert also some remarks, as they occur, concerning the Prophet
himself, and the order of time, in which he delivered the several tremendous
predictions of GOD's Vengeance against these wicked Princes.

Zedekiah was the Son of that excellent Prince Josiah King of Judah, on whose
account, expressly, the dreadful Vengeance, due to that wicked Nation, was
postponed for several years, viz. till after his death.

The Scriptures mention four Sons of King Josiah, viz. the firstborn, Johanan
(or John); the second, Jehoiakim; the third, Zedekiah; and the fourth, Shallum.
1 Chronicles. iii. 15. -- What became of the eldest Son Johanan, or John, is not
recorded -- "this Johanan" (says Bishop Patrick) is thought by many to be the
same with Jehoahaz, who succeeded Josiah in the Throne. But he (meaning
Jehoahaz) was not his firstborn, being but twenty-three years old when the
People made him King; and after three months time his Brother, being put in his
place, is said to be twenty-five years old. 2 Kings xxiii. 31, 36. Petavius
(continues the Bishop) has said a great deal about this, in his Annotations
upon Epiphanius ad Haeres. Epicur. p. 18. But after all (says the learned
Bishop) I take the truth to be, that JOHANAN WAS HIS ELDEST SON, but died
before his Father: and therefore is not mentioned in the Book of Kings; as
(continues he) Jehoahaz is not mentioned here, being made King by the People of
the Land, and presently dethroned. -- In the latter part of this remark,
however, the worthy Bishop is apparently mistaken; for the same King, who was
sometimes called Jehoahaz, is certainly mentioned in that very Text (1 Chronicles.
iii. 15.) on which the Bishop made this remark, though mentioned, indeed, under
a different name, viz. Shallum.


, but all the others ascended the Throne of David; and first of all, the
youngest Son Shallum, whom, on the death of King Josiah, the People of the Land
took, and (as it seems, without) regard to seniority) made him King in his
Father's stead in Jerusalem. 2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 1. In this Text Shallum is called
Jehoahaz, which, perhaps, was his original or proper name, and the other name,
Shallum, only a surname (signifying Peace), given him, probably, by the People
at his Coronation, and in remembrance of the peace and general tranquillity
during the greatest part of his Father's reign: but the great and learned
Archbishop Usher just reversed this supposition; for he was of opinion, that
Shallum -- Eum enim 23 annos natum, senioribus Fratribus posthabitis, Populus
Regem Patris loco constituit. (2 Reg. xxiii. 30, 31.) Shallumi nomine, ut
videtur, melioris ominis causa in aliud mutato: quod commune illud ei fuisset
cum Shallumo Jabeshi filio; qui unico tantum mense regno potitus a Manahemo est
occisus, etc. ad A. M. 3371. p. 113.


was the proper name, and Jehoahaz only the surname.

Nevertheless, in defense of what I have ventured to mention as my own opinion,
I must remark, that in the list of King Josiah's Sons, where Shallum is
mentioned with the rest of his Brothers ( viz. 1 Chronicles. iii. 15.) no less than
two of his Brothers out of three are mentioned only by THE SURNAMES which were
given them when they began to reign; and the third Brother there mentioned (or
rather the first of them, Johanan) never reigned; and therefore, probably, had
no surname to distinguish him, like the rest: but the other two, who actually
ascended the Throne of David, were mentioned by their surnames only, viz.
JEHOIAKIM ((...) Jehov-ikim, signifying Jehovah will establish) and ZEDEKIAH
((...) Tsadok-Jehov, signifying the Righteousness of Jehovah); for their proper
names were Eliakim (2 Kings xxiii. 34.) and Mattaniah (2 Kings xxiv. 17.): and
therefore it is very natural to conclude, that the name of the only remaining
Brother, who actually reigned, and is mentioned in the same Text ( viz.
Shallum, signifying Peace) is likewise a surname, as well as the other two
mentioned before him, who received the names, by which they are distinguished
in that Text, when they were first appointed to the Throne of Judah.


.

The reign of Shallum (alias Jehoahaz Jehoahaz was twenty and three years old
when he began to reign, and he reigned three months in Jerusalem. And his
Mother's name was Hamutal, the Daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. And he did (that
which was) evil in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his Fathers had
done. 2 Kings xxiii. 31, 32.
was only three months; for he regarded not the eternal Laws of God, and
thereby drew down the Divine Vengeance upon himself, by the hand of
Pharaoh-Neco, who deposed him at Jerusalem And the King of Egypt put him down
at Jerusalem, and condemned the Land in an hundred talents of silver, and a
talent of gold. 2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 3.
(2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 3.) and afterward PUT HIM IN BANDS at Riblah RIBLAH was the
fatal place where King Zedekiah was afterward judged and condemned by the King
of Babylon, and where his Sons were slain before his eyes. Jer. lii. 9. The
Text also informs us, that "he" (the King of Babylon) slew also all the Princes
of Judah in RIBLAH. Jer. lii. 10. There is something very remarkable in the
meaning of these names, Riblah and Hamath, when compared with the dreadful
Vengeance executed therein. Riblah ((...)) was capable of being interpreted
(though it likewise has a different meaning) as follows, viz. "Rixa" -- aut
jurgium inveteratum vel conturbatum, sive jurgium, defluens; (see the
Interpretation of Scripture Names annexed to the London Polyglot, Vol. VI.) and
HAMATH ((...)) "Ira vel indignatio, aut calor," etc. (ibid.); that is, the City
of Strife, or severe Chiding, in the Land of Wrath, or fiery Indignation. Now
it must appear very remarkable, I say, if we consider the interpretation of
which these names are capable, that God should incline two foreign Conquerors
(who had no connection with each other, but, on the contrary, were mortal
Enemies) to execute his Vengeance upon different Kings of Judah exactly at the
same place, viz. the City of Strife, in the Land of Wrath: insomuch that one
would suppose these names to be given afterward, in remembrance of God's
severe Vengeance already executed therein! And yet, we find, they were the
ancient names of those places, mentioned in Moses' account of the Israelitish
boundary, Numb. xxxiv. 8, 11. And though the names are really capable of
bearing a different and more favorable interpretation, yet, to the Jews, who
were nice observers concerning the real meaning of names, the possibility of
interpreting the names of these fatal places, in the awful sense which I have
mentioned, must render the accomplishment of God's Vengeance therein much more
striking and remarkable!


in the Land of Hamath, that he might not reign in Jerusalem (2 Kings xxiii.
33) And Pharaoh-Nechoh put him in bands at Riblah in the Land of Hamath, that
he might not reign in Jerusalem, etc. 2 Kings xxiii. 33.
there being, probably, some reason to apprehend, that he would attempt to
supplant his elder brother Eliakim, whom the Egyptian Conqueror had thought
proper to set up in his stead upon the Throne of David; and therefore, to
secure the new-established Monarch, he not only put Shallum IN BANDS, but also
carried him away with him into Captivity in Egypt, where he died And
Pharaoh-Nechoh made Eliakim the Son of Josiah King in the room of Josiah his
Father, and turned his name to Jehoiakim, and took Jehoahaz away; and he came
to Egypt, and he died there. 2 Kings xxiii. 34.
.

Thus Eliakim (through the Mercy of God to "the House of David") was raised to
the Throne and Kingdom of his Ancestors, even by a foreign Enemy! who also
changed his Name (that the Providence of God might be more apparent in the
Revolution) from Eliakim ((...), signifying God will establish) to Je-hoiakim,
signifying (as I have before remarked) "Jehovah will establish;" whereby it is
manifest that even a Heathen Monarch took pains to remind the new King of Judah
of his dependence on Jehovah the God of Israel, whose Laws and Religion of
course, we may presume, were likewise re-established in Judea by the same
foreign Authority; for it would have been absurd in the Egyptian Monarch to
have changed the Name of his Royal Vassal to another Name more particularly
testifying a Belief in Jehovah, the true God of Israel, if he did not mean
thereby to keep the Jewish King in constant remembrance of the National
Profession of Law and Religion by the sacred Name of the great Author of them!

The same remarkable change in the Name of a future King of Judah was made also
by another foreign and Heathen Conqueror afterward, in honor of the eternal
JEHOVAH; so that it was manifestly the Providence of God which inclined these
two great Enemies of the Jewish State, though they were also mortal Enemies to
each other, (I mean Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar) to pursue exactly the same
method in restoring "the Scepter of Judah" to the House of David, and in
declaring the Establishment of the National Law and Religion, by putting a
respectful memorial of the sacred Name of Jehovah upon the new-raised Monarchs!

In the beginning of Jehoiakim's reign, though Judea and all Syria were then
under the Egyptian Empire, the Prophet Jeremiah, in his 27th chapter -- In the
beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the Son of Josiah King of Judah, came this
word unto Jeremiah from the Lord, saying, Thus says the LORD (or the LORD
said) to me; make ye Bonds and Yokes, and put them upon thy Neck, and send them
to the King of Edom, etc. The learned Dr. Lowth (Prebendary of Winchester in
1718) in his Commentary on this place, supposes that the Name of "Jehoiakim has
crept into the Text," etc. instead of Zedekiah. "This emendation" (says he) is
confirmed by comparing this verse with the 3d, 12th, and 20th verses of this
chapter, and with the beginning of the next. -- But these verses, however, are
far from confirming the proposed emendation: all that can properly be said of
them in this respect is, that they have occasioned, in some Writers, the
supposition of an Error in the Text, which has been very well answered by
others. But there is a better evidence in favor of the Doctor's supposition
than what he has mentioned, because the latter really contains no difficulty,
if the 3d and 6th verses be considered as prophecies "These things" (says the
learned Lightfoot) are to be understood to be spoken prophetically concerning
Zedekiah, as well as concerning Nebuchad-nezzar's Sons; for the Lord by the
Prophet foretells that Nebuchadnezzar should reign, and his Son and
Grandchilde after him; and therefore must the Prophet presently make Yokes and
Bonds, and put them of his own neck in token of Judah's subjection, which
indeed begun in the very next year. And he foretells us withal that Zedekiah
should reign, and that diverse Kings should send Messengers to him, and by them
should Jeremy send those Yokes to those Kings, etc. Harmony of the Old
Testament, p. 149 and 150.


of the future reigns of Zedekiah and Nebuchadnezzar: but the evidence, which
he has not mentioned, leaves much more room for the supposition of a various
reading in the Text; for the Syriac Version has really the reading which that
learned Gentleman supposes to be the true one, viz. (...) in the beginning of
the reign of Tsedekia, instead of in the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim.
This evidence certainly proves, either that the Hebrew Copy, from which the
version was made, had really the reading supposed by Dr. Lowth, or else that
the Translator himself thought (like Dr. Lowth) that the word JEHOIAKIM had
crept into the Text instead of ZEDEKIAH, and therefore was willing to correct
the supposed error in his new version: and as the latter is neither impossible
nor improbable, the evidence of the Syriac Version must by no means be admitted
to invalidate the present Hebrew Reading, especially as the latter is
confirmed, not only by all the ancient Hebrew Manuscripts that have hitherto
been collated, but also by the Targum of Jonathan, who flourished 100 years
before the destruction of the second Temple, as Bishop Walton relates Floruit
hic centum annis ante Templi secundi vastationem, ut habetur in Talm. Fract. de
Sabbato, c. 1. -- In Biblia Polyglotta Prolegom. p. 84.
; so that his Translation is older than the oldest Syriac Version, which is
sufficiently proved in the Prolegomena to the Polyglott Bible by the same
learned Bishop. The whole verse is wanting in the Greek Version, so that no
evidence can be drawn from thence.


foretold the universal Empire of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, even before
that great Warrior was King of Babylon Which was not till the latter end of the
third year of Jehoiakim, for part of the third and part of the fourth years of
Jehoiakim were included in the first year of Nebuchadnezzar. Compare Dan. i. 1.
with Jer. xxv. 1. This was the earliest computation (there being two) of
Nebuchadnezzar's reign; for Dean Prideaux remarks, that Daniel begins his
computation from the time that Nebuchadnezzar was sent from Babylon by his
Father on this expedition (for he is speaking of Nebuchadnezzar's success in
recovering Syria and Palestine from Pharaoh-Nechoh) "which" (says he) was in
the latter end of the third year of Jehoiakim, etc. (See Connections, part I.
p. 63.) But, according to the Babylonians, his reign is not reckoned to begin
till after his Father's death, which happened two years afterward; and both
computations being found in Scripture, it is necessary to say so much here for
the reconciling of them. Ibid. p. 60.


his Father Nabopollasar (who was also called Nebuchodonosor The learned
Archbishop Usher shows, that Nabuchadonosor was a name given to Saosduchinus,
the Successor of Esarhaddon in the Assyrian and Babylonian Empire; and that he
was the Nabuchadonosor mentioned in the Book of Judith (See his Annals under
the years of the world 3336 and 3347.) That Chynaladan (called also Sarac)
succeeded this Nabuchadonosor in the Empire A. M. 3336: that Nabopollasar (the
Father of Nebuchadnezzar), who was Commander in Chief of his Forces, rebelled
against his Master Sarac, and jointly with Asstyages (called also Assuerus),
King of the Medes, conquered Sarac, and took Nineveh. And it seems that
Nabopollasar at that time had assumed the name of Nabuchadonosor, the great
Ancestor of his Master; for, according to Archbishop Usher, Nabopollasar is
mentioned under that name in the Book of Tobit (A. M. 3378), viz.
Nabopollasarus Babylonius, a Saraco (sive Chynaladano) Assyriorum and
Chaldaeorum Rege praefectus exercitui, (the example should warn Monarchs
against the keeping of great Standing Armies) and Astyages a Patre Cyaxare
Mediae Satrapa constitutus, affinitatem ineuntes (Amyiti Astyagis Filia
Nebucadnesari Filio Nabopollasari desponsata) junctis vitibus Niniven, and in
ea Saracum Regem, expugnant: quemadmodum ex Alexandri Polyhistoris fragmento (a
Cedreno, qui illud citat, minime intellecto) colligimus. Quomodo and in fine
Graeci Tobiti legimus; coepisse Niniven NABUCHODONOSORUM (sive Nabopollasarum)
and ASSUERUM (sive Astyagen, Assueri quoque nomine, Danielis ix. 1.
appellatum:) Superstite adhuc Tobia juniore qui, capta Samaria a Salmanasare,
in Assyriam cum Patre deportatus, annis 127 (vel 99, ut habet Latina, ex
Chaldaico expressa editio) vixisse dicitur, etc. -- So that Tobit had the
satisfaction to see God's Vengeance executed upon that mighty Instrument of
God's Wrath the Assyrian Empire, which had enslaved and carried away his
Countrymen the Israelites from their an cient Inheritance.


being still alive. The Prophet was directed to make Bonds and Yokes, and put
them upon his own neck, and to send them afterward to the Kings of several
neighboring Nations, with a most awful message from God concerning the rising
power of the Babylonian Monarch: -- "And now" (said the Prophet, in the Name of
the Lord, or Jehovah, of Hosts, the God of Israel, see ver. 4.) have I given
all these Lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon, my
Servant; etc. -- and all Nations (many of whom are expressly mentioned in the
third verse) shall serve HIM, and his SON, and his SON'S SON, until the very
time of his Land come (for the Empire continued for three lives or successions,
until the Babylonian measure of iniquity and oppression was fulfilled in the
reign of Belthazar The several Histories cited by the learned Grotius, in the
16th Sect. of his 3d Book de Veritate Religionis Christianae concerning the
Chaldean Monarchs, are by no means well chosen for the laudable purpose he
intended: and he refers the Reader also to Scaliger, whose Hypothesis
concerning those Monarchs is clogged with insurmountable difficulties. See
Universal History, Vol. IV. p. 425. But Dean Prideaux has clearly proved, that
Nabonadius the last King of Babylon (called Labynetus by Herodotus) was the
same with him that in Scripture is called Belshazzar, and that he was the Son
of Evilmerodach by Nitocris his Queen, and so SON'S SON to Nebuchadnezzar: and
that whereas he is called the Son of Nebuchadnezzar in the 5th chapter of
Daniel, and Nebuchadnezzar is there called his Father, this is to be understood
in the large sense, wherein any Ancestor upward is often called Father, and any
Descendant down ward Son, according to the usual style of Scripture. Connection
of the Old and New Testaments, Part I. p. 115. See also Dr-Lowth's Comment on
Jeremiah.


, when the Medes and Persians were to RETALIATE upon them THE HARD SLAVERY of
Israel); and then (continues the Prophet) many Nations and great Kings shall
SERVE themselves OF HIM, etc. Jer. xxvii. 6, 7. that is, they shall ENSLAVE his
People, in the same manner that he and his two Successors enslaved and
oppressed other Nations: rendering Slavery for Slavery!

In the same chapter ZEDEKIAH is also mentioned by name as King of Judah In the
beginning of the reign of JEHOIAKIM the Son of Josiah King of Judah, came this
word unto Jeremiah from the Lord, saying, Thus says the Lord to me; make ye
Bonds and Yokes, and put them upon thy neck, and send them to the King of Edom,
and to the King of Moab, etc. -- by the hand of the Messengers which come to
Jerusalem unto ZEDEKIAH King of Judah, etc. Jer. xxvii. 1 to 3. The learned
Archbishop of Armagh has taken notice of this chapter as a Prophecy: -- In
principio etiam regni Jehoiakimi, Jeremias praedixisse dicitur, SEDEKIAM Regem
Judae futurum, and Nebucadnesarem Regem Babyloniae, eumque Gentes finitimas
dominatui suo subjecturum: for which he refers to this 27th chapter of
Jeremiah, from the 1st to the 11th verse, A. M. 3395.


several years before he received the name of ZEDEKIAH; so that neither he
himself (whose proper name was Mattaniah) nor any other person could possibly
know, in the beginning of Jehoiakim's reign, what particular person was then
signified by the name of Zedekiah; for even Nebuchadnezzar himself, who
afterward gave him that name, was not King of Babylon when the Prophecy was
delivered, as I have already remarked. But after this foreign Conqueror had
really appointed a King of Judah, and given him the name of ZEDEKIAH (the very
name foretold by the Prophet), such an extraordinary circumstance would add
unquestionable authority to the truth of Jeremiah's mission, and would render
Zedekiah and his Courtiers inexcusable (as they really were) for rejecting the
earnest and repeated Remonstrances of that Prophet If this probable
confirmation of the word of Prophecy be duly considered, it will add much to
the weight of the Observations which I have made in a preceding Note concerning
the Truth of the Hebrew Text in the 1st verse of this chapter.


.

This timely Prediction, therefore, in the reign of Jehoiakim, with the
internal Proofs which it contained, concerning the necessity of Zedekiah's
Submission to the Babylonian Yoke, seems to have been absolutely necessary to
enable the Prophet to confute the many false Prophets, Diviners, Dreamers, etc.
(see 9th verse) who were (afterward, in Zedekiah's reign) publicly employed to
excite the People to shake off the Babylonian Yoke.

The Prophet was also forewarned in the beginning of Jehoiakim's reign (as the
same chapter testifies) that the Kings of Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tire, and Zidon
would send Messengers to a Zedekiah King of Judah; all which Kings (as Grotius
remarks) Omnes enim hi Reges subjugati a Nebuchadonosoro. Vide infra
xlviii.xlix. Comment on the 3d verse. Annot. ad Vet. Test. p. 221.


were subdued by Nebuchadnezzar; and therefore it is not improbable that the
said Messengers or Ambassadors were sent to Zedekiah for the purpose of forming
a league against the Babylonian "Nempe, ut eum sollicitarent" (says Grotius) ad
defectionem a Chaldaeo. De qua vide 2 Paral. xxxvi. 13. Ibid. p. 221.

"Their business" (says the learned Dr. Lowth) was either to congratulate
Zedekiah upon his accession to the Throne, or else to engage him IN A LEAGUE
against the King of Babylon. Comment on Jerem. p. 231.


Power: the public declarations of the false Prophets abovementioned, and the
actual REBELLION soon afterward of Zedekiah himself, renders the said
supposition about the business of the Messengers very probable; so that, if
this singular state of affairs be considered, the sending, at such a seasonable
time, to the several neighboring Kings, by the return of their Ambassadors,
the Yokes which had been worn by Jeremiah, together with GOD's awful Message
(that he would punish that Nation which will not serve Nebuchadnezzar, and put
their Neck under his Yoke, see ver. 8. And it shall come to pass, that the
Nation and Kingdom which will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar the King of
Babylon, and that will not put their nick UNDER THE YOKE of the King of
Babylon, that Nation will I punish, says the LORD, with the Sword, with the
Famine, and with the Pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand. Jer.
xxvii. 8.
, must needs strike these Heathen Monarchs (if they were not entirely abandoned
in their principles) with Fear and Reverence; especially as their Ambassadors
would hear at Jerusalem, that the Divine Message concerning the Yokes, then
sent, had been revealed to the Prophet long before (thirteen or fourteen years)
in the beginning of Jehoiakim's reign, in token of which the Prophet had worn
Yokes upon his own neck (see chap. xxviii. ver. 10, 12, 13); and that no less
than three circumstances of that extraordinary Revelation were now already
fulfilled: the Prophet having not only foretold the reign of Nebuchadnezzar,
and the reign of Zedekiah ( a name not applicable to Zedekiah himself till the
Babylonian Conqueror thought proper to give it him, so that no worldly prudence
could foresee such an event), but had also foretold the very circumstance in
which they themselves were concerned, viz. that Messengers should be sent to
this Zedekiah by such and such Kings!

In what year these Messengers or Ambassadors really arrived at Jerusalem, or
returned from thence, does not appear; but as the Yokes were, first of all, to
be put upon the Prophet's own neck, before he was to send them to the Kings
(compare the 2d and 3d verses), and as it appears that he really wore such a
wooden Yoke, as a sign against them, in the Temple, so late as the 4th year of
Zedekiah, when a false Prophet took it from his neck, and broke it, and thereby
occasioned a further command respecting those Kings, viz. that the Prophet
should make for them Yokes of Iron "Thus says the Lord; Thou" (Hananiah) "have
broken the Yokes of Wood, but thou" (Jeremiah) "shall make for them Yokes of
Iron." Jer. xxviii. 13.


, it seems most probable that the wooden Yokes first ordered had not then been
sent to them; and, consequently, that the Messengers of those Kings had not as
yet arrived at Jerusalem (for, undoubtedly, the Prophet would obey the Divine
Command as soon as he had the proper opportunity of doing so); and as Zedekiah
went to Babylon in the same year (see Jer. li. 59.) it is likely the Messengers
did not arrive, nor he rebel, till the year following. Nevertheless, in that
year (the fourth of Zedekiah) the Prophet declared the Message to Zedekiah
himself, which he had before been charged to send to the other Kings: -- I
spoke also (says he in chapter xxvii. ver. 12.) to Zedekiah King of Judah according
to all these words (that is, according to all these words which precede in the
same chapter respecting the Yokes, and which had been revealed in the reign of
Jehoiakim) saying, Bring your necks under THE YOKE of the King of Babylon, and
serve him, and his people, and LIVE. Why will ye die, thou, and thy people, by
the Sword, by the Famine, and by the Pestilence, as the Lord has spoken
against the NATION that will not SERVE the King of Babylon? etc. See ver. 12
and 13. The Almighty had laid upon all the other Nations of Palestine and Syria
THE SAME FATAL NECESSITY, either to submit to a foreign Yoke, or DIE! So that
we have here a very remarkable example of GOD's VENGEANCE AND RETRIBUTION upon
several wicked and corrupt Nations which regarded not the eternal Laws of God!
-- They must either serve the King of Babylon, or be destroyed; -- there was no
alternative! -- BE DESTROYED by the Sword, by the Famine, and by the
Pestilence, as the Lord has spoken (compare the 13th verse with the 8th) until
I have consumed them BY HIS HAND, that is, by the hand of the Babylonian
Conqueror, the appointed Instrument of God's temporal Vengeance: -- and the GOD
OF ARMIES (...) has in all ages raised up some powerful Scourges of this kind
to punish wicked and ungrateful Nations with Fire and Sword, and to reduce them
to an unnatural Bondage, on account of National Iniquities! -- Even the present
state of Mankind affords some melancholy proofs of this. How many Nations, now
subsisting in the world, have forfeited their natural Liberty, and are now
sitting under the IRON YOKES of unnatural, arbitrary Governments, subjected to
the WILL AND PLEASURE of their respective Sovereigns, instead of LAW! And if
the particular History of any, or perhaps all, of these Nations be carefully
examined, it will not, I believe, be found that any of them were ever reduced
to such a deplorable state of national Misery, till by national Wickedness, and
public Contempt of GOD's eternal Laws, they had rendered a national RETRIBUTION
strictly necessary, according to the unerring Rules of eternal Justice! All
hopes, therefore, of REDRESS to these enslaved Nations must be vain, without a
sincere reformation of manners in each Nation respectively, and without public
and most earnest national or general endeavors to obtain Reconciliation and
Forgiveness from THE KING OF KINGS; as nothing but a strict Obedience to HIS
LAWS can render any Nation truly FREE. Jeremiah made the same declaration also
to the Priests and People that he had made to the King: -- "Also I spoke" (says
he) to the Priests, and to all the People, saying, Thus says the LORD: Hearken
not to the words of your Prophets that prophesy unto you, saying, Behold, the
Vessels of the Lord's House shall now shortly be brought again from Babylon;
for they prophesy a Lie These lying Prophets were probably bribed to favor the
proposed league against Babylon, as some other wicked Prophets had been on
former occasions, according to the testimony of the Prophet Micah: -- "And the
Prophets thereof" (speaking of Jerusalem) " divine sor money." Micah iii. 11.
And Nehemiah also mentions a Prophet (one Shemaiah) who was hired to prophesy
against him; -- for Tobiah and Sanballat had hired him. Nehem. vi. 10 to 12.


unto you. Hearken not unto them: serve the King of Babylon, and live.
Wherefore should this City be laid waste? Jer. xxvii. 16, 17.

The wicked Prophets, who thus misled the People with Lies, presumed
nevertheless to use the sacred Name of JEHOVAH -- They prophesy a Lie unto you.
For I have not sent them, says the Lord (JEHOVAH), "yet they prophesy a Lie in
my Name," etc. Jer. xxvii. 14, 15.


, as if they had really declared the Will of GOD; so that the true Prophet had
need (not only of all those unquestionable Proofs of his Divine Mission, which
I have already mentioned, but even) of other Proofs also, to enable him to
oppose the lying Prophets, who pretended to speak in the Name of JEHOVAH, as
well as himself; for in the same year (that is, in the fourth of Zedekiah) one
of these wicked Prophets, Hananiah, the Son of Azur the Prophet, which was of
Gibeon, Gibeon was the place where the Tabernacle formerly stood for many years
(1 Chronicles. xxi. 29. 1 Kings iii. 5.), and was therefore an ancient seat of the
true Prophets -- such as Azur, the Father of this Hananiah, probably was; so
that as Hananiah and the other false Prophets also pretended to prophesy in the
sacred Name of Jehevah, they would be very liable to gain credit with the
People, especially as they told them such things as most flattered the national
inclination of those times, viz. to be free from the Babylonian Yoke.


-- took the Yoke from off the Prophet Jeremiah's neck, and brake it. And
Hananiah spoke (in the Temple) in the presence of all the People, saying, Thus
says the LORD; Even so will I break the Yoke of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon
from the neck of all Nations within the space of two full years. Jer. xxviii.
1, 10, 11. Upon which, it seems, the Prophet Jeremiah was directed by God to
reprove Hananiah with a severe sentence; for he not only declared that "Yokes
of Iron" should be substituted instead of the Yokes of Wood Then the Word of
the Lord came unto Jeremiah (the Prophet), after that Hananiah the Prophet had
broken the Yoke from off the neck of the Prophet Jeremiah, saying, Go, and tell
Hananiah, saying, Thus says the Lord; Thou have broken the Yokes of Wood, but
thou shall make for them Yokes of Iron. Jer. xxviii. 12, 13.


, which Hananiah had broken, as I before remarked, but he also pointed out the
lying Prophet himself to the public observation, as a notable and undeniable
token, that the Prophecies of Jeremiah were of Divine Authority! -- "Hear now,
Hananiah," (said the true Prophet): "the Lord" (i. e. Jehovah) has not sent
thee; but thou make this People to trust in a Lie. Therefore thus says the
Lord; -- Behold, I will cast thee forth from the face of the earth: This Year
thou shall DIE, because thou have taught Rebellion against the Lord. So
Hananiah the Prophet DIED the same year, in the seventh month. Jer. xxviii. 15
-- 17. That is, he died exactly two months after the Prediction, which was made
in the fifth month of the fourth year of Zedekiah. Such Evidence, added to the
former clear Tokens of Authenticity which this Prophecy of the Yokes carried
with it, must render Zedekiah and his Courtiers totally inexcusable for
neglecting the Divine Warning, and relying upon false Prophets.

Thus the propriety of considering the former part of the 27th chapter as a
Revelation in the time of Jehoiakim (agreeable to the testimony of the Hebrew
Text) is rendered apparent by the particular advantages which such a prior
Revelation would afterward give to the true Prophet, when he had to oppose the
pretended Prophecies delivered in the fourth year of Zedekiah: and the
remaining part of the 27th chapter, from the 12th verse, wherein the Prophet
mentions his personal Address to Zedekiah, must necessarily be attributed to a
future time Alia est sectio (says Grotius upon this verse) and ad aliud tempus
pertinens, sed argumento conjuncta cum superiori. Grot. Annot. ad Vet. Test.


, which in the following chapter (the 28th) is expressly declared to have been
in the fourth year of Zedekiah Chap. xxviii. And it came to pass THE SAME YEAR,
in the beginning of the reign of ZEDEKIAH King of Judah, in the FOURTH YEAR,
(and) in the fifth month, that Hananiah, etc.


.

In the beginning also of Jehoiakim's reign the Prophet Jeremiah was seized by
the Priests and the People in the Temple, for denouncing God's Vengeance
against the Nation, the Temple also (on account of the national Wickedness),
and the City In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the Son of Josiah King
of Judah, came this word from the Lord, saying, Thus says the Lord; Stand in
the Court of the LORD's House, and speak unto all the Cities of Judah, which
come to worship in the Lord's House, all the words that I command thee to speak
unto them; diminish not a word. If so be they will hearken, and turn every man
from HIS EVIL WAY, that I may repent me OF THE EVIL which I purpose to do unto
them because of THE EVIL of their doings. (This is God's Law of Retribution,
Evil for Evil, Measure for Measure, which nothing but Repentance and Conformity
to God's Laws could avert.) And thou shall say unto them, Thus faith the LORD;
if ye will not hearken to me, TO WALK IN MY LAW, which I have set before you,
to hearken to the words of my Servants the Prophets, whom I sent unto you, both
rising up early and sending (them), but ye have not hearkened. Then will I make
THIS HOUSE like SHILOH Shiloh was, probably, desolate from the time of Eli's
death, when the Ark was taken by the Philistines; for the old Tabernacle, made
by Moses, was afterward pitched on the High Place at Gibeon (1 Chronicles. xxi.
29.), and continued there till the time of Solomon, when the Temple was built
(2 Chronicles. i. 3.). The removal was, probably, made by Samuel, whose House was at
Rama, as also the Altat which he built (1 Samuel vii. 17); and Rama was in the
neighborhood of Gibeon, Gibeah, or Geba, which, if not the same place with
Rama (which also signifies a high place) was at least adjoining to it, as they
are frequently mentioned together in Scripture. See 1 Samuel xxii. 6. Ezra ii.
26. Nehem. vii. 30. Isa. x. 29. Hosea v. 8.
, and will make THIS CITY a curse to all the Nations of the Earth. So the
Priests, and the Prophets, and all the People heard Jeremiah speaking these
words in the House of the LORD. Jer. xxvi. 1 -- 7. Thus it is manifest that the
public exercise of the National Religion, agreeable to the National Law, was
continued even in the beginning of Jehoiakim's reign, though he was set up, and
ruled under the authority of a foreign Heathen Monarch (Pharaoh-Neco); for the
2d verse testifies, that the People out of all the Cities of Judah came to
worship in the Lord's House.


, and was arraigned and tried for it, as for a CAPITAL OFFENSE, before the
Princes and all the Congregation. -- Upon the Trial the Prophet persisted in
his former declaration; but at the same time assured them of Mercy and
Reconciliation, in case they would but repent and reform: so that it was
absolutely in their own power (through the Mercy of God) to have averted the
impending Vengeance. "Therefore NOW" (said the Prophet) amend your ways and
your doings, and obey the Voice of the LORD your GOD; (and then he adds the
conditional Assurance of Peace) and the LORD (said the Prophet) will repent him
of THE EVIL that he has pronounced against you. To this the Prophet added a
short Remonstrance respecting his own case: -- As for me (says he) I am in your
hand: do with me as seems good and meet unto you. But know ye for certain,
that if ye put me to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon
yourselves, and upon this City, and upon the Inhabitants thereof; for of a
truth the Lord has sent me unto you, to speak all these words in your ears.
Jer. xxvi. 8 -- 15. Whereupon he was acquitted and dismissed; for some of the
Elders cited clear precedents, from the history of former times, concerning the
legality of declaring God's Vengeance against National Wickedness: but though
this prudent judgment of the Court of Justice saved Jeremiah for that time,
yet it did not prevent the wicked Monarch Jehoiakim from murdering the
Prophet's Colleague, Urijah, who likewise prophesied against the City, and
against the Land, according to all the words of Jeremiah This would include all
that Jeremiah had prophesied in the reign of King Josiah, as well as in the
times above mentioned under Shallum and Jehoiakim. The Prophecies delivered in
the reign of Josiah (according to the learned Lightfoot) are contained in the
twelve first chapters: but the thirteenth chapter, and all that follow to the
one and twentieth, I conceive (says the same judicious Writer) to have been
delivered in the time of Jehoiakim, and not in the time of Josiah, etc. See his
Reasons at length, Harmony of the Old Testament, p. 141, 142.


: but his blood was severely avenged, some years afterward, in the fatal
catastrophe of the Tyrant!

Thus it appears that Jehoiakim was as little mindful of the Laws and Religion
of JEHOVAH (notwithstanding the memorial of that sacred Name which Pharaoh had
placed upon him) as his Predecessor Shallum; for we read also in the 2d book of
Chronicles (xxxvi. 5, 6.) that he did that which was evil in the sight of the
Lord ( i. e. Jehovah) his God. (And the account of God's Vengeance immediately
follows the declaration of the Monarch's Ingratitude! for) -- "Against him"
(continues the Text) came up Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and bound him in
fetters to carry him to Babylon.

In the book of Daniel we find that the siege of Jerusalem began in the third
year of Jehoiakim In THE THIRD YEAR of the reign of Jehoiakim King of Judah
came Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon unto Jerusalem, and besieged it. Dan. i. 1.


; but, it seems, the Babylonians did not immediately succeed in their
enterprise; for we read, in the book of Jeremiah, an account of several
transactions in the fourth year of Jehoiakim -- vel (ut noster Joseph
observat), says L'Empereur in his Annotations on Joseph Ichiia's Paraphrase on
Daniel, -- annum NEBUCADNEZARIS primum statuamus incidisse in annum Jehoiakimi
tertium desinentem and imprimis quartum incipientem; ita ut NEBUCADNEZAR
venisse dicatur JEHOJAKIMI anno tertio desinente vel exacto, suo autem primo
currente, qui respondebat partim anno illius tertio (Dan. cap. i. 1.), partim
vero ejusdem quarto (Jer. xxv. 1.), propter diversa annorum initia, cum annus
tertius JEHOIAKIMI and primus NEBUCADNEZARIS idem principium non haberent, etc.
p. 11.


; and, among the rest, that the Prophet Jeremiah, in that very year, denounced
the Judgment of God upon Jerusalem and Judea, by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar;
which proves, that the City was not, as yet, taken by him; for in the fourth
year of Jehoiakim he acquainted all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, that -- from
the thirteenth year of Josiah the Son of Amon, King of Judah, even to this day
(said the Prophet), that is, the three and twentieth year, the Word of the Lord
has come unto me, and I have spoken unto you, rising early and speaking; but
ye have not hearkened, etc. -- Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts (Jehovah
of Hosts); Because ye have not heard my words, behold, I will send and take all
the Families of the North, says the Lord, and Nebuchadnezzar the King of
Babylon my Servant, and will bring them against this Land, and against the
Inhabitants thereof, and against all these Nations round about, and will
utterly destroy them, and make them an Astonishment, and an Hissing, and
perpetual The word (...), here construed perpetual, does not necessarily bear
that signification; for it sometimes denotes a shorter period: so that Buxtorf
interprets it in his Lexicon as follows: -- "Seculum," (says he) tempus homini
absconditum tam infinitum and aeternum quam finitum, ut Genesis xvii. 8. Exodus
xxi. 6. 1 Samuel i. 22. and xiii. 13. 2 Samuel xii. 10. etc. So that the words
(...) may rather signify some limited term of Desolations -- Desolations of (or
for) an age, or a certain period, as it is rendered in the interlineary version
of the London Polyglot Bible -- "In Solitudines Seculi." Buxtorf in his Lexicon
remarks, that Raschi and Aben Ezra interpret the word (...) to signify a space
of fifty years. The Desolations spoken of in the above Text certainly were not
perpetual: and though the particular duration of them is not there declared,
yet the several Histories which mention the return from Captivity sufficiently
prove that they were limited to some such term of years as Raschi and Aben-Ezra
have attributed to the word (...) for the Servitude to Babylon (on which the
Desolations depended) were expressly limited to seventy years (see ver. 11,
12.), and the total Desolation did not continue so long as the Captivity by
about twenty years.


Desolations. Jer. xxv. 1 -- 9. And as the Denunciations of GOD's Vengeance
were generally accompanied with Promises of future Reconciliation and Comfort,
in case of Amendment, so the Servitude to Babylon was here expressly limited to
the term of serventy years -- And these Nations shall SERVE the King of Babylon
SEVENTY YEARS. Jer. xxv. 11.


; and as a further sign of God's Providence and Care of his People, the
Prophet, at the same time, denounced a heavy RETRIBUTION OF VENGEANCE against
the King of Babylon, and that Nation, the Instruments of God's Vengeance And it
shall come to pass when seventy years are accomplished, (that) I will punish
the King of Babylon and that Nation, says the LORD, for their iniquity, and
the Land of the Chaldeans; and will make it perpetual Desolations, etc. For
many Nations and great Kings shall SERVE THEMSELVES OF THEM ALSO: and I will
RECOMPENSE THEM ACCORDING TO THEIR DEEDS(mark this, ye Slave-holders and
Tyrants of the Earth!) and ACCORDING TO THE WORK OF THEIR OWN HANDS. Jer. xxv.
12 -- 14. Here is a just Retaliation for Tyranny; -- Slavery for Slavery!


; as also against many neighboring Nations, who were made to drink of the
Wine-cup of this Fury ( i.e. the Sword and Captivity); which remarkable
circumstance, as here foretold, should teach ALL NATIONS, to the end of the
World, the Necessity which God has laid on them to take warning by the several
Examples of his Vengeance and Retribution upon the Jewish NATION; because the
Prophet was directed to assure the other Nations, that if God spared not his
own peculiar People, he surely would not spare them "And it shall be" (said God
to the Prophet) if they refuse to take the Cup at thine hand to drink, then
shall thou say unto them, Thus says THE LORD OF HOSTS" (Jehovah of Hosts); Ye
shall certainly drink. For lo! I begin to bring evil on the City, which is
called by my Name, and should ye be utterly unpunished? -- Ye shall not be
unpunished: FOR I WILL CALL FOR A SWORD UPON ALL THE INHABITANTS OF THE EARTH,
SAYS THE LORD OF HOSTS. Jer. xxv. 28, 29. This Declaration has been fulfilled
upon all Nations of the World at different times; and the Sword of God's Wrath
is still as active as ever!


!

The 36th chapter of Jeremiah, from the beginning to the 8th verse, is next in
order of date, because it relates to transactions of the same year ( viz. the
fourth year of Jehoiakim, which must be during the Siege of Jerusalem by
Nebuchadnezzar, who came up in the third year of Jehoiakim). The Prophet was
then directed to write in the Roll of a Book all his former Prophecies, from
"the days of Josiah" to that time And it came to pass in the fourth year of
Jehoiakim the Son of Josiah King of Judah, that this word came unto Jeremiah,
from the LORD, saying, Take thee a Roll of a Book, and write therein all the
Words that I have spoken unto thee against Israel, and against Judah, and
against all the Nations, from the day I spoke unto thee, from the days of
Josiah, even unto this day. It may be that the House of Judah will hear all the
evil which I purpose to do unto them; that they may return every man from his
evil way; that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin. Jer. xxxvi. 1 -- 3.
So that Repentance might still have prevented "all the evil."


. See Jer. xxxvi. 1. The Book was wrote, however, by Baruch the Scribe, from
the mouth of Jeremiah, who was then in prison (Jer. xxxvi. 5. Then Jeremiah
called Baruch the Son of Neriah: and Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah
all the Words of the Lord, which he had spoken unto him, upon a Roll of a Book.
And Jeremiah commanded Baruch, saying, I am shut up; I cannot go into the House
of the Lord: therefore go thou, and read in the Roll which thou have written
from my mouth, the Words of the LORD, in the ears of the People in the LORD's
House, upon the Fasting Day: etc. Jer. xxvii. 4 -- 6.

This Fasting Day, as Archbishop Usher remarks, was that solemn Annual Fast
ordained in the Law to be kept on the 10th day of the seventh month for ever,
five days before the Feast of Tabernacles: -- Solennis videlicet illius, mensis
septimi die decimo, quotannis celebrati: (Levit. xvi. 29. xxiii. 27. Number. xxix.
7.) quinque diebus ante Festum Tabernaculorum, in quo omnes mares ex omnibus
civitatibus Judae comparebant Hierosolymis. Ad A. M. 3398. p. 119.


; and Jeremiah directed Baruch to read the Book to the People in the Temple
upon a public Fast Day. See ver. 5 -- 8.

The 45th chapter of Jeremiah seems to be the next in order of time, and
contains the Prophet's Rebuke -- And seek thou great things for thyself?
seek them not: for behold! I will bring evil upon all Flesh, says the Lord. He
nevertheless added a promise of life to Baruch, by way of comfort, saying, --
but thy life will I give unto thee for a prey in all places whither thou go.
Jer. xlv. 5.


of Baruch, for expressing his fears for himself, when he had written these
words in a book at the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of JEHOIAKIM, etc.
(see ver. 1.); which plainly refers us to the time and circumstances mentioned
in the 36th chapter. Archbishop Usher informs us, that perhaps the 30th and
31st chapters of Jeremiah, containing comfortable Promises of future
Restoration, are to be referred to the time of delivering the 45th chapter
"Jer. xlv. 1, 5. Quo fortasse" (says the Archbishop) referenda fuerint and
capita illa duo consolatoria, Jer. xxx. and xxxi. Promissiones de instauranda
Ecclesia continentia (ad A. M. 3398): but afterward he seems, with more
certainty, to date them in the year 3406. See p. 126. The 46th chapter of
Jeremiah was fulfilled about this time (that is, in the fourth year of
Jehoiakim, as the 2d verse declares), and the Prophecies against Egypt (therein
contained) were probably declared about the same time with those against
Jehoiakim, to show that Monarch his folly in trusting to the armies of Pharaoh.
Of the same date with the 46th chapter we may well suppose the 48th and 49th
chapters to be also, because the 2d verse of chap. xlvi. does use a
comprehensive expression, The Word of the LORD against the Gentiles, as
concluding all these Sermons and Prophecies against these several Nations under
one date and head; only chap. xlvii. and ver. 34. of chap. xlix. are of several
specified dates. Lightfoot's Harmony, p. 153.


: but he afterward assigns them another date with more certainty. And to the
same year (the fourth of Jehoiakim) that learned Prelate also places the 35th
chapter, concerning the Rechabites -- ingressi sunt Hierosolyma, Jer. xxxv. 11.
Ubi, quum de tempore praesente dicant; ita cousidemus Hierosolymis: colligimus
capitis hujus historiam de vino a Rechabitis recusato, eo tempore fuisse
gestam, quo Urbs a Nebuchadnesare fuit obsessa. (Dan. i. 1.) Ibid. ad A. M.
3398. p. 120.


; for, with good reason, he supposes that the circumstances therein related
(concerning their refusal to drink the Wine which the Prophet had set before
them by God's command) were transacted during the time of the Siege by
Nebuchadnezzar, for fear of whom the Rechabites had taken shelter in the City.

In the ninth month In manum Nebuchadnesaris tradidit Dominus Jehoiakimum Regem
Judae, cum part Instrumentorum Domus Dei [Dan. i. 2.], mense videlicet nono
sive Cisleu: ut colligitur ex aniversario jejunio, quod in memoriam, ut
videtur, hujus calamitatis (more apud Judaeos receptor; Zachar. vii. 3, 5. and
viii. 19.) eo mense observatum est [Jerem. xxxvi. 9.]. Ad A. M. 3398, p. 120.


of the same year (two months after Baruch had read the Roll of Prophecy in the
Temple, which was in the seventh month) Jerusalem was taken Josephus seems to
have been desirous to conceal this fact from his Gentile Readers
(notwithstanding that the Jews held a solemn Fast in the ninth month, in
commemoration of this National Calamity, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim); for
he mentions nothing of the Capture of Jerusalem, but only informs us, that in
the fourth year of Nebuchadnezzar, and the eighth of Jehoiakim (in which he
makes a mistake of four years), the Babylonian made war with great power,
demanding tribute of Jehoiakim, or threatening to fight him; and that the
other, fearing the threats of the Babylonian, and purchasing peace with money,
paid him the tributes which he had demanded for three years. (...) (...) Ant.
Jud. Lib. x. c 7. p. 336. But it plainly appears, by the circumstances which
attended that subjection of Jehoiakim to the Babylonians, that Jerusalem was
then taken; for the Sacred Writings expressly testify that Nebuchadnezzar bound
JEHOIAKIM in chains, to carry him to Babylon (though he did not then carry him
away), and that he carried of the Vessels ( i. e. part of the Vessels) of the
House of the LORD to Babylon (compare Dan. i. 2. with 2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 6, 7.):
so that the Temple (and consequently the City) was certainly at that time in
the Conqueror's power.

And as a further token of absolute conquest, the King of Babylon directed the
Master of his Eunuchs to bring of the Children of Israel, and OF THE KING'S
SEED, and OF THE PRINCES; Children in whom (was) no blemish, but well favored,
Dan. i. 3. (whereby it is manifest that the Eunuch was to CHOOSE He -- gave
order to Ashpenaz, the Master of his Eunuchs, that he should MAKE CHOICE out of
the Children of the Royal Family, and of the Nobility of the Land. Prideaux's
Connect. Part I. p. 62.


out the most promising Children that could be found of the Seed Royal, and of
the Nobility, amongst whom were Daniel and his Companions), and send them to
Babylon; which could not have been done, if Jerusalem had not then been
absolutely in the hands of the Babylonian Conqueror.


by Nebuchadnezzar, who bound Jehoiakim in setters, to carry him to Babylon 2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 6.
(as I before remarked): but he did not then carry him away Jehoiakimum catenis
vincivit Nebuchadnesar, ut abduceret eum Babyloniam (2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 6.): sed
pactis postea conditionibus servitutis, domi eum reliquit; ubi Servus illi
permansit tribus annis. (2 Reg. xxiv. 1.). A qua prima omnium Regis and Populi
Judaici sub Nebuchadnesare facta servitute, numerandi sunt anni septuaginta
Captivitis Babylonicae, a Jeremia Propheta praedicti (Jer. xxv. 11. and xxix.
10.). Ad A. M. 3398. p. 120.


; for it appears that he was afterward continued upon the Throne of David as a
tributary Monarch, and served the King of Babylon three years In his days
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon came up, and Jehoiakim became his Servant three
years: then he turned and rebelled against him. 2 Kings xxiv. 1.
for the Babylonian Monarch contented himself with taking away the most
promising Children of the Royal Family, and of the Nobility (from whence the
first commencement of the seventy years Captivity is to be dated), and also
some of the Instruments of the Temple; God having withheld him from taking more
The reason of my speaking dubiously, whether this was the fifth or sixth time
that Jerusalem was taken since the promise to David, is, because I cannot
produce sufficient authorities to prove that it was taken when King Manasseh
was carried away captive by the King of Assyria, though it is very probable
that the City was then also really taken, because Manasseh, after his
restoration, thought it necessary to build walls, and add new fortifications to
different parts of the City. See 2 Chronicles. xxxiii. 14.


or rather, perhaps, inclined him to leave the rest, that the Service of the
Temple might be still continued, which it certainly was, as well as the
National Laws and Customs, and also a National Prince of the House of David
"upon the Throne of David," notwithstanding that the Government was then held
under the authority of a foreign Heathen Monarch; which was the fifth (if not
the sixth) time The reason of my speaking dubiously, whether this was the fifth
or sixth time that Jerusalem was taken since the promise to David, is, because
I cannot produce sufficient authorities to prove that it was taken when King
Manasseh was carried away captive by the King of Assyria, though it is very
probable that the City was then also really taken, because Manasseh, after his
restoration, thought it necessary to build walls, and add new fortifications to
different parts of the City. See 2 Chronicles. xxxiii. 14.


that the like extraordinary circumstances were fulfilled since the promise was
made to King David that his House and Kingdom should be established. See 2 Samuel
vii. 11 -- 29.

In the fifth year of Jehoiakim (though the first year of his Vassalage to
Babylon), in the ninth month, a Fast was proclaimed, in remembrance of God's
Judgments in the preceding year -- in memoriam, ut videtur, Urbis eodem
superioris anni mense a caldaeis captae. Archbishop Usher, ad A. M. 3399. Dean
Prideaux says that the Fast was held on the eighteenth day of the ninth month,
and is still kept by the Jews. He also supposed (as well as Archbishop Usher)
that the City was then taken by the Chaldaeans: but see his words at length --
The great Fast of the Expiation, wherein Baruch read the Roll, as is above
related, was annually kept by the Jews on the tenth day of the month Tizri,
which answers to our September. Immediately after that. Nebuchadnezzar invaded
Judaea; and having laid siege to Jerusalem, made himself master of it in the
ninth month, called Cisleu (which answers to our November), on the eighteenth
day of that month (for on that day is still kept by the Jews an annual Fast in
commemoration of it even to this day); and having then taken Jehoiakim
prisoner, he put him in chains to carry him to Babylon. But he having humbled
himself to King Nebuchadnezzar, and submitted to become his Tributary, and
thereon sworn fealty to him, he was again restored to his Kingdom: etc.
Connect. Part I. p. 61, 62.


upon the Jewish Nation; and on the Fast Day Baruch read the Words of Jeremiah
"in the ears of all the People" who were assembled, on this solemn occasion, in
the Temple: and the Roll, which contained the Prophecies, being afterward read
also in the presence of King Jehoiakim, was, by his order, cut to pieces and
burnt; after which all the former words that were in the first Roll were again
wrote by Baruch in another Roll, with several tremendous additions against the
Nation The King of Babylon shall certainly come and destroy this Land, and
shall cause to cease from thence Man and Beast. Jer. xxxvi. 29.
, as well as, personally, against the King himself Therefore thus says the
LORD of Jehoiakim King of Judah; He shall have NONE TO SIT UPON THE THRONE OF
DAVID; and his DEAD BODY shall be CAST OUT in the Day to the Heat, and in the
Night to the Frost. Jer. xxxvi. 30. The former part of this Vengeance was
fulfilled in the Captivity of Jehoiachin the Son of Jehoiakim, who, with all
his Family, was soon afterward carried to Babylon, and a younger Brother
(Zedekiah) was set up instead of the Descendants of Jehoiakim: and the latter
part of this Prophecy, concerning the DEAD BODY of Jehoiakim, is to the same
effect with that Prophecy repeated in the 22d chapter, where it is said, -- He
shall be buried WITH THE BURIAL OF AN ASS, drawn and CAST FORTH beyond the
Gates of Jerusalem: for this also, it seems, was literally fulfilled in due
time, which shall hereafter be shown.


. The particulars of these circumstances in the fifth of Jehoiakim are related
in the 36th chapter of Jeremiah, from the 9th verse to the end.

After Jehoiakim had served Nebuchadnezzar three years, then he turned and
rebelled against him (2 Kings xxiv. 1.); which must have been in the seventh
year of his reign: and from that time to the end of his reign the Jewish Nation
was miserably harassed by Bands of Foreign Troops from several different
Nations And the Lord sent against him" (Jehoiakim) "Bands" (or Troops) of the
Chaldees, and Bands of the Syrians, and Bands of the Moabites, and Bands of the
Children of Ammon, and sent them against Judah, to destroy it, according to the
Word of the Lord, which he spoke by his Servants the Prophets. Surely at the
Commandment of the Lord came this upon Judah, to remove them out of his sight,
for the sins of Manasseh, according to all that he did, and also for the
innocent blood that he shed: etc. 2 Kings xxiv. 2.


, then subject to the Dominion of Nebuchadnezzar, which, under the Providence
of God, were to execute the Divine Vengeance upon the Jewish Nation (agreeable
to the express terms of God's Covenant) for having neglected the Divine Law
(the People being at that time notoriously corrupt and wicked), but more
particularly for having neglected those parts of the Law which are eternal,
viz. the eternal Laws of JUDGMENT (or Justice) and RIGHTEOUSNESS, of which the
Prophets were continually reminding them! -- We have no further information
from the sacred Text concerning the four remaining years of Jehoiakim's reign
For "he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem." 2 Kings xxiii. 36.


; only that he slept with his Fathers "It appears by this" (says the learned
Bishop Patrick) that to sleep with one's Fathers signifies no more than to DIE,
as they did. For Jehoiachim was NOT buried with them, NOR died in his bed: but
being taken by the Chaldaeans, he died as they led him out of JERUSALEM; and,
according to the Prophecy of Jeremiah (xxii. 18, 19.), they cast him out of the
Gates, and he had burial of an Ass; that is, lay upon the ground unburied.
Abarbinel thinks (continues the Bishop) he died in the way to Babylon; and his
Body was left in the Highway, without any care taken to inter it: but it lay
exposed to the Sun by day, and to the Frost by Night. xxxvi. Jerem. 30. See on
2 Kings xxiv. 6.

The worthy Prelate is certainly right concerning the expression "to sleep with
one's Fathers;" for that is always mentioned as a distinct thing from the
burial of any one: as for instance -- AHAZ SLEPT WITH HIS FATHERS, and they
BURIED him in the City, (even) in Jerusalem; but they BROUGHT HIM NOT into the
Sepulchers of THE KINGS OF ISRAEL: etc. (2 Chronicles. xxviii. 27.) whereby the
distinction abovementioned is rendered manifest. It was the common method, it
seems, of expressing the death (not the burial) of Princes among the Eastern
Nations; and even in Morocco, where many Eastern Customs prevail, it is
necessary, even to this day, to use some circumlocution in expressing the death
of any one, as it would be esteemed a capital offense to say in the Emperor's
presence, in direct terms, that any man was dead. This I have been informed by
a worthy friend of mine, who has frequently conversed with the present Emperor
of Morocco.

But with respect to the manner of JEHOIAKIM'S death I must remark, that
neither the opinion of the learned Bishop Patrick, quoted above, nor what he
has cited from Abarbinel ( viz. that "he died in the way") seem to agree with
the most probable account of God's Vengeance upon that wicked Monarch.


, and that JEHOIACHIN his Son reigned in his stead. 2 Kings xxiv. 6. But
Josephus In the eighth chapter of the tenth book of Jewish Antiquities,
speaking of Jehoiakim, he says, (...) P. 337. Orleans Edition, 1611.


relates that Jehoiakim RECEIVED the King of the Babylonians, who fought
against him: for, being terrified by the predictions of the Prophet, he neither
shut him out, nor fought against him: so that the Babylonian Conqueror,
entering the City, slew all the flower of the Youth of Jerusalem, together with
King Jehoiakim, whom he commanded to be cast unburied without the walls
((...)); and that he also appointed Jehoachim his Son ( i. e. the Son of
Jehoiakim) King of the Country and of the City.

This is certainly the most probable account of Jehoiakim's death; for Dean
Prideaux's account, that they took him prisoner in some sally Connections. Part
I. p. 67.
(besides that it is a mere supposition), does not afford so literal an
accomplishment of Jeremiah's Prophecy as the account of Josephus, because the
words drawn and cast forth beyond the Gates of Jerusalem seem to imply that
Jehoiakim's death should be in Jerusalem (as Josephus has represented it);
otherwise it could not well be said that he was drawn and cast forth BEYOND THE
GATES, if he did not die WITHIN THE GATES.

This second conquest of Jehoiakim by Nebuchadnezzar was the sixth (if not the
seventh) time that Jerusalem was taken by foreign Enemies since the conditional
promise was made to David concerning the Establishment of his Throne; and the
Exaltation of Jehoiachin, by the Authority of the Babylonian Conqueror, was the
seventh Restoration of the House of David to the "Throne of David," after being
as often delivered into the hands of their Enemies for neglecting God's Laws;
whereby the immediate interposition of DIVINE PROVIDENCE in the direction of
Human Affairs is unquestionably demonstrated. But notwithstanding these
examples both of God's Vengeance and of his Mercy toward "the House of David,"
the young King Jehoiachin (...) is a name compounded of two words, (...)
Jehoi-achin, or (...), signifying Jehovah will prepare; or, according to some,
Domini Praeparatio, five Domini Firmitas. (See the Interpretation of Names in
the end of the sixth Volume of Bishop Walton's Polyglot Bible, p. 30.) A
transposition of these two words (placing the last first) forms a name of the
same import, though of a very different sound -- (...), Ichin-Jehov, or
JeXin-Jehov: and that such a transposition of the name was frequently used is
apparent, because from thence is derived, by abbreviation, another name of this
Monarch, by which he is sometimes mentioned, viz. (...) (1 Chronicles. iii. 16.)
"Jeconiah" (or Icon-Jah), having the same meaning with both the forementioned
names, though the learned Pasor, in his Greek Lexicon of the New Testament,
renders it "praeparatus a Domino," which is more properly the meaning of Coniah
((...)) or Con-Jehov (the name by which the Prophet Jeremiah has distinguished
the same Monarch, in his 22d and 37th chapters), as, the characteristical
letter of the future tense, is omitted in the last-mentioned name.


(alias Jeconiah, or Coniah) very soon afterward fell into all the wickedness
of his Fathers, and, consequently, was rejected by the GOD of Israel; for the
Monarch was speedily informed by the Prophet Jeremiah, that God had determined
to deliver him up into the hands of his Enemies, and into the hands of
Bebuchadnezzar, whose face he feared As I live, faith the Lord, though Coniah
the Son of Jehoiakim King of Judah were the Signet upon my Right Hand, yet
would I pluck thee thence: and I will give thee into the hand of them that seek
thy life, and into the hand (of them) whose face thou fear, even into the
hand of Nebuchadrezzar King of Babylon, and into the hand of the Chaldeans:
etc. Jer. xxii. 24 -- 28. This chapter contains also several other Prophecies
against the Sons and Successors of King Josiah, in the exact order of their
respective reigns, just as the Prophet repeated them (after they were
fulfilled) in his Remonstrance to King Zedekiah and his wicked Court; though,
undoubtedly, the Prophet had before declared them in due time, whilst each of
the said Monarchs remained upon "the Throne of David:" but no other account
remains of these particular Prophecies, except in this 22d chapter, which shall
hereafter be proved (I hope) to be only an occasional repetition of them in the
presence of Zedekiah.


, though, it seems, he feared not GOD! for the Text informs us that he did EVIL
in the sight of the LORD, according to all that his Father had done. (2 Kings
xxiv. 9.) And then immediately follows the account of God's Vengeance against
him! -- At that time (says the Text) the Servants of Nebuchadnezzar King of
Babylon came up against Jerusalem, and the City was besieged, The Siege, here
mentioned, is erroneously cited by Dean Prideaux in his Connections, Part I. p.
67. as a transaction during the life of Jehoiakim; whereas nothing can be more
plain than the narrative of the Sacred Text, wherein, after the Historian has
mentioned the commencement of Jehoiachin's (alias Coniah's) reign, and his evil
conduct, he proceeds next in course to this account of the Divine Vengeance in
the 10th verse (which Dr. Prideaux has applied to the reign of Jehoiakim); and
the Sacred Historian, still continuing the account of that Siege in the
following verses, informs us, in the 12th verse, that JEHOIACHIN (expressly by
name) King of Judah went out to the King of Babylon, he and his Mother, etc. so
that there is not the least ground for placing the Siege in the reign of
Jehoiakim.


. 2 Kings xxiv. 10.

This Vengeance must have followed very close upon the footsteps of this King's
Iniquity; for, it seems, he reigned in Jerusalem (only) three months -- "and
ten days." Compare 2 Kings xxiv. 8. with 2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 9.

And when the year was expired King Nebuchadnezzar sent and brought him to
Babylon. 2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 10. That is, Nebuchadnezzar, first of all, sent his
Servants (viz. his Army) against Jerusalem, who besieged the City (as I have
already related from the second book of Kings) Dean Prideaux hoped to have
solved the difficulty occasioned by his own error (mentioned in the preceding
Note) by asserting that the Siege in the reign of Jehoiachin was only a
continuation of the former Siege in the reign of Jehoiakim: for he says --
After Jehoiakim's death the Servants of Nebuchadnezzar (that is (says he), his
Lieutenants and Governors of the Provinces that were under his subjection in
those parts) still continued (says he) to block up Jerusalem, etc. Connect.
Part I. p. 68. And he once more cites for his Authority the very same Text
which he had before applied to the reign of Jehoiakim; and though he adds,
also, the verse which follows it as a further Authority ( viz. 2 Kings xxiv.
10, 11.), yet neither of these verses mention a word about the supposed
continuance of the Siege from the reign of Jehoiakim to the end of Jehoiachin's
reign; neither can any such continuance be reasonably implied therein, to
authorize such an assertion: in short, the whole error seems to have been
occasioned by his adhering to his own supposition beforementioned, viz. that
Jehoiakim was " taken Prisoner in some Sally (IT MAY BE SUPPOSED)," says he, "
which he made upon them," etc. (Connect. Part I. p. 67.) for which he has not
the least Authority, the supposition being, on the contrary, directly opposite
to the testimony of Josephus before recited; and contrary also to the necessary
accomplishment of Jeremiah's Prophecy against Jehoiakim; which, I hope, has
already been sufficiently demonstrated. The Dean nevertheless persists in the
same hypothesis also in page 69 of the first part.


: but he did not bring Jehoiachin to Babylon until he himself went also
"against the City" (see 2 Kings xxiv. 11.); and then, the Text informs us,
Jehoiachin the King of Judah went out to the King of Babylon, he, and his
Mother, and his Servants, and his Princes, and his Officers: and the King of
Babylon took him in the eighth year of his reign "That is" (says Bishop
Patrick), in the eighth year of Nebuchadnezzar's reign; for he began to reign
in the fourth year of Jehoiakim: (he should rather have said in the latter end
of the third year of Jehoiakim, though the first year of Nebuchadnezzar
includes also the greatest part of the fourth year of Jehoiakim) who reigned
seven more after that, which was (or until) "the eighth year of Nebuchadnezzar."


. And he carried out thence all the Treasures of the House of the Lord, and the
Treasures of the King's House, and cut in pieces all the Vessels of Gold which
Solomon King of Israel had made in the Temple of the Lord, as the Lord had
said. And he carried away all Jerasalem, and all the Princes, and all the
mighty Men of Valor, even ten thousand Captives, and all the Craftsmen and
Smiths: none remained save the poorest sort of the People of the Land: etc. 2
Kings xxiv. 12 -- 14, etc. All these circumstances sufficiently prove, that
Nebuchadnezzar was now a THIRD time Master of Jerusalem, this being the seventh
(if not the eighth) time that the City of Jerusalem fell into the hands of
foreign Enemies, since the conditional promise was made to King David of an
established Throne: but as JEHOIACHIN forsook the ways of GOD, he was, of
course, forsaken of GOD in his temporal Government; and was given up to his
Enemies, with his Mother, his Wives, his Officers, and the Mighty of the Land,
who were all carried away together INTO CAPTIVITY from Jerusalem to Babylon 2
Kings xxiv. 15, etc.
, and thereby afforded to all future Administrations of national Government an
awful example of the Divine Vengeance against Kings and Rulers that neglect the
eternal Laws of GOD! But though Nebuchadnezzar thought it necessary to depose
Jehoiachin, as well as his Father Jehoiakim before him, yet he still persisted
in maintaining " the House of David Ezekiel. xvii. 13.
" upon "the Throne of David," and accordingly made Mattaniah his Father's
Brother King in his stead, and changed his name to Zedekiah 2 Kings xxiv. 17.
. This Monarch was the third of King Josiah's Sons By Hamutal the Daughter of
Jeremiah of Libnah. 2 Kings xxiv. 18. She was also the Mother of Jehoahaz (or
Shallum, as he is called in 1 Chronicles. iii. 15. and in Jer. xxii. 11.) the
immediate Successor of Josiah, who was deposed and carried away by
Pharaoh-Nechoh. Ibid. xxiii. 31.


that succeeded him upon the Throne of David, notwithstanding that the Nation
had been four times conquered by foreign Enemies since Josiah's death! But it
is still more remarkable, that both these foreign Conquerors, Pharaoh-Neco and
Nebuchadnezzar, should not only persist in setting up the Princes of "the House
of David" upon the Throne of David, but should also remind them of their
indispensible obligation to maintain the Laws and Religion of the GOD of Israel
by putting upon them, respectively, a Memorial of the Sacred Name of JEHOVAH;
for I have already shown, that Pharaoh-Neco gave the name of Jehoi-akim
(signifying "JEHOVAH will establish") when he set up a Monarch over the
peculiar People of JEHOVAH; and now again Nebuchadnezzar not only obliged his
new Vassal to " swear by GOD Compare 2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 13. ( viz. --
Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God) with Ezekiel. xvii. 12, 13. ( viz.
-- and made a Covenant with him, and has taken an Oath of him.)


that he would observe the Covenant which was then made between them, but he
also put upon him a signal Memorial of the Name and peculiar Principle of the
only true GOD, JEHOVAH, by giving him the Surname of Zedekiah 2 Kings xxiv. 17.
((...) Tsadok-Jehov) signifying the Righteousness of JEHOVAH, or JEHOVAH is
"righteous;" whereby it is manifest (as I have before remarked) that the Laws
and Religion of JEHOVAH were tolerated or continued among the Jews, even by the
Authority and avowed Consent of the Heathen Conqueror himself, which surely
denotes, that he was guided, in this matter, by a very particular PROVIDENCE;
for, at the same time that he afforded the Jews an opportunity of retrieving
their past conduct by observing more strictly the Laws of God, and the forms of
their own National Religion, he set before them (in the Surname of their new
Monarch) the Sum, Essence, and ultimate Purpose of all true Religion, THE
RIGHTEOUSNESS OF JEHOVAH! This was a Name, therefore, of such actual importance
to the Jewish State (though, perhaps, a common name, even before that time,
among the Jews) that it could not have occurred, by the mere light of Nature,
to the Babylonian Stranger on the solemn occasion of confirming and
establishing a King of Judah, to which it was most particularly adapted! for it
was really the name (as shall be more particularly shown hereafter) of that
future "KING OF THE JEWS" in whom alone the Throne of David Behold, the days
come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous Brauch, and a
KING shall reign and prosper, and shall execute JUDGMENT AND JUSTICE in the
Earth. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: and
this is his name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. (Jer.
xxiii. 5, 6.) i. e. (...) Jehovah-Tsadecns, which is the same name (only
transposed) with Zedekiah (...), or Tsadek-Jehov, except that the former has
the small addition of the possessive particle (...), signifying OUR, viz.
JEHOVAH OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS, instead of THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF JEHOVAH.


could be truly and effectually " established for ever!" This, surely, was far
above the knowledge and comprehension of a Heathen Stranger, unacquainted with
the revealed Laws of God!

It was also the name which, of all others, could best point out to the Jews
the only certain method of establishing the Throne of David, then newly
restored (and, indeed, of establishing every other Throne to the end of the
World); I mean a strict conformity to the eternal Law of Righteousness, -- THE
RIGHTEOUSNESS OF JEHOVAH. There was no other method of averting the dreadful
Retribution at that time fully due to the Jewish Nation! -- that impending
Vengeance and Desolation, of which the Conqueror and present Restorer of the
Kingdom was, himself, the appointed Executioner in case of Disobedience! See
how the same means of averting God's Vengeance has been since set before us,
even by THE SAVIOR OF THE WORLD HIMSELF, as the first principle of sound
policy: -- Seek ye FIRST the Kingdom of God and HIS RIGHTEOUSNESS, and all
these things (temporal necessaries) "shall be added unto you." Mat. vi. 33. But
Zedekiah paid so little regard to "the Righteousness of Jehovah," and proved so
notoriously unworthy to bear that glorious name, that the Prophet Jeremiah, was
very soon afterward, commanded to denounce God's Vengeance against him, even
in the beginning, as it seems, of his reign, that is (as the Text informs us)
after that NEBUCHADREZZAR King of Babylon had carried away captive JECONIAH the
Son of JEHOIAKIM King of Judah, and THE PRINCES of Judah, etc. The Revelation
was made under the Type of a Basket of Evil Figs (see the 24th chapter): but as
the Judgments, therein contained, are denounced not only against THE KING, but
also against HIS PRINCES and the Residue of Jerusalem (chap. xxiv. 8.) we may
presume, that this 24th chapter was not revealed till Zedekiah had so far
settled himself in the Kingdom as to have appointed PRINCES And as the evil
Figs which cannot be eaten, they are so evil; surely thus says the LORD; So
will I give Zedekiah the King of Judah, and HIS PRINCES, and the Residue of
Jerusalem, that remain in this Land, and them that dwell in the Land of Egypt
(for many of the Jews had fled to Egypt for an Assylum): and I will deliver
them to be removed into all the Kingdoms of the Earth for (their) hurt, (to be)
a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in all places whither I shall
drive them, etc. Chap. xxiv. 8, 9.


and other Officers under him; because "ALL THE PRINCES," and all Persons of
any Distinction "And he" (Nebuchadnezzar) carried away all Jerusalem, and ALL
THE PRINCES, and all the mighty Men of Valor, even ten thousand Captives, and
all the Craftsmen and Smiths: none remained save the poorest sort of the People
of the Land. 2 King xxiv. 14.


in the former reign, were carried into Captivity with their King Jehoiachin (2
Kings xxiv. 14.): and therefore, though the severe sentence in the 24th chapter
was denounced in the beginning of Zedekiah's reign, yet, undoubtedly, he had
already given sufficient proofs that his trust was in Man, and not in GOD; so
that his condemnation was just! About this time likewise the Prophecies
contained in the 29th chapter of Jeremiah were sent in a letter from the
Prophet to the Captives at Babylon, by the hands of the Ambassadors whom
Zedekiah sent to the King of Babylon. In the 17th verse of this chapter the
Prophet repeats a part of the 24th chapter, relating to the Type of Evil Figs;
which (as well as the preamble of each) proves that these two chapters were
delivered about the same time. The two next chapters ( viz. xxx. and xxxi.)
seem also to follow very properly I have before quoted the opinion of
Archbishop Usher, where he supposes these two chapters might perhaps be
referred to the date of the 45th chapter; but he afterward, with more
certainty, refers them to the time of the 29th chapter (ad A. M. 3406), which
is agreeable also to the opinion of Dr. Lightfoot (Harmony of the Old Test. p.
159.)


.

In the beginning In principio regni Sedekiae, Prophetia de Elamitis tum
subigendis tum restaurandis a Jeremia prolata est (Jer. xlix. 34, 39.) etc. Ad
A. M. 3405, p. 125.


also of Zedekiah's reign the Prophet Jeremiah denounced God's Vengeance
against Elam (or Persia); but promised, at the same time, a future Restoration.
See the 49th chapter of Jeremiah, from the 34th verse The Word of the Lord that
came to Jeremiah the Prophet against ELAM in the beginning of the reign of
ZEDEKIAH King of Judah, saying, Thus says the LORD of Hosts Jehovah of
Armiss); "Behold, I will break the Bow of Elam," etc. The Persians were always
famous Archers, as well as excellent Horsemen.


. Whether the Judgments against Ammon, Edom, Damascus, etc. contained in the
former part of this chapter were delivered also at the same time does not
appear: it is rather more probable that they were delivered about the same time
with the 46th and 48th chapters, viz. in the fourth year of Jehoiakim; for
which opinion I have already quoted the authority of the learned Lightfoot.
Some of these Nations were doomed to temporal Vengeance in the beginning of
Jehoiakim's reign. The Prophecy of this Vengeance (contained in the 27th
chapter of Jeremiah) was to be afterward communicated to them, by their own
Ambassadors, in the reign of Zedekiah, which could not be done till the latter
end, at least, of his fourth year; though the learned Archbishop of Armagh
places that Revelation in the beginning of Zedekiah's reign. See ad A. M. 3405,
p. 126. Regum Edomaeorum, Moabitarum, Ammonitarum, Tyri, and Sidonis Legatis
Hierosolyma ad visitandum novum Regem Sedekiam venientibus, DEUS Jeremiam
Vincula and Lora tradere jubet, ad Dominos fuos perferenda, etc.

But the Hebrew Text declares, that God gave this charge to Jeremiah in the
beginning of Jehoiakim's reign, which (I hope) I have already proved where I
speak of that reign. See also Dr. Lightfoot on the 27th chapter of Jeremiah, in
his Harmony of the Old Testament, p. 158.




The 50th and 51st chapters of Jeremiah seem to come next in order of time.
They contain dreadful denunciations of God's Vengeance and Retribution against
Babylon, the mighty Instrument of God's Vengeance (of which I shall have
occasion to say more hereafter). In the 51st chapter (ver. 60.) we read, that
JEREMIAH wrote in a book all the evil that should come upon BABYLON, even all
these words that are written against Babylon; which, of course, must include
both chapters: and we are enabled to ascertain the date of them by the
preceding verse; which (together with the following verses) informs us, that
the Prince Seraiah was directed to read the said Prophecies at Babylon, when he
went there with ZEDEKIAH in the fourth year of his reign, and was afterward to
cast the Book into the midst of the River Euphrates. Jer. li. 59 -- 64.

There is no particular mention in Scripture of any transactions of Zedekiah
between the fourth and ninth years of his reign; only that he rebelled against
the King of Babylon in sending Ambassadors into Egypt, that they might give him
Horses and much People; so that he seems to have entertained a foolish and
wicked desire to render himself absolute and independent by means of a Standing
Army of foreign Mercenaries; for he not only endeavored to procure Horses from
Egypt, but also much People Shall he prosper? shall he escape that does such
(things)? Ezekiel. xvii. 15.


. Ezekiel. xvii. 15. And as he vainly put his whole trust in a military Force, the
solemn Oath, which he had so lately taken, was made to yield to his political
views, though he had called GOD to witness! So that the perjured Monarch's WILL
AND PLEASURE was preferred to that RIGHTEOUSNESS in the execution of Covenants
and Laws which alone can establish the Thrones of Kings Take away the WICKED
from before the King, and his Throne shall be ESTABLISHED IN RIGHTEOUSNESS.
Prove. xxv. 5. -- For the Throne is established by RIGHTEOUSNESS. Chap. xvi. 12.

"IN RIGHTEOUSNESS shall thou be ESTABLISHED." Isaiah live. 14.

And IN MERCY SHALL THE THRONE BE ESTABLISHED, and he shall sit upon it IN
TRUTH, in the Tabernacle of David, judging and seeking Judgment (or Justice),
" and hasting RIGHTEOUSNESS." Isaiah xvi. 5. The constant lesson of the Prophet
Jeremiah to Zedekiah and the House of David was -- Execute ye JUDGMENT and
RIGHTEOUSNESS, and deliver the Spoiled out of the hand of the Oppressor -- Do
NO WRONG, do NO VIOLENCE TO THE STRANGER, etc.


, and of which his new name (Zedekiah, or Righteousness of Jehovah) was
certainly intended to remind him. This wicked policy was censured in the
severest terms by the Prophet Ezekiel: -- Shall he prosper? (said the Prophet)
shall he escape that does such (things)? or shall he break the Covenant, and be
delivered? As I live, says the LORD GOD, surely in the place (where) the King
(dwells) that made him King, whose Oath he despised, and whose Covenant he
brake, (even) with him, in the midst of Babylon, he shall die. Neither shall
Pharaoh For Pharaoh was also one of those mistaken Monarchs who placed his
whole trust in Military Power, and was censured also by the same Prophet for
his folly and presumption. Thus says the Lord God; Behold, I (am) against
thee, Pharaoh King of Egypt, the great Dragon that lies in the midst of his
Rivers, which has said, my River (is) mine own, and I have made (it) for
myself. But I will put my Hooks in thy Jaws, etc. Ezekiel. xxix. 3, 4.


, with (his) mighty Army and great Company, make for him in the War, by casting
up Mounts, and building Forts, to cut off many persons. Seeing he despised THE
OATH, by breaking the Covenant (when lo, he had given his hand), and has done
all these (things), he shall not escape. Therefore thus says the Lord GOD; As
I live, surely mine Oath that he has despised, and my Covenant that he has
broken, even it I will recompense upon his own head. And I will spread my Net
upon him, and he shall be taken in my Snare: and I will bring him to Babylon,
and will plead with him there for his trespass that he has trespassed against
me. And all his Fugitives, with all his Bands ( viz. his Regiments or Military
Forces, in which he trusted), shall fall by the Sword; and they that remain
shall be scattered toward all winds: and ye shall know that I the Lord have
spoken it. Ezekiel. xvii. 15 -- 21. Thus Zedekiah's Fate was appointed to be one
of the many proofs which God vouchsafed to the Jews, to demonstrate the Truth
of his Revelation by the Prophets.

In the ninth year of Zedekiah the impending Vengeance became visible by the
near approach of the Babylonian Army, as I have before remarked in page 28: for
then began to be fulfilled what had been foretold not only in the fourth year
of Jehoiakim, but, probably, also in the reign of Josiah. Compare Jer. i. 15.
with xxv. 9. In the former, God declares, -- I will call all the Families of
the Kingdoms of the North, etc. and in the latter, Behold, I will send and take
all the Families of the North, says the Lord (thereby marking his absolute
direction of them), and Nebuchadrezzar the King of Babylon MY SERVANT, and will
bring them against this Land, etc.

And accordingly, after Nebuchadnezzar had strengthened his Empire, by reducing
to his obedience all the Kingdoms of the Assyrian as well as the Syrian
Dominion (which latter lay to the North of Judaea, and extended quite up to
Armenia, the Armenians themselves being no other than Syrians; for Aram is the
proper name in Scripture for Syria), he compelled the conquered Nations to
assist him in reducing others to a like servile subjection under his own
arbitrary Will, without perceiving that he and they, collectively, were but a
mere instrument of Vengeance And thus was NEBUCHADNEZZAR raised up by God, to
be a SCOURGE (compare this with what I have already remarked concerning that
Monarch in pages 67, 68, 83, and 84) TO ALL THE NATIONS ABOUT HIM, for the
Punishment of their Sins. NEBUCHADNEZZAR had, indeed, OTHER THINGS IN HIS HEAD.
That which he designed, was the gratifying his own Ambition, and enlarging his
Dominions: but these were not the ends which God had to serve by him. God made
use of him as HIS INSTRUMENT, as HIS SERVANT (for so he calls him), for the
rendering to the NATIONS that just RECOMPENSE OF VENGEANCE which their Sins
called for. I mention th^se things the rather because they are instances of
God's dealing with Heathen Nations, who were under no particular Covenant with
God. Archbishop Sharp's Sermons, Vol. I. Sermon. 8. entitled, Virtue and
Religion the ONLY means to make a NATION prosperous, p. 209, 9th Edition.


in the hands of the Lord of Hosts, or God of Armies! for we read in the 34th
chapter of Jeremiah, that Nebuchadnezzar literally fulfilled the former
Prophecies by coming to fight against Jerusalem, with all his Army, and all the
Kingdoms of the Earth of his Dominion, etc. I have already related the Message
which Zedekiah sent to the Prophet Jeremiah on this occasion, with the
Prophet's Answer, which is the subject of the 21st chapter; and that the
Prophet was directed also to repeat the Subject of that Answer in the presence
of Zedekiah and his whole Court; which leads me once more to the consideration
of the 22d chapter, the difficulty of which had obliged me to go back, and
investigate the Histories of the preceding Princes of Judah, and of the Times
when the several Prophecies against them by Jeremiah were revealed: and though
this necessary digression has, I fear, been extended to a much greater length
than is consistent with due order and method, yet, I trust, my candid Readers
will excuse this defect in mere matter of form, if they should find any thing
in my digression that may tend to illustrate, and render more familiar to the
generality of Readers, that excellent Book, the Collection of Jeremiah's
Prophecies, in which all Mankind are materially concerned and interested: for
the Certainty of God's Vengeance upon wicked Nations is unquestionably
demonstrated in the Prophecies of Jeremiah; so that the Tenor of that whole
Book, indeed, relates, in some degree, to my present subject, though I had at
first intended to confine myself, in this Tract, to the examination only of the
21st, 22d, and 34th chapters, as being more particularly levelled against
Oppressors, Tyrants, and Slave-holders!

Commentators have generally conceived, that the Divine Message, recorded in
the 22d chapter (from the beginning to the 19th verse at least), was not
delivered to Zedekiah, but to Jehoiakim, because a Prophecy against the latter
is recorded in the 18th verse, viz. "Therefore" (said the Prophet, referring
back to the Offenses beforementioned) thus says the Lord, CONCERNING
JEHOIAKIM, the Son of Josiah, King of Judah; They shall not lament for him,
saying, Ah, my Brother! etc. He shall be buried with the burial of an Ass, etc.

But if we carefully examine the whole chapter, with reference to the chapter
which precedes, as well as that which follows, it will be found much more
intelligible, coherent, and striking, when the whole is considered as one
continued Address to Zedekiah, reminding him of the Judgments denounced (and
then, indeed, fulfilled) against his immediate Predecessors, exactly according
to the order of their reigns, and expressly for the same Offenses ( viz.
OPPRESSION, and the Neglect of JUSTICE and RIGHT) for which he himself, by
name, is condemned in the 21st chapter. The only difficulty which attends this
construction is occasioned by the English Translators having used the present
tense, in the 11th, 18th, and 24th verses (where the praeter tense would
certainly have been much more proper); viz. "Thus says the Lord," instead of
Thus said the Lord to, or concerning, Jehoiakim, etc. which latter is the
literal construction of the original, and is always so expressed in the
interlineary Latin Version of the London Polyglot, viz. "Sic dixit Dominus:"
for though in many other places it is indifferent to the sense, whether the
present or praeter tense is used, yet in these abovementioned it makes a very
material difference; because the Prophet is only reminding Zedekiah of the
Prophecies which he had before denounced (or, at least, to the same effect)
against his disobedient Predecessors; as that, for instance, against Jehoiakim
was first delivered by Baruch the Scribe (though not exactly in the same words,
yet surely to the same purport) in the presence of Jehoiakim himself, after he
had burnt the Roll of Jeremiah's Prophecies, viz. His dead Body shall be cast
out in the Day to the Heat, and in the Night to the Frost; (Jer. xxxvi. 30.)
which is the same thing, in effect, as to be buried with the burial of an Ass,
drawn and cast forth Jehoiakimus, a Chaldaeis captus, abjectus fuit insepultus:
nempe sepultura Asini sepultus, tractus and projectus ultra portas
Hierosolymorum; juxta Prophetiam Jerem. xxii. 18, 19. and xxxvi. 30. licet, ad
communem Naturae Legem respectu habito, dormivisse dicatur ille cum Patribus
suis. 2 Reg. xxiv. 6. Ad A. M. 3405. Though the learned Archbishop, in the
above sentence, supposes, indeed, that the quotation he there makes from the
22d chapter is really a Prophecy, and not merely (as I suppose) the Repetition
of a Prophecy, yet it is plain that he esteemed it of the same import with the
original Prophecy in the 36th chapter, by his quoting them together, in order
to explain the one by the other.


, etc. according to the repetition of the Prophecy before Zedekiah, as related
in chap. xxii. 18, 19.

The Prophet, in the beginning of the chapter, is directed to go down to the
House of the King of Judah, and speak THERE this Word, and say, Hear the Word
of the Lord, O King of Judah, THAT SIT UPON THE THRONE OF DAVID, etc. Now
the question is, who was the Prince who then sat upon the Throne of David, to
whom the Divine Message was directed? whether Shallum, Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin,
or Zedekiah? It could not be Shallum (though he is the first mentioned therein),
because the Text describes him expressly as one which went sorth out of this
place, being already carried into captivity by Pharaoh-Necho; and the Burden
of the Prophecy against him was, that " he shall return no more," etc. See the
endings of all the three verses wherein he is mentioned, viz. 10, 11, and 12,
which all end with that Burden. Again, it is not likely that Jehoiakim (who is
mentioned next in order) was then the reigning Prince, because his Son and
Successor Jehoiachin (alias Coniah, or Jeconiah) is mentioned in the
continuance of the fame Declaration, in a much more conspicuous light than
Jehoiakim himself, being addressed in the second person, as if present at the
time of the Denunciation, viz. I will give THEE into the hand of them that seek
THY Life, etc. And I will cast THEE out, etc.

And though Jehoiachin, probably, was the reigning Prince upon the Throne, when
this severe Prophecy against him was first of all denounced; and also though he
is expressly spoken of, in the 28th verse, as present, viz. "This Man CONIAH;"
yet he was not the Prince that sat upon the Throne of David, when Jeremiah
repeated (as I conceive) these several Prophecies, mentioned in the 22d
chapter; because the Prophet, after a most solemn and alarming exclamation ( O
EARTH, EARTH, EARTH, hear the Word of the Lord!) concludes his Message with a
dreadful Sentence against a Prince whom he also calls "this Man," as if present
( viz. "Write ye THIS MAN childless"), which by no means agrees with the case
either of Jehoiakim or Coniah. The former certainly was not childless; for,
besides his Son Jehoiachin, or Coniah, it is not improbable but that Daniel and
his fellows (or, at least, some of them) were also the Children of JEHOIAKIM;
for they were OF THE KING'S SEED, AND OF THE PRINCES (Dan. i. 3.) that were
carried to Babylon in the third year (or rather the fourth year) of Jehoiakim,
when that Monarch was twenty-eight or twenty-nine years of age. And it is as
certain that Coniah, or Jehoiachin, was not childless, because express mention
is made of his Seed (or Children) in the 28th verse of this 22d chapter, viz.
that he and his SEED are cast into a Land that they know not; and no less than
eight Sons of his are expressly mentioned in 1 Chronicles. iii. 17, 18. " The Sons
of JECONIAH" (the same with Coniah) Assir, Salathiel his Son, Malchiram also,
and Pedaiah, and Shenazar, Jecamiah, Hoshama, and Nedabiah. 1 Chronicles. iii. 17,
18.


. Neither did Coniah LOSE his Children during the Captivity (as the learned Mr.
Goadby, in hopes of removing the difficulty, has ventured to assert "Write ye
this Man childless."] That he had Children (says Mr. Goadby) appears from the
28th verse; and therefore this is a Prophecy that he should lose them during
his Captivity.


for he was so far from LOSING his Children during his Captivity, that it is
probable they were most of them born during the Captivity; for he was but
eighteen years of age when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem
(ONLY) "three months" (2 Kings xxiv. 8.) "and ten days" (2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 9.):
so that it is not easy to conceive, that he could have so many as eight
Children before he was carried to Babylon. But the matter is put out of dispute
by the Apostle MATTHEW, who informs us expressly, that AFTER they were brought
to Babylon, JECHONIAS BEGAT Salathiel; and Salathiel begat Zorobabel; etc. Mat.
i. 12. from whence a regular succession is continued for more than five hundred
years, down to Joseph the Hushand of the Blessed Virgin. The Prophecy,
therefore, of Jeremiah, Write ye this Man childless, could not relate to
Coniah, nor to any other Prince of the House of David, cotemporary with
Jeremiah, except ZEDEKIAH ALONE, and in him it was, indeed, literally
fulfilled; for the King of Babylon slew the SONS of ZEDEKIAH in RIBLAH before
his Eyes (Jer. xxxix. 6.): which clearly answers to the Prophecy, Write ye this
Man CHILDLESS I have taken the more pains to explain this necessary application
of the Prophecy, because, amongst the Commentators that have erroneously
applied it to Coniah, I have to oppose the weighty authority of the very
learned and worthy Archbishop of Armagh, for whose testimony, in general, I
have the highest esteem, though here I am obliged to dissent from him, on
account of the superior authority of the Text. He says. -- "Contra hunc"
(speaking of JEHOIACHIN) severissimum Dei Judicium denunciatum extat in fine
capitis xxii. Jeremiae, sententia hac, quasi in acta referenda, domum
conclusum. SCRIBITE VIRUM HUNC LIBERIS CARENTEM, VIRUM NON PROSPERATURUM IN
DIEBUS SUIS: NAM NON PROSPERABITUR DE SEMINE EJUS QUISQUAM SESSURUS IN SOLIO
DAVIDIS, ET DOMINATURUS AMPLIUS IN JUDA. Jer. xxii. 30. Vide ad A. M. 3405, p.
123. This by no means agrees with the case of Jehoiachin, but is perfectly
answerable to that of Zedeliah, who was not only rendered childless by the
Sword, but was also "a man that" did not prosper in his days; for he afterward
lingered out a miserable life, BLIND and IN CHAINS, at Babylon "Moreover" (says
the Text) "be" (the King of Babylon) PUT OUT ZEDEKIAH'S EYES, and bound him
with CHAINS, to carry him to BABYLON. Jer. xxxix. 7.


! whereas Jehoiachin, who was carried into Captivity before him, did, after
that time, really PROSPER IN HIS DAYS; for though he had done evil in the sight
of the Lord, for which he was removed, as I have before remarked, yet the great
Searcher of Hearts perceived something in him worthy of the Divine Mercy, as
also in several others that were carried into Captivity at the same time, which
was declared very soon after the commencement of their punishment, and a
mitigation was then promised by the Prophet Jeremiah, under the type of "a
Basket of Good Figs" (see the 24th chapter): whereas Zedekiah and those who
remained with him were likened to a Basket of Evil Figs, to which a heavy curse
was annexed, perfectly agreeable to the severe sentence in chap. xxii. 30.
which I have applied to Zedekiah, and as perfectly unapplicable to Jehoiachin.
The latter, and those that were carried away with him, had an absolute promise
of Grace, Peace, and Prosperity Thus says the Lord the God of Israel; Like
these GOOD FIGS, so will I acknowledge them that are carrted away Captive of
Judah ( viz. Jeconiah and the Princes of Judah, with the Carpenters and Smiths
that were carried with them; see the first verse), whom I have sent out of this
place into the Land of the Chaldaeans FOR (their) GOOD. For I will set mine
eyes upon them FOR. GOOD, and I will bring them again to this Land; and I will
build them, and not pull (them) down; and I will plant them, and not pluck
(them) up. And I will GIVE them AN HEART TO KNOW ME that I (am) THE LORD: and
they shall be my People, and I will be their God: for they shall return unto me
with their whole heart. Jer. xxiv. 5 -- 7.
; that, like the GOOD FIGS, God would acknowledge them, and set his eyes upon
them FOR GOOD, and would bring them again to their own Land (that is, some of
them, and their Descendants); that he would build them, and not pull them down,
etc. that he would give them an heart to know him; etc. upon the whole, that
they were in the Land of the Chaldaeans FOR THEIR GOOD. And accordingly the
Scriptures hear a remarkable testimony concerning THE GOOD which God reserved
for Jehoiachin IN THE LAND OF THE CHALDAEANS. So that he must necessarily be
said to have "prospered in his days;" for we read expressly, that EVIL-MERODACH
King of Babylon, in the (first) year of his reign, lifted up the head of
JEHOIACHIN King of Judah, and brought him out of prison, and spoke kindly unto
him, and SET HIS THRONE ABOVE THE THRONE OF THE KINGS THAT (were) WITH HIM IN
BABYLON (so that of him, who was thus set up, as in the highest place of
favor, upon a Throne, in the presence of the most powerful King at that time
upon earth, it could not he said, that "he did not prosper in his days,"
especially as this extraordinary favor and prosperity lasted all his days; for
we read in the Text, that) he did CONTINUALLY eat bread before him (the
Babylonian Monarch) ALL THE DAYS OF HIS LIFE. And (for) his diet, there was a
CONTINUAL DIET given him of the King of Babylon, every day a portion, UNTIL THE
DAY OF HIS DEATH, ALL THE DAYS OF HIS LIFE. Jer. lii. 31 -- 34.

Surely, therefore, it would be as improper to say of this Man JEHOIACHIN (who
had so great a share of PROSPERITY), that he did not prosper in his days, as to
" write him CHILDLESS," who had so many CHILDREN, and so long and complete a
succession of Descendants, some of whom, as Salathiel and Zorobabel, were
RULERS IN JUDAH, though they did not "SIT UPON THE THRONE OF DAVID!" The
Prophecy, therefore, of these unhappy circumstances, the Deprivation of
Children, and Want of Prosperity, in the 22d chapter, could not by any means
relate to Jehoiachin or his Descendants; and there was no other Monarch after
him "upon the Throne of David" to whom it could be applied, except ZEDEKIAH
alone.


. Now, as it is manifest, that the last verse of the 22d chapter of Jeremiah
was addressed to Zedekiah, it is equally manifest that the beginning of it was
also to him I have had the satisfaction to find (since I wrote the above) that
the learned Grotius was also of the same opinion, and that he also comfirms
what I have suggested above, concerning the Repetition of former Prophecies in
the presence of King Zedekiah; for in his Commentary on the beginning of the
22d chapter -- "Haec dicit Dominus" -- he thus expresses himself: -- " Haec
DIXIT" (says he preferring the praeter to the present tense) JEREMIAS enim
Sedeciae loquens SIMUL REPETIT QUAE REGIBUS ANTECEDETIBUS, fratriscilicet
ipsius SEDECUAEM, fratrisque filio PRAEDIXERAT, ne quid haberent quod de tam
gravi Dei ultione conquererentur. Annotata ad Vet. Test. Tom. II. p. 207 See
also Crituci Sacri, Tom. IV. P. 5579. I find also, that the Learned and
Reverend Authors of the Commentary, commonly called Assembly's Annotation, have
objected to this interpretation of Grotius (for I suppose, by their recital of
his Hypothesis, that they mean him, though they' have not mentioned his name);
but yet they have not advanced any sufficient arguments to confute his
doctrine; neither have they removed the obvious difficulties which (if I may
judge of Grotius by myself) occasioned that Hypothesis; and therefore I
conclude, that these difficulties cannot, in any other way, be so easily
explained.


; for the first part of the Divine Message, in the 22d chapter, is nearly a
Repetition of the Answer which the Prophet had before returned by Pashur and
Zephaniah, the Messengers sent to him by King Zedekiah, as mentioned in the
preceding chapter, which will clearly appear by the following collation:

Part of the Answer of the Prophet Jeremiah, sent to King Zedekiah by Passur
and Zephaniah, as recorded in the 21st chapter.
And touching THE HOUSE OF THE KING OF JUDAH, (say) HEAR YE THE WORD OF THE
LORD; O HOUSE OF DAVID (the Address to (the whole Gourt, inserted in the
Remonstrance, is here omitted, because this was a Message only to the House of
David), thus says the Lord; EXECUTE JUDGMENT in the Morning, and DELIVER (him
that is) SPOILED OUT OF THE HAND OF THE OPPRESSOR (this general term, the hand
of the Oppressor, necessarily includes Violence to the Stranger, the
Fatherless, etc.) lest my Fury go out like Fire, and burn that none can quench
(it), because of the evil of your doings. Jer. xxi. 11, 12.

The first part of the Prophet Jeremiah's personal Address to King Zedekiah,
recorded in the 22d chapter.
HEAR THE WORD OF THE LORD, O KING OF JUDAH, THAT SIT UPON THE THRONE OF
DAVID, thou, and thy Servants, and thy People that enter in by these gates;
Thus says the Lord; EXECUTE ye JUDGMENT and Righteousness, AND DELIVER THE
SPOILED OUT OF THE HAND OF THE OPPRESSOR; and do no Wrong, do no Violence to
the Stranger, the Fatherless, and the Widow, etc. -- But if ye will not hear
these Words, I swear by myself, says the LORD (Jehovah), "that this House"
(the Palace) shall become a Desolation, etc. Jer. xxii. 1, 2, 3, 5.

The Prophet afterward proceeds (in the 5th, 6th, and 7th verses of his
Remonstrance to the King and Court) to declare the certainty of Desolation and
Vengeance, if they would not hear his words; and in the 8th and 9th verses he
assigns a general Reason And many Nations shall pass by this City, and they
shall say every man to his neighbor, Wherefore has the LORD done thus unto
this great City? Then they shall answer, Because they have forsaken the
Covenant of the LORD their GOD, and worshipped other Gods, and served them.
Jer. xxii. 8, 9. Now, probably, the British Slave-dealer and British American
Slave-holder will be apt to argue from thence, that the several examples of
God's Vengeance upon the Jews, which I have cited in this Tract, have no
relation to the subject of difference between them and me. We have not
"worshipped other Gods, and served them" (perhaps they will say); so that the
account of God's Vengeance against Jerusalem, which Granville Sharp has cited
as a warning against Slave-dealing and Slave-holding, is not at all applicable
to us! -- But let me (as a Friend and Countryman) warn all such persons, that
they have really worshipped other Gods, and served them, and have broken the
Christian Covenant in as notorious and impious a manner as ever the ancient
Jews did the Covenant of Sinai! Respecting the Breach of Covenant I have wrote
at large in another Tract now in the Press; and shall therefore only offer, at
present, a few hints respecting the horrid crime of serving other Gods.

Christ himself has taught us, that NO MAN CAN SERVE TWO MASTERS: for either he
will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and
despise the other: and then he immediately adds, "Ye cannot serve GOD and
Mammon." Mat. vi. 24. and Luke xvi. 13. Here the Service of Mammon is placed in
as direct opposition to the Service of GOD, as ever was the Service of Baal,
Moloch, or Chemosh; though the first means not any particular Idol, but only
the baneful influence of Riches, or the undue prevalence of private interest
over all sense of Religion, Justice, and Virtue! In like manner Covetousness
(which includes all that I have said of Mammon) is frequently mentioned in
Scripture as downright Idolatry: For this ye know (said the Apostle Paul to the
Ephesians, chap. v. 5.), that no Whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor COVETOUS
MAN, WHO IS AN IDOLATER, has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of
God. And in the Epistle to the Colossians the same Apostle warns us against
some of the common Vices which draw down the Wrath of God, viz. Fornication,
Uncleanness, inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscence, and COVETOUSNESS, which
is IDOLATRY. Col. iii. 5.

Neither is Covetousness the only Vice that is deemed Idolatry -- all the other
Lusts and carnal Indulgences are equally ranked with Idolatry: so that those
inconsiderate persons, who yield to any of them, may as aptly be said to "serve
other Gods," as those backsliding Professors of Christianity at Philippi, whom
the Apostle Paul expressly charged with this kind of Idolatry, viz. "whose God
is their Belly:" -- For many walk (says he) of whom I have told you often, and
now tell you, even weeping, (that they are) the ENEMIES of the Cross of CHRIST:
whose end (is) Destruction, WHOSE GOD (is their) BELLY, and (whose) Glory (is)
in their Shame, who mind earthly things. Philip. iii. 18, 19. And the Service
of the Belly Even the Schismatical Teachers of Novel Doctrines are ranked with
those Idolaters who serve their own Belly, and serve not God. -- For they that
are such SERVE NOT our Lord JESUS CHRIST, but THEIR OWN BELLY; and by good
words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. Romans xvi. 18.


, is placed in as direct opposition to the Service of Christ, as the Service of
the Pantheon, or all the Heathen Deities could be, for it is as effectually the
Service of Devils, as the latter! -- " Whosoever commiteth SIN is the SERVANT
of SIN;" (John viii. 34.) and if "the Servant of Sin," then also the Servant of
the Devil; for -- " He that commits SIN (said the same Apostle) IS OF THE
DEVIL." (1 John iii.8.) -- And though Men are not so lost to Common Sense in
these more enlightened Days of Christianity, as personally to worship at the
Shrines of Demons or Devils, yet they serve the Devil as effectually as ever to
the Destruction of their own Souls, by yielding to his temptations, whether
through Mammon or Carnal Lust! -- For -- Know ye not that the UNRIGHTEOUS shall
NOT INHERIT THE KINGDOM OF GOD? be not deceived; neither Fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with
Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor
Extortioners, shall INHERIT THE KINGDOM OF GOD I Cor. vi. 9 and 10.

Thus it is clearly demonstrable (I trust) that Mankind may be guilty of
Idolatry, and of serving Devils, without paying any personal Adoration to their
Idols; and on this I found my warning not only to Slave-dealers and
Slave-holders, but also to my Countrymen in general. The dangerous prevalency
of the Devil's Empire in these kingdoms, through the service of Mammon and of
Carnal Lust, may be known by the following general Marks. 1st. By the shameful
Spirit of Time-serving, Venality, and Private Interest, which is every where
predominant, to the destruction of true Loyalty and National Independence.
2dly, By the increased number of notorious Gaming Houses, which are frequented
by the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom for Days and Nights together! 3dly,
By the multitudes of poor female Prostitutes which swarm in the public
Streets; and also by the frequency of Masquerades and Midnight Balls, which
apparently afford, to the idle and vicious part of Mankind, the most dangerous
opportunities of triumphing over unwary virtue, and of spreading the baneful
taint of Prostitution amongst females of superior Rank, whereby many persons of
Rank and figure in the gay World are become almost as notoriously dedicated (as
it were) to Venus, or the Assyrian Goddess Mylitta (See Herodotus, Lib. i. p.
83.) as ever the Heathens were of old! But the greatest mark of National
Infamy, and of Satan's Empire amongst us, (and that, indeed, which at present I
am engaged more particularly to oppose) is the shameful public encouragement
given to the African Slave Trade; wherein the Service of Mammon and of the
Devil is rendered apparent by the horrible destruction of the human Species
which it annually occasions! A particular State of that Trade lies now before
me, whereby it appears, that the number of Negro Slaves bartered for in one
year, (viz. 1768.) on the Coast of AFRICA from Cape BLANCO to RIO CONGO,
amounted to 104,100 Souls; whereof more than half (viz. 53,100) were shipped on
the account of British Merchants, and 6,300 on the account of British Americans.

By another State of this Trade in 1771, it appears that ships were sent from
Liverpool for 29,250 Bristol for 8,810 London for 8,136 Lancaster for 950 In
all for 47,146 Souls exclusive of those imported by British American and West
Indian Traders In some former years the Subjects of Great Britain seem to have
had still a much greater proportion of this cursed Trade to answer for! My
worthy friend Mr. Anthony Benezet, in his Historical Account of Guinea, (c.
xiii. p. 130.) cites Anderson's History of Trade and Commerce, to the following
Effect, viz. That England supplies her American Colonies with Negro Slaves,
amounting in Number to above ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND EVERY YEAR.


, which in that year were probably very considerable, because in the following
year (1772) several of the North American Provinces began to be alarmed for the
dangerous consequences of tolerating such an unchristian like practice, which
Sentiment was fully expressed in some of their public Assemblies, especially in
those of Virginia, Pennsylvania, and the Jersies, which shall be shown
hereafter; and I hope they have put a stop to this detestable practice time
enough to avert God's Vengeance from those Regions, though they must take
notice that their reformation is but half complete, and consequently that they
are still in danger, whilst they permit individuals to hold in perpetual
Bondage See the Vengeance of God denounced by the Prophets Isaiah and Jeremiah
against the mighty Babylonian Empire and it is Monarch, "which opened not the
House of his Prisoners" (Isa. xiv. 17.) but oppressed the Captives they had
taken, and held them fast; THEY REFUSED TO LET THEM GO. Jer. l. 33.


the poor African Captives already imported. Now if we consider what multitudes
of men must have been killed merely in the attempt to take so many wretched
Captives for sale; and again what multitudes, out of so large a number, would
die, as usual, in their passage to the West Indies and America either of Grief
and Despair, or by being inhumanly stifled in the Holds of Ships; besides the
large proportion (nearly one half) that would die of the seasoning, (as it is
called) after their arrival in the plantations; and lastly that all the
remainder of this vast multitude of 104,100 miserable human beings will
probably be worn out by hard service and oppression in the space of about 16
years, or less, according to the average rate of some calculations that have
been published. These considerations, I say, must needs inspire us with
indignation and horror even though the evil, at present, is at a considerable
distance from us. See the Appendix to my Representation of the Injustice and
Dangerous Tendency of Tolerating Slavery, etc.

Add to this Destruction the number of brave Seamen that are annually cut off,
either by the Rising of the Negroes -- A French Slaving Ship having been
surprised by an insurrection of the Negroes, who MURDERED MOST PART OF THE
CREW, the Mate, finding no possibility to escape the like fate, had set fire to
the Powder-room, and blew up the Vessel, with upwards of two hundred Slaves on
board. Gazetteer, April 16, 1773. I have heard of many instances of the like
disasters happening to Crews of English Slaving Ships: and even one of my own
Relations perished in the same unlawful Trade, with the whole Ship's Crew.


in the Slave Ships, or by pestilential distempers caught from the poor Negroes
confined in the holds of the said ships; add also the number of free Negroes
occasionally blown up -- The Polly, Captain Walsh, a Ship belonging to Mr.
Adams, struck on the Bar of Bonny this last year (the Book was printed in
1772), and was soon after attacked by the Negroes. The Captain, finding he
could not save his Ship, sent his Boat's Crew off, shut himself up in his
Cabin, and when the King of Bonny and all his People were got on board, to the
amount of fifteen hundred and upwards, set fire to the Powder; and, Sampson
like, at his death punished the treachery of his Assailants. Treatise upon the
Trade from Great Britain to Africa, by an African Merchant, Appendix F, p. 34.
A deplorable Hardness of Heart seems to have possessed this African Merchant;
for it appears, by his manner of relating the above Story, that he approved of
Captain Walsh's diabolical deed, and esteemed it rather as an act of Heroism!


, and otherwise murdered and destroyed by the inhuman Commanders of these
Slave-Ships, as well as by the arbitrary Governors on the Slave-Coasts In the
year 1767, Mr. Grosile burned the Town of Annamaboe, and killed three or four
of the Townspeople. Ibid. p. 100.


; and likewise the number of poor wretches annually sent out by the African
Company as Soldiers, who miserably perish in their settlements -- The POOR
WRETCHES sent out by the Committee have nothing on earth to support or comfort
them, in sickness or health, but a rasher of salt beef, stinking New England
rum, and Portuguese Tobacco; by which means FORTY SOLDIERS have perished at
Cape Coast, out of FORTY-EIGHT, from March the 1st to the 28th of May, all of
whom came out in the Jamaica Storeship, about the middle of last February.
African Merchant, Appendix, p. 78.


; and to complete this list of Diabolical Admitting the AFRICAN TRADE to be
ever so DIABOLICAL says a Writer under the Signature of "A Planter," quoted by
the said African Merchant, Appendix C, p. 27.), or the means by which the
Negro's Body was first obtained ever so UNFAIR, no blame can deservedly rest on
the Planter, who is ignorant of the means, and innocent (says he) of the Guilt.
-- But now, even supposing the Body of the Negro to have been obtained in
whatever manner the Planter may esteem the most fair; which the Planter will
probably allege to be, that the Negro was a convicted Criminal in his native
country; yet this Criminal never offended the Planter, nor the Laws of the
Planter's Nation, nor the "King, Lords, and Commons," who "have shared" (as he
says) "in the Profits" of the Slave Trade: so that neither the Planter nor any
of his Abettors can have any just right to continue the punishment of an
offense committed in another country, especially as neither he nor they can
possibly know whether or not the Negro was really guilty: and therefore,
admitting the African Trade to be ever so DIABOLICAL, or the means by which the
Negro's Body was first obtained ever so UNFAIR, the Planter, though he only
buys and retains the Slave, must share the heavy load of Guilt with the
diabolical Kidnnapper, because he has encouraged the Oppression by his
Purchase, and continues it by his Slave-holding!


Wickedness add the horrid carnage and bloodshed that has frequently been
occasioned by the Insurrections of Slaves, and the more horrible punishments
that have been inflicted on the poor wretched Slaves to deter them from such
attempt From the Wokingham Journal of the 29th of April, 1771.

The following is an extract of a letter of the 30th of November, from one of
the Hon. Council Board of Tobago. A conspiracy of 40 Coromantees has kept us in
continual alarm these 17 days past. Thank God, it is now quite over, as most of
them are either KILLED, HANGED, BURNT, or TAKEN. I had four out, who lay down
near Rockley-bay, CUT ONE ANOTHER'S THROATS, and DIED MUTUALLY IN EACH OTHER'S
ARMS.

The following paragraph was also taken from one of the public newspapers
about the same time.

Extract of a letter from Jamaica, Jan. 14.

The only thing that has occurred liere worth writing to you, since my last, is
a plot that has been for some time formed among the Negroes, to poison every
white person in the country: this hellish plot was luckily discovered, before
put into execution; and for which we ought to be thankful to God. We are now
daily taking up the principal negroes of the different gangs; some of the are
HANGED, some BURNT, and others BEHEADED, after being first STRANGLED. Their
HEADS ARE FIXED ON POLES ALONG THE HIGH ROADS, as a warning to the rest.

A Friend of mine assured me that he was present some years ago at one of these
horrid executions; when a poor negro man was absolutely BURNT ALIVE! The
unfortunate man was fastened down to the ground with forked sticks drove into
the earth, and sire was placed at his feet, and was gradually removed nearer to
the vital parts as the limbs were consumed! The poor fellow bore the exquisite
Torture without the least complaint, looking great part of the time on those
who stood near him with a sullen contempt.


In short, if the destruction of the Human Species which is annually occasioned
by this Cursed Trade was to be fully and fairly estimated, it would appear
enormous and shocking! it would appear that many more unfortunate human beings
are annually SACRIFICED to MAMMON, in the consequences of that iniquitous
trade, than were ever offered up by the Philistines and other deluded votaries
of Baal, Moloch, Hercules, etc.! So that the HUMAN SACRIFICES offered up to
MAMMON by the BRITISH NATION are undoubtedly more grateful to SATAN than those
of the ancient Heathens, because they are more numerous -- more banefully
destructive to the Human Species! How then (if all these points be considered)
shall our wretched Slave-dealers and Slave-holders persuade the world and
themselves, that they have not broken the Covenant and served other Gods!


for the promised Desolation of Jerusalem.

In the 10th verse the Prophet begins to recite several Predictions with which
he had formerly been charged against Zedekiah's Brothers and Predecessors, who
had been successively deprived of their Royal Dignity, and were carried away in
chains before him into a slayish Captivity, as I have before remarked. But the
hopeless SLAVERY of his Brother SHALLUM SHALLUM, alias JEHOAHAZ, (See 2 Chronicles.
xxxvi. 1.) who was deposed, put in bonds, and carried away Captive by PHARAOH
NECHO into Egypt. (Compare 2 Kings xxiii. 31, etc.)


in particular, as well as the principal cause of it, the Prophet represented
to him in very striking terms: -- Weep ye not for the Dead (says he, meaning
JOSIAH), neither bemoan him The Prophet here refers to the long mourning and
lamentations which were continued for many years in remembrance of the death of
the great and good King JOSIAH, the Father of SHALLUM as well as of ZEDEKIAH
himself. -- See 2 Chronicles. xxxv. 25. And all Judah and Jerusalem MOURNED for
Josiah, and Jeremiah LAMENTED for JOSIAH: and all the singing-men and the
singing-women (the minstrells of those ancient days) spoke of JOSIAH in their
LAMENTATIONS TO THIS DAY, and made them AN ORDINANCE IN ISRAEL: and behold they
are written in the LAMENTATIONS.


: (but) weep sore for him that GOES AWAY; for HE SHALL RETURN NO MORE, NOR SEE
HIS NATIVE COUNTRY. For thus says the Lord touching SHALLUM the Son of JOSIAH
King of Judah, which reigned instead of JOSIAH his Father, which went forth out
of this place; HE SHALL NOT RETURN THITHER any more: but he shall DIE in the
place whither they have LED HIM CAPTIVE, and shall see this Land no more! And
then the Prophet immediately refers us to the principal Causes of God's
Severity against the Royal House: "Woe unto him" (says he) that builds his
House by UNRIGHTEOUSNESS, and his Chambers by WRONG; (that) USES HIS
NEIGHBOR'S SERVICE WITHOUT WAGES, AND GIVES HIM NOT FOR HIS WORK (a clear
description of the abominable wickedness of Slavery); that says, I will build
me a wide House and large Chambers, and cutteth him out Windows; and (it is)
cieled with Cedar, and painted with Vermilion. For the Monarch [but whether
SHALLUM or JEHOIAKIM is not clearly declared Commentators in general have
supposed that the Oppression and Injustice of JEHOIAKIM is here referred to by
the Prophet; but as SHALLUM, also, "did Evil in the fight of the Lord," (2
Kings xxiii. 32.) it is not improbable that both these monarchs might have been
guilty of similar Oppression, and that the Crime of Shallum might have been
thus represented to Jehoiakim, as a warning to himself, when this prophecy was
first of all delivered, soon after Shallum was carried into captivity:
nevertheless it is only introduced in this 22d Chapter as a reproach made in
the presence of Zedekiah, which, I hope, I have already proved.


] was more careful, it seems, to display all the Elegances and Ornaments of
Architecture and the other polite Arts in sumptuous Buildings, etc. than he was
to maintain the Laws of Equity and Natural Right! but the Prophet adds -- SHALL
THOU REIGN, because thou closest (thyself) in Cedar? Did not thy Father eat and
drink, and DO JUDGMENT and JUSTICE, (and) THEN (it was) well with him But no
longer! for as soon as Josiah had undertaken an unjust war against Pharaoh
Necho (who previously warned him of the folly and injustice of it) God gave him
and his people (who were wicked enough to concur with him in his unlawful
enterprise) into the hands of their enemies upon the very first encounter. --
See the text at large, Necho, King of Egypt, came up to fight against
Charchemish by Euphrates (then, probably, belonging to the Assyrian empire):
"and Josiah went out against him. But he" (Necho) sent Ambassadors to him,
saying, What have I to do with thee, thou King of Judah? -- I come not against
thee this day, but against the house wherewith I have war: for God commanded me
to make haste: forbear thee from (meddling with) God, who (is) with me, that he
destroy thee not. Nevertheless, Josiah would not turn his face from him, but
disguised himself that he might fight with him, and hearkened not unto the
words of Necho from the mouth of God, and came to fight in the valley of
Megiddo. And the archers shot at King Josiah: and the King said to his
servants, Have me away; for I am sore wounded. His servants therefore took him
out of that chariot and put him into the second chariot that he had; and they
brought him to Jerusalem, and he died, and was buried in one of the sepulchers
of his fathers. 2 Chronicles. xxxv. 20 to 24. See also Esdras i. 25, etc. This
judgment against Josiah for undertaking an unjust war is the more remarkable,
because God had promised him (by Huldah the Prophetess) that he should be
gathered to his grave in peace, etc. (2 Chronicles. xxxiv. 28.) but the promise was
plainly conditional -- God does not deprive men of their free will -- Josiah
had it absolutely in his own power, to have availed himself of the promise by
persisting in Righteousness; God did not bring the evil upon him; nothing but
his own Royal will and pleasure in commencing an unjust war, against which he
was even expressly warned! The promise, however, through the mercy of God, may
nevertheless be said to have been fulfilled. For when Josiah was worsted before
Necho, the conqueror did not pursue his advantage over the wounded monarch to
prevent his escape from the field of battle, as might naturally have been
expected on such an occasion, nor continued the war till more than three months
afterward; which circumstance may certainly be esteemed providential; so that
Josiah was carried to Jerusalem, and may truly be said to have died in peace,
surrounded by his friends, and was buried with the most solemn Royal Pomp in
the sepulcher of his fathers.


? He judged the Cause of the Poor and Needy: then (it was) well (with him: was)
not this to know me? says the Lord, But thine Eyes and thine Heart are not but
for Covetousness, and for to shed innocent Blood, and for OPPRESSION, and for
VIOLENCE to do (it). Therefore (that is, for all these aggravating
circumstances of Tyranny) thus SAID the LORD concerning Jehoiakim the Son of
Josiah King of Judah (and not thus says; for the present tense is not proper
in this place); they shall NOT LAMENT for him, saying, Ah, my Brother? or Ah,
Sister! they shall not lament for him, (saying,) Ah, Lord! or Ah, HIS Glory!
(according to the general Lamentations that had been made for his Father
JOSIAH; but, on the contrary,) he shall be buried with the burial of an Ass,
drawn and cast forth beyond the Gates of Jerusalem Concerning the completion of
this prophecy, see pages 95, 97 -- 100.


, etc. Next in order (after a short personal Address to the Nation, concerning
the Certainty of God's Vengeance, and the Destruction of her Pastors and
Lovers) the Prophet repeats the Judgment that had before been denounced
against CONIAH the Son of JEHOIAKIM, and Nephew, as well as Predecessor, to
ZEDEKIAH, the reigning Monarch, when this Remonstrance was made: -- " As I
live, SAID" (and not says) the Lord, though CONIAH the Son of JEHOIAKIM King
of Judah were the Signet upon my Right Hand, yet would I pluck thee thence: and
I will give thee into the hand of them that seck thy life, and into the hand
(of them) whose face thou fear, even into the hand of NEBUCHADREZZAR King of
Babylon, and into the hand of the Chaldaeans. And I will cast thee out, and thy
Mother that bare thee, into another Country, where ye were not born; and there
shall ye die. But the Land whereunto they desire to return, thither shall they
not return. The Prophet then, probably, appealed to ZEDEKIAH, concerning the
unhappy fate of the person whose Sentence of Condemnation he had just been
repeating: -- " Is this Man CONIAH" (says he) a despised broken Idol? (Is he) a
Vessel wherein (is) no Pleasure? WHEREFORE ARE THEY CAST OUT, HE and HIS SEED,
and ARE CAST The Prophet speaks of CONIAH as already "cast out -- wherefore are
they cast out" -- so that, it is manifest, he could not be upon the Throne of
David when this remonstrance was made, and consequently none but Zedekiah could
then be the reigning monarch.


into a Land which they know not? (for he plainly speaks of their being cast
out as an event already past; wherefore are they cast out? etc.) And if we
consider the question as being put to ZEDEKIAH, the then reigning Monarch, it
contains great severity: for if ZEDEKIAH had consideration enough left to
reflect wherefore CONIAH and his Seed were cast out, he must necessarily be
struck with the Justice of his own Condemnation, which the Prophet was about to
pronounce, with a most awful and alarming introduction: -- O Earth! Earth!
Earth! Hear the Word of the Lord. Thus says the Lord; WRITE YE THIS MAN
CHILDLESS, a Man (that) shall not prosper in his days: for no Man of his Seed
shall prosper, SITTING UPON THE THRONE OF DAVID, and ruling any more in JUDAH.

Had Zedekiah been much more abandoned than he really was, yet these dreadful
Judgments, so solemnly pronounced in his own House, or Palace, and even before
the whole Court, could not well have failed to affect him for the present. The
following chapter seems likewise to have been delivered at the same time, in
the presence of ZEDEKIAH and his whole Court, and was, probably, a part of the
Remonstrance Though the learned Archbishop Usher attributes to the 22d Chapter
a different date from that which I suppose to be the true one, and applies the
severe sentence at the latter end of it (viz. Write ye this Man childish) to
JEHOIACHIN (which I hope I have already proved to be applicable to none but
ZEDEKIAH), yet he was convinced that the following Chapter was delivered at the
same time with the 22d. Hoc tempore sequentis quoque capitis xxiii. JEREMIAE
prophetia edita fuisse videtur. Ad A. M. 3045. p. 123.


: for after declaring "Woe" to the wicked "PASTORS Woe be unto the PASTORS that
destroy and scatter the sheep of my Pasture, says the LORD. Therefore thus
says the LORD GOD OF ISRAEL against the Pastors that feed my people; ye have
scattered my flock, and driven them away, and have not visited them: behold I
will VISIT upon you THE EVIL OF YOUR DOINGS, says the Lord. etc. Jer. xxiii.
1, 2. This should teach Princes the extreme danger of arbitrary modes of
Government; and that when they presume to rule by the indirect means of Bribery
and Corruption, or by open Military Force and Standing armies, instead of LAW
and NATIONAL RIGHT, or, (agreeable to the scripture phrase) instead of
JUDGMENT and RIGHTEOUSNESS, they may too truly be said to destroy and scatter
the sheep of God's pasture; and consequently may expect the same condemnation,
viz. that the LORD will VISIT upon them THE EVIL of THEIR DOINGS.


" (probably meaning the WRETCHED KINGS "PASTORS" (says the learned Dr. Lowth,
in his commentary on this text) comprehend both CIVIL and ECCLESIASTICAL
GOVERNORS: -- Aut potius (says the learned Michaelis) set. Sehm. (qui priorem
hujus cap. partem a v. 1 -- 9. praecedenti vaticinio contra Reges Judae
advectit) REGIBUS, Coll. c. xxii. 22. Ita quoque KIMCHI aliique. Et boc pacto
evidentior fit oppositio de Christo REGE, etc. and in his preface to the Book
of Jeremiah, after speaking of the 22d Chapter (to which, indeed, he attributes
a different date to that which I suppose to be the true one) he adds -- Ei vero
connexum est sequens, c. xxiii. quippe quod itidem directum est contra malos
pastores SEU REGES, V. 1. contra quos c. xxii.


beforementioned of the House of David, who had neglected to EXECUTE JUDGMENT
AND RIGHTEOUSNESS, and to RELIEVE THE OPPRESSED) Jeremiah takes occasion
prophetically to draw the character of the GOOD PASTOR ECO SUM PASTOR BONUS,
etc. I am the GOOD SHEPHERD. The GOOD SHEPHERD gives his life for the sheep.
etc. John x. 11.


, the true SHEPHERD OF ISRAEL "He shall feed his flock like a SHEPHERD." etc.
(Isaiah xl. 11.) The Shepherd here mentioned is THE LORD GOD, or the LORD
JEHOVAH ((...)) spoken of in the preceding verse, whose reward was with him and
his work before him, that is, when he came into the world in a visible form.


, whom God would afterward raise up, even from the same Stock (the House of
David), to EXECUTE JUDGMENT AND RIGHTEOUSNESS in the Land (compare Jer.
xxxiii. 15, 16. with chapter xxiii.): and this is expressed in such opposite terms
to the character of the reigning Prince ZEDEKIAH, then doomed to destruction,
that a contrasted allusion seems very clearly to have been intended.

Behold, the days come, says the LORD (JEHOVAH) that I will raise unto David A
RIGHTEOUS BRANCH (whereas the Royal Branch, that had just been condemned in the
preceding chapter, was most UNRIGHTEOUS); and a KING shall REIGN and PROSPER;
(whereas the former wretched Kings were pulled down from their Thrones, and
carried into Captivity, for the Neglect of Justice and Right; but the promised
King) shall EXECUTE JUDGMENT AND JUSTICE in the Earth (which was the constant
Lesson The necessity of maintaining JUSTICE and RICHTEOUSNESS in political
Government, as well as in private life, is so clearly laid down in the Holy
Scriptures, that one would think it impossible that so many people, who profess
to believe the revealed word of God, should nevertheless suffer themselves to
be deluded by the sophistical arguments of those unbelievers, who assert, that
Vices are necessary to render a state great and flourishing; and that political
Government cannot well be carried on without sometimes doing EVIL that GOOD may
come. But these notions are so far from being true, that the contrary is
clearly demonstrable -- "Name any nation" (says an accurate and careful
observer of the several histories of mankind) that was ever remarkable for
JUSTICE; for TEMPERANCE, and SEVERITY of MANNERS; for PIETY and RELIGION
(though it was in a wrang way) that did not always thrive and grow great in the
world; and that did not always enjoy a plentiful portion of all those things,
which are accounted to make a nation happy and flourishing. And, on the other
side, when that nation has declined from its former virtue, and grown impious
and dissolute in manners, we appeal to experience whether it has not likewise
ALWAYS proportionably sunk in its success and good fortunes. Archbishop Sharp's
Sermons, 1 Vol. 8th Sermon. (entitled -- Virtue and Religion the only Means to
make a Nation prosperous, which was preached before the House of Commons, 21
May, 1690.) p. 209: -- 9th Ed.


, indeed, to ZEDEKIAH and his Brothers, etc. and was as constantly by them
neglected). In his days" (continues the Prophet) Judah shall be saved, and
Israel shall dwell safely (whereas under Zedekiah their Desolation was
completed); and this is his Name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our
Righteousness, i. e. (...) Jehovah Tsadek-nou, which is the Name of Zedekiah,
or Tsadek-Jehov transposed, with the small addition of the Pronominal
Termination nou for OUR, viz. Jehovah-Tsadeknou, instead of Tsadek-Jehov; the
latter signifying Jehovah is righteous; for this name was put upon Zedekiah by
the Babylonian Conqueror, to remind him of the solemn Oath he had taken in the
Name of God.

This manifest contrasted allusion to Zedekiah makes it seem very probable,
that the Prophecies of this 23d chapter were also pronounced in the presence of
ZEDEKIAH and his Court, at the same time that Jeremiah went down to the House
of the King of Judah, to declare the solemn Message, or Remonstrance, contained
in the 22d chapter The learned Grotius, indeed, conceived that the message may
be extended, even to the 28th Chapter "Haec Omnia" (says he, speaking of the
Prophecies of Jeremiah, from the words VAE PASTORIBUS in the 23d Chapter to the
28th Chapter inclusive) USQUE AD CAPUT 28 commemorationem continent ab Jeremia
factam apud Sedeciam de sermonil us ANTE SEDECIAE tempora diversis locis ac
temporibus a se habitis, ac congruentibus cum iis qua nunc SEDECIAE dicere
coeperal; ut Dei in decretis suis et AEQUITAS et Constantia magis apparent ut
jam aliquoties diximus. Crit. Sacr. Tom. 4, p. 5588.


; but I am thoroughly convinced that it cannot with propriety be extended
beyond this 23d Chapter, because the prophecies in the following Chapter (the
24th) under the type of two Baskets of Figs, were delivered, as the Prophet
himself informs us, AFTER that NEBUCHADREZZAR King of Babylon, had carried away
Captive JECONIAH the son of JEHOIAKIM King of Judah, with the Carpenters, etc.
-- and had brought them to Babylon, that is -- SOON AFTER the said remarkable
period, or else the mentioning that public calamity as a chronological
circumstance, to mark the time, (for that is the apparent purpose of it) would
have been nugatory; and consequently we may be assured that the prophecies in
the 24th Chapter were declared in the very beginning of ZEDEKIAH'S Reign;
whereas the 21st and 22d Chapters, and probably the 23d also were not revealed
'till the siege was begun, (as I have already shown) that is -- not 'till the
9th year of that Monarch. The dates likewise of the Prophecies in several of
the following Chapters are also exactly noted in the text to be different from
the time supposed by Gratius: as for instance -- A prior date is expressly
assigned to the 25th Chapter -- it being entitled. The word that came to
Jenemiah concerning all the people of Judah in the 4th YEAR of JEHOIAKIM the
son of Josiah King of Judah, that was THE FIRST YEAR OF NEBUCHADREZZAR King of
Babylon. And again, the two next Chapters (viz. the 26th and part of the 27th)
though posterior with refpect to the order of the Book, have exact dates
assigned them, which are prior even to the 24th and 25th Chapters, for they are
expressly declared to have been revealed In the beginning of the reign of
Jehoiakim, etc. The remainder of the 27th Chapter from the 12th Verse, which
the Prophet addressed to Zedekiah, is as clearly to be attributed to the
beginning of ZEDEKIAH 's reign, -- because the circumstances related in the
following Chapter (the 28th) are expressly said to have come to pass THE SAME
YEAR in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah: and the Letter of Jeremiah to
the Captives at Babylon contained in the 29th Chapter is as clearly declared to
have been wrote after that JECONIAH the King, etc. were departed from
Jerusalem, which was also " the beginning of the reign of ZEDEKIAH;" for the
Letters were sent by ZEDEKIAH's Messengers: See the 3d Verse. So that the last
mentioned supposition of the learned Grotius cannot be true.


. It was, probably, on the first approach of the Babylonian Army ( viz. in the
ninth year of Zedekiah) that the Monarch sent Messengers to consult the
Prophet, and thereby occasioned this public Remonstrance.

The War was immediately carried on with Vigor, it seems, in every part of the
Kingdom (see the 34th chapter The word which came unto JEREMIAH from the LORD,
when NEBUCHADNEZZAR King of Babylon, and ALL his army, and ALL the Kingdoms of
the Earth of his Dominion, and ALL the people FOUGHT against Ferusalem, and
against ALL the Cities thereof. (Jer. xxiv. i.) -- So that a general Attack
seems to have been made at once in every part!


and after some considerable progress had been made in it, ALL THE FENCED
CITIES BEING TAKEN except THREE (see the 7th verse), the Prophet received a
further Command from God relating to King ZEDEKIAH, saying, Thus says the LORD
( i. e. JEHOVAH) THE GOD OF ISRAEL; Go, and speak to ZEDEKIAH King of Judah,
and tell him, Thus says the LORD; Behold, I will give this City into the hand
of the KING OF BABYLON; and he shall burn it with fire: and thou shall not
escape out of his hand, but shall SURELY BE TAKEN and delivered into his hand;
and THINE EYES SHALL BEHOLD THE EYES OF THE KING OF BABYLON, and he shall speak
with thee mouth to mouth (that is, when the King of Babylon was to sit in
Judgment upon him), and thou shall go to Babylon, etc. The Prophet however
added a few words of comfort -- yet hear the word of the Lord, O Zedekiah King
of Judah; Thus says the Lord of thee; thou shall not die by the sword: (but)
thou shall die in peace: (that is a natural death) and with the burnings of thy
Fathers, the former Kings which were before thee, so shall they burn (odours)
for thee; and they will lament thee, i. e. (the Jewish nation in Captivity will
lament thee) saying. Ah Lord! for I have pronounced the word, says the LORD.
Then JEREMIAH the Prophet spoke all these words unto ZEDEKIAH King of Judah in
Ferusalem, when the King of Babylon's Army fought against Jerusalem, and
against all the Cities of Judah that were left, against Lachish and against
Azokah: for these defenced Cities remained of the Cities of Judah. Verses 4 to
7.




These repeated Denunciations of Vengeance, with the HORRORS of the growing
dangers from the successful Enemy before their eyes every way round Jerusalem,
at length so far shook the firmness of that stubborn Monarch, that he began to
show some signs of Remorse; and as I have already shown, that THE OPPRESSION OF
THE POOR was one of the principal causes (though there were many others also)
assigned by the ALMIGHTY for casting off his People, and sending them into
CAPTIVITY ( punishing TYRANNY with SLAVERY), so even this wicked Monarch
ZEDEKIAH, who never thought of LAW or JUSTICE in his Prosperity, was now, it
seems, become sensible, that a public act of JUSTICE and MERCY toward the
oppressed Poor, that were then detained, by his opulent Subjects, in a
miserable INVOLUNTARY SERVITUDE, would be the most grateful act of Reformation,
and the most acceptable Sacrifice in the sight of a merciful God, and,
consequently, the most effectual means to avert the NATIONAL DESTRUCTION, which
was then advancing with dreadful strides! And accordingly we find, that he
actually prevailed The Text informs us, that the King ZEDEKIAH had made a
covenant with all the People which were at Jerusalem to PROCLAIM LIBERTY unto
them; that every man should let his manservant, and every man his
maidservant, being an Hebrew or Hebrewess, GO FREE; that none should SERVE
himself of them, (to wit) "of a Jew his Brother." And it is probable that this
was the King's own proposal, (though perhaps at the suggestion of the PROPHET,
to fulfill the Law), because in the following verse it is said, that ALL THE
PRINCES and ALL THE PEOPLE HEARD that they should let their manservant, etc.
GO FREE -- they OBEYED -- and these terms hearing and obeying seem to imply
that neither the Princes nor the People were the proposers of the equitable
mensure, -- "Now" (says the Text) when ALL the Princes and ALL the People which
had entered into the Covenant HEARD that every one should let his manservant
and every one his maidservant GO FREE, that none should serve themselves of
them any more, then THEY OBEYED, and LET THEM GO. Chap. xxxiv. 8 to 10.


upon his Princes and People to PROCLAIM LIBERTY to their POOR BRETHREN IN
BONDAGE; and this Proclamation of LIBERTY was a public Act of the State
"COMMUNI DECRETO" (says Grotius upon the place) statuerat impleri quod lex
jubebat, sed Judaei, non observaverant. Vide Exodus xxi. 2. Deuteronomy. xv. 12.


; for not only the King, but all the Princes, and all the People, bound
themselves, in a most solemn covenant, to comply with the terms of the
Proclamation Viz. That every man should let his manservant, and every man his
maidservant, being an Hebrew or Hebrewess, go free, etc. 9th verse.


, which was also agreeable to an ancient Ordinance of their Law And ye shall
hallow the fiftieth year, and PROCLAIM LIBERTY throughout (all) the Land unto
ALL THE INHABITANTS thereof; it shall be a Jubilee unto you, etc. Levit. xxv.
10.


. Now, to confirm all that I have hitherto asserted concerning the principal
causes of God's Anger against the Jews, my Readers are earnestly requested to
remark, that this material Reformation was ACCEPTED BY THE ALMIGHTY, who even
condescended to signify by his Prophet, that the People HAD DONE RIGHT IN HIS
SIGHT IN PROCLAIMING LIBERTY EVERY MAN TO HIS NEIGHBOR (ver. 15.). And had the
Jewish Government at that time persevered in this NECESSARY ACT OF JUSTICE AND
BROTHERLY LOVE, they might probably (as Charity covers a multitude of Sins)
have received Grace for a further Amendment, and might have obtained a
mitigation, or at least a respite or postponing, of those dreadful Judgments
which had long been denounced by the Prophets against that devoted Nation: but
alas! the just Decrees were confirmed, on account of the want of sincerity and
the deplorable impenitence on their part; for no sooner was the appearance of
God's approaching Vengeance withdrawn (by the sudden retreat of the Chaldaeans
from the Siege on the approach of Pharaoh's Army Then Pharaoh's army was come
forth out of Egypt: and when the Chaldeans that besieged Jerusalem heard
Tidings of them, they departed from Jerusalem. Chap. xxxvii. 5. See also 11th
verse, at which time (says Grotius) the King and the Princes repealed the
Popular Decree concerning Liberty, mentioned in the 34th chap. -- Quo tempore
(says he) Rex et Principes resciderunt decretum de popularium liberate ut
habuimus, c. 34. -- When the army of the Chaldeans was broken up from Jerusalem
for fear of Pharaoh's army.


, see chap. xxxvii.) than the wretched tyrannical Masters (who could not repent
of their enormous Oppressions, yet) speedily repented of their temporary
Benevolence; and being themselves entangled in a much more dangerous Bondage
(through their abominable Avarice) under that old Slave-holder and hard
Task-master the Devil, they wickedly renewed their former iniquitous claims of
private Property in the Persons of their poor Brethren, and caused the Servants
and the Handmaids, whom they had LET GO FREE, to return: and brought them INTO
SUBJECTION for Servants and for Handmaids. Jer. xxxiv. 11. Perhaps they thought
to excuse themselves, like our modern African Merchants and American Planters,
by pleading THE NECESSITY of tolerating Slavery, and the exaction of
involuntary Service; viz. that the Profit arising therefrom was necessary for
their support; and that Husbandry and other laborious business could not be
performed at so cheap a rate by free hired Servants as by Slaves: but whether
such reasons as these, or others of greater weight, were then alleged, is not
material; it is sufficient for the present argument to be certain, that,
whatever were their Pretenses or Excuses for enslaving their Brethren, they did
only deceive themselves, and hasten the Vengeance of Almighty God upon their
own heads; for they were, very soon afterward, delivered up into the hands of
their Enemies, the Babylonian Tyrants, under whom their Countrymen, that had
been carried away in the former Captivities, experienced, IN THEIR OWN PROPER
PERSONS, the deplorable condition of SLAVES, being a most just punishment for
that TYRANNY and unreasonable VASSALAGE with which they so unlawfully oppressed
their POOR BRETHREN! Such was their Crime (I mean their principal Crime, or at
least one of those Crimes which was most abominable in the sight of a merciful
GOD; for they were, indeed, notoriously guilty of Idolatry, and many other
detestable Crimes besides this) and such their retaliated Punishment, which was
inflicted expressly on that account. -- "THEREFORE" (says the Text; so that the
reason of God's interposition is manifest) the Word of the LORD came to
Jeremiah from the LORD, saying, Thus says the LORD (JEHOVAH), the GOD of
Israel; I made a Covenant with your Fathers in the day that I brought them
forth out of the Land of Egypt, OUT OF THE HOUSE OF BONDMEN (a circumstance
which they were frequently commanded never to forget, as I have before
remarked, but sympathetically to learn MERCY thereby But thou shall remember
that thou wast a Bondsman in Egypt, and the LORD thy GOD redeemed thee thence:
THEREFORE I command thee to do this Thing. Deuteronomy. xxiv. 18, 22. also c. xv. 15.
and xvi. 12, etc. etc.


, saying; At the end of seven years let ye go every man his Brother an Hebrew,
which has been sold unto thee; and when he has served thee six years, thou
shall LET HIM GO FREE from thee: but your Fathers hearkened not unto me,
neither inclined their ear. And ye were now turned, and had DONE RIGHT IN MY
SIGHT, IN PROCLAIMING LIBERTY EVERY MAN TO HIS NEIGHBOR Mark this ye sordid
Tyrants of the Earth! the ALMIGHTY LORD OF THE UNIVERSE has condescended to
inform you, that the PROCLAIMING LIBERTY every man to his neighbor, (and all
Men without distinction are at this day to be esteemed your Neighbors and
Brethren,) IS RIGHT IN HIS SIGHT!


; and ye had made a Covenant before me in the House which is called by my Name:
But ye turned and polluted my Name, and caused every man his Servant, and every
man his Handmaid, whom he had SET AT LIBERTY AT THEIR PLEASURE (or to their
mind or will), to return, and brought them into subjection, to be unto you for
Servants, and for Handmaids. THEREFORE (now mark the Punishment, ye wretched
Slave-holders and Advocates for private Property in the Persons of Men) thus
says the LORD (JEHOVAH); Ye have not hearkened unto me IN PROCLAIMING LIBERTY
every one to his Brother, and every man to his Neighbor: behold, I PROCLAIM A
LIBERTY for you, says the LORD (significantly marking his detestation of
Slave-holding by an ironical repetition of that opposite measure (the
proclaiming of LIBERTY) which they had neglected; and therefore God himself
PROCLAIMED a different kind of LIBERTY -- LIBERTY) to the Sword, to the
Pestilence, and to the Famine: (here is a PROCLAMATION OF LIBERTY with a
vengeance! But alas! the hardened Jewish Slave-holders, like Englishmen
nowadays, were too wicked to take warning.) And I will make you (says the
Lord) to be removed into all the Kingdoms of the Earth (that is, to be led away
into Captivity by their Enemies: SLAVERY being a very just as well as common
punishment for TYRANTS). And I will give the men that have transgressed my
Covenant, which have not performed the Words of the Covenant which they had
made before me, when they cut the Calf in twain, and passed between the Parts
thereof For in making the Covenant before God in the Temple to proclaim
Liberty, as mentioned in the 15th verse, they divided the victim in two parts,
and passed between the parts in imitation of the solemn Covenant which God made
with Abraham, when a smoking furnace, and a lamp of fire, passed between the
pieces of the divided Heifer, She Goat, etc. as mentioned in Genesis xv. 9 to 17,
signifying, says Vatablus, -- that they wish to be put to death as this Calf
was cut asunder, if they break the Covenant. -- In federe pangendo dividebant
vitulum, et per medium transibant, significantes se optare emori ut ille
vitulus erat caesus si fedus frangerent. Crit. Sac. Tom. 4.5640. -- "Nam
significabat" (says Munster) ritus ille ut, si quis dolo malo discessisset a
pollicitis, illum quoque secaret Dominus et occideret horrende. Crit. Sac.
5639. -- And Clarius gives a part of the words used on those occasions, "Ordo
orationis" (says he) est, Dabo viros qui praevaricantur fedus meum, sicut
vitulum quem conciderunt, etc. In Templo enim immolarant ritu celeberrimo
diviso vitulo per cujus parts utrinque oppositas incedebant, simulque jurabant
et se devovabant ut eveniret ipsis sicut vitulo si fedus rumperent. Dicit ergo
-- Dabo vos sicut vitulum illum, etc.


, the Princes of Judah, and the Prince of Jerusalem, the Eunuchs, and the
Priests, and all the People of the Land, which passed between the parts of the
Calf; I will even GIVE THEM INTO THE HAND OF THEIR ENEMIES, and into the hand
of them that SEEK THEIR LIFE: and their dead Bodies shall be for Meat unto the
Fowls of the Heaven, and to the Beasts of the Earth Manifestly alluding to the
heavy curse to which, with their own consent, they had rendered themselves
liable by their breach of the Solemn Covenant, viz. that they should be slain,
as the Calf was when they made the Covenant, and their dead bodies be left like
the divided parts of the Calf, to the fowls of the air, etc. for in the
description of that solemn rite in Genesis we read that -- "the Fowls came down
upon the Carcases," and -- "Abram drove them away." Genesis xv. 11.


. And ZEDEKIAH KING OF JUDAH, and the PRINCES, will I give into the hand of
their Enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their Life Here is a
distinct repetition of a part of the same Judgment against the King and
Princes, though it does not appear that the King himself was actually guilty of
slave-holding: however, it seems, he neglected to enforce the Laws of the Land
in behalf of the injured poor, and by suffering others with impunity to hold
their Brethren in an unnatural Bondage, he become a party in the oppression,
and of course a sharer of the punishment. O that modern Kings, who in any
degree consent to the toleration of slavery in their dominions, would think of
this tremendous example, and exert every Royal Prerogative (that they are
legally invested with) in restraining their Princes and People from oppressing
their poor Brethren; in maintaining the natural Rights of Mankind; and in
defending the Poor from the Rich, the Weak from the Strong, by ballancing the
Power of the Nobles (or rich Landholders) by the Official Power of the Crown in
behalf of the just Rights of the Common People. These are the most essential
purposes of Regal Government and Royal Prerogative, which, surely, can never be
exerted either so profitably, or so safely, on any other occasions whatsoever,
for it is by strict Justice or Righteousness alone that a King's Throne can be
truly and safely established, and not by refined sophistical Politics,
Mercenary Armies, or Parliamentary Corruption!


, and into the hand (continued the Prophet) of the King of Babylon's Army,
which are gone up from you (for the withdrawing of the Babylonian Army was a
very recent instance of God's Mercy, which rendered more notorious the
ingratitude of those who so immediately broke the solemn Covenant of
PROCLAIMING LIBERTY; but GOD's VENGEANCE kept pace with the Oppression of the
unrepenting Tyrants!). Behold, I WILL COMMAND, SAYS THE LORD, and CAUSE THEM
TO RETURN TO THIS CITY (a remarkable instance of God's overruling Providence
in the World! The haughty, self-willed, Babylonian Monarch and his Men of War
perceived not that they were mere instruments in the hands of God!), and they
shall fight against it, and take it, and burn it with fire: and I WILL MAKE the
Cities of Judah a Desolation without an Inhabitant. Jer. xxxiv.

There is no order of time preserved in the Collection of Jeremiah's
Prophecies, as I have already remarked; for the two next chapters ( viz. the
35th and 36th) contain Prophecies which were delivered several years before, in
the reign of Jehoiakim; but the 37th chapter relates to the same time exactly
as the 34th chapter last quoted, viz. the times when Pharaoh's Army was come
forth out of Egypt (xxxvii. 5.), which occasioned the departure (for the
present) of the Chaldeans. And it was, probably, in the interval between these
two circumstances ( viz. after Pharaoh was come forth from Egypt, and was
advancing, but before the Chaldeans left the Siege on that account) that
Zedekiah sent two Messengers to the Prophet (who was then at liberty, as the
4th verse expressly declares) to desire his Prayers: -- Pray now unto the Lord
our God for us; but the Prophet's Answer on that occasion was not returned till
the Chaldeans departed from Jerusalem, as mentioned in the 5th verse (and
probably also not till after the Covenant about Liberty was broken): -- Then
came the Wor^ of the Lord to Jeremiah, saying, Thus says the LORD, the GOD OF
ISRAEL; Thus shall ye say to the King of Judah, that sent you unto me to
enquire of me; Behold, PHARAOH's Army, which is come forth to help you, shall
return to Egypt into their own Land. And the CHALDEANS SHALL COME AGAIN, and
fight against this City, and take it, and burn it with fire. Thus says the
Lord; DECEIVE NOT YOURSELVES, saying, The Chaldeans shall surely depart from
us; for they shall not depart. For though ye had smitten the whole Army of the
Chaldeans that fight against you, and there remained but WOUNDED MEN among
them, (now mark how impossible it is for Slave-holders to stand before their
Enemies!) "yet should they" (that is, the wounded men) rise up every Man in his
Tent, and burn this City with Fire. Chapter xxxvii. to ver. 10.

It was also during this recess of the Babylonian Army, that the Prophet was
put into prison by the Princes, for taking that opportunity to attempt his
escape from Jerusalem. See chapter xxxvii. 11 -- 16.

Afterward For he remained in Prison many days, as we read in the 16th verse.


Zedekiah the King sent and took him out: and the King asked him secretly in
his House, and said, Is there (any) Word from the Lord? And Jeremiah said,
There is: for, said he, Thou shall be delivered into the hand of the King of
Babylon, etc. Chapter xxxvii. 17.

The Prophet also took this opportunity of remonstrating to the King concerning
his own case: -- " Moreover Jeremiah said unto King Zedekiah, WHAT HAVE I
OFFENDED AGAINST THEE, or against thy Servants, or against this People, that ye
have put me in Prison This shows that speaking Truth, be it ever so severe,
(provided it is not spoken for the sake of mere abuse, but for the purposes of
warning and amendment) ought not to be esteemed an Offense, for surely no
truths can ever be more harsh or severe than those uttered by Jeremiah against
the Court of Zedekiah!


? Where (are) now your Prophets, which prophesied unto you, saying, The King of
Babylon shall not come against you, nor against this Land For these Evil
Counselors, it seems, like true implements of the Devil, attempted by their
false intelligence from time to time to make the King firm in his bad measures
and wicked policy.


? Therefore hear now, I pray thee, O my Lord the King: let my supplication, I
pray thee, be accepted before thee; that thou cause me not to return to the
House of Jonathan the Scribe, lest I die there. And it appears that Zedekiah
(notwithstanding his general wickedness) yet had no personal pique against the
Prophet, but was well inclined to grant his Petition, as also a daily allowance
of Bread, as long as any could be procured " Then" (says the Text) Zedekiah the
King commanded that they should commit Jeremiah into the Court of the prison,
and that they should give him daily a piece of bread out of the Bakers Street,
until all the Bread in the City were spent.


.

And when the Princes advised Zedekiah to put Jeremiah to death, because he
publicly exhorted all the People to go over to the Enemy Which would have been
treason to the state, and a high crime, had not the Kingdom been actually
condemned by the word of God, viz. Thus says the Lord; He that remains in
this City shall die by the Sword, by the Famine, and by the Pestilence: but he
that goes forth to the Chaldeans shall live; for he shall have his life for a
prey, and shall live. Thus says the Lord; This City shall surely be given into
the hand of the King of Babylon's army, which shall take it. Therefore the
Princes said unto the King, We beseech thee let this man be put to death: for
thus he weakeneth the hands of the men of war that remain in this City, and the
hands of all the people, in speaking such words unto them: for this man seeks
not the welfare of this people, but the hurt, etc. Chap. xxxviii. 2 to 4.


, it appears, that though the King thought he had not sufficient authority to
oppose their Council, yet he would not concern himself against the Prophet to
condemn him, but only left him in their hands Then Zedekiah the King said,
Behold, he (is) in your hand; for the King (is) not (he that) can do (any)
thing against you. Chap. xxxviii. ver. 5.


; and no sooner was the King informed of the dangerous situation of Jeremiah
from the malice and injustice of the Princes My Lord the King, these men have
done evil in all that they have done to Jeremiah the Prophet, whom they have
cast into the dungeon; and he is like to die for hunger in the place where he
is: for ( there is) no more bread in the City. Chap. xxxviii. ver. 9.


, than he gave express orders to the generous and conscientious Ethiopian (who
had represented the case) to take a Guard of thirty Men, and draw him up from
the Dungeon, and he was placed in the Court of the Prison Chap. xxxviii. 10 --
13.
. The King afterward sent for the Prophet, and had a private conference with
him; he also bound himself under a solemn Oath, that he would neither kill him
nor give him up to his Enemies; and as he kept his promise, notwithstanding
that Jeremiah still persevered in denouncing the most tremendous Judgments
against him and the whole Kingdom, it is manifest, that the king had no
personal resentment against the Prophet; being sensible, probably by that time,
of Jeremiah's sincerity and innocence, as well as of the truth of his Warnings,
though he had not grace and humility enough to submit himself to the only
alternative from destruction, which God was now pleased to offer him, (perhaps
in consideration of his favor to Jeremiah) and which the Prophet as
affectionately pressed him to accept, but in vain.

These circumstances, and several others, will be found in the 38th chapter --
If thou will assuredly go forth unto the King of Babylon's Princes, then thy
soul shall live, and this City shall be burned with fire; and thou shall live
and thine house. But if thou will not go forth to the King of Babylon's
Princes, then shall this City be given into the hand of the Chaldeans, and they
shall burn it with fire, and thou shall not escape out of their hand. And
Zedekiah the King said unto Jeremiah, I am afraid of the Jews that are fallen
to the Chaldeans, left they deliver me into their hand, and they mock me. But
Jeremiah said. They shall not deliver (thee). Obey, I beseech thee, the voice
of the LORD which I speak unto thee: so it shall be well unto thee, and thy
soul shall live, etc. Chap. xxxviii. ver. 17 to 20. The remainder of the
chapter contains a further description of the judgments that were to take
place in case ho refused to accept of the alternative above mentioned; as also
an account of Zedekiah's expedient for concealing what had passed between him
and Jeremiah from the Princes.


; but we must go back to the 32d chapter for the continuation of the History,
which we there find advanced to the tenth year of Zedekiah's reign, the Siege
being still carried on, and Jeremiah still shut up in the Court of the Prison.
In the 3d, 4th, and 5th verses we find a repetition of some circumstances of
the dreadful Vengeance before denounced against Zedekiah; but they are not
mentioned in that place as being then repeated by the Prophet, but only as
having been the cause of his Confinement. From the 6th to the 16th verse is
related -- the remarkable Prophecy concerning the Repossession of Houses,
Fields, and Vineyards after the Captivity; in token of which the Prophet's
Kinsman, Hanameel, was providentially sent to tender to him the purchase of a
Field in Anathoth, to which he was next Heir. From the 17th to the 25th verse
of this chapter is contained -- the Prophet's Prayer on that occasion, wherein
he most solemnly describes the Mercy, as well as the Vengeance, of GOD, then
dreadfully approaching! -- Ah Lord God! Behold, thou have made the Heaven and
the Earth by thy great Power and stretchedout Arm, (and) there is nothing too
hard for thee: Thou show loving kindness unto thousands, and RECOMPENSEST
THE INIQUITY of the Fathers into the bosom of their Children after them: THE
GREAT, THE MIGHTY GOD! THE LORD (or Jehovah) OF HOSTS (is) HIS NAME! GREAT IN
COUNCIL, and MIGHTY IN WORK? For thine Eyes (are) open upon all the ways of
Men, to GIVE EVERY ONE ACCORDING TO HIS WAYS, (mark this, ye Slave-holders and
African Merchants!) AND ACCORDING TO THE FRUIT OF HIS DOINGS! Which have set
Pofuisti (...) Ponere pro facere, more Hebreorum. Vatablus. Crit. Sac. Tom. 4.
p. 5628.


Signs and Wonders in the Land of Egypt (even) " unto this day "Usque ad diem
hunc." -- Celebrata scilicet, says Grotius. Crit. Sac. Tom. 4. p. 5632.


" (amongst which the most remarkable were God's severe Judgments against the
great Egyptian SLAVE-HOLDER and his Kingdom, who refused to PROCLAIM LIBERTY to
his Bond Servants) " and in Israel -- In Israel also, even in that very nation
which the Almighty (by the abovementioned Signs and Wonders) delivered from the
HOUSE OF BONDAGE, and restored to their natural Rights; which, nevertheless,
was since become notorious, for the same kind of oppression that God had
punished in Egypt, -- for a Crime, which of all others, must be most
intolerable in the Sight of the GREAT REDEEMER FROM SLAVERY; it being not only
a proof of the most shameful ingratitude, but also a notorious breach of God's
express Command, viz. to remember that they themselves had been BONDMEN IN
EGYPT! See Deuteronomy. xv. 15. xvi. 12. xxiv. 18 and 22.


, and among" (other) Men Amongst other Nations also GOD's VENGEANCE against
Tyrants and Oppressors has been manifested, some examples of which shall
hereafter be inserted.


; and have made thee a Name as at this day (viz. the day or time that GOD
recompensed the Jews "according to their ways;" the dreadful Storm of GOD's
VENGEANCE against Jerusalem being then begun, which was not to cease till the
whole was laid desolate!), and have brought thy People Israel out of the Land
of Egypt with Signs and with Wonders, and with a strong Hand, and with a
stretched-out Arm, and with great Terror For that wonderful example of GOD's
VENGEANCE against TYRANNY, and of his MERCY IN REDEEMING a Nation from SLAVERY,
was of all others the most eminent, and, confequently, the oftenest repeated in
Scripture (as in this place), 'till the accomplishment of the much more
glorious redemption from SPIRITUAL SLAVERY, the BONDAGE of the Devil Forasmuch
then as the Children are Partakers of flesh and blood, he, (that is, Christ)
also himself, likewise took part of the same; that through Death he might
destroy him that had the power of death, (that is, the Devil,) and deliver them
who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to Bondage. Heb. ii.
14, 15. -- I beheld Satan as Lightning fall from Heaven. Luke x. 18.


, (of which the former was only a Type;) when the Son of God invited all
mankind to the FREEDOM of the GOSPEL, -- to the True Knowledge of the LAW of
LIBERTY for the regulation of their behavior toward each other; giving them
power to become the sons of God John i. 1^.
; and to partake even of the Divine Nature -- Through the knowledge of him that
has called us to Glory and Virtue: whereby are given unto us exceeeding great
and precious promises; that by these ye might be PARTAKERS of the DIVINE
NATURE, having escaped the Corruption that is in the world through Lust. 2
Peter i. 3, 4.


by the Gift of the Holy Ghost For as many as are led by the Spirit of God,
they are the Sons of God. For ye have not received the Spirit of Bondage again
to fear, but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry -- Abba --
Father, etc. Romans viii. 14, 15. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and
that the Spirit of God dwells in you? If any man defile the Temple of God,
him shall God destroy: for the Temple of God is Holy, which (Temple) "ye are."
1 Cor. iii. 16, 17.


, which is absolutely promised to all that sincerely ask " Ask and it shall be
given you," etc. Matt. vii. 7. Mark xi. 24. Luke xi. 9. John xv. 7.


it in Christ's name Whatsoever ye shall ask IN MY NAME (said our Lord JESUS)
in my Name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye
shall ask any thing IN MY NAME, I will do it, etc. John xiv. 13, etc. -- How
much more shall your Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him.
Luke xi. 13.


.


and have given them this Land, which thou did swear to their Fathers to give
them, a Land flowing with Milk and Honey; and they came in and possessed it;
but they obeyed not thy Voice, neither WALKED IN THY LAW: they have done
nothing of all that thou command them to do: therefore thou have caused all
this evil to come upon them. The Prophet then proceeds to describe the Terrors
of the Siege, which were at that time present before his eyes: -- "BEHOLD THE
MOUNTS!" (said he) " They are come unto the City to take it," etc. And after
reciting some other Causes of God's Anger against his People (as Disobedience,
Idolatry, etc.), and declaring the certainty of the Desolation that would
follow, he once more promises a happy Return to their own Land; which is also
again repeated in the following chapter (xxxiii), with the additional Promise
of the BRANCH OF RIGHTEOUSNESS to grow up unto David, that should execute
JUDGMENT and RIGHTEOUSNESS -- which Zedekiah had so notoriously neglected; for
on these Terms alone could the Jews be permitted to remain in possession of
their own Land! -- If ye thoroughly amend your ways and your doings: if ye
thoroughly EXEOUTE JUDGMENT between a MAN and his NEIGHBOR; (if) YE OPPRESS
NOT THE STRANGER, (mark this ye transporters of the poor AFRICAN!) the
fatherless and the widow, and shed not innocent blood in this place, neither
walk AFTER OTHER GODS (see note in pages 142 to 152) to your hurt; then will I
CAUSE YOU TO DWELL IN THIS PLACE, in THE LAND THAT I GAVE TO YOUR FATHERS, FOR
EVER AND EVER. Jer. vii. 5, 1. A plain declaration this that they might for
ever have enjoyed that National Establishment which God had given them! no
foreign armaments could have had power to DEPRIVE them of God's Gift, had not
their own iniquities deprived them of God's protection! It was the NEGLECT OF
JUSTICE and NATURAL RIGHT, or (according to the scripture phrase) of JUDGMENT
and RIGHTEOUSNESS, which drew down GOD'S VENGEANCE upon them! This was
apparently THE PRINCIPAL CAUSE (let Britain therefore tremble for her notorious
national corruption and oppressions) OF THAT HORRID MISERY WHICH REIGNED IN
JERUSALEM DURING THE BABYLONIAN SIEGE. -- They that did feed delicately are
desolate in the streets! they that were brought up in scarlet embrace
dunghills! Lam. iv. 5. and again, They that be slain with the sword are better
than (they that be) SLAIN WITH HUNGER; for these pine away STRICKEN THROUGH for
(want of) the fruits of the field. The hands of the pitiful (or rather of the
affectionate or tender hearted) women have SODDEN (that is, BOILED, for want of
other food) their own Children, THEY WERE THEIR MEAT in the Destruction of the
Daughter of my People. Ibid. ver. 9, 10.

A more deplorable state of wretchedness cannot be described! These miseries
increased till the 11th year of Zedekiah, when (as we read in the 39th chapter)
" the City was broken up And it came to pass, that when Zedekiah the "King of
Judah saw them" (that is, Princes of Babylon, who sat in the Middle Gate, after
the CITY WAS BROKEN UP. See chapter xxxix. 2, 3.) and all the men of war, then they
fled, and went forth out of the city by night, by the way of the King's Garden,
by the gate between the two walls: and he went out the way of the plain. But
the Chaldeans army pursued after them, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of
Jericho: and when they had taken him they brought him up to Nebuchadnezzar King
of Babylon to RIBLAH in the Land of HAMATH, where he gave Judgment upon him.
Chapter xxxix. 4, 5. Compare this with the Note in page 48.


; and then was the DREADFUL VENGEANCE, so repeatedly denounced by the Prophet
against Zedekiah, ready to burst on the Head of that wicked Prince, who, in
addition to all his other Crimes, had so lately violated the solemn Covenant of
PROCLAIMING LIBERTY TO THE BOND SERVANTS, by neglecting to enforce the Laws of
God, and of his Country, in behalf of the poor OPPRESSED PEOPLE, that had been
compelled by their petty Tyrants to return into BONDAGE!

This was so notorious a contempt of JUSTICE and RIGHTEOUSNESS (like the
Toleration of SLAVERY in the BRITISH EMPIRE), that GOD'S VENGEANCE, before
denounced, was inevitably confirmed, and the KING was, soon afterward,
delivered up, with ALL HIS NOBLES AND MEN OF WAR that remained, into the hands
of their enraged Enemies, agreeable to the just decree of GOD (before recited
from the 34th chapter); his Sons were slain BEFORE HIS EYES Then the King of
Babylon flew the Sons of Zedekiah in RIBLAH before his eyes: also the King of
Babylon slew ALL THE NOBLES of JUDAH. Chap. xxxix. 6. See also Chap. lii. 10.


! and HIS EYES beheld THE EYES of the stern Tyrant of Babylon, as the Prophet
Jeremiah had very circumstantially foretold Thou shall not escape out of his
hand, but shall surely be taken and delivered into his hand; and THINE EYES
shall behold the EYES of the King of Babylon, and he shall speak with thee
MOUTH to MOUTH, and thou shall go to Babylon, etc. Chap. xxxiv. 3.


: but he never SAW more; for HIS EYES were PUT OUT by the order of the
implacable CONQUEROR Moreover he put out Zedekiah's Eyes, and bound him with
Chains, to carry him to Babylon. Chap. xxxix. 7. And in the 52d chapter, where
these circumstances are repeated, we find the following addition, viz. that the
King of BABYLON carried him to Babylon, and put him in prison to the day of his
death. Chap. lii. 11.


, who thereby fulfilled another not less remarkable Prophecy of Ezekiel to the
Captives at Babylon, telling them from God, I will BRING HIM TO BABYLON, the
Land of the Chaldeans; yet shall he NOT SEE IT, though be shall die there!
Ezekiel. xii. 13. Now to complete this tremendous Example of God's Judgment
against the Toleration of Slavery, I must add, that the King of Babylon SLEW
ALL THE NOBLES OF JUDAH, that is, ALL that were taken at that time; and having
put out Zedekiah's Eyes, as beforementioned, he bound him ( Slave-like) with
Chains, to carry him to Babylon, where he and the remainder of the Jewish
Captives (the former SLAVE-HOLDERS, whose OPPRESSION he had unjustly tolerated)
became (according to the phrase of our modern Slave-holders) the PRIVATE
PROPERTY of the Babylonian Tyrant and his Soldiers! They took the young Men to
grind, and the Children fell under the Wood Lam. v. 13. In the same chapter the
miseries of a foreign Jurisdiction are strongly delineated, -- Our Inheritance
is turned TO STRANGERS, our Houses to Aliens. We are Orphans and Fatherless,
our Mothers are as Widows. We have drunken our Water for Money; our Wood is
sold unto us. OUR NECKS ARE UNDER PERSECUTION; WE LABOR AND HAVE NO REST, etc.
A just recompense for SLAVEHOLDERS! and again, -- "SERVANTS" (or Slaves) "have
ruled over us," etc.mdash; They ravished the Women in Sion, and the Maids in
the cities of Judah! PRINCES are hanged by their hand: the faces of Elders were
not honored. THEY TOOK THE YOUNG MEN TO GRIND, AND THE CHILDREN FELL UNDER THE
WOOD, etc. Such a Retaliation of Tyranny must every nation expect that promotes
and tolerates Slavery and Oppression! Nothing but severe Repentance and
Amendment can prevent it! O that my countrymen would consider this!


-- under the heavy burdens of their BABYLONIAN SLAVE-HOLDERS. But, what is
still more remarkable, the Poor of the People (who were, probably, the Bondmen
and Bondwomen, whose Cause God had avenged by these heavy Judgments) were left
at home to possess the Lands and Vineyards of their former tyrannical Masters;
for NEBUZARADAN the Captain of the Guard lest of the POOR OF THE PEOPLE, WHICH
HAD NOTHING in the Land of Judah, and gave them Vineyards and Fields AT THE
SAME TIME. Jer. xxxix. 10.

Now if the African Traders, West India Merchants, and American Planters could
make it appear, that their imaginary PROPERTY in Negro Slaves, for which they
so strenuously contend, is as justly acquired, as the PROPERTY in Hebrew
Captives, which the Babylonians acquired by their providential success in the
Jewish War: yet this would not afford them any just excuse, or comfort, for
their wounded Consciences, if they should ever have grace to feel remorse;
because it appears, that this VERY BONDAGE of the JEWS (though apparently
according to their deserts) brought upon the CHALDEANS, in their turn, the same
deplorable slavish condition, which they (like our modern Slave-holders)
thought they had an undoubted right to impose on their imaginary Property, the
Jewish Captives!

And yet Nebuehadnezzar did not burn and depopulate the Cities of Judaea merely
for the sake of procuring Slaves, like the black Accomplices of the Royal
African Company. His War was just and honorable: he came to punish a
rebellious and wicked tributary Nation, which had, without any just reason (and
contrary to the express Commands of GOD by the Prophets), attempted to shake
off their Allegiance to the Babylonian Empire, to which they had long been
subject; for the wicked Jewish King Manasseh, the Son of King Hezekiah, had,
long before, been conquered, and carried into Captivity to Babylon And the Lord
spoke to Mauasseh and to his people: but they would not hearken. Wherefore the
Lord brought upon them the Captains of the Host of the King of Assyria, which
took Manasseh among the Thorns, and bound him with fetters, and carried him to
Babylon. 2 Chronicles. xxxiii. 10, 11.


, by the King of Assyria According to Bishop Usher this King of Assyria was
Esarhaddon, who (as he relates) annexed the dominion of Judaea to the Imperial
Crown of Assyria, and carried King Manasseh to Babylon; but, upon his
repentance, mercifully restored him to his Royal Dignity, though he was still
to remain subject to the Imperial Jurisdiction of Assyria: and afterward, when
the whole Assyrian Power devolved to Nebuchadnezzar, in the commencement of the
Babylonian Empire, Jehoiakim King of Judah, became his servant three years, and
then turned and rebelled against him 2 Kings xxiv. 1.
; but the kingdom being again conquered a few years after, in the reign of his
Son Jehoiachin, the King of Babylon carried the latter into captivity, and made
Zedekiah King in his room, who also rebelled both against God and the King of
Babylon, and thereby wilfully drew down those heavy judgments upon himself and
the kingdom!


; and the Assyrian Power afterward devolved to Nebuchadnezzar in the
Commencement of the Babylonian Empire, who had also himself, thrice before this
last War, conquered Judea; and Zedekiah, the last Monarch before the Captivity,
reigned expressly by his APPOINTMENT, so that his wilful rebellion clearly
justified the Babylonian Invasion; and add to this, that the Assyrians O
Assyria! the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is mine
indignation. I will send him against a hypocritical Nation, and against the
people of my wrath will I give him a charge to take the spoil, and to take the
prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets. Howbeit, he means
not so, neither does his heart think so, but (it is) in his heart to destroy,
and cut off nations not a few, etc. Isaiah x. 6, 7.


and Babylonians And now I have given all these lands into the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon, my servant, etc. -- and ALL NATIONS shall
SERVE him, and his Son's Son, until the very time of his Land come: and then
many nations and great kings shall SERVE THEMSELVES of him, etc. Jer. xxvii. 6,
7. -- Here is a manifest instance of National Retribution in kind!


were, in a very extraordinary manner, preordained and authorized by Almighty
God to punish the crying wickedness of the Israelites and Jews; which surely
may be alleged as a further justification of the conquest, and subsequent
Right of Service, (if it may be esteemed a Right) which both Assyrians and
Babylonians seemed to have acquired thereby.

But notwithstanding all these remarkable circumstances (which rendered the
claims of these Eastern Nations to the Jewish Captives, infinitely more
equitable than any claims that our modern slave-holders can produce in favor
of their unnatural oppression of the poor wretched Captives of Africa) yet both
Assyrians and Babylonians, as well as ALL the other neighboring nations that
were guilty of the like oppressions, drew down upon themselves a severe
national RETRIBUTION of Vengeance for presumptuously enslaving and oppressing
each other; for, though they were instruments in God's hand for the mutual
punishment of each other, and acted expressly by his permission for that
purpose, yet the Causes of Action, which they themselves were capable of
perceiving, and by which they were apparently moved, were very different: --
Avarice, Pride, Lust of Power, the unjust Dictates of Wicked and Corrupt Hearts
were the only personal Motives! but the Almighty can turn even these Evils to
his own Glory, for the execution of his eternal Justice; and in due time will
excute VENGEANCE even on the Instruments of his VENGEANCE; -- Wherefore it
shall come to pass, (says Isaiah in the 10th chapter) that when the Lord has
performed his whole Work upon Mount Zion, and on Jerusalem, I will punish the
Fruit of the stout heart of the KING OF ASSYRIA, and the Glory of his high
looks. For he says, -- By the strength of MY HAND I have DONE (it), and by MY
WISDOM; for I am prudent: and I have removed the bounds of the people, and have
robbed their Treasures, and have PUT DOWN (or enslaved) THE INHABITANTS like a
valiant (man). And my hand has found as a nest the RICHES OF THE PEOPLE: and
as one gathers Eggs (that are) left, have I gathered all the Earth, and there
was none that MOVED THE WING, or opened the mouth, or peeped. -- Shall the Ax
boast itself against him that heweth therewith? (or) shall the SAW magnify
itself against him that shakes it? (Thus God asserts the actual guidance of
his Providence in human Transactions, by representing the haughty unbelieving
Monarchs of Assyria as mere WORK TOOLS in his hands), as if the rod should
shake (itself) against them that lift it up, (or) as if the staff should lift
up (itself as if it were) no wood. Therefore shall the Lord, the LORD OF HOSTS
(or ARMIES, Jehovah Tsabaouth) send among his sat ones leanness, and under his
Glory he shall kindle a burning like the burning of a fire, etc; Chap. x. 12 --
16.

And after encouraging the remnant of Israel to stay upon the Lord, the Holy
one of Israel, in truth, by a promise THAT THE CONSUMPTION DECREED That is --
DECREED on account of the National Injustice and Tyranny described in the 1st
verse of the same chapter, viz. Woe unto them that DECREE UNRIGHTEOUS DECREES,
(i. e. make Laws that are contrary to Natural Right and Justice) Laws like
those whereby the AFRICAN SLAVE TRADE is promoted and encouraged, or like those
whereby MARRIAGE is restrained; like those also which tolerate the Oppression
of the poor Colliers, Salters, and Miners in Scotland; or like those diabolical
DECREES of UNRIGHTEOUSNESS and GRIEVOUSNESS, which some of our American
assemblies have wickedly PRESCRIBED against their poor Negro Slaves, many of
which I have particularly pointed out in my Representation against Slavery.
pages 49 to 73.


and THAT WRITE GRIEVOUSNESS, WHICH THEY HAVE PRESCRIBED: to turn aside the
needy from Judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my people,
that Widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless! And what
will ye do IN THE DAY OF VISITATION, AND IN THE DESOLATION (which) SHALL come
FROM far? etc. -- which was manifestly, THE CONSUMPTION DECREED. etc.


shall OVERFLOW with RIGHTEOUSNESS; (for the promises of blessings and
forgiveness are generally blended with the denunciations of God's Judgments,
in order to encourage Repentance and Reliance on God) the Prophet comforts the
Sufferers under the present Affliction with an assurance that it shall not be
of long continuance. Therefore thus says the Lord God of Hosts, O my People,
that dwell in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian: he shall smite thee with
a Rod, and shall lift up his Staff against thee, after the manner of Egypt
(that is, by holding them in A SEVERE BONDAGE, as the Egyptians had formerly
done In via Aegypti (...) Hebraismus, pro more, ritu Aegyptiorum. Eo modo quo
afflixerunt te Aegyptii, sic te affligent Assyrii. -- Vatablus. [ Caedet ille
quidem te baculo, suaque virga petet Aegyptiaco more] -- ut olim Pharao.
Castalio. -- Sicut olim in Aegypto servierunt, et abea tandem servitute
liberati. Clarius. Crit. Sac.


: "for yet a very little while" (said the Prophet) and THE INDIGNATION shall
cease, and MINE ANGER IN THEIR DESTRUCTION. And the Lord of Hosts shall stir up
A SCOURGE for him ( viz. the Assyrian) according to the Slaughter of Midian at
the Rock of Oreb ( viz. by the Militia of Israel under Gideon): and (as) his
Rod (was) upon the Sea, so shall he lift it up after the manner of Egypt Sicut,
inquit, olim aquis Rubri Maris Aegyptios prostravi sola baculi elevatione per
Mosen, etc. Clarius. Crit. Sac.


. And it shall come to pass in that day, (that) his BURDEN shall be taken away
FROM OFF THY SHOULDER, and his YOKE from off thy Neck, and the YOKE shall be
DESTROYED because of the anointing. etc. Again, in the 14th chapter, a similar
Prophecy is delivered against Assyria: -- I will break the Assyrian in my Land,
and upon my Mountains tread him under foot. And then he immediately alludes to
the cruel Bondage and Oppression which drew down the VENGEANCE OF GOD upon the
Assyrian: -- "Then," said the Prophet, shall his YOKE depart from off them, and
his BURDEN depart from off their Shoulders This VENGEANCE came upon the
Assyrians, not all at once, but at several different periods, that they might
have warning and opportunity to repent! One remarkable instance of it is fully
recorded in scripture, I mean that supernatural destruction of the greatest
part of their army in one night after Sennacherib had blasphemed God by his
Captains, and presumptuously proposed to carry away the Inhabitants of
jerusalem INTO CAPTIVITY: for that was expressly his purpose as signified by
Rabshakah -- MAKE AN AGREEMENT WITH ME BY A PRESENT, and come out to me and
eat, etc. until I come and TAKE YOU AWAY to a Land like your own Land, etc. at
another time Pharaoh Necho was charged with the execution of GOD's VENGEANCE
against them. (Compare 2 Kings xxiii. 29. with 2 Chronicles. xxxv. 21, etc.) After
which time we hear no more of the ASSYRIAN OPPRESSOR, (that Monarchy being soon
after swallowed up in the BABYLONIAN TYRANNY) so that his YOKE of course
departed FROM OFF the Nations he had ENSLAVED, and his BURDEN from off their
shoulders, agreeable to the prophesy above


This (is) the purpose (that is) purposed upon the whole Earth; and this (is)
the hand (that is) stretched out upon all the Nations. etc. Chap. xiv. 25, 26.

This seems to be a declaration, that GOD'S VENGEANCE against ASSYRIA for
TYRANNY and OPPRESSION We to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; and
dealest treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee: when thou
shall cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled; (and) when thou shall make an end
to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee! Isaiah xxxiii.
1. Here the Law of Retribution is clearly laid down. Commentators have
generally understood this to be denounced against Assyria.


should be a standing Example and Precedent for the Judgment of all other
Nations, but more especially of the Nations bordering on Judea, because there
are several other Prophecies concerning the neighboring Nations, which
sufficiently correspond with this example of VENGEANCE against Assyria (both as
to the mode, and principal, cause), sufficiently, I say, to prove, that a
similar fate to that of Assyria was the PURPOSE that was PURPOSED UPON THE
WHOLE EARTH. -- "For behold" (says the Prophet Joel, chap. iii.) in those days
and in that time when I shall bring again THE CAPTIVITY OF JUDAH AND JERUSALEM,
I will also gather ALL NATIONS, and will bring them down into the Valley of
JEHOSHAPHAT (signifying JEHOVAH IS JUDGE, or HAS JUDGED), and will plead with
them there for MY PEOPLE, and (for) MY HERITAGE ISRAEL, whom they have
SCATTERED AMONG THE NATIONS, and parted my Land. (And now the Prophet proceeds
to mark the Scandal of Trading in Slaves in strong ironical terms) And they
have CAST LOTS A poor Negroe whom I was so happy as to assist in procuring his
freedom, was won (I am informed) by his last master in Virginia, at a Game of
Cards, or some other such mode of casting LOTS.


(says he) for my People; and have given a BOY for a HARLOT, and sold a GIRL
for WINE, that they might drink. Yea, and what have ye to do with me, O TIRE
and ZIDON? (the Liverpool and Bristol The Slave Trade carried on at these two
places so far exceeds that which is chargeable to the Great Metropolis, (I mean
more especially in proportion to the immense general commerce of the latter)
that the guilt of London, in that particular at least, is very inconsiderable
when compared with the accumulated iniguity and bloodshed, for which the
inhabitants of the other two places must inevitably be accountable if they do
not repent! See the comparative state of the Slave Trade in page 147.


of Palestine, that were then become infamous by harboring the most eminent
Merchants in the SLAVE TRADE of those days) -- " Will ye render me a
RECOMPENSE?" (mark this, ye opulent African Merchants -- What RECOMPENSE can ye
make for such an abominable affront to the Creator of Mankind as your
detestable Traffic in Slaves! Cannot you be content with a lawful and fair
Trade in Gold-dust, Ivory, Gums, Wax, etc. etc. which the African Coast will
afford in abundance, but you must traffic in the BODIES of the poor wretched
Inhabitants, to support your Luxuries, like those who gave a BOY for a HARLOT,
and a GIRL for WINE! Are you a jot more righteous, who barter MEN, WOMEN, and
CHILDREN, by hundreds together, for SUGAR and RUM! Is this your RECOMPENSE to
God for all his Mercies? Repent in time, lest God should return your RECOMPENSE
upon your own heads; for he has declared in this same Text) -- " If ye
RECOMPENSE me" (that is, in such an unmerciful manner), swistly (and) speedily
will I return YOUR RECOMPENSE UPON YOUR OWN HEAD; etc. And in the next verse
but one, the Prophet marks the SLAVETRADE of Tire and Zidon as one of the
principal causes of his VENGEANCE: -- The Children also of Judah and the
Children of Jerusalem have YE SOLD unto the GRECIANS, that ye might remove them
FAR FROM THEIR BORDER: (but how much farther do the ENGLISH REMOVE THE POOR
AFRICANS FROM THEIR BORDER!) Behold, I will raise them out of the place wither
ye have SOLD THEM, and will RETURN YOUR RECOMPENSE UPON YOUR OWN HEAD: (Observe
how clearly THE LAW OF RETRIBUTION is here laid down), and I WILL SELL your
SONS and your DAUGHTERS into the hands of the children of JUDAH, and they shall
sell them This is not to be considered as a permission to the Jews to deal in
Slaves, but only as a prophecy of GOD'S retaliation upon Tire and Zidon, which
Grotius says was fulfilled when Gaza, Sidon, and Tire were afterward taken by
Alexander, Nempe cum Gaza, Sidon, et Tyrus captae ab Alexandro. Crit. Sac. Tom.
4. p. 645 z. for the Jews were undoubtedly guilty of sin when they fulfilled
the prophecy, and probably added thereby to their succeeding national
affictions under Antiochus, and other succeeding Tyrants; for the same may be
said of the Jews in this Case, that the learned Ferrerius observed on the case
of the Assyrians, who were pre-ordained by God to punish the Israelitos and
many other neighboring Nations for their Oppressions and other wickedness, For
though the Assyrians executed GOD'S wrath expressly by GOD'S permission, or
even as it were by the Divine Command, in prophecy, yet the Assyrians
themselves (as also the Jews after them) did not consider their actions in any
such light; for the only motives they were sensible of, were the dictates of
their own wicked hearts, and the love of unlawful gain! Ferrerius in speaking
of Isaiah's prophecy concerning the Assyrians, chap. x. 26. remarks -- Versus
24 (says he) dixerat quod Assyrius percussurus sit Israelitas, sicutAegyptius;
hic (viz. in the 26th verse) autem quod Dominus parcussurus sit Assyrios, sicut
Aegyptum. Justum cnim est, ut inquit Paulus, QUOD REDDAT DOMINUS VICEM IMPIIS
QUI FILIOS DEI DIVEXANT, sive Aegyptii sive Assyrii sint, ETIAMSI ^^^MIT^ENTE
VEL ETIAM JUBENTE DOMINO illud faciant: nam et quod INIQUO ANIMO ID FACIANT, et
propter alia quoque scelera, IRA DEI DIGNI sunt, etc. Crit. Sac. Tom. 4. p.
4780. See also note, in page 125, concerning Nebuchadnezzar quoted from Abp.
Sharp.


to the SABEANS, to a people FAR OFF; (an exact retaliation) for the Lord has
spoken (it). Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles: (or more properly, according
to the strict sense of the original word (...), among the NATIONS, for the
example ought indeed to instruct ALL NATIONS) prepare WAR, wake up the mighty
men, let ALL THE MEN OF WAR DRAW NEAR, let them come up. Beat your PLOW SHARES
into SWORDS, (thus the blessings of the Gospel of peace are manifestly reversed
to these nations which TRADE IN SLAVES; and indeed it has long been a proverb
with the poor Africians, that wherever the Christian Faith is spread, there
goes with it a SWORD and a GUN!) and your pruning hooks (continues the Prophet)
into spears: let the WEAK say I am STRONG! (Here again is another mark of GOD'S
VENGEAVANCE against oppressive Nations, viz. THE INFATUATION OF THEIR
COUNCILS.) Assemble yourselves! (says the Prophet) and come all ye NATIONS In
the common Translation it is rendered, "Come all ye Heathens;" but the original
word (...) more properly signifies the Nations, than the Heathens.


and gather yourselves together round about: thither cause THY MIGHTY ONES to
come down, O Lord. Let the Nations be wakened, and come up to the valley of
JEHOSHAPHAT, (i. e. the valley of JEHOVAH THE JUDGE) for there will I sit to
JUDGE ALL THE NATIONS round about. Put ye in the sickle; for the Harvest is
ripe: come, get ye down, for the press is full, the fats overflow; FOR THEIR
WICKEDNESS IS GREAT! MULTITUDES, MULTITUDES IN THE VALLEY OF DECISION! etc.
After which the Prophet denounces Judgment against two of these oppressive
Nations expressly by name -- EGYPT shall be a desolation, and EDOM shall be a
desolate wilderness; (and the principal reason of these judgments is also as
expressly assigned) for their VIOLENCE And the Egyptians " for their VIOLENCE,"
received from God A RETRIBUTION IN KIND, which is still more awfully expressed
by the prophet Isaiah, -- So shall the King of Assyria lead away the EGYPTIANS
Prisoners, and the ETHIOPIANS Captives, young and old, naked and barefoot,
even with (their) buttocks uncovered to the shame of Egypt! Isaiah xx. 4. -- A
lively description this, of the extreme misery and contempt with which the poor
wretched Ethiopian Captives, even to this day, are oppressed and vilified! --
But by whom? -- Not now, surely, by their old enemies, the Assyrians, for they,
long ago, received a just recompense for their Tyranny and uncharitableness,
and are wiped off from the face of the earth! and may we not expect that the
Almighty will also visit the modern Oppressors of the Ethiopians, whose
barbarous and unfeeling behavior toward the poor naked Ethiopian Captives is
equally notorious? -- May we not expect that the Assyrians, or men of Nineveh.
shall rise in Judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it! Matt. xii.
41. for they were previously engaged in a just war against the Egyptians and
Ethiopians: they were proveked to revenge by real Injuries -- by the lawless
incursions of those unhappy Sons of of Ham, and therefore they may seen to have
some excuse for their severities. But the Europeans (and more notoriously the
British Nation) are now guilty of the same horrid barbarity and
uncharitableness toward the Ethiopians, WITHOUT ANY PROVOCATION WHATSOEVER,
except the most detestable Lust for unlawful Gain and Power! -- Let my deluded
countrymen receive from me AN UNDENIABLE TOKEN of the apporaching DESTRUCTION
AND MISERY which must inevitably overtake them if they do not repent! -- The
Token, alas! is already upon them. -- Let them compare our present national
condition, with the several alarming circumstances, which preceded the horrible
debasement of the Egyptioans and Ethiopians above mentioned! even the best
Histories of those nations cannot furnish a more exact and lively description
of those Symptoms of approaching nations destruction, than that which was
declared by Isaiah in the spirit of prophecy! -- "I" (the Lord, or Jehovah)
will set THE EGYPTIANS against THE EGYPTIANS: and they shall fight every one
against his Brother, and every one against his Neighbor; City against City,
(and) Kingdom against Kingdom. And the Spirit of Egypty shall fail in the midst
thereof; and I will destroy the council thereof! Isaiah xix. 2, 3.


against the Children of JUDAH, because they have SHED INNOCENT BLOOD in their
Land. But JUDAH shall dwell for ever, and JERUSALEM from generation to
generation, for I will cleanse their Blood that I have not cleansed, for the
Lord dwells in Zion. Joel iii. " The PURPOSE" (beforementioned) that is
PURPOSED upon the whole earth, -- was manifested also in the Judgments
denounced against THE EDOMITES by the Prophet OBEDIAH, -- Thy mighty men, O
Teman, shall be dismayed; to the end that every one of the mount of ESAU may be
cut off by slaughter, (and then the Prophet assigns the usual causes of such
VENGEANCE.) For (thy) VIOLENCE against thy Brother JACOB, shame shall cover
thee, and thou shall be cut off for ever. In the day that thou stoodest on the
other side, in the day that the strangers CARRIED AWAY CAPTIVE his forces, and
Foreigners entered into his gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem, EVEN THOU
(wast) AS ONE OF THEM: (that is one that assisted to ENSLAVE them.) But thou
should not have looked on the day of thy Brother, in the Day that he became
a Stranger; (viz. in the day that their Brethren the Israelites were carried
away Captives into a strange land; for it seems, that even to be neuter, or
merely look on," like idle spectators, when the LIBERTY of their Brethren was
at stake, would have been criminal; but the EDOMITES added to this Crime, by
REJOICING at the Calamity, and joining the triumphant Tyrants;) neither
should thou have REJOICED OVER the Children of JUDAH in the day of their
destruction; neither should thou have spoken PROUDLY in the day of distress.
Thou should not have entered into the gate of my people in the day of their
calamity; yea, thou should not have LOOKED ON their AFFLICTION in the day of
their calamity; nor have laid hands on their substance in the day of calamity.
Neither should thou have stood in the Cross-way, to cut off those of his
that did escape; neither should thou have DELIVERED UP (or rather SHUT UP
(...) or CONFINED as in Slavery or Foreign Captivity, which by the Restoration
promised to the Captives, in the 20th and 21st verses, seems to have been the
case) those of his that DID REMAIN in the day of distress. For the Day of the
LORD is near upon all the Heathen (that is ALL THE NATIONS; and then follows
THE PURPOSE of RETRIBUTION that is PURPOSED upon the whole earth) As THOU HAVE
DONE, it shall be DONE unto thee: thy REWARD shall return UPON THINE OWN HEAD,
etc.

The like PURPOSE of RETRIBUTION was denounced against several Nations by the
Prophet AMOS, and first against the SYRIANS -- Thus says THE LORD for three
Transgressions of DAMASCUS and for four, I will not turn away (the punishment)
thereof: (nevertheless their unmerciful Tyranny over the Inhabitants of GILEAD,
is the only Transgression mentioned, -- "because" (said the Prophet) they have
threshed GILEAD with Threshing Instruments of Iron. But I will send FIRE into
the House of HAZAEL, (the King of Syria anointed by Elijah) which shall devour
the Palaces of BENHADAD: I will break also the Bar of Damascus, etc. And then
at last he denounces the ordinary punishment for Tyrants and Oppressors -- And
the people of SYRIA shall GO INTO CAPTIVITY unto KIR, says the LORD. (Amos i.
1 to 5.) This Prophecy was punctually fulfilled when AHAZ King of Judah hired
TIGLATH-PILESER King of Assyria to help him against the SYRIANS, for we read in
the 2 Kings xvi. 9. -- That the King of Assyria hearkened unto him (viz. AHAZ):
for the King of Assyria went up against DAMASCUS, and took it, and CARRIED (the
people of) it CAPTIVE to KIR, and slew REZIN. REZIN was that turbubulent and
oppressive King of SYRIA, who, in another prophecy, is compared to "a sinoaking
Firebrand." Isaiah vii. 4. The same "PURPOSE" of RETRIBUTION was also declared
by AMOS against the PHILISTINES -- For three Transgressions of GAZA, and for
four, I will not turn away (the punishment) "thereof:" -- and yet only one of
the four Transgressions is mentioned, which we may, therefore, reasonably
conclude to be the principal Transgression, viz. -- "because" (says the Text)
they CARRIED AWAY CAPTIVE THE WHOLE CAPTIVITY to diliver (them) up to EDOM:
Grotius thinks that this Transgression was committed when Sennacherib invaded
Judaea, and that many Jews upon his first approach fled to the neighboring
Regions, and that the Philistines, instead of protecting the poor fugitives,
who had done them no injury, SOLD THEM to the EDUMAEANS, as if they had been
taken in open war. Cum Sennacheribus Judaeam invasit, multi ad primum ejus
adventum in vieinas regiones se recepere, ut apparuit. Esa. xvi. 4. Philistini
hos Judaeos, qui nihil ipfis nocuerant, non ut supplices protexerunt, sed quasi
bello captos VENDIDERUNT Idumaeis. Crit. Sac. Tom. 4. p. 6473. Many other
commentators besides Grotius have supposed this Transgression to have been
committed during the troubles occasioned by Sennacherib's Expediton; but it is
not probable (though indeed it is possible) that this was the time to which the
prophecy referred; because, if it really was, the Prophecy foretold the
Transgression itself. as well as the punishment of it; for we find that the
Prophecy was delivered "in the days of Uzziah," whereas the Event to which they
refer, did not happen till many years afterward in the reign of Ahaz: there
are some instances indeed of God's vengeance being really denounced against
particular crimes even before the crimes themselves were committed, which I
shall show when I come to speak of Babylon; but in the case before us there is
no necessity for supposing any such anticipation, it being much more probable
that the offense, referred to by the Prophecy, was previously committed by the
Inhabitants of GAZA after the combined army of the Philistines and Arabians
had, by God's permission, subdued and plundered the inhabitants of Judea in the
reign of Jehoram, as related in the 2d Chron. xxi. 16, 17, etc. to which it is
referred in Clarke's Annotations. The cruelty of delivering up the CAPTIVES to
EDOM at the time abovementioned, would be much aggravated in the circumstances
of these times; for then the Edomites were become inveterate enemies to the
Jews, having lately revolted from Judah, and during that very reign had been
beaten, and many of them slain, in a pitched battle with the Jews, which
rendered them the more implacable; and therefore the unnatural cruelty OF
DELIVERING UP the Jewish Captives to Edom at such a time, must necessarily be
esteemed a most heinous offense in the sight of a merciful God!


or rather (as the word (...) more properly signifies] to cause (them) to be
shut up (that is, in Bondage) to Edom: in short, it appears from thence, that
they carried on the SLAVE TRADE with EDOM, as our Liverpool and Bristol
Merchants, and some at London (but few in proportion to the size of the place),
do at present with America! But they were allowed but a short space for the
enjoyment of their unlawful gains! The denunciations of VENGEANCE follows
closely upon the very mention of that UNNATURAL OPPRESSION! But I will send a
FIRE (said the ALMIGHTY) on the Wall of GAZA This Prophecy was probably
fulfilled in the reign of Hezekiah; for we read in the 2 Kings xviii. 8. that
he smote the PHILISTINES, even unto GAZA, and the Borders thereof, from the
tower of the Watchmen to the fenced City. But the Philistines of Ashdod, etc.
(if not Gaza also) began to feel the weight of GOD's VENGEANCE much sooner,
even by the hands of the King in whose reign the Prophecy was delivered; -- for
"as long as he" (viz. UZZIAH) sought THE LORD, GOD made him to prosper. And he
went forth, and warred against the PHILISTINES, and BRAKE DOWN THE WALL OF
GATH, and the wall of JABNEH, and the wall of ASHDOD, and built Cities about
ASHDOD, and among the PHILISTINES. And GOD helped him against the PHILISTINES
and against the ARABIANS that dwelt in GURBAAL, and the MEHURIMS, etc. 2 Chronicles.
xxvi. 5, 6, 7. And ASHDOD was afterward taken by the troops of SARGON King of
Assyria (Isaiah xx. 1.), under TARTAN, one of his Generals, who is mentioned
likewise in 2 Kings xviii. 17. so that this was probably when the Assyrians
went up against Jerusalem in the Reign of Hezekiah. A very severe VENGEANCE
against the PHILIPSTINES was afterward executed by the Chaldeans; and, long
after that, again by the Macedonians under Alexander.


, which shall devour the Palaces thereof; and I will cut off the Inhabitants
from ASHDOD, and him that holds the Scepter from ASHKELON; and I will turn
mine hand against EKRON, and the Remnant of the PHILISTINES SHALL PERISH, says
the LORD GOD! Amos i. 6, 7, 8.

The Prophet then proceeds with a Denunciation of the like "PURPOSE" of GOD'S
VENGEANCE against the opulent City of TIRE, and expressly for the same offense;
for the Tyrians were, probably, Confederates with the Philistines of Gaza, and
other Cities of the Phoenician Coast, when they assisted the Arabians to
OPPRESS and ENSLAVE the Inhabitants of JUDEA. -- Thus says the LORD; for three
Transgressions of TYRUS, and for four, I will not turn away (the punishment)
thereof; (now be pleased to remark, that though the Tyrians were notorious
Idolaters, and very wicked in many other respects, yet, here again, the
OPPRESSION of ENSLAVING THEIR BRETHREN (even of a different Nation) was the
only Crime that God was pleased, more particularly, to impute and point out to
them, as being most heinous in his sight) "because" (said the Prophet) they
delivered up the WHOLE CAPTIVITY TO EDOM (for TIRE was the Philistine
LIVERPOOL, it seems, which supplied Edom with SLAVES), and remembered not the
BROTHERLY COVENANT Probably alluding to the league that was made between
SOLOMON and HIRAM King of TIRE, (mentioned in the first book of Kings v. 12.)
and there was PEACE BETWEEN HIRAM and SOLOMON; and they two MADE A LEAGUE
together.


: but I will send a FIRE on the Wall of TYRUS, which shall devour the Palaces
thereof. Amos i. 9, 10. By another cotemporary Prophet (Isaiah) a RETRIBUTION
IN KIND was denounced against TIRE -- Is this your joyous City, whose antiquity
was of ancient days? HER OWN FEET SHALL CARRY HER AFAR OFF to sojourn. -- (Ire
pedibus suis in Captivitatem, says Clarius, Crit. Sac. Tom. 4. p 4905. that is,
just as the poor slaves are nowadays brought down on foot from the inland
parts of Africa to the slave markets on the coasts!) who has taken THIS
COUNCIL against TIRE the crowning (City), whose Merchants are Princes, whose
Traffickers are the Honorable of the Earth? THE LORD OF HOSTS HAS PURPOSED
IT, (plainly referring to the PURPOSE which he had before declared in the xiv.
chap. 26. to be PURPOSED UPON THE WHOLE EARTH, -- which I have shown to be for
the most part a RETRIBUTION IN KIND) to strain (or pollute) the pride of all
Glory, and to bring into contempt all the Honorable of the Earth. Isai. xxiii.
7, 8, 9.


The like purpose of God's Vengeance is next denounced against Edom, on account
of her notorious violations also of Brotherly Love; for the Almighty Father of
Mankind will not see his creature Man oppressed and vilified without revenging
the affront! -- Thus says the Lord; for three Transgressions of EDOM, and for
four, I will not turn away (the punishment) thereof; because he did pursue his
Brother with the Sword, and did CAST OFF ALL PITY (as our modern American
Slave-holders CAST OFF ALL PITY toward their poor RUNAWAY SLAVES! for I have
seen rewards publicly offered for the Heads of those poor oppressed People From
the Carolina Gazette (by Robert Wells) dated 30 Dec. 1774.

A HUNDRED POUNDS REWARD.
Run away upwards of twelve months ago, a Negro Man, named SALISBURY, a squat,
well-set fellow, about five feet five inches high, branded on the right breast
-- S," (N. B. Branded like a beast) "He formerly belonged to Richard Beresford,
Esquire and is supposed to be harbored about the plantation of Mr. John Wigfall,
in St. Thomas's Parish, where he has a brother. I will give a reward of Twenty
Pounds currency to whoever will apprehend the said Negro, and deliver him at
the Workhouse in Charlestown, or any of the Gaols in this province, or to me
at my Plantation in St. Bartholomew's Parish. I WILL GIVE THE SAME REWARD FOR
HIS HEAD" (N. B. The subscriber is absolutely guilty of Felony for offering a
price for blood.) And a further reward of One Hundred Pounds currency for the
discovery of his being harbored by a white person, and Fifty Pounds currency
if by a Negro, (though it is a moral Law of the Old Testament, a Command even
FROM GOD HIMSELF, not to deliver up to his Master the Servant that is escaped
from his Master. Deuteronomy. xxiii. 15.) to be paid on conviction of the Offender or
Offenders.

October 7, 1774. Signed, THOMAS SMITH.



and the shooting of runaway Negroes has even been encouraged by some of the
Plantation Laws! which is wilful premeditated Murder, such as God will never
leave unpunished); and his Anger did tear perpetually, and he kept his Wrath
for ever. But I (said Jehovah) WILL SEND A FIRE UPON TEMAN (the Carolina of
those times), which shall devour the Palaces of Bozrah. Amos, chap. i. II, 12.

The Prophet in the next verse denounces GOD'S VENGEANCE against the
bloody-minded Ammonites, for their horrid barbarity in murdering the Wives and
Children of their Enemies, MURDER being a crime still more heinous in the sight
of GOD than SLAVERY; because the robbing a man of his Life is a higher Act of
Oppression and unnatural Violence than Bondage, it being, indeed, the last
degree of Oppression that a Tyrant has in his power! -- Thus says the Lord;
for three Transgressions of the Children of AMMON, and for four, will I not
turn away (the punishment) thereof; because they have RIPPED UP THE WOMEN WITH
CHILD OF GILEAD, This example shows that God will severely avenge himself of
all such abandoned soldiers as those who kill Women and Children, for we may be
assured that no pretended Rules of War can justify such detestable outrages in
his sight, unless they can produce an express Commission from the Almighty for
that purpose, like that which was given to the Israelites against the wicked
Canaanites, etc.


that they might enlarge their border Probably the Ammonites (like some of our
Settlers and Planters at St. Vincents) coveted -- that fine CREAM PART of the
Country -- about Gilead, then in the possession of their neighbors; and might
perhaps stir up their public Financiers to settle an arrangement for the
disposal of the said Lands, without the knowledge and consent of the ancient
and lawful possessors, as if the supposed political necessity to enlarge their
border could justify ROBBERY and MURDER, by authority of Government! -- Against
similar crimes in Israel, the Prophet thus denounced God's vengeance! Woe to
them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds! when the morning is
light they practice it, because it is in the power of their hand. And they
covet Fields, and take (them) by viclence: and Houses, and take (them) away: so
they oppress a man and his house, even a man and his heritage. Therefore thus
says the LORD (JEHOVAH); -- Behold, against this family (apparently meaning
the Family or stock of that whole nation) do I devise AN EVIL from which ye
shall not remove your necks; neither shall ye go haughtily: FOR THIS TIME IS
EVIL. Mic. ii. 1 to 3. For your hands are defiled with BLOOD, and your fingers
with INIQUITY: -- none calls for JUSTICE, nor (any) pleads for TRUTH: they
trust in vanity and speak lies; THEY CONCEIVE MISCHIEF, and BRING FORTH
INIQUITY! etc. -- and the act of Violence (is) in their hands. Their feet run
to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood: their thoughts are
thoughts of iniquity; wasting and destruction or breaking (are) in their paths.
THE WAY OF PEACE THEY KNOW NOT; and (there is) NO JUDGMENT (...) i. e. right
or justice) in their goings! they have made them crooked paths: whosoever goes
therein shall not know peace. THEREFORE IS JUDGMENT (i. e. right or equity)
far from us, neither does JUSTICE (...) properly RIGHTEOUSNESS) "overtake us:"
etc. -- " According to (their) deeds," (or more properly) according to
RECOMPENSES (i. e. God's eternal laws of RETRIBUTION) "accordingly he" (i. e.
Jehovah) will REPAY, fury to his Adversaries, RECOMPENSE to his Enemies, to the
ISLANDS he will REPAY RECOMPENSE! Isaiah lix. to the 18th verse.


: but I will kindle a Fire in the wall of Rabbah, and it shall devour the
Palaces thereof, with shouting in the day of battle, with a Tempest in the day
of the Whirlwind: and their King shall GO INTO CAPTIVITY, (mark the proper
punishment of Tyrants) HE AND HIS PRINCES TOGETHER, says the LORD. Amos i. 13
-- 15.

Next in order the Prophet declares God's Purpose of Vengeance against Moab
(see the following chapter): -- Thus says the Lord: for three transgressions
of MOAB, and for four, I will not turn away (the punishment) thereof; because
he burned the bones of the King of EDOM into lime, (the Chaldee Interpreter
adds, (...), and plastered them like Chalk (or lime) in the House. This seems
to have been done in extreme contempt, to vilify the Edomites; and does not
agree with the account of the particular human Sacrifice made by the King of
Moab upon the Wall, mentioned in 2 Kings iii. 27. to which the margin of our
English Bibles commonly refers us; for that seems to have been a Sacrifice by
the King of Moab of his own Son "Suum" (viz. Filium) "inquam" (says Grotius)
non Idumaeae Praefecti, ut quidam colligunt ex Amoso ii. 1. ubi alia respicitur
Historia. Crit. Sac. Tom. 4. p. 2579.


, rather than a burning of the bones of the King of Edom. We may, however,
learn from this example, that God is offended with any contemptuous vilifying
of the Human Body, even when dead; and how much more then will he be offended
with those who vilify their living Brethren, by contemptously holding them in a
despicable Bondage!) -- But I will send a Fire upon Moab MOAB was condemned
also by another Prophet (Isaiah) for her want of Charity to the poor fugitives
of Israel and Judah in a time that God had delivered them into the hands of
their enemies, -- "Hide the Outcasts" (said Isaiah in his denunciation of
Judgment against MOAB) bewray not him that wandereth; Let mine OUTCASTS dwell
with thee MOAB; Be thou a Covert to them from the face of the SPOILER: for the
EXTORTIONER is at an end, the SPOILER cease, the OPPRESSORS are consumed out
of the Land. Isaiah xvi. 4.


, and it shall devour the Palaces of Kirioth, and Moab shall die with tumult,
with shouting, (and) with the sound of the trumpet: and I will cut off THE
JUDGE FROM THE MIDST THEREOF, and will slay ALL THE PRINCES THEREOF WITH HIM,
says the LORD. Amos ii. 1 -- 3.

To these Judgments of the several Nations the Prophet now adds the
Condemnation of Judah, left the Jews should imagine that GOD'S VENGEANCE was
only to be denounced against the Heathen Nations. -- Thus says the Lord; for
three Transgressions of Judah, and for four, I will not turn away (the
punishment) thereof; because they have DESPISED THE LAW OF THE LORD, [now the
Apostle Paul informs us, that all the Law is fulfilled in one word, (even) in
this; Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thyself. Galat. v. 14. and,
consequently, the OPPRESSION OF THE POOR (of which the Jews were notoriously
guilty, as I have shown) was (next to Idolatry) one of the most heinous
Transgressions of the Law, which principally drew down God's Vengeance upon
them, though it is not particularly mentioned in this place] -- and have not
kept his Commandments; and their lies caused them to err, after the which their
Fathers have walked. But I will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall devour the
Palaces of Jerusalem. Amos ii. 4, 5.

And last of all is declared the PURPOSE of Retribution and Vengeance, that was
PURPOSED upon the People of Israel, to whom the Prophet Amos was more
particularly sent, to warn them of their approaching CAPTIVITY, on account of
their notorious oppressions, and for the SLAVE TRADE in particular. -- Thus
says the Lord, for three transgressions of Israel, and for four, I will not
turn away (the punishment) thereof; because they SOLD THE RIGHTEOUS FOR SILVER,
and the POOR FOR A PAIR OF SHOES. Amos ii. 6. And in the next chapter the
prophet is directed to call upon their old enemies the Philistines and
Egyptians to bear witness to the cause of God's vengeance on his own people:
Publish in the Palaces of ASHDOD, and in the Palaces of the Land of Egypt, and
say, Assemble yourselves upon the mountains of SAMARIA, and behold the great
TUMULTS in the midst thereof, and the OPPRESSED IN THE MIDST THEREOF. For they
KNOW NOT TO DO RIGHT The Prophet Amos charges them still further with their
shameful perversion of JUSTICE and NATURAL RIGHT, in the 5 th chapter and 7th
verse, -- Ye who TURN JUDGMENT TO WORMWOOD, and LEAVE OFF RIGHTEOUSNESS IN THE
EARTH. And a little afterward he charges them with notorious corruption -- For
I know your manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins: they AFFLICT THE
JUST, they TAKE A BRIBE, and they TURN ASIDE THE POOR IN THE GATE ( from their
RIGHT). Therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that time: for it is an
evil time. He then warns them to make use of that Natural Knowledge of Good and
Evil, which all mankind inherit from our first parents -- Seek GOOD, and not
EVIL (says the Prophet): that ye may live: and so the Lord, the God of Hosts,
shall be with you, as ye have spoken. Hate the EVIL, and love the GOOD, and
establish JUDGMENT in the Gate, it may that the Lord God of Hosts will be
gracious unto the Remnant of Joseph. -- Thus the ISRAELITES might have saved
themselves from God's Vengeance by a timely repentance, but they were too
corrupt and wicked, it seems, to take warning: for the Judgment is,
immediately after, denounced on account of the said NATIONAL CORRUPTION AND
INJUSTICE. -- Therefore, the Lord, the God of Hosts, the Lord says thus;
WAILING shall be in all thy streets; and they shall say in all the highways,
ALAS! ALAS! and they shall call the Husbandman to mourning; and such as are
skilful of lamentation, to wailing. And in all vineyards shall be wailing; for
I WILL PASS THROUGH THEE, SAYS THE LORD!

Now let the inhabitants of Great Britain examine themselves, and enquire,
whether there are not CORRUPTIONS and INJUSTICE among them also, which may be
equally liable to draw down God's VENGEANCE? Whether their Representatives in
the great National Assembly, or "Congregation of the People," do not annually
encourage and promote the AFRICAN SLAVE TRADE, which includes infinitely more
OPPRESSION and INJUSTICE than the Israelites were ever guilty of! and whether
the poor Miners, Colliers, and Saliers of Scotland, who lately applied to them
for relief from the monstrous OPPRESSION and INJUSTICE of the unreasonable
Landholders (an oppression at least equal to, if not far exceeding the
Israelitish Bondage of the Poor) have yet received redress for the Injuries
done them? or whether, on the contrary, the Injustice (which never had any
other foundation but that of unjust Force and Usurpation) is not now confirmed
for a certain number of years longer by act of Parliament! But, O my
countrymen! let us call to mind (before it is too late) the dreadful
consequences of turning JUDGMENT INTO WORMWOOD, and of leaving off
Righteousness in the Earth! Let us remember the heavy Judgments that are
denounced against the Oppressions of the poor, and that there is ONE who will
surely avenge their cause, -- THE LORD (JEHOVAH) is HIS NAME that strengthens
the SPOILED against the STRONG, so that the SPOILED shall come AGAINST THE
FORTRESS. THEY HATE HIM THAT REBUKES IN THE GATE, AND THEY ABHOR HIM THAT
SPEAKS UPRIGHTLY. Forasmuch therefore (continues the Prophet) as your
TREADING IS UPON THE POOR, and ye take from him burdens of wheat, ye have
built houses of hewn stone, but ye shall not dwell in them; ye have planted
pleasant Vineyards, but ye shall not drink wine of them. For I KNOW YOUR
MANIFOLD TRANSGRESSIONS, and your mighty sins: they afflict the Just, they TAKE
A BRIBE, and they turn aside THE POOR in the Gate from their right, etc. Amos
v. 8 to 12.


says the Lord; who store up Violence and Robbery in their Palaces. Therefore
thus says the Lord God; and Adversary (there shall be) even round about the
Land: and he shall bring down they Strength from thee, and thy Palaces shall be
spoiled. etc. Amos iii. 9, 10, 11.

Thus it appears, that God was not less severe against his, own peculiar
People, when guilty of Oppression and Injustice, than he was against the
neighboring Nations for the like Offenses! And I hope the many examples which
I have given of God's Vengeance against these Crimes, and more especially
against the Crime of enslaving and vilifying Mankind, will awaken the attention
of my Countrymen in general, that they may seriously consider whether we have
not just reason to fear the effects of GOD'S VENGEANCE also upon GREAT BRITAIN
and HER COLONIES for similar Offenses!

Long before the present unhappy CIVIL WAR broke out between the Mother Country
and her Colonies, I thought it my duty to give fair warning to his Majesty's
Ministers Extract of a Letter from the Author to Lord --, dated the 18th of
February, 1772. -- His Majesty has been pleased, lately, to recommend to
Parliament the providing new Laws, for supplying Defects or REMEDYING ABUSES in
such instances where it shall be requisite; and, I apprehend, my Lord, that
there is no instance whatever, which requires more immediate redress than the
present miserable and deplorable SLAVERY of Negroes and Indians, as well as of
white English servants in our Colonies. I say immediate redress, because to be
in power, and to neglect (as life is very uncertain) even a day, in
endeavoring to put a stop to such monstrous injustice and abandoned
wickedness, must necessarily endanger a man's eternal welfare, be he ever so
great in temporal dignity or office, etc.


that some heavy VENGEANCE, must inevitably overtake us (according to the usual
course of GOD'S Providence) if the iniquitous SLAVE TRADE, and the Toleration
of involuntary Bondage, were continued; and that such monstrous OPPRESSION and
NATIONAL WICKEDNESS Extract of a letter from the Author to Lord --, dated the
4th of December, 1774.

-- If the seasonable warning against the crying national wickedness of
promoting the AFRICAN SLAVE TRADE, and tolerating SLAVERY in America, which I
seht about three years ago, in a private letter to Lord --, had been duly
regarded, I sincerely believe that the present misunderstanding, etc. and the
alarming consequences which now threaten us, would not have happened! -- Great
Britain and her Colonies seem to be preparing themselves for MUTUAL For all the
Law is fulfilled in ONE WORD (even) in this; Thou shall love thy Neighbor as
thyself. But if we bite and devour one another, take heed that YE BE NOT
CONSUMED ONE OF ANOTHER. Gal. v. 14, 15. See my Tract on "The Law of Liberty,
or Royal Law."


DESTRUCTION, which, alas! is too apparently merited on both sides: for such
monstrous OPPRESSION and NATIONAL WICKEDNESS cannot escape a NATIONAL
PUNISHMENT according to the usual course of God's providence in the World,
unless a hearty repentance and amendment should avert the impending vengeance!
etc.


cannot escape a NATIONAL PUNISHMENT, according to the usual course of GOD's
PROVIDENCE in the World, unless a hearty Repentance and Amendment should avert
the impending Vengeance.

This Doctrine is unquestionably demonstrated (I trust) by the several Extracts
from the Holy Scriptures, which I have inserted in the preceding pages: and the
proof of it (I thank God) affords me a double recompense for my labors in
collecting them; for it not only vindicates my previous assertions to the
Ministers of his present Majesty, but it confirms the similar assertions of my
own Grandfather, declared, near a Century ago, to the great National Assembly
of this Kingdom -- "Wicked men" (said he) may be happy and prosperous here, and
good men may suffer many afflictions and tribulations, without any the least
reflection on the justice or goodness of the great Governor of the World:
because there is a farther day reserved for the adjusting all men's rewards,
according to their works. But now the consideration of PUBLIC SOCIETIES and
NATIONS is QUITE DIFFERENT. NATIONS are not made to be IMMORTAL, but end with
the world. No SOCIETY, AS A SOCIETY, SHALL BE CALLED TO A FUTURE ACCOUNT; but
all the rewards and punishments they are capable of AS SOCIETIES, MUST BE
ADJUDGED AND DISTRIBUTED TO THEM IN THIS PRESENT LIFE. And therefore if we
suppose GOD to be the Judge and Governor of the World, and of all the Nations
in it; as well as he is the Judge and Governor of particular persons; we must
likewise suppose, that he administers all affairs so, that righteous and
religious NATIONS have IN THIS WORLD the reward of their virtue in the
blessings of peace and plenty, and all manner of temporal prosperity: and on
the other side, impious and incorrigible NATIONS are likewise punished IN THIS
WORLD for their wickedness; either by severe JUDGMENTS, OR BY A TOTAL
DESTRUCTION; as GOD in his infinite wisdom sees cause. -- The word of God does
all along bear testimony to the truth of this. -- There is no Judgment
threatened to any nation in the Holy Scripture (and abundance of nations are
there threatened) but it is upon the account of the Sins and Wickedness they
were guilty of. Which Sins if they repented of, so repented as to forsake them,
they might find mercy. And accordingly we find in fact, that GOD ALWAYS DEALT
WITH PEOPLE AND NATIONS ACCORDING TO THESE MEASURES, etc. -- And after citing
the examples of the Ninevites, Canaanites, and Babylonians, and after referring
us to the Greek, Roman, and even to the Turkish history for more examples, he
remarks concerning the Jews in particular, that -- every degree of PUBLIC VICE,
and departure from GOD's Laws, was always punished with PUBLIC Judgment. And
on the other side, every degree of PUBLIC Repentance and Reformation was always
rewarded with PUBLIC Happiness and prosperity: so that any one that could make
a right estimate of that nation, and how it stood as to VIRTUE and VICE, might
constantly make a Judgment likewise how it would fare with them, as to their
outward temporal affairs. I must confess (says he) that generally speaking,
there is little force in those arguments that are drawn from examples; but in
the case I am now upon, I think there is great weight in them. For though we
can not angue from GOD's dealing with one person, that he will just deal in the
same manner with another; yet as to NATIONS and KINGDOMS THE CASE IS OTHERWISE,
as I before said. For GOD's Dispensations and Providence to them, seem all to
proceed upon ONE IMMUTABLE FOUNDATION ( which will be THE SAME IN ALL AGES AND
COUNTRIES) namely, the expression and vindication of his justice and goodness
in this world. Archb. Sharp's Sermons, vol. 1. sermon. 8. entitled, Virtue and
Religion the only Means to make a Nation prosperous. The whole sermon is indeed
a complete and unanswerable argument against those sophists who contend for the
necessity of Political Evil, and of permitting and encouraging Vice in certain
degrees (as they shall think fit) for state occasions.


.

Can we claim a better RIGHT to the enslaved Negroes in the British Colonies
than the several ancient Nations, abovementioned, had to their Captive Enemies,
whom God had delivered into their hands? And yet, we find, they were made
mutual Instruments of Destruction to each other, on that very account!

Israel (I mean the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes) was the Scourge of Judah, Judah
of Israel: Syria was the Scourge of both; as also were Edom, Moab, and Ammon:
and Assyria was the Scourge of them all. Egypt, again, was the Scourge of
Assyria; and Assyria (under a Babylonish King) became afterward the severe
Scourge and Retaliator of Evils upon Egypt!

The opulent Tire, with her princely Merchants, suffered among the rest for her
iniquitous Traffic in Slaves These enterprising Traders, the first great
Navigators of the World says the sensible and benevolent Author of Britannia
Libera), having, in the course of their success and their grandeur, imported
for their own use a great number of SLAVES, they conspired, slew their Masters,
and all the Freemen (two only excepted, old STRATO and his Son, who were saved
through the GENEROSITY OF THEIR OWN SLAVE) took to themselves their wives and
daughters, with the whole city, and raised a new commonwealth; A DREADFUL
EXAMPLE, says Justin, to all the world, CELEBRE HOC SERVORUM FACINUS,
METUENDUMQUE EXEMPLUM TOTO ORB TERRARUM FUIT. Just. Hist. lib. xviii.


who nevertheless went on in their former course of ENSLAVING one another.
Britannia Libera, or a Defense of the Free State of Man in England against the
Claim of any Man there as a slave." p. 3.


; and the lesser Philistine States, Ashdod, Gath, Gaza, etc. did not partake of
the uncharitable Crime, without an equal share of Retribution!

These examples clearly demonstrate the necessity of observing the Apostle's
Advice: -- If ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye are not
consumed one of another (Gal. v. 15.): which is a striking representation of
the EXTREME DANGER of Oppression and the Want of Brotherly Lover; for surely no
Oppression can be more notorious and biting than that of enslaving others; nor
can the DANGER of being "consumed one of another" (according to the Apostle's
express words) be more apparent, than in the FREQUENT INSURRECTIONS which have
ever been the unavoidable consequences of Slavery! See an Extract from Mr.
Morgan's Book, entitled, "A Plan for the Abolition of Slavery," etc. printed at
the end of this Tract.


Can we reasonably expect, that the only exception to God's general rule of
National Vengeance and Retribution upon the Authors of Slavery and Oppression
shall be in favor of GREAT BRITAIN, which has so notoriously exceeded all
other Nations in the multiplicity and largeness of her dealings in the
MAN-TRADE Long before this additional load of national guilt had arrived at any
considerable height, the nation was supposed to be under a very dangerous
burden of Sin, which my Grandfather testified before the House of Commons, we
are not that innocent, virtuous, pious people (said he) that may certainly
reckon upon God's favor, and think ourselves in all cases sure of his
protection. For if the Doctrine I have now been insisting on to you, be true
Doctrine; then we of this nation can but entertain very small hopes of being
HAPPY and PROSPEROUS. Nay we cannot but apprchend MISERY and RUIN, and
desolation to ourselves; unless God be abundantly more merciful to us than we
deserve. And there can be no way to prevail with him to be so, but an UNIVERSAL
HUMILIATION and REPENTANCE! and this is the application I desire to make of the
point I have been now treating of. -- (With the same view and desire exactly is
the present address laid before the public, though the author was not aware
when the tract was sent to the press, that his ancestor had borne (such ample
public testimony to the truth of the same doctrine concerning the Law of
National Retribution, as he has since cited from his works,) -- If the measure
of God's dealing with NATIONS be always according to the moral state of them;
if their good fortunes be dealt out to them according to their virtues; and
Judgments be inflicted upon them, according to their provoking God by their
Sins; as we have said; good Lord! what a lamentable prospect have WE OF THIS
KINGDOM of what may come upon us? and what infinite reason have we thereupon,
immediately to try all the ways that are possible of making our peace with God,
that so INIQUITY MAY NOT BE OUR RUIN! Archbp. Sharp's Sermons, Vol. 1. Sermon. 8.
p. 215, 216. 9th edit. But the horrible abomination of the Slave Trade was only
in its infancy when my Grandfather made this declaration, and the baneful
tendency of it perhaps was hardly known to him, or he would certainly have
entered a zealous and particular protest against it! With such an accumulated
load of national Guilt, the necessity of a public humiliation and repentance is
become more and more obvious, especially as the long foreseen Vengeance of the
Almighty seems now ready to burst upon our heads! let us therefore earnestly
join in the necessary reformation "that so iniquity may not be our Ruin."


; that iniquitous and oppressive business of purchasing our poor unhappy
African Brothers, and Sisters ( Men, Women, and Children), and then forcibly
transporting them "far from their border," even to the opposite side (almost)
of this terrestrial Globe!

What is this, my Countrymen, but a notorious aggravation of that very crime
for which the Vengeance and Retribution of the ALMIGHTY was poured on the heads
of the ancient Tyrian Merchants, abovementioned. They SOLD the Captive Jews to
the Grecians, a neighboring People; but YE HAVE SOLD the poor Africans (who
never offended you) to the very distant Inhabitants of America and the West
Indies, THAT YE MIGHT REMOVE THEM FAR (far indeed!) "FROM THEIR BORDER." Have
we not reason to expect the same awful Decree of the Divine Justice which
immediately follows these words -- "Behold, I will raise them" (i. e. the
Slaves) out of the place WHITHER YE HAVE SOLD THEM, and will return your
Recompense upon your own head. AND I WILL SELL YOUR SONS AND YOUR DAUGHTERS,
etc. Joel iii. 7, 8. Have we not ample reason to fear, that God will make of
this Nation (in proportion to the magnitude of our guilt in Slave-dealing) a
tremendous Example of RETRIBUTION, to deter other Nations from offending his
Eternal JUSTICE, if a sincere and speedy national Repentance does not avert the
Evil? -- "THE LORD" (JEHOVAH) IS HIS NAME: that strengthened the SPOILED
against the STRONG: so that the SPOILED shall come against the FORTRESS. (Amos
v. 8, 9.) That says -- They shall SPOIL those that SPOILED them. (Ezekiel. xxxix.
10.) This latter Sentence of RETRIBUTION (as well as the first) was denounced,
indeed, against the Oppressors of the ISRAELITES; but yet the Justice of it is
equally applicable to the unprovoked Oppressors of the poor Africans! -- We
know not how soon a just national Retribution may overtake us! how soon the
Almighty may think fit to recompense the British Nation according to the work
of their own hands! or how soon he may withdraw his light from us, and leave us
involved in the same deplorable ignorance that the Africans themselves
unhappily fell into very soon, after they perverted (the Truth and Intention of
the Gospel, which was once planted (and that very early) even in the internal
parts of their vast Continent, as I have elsewhere shown! (See my Tract on the
just Limitation of Slavery, pages 21 to 26.) This lamentable Fall of Africa
'That AFRICA' (said he) which is not now more fruitful of Monsters than it was
once of excellently wise and learned men; that AFRICA, which formerly afforded
us our Clemens, our Origin, our Tertullian, our Cyprian, our Augustine, and
many other extraordinary lights in the Church of God; that FAMOUS AFRICA, in
whose soil CHRISTIANITY did thrive so prodigiously, and could boast of so many
flourishing Churches, alas! ISNOW A WILDERNESS. The wild Boars have broken into
the Vineyard and eaten it up, and it brings forth nothing but Briars and
Thorns: to use the words of the Prophet. And who knows but GOD MAY SUDDENLY
MAKE THIS CHURCH AND NATION, THIS OUR ENGLAND; which, Jeshurun like, is waxed
fat and grown proud, and has kicked against God, SUCH ANOTHER EXAMPLE OF THE
VENGEANCE OF THIS KIND. Archbp. Sharp's Sermons, Vol. 2. Sermon. 1. entitled,
Repentance the Means for averting God's Judgment, 5th edit. p. 22. Preached
before the House of Commons, April 11, 1679.


was the very example by which my own Grandfather, near a Century ago (wanting
only three years), warned the House of Commons concerning our national Danger.

But there is still one more great example against Tyranny and Oppression,
which must not be omitted: I mean the example of God's Vengeance against
Babylon, that great and terrible Scourge of all the other ancient Nations,
already mentioned in this Tract; for as her OPPRESSIONS were more general and
extensive, so her Punishment is more frequently and more fully declared in
Scripture.

The Prophet Jeremiah denounced the Law of Retribution against the Babylonians
in the strongest terms, as well in return for the cruel Slaughters they were
guilty of, as for the heavy Yoke of Bondage with which they oppressed the
Captive Israelites. See chap. L. -- Declare ye among the Nations (said the
Prophet), and publish, and set up a standard; publish, (and) conceal not: say,
BABYLON is taken, BELL is confounded, etc. For out of the North there comes up
a Nation against her, which shall MAKE HER LAND DESOLATE; (manifestly in return
for the cruel DESOLATION of Judea;) and none shall dwell therein (that is, in
Babylon): they shall remove, they shall depart, both Man and Beast, (Jer. L. 2,
3.) And to mark the Indignation, as well as the Cause of it, in the strongest
terms by the severity of Contrast, the Promise of a happy Restoration to the
Captives, whom they oppressed, is blended with the Sentence of their own
Condemnation: -- In those days, and at that time, says the Lord, the Children
of Israel shall come, they and the Children of Judah, together, going and
weeping: they shall go and seek the Lord their God. They shall ask the way to
Zion with their faces thitherward, (saying,) Come, and let us join ourselves to
the Lord in a perpetual Covenant (that) shall not be forgotten. My People have
been lost Sheep: their Shepherds (that is, their wicked Kings, see Jer. xxiii.)
have caused them to go astray, etc. All that found them HAVE DEVOURED THEM: and
their ADVERSARIES said, We offend not, because they have SINNED AGAINST THE
LORD In like manner, an Advocate for the African Trade, who distinguished
himself by the signature of Mercator, hoped to remove the odium of oppressing
the poor Africans, by falsely asserting, that they were descended from Canaan,
who was cursed by his Father Noah: -- Cursed be Canaan; a Servant of Servants
shall he be unto his Brethren. Treatise upon the Trade from Great Britain to
Africa, by an African Merchant, Appendix 5. See also my Tract on the Just
Limitation of Slavery, etc. p. 46 -- 49. wherein this Assertion of Mercator is
answered.


, the Habitation of Justice; even the Lord, the Hope of their Fathers. The
Prophet then immediately refumes the Burden of Babylon: -- Remove out of the
midst of Babylon, etc. -- Shout against her round about: she has given her
hand: her Foundations are fallen, her Walls are thrown down: for it (is) THE
VENGEANCE OF THE LORD: take VENGEANCE upon her; AS SHE HAS DONE, DO UNTO HER.
(Jer. L. 4 -- 15.) Here the Law of Retribution is strongly marked! And again in
the 17th verse: -- Israel (is) a scattered Sheep; the Lions have driven (him)
away: first the KING OF ASSYRIA has devoured him; and last this NEBUCHADREZZAR
KING OF BABYLON has broken his bones. Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts,
the God of Israel; Behold, I will punish the KING OF BABYLON and his Land, as I
have punished the KING OF ASSYRIA. (See the example before quoted.) And I will
BRING ISRAEL AGAIN TO HIS HABITATION, etc. -- Call together the Archers against
BABYLON: all ye that bend the bow, camp against it round about; let none
thereof escape: RECOMPENSE HER ACCORDING TO HER WORK; ACCORDING TO ALL THAT SHE
HAS DONE, DO UNTO HER; for she has been PROUD against the Lord, against the
Holy One of Israel. Therefore shall her young men fall, in the streets. etc.
And a little further the principal cause of God's (Anger is more particularly
expressed: -- Thus says the Lord of Hosts; The Children of Israel and the
Children of Judah (were) OPPRESSED TOGETHER: and all that TOOK THEM CAPTIVES
HELD THEM FAST; they REFUSED TO LET THEM GO. But mark, ye Slave-holders, what
immediately follows! -- Their REDEEMER (is) STRONG; THE LORD OF HOSTS (Jehovah
of Armies) (is) his Name; he shall THOROUGHLY PLEAD THEIR CAUSE, that he may
give rest to the Land, and disquiet THE INHABITANTS OF BABYLON -- A SWORD IS
UPON THE CHALDEANS, etc. See the whole 50th chapter.

The Law of Retribution is also strongly marked in the 30th chapter, where the
Prophet promises that Jehovah will BRING AGAIN THE CAPTIVITY OF HIS PEOPLE
ISRAEL AND JUDAH; (ver. 2.) and that JACOB shall be saved OUT OF HIS TROUBLE,
(ver. 7.) and more especially from SLAVERY, declaring, as the Word of the Lord
of Hosts, I will break his YOKE FROM OFF THY NECK, AND WILL BURST THY BONDS;
and STRANGERS shall no more SERVE THEMSELVES OF HIM. But they SHALL SERVE THE
LORD THEIR GOD Compare this with Levit. xxv. 42. For they are MY SERVANTS (said
the Almighty), which I brought out of the Land of Egypt; they shall not be SOLD
as BONDMEN.


, and DAVID their King, whom I will raise up unto them This is allowed, even by
the Jews, to be a Prophecy of the Messiah; for in the Targum of Jonathan it is
rendered (...), and obedient Meschiae filie David Regi suo. The Messiah is
reprented under the name of David (signifying a Friend) in three other places
-- twice in Ezekiel, and once in Hosea -- being the true Friend of Mankind,
whose principal Doctrine was universal Love and Good Will toward Men. And
Christ himself, after explaining the necessary Doctrine of Love (John xv. 9 to
13.), condescended to honor his followers with the reciprocal appellation of
FRIENDS: -- " Ye are my FRIENDS," (said he) if ye do whatsoever I command you.
Henceforth I call you not SERVANTS; for the SERVANT knows not what his Lord
does: but I have called you FRIENDS; for all things that I have heard of my
Father I have made know unto you. etc. Here is a clear ENFRANCHISEMENT of
Christ's Household: whereby we learn, that TRUE CHRISTIAN LIBERTY is acquired
by the Knowledge of GOD'S WILL, revealed to us by Christ; if we sincerely ask
the assistance of the HOLY SPIRIT, that we may act accordingly, then shall we
be Friends indeed!


. (See verses 8 and 9.) And he represents God as speaking to the whole Nation
under the personal figure of their Ancestor, the Patriarch JACOB, saying, I am
with thee, says the Lord, to save thee: though I make A FULL END OF ALL
NATIONS whither I have scattered thee, yet will I not MAKE A FULL END OF THEE
(showing that Israel was still the peculiar People of God): but I will correct
thee in measure, and will not leave thee altogether unpunished. (ver 11.) And
also after some further expostulation concerning the grievous affliction of
that peculiar People, and the cause of it, the Prophet proceeds, in the 16th
verse, to declare the Divine Judgment of a severe RETRIBUTION against the
Enemies of JACOB: -- Therefore all they that DEVOUR THEE shall be DEVOURED; and
all thine Adversaries, every one of them, shall GO INTO CAPTIVITY; and they
that SPOIL THEE shall be A SPOIL, and all that PREY UPON THEE will I give FOR A
PREY: for I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds,
says the Lord; because they called thee AN OUTCAST As it was manifestly an
offense in the sight of God to call Israel an OUTCAST during the former
DESOLATION; it, certanily, is not less so now, though that devoted People is at
present dispersed over the face of all the Earth, without a single Acre of
National Territory in any one place! for the scriptures gives us ample
assurance of a much more glorious Return of the Jews, than that from Babylon;
and the Apostle to the Gentiles has expressly declared, that God has not CAST
AWAY his people which he fore knew. Romans xi. 2. And in the 11th verse he says,
through THEIR FALL Salvation is come unto the Gentiles for to provoke them to
Jealousy. Now (says he) if the FALL OF THEM be the RICHES OF THE WORLD, and THE
DIMINISHING of THEM the RICHES OF THE GENTILES; HOW MUCH MORE THEIR FULLNESS?
etc. and again in the 15th verse -- IF THE CASTING AWAY of them be the
reconciling of the World, what shall the RECEIVING OF THEM BE, BUT LIFE FROM
THE DEAD? And the apostle also warns us NOT to boast against the Branches of
that Mystical Olive Tree on which the Wild Olive Tree of the Gentiles is
grafted, "for" (says he) if God spared not the NATURAL BRANCHES (the
Israelites) take heed lest he ALSO "SPARE NOT THEE." -- (and indeed we have the
greatest reason to acknowledge the great mercy of God in sparing this nation
hitherto, if we consider the many bloody persecutions of the Jews in this
Kingdom during the dark days of POPISH IGNORANCE, (many particulars of which
may be seen in Tovey's Anglia Judaica) or perhaps we may say, that many of the
bloody Civil Wars and other National Calamities, that have already distressed
this Nation, may have been inflicted on our ancestors for their unmerciful
Treatment of these wandering STRANGERS in persecuting, banishing, and even
MURDERING them in multitudes for the sake of plundering and robbing them of
their wealth! Let us remember the confident hope of the Apostle, that the
Israelites shall be again grafted into their own Olive Tree -- "for" (says he)
God is able to graff them in again. For if thou were cut out of the OLIVE TREE
which is WILD BY NATURE, and were GRAFFED contrary to nature into a GOOD OLIVE
TREE; how much more shall these, which be THE NATURAL BRANCHES, be GRAFFED INTO
THEIR OWN OLIVE TREE? and he adds, for I would not, Brethren, that ye should be
ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own conceits; that
BLINDNESS IN PART is happened to ISRAEL until the FULLNESS OF THE GENTILES BE
COME IN. And so shall ALL ISRAEL be saved: as it is written -- There shall come
out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from JACOB. For this
is my Covenant with them when I shall take away their Sins, etc. See the whole
chapter.


, (saying,) This (is) Zion, whom no man seeks after. etc.

In the 25th chapter also a severe Retribution is denounced expressly against
"the King of Babylon" and the Land of the Chaldeans, to confirm all. that had
been foretold by Jeremiah: -- I will make it (viz. Babylon, or the Land of the
Chaldeans) perpetual Desolations. And I will bring upon that Land all my Words
which I have pronounced against it, (even) all (that is) written in this Book,
which Jeremiah has prophesied against all the Nations. For many Nations and
great Kings shall serve themselves of them also (that is, by reducing them also
to Slavery and Bondage): and I will recompense them (now mark God's Law of
Retribution) according to their deeds, and according to the works of their own
hands. Jer. xxv. 12 -- 14.

And even the Prophet Isaiah, who lived long before Jeremiah, also denounced a
RETRIBUTION IN KIND against BABYLON, in as plain and intelligible a style, as
if he had been relating the history of things past, though the time of
delivering the Prophecy was long before the CAPTIVITY of JUDAH, and,
consequently, long before even the OFFENSE was committed, for which the
RETRIBUTION was denounced. See chap. 14. "For the Lord" (said Isaiah) will have
mercy on Jacob, and will yet CHOOSE ISRAEL, and set them in their own Land;
(this, observe, was foretold long before they were removed from it;) and the
Strangers shall be joined with them; (this was the case, particularly, of the
Edomites, after the return from the Babylonish Captivity;) and they shall
cleave to the House of JACOB. etc. -- And they shall take them CAPTIVES WHOSE
CAPTIVES THEY WERE; and they shall rule over THEIR OPPRESSORS. (This is a
manifest RETRIBUTION IN KIND.) And it shall come to pass in the day that the
Lord shall give thee (Israel) rest from thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and from
the HARD BONDAGE wherein thou wast made to SERVE, that thou shall take up this
proverb against the KING OF BABYLON, and say, How has THE OPPRESSOR CEASED!
The Lord has broken the Staff of the Wicked, (and) the Scepter of the Rulers.
He who SMOTE THE PEOPLE in wrath with A CONTINUAL STROKE; he that RULED THE
NATIONS IN ANGER, is persecuted, and none hinders. etc. Isaiah xiv. 1 -- 6.
-- They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, (and) consider thee,
(saying, is) this the Man that made the Earth to tremble, that did shake
Kingdoms? (that) made the World as a Wilderness, and destroyed the Cities
thereof? (that) OPENED NOT THE HOUSE OF HIS PRISONERS? etc. Ver. 16, 17. Mark
this, ye hardened Slave-holders, who are so tenacious of that usurped and
pretended property which ye claim in the Persons of your Fellow Men! Will ye
also refuse to OPEN THE HOUSE OF YOUR PRISONERS? Remember that the same God
still reigns, and never changes. If he spared not the first and most glorious
Monarchy upon Earth, he surely will not spare you, unless ye sincerely repent
and reform! God's Vengeance against Babylon was executed expressly on account
of the heavy Yoke of Bondage with which they oppressed their Captives. The
Judgment, and the Denunciation of it, was the more exemplary, as it was a
JUDGMENT IN KIND -- a manifest RETRIBUTION OF SLAVERY? The Language is awful
and majestic, as well as truly poetical; for the condemned Nation is
figuratively represented under the similitude of a delicate young Woman, or
Virgin, whereby the national Judgment is rendered (as it were) personal; and,
consequently, much more striking and affecting than it could have been in any
other way. "Come down" (said the Prophet Isaiah, chap. xlvii.), and sit in the
dust, O VIRGIN DAUGHTER OF BABYLON! SIT ON THE GROUND: (that is, to denote her
future abject state, when deprived of Royalty:) (there is) no Throne, O
DAUGHTER OF THE CHALDEANS: for thou shall no more be called tender and
delicate! The Prophet then proceeds to describe the deplorable state of the
most ABJECT SLAVES, which was now to be transferred from the Sufferers to the
Slave-holders themselves! He still addresses himself to the Imperial City under
the simile of a Woman, and gives that "Lady of Kingdoms" See ver. 5. -- Sit
thou silent, and get thee into darkness, O DAUGHTER of the Chaldeans: for thou
shall no more be called THE LADY OF KINGDOMS!


a humiliating information of her future employment and condition in SLAVERY:
-- Take the millstones, and grind meal: uncover thy locks, make bare the leg,
uncover the thigh, PASS OVER THE RIVERS. Thy nakedness shall be uncovered; yea,
thy shame shall be seen: I WILL TAKE VENGEANCE, I will not meet (thee as) a
man. etc. The Prophet, after giving assurance to Israel, that Jehovah, the Holy
One of Israel, would be their REDEEMER (that is, a REDEEMER from SLAVERY, both
temporal and spiritual), proceeds to declare the reason of God's severe
Vengeance against BABYLON in the 6th verse: -- I was wroth with my People, I
have polluted mine Inheritance, and given them into THINE HAND: thou did show
them NO MERCY: upon the Ancient have thou VERY HEAVILY LAID THY YOKE. And thou
said, I shall be a Lady for ever: (so) that thou did not lay these (things)
to thy heart, neither did remember the latter end of it. Therefore hear now
this, thou (that art) given to pleasures, that dwell carelessly, etc. --
These two things shall come to thee, IN A MOMENT, IN ONE DAY; the loss of
Children and Widowhood; they shall come upon thee in their perfection, for the
multitude of thy Sorceries, (and) for the great abundance of thine
Enchantments. For thou have trusted in thy Wickedness: thou have said, None
sees me. Thy Wisdom and thy Knowledge it has perverted thee. (Mark this, ye
little Philosophers and sophistical Deists, who even make it a question whether
there be such a thing as Providence in the World.) And thou have said in thine
heart, I (am), and none else beside me. Therefore shall evil come upon thee;
thou shall not know from whence it rises: and mischief shall fall upon thee;
thou shall not be able to put it off: and DESOLATION shall come upon thee
SUDDENLY Compare this with the above-recited passage in the 9th verse: -- These
two things shall come to thee, IN A MOMENT, IN ONE DAY, etc. The same SUDDEN
and UNEXPECTED VENGEANCE is also strongly described by Jeremiah: -- "Babylon"
(said he, in the spirit of Prophecy) is SUDDENLY FALLEN AND DESTROYED: HOWL FOR
HER, etc. Chap. li. 8. This exemplary VENGEANCE was denounced expressly on
account of the Babylonian TYRANNY over the Jewish CAPTIVES; for in a preceding
verse the latter are comforted, and informed of the RETRIBUTION determined
against babylon: -- "For Israel has not been forsaken" (said the Prophet) nor
Judah, of his God, of the Lord of Hosts, though their Land was filled with Sin
against the Holy One of Israel. Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver
every man his soul: be not cut off in her iniquity; for this is THE TIME of the
LORD'S VENGEANCE; he will render unto her A RECOMPENSE. Also in the 24th verse
of the same chapter the RETRIBUTION is clearly declared: -- I will render unto
Babylon, and to all the Inhabitants of Chaldea, all their evil that they have
done in Zion in your sight, says the Lord. etc. And in the 49th verse also: --
As Babylon (has caused) the slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon shall fall
the slain of all the Earth. etc.


, (which) thou shall not know. Stand now with thine Enchantments, and with the
multitude of thy Sorceries, wherein thou have labored from thy youth; if so be
thou shall be able to profit, if so be thou may prevail. Thou art wearied
with the multitude of thy Councils. Let now the Astrologers, the Star-gazers
(for Babylon was famous for her very ancient Royal Observatory), the monthly
Prognosticators stand up, and save thee from (these things) that shall come
upon thee. Behold, they shall be as stubble; the FIRE shall BURN THEM; they
shall not deliver themselves from the power of the FLAME: etc. Isaiah xlvii. 1
-- 14.

The Babylonians were Worshippers of Fire; so that the abovementioned
Denunciation of Fiery Vengeance seems to be peculiarly applicable: and it is
remarkable, that the King of Babylon had recourse to his Astrologers The King
cried aloud to bring in the Astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the Soothsayers,
etc. viz. to interpret the handwriting on the wall, mentioned in the Book of
Daniel, chap. v. But they were ignorant of their approaching destruction!


(agreeable to this Prophecy) in the dreadful night when the Medes and Persians
were to enter his Capital City; for these Nations were expressly called upon by
name as the appointed Instruments of GOD'S VENGEANCE " Make bright the ARROWS"
(for the Medes and Persians were famous Archers); gather the shields; the Lord
has raised up the Spirit of the Kings OF THE MEDES: for his device (is)
against BABYLON to destroy it; because it (is) the VENGEANCE OF THE LORD, THE
VENGEANCE OF HIS TEMPLE. Jer. li. 11. And in the 27th verse the Prophet
expressly names the Kingdoms from whence the several Armies that came with the
MEDES and PERSIANS were raised: -- Set ye up a standard in the Land, blow the
trumpet among the Nations, prepare the Nations against her, call together
against her the Kingdoms of ARARAT. ( viz. in the neighborhood of Armenia),
"MINNI" (or Aram-Minni, the Armenians themselves), " and ASHKENAZ" ( viz. the
Nations descended from the eldest Son of Gomer; who were nearly allied in blood
to the Medes, Madai their Ancestor being a Brother of Gomer, as also of Magog,
from whom the Turks have since descended, and all of them from the same
neighborhood). "Appoint a Captain against her" (who is afterward declared to
be CYRUS); cause the HORSES to come up as the rough Caterpillars (the Persians,
as also the Parthians, and after them the Turks, likewise were ever famous for
their Cavalry); prepare against her the Nations, with the Kings of the MEDES,
the Captains thereof, and all the Rulers thereof, and all the Land of his
Dominion. etc. And in ver. 48 he says, For the Spoilers, SHALL COME UNTO HER
FROM THE NORTH. The Prophet Isaiah also distinctly pointed out the same
Instruments of GOD'S VENGEANCE against Babylon: -- Lift ye up the Banner upon
THE HIGH MOUNTAIN; exalt the voice unto them: etc. describing the first
mustering of the confederate Nations against the overgrown tyrannical power of
Babylon: -- The noise of a multitude IN THE MOUNTAINS (probably meaning the
Mountains of Ararat, etc. mentioned by Jeremiah) like as of a great People; a
tumultuous noise of the Kingdoms of Nations gathered together: THE LORD OF
HOSTS ( viz. Jehovah of Armies) mustereth the Host of the Battle. (Here we see
the proper meaning of the Lord of Hosts.) They come from a far Country, from
the end of Heaven, (even) the Lord and the Weapons of his indignation, to
destroy the whole land, etc. Behold I will stir up the MEDES against them,
which shall not regard Silver; and (as for) Gold they shall not delight in it
(Their) Bows also (for the Medes were eminent Archers) shall dash the young men
to pieces: and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their Eye
shall not spare the Children. And BABYLON the Glory of Kingdoms, the beauty of
the Chaldees excellency shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. etc.
Chap. xiii. 2 -- 19. Again in 21st chapter the same Prophet distinctly names
the Medes and Persians to be the instruments of God's retribution against
BABYLON. A grievous Vision is declared unto me. The Treacherous Dealer deals
treacherously, and the Spoiler spoileth. Go up, O ELAM! (for the Persians were
descended from the Patriarch Elam, the Son of Shem, mentioned in Genesis x. 22.
as Josephus observes in his Antiq. Lib. i. c. 7. (...). Besiege O MEDIA: all
the sighing thereof have I made to cease. Therefore are my loins filled with
pain: (the Prophet seems to describe the consternation of the King of Babylon
just before his destruction) Pangs have taken hold upon me, as the Pangs of a
Woman that travaileth: I WAS BOWED DOWN AT THE HEARING (of it), viz. of
Daniel's interpretation of the handwriting upon the wall of the Banqueting
House. " I was dismayed at the seeing (of it)" (probably meaning the miraculous
appearance of the hand which wrote) My heart PANTED, fearfulness affrighted me!
Isaiah xxi. 2 -- 4. The extreme fear which really possessed the King of Babylon
in that dreadful time of retribution, is strongly described by Daniel who was
an eyewitness of it. (Chap. v. 6.) viz. That the joints of his loins were
loosed, and his knees smote one against another.

The Medes and Persians and their associates are also described by Jeremiah, as
well as the extreme fear and anguish of the King of Babylon, on hearing the
report of them -- "Behold" (said the Prophet) a people shall come FROM THE
NORTH (Armenia, Media, etc. being to the north of Mesopotamia or Babylonia) and
a great nation, and many Kings shall be raised up from the coasts of the earth.
They shall hold the bow and the lance: they are cruel, and will not show mercy;
their voice shall roar like the sea, AND THEY SHALL RIDE UPON HORSES. (See the
remark above concerning the Pensian Cavalry, the Persians having obtained that
very name on account of their character as horsemen, for Perse, or Pheresh,
signifies a Horseman, as well as Parth or Phereth) every one put in array like
a man to the battle, against thee, O Daughter of Babylon. The King of Babylon
has heard the report of them, and his hands waxed feeble: Anguish took hold of
him, and Pangs as of a Woman in Travail, etc. Chap. l. 41 -- 43.


; and the horrors of that fatal night were plainly foretold: -- The night of my
pleasure (says the Prophet, manifestly referring to the impious midnight
carousal mentioned by Daniel, by Herodotus, and Xenophon) has he turned into
FEAR unto me (the excess of which is described in the former verses, quoted in
the preceding Note). PREPARE THE TABLE, watch in the WATCHTOWER For the
Babylonians trusted in their Walls and Towers, as appears also by Jeremiah's
prophecy on the same occasion, Set up the Standard upon the Walls of Babylon --
make the watch strong, set up the Watchmen, prepare the ambushes, etc. Jer. li.
12.


, EAT, DRINK. ARISE, YE PRINCES It appears by the account of Xenophon, that
when Gobryas and his men first entered the Palace in that fatal night, they
found the King and his Princes assembled, and the King standing with a drawn
scymitar in his hand, ready to oppose them (notwithstanding his extreme
consternation just before, on hearing the miraculous prediction of his fate),
that he might endeavor to persuade his Princes to stand by him, and resist the
Enemy; though, indeed, the learned Vitringa supposes. that the words arise, ye
Princes, and anoint the shield refer to the Speech of Cyrus just before the
assault, recorded likewise by Xenophon -- A (...), etc.


and anoint the shield, etc. Isaiah xxi. 4, 5.

The Prophet Jeremiah also alludes to the same fatal Babylonian supper, which
seems to have been intended as a Festivity to the honor of their False Deities
We read in Daniel v. 4. that they DRANK WINE, and PRAISED THE GODS OF GOLD, and
OF SILVER, of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.


, in order to insure success against the Besiegers: -- In their heat (or in
their anger, that is, against their Enemies in the War) I will make their
FEASTS, and I will make them DRUNKEN, that they may rejoice, and sleep a
perpetual sleep, and not wake, says the Lord. I will bring them down LIKE
LAMBS to the slaughter (that is, without opposition or resistance on their part
Which is described also in the 40th verse of "the same chapter: -- The mighty
men of Babylon have forborne to fight, they have remained in their holds; THEIR
MIGHT HAS FAILED, they BECAME AS WOMEN: they (that is, the Enemy) have burned
her dwelling places; her bars are broken. One post shall run to meet another,
TO SHOW THE KING OF BABYLON that his City is taken at one end, and that the
passages are stopped, and the reeds they have burned with FIRE, and the men of
war are affrighted. etc.


, like Rams with He-goats. How is Sheshach taken! and how is the praise of the
whole Earth surprised! (alluding to the unexpected entry of the Enemy;) How is
Babylon become an astonishment among the Nations! etc. Jer. li. to ver. 42. And
the manner of bringing about this VENGEANCE, as well as the REASON of it, is
further described in the same chapter: -- For the Lord God of RECOMPENSES (said
the Prophet, ver. 56.) shall surely REQUITE. And I will MAKE DRUNK her PRINCES
and her WISE MEN, her CAPTAINS and her RULERS, and her mighty men: and they
shall SLEEP A PERPETUAL SLEEP, and not wake, says the King, whose name is the
Lord of Hosts ( viz. Jehovah of Armies). Thus says the Lord of Hosts; The
broad walls of Babylon shall be utterly broken, and her high gates shall be
burned with fire, and the people shall labor in vain, and the folk in the
fire, and they shall be weary. Jer. li. 56 -- 58.

The Armies of God's Wrath upon Babylon were led by Cyrus, who was expressly
called upon by name, and appointed to this service about two hundred years
before he was born Clank's Annotations.
; and Deliverance also by his hand from Bondage was promised, at the same time,
to the Jews, even many years before they were carried into Captivity: --
Remember these, O Jacob and Israel; for thou (art) my Servant: I have formed
thee; thou (art) my Servant: O Israel, thou shall not be forgotten of me. I
have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud, thy sins;
return unto me; for I have redeemed thee (that is, from the Babylonish Slavery,
as the remainder of the chapter will show). Sing, O ye Heavens; for the Lord
has done (it): shout, ye lower parts of the Earth: break forth into singing,
ye Mountains, O Forest, and every Tree therein: for the Lord has redeemed
Jacob If the Redemption of the Jews even from Temporal Slavery was esteemed a
subject of Joy and Triumph to the Universe (Heaven and Earth), how much more
will the world have cause to rejoice when the Lord shall redeem them also from
that spiritual Slavery and hardness of heart, in which they remain at present;
how much more interesting to all the world will be their last great and
glorious return to their Redeemer! "If the fall of them" (said the Apostle
Paul) be the riches of the world, and the diminishing of them the Riches of the
Gentiles; how much more their fullness? Romans xi. 12. and he tells us again in
the 25th verse, That Blindness in part is happened to Israel until the fullness
of the Gentiles be come in, and so shall ALL ISRAEL be saved; etc. and again in
the 32d verse -- that God has included them ALL IN UNBELIEF that he might have
mercy upon ALL.


, and glorified himself in Israel. Thus says the Lord THY REDEEMER, and he
that formed thee from the Womb; I (am) the LORD (Jehovah), that makes all
(things); that stretches forth the Heavens alone; that spreads abroad the
Earth by myself: that frustrateth the Tokens of the Liars, and makes Diviners
mad; that turns Wise (Men) backward, and makes their Knowledge foolish;
(referring, probably, to the unprofitable Sciences and vain Politics of the
Chaldeans;) that confirms the Word of his Servant, and performs the Counsel
of his Messengers; that says to JERUSALEM, THOU SHALL BE INHABITED (that is,
after the appointed Desolation), and to the Cities of JUDAH, Ye shall be built,
and I will raise up the decayed places thereof: that says to the Deep
(whereby, according to the Targum, BABEL is meant), Be DRY; and I will DRY UP
thy Rivers: (most probably alluding to the successful stratagem of Cyrus to dry
up the Rivers by altering their Course, whereby he gained an unsuspected
passage into the City through the emptied Channels "In the language of the
Prophets" (says Mr. Cruden in his Concordance) Waters often denote a great
multitude of people; -- and this prophecy perhaps might allude to the vast
conflux of people at Babylon; that God would dry them up by making the place
desolate; but yet the literal sense is certainly to be preferred, because it
seems to have had a literal accomplishment in the successful stratagem of Cyrus
abovementioned. -- Certe de Babylone est sermo, (says the learned Forerius) per
quam fluebant flumina Tigris and Euphrates; quorum cursum avertit Cyrus, ut
exsiccato alveo subintrarent Milites Civitatem, etc. Crit. Sac. Tom. 4. p.
5186. And Grotius upon the same Text says, Hoc pertinet ad id quod Cyrus fecit
ut Babylonem caperet: amnem cnim Euphratem diffidit and part ejus in lacus
abducta per alveum veterem in urbem ingressus est. Historia est apud Jeremiam
li. 32. and apud Herodotum.


that says of CYRUS, (he is) my SHEPHERD, and shall PERFORM ALL MY PLEASURE;
even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shall be built; and to the Temple, Thy
Foundation shall be laid. Isaiah xliv. 21 -- 28. And in the 45th chapter the
great Restorer of temporal Liberty is further revealed: -- Thus says the Lord
to his Anointed, to CYRUS, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue Nations
before him; and I will loose the loins of Kings; (see the former account
concerning the extreme fear of the King of Babylon and his Princes;) to OPEN
before him THE TWO-LEAVED GATES; and THE GATES SHALL NOT BE SHUT. (Compare this
with Zenophon's Account of the Palace Gates being OPENED on the first Alarm.) I
will go before thee and make the crooked places straight: I will break in
pieces the Gates of Brass, and cut in sunder the Bars of Iron: and I will give
thee the Treasures of Darkness, and hidden riches of Secret places, (alluding
probably to the immense quantities of Gold in the secret Chapels of the
Babylonish Idols within the great ancient Herodotus, who was at Babylon before
the Persian Conquest, gives some account of this, according to the intelligence
he had received from the Babylonish Priests (for strangers were not permitted
to see them), whereby they might with great propriety be called -- The "hidden
riches of secret places;" and they were also very properly called Treasures of
Darkness, being dedicated to Demons; for the greatest part of the gold was
worked up into the various imaginary forms of the false Deities. There was one
Golden Idol of Jupiter of an immense size.


Tower.) that thou may know that I the Lord, which call (thee) BY THY NAME,
(am) the God of Israel. And in the next verse the Prophet assigns the reason
why the Almighty thus called upon CYRUS, viz. -- for Jacob my Servant's sake,
and Israel mine elect, I have even called thee BY THY NAME: I have SURNAMED
THEE, though thou have not known me. I (am) the Lord, (or rather I (am)
JEHOVAH) and (there is) none else, (there is) no God beside me: I girded thee,
(or strengthened thee) though thou have not known me, etc. and God's PURPOSE in
raising up CYRUS is still more clearly declared in the 13th verse, -- I have
raised him up in RIGHTEOUSNESS, and I will DIRECT ALL HIS WAYS: he shall BUILD
MY CITY, and HE SHALL LET GO MY CAPTIVES, (mark this ye wretched Slave-holders)
NOT FOR PRICE, NOR REWARD, says the Lord of Hosts; and accordingly the
Proclamation of Freedom to the Jews and the Decree for rebuilding the Temple
were made in the first year of Cyrus. See Ezra i. 1.

Now let my Readers seriously compare these accounts of God's peculiar favor
to CYRUS, THE RESTORER OF LIBERTY, with the accounts (which I have already
recited) of GOD'S opposite treatment of that man who OPENED NOT THE HOUSE OF
HIS PRISONERS. Isaiah xiv. 17.

Cyrus by the Almighty was expressly called, in the 45th chapter of Isaiah,
"HIS ANOINTED:" -- Thus says the Lord to HIS ANOINTED, to CYRUS; and (...),
literally to his Messiah In the Septuagint the passage is rendered (...), and
literally from thence in the Latin Vulgate "Christo meo Cyro," to Cyrus my
Christ. By Munster it is rendered MESCHIAE SUO; hoc est (says he) Regi suo.
Vocatur autem CORESCH seu CYRUS MESCHIAS and Rex Domini, quod ille ordinaverit
eum in Regem per quem disposuerat devastare Regnum Babylonicum, quodque
CHRISTI: VERY MESCHIAE Typum gereret. Crit. Sac. Tom. 4. p. 5190. And the
learned Forerius, upon the same Text, remarks as follows: Nomine (...) Reges
propter UNCTIONEM dicebantur. CYRUM autem SUUM REGEM vocat Dominus quod ab eo
electus fuisset, and quod ad implendam voluntatem suam eum destinasset. Illi
etenim Reges qui servis Dei favent, qui eos IN LIBERTATEM ASSERUNT, qui hosts
eorum oppugnant, digni sunt qui DEI REGES dicantur. Verum enimvero quia de
reductione captivitatis instituebat sermonem, de Cyro, per quem eos reducturus
erat, plura dicendi cepit occasionem, quod is esset CHRISTI DOMINI Typus and
Figura. Crit. Sac. Tom. 4. p. 5194.


, to Cyrus, etc. for Cyrus, by freely restoring a great Nation to their natural
liberty from a heavy Bondage under the Babylonian Tyrant, might justly be
esteemed a Type of that future great Restorer to universal Liberty, foretold by
the same Prophet, who was afterward to enfranchise all Mankind from a much
worse Bondage under the Empire of Satan The Spirit of the Lord God (is) upon
me; because the Lord ( viz. Jehovah) HAS ANOINTED ME to preach good tidings
unto the meek; he has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to PROCLAIM
LIBERTY TO THE CAPTIVES, and the OPENING OF THE PRISON TO (them that are)
BOUND; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and THE DAY OF VENGEANCE OF
OUR GOD, etc. Isaiah lxi. 1, 2. And also in a former chapter: -- To open the
blind eyes, to BRING OUT THE PRISONERS FROM THE PRISON, (and) them that sit in
darkness out of the PRISONHOUSE. etc. Chap. xlii. 7. This Prophecy of Isaiah,
that Christ should PROCLAIM LIBERTY TO THE CAPTIVES, was acknowledged and read,
even by CHRIST himself, in the Synagogue of Nazareth on the Sabbathday The
Evangelist Luke gives an account of this remarkable event chap. iv. and seems
to have blended together the two Prophecies which I have recited above, as
neither of them singly will answer exactly the quotation he has given from
Isaiah, though, taken together, they amount very nearly to the same thing.


, and declared to be then fulfilled: -- This day (said our Lord) is this
Scripture fulfilled in your ears. But alas! the greatest part of the Nation
obstinately and wickedly rejected that GLORIOUS FREEDOM which was then
proclaimed; whereby they drew down God's severe Vengeance upon themselves,
being soon after deprived even of that temporal Inheritance, (which they seemed
to value above all other things) after suffering the most extraordinary
slaughters and calamities of an unsuccessful and destructive war in defense of
it, and of their TEMPORAL LIBERTIES! And they remain in exile to this day, a
living Testimony to the Truth of Prophecy "And when he" (Jesus) "was come near"
(that is, to Jerusalem) he beheld the City, and WEPT OVER IT, saying, If thou
had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things (which belong)
unto thy peace! But now they are hid from thine eyes. For the days shall come
upon thee that thine Enemies shall cast a Trench about thee, and compass thee
round, and keep thee in on every side, ( and it is very remarkable, that the
Romans, after trying all the usual means in vain, should at length be obliged
to have recourse to this method before they could succeed,) and shall lay thee
even with the ground, and thy Children within thee: and they shall not leave in
thee one stone upon another, because thou knew not the time of thy
visitation. Luke xix. 41 -- 44. Thus Christ proclaimed THE DAY OF VENGEANCE OF
OUR GOD, -- agrecable to Isaiah's prophecy, already recited in this note, p.
299.


, and an Example to all the Nations, wherever they are difpersed, of GOD'S
VENGEANCE against the Rejecters of his divine Revelation!




This spiritual Freedom is, indeed, clearly tendered to all men: but how many
are they who, for the sake of a little worldly profit, are again entangled in
the snares and temptations of their spiritual Enemy, and submit themselves to
his Bondage! How can we suppose, that those men are FREE from THE MAMMON OF
UNRIGHTEOUSNESS, who are led by the temptations of private interest to infringe
the NATURAL RIGHTS OF MANKIND, by uncharitably retaining their Fellow Men in an
involuntary SERVITUDE!

Can any injury, except that of taking away a man's LIFE, exceed that of taking
away a man's LIBERTY, who has never offended us! Can any robbery or injustice
whatsoever be more atrocious than that of wearing out our poor Brethren in a
hard involuntary service, without WAGES or REWARD! thereby continually robbing
them of the Fruit of their Labors! Have I not shown, by unquestionable
examples from Scripture, that this is a crying sin, and that the Almighty has
denounced Woe Woe unto him that builds his House by Unrighteousness, and his
Chambers by Wrong; (that) USES HIS NEIGHBOR'S SERVICE WITHOUT WAGES, AND
GIVES HIM NOT FOR HIS WORK; etc. Jer. xxii. 13.


against all such Offenders? Do we not profess to serve THE SAME GOD who so
severely punished the Jews for this very crime? And is there any just ground to
hope, that GOD, who spared not his own peculiar People, will, nevertheless,
excuse the Inhabitants of Great Britain and her Colonies, when they are
wilfully guilty of the same offense!

The whole tenor of the Scriptures teaches us, that SLAVERY was ever
detestable in the sight of God, insomuch that it has generally been denounced
(and, of course, inflicted) as the punishment of the most abandoned Sinners; of
which I have already given a great variety of instances.

Let us therefore, before it is too late, take warning by these tremendous
examples of GOD'S VENGEANCE against this kind of Oppression, which the
Scriptures hold forth, not only to this Nation, but to all the World besides!
The examples which I have quoted of God's Vengeance, denounced against the
Israelites and Jews for TYRANNY, are not more striking than the examples of
VENGEANCE denounced against the very Instruments of that VENGEANCE (the
Assyrians and Babylonians) expressly on the same account; for though the latter
were mere Instruments in God's hand, to punish the Jews in kind, yet they were
themselves subjected to the like RETRIBUTION!

Nay, THE VENGEANCE was denounced particularly against the Chaldeans (and the
cause of it, also, was declared) long before they were guilty of the offense,
as I have before remarked, even while the Jews, the Nation vindicated by this
punishment, were exercising that Tyranny at home for which they were then
doomed to the Babylonian Yoke, and thereby laid the foundation for the future
retaliated CAPTIVITY of their haughty CONQUERORS the Chaldeans!

And have not we just reason to dread the severe VENGEANCE OF ALMIGHTY GOD,
when it is notorious, that the Tyranny exercised in the British Colonies is
infinitely more unmerciful than that which was formerly exercised by the
Chaldeans, insomuch that the state of the Jews in their Captivity might be
esteemed rather as Freedom than Bondage, when compared with the deplorable
Servitude of the wretched NEGRO SLAVES, as well as of the white Servants, in
our Colonies?

What must be the consequence of such abominable wickedness?

By as much as we exceed the Assyrians and Babylonians in religious knowledge,
by so much more severely may we expect the hand of God upon us for our
monstrous abuse of such advantages!

The Inhabitants of Great Britain and the Inhabitants of the Colonies seem to
be almost equally guilty of Oppression!

THE COLONIES protest against the Iniquity of the SLAVE TRADE; but,
nevertheless, continue to hold the poor wretched Slaves in a most detestable
Bondage! GREAT BRITAIN, indeed, keeps no Slaves, but publicly encourages the
Slave Trade, and contemptuously neglects or rejects every petition or attempt
of the Colonists against that notorious wickedness!

The House of Burgesses in Virginia, transmitted a very sensible and respectful
Petition to the King Extracts from the minutes of the House of Burgesses in
Virginia.

Wednesday, April 1st, 1772. Most Gracious Sovereign,
WE your Majesty's dutiful and loyal subjects the Burgesses of Virginia, now
met in general assembly, beg leave with all humility to approach your Royal
Presence.

The many instances of your Majesty's benevolent intentions and most gracious
disposition to promote the prosperity and happiness of your subjects in the
colonies, encouraged us to look up to the Throne, and implore your Majesty's
paternal assistance, in averting a Calamity of a most alarming nature.

The importation of slaves into the colonies from the coast of Africa has long
been considered as a trade of great Inhumanity, and under its present
encouragement, we have too much reason to fear will endanger the very existence
of your Majesty's American dominions.

We are sensible that some of your Majesty's subjects in Great Britain may reap
emolument from this sort of Traffic; but when we consider that it greatly
retards the settlement of the colonies with more white inhabitants, and may in
time have the most destructive influence, we presume to hope, that the interest
of a few will be disregarded, when placed in competition with the security and
happiness of such numbers of your Majesty's dutiful and loyal subjects.

Deeply impressed with these sentiments, we most hum^ly beseech your Majesty to
remove all those restraints on your Majesty's Governors of this colony, which
inhibit their assenting to such laws as might check so very pernicious a
commerce.

Your Majesty's ancient colony and dominion of Virginia has at all times, and
upon every occasion, been entirely devoted to your Majesty's facred person and
government; and we cannot forego this opportunity of renewing those assurances
of the truest loyalty and warmest affection, which we have so often, with the
greatest sineerity, given to the best of Kings, whose wisdom and goodness we
esteem the surest pledge of the happiness of all his people.

Resolved, nemine contradicente, That the House does agree with the Committee
in the said address to be presented to his Majesty.

Resolved, That an address be presented to his Excellency the Governor, to
desire that he will be pleased to transmit the address to his Majesty, and to
support it in such manner as he shall think most likely to promote the
desirable end proposed.

(COPY.)



, dated the 1st of April, concerning the Iniquity, Inhumanity, and destructive
Influence of the AFRICAN SLAVE TRADE, to which not the least Answer has yet
been returned!

The Freeholders and Inhabitants of the County of Somerset, in New Jersey,
also, through their regard to the civil and RELIGIOUS Interest of the Country,
and the established Rights of Mankind, presented to the Governor, Council, and
Representatives of that Province a very seasonable Testimony against that
wicked Traffic which has Slavery for it is object, praying them to provide
against the future Importation of Slaves into that Colony and to enable such
persons as shall choose it to manumit their SLAVES upon equitable Principles to
the Owners and the Public, etc. To the Governor, Council, and Representatives
of the Province of New Jersey, in General Assembly met.

The Petition of sundry Freeholders and Inhabitants of the County of Somerset,

Respectfully shows,

THAT your Petitioners, influenced with an equal regard to the civil and
religious interests of this Province and the established Rights of Mankind,
have with concern often viewed that Traffic, which has Slavery for it is object,
in a light very unfriendly to both; and it has afforded pleasure to observe the
liberal advances which of late have been made among all ranks of people toward
the discountenance of that Trade, and promotion of Justice to those who have
thereby been deprived of their Liberty. Hence your Petitioners are induced to
address the Legislature, and to request, that a subject so important may
receive that attention which it deserves. Your Petitioners also beg, that you
will not only provide against the future importation of Slaves into this
Colony, by such ways as you may think best, but to enable such persons as shall
choose it to manumit them by making them useful and happy upon equitable
principles to the Owners and the Public, as in your wisdom may appear most
conducive to those good ends. And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.


. Another Petition upon the like benevolent principles was presented to the
same Assembly by diverse Inhabitants of the County of ESSEX in the said
Province, wherein they also signified their dissatisfaction concerning an Act
of Assembly in force for preventing the manumitting and setting free any Negro
Slave, etc. whereby many are obliged to keep their Fellow Men in a Slavery to
them unlawful, and contrary to their Christian Principles, etc. And they exhort
the Assembly to obtain an alteration of his Majesty's Instruction to the
Governor relating to the African Trade, etc. To the Honorable House of
Representatives, now sitting at Burlington in the Province of New Jersey.

The humble Petition of diverse Inhabitants of the County of Essex in the said
Province, shows,

THAT many of his Majesty's loyal subjects in this Province observe, with
uneasiness, the great increase of negro slaves from the coast of Africa, which
is considered, not only as preventative of the importation and increase of
white servants and laborers, by which the present extravagant price of labor
would be proportionably lessened, but also as laying a foundation of that which
may hereafter prove dangerous to Government, and subversive of the liberties of
the people, it being justly observed, That slaves are the natural enemies of
society, and their numbers must always be dangerous. It is also with
dissatisfaction that some of the inhabitants of this province observe an Act of
Assembly in force, for preventing the manumitting and setting free any negro
slave, however healthy and able to earn his or her living, without such terms
as many are wholly unable to, and others cannot without great difficulty comply
with, whereby they are obliged to keep their fellow men in a slavery (to them
unlawful and contrary to their Christian principles). In order therefore to
remedy these growing evils, your petitioners humbly pray this Honorable House,
that they would take such measures as to them in their wisdom may seem meet, to
obtain an alteration of his Majesty's Instruction to his Excellency the
Governor, relating to the African trade, so that his Excellency may be at
liberty to consent to such laws for the preventing the future importation of
negro slaves into this province, as to the Legislature may appear just and
reasonable. And also that the Act of Assembly relating to the manumitting of
negro slaves may be repealed, and the inhabitants of this province allowed by
law to set free any of their negro slaves, who shall appear to some proper
judicature to be able of body and sound in mind, and under a certain age to be
fixed by this Honorable House, or under such other reasonable restrictions, as
to the Legislature may seem just and reasonable. -- And your petitioners as in
duty bound shall ever pray.


A number also of the Inhabitants of the City and County of Philadelphia bore
the like testimony against the African Trade in a pathetic and earnest Petition
to their Provincial Assembly; wherein they take notice of the example set them
by the Province of Virginia in petitioning the King, from a deep sensibility of
the danger and pernicious consequences which will be attendant on a
Continuation of this most iniquitous Traffic To the Representatives of the
Freemen of the Province of Pennsylvania in Assembly met.

The Petition of a number of the Inhabitants of the City and County of
Philadelphia,

Respectfully shows,

THAT the importation of the natives of Guinea, to be sold and used as slaves
in the provinces and islands of the British dominions in America, has long been
an occasion of deep concern to a great number of the Inhabitants of this
province, as well on account of its inconsistency with the whole tenor of the
Christian religion, as because of the evil influence it has on the religious
and moral conduct of the people, and the dreadful consequence which, it is to
be feared, will one day attend in those parts where it prevails.

We are the more encouraged to lay this important object before you, as we
understand some of the colonies have been led into serious consideration, as
well of the iniquity of the practice, as of the dangerous situation some of
them are in, particularly the province of Virginia, whose House of Burgesses
has lately petitioned the King, from a deep sensibility of the danger, and
pernicious consequences which will be attendant on a continuation of this MOST
INIQUITOUS TRAFFIC.

We your petitioners, therefore, most earnestly beseech you, to take this
matter, which we apprehend to be of the utmost consequence to the welfare and
safety of the British colonies, under your most serious consideration, and to
use your utmost endeavors with the other colonies, in making such
representations to the King as to you may appear most effectual toward putting
a stop to this mighty evil."

Signed by about two hundred persons, amongst whom were, the provost of the
academy, and three other clergymen of the church of England, being all that are
in this city, sive Presbyterian Clergymen, and four other Ministers, the rest
respectable Inhabitants.


. But the Assembly, being desirous first to know what reception the
abovementioned neglected Virginian Petition had met with at Court, postponed
their address to the Throne; and instead of it transmitted an Act of Assembly
for the King's Assent, whereby they laid a heavy duty on the head of every
Slave that should be imported, amounting almost to a prohibition of the
iniquitous Traffic; but this seasonable attempt to discourage the crying
national sin, met with a very cold reception it seems on this side of the
Atlantic, and the Bill was absolutely rejected; so that the horrid Guilt of
persisting in that monstrous Wickedness must rest on this side of the Atlantic!
Is this -- to execute Judgment and righteousness? Is this to deliver the
SPOILED out of the hand of the OPPRESSOR? Is this to "do no wrong," to do no
violence to the STRANGER?

Does not the same God, who warned the impolitic Zedekiah by the mouth of his
Prophet, also equally warn us by the written word which he has given to us for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness? 2 Timothy
iii. 16.

Does he not equally warn us by these everlasting Records of his tremendous
Judgments and dreadful VENGEANCE even against his own peculiar people? FOR --
all these Things happened unto them for ensamples: (as I have before observed)
and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the Ends of the World are
come. 1 Cor. x. 11.

And yet with all these spiritual advantages, I fear we far exceed the Jews in
the enormity and multitude of our National Oppressions: how then shall we
escape the just Vengeance of God, if we persevere in these inhuman practices?
Is this the return we make to God for the Blessing of a Christian Education!
Surely he has expected better thing of us! Have we not just reason to fear
that he will condemn this nation as he did the Jews of old? saying -- he looked
for JUDGMENT, but behold OPPRESSION; for RIGHTEOUSNESS, but behold a CRY!
Isaiah v. 7.

As God never changes, it is impossible that this nation should escape his just
retribution, and still persist in violating the natural Rights of mankind!

Reflect, my Countrymen, for a moment, upon the present state of those enormous
national Transgressions, the African Slave Trade encouraged in GREAT BRITAIN,
and the toleration of Slavery in THE BRITISH COLONIES, and you will readily
perceive that we must stand condemned even if we judge ourselves! and how then
shall we appear before that Righteous Judge, who is no respecter of persons?
How can we hope to escape the DIVINE VENGEANCE when we know that the Almighty
has even bound himself with a most solemn oath never to forget any such, acts
of OPPRESSION? The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, SURELY I will
never forget any of their works, or rather "all their works," (...); amongst
which the SLAVE TRADE, in particular, is expressly mentioned in the preceding
verse, viz. buying the Poor for Silver, etc. And then he condescends to appeal,
as I before remarked, to human Judgment concerning the propriety, or rather
the necessity and certainty, of the Divine Vengeance for such National
Wickedness! -- Shall not the Land tremble for this? and every one mourn that
dwells therein? Amos viii. 6 -- 8. And in like manner by the Prophet Jermiah:
-- Shall I not visit for these things? Shall not my Soul be avenged on such a
Nation as this? Chap. v. 9. These Judgments, indeed, were denounced against
the Jews; but surely common sense must teach us that they are equally
applicable at home, that is, on such a Nation AS THIS, my Countrymen!

But there is still a way to escape, if my Countrymen have but grace to take
warning! And therefore to the unquestionable Examples of GOD's Retribution and
Vengeance which I have already given, let me add, before I conclude, on very
remarkable Example of GOD's Vengeance for National Oppression being actually
averted by the seasonable interposition of a few individuals, who procured the
dismission and enfranchisement of a large body of poor enslaved people, and
thereby appeased the denounced Wrath of our merciful God!

In the beginning of the 28th chapter of the second Book of Chronicles, an
account is given of the abominable Idolatry and Wickedness of Ahaz King of
Judah, who (even) burned his Children in the Fire, and by that superlative
degree of Uncharitableness and Inhumanity demonstrated a voluntary submission
to that heavy Yoke of Bondage under the Grand Spiritual Enemy of Mankind, from
which the Almighty Protector of the Creation had so gloriously delivered his
Ancestors, after the abominations (says the Text) of the Heathen, whom the Lord
had cast out before the Children of Israel. He sacrificed also and burned
incense in the high places, and on the hills, and under every green tree.
Wherefore the Lord his God delivered him into the hand of the King of SYRIA;
and they smote him, and CARRIED AWAY A GREAT MULTITUDE OF THEM CAPTIVES, and
brought (them) to DAMASCUS. And he was also delivered into the hand of the King
of ISRAEL, who smote him with a great slaughter: for PEKAH (the King of Israel)
the Son of REMALIAH slew in Judah AN HUNDRED AND TWENTY THOUSAND IN ONE DAY,
all valiant men; because THEY HAD FORSAKEN THE LORD GOD OF THEIR FATHERS. And
ZICHRI, a mighty man of Ephraim, slew MAASEIAH THE KING'S SON, and AZRIKAM THE
GOVERNOR OF THE HOUSE, and ELKANAH (that was) NEXT TO THE KING. And the
Children of ISRAEL carried away captive of their Brethren TWO HUNDRED THOUSAND
WOMEN, SONS AND DAUGHTERS, and took also away much spoil from them, and brought
the spoil to Samaria. But a Prophet of the Lord was there whose name (was)
ODED: and he went out before the Host that came to Samaria, (tha it is, as they
returned from the War to Samaria with their Captives and Booty,) and said unto
them, "Behold, because the LORD GOD of your Fathers was wroth with Judah, he
has delivered them into your hand, and ye have SLAIN THEM IN A RAGE (that)
REACHES UP UNTO HEAVEN. And now (said the Prophet) ye purpose to KEEP UNDER
the Children of Judah and Jerusalem for BONDMEN and BOND-WOMEN unto you: (but
are there) NOT WITH YOU, EVEN WITH YOU, SINS against the LORD your GOD? Now
hear me therefore, and DELIVER THE CAPTIVES AGAIN, which ye have TAKEN CAPTIVE
OF YOUR BRETHREN: FOR THE FIERCE WRATH OF THE LORD (is) UPON YOU. 2 Chronicles.
xxviii. 9 -- 11. And may it not be said in these latter days, with equal Truth,
to the Inhabitants of GREAT BRITAIN and HER COLONIES, Are there not with you,
even with you, Sins against the LORD your GOD? that is, are there not with you
already a sufficient number of SINS (for which, unless you repent, you will
certainly be accountable) but that you must presumptuously add to your Sins and
to your Trespass the horrid guilt of SLAVERY and OPPRESSION, to hasten GOD'S
VENGEANCE upon you? but that you must suddenly heap up the measure of your
iniquity by tolerating in your Colonies a much more grievous Slavery, a much
more numerous Bondage, than the Israelites were ever guilty of? Yet in Israel,
there were found four Chiefs or Noblemen -- Heads of the Children of Ephraim,
who were zealous to avert God's Wrath, and save their Country by a speedy
restoration of the JEWISH CAPTIVES to their natural freedom. They valiantly
STOOD UP against them that came from the War, -- (which were, probably, not
only PEKAH, their King, and his Princes, but also the principal Warriors of
their Country; see the 6th, 7th, and 14th verses) -- and said unto them, Ye
shall not bring in THE CAPTIVES hither. -- These were peremptory Terms, which
showed, that they were ready to risk their Lives in so good a cause; and, at
the same time, they assigned the reason of their opposition in a SOLEMN PROTEST
-- "for whereas" (said they) we have offended against the Lord (already), ye
INTEND TO ADD (more) TO OUR SINS and to OUR TRESPASS: -- for our Trespass is
great, and (thereis) fierce wrath against Israel. Ver. 12, 13.

This reason, as well as the undaunted Resolution of those who gave it, had the
proper effect upon the Israelitish Soldiers, who, notwithstanding the general
depravity of their countrymen, still deserved the name of MEN, by
demonstrating, that they were not insensible to REASON, and that they thought
themselves entitled (though SOLDIERS) to that common Right of HUMAN NATURE, the
Right of judging for themselves in matters of conscience, without which no man
can be truly honorable: for as soon as they heard the just remonstrance of
the four Noblemen, they quitted the Prey and the Plunder (a hard thing for
Soldiers to submit to) without waiting, it seems, for the word of command from
the King or his Princes! -- "So the armed men" (says the Text) lest the
Captives and the Spoil before THE PRINCES and ALL THE CONGREGATION. Ver. 14.

Here (be pleased to observe) is a National Council at once assembled in the
field; the whole Power of the People -- THE PRINCES AND ALL THE CONGREGATION.

What were their Deliberations on this occasion does not appear, nor their
RESOLUTIONS, or rather, they seem to have been totally IRRESOLUTE, wavering
between what was a RIGHT TO BE DONE and PRIVATE INTEREST; as if each man was
unwilling to give up his share of the booty, and yet ashamed openly to resist
the active Resolution of the four Chiefs on so charitable a cause; for these
four Noblemen, it seems, at last boldly took upon themselves the whole
business; -- "and the men" (says the Text) "which were expressed by name,"
(viz. the four Noblemen mentioned in the 12th verse) ROSE UP, and TOOK THE
CAPTIVES, and WITH THE SPOIL CLOTHED all that were naked among them, and
arrayed them and shod them, and gave them to eat and to drink, and anointed
them, and carried all the feeble of them upon asses, and brought them to
Jericho the City of Palm Trees, to their brethren: then they returned to
Samaria. Thus an immediate Judgment from God upon Israel was averted by the
spirited opposition of FOUR individuals against a whole Nation! But Great
Britain and her Colonies, which forcibly detain more than FOUR times the number
By an account of the European settlements in America, printed in 1770, we are
informed that there are allowed to be in OUR WEST INDIES at least two hundred
and thirty thousand NEGRO SLAVES. Vol. 2, p. 117. " In VIRGINIA" (says the same
author) much the larger part of the inhabitants are the NEGRO SLAVES, who
cannot be much fewer than AN HUNDRED THOUSAND SOULS; they annually import (says
he) into the two tobacco colonies between THREE AND FOUR THOUSAND OF THESE
SLAVES: p. 216, 217; and in Maryland, (as the same author informs us in p.
233.) the Negroes (are) upwards of SIXTY THOUSAND.

The number of slaves-already mentioned (without reckoning the multitudes since
transported to the new increasing settlements in the Grenada Islands, and in
the islands of Tobago, Dominica, and St. Vincents; as also exclusive of the
multitudes in the two Carolinas, the two Floridas, Georgia, the two Jerseys,
New York, etc.) amount to THREE HUNDRED AND NINETY THOUSAND SOULS, at the least
computation: so that if the multitudes actually omitted in this account, were
truly added, the oppression would appear enormous! The total amount of the
oppressed multitude, perhaps would not fall far short of the numerous Bondage
of oppressed Israelites which first drew down the exemplary and ever memorable
VENGEANCE of the ALMIGHTY, upon the hardened Egyptian Tyrant and his kingdom!


of wretched Captives in an involuntary servitude, much more intolerable than
any that the Israelites were ever guilty of exacting! -- GREAT BRITAIN which
recruits the ravages of her Cruelty, Oppression, and Injustice, by an annual
supply of more than fifty thousand poor See note in page 147.
African STRANGERS (against whom they have not the least pretense of war or
quarrel) -- MEN AND WOMEN, SONS AND DAUGHTERS -- FOR BONDMEN AND FOR BONDWOMEN
to be worn out with unremitted labor; like those poor injured creatures whose
places they supplied! -- Great Britain, I say, with all this accumulated load
of guilt has not yet produced four Chiefs or Noblemen to PROTEST against this
most abominable Tyranny, and to stand in the Gap, with reverential fear of God,
to avert the DIVINE VENGEANCE, though Religion, Humanity, and even Common Sense
ought to have prompted them to it! -- May we not too aptly compare the
principal crimes of the Jews, (for which they lost their liberty), to the
present crying Sins of GREAT BRITAIN AND HER COLONIES! -- "In the midst of
thee" (said a Prophet from God) have they DEALT BY OPPRESSION WITH THE
STRANGER: in thee have they vexed the Fatherless and the Widow. Ezekiel. xxii. 7.
And again, The People of the Land have used OPPRESSION and exercised ROBBERY,
and have vexed the Poor and Needy: yea, they have OPPRESSED THE STRANGER
WRONGFULLY. And I sought for A MAN among them that should make up the hedge,
and STAND IN THE GAP before me for the Land, that I should not destroy it: but
I sound none! THEREFORE have I poured out mine indignation upon them, I have
consumed them with the fire of my wrath: THEIR OWN WAY have I RECOMPENSED UPON
THEIR HEADS, says the Lord God. Ezekiel. xxii. 29 -- 31. And have not the
Inhabitants of Great Britain and her Colonies, therefore, just reason to expect
a similar VENGEANCE for the like OPPRESSIONS? Do they flatter themselves, that
the same God will permit them to go on without recompensing their OWN WAY upon
their HEADS! Slavery for Slavery? Or have they forgot, that the God of Israel,
who thus reproved his peculiar People for holding their Brethren in BONDAGE, is
the SAME "LORD GOD" with whom we have to do? and that he is UNCHANGEABLE? How
would our Rulers and Chief Men bear a repetition of this unchangeable word in
the presence of God, when the Books are opened for Judgment: -- I sought for a
Man among them that should make up the hedge, and STAND IN THE GAP before me
for the Land, that I should not destroy it; but I FOUND NONE! May I not say,
that even backsliding Israel shall rise up in Judgment with this Generation,
and shall condemn it? As the backsliding Israel has justified herself more
than treacherous Judah, (Jer. iii. 11.) so she has surely "justified herself
more than" BRITAIN! for when the measure of her iniquity seemed to be filled by
that notorious act of Oppression in the reign of Pekah beforementioned, there
were yet found in her FOUR worthy Advocates to STAND IN THE GAP before GOD for
the Land; even four "Chiefs" (or Nobles) "of the Children of Ephraim," who
boldly protested against the horrid crime of domestic Slavery. But Great
Britain, though staggering under a much heavier load of the same kind of Guilt,
has not produced, out of her numerous Peerage, ONE SINGLE CHIEF to stand up
"for the Land," and remove her burden! Mark this, ye Right Reverend Fathers of
our Church, who sit with the PRINCES of the Realm to consult the welfare of the
State! Think not that I am inclined, through any misguided prejudice If I am
prejudiced at all, I am sure it is in favor of Episcopacy, for I not only
entertain a most sincere personal respect and esteem for several truly worthy
and learned Individuals of that order, now living, but I am even descended from
one of the same holy function, who in his correspondence with foreign
Protestant churches, very ably defended and promoted the Establishment of
Episcopacy; and, above all, I am thoroughly convinced by the Holy Scriptures
that the institution of THAT ORDER in the Christian Church IS OF GOD; and that
the only defect in the English Establishment of it, is the want of a FREE
ELECTION The learned Judge Blackstone, in his Commentaries, book I. c. 11. p.
377. informs us, that ELECTION was, in VERY EARLY TIMES, the usual mode of
Elevation to the EPISCOPAL CHAIR throughout all Christendom; and this (says he)
was promiscuously performed by the LAITY, as well as by the CLERGY, (" per
CLERUM and POPULUM:") for which he cites very ample authorities. But afterward
a complaint of tumultuous Elections, together with the supposed Royal
Prerogative of granting the Investiture of Temporalities (though the
Temporalities, being originally granted to support the Dignity of the Office,
cannot reasonably be so far drawn from the first intention, as to deprive the
Office of that real Dignity which arises from a free Election) served the
designs of Emperors and Kings as a pretense to invade the Freedom of Election;
and the same pretense of TUMULT proved equally favorable to the opposite
designs of Popes; so that these jarring interests seemed united, however, in
their endeavors (as it were by one Spirit of Antichrist) to deprive the Church
of her ancient Right, which (had it been maintained) would probably have
prevented most of the future usurpations of the Papal Antichrist; and therefore
the Policy of the Court of Rome at the same time began by degrees to EXCLUDE
THE LAITY from any share in these ELECTIONS, (says the learned Judge
Blackstone,) and to confine them wholly to the CLERGY, which at length was
completely effected. 1 Blackstone, c. 11. p. 378. The original ground for the
complaint of tumult in these Elections was probably occasioned by the neglect
of that unexceptionable Apostolic mode of Election described in Acts i. 15 to
26; for when Christianity began to be corrupted by Vows of Celibacy, and other
Popish and Diabolical Doctrines, the Clergy and Laity began to have opposite
interests to serve (which ought never to be) in the Choice of their Bishop,
and, of course, the two contending parties would reciprocally depend upon their
own activity, zeal, or address for success in the Election; so that Tumult (the
old complaint) must be the necessary consequence; whereas had it been an
indispensible form to nominate TWO qualified persons (viz. either two by the
promiscuous suffrages of both parties, or one by each party), and afterward,
in solemn prayer, to submit the final decision to the Providence of God by a
Lot (as in the Apostolic Election), there could be no room for contention: the
undue influence and partiality of Individuals would be effectually checked;
and, above all, the joint prayers of both parties, in an appeal to God's
decision, would certainly add Solemnity (instead of Tumult) to the Election, if
not also much additional Dignity to the Elected. Dum secum habebant APOSTOLI
Dominum, non usi sunt SORT: neque post adventum Paracloti ea sunt usi, c. x.
19. xvi. 6 ss. sed in uno hoc intermedio tempore, and in uno hoc negotio usi
sunt, CONVENIENTISSIME. Bengelii Gnomon Nov. Test. p. 460. This remark opens to
us a very satisfactory reason why the Apostles discontinued the primitive mode
of Election, and took upon themselves the appointment of Bishops: for while
they were endowed with manifest supernatural power in working Miracles, their
authority to appoint Bishops, without the formulary precautions of the first
precedent, could not be questioned, because their appointment of Bishops was
clearly the appointment of the Holy Ghost: but when these extraordinary gifts
ceased in the Church, the primitive mode of Election became once more
desirable, as being best suited to the ordinary state of the Church in all
succeeding ages. This is not a singular opinion of my own: the learned
Bengelius (p. 459) refers us not only to those who have thought as I do, but
also to examples of it is having been really practiced in Episcopal Elections:
-- Hodie quoque in ELEGEND IS EPISCOPIS SORTI LOCUM ESSE POSSE censet justus
Jonas ad hunc locum, and memorabile exemplum resert Comenius in Hist-Ecoles.
Slav.. 60. habet etiam b. Riegerus Bohm. Br. vol. iii. p. 36. The primitive
Election, mentioned in the Acts, was the Election of a Bishop, as well as of an
Apostle, the Office or Charge of a Bishop being apparently included in the
Apostolic Dignity; for though Matthias, on whom the lot fell, was immediately
numbered among the eleven APOSTLES, yet the vacant Charge to which he was
elected was un questionably an Episcopal Charge. The expression of the Holy
Ghost, in the Prophecy of the Psalmist (Psalm cix. 8. " let another take HIS
OFFICE"), proves that the said Office was of that nature; for the Hebrew word
(...), commonly rendered "his office," properly signifies a VISITATORIAL
office, which expression, by the ancient Authors of the Septuagint Version, as
well as the Apostle Peter, was conceived to be of the same general import as an
Office of SUPERINTENDENCY; and therefore they all called it an Episcopate,
(...), literally, let another take his Episcopate, or "Bishopric." Matthias,
therefore, and the other Apostles were properly (...), or Bishops; and the
Right of Nomination to the vacant Charge was not then confined to the Apostles
alone (as Dr. Hammond, without authority of Scripture, has asserted), but an
appeal was made to the sense of the whole Congregation, the (...), or Crowd of
120 Persons then present, by the Apostle Peter, and they accordingly appointed
two, (...), and afterward joining in solemn prayer, submitted the decision or
final Election by lot to the Providence of God! -- "Thou, Lord," (said they,
(...)) which know the hearts of all men, show of these TWO the ONE whom thou
have chosen. -- (...). The person on whom the lot fell might from the 10T
((...)) be truly denominated CLERICUS, as he was thereby authorized to take
upon himself the LOT of service, (...) TON KAHPON (...). The very learned and
judicious Erasmus was of the same opinion respecting the appointment of two
persons by the Congregation or (...): -- Haec oration (says he, speaking of
Peter's Address to the People) " quum placuisset MULTITUDINI statuerunt DUOS,"
etc. And a little afterward he gives the following commendation of that
primitive example: -- Tametsi SORTS periculosae non sunt, quae utricunque
faverint, probum and idoneum designant. Nec torum negotium creditum est
SORTIBUS. SUFFRAGIIS sunt electi DUO probatissimi. Inter hos ambiguitatem
Electionis finiit SORS, quae nec ipsa temeritatem habere potuit, cujus eventum
moderatur precatio. SORS igitur haec, quae nihil aliud-suit quam DECLARATIO
DIVINAE VOLUNTATIS, designavit MATTHIAM, quanquam JOSEPH praeter cognominis
(viz. Justus) commendationem, etiam JESU propinquitate commendebatur. Et tamen
huic praelatus est Matthias, quo nos doceremur IN DELIGENDIS EPIS COPIS, quibus
credenda sit Evangelicae Doctrinae dispensatio, adeo nihil esse tribuendum
humanis affectibus, etc.


to the Office. For as it may clearly be proved that the Churches of Britain
and Ireland have a just and ancient Right to elect their own Bishops, and did
actually exercise that right for many ages, till the antichristian Usurpations
of Monks and Popes over the secular (or parochial) Clergy occasioned the
interference of Kings, so it may as clearly be demonstrated, that the present
mode of Election by Writ of Conge D' Eslire, sent to the several Cathedral
Chapters, together with a Letter Missive, containing the name of the person
which they shall Elect and Chase? (agreeable to the Act of 25 Hen. VIII. cli.
xx. sec. 4.) is a total perversion of that just and ancient Right In a little
Tract (by John Barnes, an English Benedictine) entitled, Sententia de
Ecclesiae Britannicae Privilegiis, which was printed together with some little
Tracts of Archbishop Usher in 1687, we find still a more ample testimony of the
ancient Right of choosing Bishops: -- Cum ANTIQUI MORES Ecclesiae suae (speaking
of the ancient BRITISH, SCOTCH, and IRISH) postularent ut OMMIA inter se
SYNODICE agerent, tum pro EPISCOPORUM ORDINATIONIBUS, tum pro aliis negotiis
Ecclesiasticis. Verba little ex BEDA, lib. ii. 6.2. Eceles. Hist. sunt, QUOD NON
POSSUNT ABSQUE SUORUM CONSENSU ET LICENTIA PRISCIS ABDICARE MORIBUS." P. 154.
And after citing an example from Bid, concerning the Election of a Bishop
(viz. Aidan) by a Scotch Synod, at the request of the Saxon King Oswald, to
instruct and preside over the Ministry of the newly converted Saxon or English
Church (see p. 154. and 155), he further remarks: -- Et ex HUNGTING-DONIENSI
(says he) lib. iii. Hist. and BED. lib. ii. constat ET SCOTOS ET BRITANNOS
OMNIA SUA COMMUNI CONSENSU EGISSE.

It appears also, that the Saxon or English Church, though much less ancient
than the British, Irish, and Scotch Churches, did yet enjoy the same
inestimable privilege of electing Bishops. The Monk Matthew Paris has
transmitted to us a memorable example of this, in his Account of the Election,
A. D. 1095, of the celebrated Ulstan to be Bishop of Worcester: -- Processu
autemtemporis ULSTANUS (ELECTO ad Archiepiscopatum Eboracensem ALDREDO) unanimi
consensu, tam CLERI quam TOTIUS PLEBIS, Rege insuper ut quem vellent sibi
eligerent praesulem and animarum Pastorem annuente, IN EPISCOPUM ejusdem loci
ELIGITUR. P. 20. And even in later times, when the Romish Corruptions had so
far prevailed as to exclude the LAITY from Elections, yet the Clergy still
enjoyed the free right of electing their Prelates, whether Abbots or Bishops;
for the learned Judge Blackstone informs us, that this right was granted in a
charter to all the Monasteries and Cathedrals in the Kingdom by King John, see
vol. i. p. 379; and also that this grant was expressly recognized and confirmed
in King John's MAGNA CARTA, and was again established by STATUTE 25 Edward III.
St. 6. 3. Ibid. This Statute first gave parliamentary authority, indeed, to the
King's Conge D' Eslire (though it was in use long before), and acknowledges the
King's Right of Assent or Approbation "after the Election;" yet it contains
nothing which can remove the prudent and reasonable limitation to which that
Assent or Approbation was formerly subject, viz. that it WAS NOT TO BE DENIED
WITHOUT A REASONABLE AND LAWFUL CAUSE. Judge Blackstone, b. i. c. 11. p. 379.
And this very Act (which was manifestly ordained to restrain the simoniacal
practices and shameful usurpations of the Bishops of Rome) expressly
acknowledges the Right of FREE ELECTIONS in the Church, viz. that the FREE
ELECTIONS of the Archbishops, Bishops, and all other Dignities and Benefices
ELECTIVE in England, shall hold, etc. The Right was also fully established by
preceding Statutes, still in force, though (unhappily for this Kingdom) not in
use; as -- " There shall be FREE ELECTION of Dignities of the Church." 9 Edward
II. c. 14. Title. And again, ELECTIONS OUGHT TO BE FREE. 3 Edward I. c. 5. Mr.
Ruffhead, in his useful Index to the Statutes, very properly refers us, under
the head of "ELECTION of BISHOPS," to this last-mentioned Statute; for
Episcopal Elections ought certainly to be included in the meaning of the said
Statute, as well as all other Elections; for an ELECTION without a CHOICE is a
manifest contradiction in term^, and NO ELECTION.


abovementioned, and is entirely destructive of all the desirable purposes of a
free Election. This practice, however, cannot be censured in stronger terms
than those in which it is expressly condemned by a subsequent Act of
Parliament, (1 Edw. VI. chap. ii.) though the former Act is supposed to be
still in force, viz. The said ELECTIONS be in very deed NO ELECTIONS but only
by a Writ of CONGE D'ESLIRE, have colors, shadows, and pretenses of Elections,
serving nevertheless to no purpose, etc.

If it had not been for this notorious defect in point of Election, and the
general idea of its consequences, I am persuaded that the late worthy Primate
of England, would not have found such opposition in hi^ endeavors some few
years ago to promote the establishment of EPISCOPACY in America!


, to charge your Order, in particular, with the omission. The crying Sin has
hitherto been far distant from your sight, and perhaps was never fully
represented to you, or, like faithful Watchmen of Israel, you would long ago
have warned our Nation of the Danger: but I now call upon you, IN THE NAME OF
GOD, for assistance! Ye know the Scriptures, and therefore to you, my Lords, in
particular I appeal! If I have misrepresented the Word of God, on which my
Opposition to SLAVERY is founded, point out my errors, and I submit: but if, on
the other hand, you should perceive that the Texts here quoted are really
applicable to the question before us, that my conclusions from thence are
fairly drawn, and that the Examples of GOD'S VENGEANCE against TYRANTS and
SLAVE-HOLDERS ought strictly to warn us against similar Oppressions and similar
Vengeance, you will not then, I trust, be backward in this Cause of GOD and
MAN. Stand up (let me entreat you) for the Land; MAKE UP THE HEDGE, to save
your Country; perhaps it is not yet too late! Enter a solemn protest, my Lords,
against those who have oppressed the Stranger wrongfully. Ye know that the
Testimonies I have quoted are of God! Warn therefore the Nobles and Senators of
these Kingdoms, that they incur not a double load of Guilt! as the burden, not
only of the much-injured African Strangers, but also of our Country's Ruin,
must rest on the heads of those who withhold their Testimony against the CRYING
SIN Of TOLERATED SLAVERY! For I KNOW that the LORD will maintain the CAUSE of
the Afflicted, and the RIGHT of the Poor. Psa. cxl. 12.

GRANVILLE SHARP.

SOLI DEO GLORIA ET GRATIA.
TEXTS OF SCRIPTURE QUOTED OR ILLUSTRATED IN THE FOREGOING TRACT.
GENESIS.
Chapter. Verse. Page. XV. 11. 182 XVII. 8. 81

EXODUS.
II. 23, 24. 12 III. 7, 8. 13 XXI. 2, 5, 6. 4, 5, 81, 173 XXII. 21 -- 24. 16
XXIII. 9. 15

LEVITICUS.
XIX. 18, 33, 34. 10, 11 XXV. 10, 39, 40. 4, 173

DEUTERONOMY.
V. 15. 14 VII. 2, 16. 8, 9 X. 17 -- 19. 10 XV. 12, 15. 173, 178, 195 XVI. 12.
178, 195 XXIII. 15, 16. 21 XXIV. 18, 22. 178 -- 195

JUDGES.
VI. 8. 14

I SAMUEL.
Chapter. Verse. Page. I. 22. 81 VII. 17. 75 XIII. 13. 81 XXII. 6. 75

II SAMUEL.
VII. 11 -- 29. 93 XII. 10. 81

I KINGS.
III. 5. 70 V. 12. 236

II KINGS.
XVI. 9. 231 XVIII. 17. 234 XXIII. 29, 31 -- 34, 36. 45, 47 -- 50, 97, 216
XXIV. 1, 2, 6, 8, 11 -- 15, 17, 18. 91, 95 -- 98, 104, 106, 107, 108, 115, 135
XXV. 1. 26

I CHRONICLES.
III. 15 -- 18. 44, 108, 134 XXI. 29. 70, 75

II CHRONICLES.
I. 3. 75 XXV. 16 -- 24. 42 XXVI. 5 -- 7. 234 XXVIII. 9 -- 11, 27. 98, 322
XXXIII. 14. 92 XXXV. 21. 216 XXXVI. 1, 3, 6, 7, 9, 10, 13. 46, 48, 90, 104,
109, 135

EZRA.
I. 1. 297 II. 26. 75

NEHEMIAH.
Chapter. Verse. Page. VI. 10 -- 12. 69 VII. 30. 75

PSALMS.
XII. 5. 19 LXXXI. 6, 7. 14 CXL. 12. 340

PROVERBS.
XVI. 12. 120 XXV. 5. ibid.

ISAIAH.
III. 13 -- 15. 21 V. 7. 316 VII. 4. 231 X. 6, 7, 12 -- 16, 29. 75, 209, 213
XIII. 2 -- 19. 285 XIV. 17, 25, 26. 217 -- 297 XVI. 4. 244 XIX. 2, 3. 226 XXI.
2 -- 5. 286, 287 XXIII. 7 -- 9. 237 XXXIII. 1. 217 XL. 11. 163 XLII. 7. 299
XLIV. 21 -- 28. 294 XLV. 1 -- 5, 13. 294 -- 296 XLVII. 1 -- 14. 283 L. 41 --
43. 287 LIVE. 14. 121 LVIII. 3. 19 LXL. 1, 2. 299

JEREMIAH.
I. 15. 124 III. 11. 330 V. 26 -- 29. 24 VI. 6 -- 8. 26. Chapter. Verse. Page.
VII. 5 -- 7 199 XXI. 1, 2, 3 -- 9, 11, 12. 29, 30, 36, 142 XXII. 1 -- 3, 5 --
9, 13, 18, 19, 24 -- 28, 30. 97, 103, 137, 142, 301. XXIII. 1, 2, 5, 6. 112,
162 XXIV. 1, 5, 7 -- 9. 114, 138, 169 XXV. 1 -- 9, 11 -- 14. 81, 82, 124, 275
XXVI. 1 -- 15. 76, 77 XXVII. 4 -- 7. 85, 209. XXX. 2, 7 -- 9, 11, 16. 269 --
272. XXXIII. 15, 16. 163 XXXIV. 1 -- 3, 11. 28, 176 XXXV. 11. 88 XXXVI. 1 -- 3,
5, 9, 29, 30. 85, 89, 94, 95, 97 XXXVII. 4 -- 17. 185 -- 187 XXXVIII. 2 -- 5, 9
-- 13. 189, 190 XXXIX. 1 -- 7, 10. 27, 136, 137, 201, 206 XLV. 1, 5. 87 XLIX.
34, 39. 116, 117 L. 2 -- 15, 33, 41 -- 43. 148, 265 -- 269, 287 LI. 1 -- 42, 59
-- 64. 119, 287 -- 290 LII. 9 -- 11, 31 -- 34. 27, 48, 139, 203

LAMENTATIONS.
IV. 5, 9, 10. 200, 201 V. 13. 205

EZEKIEL.
VII. 3, 4, 8, 9, 11, 23. 31 XII. 19. 32 XVII. 15 -- 21. 120 -- 123 XXII. 7.
33, 34 XXIX. 3, 4. 122 XXXIX. 10. 262

DANIEL.
I. 1 -- 3. 79, 90, 134 V. 4, 6. 286, 288

HOSEA.
V. 8. 75

JOEL.
III. 7, 8. 227, 261

AMOS.
Chapter. Verse. Page. I. 1 -- 15. 230 -- 242 II. 1 -- 6. 242, 246 III. 9 --
11. 246 -- 250 V. 7 -- 12. 247 -- 249 VIII. 4 -- 8. 23

OBADIAH.
I. 9 -- 15. 227 -- 229

MICAH.
III. 11. 69

ZECHARIAH.
VII. 3, 5. 89 VIII. 19. Ibid.

MATTHEW.
I. 12. 135 VI. 24, 33. 113, 143 VII. 7. 197

MARK.
XI. 24. 197.

LUKE.
IV. 17 -- 21. 299 X. 18. 196 XI. 9, 13. 197 XVI. 13. 197 -- 143

JOHN.
I. 12. 196 X. 11. 163 VIII. 34. 145 XIV. 13. 197 XV. 7. 197

ROMANS.
VIII. 14, 15. 197 XI. 12, 25, 32. 292 XVI. 18. 145

I CORINTHIANS.
Chapter. Verse. Page. III. 16, 17. 197 VI. 9, 10. 145 X. 11. 12

GALATIANS.
V. 14, 15. 11, 257

EPHESIANS.
V. 5. 144

PHILIPPIANS.
III. 18, 19. 144

COLOSSIANS.
III. 5. 144

HEBREWS.
II. 14, 15. 196

II PETER.
I. 3, 4. 197

I JOHN.
III. 8. 145

INDEX.
A.
AFRICA, number of slaves annually bartered for on the coast of, page 147,
note. Abp. Sharp's reflections on the decline of, to the present barbarous
state, 263, note. African Company, the property they acquire in negroslaves
unjust, 206. The means of procuring them detestable, 207. -- Merchants of
Liverpool and Bristol, remonstrance to them, on their traffic for men's bodies,
219. See Slave Trade. Ahaz king of Judah, the judgments inflicted on him for
his inhuman idolatry, 319. Amaziah king of Judah, his haughty rejection of
prophetical advice, and subsequent humiliation, 41, note. America, the cause of
the opposition to the establishment of episcopacy there, assigned, 339, note.
Ammonites, denunciation of God's vengeance against them for their barbarities,
240. Amos, his description of the practices by which the Jews reduced their
poor brethren to slavery, 21. The Retribution denounced by him against the
Syrians for their oppressions, 229. Against the Philistines, 231. Against Tire,
235. Against Edom, 237. Against the bloody-minded Ammonites, 240. Against Moab,
242. Against Judah, 245. And, lastly, against Israel, 246. Armies, standing, a
warning example against the keeping of, 56, note. Assyrians and Babylonians,
instruments in the hand of God for the mutual punishment of each other, 210.
Remarkable instance of divine vengeance against the former, 216, note.
B.
Babylon, the Prophet Jeremiah's denunciation of retribution against, 264. A
prior denunciation against, by Isaiah, 275. The bondage with which her captives
were oppressed, the cause of God's vengeance against, 277. The stratagem by
which Cyrus entered the City, 293. Great treasures found in the chapels of the
idols, 295. Barnes, his account of the ancient mode of choosing Bishops, 334,
note. Bengelius, his account of the primitive mode of electing Bishops, 334,
note. Bishops, appeal to, and call upon them to exert their influence against
negro-slavery, 331. The order of, a divine institution, 332, note. Defect in
the English establishment of, ibid. The present mode of electing, a total
perversion of the primitive one, 334, note. This present mode expressly
condemned by Act of Parliament, 337, note. Blackstone, Judge, his account of
the ancient mode of electing Bishops, 332, note. This right how usurped from
the Laity, 333, note. Britain, warnings to the inhabitants of, for tolerating,
by National Authority, the oppression of African Strangers in the Colonies, 16,
34. Indications of the Devil's empire over, 146, note. Unjust laws pointed out,
213, note. Symptoms of national destruction, 226, note. Inquiry whether the
corruptions and injustice which have destroyed other nations, may not draw down
God's vengeance on them, 248, note. Cannot expect to be the only exception to
God's general rule of national retribution, 258, 302.
C.
Christian Dispensation, Charity and Benevolence duties of indispensable
obligation under, 6. Will not justify holding men in slavish bondage, ibid.
Churches of Britain and Ireland, how deprived of the just and ancient right of
electing their own Bishops, 333, note. Colonies, British, the oppressive
treatment of negroes in, far exceeding those practices for which the Jews were
reproached by their Prophets, 25. Number of negro slaves annually purchased
there, 147. More tyranny exercised over the negroes there than formerly by the
Chaldcans over the Jews, 304. And have reason therefore to expect more severe
punishment, 305. Protest against the slave trade, yet at the same time continue
to hold slaves in bondage, ibid. Covetousness, a species of idolatry, 144,
note. Cyrus, the instrument of God's wrath against Babylon, and of deliverance
to the Jews, predicted to this service two hundred years before his birth, 290.
Called by Isaiah the Anointed of God, 297. In what respect a type of the
Messiah, 298.
D.
Dispensations of Providence to public societies, extract from Abp. Sharp's
sermon on, 253, note.
E.
Edomites, the judgments denounced against them by the Prophet Obadiah, with
the reason, 227. Eliakim. See Jehoiakim. Episcopacy, how prevented from being
established in America, 339, note. Ezekiel, his severe prophetical censure of
King Zedekiah's breach of faith, 121.
F.
Father, a term often used in a loose sense in holy scripture for any direct
ancestor, 58, note. Ferrerius, his remarks on Isaiah's prophecy concerning the
Assyrians, 222, note. Freedom, spiritual, clearly tendered to all mankind by
Jesus Christ, 299. The rejection of this offer by the Jews the cause of the
loss of their temporal inheritance, ibid. note.
G.
Government, political, the necessity of administering it on just and righteous
principles to produce national prosperity, 164, note. The woes denounced
against national injustice and tyranny, 213, note. Grotius, his commentary on
Jeremiah, chapter xxii. defended, 140, note. A mistake of his, respecting the
extent of the prophet's message to king Zedekiah, rectified, 167, note. His
opinion of the transgression for which the Philistines incurred the censure of
the Prophet Amos, examined, 232, note.
H.
Hananiah, a false prophet, rebuked by Jeremiah, 72. Heathen, who are to be
understood as comprehended under this term in the Mosaic law, 8. Herodotus, his
authority quoted for the great treasures in Babylon, when taken by Cyrus, 295,
note.
I.
Idolatry, a specification of vices that participate in the guilt of, 143,
note. Je-hoiakim, how he attained the crown of Judah, 49, 50. Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon made the instrument of God's vengeance against him for his evil
deeds, 79, 90. Rebels against Nebuchadnezzar, 95. Jeremiah, his account of the
practices by which the Jews reduced the poor to slavery, 23. His prediction of
the future empire of Nebuchadnezzar, 52, 57. His prophetical message to
Zedekiah particularly considered, 131. Collation of passages in chapter xxi. and
chapter xxii. 141. Sec Zedekiah. Jerusalem, the prophet Jeremiah's denunciations
against that city for oppression, 26. Is taken by Nebuchadnezzar, 89. Is taken
a second time, 99. Is taken a third time, 106. Jewish servitude, the nature of
under the Mosaic law, explained, 4. Jews, the permission granted them of
keeping bondsmen, cannot be claimed by any other nation, 8. The strongest
instances of God's vengeance against tyrants, to be found in their history, 11.
Their restoration to natural freedom from Egyptian slavery, the first national
mercy they experienced, 12. This deliverance frequently mentioned by the
prophets, 13. And particularly recommended to their remembrance, 14. That they
might be moved to sympathize with oppressed strangers, 15. Warnings given them
of the danger of oppression, 16. Their oppressions trivial in comparison with
the treatment of negroes in the British Colonies, 25. The judgments of God
executed against king Zedekiah, his family, and the nobles of Judah, 202. Under
their present dispersion, have scriptural assurances of a glorious
re-establishment, 272, note. Their final conversion will be a true object of
general joy, 291, note. Josephus, his disingenuous attempt to conceal the
taking of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, 89, note. His account of the death of
Jehoiakim, 98. Josiah king of Judah, account of his sons, 44. The judgment he
drew on himself by undertaking an unjust war against Pharaoh Necho, king of
Egypt, 155, note. Isaiah, his reproof to the Jews for the inconsistency of
their outward humiliations with their oppressive conduct to the poor, 19. His
denunciation against the city of Tire, 237, note. Judah, remarkable deliverance
of, from the bondage of Pekah king of Israel, by four chiefs of the children of
Ephraim, 322.
L.
Liberty, the deprivation of, the greatest of all injuries, except the loss of
life, 301. Lives, a general view of the melancholy destruction of, in the
prosecution of the slave trade, 148, note. Lowth, Dr. examination of his
opinion concerning the successor of Josiah king of Judah, as mentioned by the
prophet Jeremiah, 52, note. His interpretation of the word pastor, 162, note.
M.
Masquerades, the baneful tendency of, 146, note. Micah, his denunciation of
God's vengeance against the Ammonites for their covetous violence, 241, note.
N.
Nations, not like individuals, to be called to a future account for their
crimes, but receive their punishments in their collective capacity in this
world, 253, note. Are, by divine wisdom, made mutual scourges to each other,
256. National wickedness, has generally been visited by national punishments,
10, 253, note, 259, note. Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, the nations commanded
to submit to his yoke, 63, note, 66. Kills Jeholakim, 99. His extensive
conquests, 124. Executes the decree of God against king Zedekiah, 202. His
conduct considered, 207. Negroes, inhuman treatment of them for resistance to
tyranny, 151, note. One played for and won, at cards, 219, note. Advertisement
for the head of one, 238, note. Computation of the number of, in our American
islands and settlements, 326, note. New Jersey, proceedings of the inhabitants
and freeholders, in disapprobation of the importation of negro slaves, 308.
P.
Paris, Matthew, the ancient mode of electing bishops, collected from his
account of the election of Ulstan to the sea of Worcester, 337. Pastor, a term
used both in a civil and ecclesiastical sense, 162, note. Patrick, Bishop, his
mistake concerning the eldest son of Josiah king of Judah, corrected, 45, note.
His account of the death of Je-hoiakim, 97, note. Philadelphia, petition of the
inhabitants of, to the provincial Assembly, against the importation of negro
slaves, 312. A provincial act imposing a heavy duty on them, rejected by the
crown, 314. Philistines, the retribution prophesied against them by Amos, 231.
For carrying on a slave trade with Edom, 233. When probably fulfilled, 234,
note. Plagues of Egypt, signal instances of God's vengeance against
slave-holder, 13. Planters, not to be exculpated from sharing the load of guilt
with the kidnappers in the slave trade, 150, note. Prideaux, Dean, determines
who Belshazzar was in profane history, 58, note. His account of the great fast
of expiation, 93, note. His account of the death of Jehoiakim king of Judah
corrected by Josephus, 99. Prophets, lying, hired for money, 69, note.
R.
Retribution, the divine law of, explained, 75, note, 253, note, 259, note.
Riblah in the land of Hamath, critical exposition of the names of those places,
48, note. The judgments of God against king Zedekiah, his Family, and the
nobles of Judah, executed there, 201.
S.
Seamen, the great hazard they run in the African slave trade, 149, note.
Secker, Abp. the cause of the opposition to his endeavors at promoting
episcopacy in America, traced, 339, note. Shallum king of Judah, critical
opinions concerning his proper name, 46, note. His fate, 47. Sharp, Abp. his
account of the use God made of king Nebuchadnezzar, 125, note. Extract from his
sermon on the means of national prosperity, 253, note. His sentiments on
national retribution, 259, note. His reflections on the present barbarous state
of Africa, 263, note. Slave trade to Africa, rendered a national crime by its
legislative support, 1. Indications of a national retribution for the guilt of
it, 3. The judgments of God against the Jews, brought home to the reflection
of African traders and American planters, 206. We have reason to fear the like
divine vengeance for the guilt of this criminal traffic, 260. Slavery and
oppression, the public toleration of, a most heinous national crime in the
sight of God, 10. Strong prophetical description of, 154 Warning hints for the
stopping of, communicated by the Author to the British Ministry, 251, 252,
notes. Soldiers, African, their deplorable situation in the company's
settlements, 150, note. Syrians, the denunciations of the prophet Amos against
them for their oppressions, how fulfilled, 230.
T.
Tyrants, tremendous examples of God's vengeance against, to be found in all
histories, particularly that of the Jews, 11. Tire and Zidon, the ports for the
ancient slave trade, of Palestine, 219. How this wicked traffic was retaliated
upon them, 222, note. The government of Tire subverted by the slaves, 256,
note.
V.
Vices, destructive of national prosperity, 165, note. Public, how punished,
253, note. Virginia, petition of the house of burgesses to the king on the
inhumanity and dangerous tendency of the African slave trade, 306. Urijah the
prophet murdered by Jehoiakim king of Judah, 77. Usher, Abp. his account of
Nabuchadonosor king of Babylon, 55, note. His opinion as to the king addressed
by the prophet Jeremiah, chapterxxii. corrected, 136, note.
W.
War, barbarity in, will incur the vengeance of God, 240, note.
X.
Xenophon, his account of the destruction of Babylon, 287, 288, 295.
Y.
Yokes, prophetically used as emblems of slavery, 52, note, 56, 64.
Z.
Zedekiah king of Judah, prophetic denunciations against him for injustice and
oppression, 26. Exhortations to him, 37. Historical account of that prince, 44,
59. Is raised to the throne by Nebuchadnezzar, 108. Exposition of his regal
name, 110, 166. Rebels against the king of Babylon, 119. The prophet Jeremiah's
message to him particularly considered, 131. Proclaims liberty to bondsmen,
172. Denunciations upon his relapse, 177. Judgment executed on him, by the
hand of his conqueror Nebuchadnezzar, 202.
This Tract having been unavoidably extended to a much greater length than was
at first intended, the Extract from Mr. Morgan's Book, mentioned in p. 258, is
inserted in the Appendix of another Tract, entitled, The just Limitation of
Slavery in the Laws of God compared with the unbounded Claims of the African
Traders and British American Slave-holders.

FINIS.
By the same AUTHOR.
I. A Short Treatise on the English Tongue. Being an Attempt to render the
Reading and Pronunciation of the same more easy to Foreigners. 1767. II.
Remarks on several very important Prophecies. 1768. III. A Representation of
the Injustice and dangerous Tendency of Tolerating Slavery; or of admitting the
least Claim of Private Property in the Persons of Men in England. Being in
Answer to an Opinion given in the Year 1729, by the (then) Attorney General and
Solicitor General concerning the Case of Slaves in Great Britain. 1769. IV.
Remarks concerning the Encroachments on the River Thames near Durham Yard.
1771. V. Remarks on the Opinions of some of the most celebrated Writers on
CROWN LAW, respecting the due Distinction between Manslaughter and Murder.
1773. VI. In two Parts. 1. A Declaration of the Peoples Natural Right to a
Share in the Legislature; which is the fundamental Principle of the British
Constitution of State. 2. A Declaration, or Defense of the same Doctrine, when
applied particularly to THE PEOPLE OF IRELAND. 1774.
Printed ser B. WHITE, at Horace's Head, in Fleet Street.

TRACTS, by the same AUTHOR, Now in the Press for Publication, by B. WHITE in
Fleet Street, and E. and C. DILLY in the Poultry.
I. A Tract on the Law of Nature, and Principles of Action in Man. II. THE CASE
OF SAUL; being an Appendage to the former Tract, wherein the compound Nature
and various Principles of Action in MAN (with the Reality of supernatural,
spiritual Influence, both good and bad) are proved by unquestionable Examples
from the History of that unfortunate Monarch, and also from many other parts of
Scripture. III. The just Limitation of Slavery in the Laws of God compared with
the unbounded Claims of the African Traders and British American Slave-holders.
IV. The Law of passive Obedience: or, Christian Submission to personal
Injuries. -- Wherein is shown that the several Texts of Scripture which command
the entire Submission of Servants or Slaves to their Masters, cannot authorize
the latter to exact an involuntary Servitude, nor in the least degree justify
the unbounded Claims of modern Slave-holders. V. "The Law of Liberty;" or (as
it is called in Scripture by way of eminence) "the Royal Law,," by which all
Mankind will certainly be judged!

