THE LAW OF PASSIVE OBEDIENCE, OR Christian Submission to Personal Injuries:

Wherein is shown, that the several texts of scripture, which command the
entire submission of servants or slaves to their masters, cannot authorize the
latter to exact an involuntary servitude, nor, in the least degree, justify the
claims of modern Slaveholders.

By GRANVILLE SHARP.

SERVANTS, obey in all things (your) masters, according to the flesh; not with
eye service, as men pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God: etc.
Coloss. iii. 22. THE LAW OF PASSIVE OBEDIENCE, OR CHRISTIAN SUBMISSION to
PERSONAL INJURIES.
THE illegality of slavery among Christians is a point which I have long
labored to demonstrate, as being destructive of morality, and consequently
dangerous both to body and soul. There are nevertheless some particular Texts
in the New Testament, which, in the opinion even of several well meaning and
disinterested persons, seem to afford some proof of the toleration of slavery
among the primitive Christians; and, from thence, they are induced to conceive,
that Christianity does not oblige its professors to renounce the practice of
slaveholding.

A learned and reverend correspondent of mine seems to have adopted this
notion, and has signified his opinion nearly to the same effect, in a private
letter to me on this subject, to which I have not yet ventured to send him a
reply, though it is a considerable time since I received his letter; but, to
say the truth, the question in which I had never before apprehended any
difficulty, was rendered very serious and important, upon my hands, by my
friend's declaration; and I thought myself bound to give it the strictest
examination, because I conceived (as I do still) that the honor of the Holy
Scriptures, which of all other things, I have most at heart, was concerned in
the determination of the point in question; and yet I know, that my friend is
full as zealous for the honor of the Scriptures as myself, and much more
learned in them, being very eminent in that most essential branch of knowledge.

I believe also that he is perfectly disinterested, and of undoubted Christian
benevolence. The objection has therefore acquired an accumulated weight from
the authority and worth of the person who made it; and consequently, it
demanded more circumspection and reading, to answer it in any reasonable time,
than my short broken intervals of leisure (the only time that I was then master
of) would permit me to bestow upon it; and as so much time has already elapsed,
the answer which I originally intended for my friend's private perusal, shall
now be addressed to all well meaning persons in general, who may have had the
same motives for admitting in any degree the legality of slavery; and that
there are many such (even among those that are concerned in the practice of
slaveholding) the example of my disinterested friend's opinion, and common
charity, oblige me to suppose. I shall therefore consider my friend's opinion
as the common excuse of our American and West Indian brethren for tolerating
slavery aamong them.

I do not think (says he) that Christianity released slaves from the obligation
they were under according to the custom and law of the Countries, where it was
propagated. This objection to my general doctrine is expressed in the most
guarded terms; -- so guarded, that it obliges me to acknowledge, that the
observation is, in some respects, strictly true. My present attempt is not to
confute, but rather to demonstrate wherein this truth consists, which will
afterward enable me to point out such a due limitation of the doctrine, as
will render it entirely consistent with the hypothesis, which I have so long
labored to maintain, viz. the absolute illegality of slavery among Christians,

In conformity to my worthy friend's declaration I must first observe, that the
disciples of Christ (whose Kingdom, he himself declared, -- is not of THIS
WORLD. John xviii. 36.) had no express commission to alter the TEMPORAL
CONDITION OF MEN, but only to prepare them for a BETTER WORLD by the general
doctrines of faith, hope, charity, peace and goodwill, (or universal love and
benevolence to all mankind) submission to injuries, dependence upon God, etc.
etc. etc. which (though general doctrines) are amply and sufficiently
efficacious indeed, for the particular reformation of ALL CONDITIONS OF MEN,
when sincerity is not wanting in the application of them; but the principal
intention of the whole system is evidently to draw men from the the cares and
anxieties of this present life, to a better hope in the life to come, which is
Christ's proper kingdom: Christian servants therefore were of course instructed
to be patient, to be humble and submissive to their masters, not only to the
good and gentle, but also to the froward. So that even ill usage does not
justify perverseness of behavior in christian slaves.

THE apostle Paul also frequently insists upon the absolute necessity of an
unfeigned obedience in the behavior of christian servants to their masters.
Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called. Art thou called
being a servant? care not for it; etc. 1 Cor. vii. 21. and again, Servants be
obedient to them that are (your) masters according to the flesh, with fear and
trembling, in singleness of your heart as unto Christ; not with eye service, as
men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the Will of God from the
heart; with good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men: knowing
that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he receive of the
Lord, whether he be bond or free," Ephesians. vi 5-8. Again, Servants obey in all
things (your) masters according to the flesh; not which eye service, as men
pleasers, but in singleness of heart fearing God: and whatever you do, do it
heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men. Colos. iii. 22, 23. The same
apostle instructs Timothy to recommend obedience to servants, 'Let as many
servants (says the apostle) as are under the yoke, count their own masters
worthy of all honor, that THE NAME OF GOD AND HIS DOCTRINE BE NOT BLASPHEMED.
And they that have believing masters, let them not despise (them) BECAUSE THEY
ARE BRETHREN; BUT RATHER DO (them) SERVICE, BECAUSE THEY ARE FAITHFUL AND
BELOVED PARTAKERS OF THE BENEFIT. These things teach and exhort: If any man
teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, (even) the words of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness; he is
proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and strifes of words,
whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil-furmisings, perverse disputings of
men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is
godliness. From such withdraw thyself. But godliness with contentment is great
gain. for we brought nothing into (this) world, and it is certain we can carry
nothing out. And having food and raiment, let us be therewith content.' 1 Timothy
vi. 1 to 8. -- And again he insists on the same doctrine, '(Exhort) servants,
(says he) to be obedient unto their own masters, (and) to please (them) well in
all things, not answering again, not purloining, but showing all good fidelity;
that they may ADORN THE DOCTRINE OF GOD OUR SAVIOR IN ALL THINGS. Titus ii. 9,
10.

THESE Texts are amply sufficient to prove the truth of my learned friend's
assertion, so far as it relates to THE DUTY OF THE SLAVES THEMSELVES, but this
absolute submission required of Christian servants, by no means implies the
legality of slaveholding ON THE PART OF THEIR MASTERS, which he seems to
apprehend.

THE slave violates no precepts of the gospel by his abject condition, provided
that the same is involuntary (for if he can be made free, he is expressly
commanded by the apostle to use it rather Art thou called (being) a servant?
care not for it; BUT IF THOU MAY BE MADE FREE, USE IT RATHER. For he that is
called in the lord (being) a servant, is the lord's freeman, etc. ye are bought
with a price, BE NOT YE THE SERVANTS OF MEN. 1 Cor. vii. 21-23.
) but how the master who enforces that involuntary servitude, can be said to
act consistently with the Christian profession, is a question of a very
different nature, which I propose to examine with all possible care and
impartiality, being no otherwise interested in it, than as a Christian who
esteems both masters and slaves as brethren, and consequently, while he pities
the unhappy temporal condition of the latter, is extremely ^nxious for the
eternal welfare of the former.

I HAVE already admitted, that CHRISTIANITY DOES NOT RELEASE SLAVES, from the
obligation they were under according to the custom and law of the countries
where it was propagated, agreeable to my learned friend's assertion, in favor
of which I have produced a variety of texts: but as the reason of the law,
(according to a maxim of the English law) is the life of the law, we cannot
with justice draw any conclusion from thence, in favor of the master's claim,
till we have examined the principles, on which the doctrine of submission, in
these several texts, is founded; and we shall find, upon a general view of the
whole, that the principal reason of enforcing the doctrine was not so much
because the persons to whom it was addressed, were slaves, as because they were
Christians, and were to overcome EVIL with GOOD, to the GLORY OF GOD and
RELIGION.

THESE principles are clearly expressed in several of these very texts, and
implied in all of them, viz. ' That the name of God and his doctrine be not
blasphemed.' (1 Timothy vi. 1.) and again, that they may adorn the doctrine of God
our Savior IN ALL THINGS. (Titus ii. 10.) So that a zeal for the GLORY OF GOD,
and of HIS RELIGION (the principles of the first great commandment) is the
apparent ground and sole purpose of the Christian slave's SUBMISSION, which was
therefore to be WITH SINGLENESS OF HEART AS UNTO CHRIST. not with eye service,
AS MEN PLEASERS, but as THE SERVANTS OF CHRIST, doing the will of God from the
heart; with good will doing service, AS TO THE LORD, and NOT TO MEN: knowing
that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall HE RECEIVE OF THE
LORD, whether he BE BOND OR FREE. Ephesians. vi. 5-8. And again, the same apostle
charges the servants among the Colossians, to obey not AS MEN PLEASERS, but in
singleness of heart, FEARING GOD: and whatsoever they do, to do it heartil, as
TO THE LORD, and NOT UNTO MEN. Coloss. iii. 2.

THUS it is plain that the service was to be performed 'as TO THE LORD,' and
'NOT TO MEN,' and therefore it cannot be construed as an acknowledgement of any
right, or property really vested in the master. This will clearly appear upon a
closer examination of some of these texts. In the first, for instance, though
the apostle Peter enforces the necessity of the servants submission to their
masters, in the strongest manner, commanding them to be subject not only to the
good and gentle, but ALSO TO THE FROWARD, etc. (1. Pet. ii. 18.) yet he adds in
the very next verse, -- for this is thank worthy, if a man, FOR CONSCIENCE
TOWARD GOD, endure grief, SUFFERING wrongfully, -- (...), so that, it is
manifest, the apostle did not mean to justify the claim of the masters, because
he enjoined the same submission to the servants that suffered wrongfully, as to
those who had good and gentle masters: and it would be highly injurious to the
gospel of peace, to suppose it capable of authorizing wrongful sufferings, or
of establishing a right or power in any rank of men whatever, to oppress others
unjustly, or (...)! And though the apostle Paul, also, so strongly exhorts
servants to submit to their masters, and to abide in the same calling wherein
they were called, and ' not to care for it.' (1 Corinthians, vii. 20, 21.) Yet
at the same time he clearly instructs them, that it is their duty to prefer a
state of freedom whenever they can fairly and honestly obtain it; but if thou
may be made free (says he) USE IT RATHER. (v.21.) And the reason, which he
assigns for this command, is as plainly delivered, viz. the equality of
servants with their masters in the fight of the Almighty, For he that is called
in the Lord, (being) a SERVANT (says he) is the Lord's FREEMAN: LIKEWISE, also
he that is called (being) FREE, is Christ's SERVANT. (verse 22.) Christ having
purchased all men to be his peculiar servants, or rather freemen. Ye are bought
with a price says the apostle, in the 23d verse.) BE NOT YE THE SERVANTS OF
MEN, which plainly implies, that it is inconsistent with the dignity of a
Christian, who is the servant or freeman of GOD, to be held in an unlimited
subjection, as the bond servant or slave of a MAN; and, consequently, that a
toleration of slavery, in places where Christianity is established by law, is
entirely illegal; for though THE SLAVE commits no crime by submitting to the
involuntary service, (which has been already demonstrated,) yet the CHRISTIAN
MASTER is guilty of a sort of sacrilege, by appropriating to himself, as an
absolute property, that body, which peculiarly belongs to God by an inestimable
purchase! For if God said of the Jews, even under the old law, (Levit. xxv.
52.) THEY ARE MY SERVANTS, which I brought forth out of the land of Egypt; THEY
SHALL NOT BE SOLD AS BONDMEN. My learned friend, (mentioned in the beginning of
this Tract) has remarked that though God expressed himself concerning the Jews
under the law in this manner. THEY ARE MY SERVANTS, WHICH I BROUGHT FORTH OUT
OF THE LAND OF EGYPT, THEY SHALL NOT BE SOLD AS BONDMEN. etc. yet This did not
signify (says he) that they were not to be slaves at all. They might be slaves
for seven years, as is well known, notwithstanding they were God's redeemed
servants. Nay, they might remain slaves 'till the jubilee, WITH THEIR OWN
CONSENT, at the expiration of that short term of involuntary servitude. These
words indeed contained a declaration that none of the Israelites were to be
slaves for ever like the Heathen. But what a slippery proof, (says he) of this
exemption with regard to Christians? How dangerous (continued he,) is it to
build doctrines upon such parallels and comparisons! But my worthy friend seems
to forget that the kind of slavery which I oppose, is not that limited
temporary servitude, which he describes as consistent with the law, for that
differs very little from the condition of hired servants, in which light, the
Hebrew masters were bound by the law, to look upon their brethren, even though
bought with their money as bond servants or slaves, If thy brother (that
dwells) by thee be waxen poor, and BE SOLD unto thee; THOU SHATL NOT COMPEL
HIM TO SERVE AS A BOND SERVANT: (but) AS AN HIRED SERVANT AND AS A SOJOURNER,
he shall be with thee, and shall serve thee unto the year of Jubilee. And then
shall he depart from thee, (both) he and his children with him, etc. For they
are my servants, (said the Almighty) THEY SHALL NOT BE SOLD AS BONDMEN. THOU
SHALL NOT RULE OVER HIM WITH RIGOR, but shall fear thy God. Levit. xxv. 39,
43. Here is the very text, (with it is context) which I had quoted, to show the
illegality of holding a brother Israelite in absolute slavery, and as I have
elsewere fully demonstrated that men of all nations are to be considered as
brethren under the gospel dispensation, so my learned friend surely does great
injustice to the argument, when he calls it a slippery proof of this exemption
with regard to Christians, and asserts that the text in question does not
signify that they (the Israelites) were not to be slaves at all! It clearly
signifies however, that whatsoever right a master might have acquired (even by
an absolute purchase) over his Hebrew brother, yet that he was still required
to treat him as an hired servant, and to discharge him and his at a limited
time: and when we compare it with the parallel text in Deuterenomy, (xv, 12,
14.) we find the master is there strictly enjoined to reward the Bondman
LIBERALLY for his past services, viz. And when thou sendest him out free from
thee, THOU SHALL FURNISH HIM LIBERALLY out of thy flock, and out of thy floor,
and out of thy wine press, etc. Surely when the true nature of such limited
servitude is duly considered, it affords but ' a slippery proof,' (if I may use
my friend's expression) that they were to be slaves at all, at least, ' at
all,' in the sense contended for by our American and West India slaveholders
(which is the only matter in dispute at present) especially as the condition of
a hired servant is expressly mentioned, as the rank in which such Bondmen were
to be esteemed. And therefore I trust I may fairly retort the observation of my
learned friend, -- ' How dangerous is it to build doctrines,' (that is in
favor of absolute slavery) upon such parallels and comparisons!
How much more ought Christians to esteem their brethren, as the peculiar
servants of GOD on account of their being freed from the more severe bondage of
our spiritual enemy, (of which the Egyptian bondage was only a type) by the
inestimable price of Christ's blood! and, surely, we may therefore say, they
are GOD'S SERVANTS, whom Christ has redeemed with his own blood, as much as
the Jews of old who were on that account expressly enfranchised from worldly
bondage, THEY ARE MY SERVANTS, THEY SHALL NOT BE SOLD AS BONDMEN; for this
application of the text is entirely to the same effect as the apostle's
expression to the Corinthians, -- Ye are bought with a price, BE NOT YE THE
SERVANTS OF MEN. (1. Cor. vii. 23.) Dr. Whithy, indeed supposes that the words
' ye are bought with a price,' refer only to a pecuniary price given by the
primitive Christians, to buy their brethren out of slavery.' But the authority
of Justin Martyr and Tertullian, which he cites, by no means proves his
interpretation of the text, though it may sufficiently prove the primitive
practice of redeeming slaves; which also furnishes a new argument against the
legality of slavery among Christians, so far as the example of the primitive
Christians is concerned. But scripture is best interpreted by scripture, and
therefore the most certain means of ascertaining the true meaning of the words
(...), ye are bought with a price, is to have recourse to the very same
expression ((...), the words being only transposed) in the preceding chapter,
20th verse, where we shall find that it can refer to nothing less than the
inestimable price of Christ's redemption, What know ye not (says the apostle)
that your BODY is the TEMPLE OF THE HOLY GHOST, (which is) in you, which you
have of God, and YOU ARE NOT YOUR OWN? FOR YE ARE BOUGHT WITH A PRICE:
therefore glorify God IN YOUR BODY, and in your spirit, WHICH ARE GOD's, (1
Cor. vi. 19, 20.) and, consequently, it is the duty of a Christian legislature
to vindicate THE LORD'S FREEMEN from SLAVERY, as all mankind are included in
the same inestimable purchase, for it is not only their souls but even their
bodies, which are God's;' and therefore it is an abominable sacrilege, that
those bodies which are capable of being the temple of the Holy Ghost, should be
esteemed the mere chattels and private property of mercenary planters and
merchants, merely for the sake of a little worldly gain!

BUT slaveholders may perhaps allege that believing masters are mentioned as '
faithful and beloved,' in one of the texts, which I have cited, and are also
expressly accounted as ' partakers of the benefit,' (see 1 Timothy, vi. 2.) so
that, from thence, they may perhaps infer, that slavekeeping is not
inconsistent with their Christian profession.

BUT these expressions are included in that part of the apostles charge to
Timothy, which relates merely to the instruction of servants, so that there is
no room to suppose, that any reference was intended to the practice of the
masters by way of justification. The meaning therefore can amount to no more
than this, viz. that, as it is the duty of servants to ' count their own
masters,' (even those that are unbelievers) ' wor'thy of ALL HONOR Apparently
meaning, ' all honor,' which is not inconsistent with their duty to God.
, THAT THE NAME OF GOD AND HIS DOCTRINE 'BE NOT BLASPHEMED,' so the same reason
obliges them, more especially, to count their believing masters worthy of all
(lawful) honor, because of their Christian profession, which renders them
accepted of God. For common charity obliges us, as Christians, to suppose that
all men, who believe and hold the same profession as ourselves, are ' faithful
and beloved,' as well as partakers of the benefit of Christ's redemption,
Christ's redemption does not seem to be ' the benefit' spoken of in the text,
though I have admitted this implication to avoid controversy. Dr. Whitby,
supposes that the benefit of the service is meant, and he construes the
sentence accordingly, because they who partakes;of the BENEFIT OF THE SERVICE,
are faithful and beloved. And Dr. George Benson, also, renders it in the same
sense, viz. because they who partake of THE BENEFIT OF THEIR SERVICE, are
Christians, and beloved of God. And then he adds in a note, This (says he) I
take to have been spoken of THE MASTERS, who received the BENEFIT OF THE
SERVICE of their slaves. So the author of the Syriae version seems to have
understood the words. The MS. called Pet. 2. read ((...) labor) and Pet. 3. and
Borner, read (...) piety, for which he refers us to Kuster's edition of Dr.
Mill, -- And finally (says he) I would observe that (...)] is never used,
throughout the New Testament, for the privilege of having the gospel, or the
unspeakable BENEFIT of eternal life.
because Belief is the true means of leading and disposing men to acquire such
happiness; and though many other necessary Christian qualities may seem wanting
in our believing brethren, yet we must not presume to condemn them; God alone
being their Judge: and, for this reason also, Christian servants must not
condemn and despise their believing masters, (though they know themselves
equalin dignity as brethren, and that it is, consequently, their masters duty
to treat them as brethren,) but must render them service the more willingly on
this account, having brotherly love as an additional motive to faithful
service. It is manifest, therefore, that this text was intended to regulate the
conduct of Christian servants, and not that of Christian masters; for, with
regard to the former, the doctrine is perfectly consistent with the other
texts, that I have quoted; which is not the case when it is applied to justify
the mere temporal claims of masters or slaveholders, because there are many
clear and incontrovertible precepts throughout the New Testament for regulating
the conduct of Christian masters, which exclude the justification of any such
claims among Christians, and consequently forbid any application or
interpretation of these particular texts in favor of them: and besides we must
always remember, that it is not lawful to maintain an hypothesis upon the
testimony of any one single text of doubtful interpretation, especially when
the same does not clearly correspond with the rest of the scriptures, and
cannot bear the test 'of the royal law,' of which more shall be said in my
tract 'on the Law of Liberty.'

I mention this text of St. Paul, as one of 'doubtful interpretation,' because
commentators are divided concerning the application of the very words on which
the imaginary justification of the slaveholder is supposed to be founded! Many
learned men (and Dr. Hammond among the rest) have construed the words --
'(...), (1 Timothy vi. 2,) These words are translated by Dr. Hammond, as follows,
-- because they who help to do good, are faithful and beloved, and he uses
several arguments to show that these epithets refer to the servants, rather
than to the masters.
in a very different manner from the common version, and applied them to the
servants, which entirely destroys the presumption in favor of the slaveholder.

Nevertheless I have contented myself with the common rendering, being
convinced that no conclusions can fairly be drawn from this text in favor of
Slavery, even when the epithets faithful and beloved, etc. are applied to the
Masters; because the signification of them must necessarily be restrained
within the bounds of gospel doctrine; and, therefore, we cannot conceive that
the apostle intended, by the application of these epithets, to justify any
practices which are inconsistent with the benevolence enjoined in other parts
of the New Testament; for this would be liable to produce a contrary effect
from that which the apostle expressly intended by his injunction, viz. that
"the name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed."

Thus it appears, I hope, that the principles, on which the doctrine of the
servants submission is founded, are clearly expressed; so that Slaveholders can
have no right to avail themselves of any of these texts to enforce an ABSOLUTE
SUBMISSION; for, though these several texts clearly justify the Slave, yet they
cannot justify the Master, unless he can show that the same principles, (or
reason of the Law,) on which they are founded, hold good also on his side of
the question. (1) This is apparently the case in the other different relations
of life, mentioned in these contexts; as in the relation between husbands and
their wives, parents and their children, but is far otherwise in the relation
between masters and their servants, (unless free hired servants are to be
understood,) and therefore the objection of my learned friend, drawn from
thence, cannot be just. He says, If the connection of persons in the two former
respects be lawful, so that husbands had a right to the subjection of their
wives, and wives a right to the love of their husbands; parents had a right to
the honor and obedience of their children, and children a right to maintenance
and instruction by their parents: unnatural (says he) is it to imagine the
connection between Masters and Slaves was looked upon by him as absolutely
unlawful, so that the former had no right to rule the latter! Indeed, he very
clearly signifies (says he) that the right of dominion remained, when be
opposes DOING WRONG TO OBEYING IN ALL THINGS THEIR MASTERS ACCORDING TO THE
FLESH, etc. as he does. Coloss. iii. 25. (...) (...).

But my learned friend has entirely misunderstood the purport and intention of
my arguments on these several texts relating to obedience and submission. I
have not attempted to prove, by these particular expressions of the apostle,
that the connection between Masters and Slaves was looked upon by him as
absolutely unlawful, so that the former had no right to rule the latter; for
this I have demonstrated, I trust, by OTHER AUTHORITIES of Scripture equally
authentic, and much less liable to be misunderstood. My attempt to explain the
texts in question extends no farther than to show that they do not really
justify the uncharitable claims of the modern Slaveholders, though they are
frequently cited for that purpose.

An attempt to show that any particular doctrine is NOT NECESSARILY IMPLIED in
a certain text or texts of Scripture, is a very different thing from an attempt
to PROVE or AUTHENTICATE AN OPPOSITE DOCTRINE by the same text of Scripture!
For instance, when my learned friend asserts, as above, that the apostle to the
Colossians, iii. 25. very clearly signifies that the right of dominion
remained, when he opposes DOING WRONG to OBEYING in all things their Masters,
etc. I do not pretend to build an opposite doctrine upon the very same words,
but shall only endeavor to show that this supposed "right of dominion" is not
necessarily implied in the text which my friend has cited in support of it.

The servants are indeed expressly and plainly exhorted to obedience and
submission, as well in this as in all the other texts before recited, so that a
contrary behavior in them might certainly be esteemed a doing wrong on their
part yet this by no means implies "a right of dominion" vested in the Master;
for that would prove too much; because the like submission is elsewhere equally
enjoined to those who are expressly said to endure grief, SUFFERING WRONGFULLY,
((...),) and we cannot suppose (as I have before observed) that the submission
enjoined implies a right in the Master to exercise such a dominion as that of
oppressing others UNJUSTLY, or (...); for that could not possibly tend to
promote the declared purposes of the apostle's exhortations, viz. "that the
name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed," (1 Timothy vi.) and again, that
they may adorn the doctrine of God in all THINGS, (Titus ii. 9.) These
purposes, however, are fully answered in the advice given by the same apostle
to all the other different relations of life mentioned by my worthy friend.
WIVES may adorn the doctrine of God by SUBMISSION to their own husbands, as it
is fit in the Lord. (See Coloss. iii. 18.) And HUSBANDS, by love to their
wives: for they are expressly charged in the following verse not to be bitter
against them, that is, they must, by love and sincere affection, moderate and
soften that supreme authority with which husbands are entrusted, (by the laws
of God and man,) that they may rule rather by the gentle influence of an
inviolable love and fidelity, as so good an example will seldom fail to produce
due respect, and will certainly "adorn the doctrine" or profession of the
Christian. CHILDREN may adorn the doctrine of God by OBEDIENCE to their parents
in all things, for this is well-pleasing (says the text) unto the Lord. (v.
20.) And again, the reciprocal duty of FATHERS is plainly pointed out to be a
prudent moderation of that paternal authority with which they are entrusted,
for they are carefully warned against an arbitrary severity, Provoke not (says
the apostle) your children to anger, lest they be discouraged. SERVANTS are in
the very next verse (v. 22.) commanded to obey in all things their Masters
according to the flesh, not with eye-service, as MEN-PLEASERS, but in
singleness of heart, FEARING GOD: so that the SUBMISSION of the servants was
also to adorn the "doctrine of God," it being manifestly enjoined only for
God's sake, and not on account of any supposed "RIGHT OF DOMINION" invested in
the Masters, which the following verses (v. 23, and 24.) when applied to THE
SERVANTS, sufficiently demonstrate, -- And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily as
to the Lord, and NOT UNTO MEN: knowing, that of THE LORD ye shall receive THE
REWARD OF THE INHERITANCE: for YE SERVE THE LORD CHRIST. And to the same
eternal and unerring Dispenser of Rewards (and not to temporal Masters) is
attributed the power of punishing the "doing wrong," mentioned in the very next
verse; which, according to my learned friend's notion, is opposed to obeying in
all things the Masters; -- he that DOES WRONG (says the text) shall receive
for THE WRONG which he has done: and THERE IS NO RESPECT OF PERSONS. (v. 25.)

Such strict impartiality in the administration of justice cannot always be
attributed, with certainty, even to the best-regulated human tribunal, and much
less is it applicable to the decisions of uncontrouled will and pleasure, in
punishing "wrong doing," under the absolute dominion of Slaveholders! No
earthly dominion whatever is conducted with such an equal distribution of
rewards and punishments, as that it may always with truth be said, "there is no
respect of persons," for this is the proper characteristic of the judgments
and dominion of GOD and CHRIST alone. For THE LORD is JUDGE, and with him is NO
RESPECT OF PERSONS. Ecclesiasticus xxxv. 12. " For there is NO RESPECT OF
PERSONS with GOD." Romans ii. 11. And, therefore, we may fairly conclude that the
punishment, not only of SLAVES, but that also of MASTERS, that "do wrong," is
to be understood in the text which my friend has cited to support his notion of
a right of dominion vested in the Masters; so that the said supposed right has,
indeed, but a very "slippery" foundation! Agreeable to my last remark on this
text, (Coloss. iii. 24.) the learned Dr. Whitby has commented upon it, as if he
thought it exactly parallel to another declaration of the same apostle, (viz.
Ephesians. vi. 8 and 9.) wherein not only both Masters and Servants are
unquestionably included, but also the dominion, or judgment, in which THERE IS
NO RESPECT OF PERSONS, is expressly attributed to our MASTER IN HEAVEN. --
Christ, in judging men at the last day, (says the Doctor,) will have NO RESPECT
to the quality or external condition of any man's person; but, WHETHER HE BE
BOND OR FREE, he shall receive recompense FOR THE GOOD THAT HE HAS DONE, in
obedience to him; whether he be MASTER or SERVANT, he shall be punished for THE
WRONG THAT HE DOES in those relations.

If all these circumstances be duly considered, it will manifestly appear, I
trust, that the Masters supposed "right of dominion" (which, certainly, is not
EXPRESSED in the text) cannot even be implied in these contexts, nor in any of
the parallel passages already recited! Can the Master adorn the doctrine of God
our Savior, (as in the other indissoluble relations of life,) by continuing
the unnatural connection of Master and Slave, and by exacting involuntary
labor from his brethren, without wages or reward, agreeable to my friend's
notions of the supposed implied right of dominion? The reciprocal duty of the
Master is mentioned, indeed, in the next chapter, (Col. iv. 1.) but it is of
such a nature as must necessarily lead Christian Masters to abhor any such
supposed right of dominion as that which is tolerated in the British colonies,
and which my friend seems desirous to defend! The Masters are not directed by
the apostle to claim as their own, by "right of dominion," the labor of their
servants WITHOUT WAGES, but, on the contrary, are expressly commanded to GIVE
unto (their) servants that which is JUST and EQUAL; which comprehends (as I
have fully shown in the preceding tract) such a measure of generosity,
recompense, and benevolence, on the part of the Master, as is totally
inconsistent with the claims and views of modern Slaveholders! and, if put in
practice, would necessarily effect the entire abolition of slavery!

The Masters are likewise carefully reminded, in the last mentioned text, that
they also have a Master in Heaven. (Col. iv. 1.) -- A Master, by whose example
they are bound to regulate their conduct, so that this consideration alone is a
sufficient antidote against slavery; for the principal doctrine of that
heavenly Master was LOVE, which cannot subsist with the contrary exaction of
involuntary servitude! This is my commandment, (said that glorious and gracious
MASTER,) " That ye LOVE one another. AS I have LOVED you." The nature of his
love (which we are to imitate, that is, to LOVE as he has LOVED us) is then
immediately described as exceeding all bounds of comparison, " Greater LOVE"
(said he) has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his FRIENDS.
Ye are my FRIENDS, if ye do whatsoever I command you. HENCEFORTH I CALL YOU NOT
SERVANTS. Here is an express enfranchisement of his Servants for our example!
The universal Lord and Master of all men delights in promoting the dignity of
human nature; which cannot be said of the temporal Slaveholder, who enforces an
imaginary "right of dominion," by exacting an involuntary service, and that for
no other purpose than for the sake of a little pecuniary gain, by depriving the
labourer of his hire; which savours of no other love but self-love; whereas,
our disinterested Lord and Master has even laid down his life through love and
compassion to his SERVANTS, and has declared us free, as before recited. --
Henceforth I call you not SERVANTS; for the Servant (said he) knows not what
his Lord does; but I have called you FRIENDS; for all things that I have heard
of my Father I have made known unto you. (John xv. 12-15.) And, in the 17th
verse, he again enforces his doctrine of LOVE: " These things I command you,
(said he,) that ye LOVE one another." The measure of this indispensible LOVE is
expressly declared in the Scriptures, Thou shall LOVE thy neighbor AS THYSELF.
LOVE works no ill to his neighbor: therefore LOVE (is) the fulfilling of the
law. (Romans xiii. 9 and 10.)

Such LOVE, therefore, is clearly incompatible with the arbitrary claims of the
Slaveholder, who can neither be said to LOVE his neighbor as himself, nor to
cherish that LOVE which works no ill to his neighbor, whilst he strenuously
contends for such a right of dominion as may enable him to exact, not only the
involuntary service of his neighbors and brethren, contrary to the law of
nature, but also to rob them of the fruits of their own labors, GIVING THEM
NOT FOR THEIR WORK; against which practices a severe denunciation of WOE is
expressly declared in the Scriptures; as I have fully demonstrated in my tract
on "the Law of Retribution," as well as in the preceding tract: and, therefore,
as it is necessary to construe difficult or dubious passages of Scripture
consisttently with the general tenor of Scripture evidence, it would be highly
improper to admit this opposite, doctrine of a supposed "RIGHT OF DOMINION,"
especially as the same is not expressed in the text which my learned friend has
cited for it, but is merely drawn forth by an imaginary implication!


Can the Slaveholders and African traders allege, for instance, that they
shall adorn the doctrine of God our Savior, (Titus ii. 10.) by persisting in
their unnatural pretensions to an absolute property in their poor brethren? or
that they do the will of God from the heart, (Ephesians vi. 5, etc.) when they
retain their neighbor in an involuntary unrewarded servitude for life? If they
can do this, I shall have reason to be silent. But if, on the contrary, it
should evidently appear that a very different behavior is required of
Christian Masters, that the name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed, (1 Timothy vi. 1.) they must be obliged to allow that the "reason, or life of the
law" is against them; and, consequently, that none of these texts, relating to
Christian servants, are capable of affording them the least excuse for their
selfish pretensions. They will find also, upon a more careful examination of
the Scriptures, that they themselves are as much bound by the gospel to bear
personal injuries with patience and humility, as their Slaves. Because the
benevolent principles of the gospel of peace require all men, freemen as well
as slaves, to return "good for evil." " Bless them that CURSE you," (said our
Lord,) and PRAY for them which DESPITEFULLY USE YOU. And unto him that SMITES
thee on the one cheek, offer also the other; and him that TAKES AWAY thy
cloak, forbid not (to take thy) coat also, etc. Luke vi. 28, 29. But, though
submission and placability are thus unquestionably enjoined to the sufferers in
all the cases above recited in the text, yet surely no reasonable man will
pretend to allege, from thence, that tyrants and oppressors have thereby
obtained a legal right, under the gospel, to curse others, and use them
despitefully; or that the unjust oppression of strikers and robbers is thereby
authorized or justified! In the same light exactly must we view the
Slaveholders claim of private property in the persons of men, whenever an
attempt is made to support it on the foundation of any such texts as I have
quoted, wherein servants or slaves are exhorted to submit with passive
obedience, etc. to their Masters; because the right (as it is improperly
called) or pretension of the Master may with the greatest propriety be compared
to the pretended right or authority of oppressing or robbing others, which is
too often exercised by imperial tyrants and despotic princes, as well as by
their brethren in iniquity of a lower class, viz. pirates, highwaymen, and
extortioners of every degree! The gospel of peace cannot authorize the
oppression of these lawless men, though it clearly enjoins patience,
submission, and acquiescence, to the individuals that are enjured, whether
freemen or slaves! The placability and absolute submission, commanded by the
last-cited text, to Christians in general, are manifestly founded on the very
same principles with that particular submission which the gospel requires of
Christian slaves; and is farther parallel to the latter, by being equally
passive; so that the oppression of the Slaveholder can no more be justified by
any text of the New Testament, that I am able to find, than the oppression of
the striker and robber.

Unhappily for the Christian world, the duties of patience, submission, and
placability, enjoined by the gospel to persons injured, are too commonly either
misunderstood or rejected; though the temporal, as well as the eternal,
happiness of mankind greatly depends upon a conscientious and proper
observation of these duties: for even the most rigid obedience to the letter of
the command would be far from being productive, either of the real evils to
which the pernicious doctrine of a national passive obedience apparently tends,
or of the imaginary inconveniences apprehended by the advocates for duelling,
because the same benevolent principles, (viz. universal love and charity,
founded on the great commandment, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself,)
which oblige the true Christian, most disinterestedly, to forgive all injuries,
and pass over every affront offered to his own person, will necessarily engage
him, on the other hand, as disinterestedly, to oppose every degree of
oppression and injustice, which affects his brethren and neighbors, when he
has a fair opportunity of assisting them; and from hence arises the zeal of
good men for just and equitable laws, as being the most effectual means of
preserving the peace and happiness of the community, by curbing the insolence
and violence of wicked men. We have an eminent example of this loyal zeal in
the behavior of the apostle Paul, who could not brook an infringement of the
Roman liberty from any persons whatever in the administration of government,
though he could endure personal injuries from men unconnected therewith, and
the persecutions of the multitude, with all the Christian patience and meekness
which the gospel requires. The Scripture-history of this great apostle affords
many proofs of his extraordinary humility and patience under sufferings, so
that his spirited opposition to the illegal proceedings of magistrates cannot
be attributed to private resentment on his own account, but merely to his zeal
for the public good, founded upon the great Christian principle of loving his
neighbor as himself, since the maintaining of good laws is, certainly, the
most effectual means of promoting the welfare and happiness of society. His
resolute and free censure of the magistrates at Philippi, in the message which
he sent by their own sergeants, (2) And, when it was day, the magistrates sent
the sergeants, saying, Let those men go And the keeper of the prison told this,
saying to Paul, The magistrates have sent to let you go: now therefore depart,
and go in peace. But Paul said unto them, They have beaten us openly
uncondemned, being Romans, and have cast (us) into prison: and now do they
thrust us out privily? nay verily; but let them come themselves and fetch us
out. And the sergeants told these words unto the magistrates: and they feared
when they heard that they were Romans. And they came and besought them, and
brought (them) out, and desired (them) to depart out of the city. Acts xvi. 35
to 39.
his spirited remonstrance to the chief captain at Jerusalem, (3) The chief
captain commanded him to be brought into the castle, and bade that he should be
examined by scourging; that he might know wherefore they cried so against him.
And, as they bound him with thongs, Paul said unto the centurion that stood by,
Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman, and uncondemned? When
the centurion heard (that), he went and told the chief captain, saying, Take
heed what thou do: for this man is a Roman. Then the chief captain came, and
said unto him, Tell me, art thou a Roman? he said, Yea. And the chief captain
answered, With a great sum obtained I this freedom, and Paul said, But I was
free born. Then straightway they departed from him which should have examined
him: and the chief captain was also afraid after he knew that he was a Roman,
and because he had bound him. On the morrow, because he would have known the
certainty wherefore he was accused of the Jews, he loosed him from (his) bands,
and commanded the chief priests and all their council to appear, and brought
Paul down, and set him before them. Acts xxii. 24 to 30.
and his severe rebuke to the high priest himself, even on the seat of
judgment, (4) And Paul earnestly beholding the council, said, Men and
brethren, I have lived in all good conscience before God until this day. And
the high priest Ananias commanded them that stood by him to smite him on the
mouth. Then Paul said unto him, God shall smite thee, (thou) WHITE^ WALL; for,
sit thou to judge me after the law, and command me to be smitten
contrary to the law? And they that stood by said, Revilest thou God's high
priest? Then said Paul, I wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest, for
it is written, Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people. Acts
xxiii. 1 to 5.
are remarkable instances of this observation.

In the last-mentioned instance, indeed, the apostle was charged, by those
"that stood by," with reviling God's high priest, which would have been a
notorious breach of the law, had there not been circumstances of justification
sufficient to vindicate the severity of the Apostle's censure: these, however,
were not urged by the apostle himself, who best knew how to behave toward
those with whom he had to do. He readily allowed the principle (however) on
which the censure of his accusers was founded, but he by no means retracted
what he had so justly applied to the person of the unworthy magistrate who sat
to judge him; neither did he even acknowledge him to be the high priest, though
he was expressly questioned for a supposed misbehaviour to that dignitary! His
answer was cautiously worded. -- He did not say, -- I knew not that this
person, whom I have censured, was the high priest, but, -- (...), etc. I knew
not, brethren, that there is a high priest. (5) The learned Hugh Broughton has
construed the text as follows, -- I knew not, brethren, that there was a high
priest; but the words, (...), are more literally rendered above. CASTALIO reads
it, -- Nesciebam, fratres, esse pontificem. -- And HEINSIUS, -- Summum esse
sacerdotem ignorabam.
Which answer, though on the first hearsay it seems to bear some affinity to an
excuse or apology for what had past, yet, in reality, includes a still farther
rebuke; for it plainly implies that the high priest, in whose presence the
apostle then stood, was (in some respect or other) deficient or blameable in
his deportment as chief magistrate, either that he did not duly support the
dignity of that sacred and distinguishing public character, so that he did not
seem to be high priest, and of course could not be known and honored as such;
or else that his behavior had been so unjust and illegal that he did not
deserve to be considered as a lawful magistrate, who had publicly demeaned
himself as a tyrant, by commanding a prisoner to be beaten, contrary to law,
without hearing his defense! And, that this latter sense is most probable we
may learn by the following circumstance, viz. that the apostle chose to decline
the dispute, and to wave the accusation about reviling the high priest, by
acknowledging the principle of law on which it was manifestly founded, viz.
Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people. But, be pleased to
observe, he neither acknowledged that he himself had broken the said precept by
so severely censuring the unjust ruler, nor did he acknowledge the presence of
a high priest in the person of Ananias; neither did he allow the bystanders
time enough to criticize upon the true literal meaning of his reply, (whereby
they would probably have been led to demand some express recantation of the
personal censure which he had so amply bestowed upon the high priest,) but he
prudently changed the subject in debate from the PERSON of the high priest (who
was a zealous overbearing SADDUCEE) (6) (...), etc. But the younger ANANUS,
who, as we have said, obtained the pontificate, was of a bold and daring
disposition, and followed the sect of the SADDUCEES, who, with respect to
judgments, are more cruel than all the rest of the Jews, as we have already
demonstrated. Therefore, Ananias being of this stamp, etc.
to an avowed censure of his whole sect, charging the SADDUCEES in particular
with the unjust persecution, then before the assembly, and openly appealing to
the opposite party, the Pharisees, in order to divide his united enemies: I am
a PHARISEE, (said he,) the son of a PHARISEE; of the hope and resurrection of
the dead I AM CALLED IN QUESTION. Such a manifest reflection against the whole
body of Sadducees cannot by any means favor the supposition of an intended
apology, or recantation, in the preceding sentence, to soothe the enraged
leader of that very party, whom he had publicly branded as a hypocrite, with
the significant appellation of whited wall! Let it be also remembered that the
supposed breach of the precept (thou shall not speak evil of the RULER of thy
people) could not rest entirely on the circumstance of KNOWING ANANIAS TO BE
THE HIGH PRIEST; for, whether the apostle did know, or did not know, that
Ananias was high priest, yet he certainly knew, before he censured him, that he
was a ruler of the people, and that he then sat in the quality of a judge; (for
this is declared in the very censure itself, -- sit thou to JUDGE ME after
the law, and command me to be smitten CONTRARY TO LAW?) so that whether
Ananias was really high priest, or not, yet he was manifestly censured in his
official capacity as a ruler, or magistrate, and not as a private individual,
through any inadvertency or mistake of the apostle, as some commentators have
conceived. And, even when the apostle was informed, by those that stood by,
that the magistrate whom he had censured was the high priest, ("revilest thou
God's high priest?") Yet his reply, (I knew not, brethren, that there is a high
priest,) when fairly compared with the preceding censure of Ananias, as an
unjust dispenser of God's law, (sit thou to judge me according to law?
etc.) proves, as I before remarked, that the apostle neither acknowledged the
dignity of a high priest, nor that of a legal ruler, in the person of Ananias,
though he knew him at the same time TO BE A RULER, and had censured him as
such, for having notoriously prostituted the power and authority of a ruler,
and violated the law, by commanding him to be stricken contrary to law,
notwithstanding, that he sat to judge (as the apostle remarked) ACCORDING to
the law; in which case no epithet whatever could be so apt and expressive to
mark the true character of the dignified hypocrite in power, as whited wall!
This proves, that the apostle knew well enough with whom he had to do. The
censure was too just, and his prophecy in the accomplishment too true, ( "God
shall smite thee," thou whited wall,) (7) This denunciation of God's vengeance
against Ananias was fully justified by the event; for, Josephus (as the learned
monsieur Martin remarks) reports that he was killed in Jerusalem with his
brother Ezechias. "Josephe rapporte," live. 2. de la guerre des Juifs, qu'il fut
massacre dans Jerusalem avec son friar Ezechias.
to be esteemed a mere unguarded sally of resentment! The latter supposition
is, indeed, inconsistent with the remarkable sagacity, prudence, and readiness
of mind, which always distinguished this apostle in bearing his testimony to
the truth, on the most dangerous emergences! The apostle's known character as a
chosen vessel for Christ's service, and as an exemplary preacher of
RIGHTEOUSNESS, will by no means permit us to conceive that he was either guilty
of any mistake or inadvertency with respect to the person of the high priest on
this occasion; or of any illegal or misbecoming behavior to him as a ruler or
judge of the people! When these several circumstances are compared with the
general bad character of Ananias, (8) This malicious Sadducee very soon
afterward gave so flagrant a proof of his injustice and cruelty toward the
Christians, that even the Jewish historian, Josephus, has recorded it as an
event which gave offense to all good and loyal men at that time in Jerusalem; I
mean the murder of the apostle James, bishop of Jerusalem, whom Josephus styles
the brother of Jesus, who was called Christ. The Jewish historian, therein,
bears a remarkable testimony in favor of Christianity, -- (...), (for he is
described, in the preceding quotation from Josephus, as a bold daring man of
the most cruel sect,) (...). Which is translated by Mr. Whiston as follows, --
When, therefore, Ananus was of this disposition, he thought he had now a proper
opportunity (to exercise his authority). FESTUS was dead; and ALBINUS was but
upon the road. So he assembled the sanhedrim of judges, and brought before them
THE BROTHER OF JESUS, WHO WAS CALLED CHRIST, whose name was JAMES, and some
others, (or some of his companions,) and when he had formed an accusation
against them as breakers of the law, he delivered them to be sioned. The MOST
EQUITABLE OF THE CITIZENS, AND SUCH AS WERE THE MOST UNEASY AT THE BREACH OF
THE LAWS, DISLIKED WHAT WAS DONE. They also sent to the king, (Agrippa,)
desiring him to send to ANANUS, that he should act so no more; for that what he
had already done was not to be justified.
as a persecuting zealot of the most virulent and intolerant sect among the
Jews, it must appear that the apostle accounted that person unworthy of any
esteem as a magistrate, whom he had so publicly convicted of abusing and
perverting the legal authority with which he had been entrusted; and, indeed, a
notorious breach of the law, by any man in the capacity of a ruler, may
reasonably be esteemed a temporary disqualification for such an honorable
trust; for, a judge without justice and righteousness, who openly perverts
judgment, does thereby unquestionably degrade himself from the dignity of his
station, and render himself unworthy, for the time being, of that respect which
is otherwise due to his rank in office. The same apostle, indeed, upon another
occasion, commands us to give "honor to whom honor" is due; but what honor
can be due to a convicted hypocrite, -- a whited wall, -- a wolf in sheep's
clothing, -- to an Ananias on the seat of judgment? SUCH characters must
expect SUCH treatment, as Ananias met with, from all sensible and discerning
men; if the latter are also equally loyal with the apostle, I mean in the
strict and proper sense of the word loyal, (which is so frequently misapplied
and perverted by sycophants,) that is, if they are equally zealous with that
apostle for law, justice, and righteousness, for the general good of mankind!
So that if we approve of the apostle's advice, in the beginning of the same
sentence, viz. RENDER, THEREFORE, UNTO ALL THEIR DUES, -- tribute, unto whom
tribute, -- custom, to whom custom, -- FEAR, to whom FEAR, -- HONOR to whom
HONOR; we must needs also allow, that the apostle's practice (even in his
behavior to Ananias) was strictly consistent with his own declared precepts,
and that he most justly rendered to Ananias HIS DUE, when he so severely
reprimanded his conduct as a judge! When all these circumstances are duly
considered, the meaning of the apostle's reply, may, fairly enough, be
paraphrased in the words of LORINUS, (9) Nesciebam eum esse PONTIFICEM, quia,
ex modo loquendi furioso, non videtur esse PONTIFEX, sed TYRANNUS. Many of the
most learned and celebrated commentators have considered the apostle's censure
nearly in the same light. In the learned commentary, commonly called Assembly's
Annotations, the same sense is applied to the apostle's reply to the charge of
having reviled God's high priest, viz. I knew him not to be a lawful high
priest, WHO THUS VIOLATETH THE LAW; and, indeed, (says the Commentary,) " he
was but an usurper. -- For proof of which they refer us to Josephus, Ant. l.
20. c. 3.5. Chr. Helvic. Theat. Hist. Anno Christi, 46.

The learned MATHIAS FLACIUS FRANCOWITZ remarks, that the famous Augustine,
bishop of Hippo, thought this reply of the apostle IRONICAL, IRONIAM esse putat
Augustinus. Est sane quiddam vicinum ironiae. Cum enim videret cum sedere inter
sacerdotes loco praecipuo, et secundum legem judicare; necessario scivit eum
esse pontificem: tametsi et aloqui etiam minimi pueri necessario id illic vel
ex sola ejus pompa et asseclis vulgoque jactatis vocibus sciverunt, nedum
Paulus homo tam vigilans et diligens. Sensus ergo est: Ego non agnosco in hoc
homine pontificem Dei (...) sed hypocritam, seduilorem, et veritatis
persecutorem. Alioqui been scio principi maledicendum non esse.
and truly, (says he,) it borders upon IRONY; for, when he saw him (Ananias)
sit in the chief place among the priests, to judge according to the law, he
necessarily knew him to be the high priest: for even the little children knew
that by his mere pomp and attendants; and much less could a man, so watchful
and diligent as Paul, be ignorant of it; the sense therefore, is, (says the
learned Francowitz,) I do not acknowledge, in this man, the high priest of God,
but a hypocrite, a deceiver, and a persecutor of the truth. Otherwise, I well
know that a ruler is not to be spoken against or reviled. To the same effect,
also, the learned monsieur Martin, -- "as St. Paul" (says he Comme St. Paul
n'ignoreit pas, et ne pouvoit pas meme ignorer, que ce ne fut le souverain
sacrificateur, puis qu'il le voyoit a la tete du sanhedrin, il vaut mieux
traduire le term de l'original par je ne pensois pas, comme Marc ix. 6. et
prendre ainsi cette repartie de St. Paul comme une grave et forte ironie, par
laquelle il vouloit fair sentir a ceux qui l'avoient repris de manquer de
respect pour le souverain sacrificateur, que c'etoit un homme indigne de ce
caractere; et qu'il ne croyoit pas qu'un vicieux et un impie; comme etoit
Anani^^, qui avoit usurp le pontifient en l'achetant des Romans, meritat
d'etre regard comme le souverain sacrificateur de Dieu.
) was not ignorant, nor could be ignorant, that this was the high priest,
especially as he saw him at the head of the sanhedrim, it is better to
translate the term of the original, by I DID NOT THINK, etc. as in Mark ix. 6.
and so to understand this reply of St. Paul as a grave and strong irony, by
which he would make those understand, by whom he was accused of the want of
respect for the high priest, that this person was a man unworthy of that
character, and that he did not believe, that a vicious and wicked man, such as
Ananias, who had usurped the pontificate by purchasing it of the Romans, could
deserve to be esteemed as the high priest of God!

It would be tedious to quote all the authorities that may be found to this
purpose; the evidence, however, of the learned Dr. Whitby, as it includes more
authorities than his own, is worthy the readers notice. -- Dr. LIGHTFOOT and
GROTIUS (says he) think as I do, that St. Paul does NOT go about TO EXCUSE HIS
MISTAKE, but rather says, I KNOW WELL ENOUGH THAT GOD'S HIGH PRIEST IS NOT TO
BE REVILED, but that this ANANIAS is a HIGH PRIEST, I know not, i. e. I DO NOT
OWN HIM AS SUCH who has procured this title by bribery: our celebrated RABBIS
having declared that such an one IS NEITHER A JUDGE, nor TO BE HONORED AS
SUCH, etc.


as I find him quoted by CORNELIUS A LAPIDE, viz. I knew not that he was the
high priest, because, from his furious manner of speaking, he did not seem to
be a HIGH PRIEST, but a TYRANT. This sense is strictly consonant to reason and
natural right!

Justice and righteousness are so inseparably connected with the proper
character of a CHIEF MAGISTRATE or RULER, that any notorious perversion of
those necessary principles, in the actual exercise of that official power with
which a magistrate is entrusted for legal (and not for illegal) purposes, must
unavoidably distinguish the contemptible hypocrite, THE WHITED WALL, from the
honorable MAGISTRATE, and deprive the former of the respect which is due only
to the latter! Sit thou to judge me ACCORDING TO THE LAW, and command me
to be smitten CONTRARY TO LAW? Thus the apostle clearly explained the fitness
and propriety of the reproachful figure of speech, (whited wall,) by which he
had expressed the true character of the unworthy judge!

An appellation similar to this was given, even by our Lord himself, to the
Scribes and Pharisees, who were the teachers and magistrates of the people: Woe
unto you, SCRIBES and PHARISEES, HYPOCRITES; for ye are like unto WHITED
SEPULCHERS, which, indeed, appear beautiful outward, but are within full of
dead men's bones and of all uncleanness. (Matthew. xxiii. 27.) -- And, in the
context, he calls them "blind guides," (v. 24.) -- hypocrites, (v. 25.) -- full
of hypocrisy and iniquity, (v. 28.) -- partakers in the blood of the prophets,
(v. 30.) -- serpents, -- "generation of vipers," -- "how can ye escape the
damnation of hell?" etc. (v. 33.) Nay, Herod himself, the tetrarch of Galilee,
was not exempted from the severity of our Lord's censure, when there was a
proper occasion to declare it; for, though our Lord lived, for the most part,
under Herod's temporal jurisdiction, that is, in GALILEE, yet he openly
characterised the crafty, base, and self-interested, disposition of the
TETRARCH, by expressly calling him a FOX, -- (10) "The message, our Lord here
sends to Herod," (says a sensible and learned commentator, the Rev. Mr. Francis
Fox, in his edition of the New Testament, with references set under the text in
words at length,) is no breach of that command which forbids the SPEAKING EVIL
OF THE RULER OF THE PEOPLE, and consequently is no blemish (says he) in our
Lord's example. For our Lord here acts AS A PROPHET, as one who had received an
extraordinary commission from God: and those, who were truly PROPHETS, were, in
the EXECUTION of their COMMISSION, above the greatest MEN and most powerful
princes, whom they were not to spare when God sent them to reprove for sin. All
this is certainly true with respect to the real authority of Christ to censure
Herod, and that his applying so harsh and severe an expression to the tetrarch
is no blemish in our Lord's example: but yet this is not, I apprehend, the
proper method of reconciling the seeming difficulty, which arises from this
example, of our Lord's applying a severe and reproachful epithet to a chief
ruler, (in calling Herod a FOX,) when it is compared with that precept of the
law, which forbids the speaking evil of the ruler of the people; for, though
our Lord had ample superiority and authority to reprove whomsoever he pleased,
even the greatest ruler upon earth, yet, with respect to his own personal
behavior, as a man among men, he claimed no authority to dispense with the
positive precepts of the Mosaic law, on account of his own real dignity, or
superiority over the rest of mankind, but strictly obeyed the law in all
things, and publicly declared his strict conformity thereto. "Think not," (said
he,) that I come to destroy the LAW or the PROPHETS: I am not come to destroy,
but to fulfill. Matthew. v. 17.

" By THE LAW AND THE PROPHETS" (says the same ingenious commentator above
cited) are meant the great rules of life, delivered in the writings of MOSES
and the PROPHETS, or in the Old Testament, more especially the duties of the
MORAL or NATURAL LAW; (from whence those, respecting our behavior to RULERS,
cannot with propriety be excluded;) These, our Lord assures us, HE DID NOT COME
to DESTROY or DISSOLVE: It was not his design to FREE men from the obligation
they were under to practice the MORAL LAWS of GOD, but to fulfill and perfect
them. This our Lord did, BY LIVING UP TO THOSE LAWS HIMSELF, (which totally
excludes the idea of his dispensing, on account of his own real superiority,
with that moral law respecting behavior to rulers,) and becoming thereby AN
EXAMPLE TO US, by freeing them from the corrupt glosses, which the teachers
among the Jews put upon them, and by expounding them in their fullest sense,
and according to their just latitude, showing that they command not only an
OUTWARD OBEDIENCE, but THE OBEDIENCE even of the MIND and THOUGHTS, as appears
in what our Lord delivers in the following verses: -- These laws have their
foundation in the reason and nature of things, and therefore their obligation
will never cease.


Go ye, and tell that FOX, etc. (Luke xiii. 32.) and, though our Lord endured
the most provoking indignities from the licentious soldiery and reviling
multitude, in silence, answering not a word, agreeable to that striking
character of a suffering Messiah, so minutely described, many ages before, by
the prophet Isaiah; (11) He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, YET HE OPENED
NOT HIS MOUTH: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter; and, as a sheep before
her shearers IS DUMB, SO HE OPENED NOT HIS MOUTH. He was taken from prison, and
from judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of
the land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he stricken!
Isaiah liii. 7, 8.
yet he made an apparent distinction between the VIOLENCE and INJUSTICE of
these, as individuals, and the INJUSTICE of a man in a public character, as a
chief magistrate; for even, in our Lord's state of extreme humiliation, when
his hour of sufferings was come, he did not fail to rebuke the INJUSTICE of the
high priest in his judicial capacity, because, instead of proceeding against
him by the legal method of examination by witnesses, he had attempted to draw
out matter of accusation from his own mouth, against himself, by
INTERROGATORIES, according to the baneful method of arbitrary courts!

But our Lord soon put a stop to his impertinent QUESTIONS, by referring him to
the legal method of finding evidence by witnesses: -- Why ASK thou me? ASK
them which heard me, what I have said unto them: behold, they know what I said.
John xviii. 21. Upon which, a time-serving officer, who probably had not
accustomed himself to distinguish the different degrees of respect that are due
to good and bad magistrates, gave Jesus a blow, or rap with a rod, ((...),)
saying, Answerest thou the high priest so? (v. 22.) which open injustice, to a
person uncondemned, (even while he stood in the presence of the magistrate, who
ought to have protected him,) drew a farther remonstrance, even from the
meekest and humblest man that ever was on earth, though the same divine person
afterward suffered much greater indignities in silence! For, Jesus answered
him, -- If I have spoken evil, (said he,) bear witness of the evil: but, if
well, why smitest thou me? (V. 23.)

This shows that the reprehension of magistrates and their officers, for
injustice and abuse of power, is not inconsistent with the strictest rules of
Christian PASSIVE OBEDIENCE: and, though the apostle Paul, in a similar case,
used much harsher language, yet his censure was undoubtedly just and true, and
the severity of his expressions was plainly justified (as I have already shown)
by the event! i. e. by the fatal catastrophe of ANANIAS. The law, therefore,
which forbids the speaking evil of the ruler of the people, is certainly to be
understood with proper exceptions, so as not to exclude any just censure of
rulers, when their abuse of office, and the cause of truth and justice, may
render such censure expedient and seasonable. That the apostle Paul thus
understood the text in question, is manifest from his manner of quoting it,
when he was charged with reviling God's high priest, if the severity of his
censure be compared with the indifference which he showed, immediately
afterward, toward the offended Sadducee, by openly professing himself to be
of an opposite party, and by throwing an oblique charge against the whole body
of Sadducees, as the principal authors of the unjust persecution against
himself, -- I am a PHARISEE, (said he,) the son of a PHARISEE; of the hope and
resurrection of the dead am I called in question. (Acts xxiii. 6.) Thus he
manifestly threw the whole blame upon the Sadducees, and thereby showed no
inclination to apologize for the severity of his speech to their dignified
chief!

I must farther remark, that the apostle's behavior, in openly opposing the
high priest, (who, as such, was also a chief magistrate and judge,) is by no
means inconsistent with that excellent advice which the same apostle has laid
down in the thirteenth chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, though it is
frequently cited by the advocates for arbitrary power, in order to justify
their false notions concerning the necessity of absolute submission and entire
passive obedience!

To an inattentive reader, indeed, the apostle's expression may seem too much
to favor such doctrines, if the sense and connection of the whole context are
not carefully weighed together; but though he said, -- Let every soul be
subject unto the higher powers. For there is no power but of God: the powers
that be are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore, resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God: and they, that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation. Yet he immediately afterward signifies what kind of
rulers he spoke of "that were not to be resisted." " For RULERS" (says he in
the very next verse) ARE NOT A TERROR TO GOOD WORKS, BUT TO THE EVIL. Will thou
then not be afraid of the power? do that which is GOOD, and thou shall have
praise of the same; for he is the MINISTER of GOD to thee for GOOD. (But
ANANIAS, as a ruler, was certainly the very reverse of this description, so
that the practice of the apostle, with respect to him, was by no means opposite
to this doctrine.) "But" (says he) if thou do that which is EVIL, be afraid;
for he bears not the sword in vain: for he is THE MINISTER OF GOD, a revenger
to (execute) wrath upon him that does evil. Wherefore (ye) must needs be
subject, not only for wrath, but also FOR CONSCIENCE SAKE. For this cause pay
ye tribute also: for they are GOD'S MINISTERS, attending continually upon this
very thing. Render, therefore, to all their dues: tribute, to whom tribute (is
due); custom, to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honor (12) See pages 55, 56,
and 71, concerning the kind of magistrates to whom honor is or is not due!
to whom honor. (Romans xiii. 1 to 7.) Now, be pleased to remark, that the
apostle has expressly and repeatedly assigned the reason why so much respect
and obedience is due to the higher powers, or to the ruler, or magistrate; for
he is (says the apostle) the MINISTER "OF GOD TO THEE FOR GOOD," etc. and
again, -- for he is the MINISTER OF GOD, a revenger to wrath upon him that
does evil: and again, -- FOR THEY ARE GOD'S MINISTERS; -- that is, they are
God's ministers while they maintain justice and righteousness in the execution
of their public charge, howsoever deficient their characters may be in other
respects, as private individuals; but, on the other hand, such an unjust ruler
as Ananias, for instance, who sat to judge ACCORDING TO LAW, and yet commanded
a person to be beaten CONTRARY TO LAW, such a ruler, I say, cannot be esteemed
a minister of God to us FOR GOOD, or a minister of God in any respect
whatsoever. A man, who is notoriously guilty of perverting the laws, and of
abusing the delegated power, with which he is entrusted, by acts of violence
and injustice, is so far from being "the minister of God," that he is
manifestly "the minister of the devil;" which is the express doctrine of the
common law of this kingdom, according to the most approved and most ancient
authorities; wherein we find it applied not merely to inferior rulers, but to
the supreme preme magistrate, even to the king himself, (13) The celebrated and
learned Henry de Bracton says, -- that a king can do nothing else upon earth,
as he is THE MINISTER and VICAR OF GOD, but that only which BY LAW he may do,
etc. And, a little farther, he adds, -- "His power, therefore," (says he,) is
of right, (or law,) and not of wrong, (or injury,) etc. -- That a king ought,
therefore, to exercise the power of right, (or LAW,) as THE VICAR AND MINISTER
OF GOD on earth, because that power is of GOD ALONE; but the power of WRONG (or
INJURY) is of the DEVIL, and NOT OF GOD, and the work of which so ever of these
the king shall do, of him HE IS THE MINISTER This is perfectly agreeable to the
doctrine of holy Scripture; -- "Whosoever commits sin" (said OUR LORD
HIMSELF) is the servant (or minister) "of sin." John viii. 34. Here is no
exception or exclusive privilege allowed on account of temporal dignity, or
offices of worldly power! All men that wilfully do evil, (be they high or low,)
are not only servants of SIN, but also SONS (as well as servants) OF THE DEVIL,
as our Lord himself declared, " Ye do the deeds of YOUR FATHER," etc. Ibid.
ver. 41. And, when those men, to whom he addressed himself, still contended
(notwithstanding their wicked deeds) that they were the sons and servants of
God: Christ replied, "Why do ye not understand my speech?" etc. -- Ye are of
(your) father, THE DEVIL, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a
murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no
truth in him. When he speaks a lie, be speaks of his own: for he is a liar,
and the father of it. Ibid. ver. 43 and 44. And, In like manner, THE DEVIL is
cortainly the FATHER, or PROMOTER, of every other immorality among men, as much
as he is of murder, lying, and deceit, howsoever dignified the visible agents
therein may be by the investiture of temporal honors, titles, and power, or
royal commissions! -- "Know ye not" (said the apostle Paul) that to whom ye
yield yourselves SERVANTS to obey, HIS SERVANTS (or MINISTERS) ye are to whom
you obey* whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness Romans
vi. 6.
whose work he shall do. While, therefore, he does JUSTICE, he is the VICAR (or
MINISTER) of the ETERNAL KING; but he is the MINISTER of the DEVIL while he
turns aside to INJUSTICE, for he is called king (REX) from WEDL RULING, and not
from REIGNING; because he is KING while he RULES WELL, but a TYRANT while he
oppresses the people committed to his charge with violent (or oppressive)
government. Nihil enim aliud potest rex in terris, CUM SIT DEI MINISTER ET
VICARIUS, nisi id solum quod de jure potest, etc. Potestas itaque sua juris
est, et non injuriae, etc. Exercere igitur debet rex potestatem juris, sicut
DEI VICARIUS ET MINISTER in terra, quia illa potestas solius Dei est, potestas
autem injuriae DIABOLI, non DEI; et cujus horum opera fecerit rex, ejus
MINISTER erit, cujus opera fecerit. Igitur dum facit justitiam, VICARIUS EST
REGIS AETERNI; MINISTER AUTEM DIABOLI, dum declinet ad injuriam. Dicitur enim
rex a been regendo et non a regnando, quia rex est dum been regit, tyrannus dum
populum sibi creditum violenta opprimit dominatione. Henrici de Bracton de
Legibus et Consuetudinibus Angliae lib. iii. c. ix. And nearly the same
doctrine in substance is laid down in Fleta, lib. i. c. 17.
if he rules contrary to law, by violating, corrupting, or perverting, in any
respect, the powers of government! And that excellent constitutional lawyer,
Lord Summers, informs us, that ST. EDWARD'S LAW even goes farther, (14) The
judgment of whole kingdoms and nations, concerning the rights, power, and
prerogative, of KINGS, and the rights, privileges, and properties, of the
PEOPLE, etc. See the 61st paragraph.
viz. That, unless the king performs his duty, and answers the end for which he
was constituted, not so much AS THE NAME OF A KING shall remain in him. Now,
when these constitutional principles of the English law are collated and duly
compared with the precepts before cited from the apostle Paul, they are so far
from being contradictory, that the full and clear meaning of them all may be
maintained together without the least inconsistency or discrepance of doctrine;
for we may surely say, with the apostle, "Render to all their dues," etc.
without seeming to favor the pernicious and dangerous doctrine of an unlimited
passive obedience! Render, therefore, to all their dues; tribute, to whom
tribute (is due); custom, to whom custom; fear, to whom fear; honor, to whom
honor. -- For, though custom, tribute, fear, and honor, are certainly due to
him who is the MINISTER OF GOD to us for good, yet, surely, no honor is due,
or ought to be rendered, to THE MINISTER OF THE DEVIL, to the perjured violater
of a public trust, who, in the eye of the English law, is not even worthy of so
much as the name of a king!

Fear, indeed, may too often be said to be due to such men when in power; but
it is a very different sort of fear from that reverential fear which is due to
him who is the minister of God to us for good! It is such a fear only as that,
which men have of a wild beast that devours the flock! He is fierce and strong,
say they, and, therefore, each individual, through fear of personal
inconvenience to himself, is induced to wink at the ruinous depredations made
upon his neighbors and brethren, so that, for want of a prudent and timely
opposition, the voracious animal (which in a state is a manyheaded monster)
becomes stronger and more dangerous to the community at large, till the unwary
time-servers themselves perceive (when it is too late) that, by their own
selfish connivance, respectively, as individuals, they have been accessaries to
the general ruin; and, as such, must one day be answerable to God for their
shameful breach of that LAW OF LIBERTY, (15) See my Tract on the Law of Liberty.
( Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself,) in which we are assured all the
law is fulfilled, (16) For all the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this;
thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself. Galatians v. 14.
and by which, we are also assured, we shall be judged! (17) So speak ye, and
so do, as they that shall be JUDGED by the law of liberty. James ii. 12.


This heavenly principle is the true and proper ground for patriotism, and
undoubtedly has always been the predominant motive of great and good men, (such
as the disinterested and loyal apostle Paul, following his Lord's example,) in
their opposition to the injustice of rulers and magistrates, though they
passively submit to personal injuries from other hands! for, in this, as I have
already remarked, consists the due distinction between the necessary Christian
submission to personal injuries, and the doctrine of an unlimited passive
obedience.

The SUBJECTION and OBEDIENCE to MAGISTRATES, enjoined by the same apostle in
his Epistle to Titus, (c. iii. 1.) must certainly be understood with the same
necessary limitations, -- Put them in mind (says the apostle) TO BE SUBJECT TO
PRINCIPALITIES AND POWERS, TOOBEY MAGISTRATES, ((...), says he, but then he
immediately subjoins,) to be ready to every good work. -- And no man can be
esteemed ready to every good work, if he is obedient to magistrates when their
commands exceed the due limits of the law; or if (contrary to the example of
the apostle himself) he neglects a fair opportunity of publicly
discountenancing and censuring any notorious perversion of justice and right by
a magistrate!

The same necessary limitation of the doctrine of obedience must also be
understood when we read the exhortation of another apostle on this head, viz.
Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake: whether it be
to the KING, as supreme; or unto GOVERNORS, as unto them that are sent by him
FOR THE PUNISHMENT OF EVIL DOERS, and for the PRAISE OF THEM THAT DO WELL. For
so is the will of God, that with WELL-DOING ye may put to silence the ignorance
of foolish men: as free, and not using (your) liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the servants of God! (1 Peter ii. 13-16.) GOVERNORS are
here declared to be sent for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise
of them that do well; to such, therefore, as answer this description, the
submission and honor enjoined in the context are undoubtedly due; but,
whenever the governors themselves become the evil doers, and, like Ananias,
instead of praising and encouraging "them that do well," do notoriously abuse,
oppress, and murder, them, as he did, (18) The apostle Paul was so far from
retracting any part of his severe censure and remonstrance against Ananias,
that he afterward (before Felix) defied Ananias and the rest of his accusers
to show that he had been guilty of any the least misdemeanour ever since his
last arrival at Jerusalem, and more particularly while "he stood before the
council," (meaning the time when he foretold that God should smite that whited
wall, Ananias,) "or else" (said he to Felix) let these same here say, (meaning
the high priest Ananias, the elders, and their orator, Tertullus, mentioned in
the first verse of the chapter,) if they have found any EVIL DOING The word in
the original is (...), signifying rather injustice, or unrighteousness, than
EVIL-DOING; and as the former may be essected by words as well as by deeds,
this public challenge from the mouth of the apostle includes a complete
justification of all that he either said or did on that day before the council.
IN ME WHILE I STOOD BEFORE THE COUNCIL, except it be for this one voice, (now
he once more provokes the malicious Sadducee,) that I cried, standing among
them, Touching THE RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD I am called in question by you this
day. (Acts xxiv. 20.) This is a manifest declaration that there was nothing
reprehensible either in his behavior or words on that day before the council,
because his declaration concerning the resurrection of the dead was the only
one voice (or expression) which he supposed these Sadducees could call in
question and lay to his charge!
it would be a manifest perversion of the text to suppose that we are required
thereby to submit ourselves to every ordinance of man, (19) The apostles and
disciples of Christ were so far "from submitting themselves to every ordinance
of man," that they boldly rejected the unjust commands even of the high priest
and the whole national council of the Jewish state! The great council, called
SANHEDRIM, i. e. (...), (the commands of which they rejected,) included at that
time all persons of their nation that bore any public authority or dignity
among them, for the text expressly informs us that their RULERS, and ELDERS,
and SCRIBES, and ANNAS, THE HIGH PRIEST, (and the high priests since the time
of the Maccabees were generally considered as a sort of princes,) and Caiaphas,
and John, and Alexander, and as many as were of the kindred of the high priest,
were gathered together at Jerusalem.

No power, therefore, amongst the Jews, could be more respectable (in regard to
temporal authority) than this great national council: and the apostle Peter
accordingly acknowledged their legal authority at first, by respectfully
addressing them, saying, -- Ye rulers of the people and elders of Israel, etc.

Yet, notwithstanding the temporal authority of this awful assembly of rulers
and elders, (or senators,) they were publicly disregarded and contradicted by
the apostles even in their presence, upon the very first proposal of an
unreasonable and unlawful ORDINANCE; for "they called them," (the apostles,)
and COMMANDED THEM not to speak at all, nor teach in the name of Jesus. -- But
Peter and John answered and said unto them, whether it be right in the sight of
God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. For we cannot but speak
the things we have seen and heard. (Acts iv. 19 and 20.) And afterward, when
they were brought a second time before the said great council to answer for
their breach of this ORDINANCE OF MAN, the high priest asked them, saying, DID
NOT WE STRAIGHTLY COMMAND YOU that you should not teach in this name, and
behold ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine, and intend to bring this
man's blood upon us. Then Peter and the other apostle answered and said, -- WE
OUGHT TO OBEY GOD RATHER THAN MEN, etc. This sentence, in effect, holds good
with respect also to the rejection of every public ordinance that is contrary
to reason, justice, or natural equity, as well as those that are contrary to
the written word of God! This I have shown more at large in my Declaration of
the People's Right.


without admitting such just and necessary exceptions to the doctrine as I have
already cited from the example of the apostle Paul, and even from that of our
Lord himself.

And, therefore, though the apostle Peter adds, -- Honor all (men): love the
brotherhood: fear God: honor the king: yet he must necessarily be understood
to mean, with the apostle Paul, that we must render honor to whom honor is
DUE, and not to honor such men and such kings as are unworthy of honor! (20)
To the example of the patriotic apostle, Paul, upon this point, I must now add
that of another chosen vessel of Christ, the protomartyr Stephen: this
excellent man, "full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom," (Acts vi. 3.) "full of
faith and power," (v. 8.) and whose wisdom and spirit none were able to resist:
(v. 10.) -- This excellent man, I say, has left us by his own example an
unquestionable precedent on record to demonstrate that HONOR IS NOT DUE to the
highest temporal authority on earth, not even to a great national council of
rulers and elders, while they exercise their authority in unjust prosecutions,
and abuse their power by enacting unreasonable and tyrannical ordinances. The
great council of the Jewish state had "straightly commanded" the aposties and
disciples of Christ (as I have already remarked in a preceding note) not to
speak at all, nor teach in the name of Jesus; which command, it seems, was
given lest their preaching should "bring this man's blood" (said the high
priest, meaning the blood of our LORD JESUS) "upon us:" but Stephen paid so
little regard either to the unlawful command itself, or to the reason of it,
that he afterward publicly upbraided the whole council, with the high priest
at the head of it, (in the most stimulating and unreserved terms,) as the
betrayers and murderers of that just One! -- Ye stiff-necked, and uncircumcised
in heart and ears, (said he to their faces in the public assembly,) ye do
always resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers (did), so (do) ye. Which of the
prophets have not your fathers persecuted? And they have slain them which
showed before of the coming of the JUST ONE, of whom ye have been now the
BETRAYERS and MURDERERS, etc. (Acts vii. 51 and 52.) Words could not well be
sharper than these, which is manifest from their effect; for the text testifies
that when they heard these things they were CUT TO THE HEART, and they gnashed
on him with (their) teeth. (V. 54.) Thus it clearly appears that the holy,
innocent, and meek Stephen did not think himself bound (like our
undistinguishing passive-obedience men) to submit to every ordinance of man,
etc. nor to honor all men, without making reasonable and due exceptions! Nay,
so far from honoring men merely on account of their temporal dignity, it is
manifest that he treated the whole body of rulers with the utmost severity and
contempt, while he thought them unworthy of honor, and yet there is no doubt
but that he most conscientiously, on every occasion, rendered honor to whom
honor WAS DUE!


But what men (it will be said) are to be esteemed the proper judges of desert
in such cases, so as to determine with propriety when honor is or is not to be
rendered? To which I answer, -- Every man is a judge of it if he be not an
idiot or mad man! Every man of common sense can distinguish justice from
injustice, right from wrong, honorable from dishonorable, (21) See my Tract
on the Law of Nature and the Principles of Action in Man, wherein, I hope, this
point is fully demonstrated.
whenever he happens to be an eye or ear witness of the proper circumstances of
evidence for such a judgment! Every man, (except as above,) be he ever so poor
and mean with respect to his rank in this life, inherits the knowledge of good
and evil, or REASON, from the common parents of mankind, and is thereby
rendered answerable to GOD for all his actions, and answerable to MAN for many
of them!

In this hereditary knowledge, and in the proper use of it, (according to the
different stations of life in which men subsist in this world,) consists the
equality of ALL MANKIND in the sight of GOD, and also in the eye of the law, I
mean the common law and rules of natural justice, which are formed upon the
selfevident conclusions of human reason, and are the necessary result of the
abovementioned hereditary knowledge in MAN. Every man knows, by what we call
conscience, (which is only an effect of human reason upon the mind,) whether
his own actions deserve the censure of the magistrate, who bears not the sword
in vain! And the same principle of hereditary knowledge enables him to judge
also concerning the outward actions of other men, whether they be just or
unjust; whether they be praiseworthy or censurable!

But, if a man abuses his own natural reason, and suffers himself to be blinded
by private interest, by passion, or unreasonable resentment, or by pride, envy,
or personal partiality, and is thereby led to misconstrue the actions of his
superiors, to behave unseemly toward them, and to censure them publicly
without a just cause, the conscience of such an offender against reason will
speedily inform him that he has cause to fear the magistrate, and that he is
liable to suffer for his misbehaviour "as an evil doer:" but, when the like
faults are discoverable on the other side, that is, on the side of the superior
or magistrate, (as it happened in the case of Ananias,) a just censure of the
unjust magistrate, even though it comes from the poorest and meanest man that
happens to be present, will have its due weight in the opinion of all
unprejudiced and disinterested persons, and may occasion a considerable check
to the progress of injustice; and, therefore, if any man neglects such an
opportunity (when he has it in his power) of making a personal protest (as Paul
did) against the public injustice of a wicked magistrate, he strengthens the
hand of iniquity by his timidity and remissness, and becomes accessory to the
public disgrace by refusing his endeavors, according to his abilities,
(howsoever small,) to vindicate the laws of God, and maintain the common rights
of his neighbors and brethren. Such an one unhappily demonstrates that he has
more fear of MAN than of GOD, and much more love for himself than he has for
his neighbor and country, and, consequently, in that awful day, when he shall
be judged by the law of liberty, (22) James ii. 12. See also my Tract on the
Law of Liberty.
must be liable, (unless a timely repentance should have previously restored
him to a better use of that hereditary knowledge for which all men are
accountable,) must be liable, I say, to be cast with the unprofitable servant
into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth! Matthew. xxv.
30.

ALL MEN, therefore, be they ever so rich, or ever so poor and mean, are
REQUIRED to vindicate the cause of truth, justice, and righteousness, whenever
they have a favorable opportunity of doing so; they ARE REQUIRED, I say,
because they ARE ENABLED by their NATURAL KNOWLEDGE of GOOD and EVIL to discern
and judge concerning the fitness or unfitness of human actions, and of the
justice or injustice of all measures and proceedings that happen to fall within
the reach of their inspection and consequent observation. He, who denies this,
is ignorant of the true dignity of human nature, and wants a teacher to point
out to him not only the equality of mankind before God, but also the universal
conditions of man's subsistence in the world! -- THE HEREDITARY KNOWLEDGE OF
GOOD AND EVIL may, at least, be esteemed as the ONE TALENT for which all
mankind are accountable to the universal Lord! And, therefore, if they wilfully
abuse or bury THIS TALENT, they have surely nothing to expect but the
condemnation abovementioned of the unprofitable servant!

Shall we blame the patriotic apostle, then, for his zeal in vindicating the
natural rights of mankind against an UNJUST JUDGE, when he had so fair an
opportunity of protesting against his iniquity? God forbid! Let us, on the
contrary, revere his example, which, in reality, affords no opposition to the
doctrine laid down in the beginning of this Tract concerning the necessity of
Christian submission to personal injuries. If he, sometimes, freely and
courageously expressed his resentment for personal ill usage, (23) In pursuing
the examination of this subject concerning resentment for personal ill usage, I
was gradually led to consider the present unnatural though prevailing practice
of DUELLING; and this occasioned my Remarks on the Opinions of some of the most
eminent Writers on CROWN LAW, respecting the due distinction between
MANSLAUGHTER and MURDER, (printed in 1773,) which Remarks were, at first,
intended as a continuation of this tract; but finding, soon afterward, that
some publication, to correct the common mistaken doctrines concerning
manslaughter and duelling, was become more immediately necessary, I thought it
advisable to detach what I had written on that subject from this tract, and to
print it as soon as possible, (with some sew alterations and additions,) rather
than to wait for the publication of these other tracts.
it was always ways in vindication of the law, on which (next to the providence
of God) the safety, liberty, and happiness, of the community depend; whereas,
the hasty revenger of his own cause is so far from being a friend to the
community, or a lover of liberty, that he himself is actually a tyrant; because
he neglects the necessary doctrine of Christian submission to personal
injuries, and on every occasion is ready to revenge his own cause with his own
hand, and to usurp all the distinct offices of judge, jury, and executioner! He
is so far from vindicating the law, like the generous and patriotic apostle,
for the sake of national liberty, that he manifestly sets himself up above the
law, (which is the first characteristic of a tyrant,) and thereby renders
himself in fact an open enemy to liberty, and consequently a disgrace to
society!

GRANVILLE SHARP.

"GLORY to GOD in the Highest!
"And on Earth -- PEACE,
"GOOD WILL toward Men!"

INDEX OF Texts referred to in the foregoing Work.
Levitious. Chap. Verses. Pages. xxv. 52. 18. Deuteronomy. xv. 12, 14. 21.
Ecclesiastious. xxxiii. 12. 34n. Isaiah. liii. 7, 8. 64 n. Matthew. v. 17. 63
n. xxiii. 24, 25. 61. 27, 28. 61. 30. 33. 61. xxv. 30. 88. Mark. ix. 6. 58 n.
Luke. chap. verses. pages. vi. 28, 29. 39. xiii. 32. 62. John. viii. 34. 72 n.
41. 72 n. 43, 44. 72 n. xv. 12 to 15. 37 n. xviii. 21, 22. 65. 23. 66. 36. 7.
Acts. iv. 8. 83 n. 10. 83 n. 19, 20. 83 n. vii. 51, 52. 84 n. 54. 84 n. xvi. 30
to 39. 44 n. xxii. 24 to 30. 45 n. xxiii. 1 to 5. 45 n. xxiii. 6. 67. xxiv. 20.
80 n. Romans. ii. 11. 34 n. vi. 6. 73 n. xiii. 68. 1 to 7 70. 9, 10. 37 n. 1
Corinthians. vi. 19, 20. 23. vii. 21. 7. 20, 21. 16. 21 to 23. 12 n. 21. 17.
21. 17. 22. 17. 23. 17. 20. Galatians. v. 14. 76 n. Ephesians. vi. 5 to 8. 7.
15. 5, etc. 34. 8, 9. 34 n. Colossians. iii. 2. 15. iii. 18. 32 n. 20. 33 n.
22. 33 n. 22, 23. 7. 23, 24. 33 n. 24. 34 n. 25. 31n. 34n. iv. 1. 35n. 36n. 1
Timothy. vi. 32 n. 1 to 8. 11. 1. 14. 38. 2. 24. 28. Titus. ii. 9. 32 n. 9, 10.
11. 10. 14. 32. iii. 1. 77. James. ii. 12. 77n. 84n. 1 Peter. ii. 13 to 16. 79.
18. 15.

INDEX OF THE Different Authors referred to.
A.
ASSEMBLY's ANNOTATIONS, 57 n. Ananias, 49 n. Ananus, 49 n. Augustine, bishop
of Hippo, 57 n.
B.
Benson, (Dr. Geo.) 25 n. Borner, 26 n. Bracton, (Hen. de,) 72 n. 73 n.
Broughton, (Hugh,) 47 n.
C.
Castalio, 47 n. Cornelius a Lapide, 58.
F.
Fleta, 73 n. Fox, (reverend Francis,) 59 n. Francowitz, (Mat. Flac.) 57 n. 58
n.
G.
Grotius, 59 n.
H.
Hammond, 28. Heinsius, 47 n.
J.
Josephus, 52 n. 53 n. 57 n. Judgment of whole kingdoms and nations, etc. 74
n. Justin Martyr, 21.
K.
Kuster, 26 n.
L.
Law of Liberty, 76 n. 86 n. Law of Nature, 85 n. Lightfoot, 59 n. Lorinus, 57.
M.
Martin, (mons.) 58 n. Mill, (Dr.) 26 n.
P.
Pet. 2 and 3. MSS. so called, 26 n.
S.
Summers, (lord,) 73. Syriac version, 25 n.
T.
Tertullian, 21.
W.
Whiston, 54 n. Whitby, (Dr.) 59 n. 21. 25 n. 34 n.
INDEX OF THE Various Topics discussed in this Work.
A.
ANANIAS. See FRANCOWITZ, MARTIN, also high priest, judge, and magistrate. St.
Paul's denunciation against him justified by the event, 52 n. his injustice and
cruelty toward the Christians, 53 n. Apostles. Did not submit themselves to
every ordinance of man without exception, 78 and seq. Author. A learned and
reverend correspondent differs from him in his notions of slavery, 4; his
character of that correspondent, 5; concessions of his, 6, 13; reasons for not
answering a letter from him at the time of receiving it, ib. his design in this
treatise is to demonstrate the absolute illegality of slavery among Christians,
7; esteems both master and slaves as brethren, 12; his reasons for printing his
Remarks on the Crown Law prior to this tract, 91 n.
B.
Believers. God alone their judge, 26.
C.
Christ. His disciples had no commission to alter the temporary conditions of
men, 7; claimed no authority to dispense with the Mosaic law, 62 n. Conscience.
Only an effect of human reason, 86. Correspondent of the Author's. See Author.
Does not think Christianity released slaves, etc. 6; an opinion of his
examined, 18 n. and seq. another, 30 n. and seq.
D.
Duties of placability, submission, and patience, too commonly misunderstood or
rejected by the Christian world, 41.
E.
Edward, (St.). The strictness of his law concerning kings, 74 and seq.
Egyptian bondage. A type of our spiritual servitude to the enemy of mankind,
20.
F.
Fear. That we have of a tyrant very different from that we have of a good
magistrate, 75. Francowitz, (Mat. Flac.). His opinion of St. Paul's answer to
Ananias, 57 n. Freedom. The attainment of it legally enjoined servants by St.
Paul, 12 n. 16.
G.
GOD. Submission in servants enjoined for conscience sake toward him, 15 and
seq. masters and servants equal in his sight, 17. See Believers, Judge. Good
and evil. See Reason. Good men. From whence their zeal arises for just and
equitable laws, 42. Grotius. Quoted by Dr. Whitby concerning St. Paul's reply
to Ananias, 59 n.
H.
High priest. St. Paul's spirited but cautious behavior before him, 46 and
seq. did not attempt to excuse or apologize for it, 47 and seq. 67; the
justness of that behavior, 56. 60. 90; Lorinus' paraphrase of the apostle's
reply to him, 57; which is strictly consonant to reason and natural right, 59;
our Lord's behavior, in the same predicament, exactly similar, 60 and seq. the
apostle's behavior not inconsistent with his doctrine, Romans xiii. 68 and seq.
which behavior he afterward defended before Felix, 79 n.
J.
Jews. Not to be sold as bondmen, 18, 19, 20. Sec Slavery. Injustice. Censuring
bad magistrates may tend to check its progress, 87; which is the duty of every
man, 89. Interrogatories. Their illegality, 64. Judge. One who perverts
judgment degrades himself from his office, 55; our Savior's character of
such, 61 and seq. who cannot be deemed ministers of God in any respect, 71.
K.
Kings. Are not ministers of God when they act contrary to law, 72; and see the
notes on that and the succeeding page. See Edward (St.); not worthy the name of
a king, 75; but are ministers of the devil, and unworthy of honor while they
do evil, ib.
L.
Law. A notorious breach of it by a ruler is a temporary disqualification, 55.
See Kings, Edward (St.). Loyal. What it is to be really so, 56.
M.
Magistrates. Their reprehension not inconsistent with Christian passive
obedience, 66 and seq. good one. See Fear, Injustice. Martin, (mons.). Agrees
with M. Flac. Francowitz, Grotius, Whitby, etc. concerning St. Paul's reply to
Ananias, 58 n. Masters. See GOD, Slavery. Ministers of God. See Kings.
Ministers of the devil. See Kings.
O.
Obedience. See Servants. Opp ession. That practiced by the slave-holders no
more justified by the New Testament than that of strikers or robbers, 41.
P.
Passive obedience. See Magistrates. Not due to evil magistrates, 77 and seq.
Patience. See Duties. Patriotism. The proper ground for it, 77. Paul, (St.).
His zeal for the Roman liberty, 42; his Christian patience and meekness under
personal injuries, 43. 44 n. See high priest. His injunction, Tit. iii. 1.
explained, 77. Peter, (St.). His injunction, 1 Pet. ii. 13 to 16. explained,
79. Price. The meaning of that word in 1 Cor. vii. 23. examined, 21 and seq.
Q.
Questions. Serious ones to the slave-holders, 30 and seq.
R.
Reason. Inherited by all men, except idiots or mad men, 84. 89; which renders
all men equal in the sight of God and the law, 85. See Conscience. The talent
for which all men are accountable, 90. Royal law. No single text to be depended
on, which will not bear the test of it, 27. Ruler. See Law.
S.
Sanhedrim. Its power and dignity, 81 n. Scriptures. Their honor what the
author has most at heart, 4. Servants, (Christian,). Their obedience frequently
insisted on by St. Paul, 8 and seq. the submission required of them does not
imply the legality of slaveholding, 11; on what principles that submission is
founded, 13 and seq. 24 n. which do not admit of any right or property in the
master, 15; submission enjoined by St. Peter both to the good and bad master,
for conscience' sake toward God, 15 and seq. See GOD, Slavery, Slave-holders,
Tyranny. Slave-holders. Cannot avail themselves of any of the texts relating to
Christian servants, 29. 38. See Questions, Oppression. Slavery. some particular
texts seem to prove the toleration of it amongst the primitive Christians, 3.
See Author. No more than a state of hired servitude among the Jews, 19 n. 21 n.
the text 1 Timothy vi. 2. no argument in favor of it, 24 and seq. that text
intended for servants, not masters, 26; so understood by Dr. Hammond, 26; the
texts which justify the slave's submission do not authorize the master's
tyranny, 30. (See the whole note in that page.) 40. Subjection (unlimited).
Inconsistent with the dignity of a Christian, 17; and entirely illegal, ib. See
Duties.
T.
Texts. See Price, Slavery, Whitby, Paul, Peter. Tyrants. See Fear. The folly
and wickedness of abetting them, 76; characteristics of one, 91. Tyranny. The
submission enjoined in the gospel no plea for it, 39.
W.
Whitby, (Dr.). Mistakes the meaning of the text 1 Cor. vii. 23, 21; is of the
same opinion with Grotius concerning St. Paul's reply to Ananias, 59 n. Whited
wall. The propriety of that expression of St. Paul, 52.
THE END.
ERRATUM.
Page 47, line 2, for hearsay, read hearing.

Tracts by the same AUTHOR. Printed for B. WHITE, at HORACE's-HEAD,
FLEET STREET.
I. A Short Treatise on the English Tongue. Being an Attempt to render the
Reading and Pronunciation of the same more easy to Foreigners. 1767. II.
Remarks on several very important Prophecies, first Edition, in 1768, (second
Edition, 1775.) This Book contains, 1st, Remarks on the Prophecy of Isaiah vii.
13 -- 16. -- That a Virgin should conceive and bear a Son. 2dly, Remarks on the
Nature and Style of prophetical Writings. 3dly, Remarks on the Accomplishment
of Isaiah's Prophecy, (vii. 8.) Within threescore and five Years shall Ephraim
be broken, that it be not a People. 4thly, On the Departure of the Scepter and
Lawgiver from Judah. 5thly, A Confirmation of the above Remarks by farther
Examples drawn from the Prophets, etc. III. A Representation of the Injustice
and dangerous Tendency of Tolerating Slavery; or of admitting the least Claim
of Private Property in the Persons of Men IN ENGLAND. Being an Answer to an
Opinion, given in the Year 1729, by the (then) Attorney General and Solicitor
General, concerning the Case of Slaves in GREAT BRITAIN. 1769. This Tract
contains many Examples of the monstrous Iniquity and Injustice of the
Plantation Laws respecting Slaves; as also some Account of the gradual
Abolition of the ancient English Slavery called VILLENAGE, which was at length
happily effected by the Wisdom and Perseverance of the English Courts of Common
Law. IV. Remarks concerning the Encroachments on the River Thames near
Durham-Yard. 1771. V. An Appendix to the Representation of the Injustice and
dangerous Tendency of tolerating Slavery. (See Number III.) 1772. VI. Remarks
on the Opinions of some of the most celebrated Writers on CROWN LAW, respecting
the due Distinction between Manslaughter and Murder; showing that the
Indulgence allowed by the Courts to voluntary Manslaughter in Rencounters,
DUELS, etc. is indiscriminate and without Foundation in Law; and is also one of
the principal Causes of the Continuance and present Increase of the base and
disgraceful Practice of DUELLING. 1773. The peculiar Case of Gentlemen in the
Army, respecting the Practice of DUELLING, is carefully examined in this Tract;
as also the Depravity and Folly of modern Men of Honor falsely so called. VII.
In two Parts. 1. A Declaration of the People's Natural Right to a Share in the
Legislature; which is the fundamental Principle of the British Constitution of
State. 2. A Declaration, or Defense, of the the same Doctrine, when applied
particularly to THE PEOPLE OF IRELAND. 1774. (2d Edition, 1775.) In these two
Pieces many Examples and Proofs are produced concerning the parliamentary
Rights of the People; viz. That the Assent of the People is absolutely
necessary to render Laws valid: That a free and equal Representation of the
Inhabitants of this Kingdom is necessary for the Salvation of the State, and
the Security of Peace and of Property: That the Representatives of the People
have no legal Right to give assent in any new Device without Conference with
their Countries: That it is an ancient and just Right of the People to elect a
new Parliament every Year once, and more often if Need be; and that no
Regulations whatsoever, wherein the Representatives are made Judges of their
two Elections, can be effectual against national Corruption! Examples are
likewise here given of several surreptitious STATUTES that are void through the
Want of due legal Assent; and of Others that are void by being unjust and
repugnant to constitutional Principles! The Danger of keeping standing Armies
is also demonstrated, and the Wickedness and Impolicy of Acting by national
Corruption! etc. etc.
The following Tracts by the same AUTHOR ARE Printed for B. WHITE, in
FLEET STREET, and E. and C. DILLY, in the POULTRY.
VIII. The just Limitation of Slavery in the Laws of God, compared with the
unbounded Claims of the African Traders and British American Slave-holders. To
this Piece is added a copious Appendix, containing, An Answer to the Rev. Mr.
Thompson's Tract in Favor of the African Slave Trade. Letters concerning the
lineal Descent of the Negroes from the Sons of HAM. The Spanish Regulations for
the gradual Enfranchisement of Slaves. A Proposal, on the same Principles, for
the gradual Enfranchisement of Slaves in America. REPORTS of Determinations in
the several COURTS OF LAW against Slavery, etc. 1776. IX. THE LAW of PASSIVE
OBEDIENCE; or Christian Submission to personal Injuries: Wherein is shown that
the several Texts of Scripture, which command the entire Submission of Servants
or Slaves to their Masters, cannot authorize the latter to exact an involuntary
Servitude, nor in the least Degree justify the Claims of modern Slave-holders;
and also that the several Texts, which enjoin Submission to Rulers,
Magistrates, etc. do not in any Respect authorize the dangerous Doctrine of an
unlimited passive Obedience. X. "THE LAW OF LIBERTY;" or (as it is called in
Scripture by way of Eminence) "the Royal Law," by which all Mankind will
certainly be judged! XI. THE LAW OF RETRIBUTION; or a serious Warning to
Great Britain and her Colonies, founded on unquestionable Examples of GOD's
temporal Vengeance against Tyrants, Slave-holders, and Oppressors. 1776. The
Examples are selected from Predictions, in the Old Testament, of national
Judgments, which (being compared with the actual Accomplishment) demonstrate
"the sure Word of Prophecy," as well as the immediate Interposition of divine
Providence, to recompense impenitent Nations according to their Works.
Tracts, by the same AUTHOR, now in the Press for Publication.
XII. A Tract on the Law of Nature and Principles of Action in Man. XIII. THE
CASE OF SAUL; being an Appendage to the former Tract, wherein the compound
Nature and various Principles of Action in MAN (with the Reality of
supernatural spiritual Influence, both good and bad) are proved by
unquestionable Examples from the History of that unfortunate Monarch, and also
from many other Parts of Scripture.

