STATUTES OF THE MAIDEN HOSPITAL, FOUNDED BY THE COMPANY OF MERCHANTS OF
EDINBURGH, AND MARY ERSKINE.

EDINBURGH: PRINTED BY WILLIAM SMELLIE.

M,DCC,LXXXIII.

ACT OF PARLIAMENT IN FAVORS OF THE MAIDEN HOSPITAL, FOUNDED BY THE COMPANY OF
MERCHANTS, AND MARY ERSKINE.
AT Edinburgh, the twenty-fifth day of March, one thousand seven hundred and
seven years, our Sovereign Lady, and Estates of Parliament, considering, that
the COMPANY of MERCHANTS of EDINBURGH, and MARY ERSKINE, relict of James Hair
drogist in Edinburgh, with the assistance of several noble and generous
benefactors, have erected a Hospital for maintaining and educating poor young
children of the female sex, and with the money given by the said Mary Erskine,
have purchased and acquired the great lodgings, houses, and yards, in Bristo,
for accommodation of the children of the said Hospital: And also considering
that the management of the said Hospital is settled on certain Governors,
Treasurer, Clerk, and other Officers, conform to certain rules and
constitutions agreed upon by the donators and benefactors, a part whereof are
contained in a contract past betwixt the present governors of the said
Hospital, and the said Mary Erskine, dated the twelth and thirteenth days of
March instant. Therefore her Majesty, and Estates of Parliament, hereby allow
and approve of the erection of the foresaid Hospital, and ratify and confirm
the same, together with the Rules and Constitutions already made for managing
thereof, particularly these contained in the foresaid Contract, with the said
Contract itself, together with such Rules and Constitutions as shall hereafter
happen to be made, for the better governing and regulating of the said
Hospital, and whole concerns thereof, the samen haill Constitutions and Rules
being always consistent with the laws of this kingdom, and with the amended
Constitutions contained in the said contract, and approven of by the Town
Council of Edinburgh. And farther, Her Majesty, and Estates of Parliament,
hereby authorize the Governors of the said Hospital to receive all
mortifications and donations that shall be made in favors of the samen;
approving hereby of the samen, and of all donations and mortifications already
made; declaring the said Hospital, in all time coming, to be a free Hospital;
and the foresaid great lodging, houses, and yards, and pertinents thereof, in
Bristo, purchased and doted for the use of the said Hospital by the said Mary
Erskine, to be free of all public burdens whatsomever, for the pious use above
mentioned; with power to the Governors thereof, not only to administrate the
funds and rents of the said Hospital with all donations already made; but
likewise to purchase and procure lands and tenements, and others, for the use,
benefit, and advantage, of the said Hospital. And, for that effect, to make and
grant, give, and receive all manner of writes, deeds, and securities necessary,
and to have and use a common seal, with such inscriptions as the Governors
shall think fit, for confirmation of the said deeds and writes. And generally
to have, use, and enjoy all such powers, liberties, and immunities, as any
Hospital has, or by law may have, within this kingdom. Extracted forth of the
records of Parliament, by Sir James Murray of Philiphaugh, one of the Senators
of the College of Justice, Clerk to the Parliament, and to her Majesty's
Councils, Registers, and Rolls.

Sic subscribitur, JA. MURRAY.

STATUTES OF THE MERCHANT MAIDEN HOSPITAL OF EDINBURGH.
IN the Hall of the Hospital in Bristo, the tenth day of February, one thousand
seven hundred and eighty-three,

The Donors and Contributors to the Hospital, their Heirs and Representatives,
being regularly convened by particular notice, and public advertisement in the
Newspapers, the Committee appointed by their last general meeting for revising
and amending the Rules and Constitutions of the Hospital, conform to the power
and faculty reserved to the contributors by the twenty-first chapter, laid
before them the following new draught of the Statutes.

STATUTE I. The Name and Designation of the Hospital.
THIS Charitable Foundation shall be called the MAIDEN HOSPITAL, founded by the
COMPANY of MERCHANTS of EDINBURGH, and MARY ERSKINE; and, in all rights and
writings of importance, in which the Hospital is concerned, it shall be
described by this designation, and no other.

STATUTE II. The Governors of the Hospital.
THE Management and Administration of the affairs of the Hospital, and of all
the Funds thereof, shall be in the following Council of Governors, viz. the
four Old Bailies, and Old Dean of Guild, who serve as such in the Town Council
of Edinburgh; three Ministers of the Gospel of Edinburgh or Suburbs, to be
elected by the Ministers thereof; the Master of the Merchant Company of
Edinburgh; three Assistants of the said Company to be elected by the Master,
Assistants, and Treasurer thereof; and nine others, who have been Masters,
Assistants, or Treasurers of the Company, or Benefactors to the Hospital, to be
elected by a General Meeting of the said Company; the Treasurer of the
Hospital, while he serves, without fee or salary; and, on account of the pious
and charitable MARY ERSKINE, two of the name of ERSKINE to be elected and
presented yearly, in terms of the contract with her, making in all twenty-four
Governors.

The Master of the Merchant Company to be the Ordinary Preses.

Which twenty-four shall be perpetual Governors of the Hospital, for managing
and directing all its affairs, with power and authority to choose and appoint a
Governess, School-mistresses, and such officers and servants as may be
necessary for education of the children and service of the House, and to
dismiss them when they shall see cause; to elect the children who are to be
admitted into the Hospital, and expel them for misbehaviour; to regulate the
diet of the family, and to settle and direct the government thereof; with power
also to make rules and bye-laws for the better administration and conducting
the business of the Hospital, such rules being no way inconsistent with the
statutes now ordained.

STATUTE III. The Election of Governors.
UPON the third Monday of October yearly, the several Societies who have a
right to elect Governors, as in the preceding statute, shall choose the
respective number of persons aforesaid, and a list of their names shall be
given in by the clerk of the Hospital, on the last Monday of October, at a
meeting of the Governors for the preceding year.

In respect the old magistrates commence their serving as such, and are
exauctorated before the last Monday of October, and that the annual election of
office-men of the Merchant Company is some space of time before said day, it is
provided, that they who served the preceding year shall continue Governors
until the last Monday of October yearly.

But none of the persons chosen Governors, as above mentioned, shall enter on
the administration, or have any voice or interest in the concerns of the
Hospital, until he or they solemnly swear the following oath.

"I A. B. do faithfully swear and promise, before God, that, to the best of my
knowledge and power, I shall carry and demean myself in all matters which
concern the election of the officers and children, or any thing else, belonging
to the Maiden Hospital, founded by the Company of Merchants of Edinburgh and
Mary Erskine, truly and honestly; and, if I know any person going about to
defraud or prejudge the said pious work, I shall obstruct it to my power, and
reveal it to the Governors."

After which, such of the former Governors as are not continued, shall be
honorably dismissed.

Then the Preses shall exhort the new Governors to make conscience of their
duty in the government of the Hospital, and, for that purpose, regularly to
attend the quarterly and other Meetings, and to visit the Hospital during the
months appointed them; and one of the ministers present shall exhort the
Children, the Governess, the Mistresses, and others, having charge of the
education of the young people in the Hospital, to attend to their respective
duties, faithfully as in the sight of God.

STATUTE IV. The Meetings and Quorum of the Governors.
FOR the management of the Hospital, and the administration of all its affairs,
there shall be seven stated Meetings of the Governors yearly, viz. Quarterly
Meetings on the third Mondays of January, April, July, and October; the last
Monday of October for passing the Treasurer's annual accounts, and receiving
the new Governors; and the last Mondays of November and May for electing girls
into the Hospital. But the Preses, and, in his absence, the Treasurer, may call
other Meetings, as often as the business of the Hospital shall require.

No Meeting of the Governors can proceed to business, unless there shall be
present at least eight of their number, including the Preses, who are declared
to be a quorum. In absence of the Ordinary Preses, the Old Dean of Guild shall
preside; in his absence, the first of the Old Bailies; in absence of all these,
a Preses shall be chosen for the time; and, whatever shall be concluded on by a
majority of those present, shall stand in full force; the Preses to have the
first, and, in case of an equality of voices, a casting vote.

All Meetings of the Governors for the business of the Hospital, Committees
excepted, shall be held in the Hall appointed for the Governors, unless
unavoidably impeded. And all the Governors shall be warned to every Meeting by
the Officer of the Merchant Company, who is to serve as Officer to the
Hospital, by delivering a billet at each of their dwelling-houses the day
before the Meeting at latest. He shall be paid by the Treasurer the quarterly
sum of (...)

STATUTE V. The Election and Duty of Treasurer.
ON the third Monday of October yearly, the Governors of the Hospital shall
choose a sufficient Merchant in Edinburgh to be Treasurer of the Hospital for
one year; but he may be continued for two or more years, if the Governors
think fit to elect him of new yearly. Before he is admitted to the exercise of
his office, he shall solemnly swear the oath following:

"I A. B. elected Treasurer to the Maiden Hospital, founded by the Company of
Merchants in Edinburgh and Mary 'Erskine, do swear, and faithfully promise,
with my best skill and power, to discharge all that is required of me by the
Statutes of the said Hospital, truly and honestly. So help me God."

The Treasurer's office is to receive all the Hospital's rents, and interest of
money; to keep all the stock and money belonging to the Hospital; and to uplift
and re-employ principal sums, as directed by the Governors; to pay all wages
and salaries due from the Hospital; to provide and pay all necessaries for the
Children and the House; to furnish the Governess with money for buying
provisions, and to take in her account thereof monthly; to attend to the
repairs of the building; to observe the conduct of the Governess, Mistresses,
and Servants; and, if necessary, report his opinion thereof to the Governors
of the Hospital.

He shall make out the accounts of his payments quarterly, fairly written in a
book, which he shall deliver to the Auditors, so as they may examine the
accounts, and, with their reports, lay them before the Governors at the
Quarterly Meetings, for approbation, and to be allowed in his Annual Account.
He shall also make out and deliver to the Auditors the whole Account of his
year's intromissions with the Stock and Revenue of the Hospital, to be examined
and reported by them to the Governors, at their meeting on the last Monday of
October; and, after that Account and Report are approved by the Governors,
they shall discharge the Treasurer of his intromissions, the Account and Report
shall be fully copied into the record of the Treasurer's Accounts, and, in case
of a change, signed by the Treasurer accounting, and his successor in office;
the discharged Account to remain with the Old Treasurer for his exoneration.
The Governors shall finish their approbation of said Account before the
admission of their Successors, that the Treasurer's Accounts may be judged by
those who knew how he has acted. At his removal, he shall deliver up to the
succeeding Treasurer all the Accounts and Papers belonging to his office,
together with all the Rights and Writings of every sort that belong to, or any
way concern the Hospital; of which Writings and Papers two inventories shall be
made and signed by the Old and New Treasurers, one to be kept by each of them.

If the Treasurer shall die, or be removed, before the annual expiration of his
office, the Governors shall, within a month after his death, or removal, elect
another, according to the terms of this Statute.

STATUTE VI. The Election and Duty of Auditors.
ON the last Monday of October yearly, the new Governors of the Hospital shall
choose four Auditors of the Treasurer's and all other Accounts which concern
the Hospital; of which Auditors, one shall be an old magistrate, one a
minister, and two others, all Governors for the time, who shall take the same
oath as the Treasurer, mutatis mutandis; and, if any one of them shall not
accept, or happen to die, the Governors, at their first meeting thereafter,
shall elect onother in his stead.

The Auditors, or any two of them, shall examine the Treasurer's Quarterly
Accounts at the end of every quarter, and deliver to the Governors, at each
Quarterly Meeting, the Account for the three last months, written in a Book,
containing all the particular sums paid during that time, with their report
thereon subscribed, which shall be publicly read, the Account either
comptrolled or allowed, and the approbation thereof signed by the Preses and
Clerk, with these words: 'By order of the Governors.' On the last Monday of
October yearly, the Auditors shall deliver to the Governors in Council the
Account of the Treasurer's intromissions for the whole preceding year, with
their report thereon, which shall be read publicly, and the Account comptrolled
or allowed, as the Quarterly Accounts. The benefactors to the Hospital, their
heirs and representatives, may, if they please, be present at auditing the
Treasurer's Accounts.

STATUTE VII. The Election, Office, and Duty of a Clerk.
THE Clerk of the Hospital shall be chosen by the Governors, and continue in
office during their pleasure only. His office and duty is to keep in order all
the Writings and Papers belonging to the Hospital, to attend the Governors at
their meetings, to minute their sederunts, to draw their orders and
resolutions, and to keep a clear and distinct record or digest of all their
proceedings, marking down in the margin of each sederunt every thing material
done at the meeting. He shall have the benefit of drawing all manner of
securities and writings which shall occur in the course of the business, and
shall receive no greater fee than is usually paid to the writers to the signet,
or town clerks of Edinburgh, in like cases. Before his admission to the office,
he shall take the oath de fideli, the same as the Treasurer. Upon his death or
removal, the Governors shall proceed within a month to the election of another
Clerk, in terms of this Statute. He shall be paid quarterly the sum of(...)

STATUTE VIII. The Election, Qualifications, Charge, and Duty of Governess.
AN unmarried woman of good character, and of the established religion of the
country, shall be chosen Governess of the Hospital. She must be free of the
burden of Children, not under thirty-five, nor above fifty years of age, and
well qualified for all the duties of the office. She shall have the charge and
superintendance of the whole house and family, and be accountable for her
management to the Governors. In this she shall strictly observe the Rules for
the government and order of the House appointed by the Governors of the
Hospital the twenty-seventh day of May seventeen hundred and seventy-six, or
such other Rules as they shall afterward ordain. That, after considering the
Statutes and Rules of the Hospital, a copy of which shall be previously given
her, she shall, in the presence of the Governors, solemnly take the following
oath:

"I A. B. elected Governess of the Maiden Hospital founded by the Company of
Merchants of Edinburgh and Mary Erskine, do swear, and faithfully promise,
before God, that, to the best of my power, I shall discharge all that the
Statutes and Rules of the Hospital require of me, and shall do my best to see
them observed by all others under my care and inspection; and I promise
faithful obedience to the present Governors of the Hospital, and their
successors in office."

After which, she shall, in the presence of the Mistresses, Children, and
Servants, be publicly declared Governess over them, and they commanded to yield
her all respectful obedience, on pain of being expelled the Hospital.

She having the whole charge of the House committed to her, shall keep an exact
Inventory of the household furniture and linens, and deliver the same to the
Treasurer, before making up his annual Accounts. She shall be also careful to
keep the furniture, with all the apartments of the house, neat, clean, and in
good order, and shall not be any night out of the Hospital without leave of the
Preses, or the Treasurer, or two of the Governors.

If, at any time, the Governess shall marry, her place shall thereby become
void. The Governor may also remove her from her office at any time, and for
any cause they think she deserves to be dismissed. If, through infirmity, old
age, or otherwise, she shall become unable to discharge her duty, which shall
be made unquestionably to appear to the Governors, then she shall be
respectfully dismissed from her office; but, if she has served in it any
considerable time, ten years at least, and be not able to maintain herself, she
shall be allowed suitable lodging and maintenance in the Hospital during life,
or, in the option of the Governors, such an annual pension, out of the House,
as they shall judge proper.

In case of a vacancy in this office, the Governors shall, with all convenient
expedition, inquire after and elect a new Governess. She shall be paid
quarterly the sum of(...)

STATUTE IX. The Qualifications, Election, and Duty of the Schoolmistresses.
THERE shall be chosen as many Schoolmistresses as the Governors think the
number of girls in the House require. They must be unmarried, free of the
burden of children, not under twenty-five, nor above forty years of age, of
good character, of the established religion of the country, and well qualified
for all the duties of their office. They shall teach the children to read, to
sew colored and white seam, the washing and dressing of linens, and such other
parts of education as belong to their different departments, and are pointed
out to them by the Governors. They shall also have an eye over the morals and
manners of the children, and correct those under their care for their faults.
They shall be careful to see the schools and chambers kept clean, and in good
order, and the children neat and clean in their persons and clothes. They shall
strictly observe the Rules appointed by the Governors for the management and
order of the House, and, in all the duties of their office, shall be subject to
the direction of the Governess, to whom they must give a respectful obedience,
and set an example thereof to the children and servants.

The Schoolmistresses may be dismissed in the same manner as the Governess; and
their office shall become void on marriage. In like manner, they may be
rewarded for long and faithful service, of twenty years at least, if the
Governor shall think fit. On the marriage, dismission, or death of a
Schoolmistress, the Governors shall inquire after and elect another with all
proper expedition. Each Mistress shall be paid quarterly the sum of(...)

STATUTE X. A Master, or Masters, to teach Writing and Arithmetic, Church
Music, and Reading. A Chaplain, to say Prayers, and catechize the Children.
AS, from the increased number of girls now in the House, it is found
impracticable for the Governess or Mistresses faithfully to discharge their
respective duties, and, at the same time, to teach them to write and to cast
accounts, to sing church-music, and to read with propriety, the Governors may
therefore choose Masters for these different branches of education, to attend
at such hours as they shall judge proper. The teacher of writing and arithmetic
shall be paid quarterly the sum of (...) and the teacher of churchmusic and
reading the sum of(...)

For the same reason, the Governors may choose a Chaplain regularly to say
prayers in the Hospital, and also to catechize and instruct the children in the
principles of religion, in such days, and at such hours, as they shall appoint.
He shall be paid quarterly the sum of(...)

Neither the Teaching Masters nor Chaplain shall reside in the Hospital.

STATUTE XI. The Qualifications and Election of Poor Children.
THERE shall be chosen and admitted into the Hospital so many Girls as the
stated and certain revenue shall be able to maintain and educate, with the
reservation after provided. They shall be the children or grandchildren of such
who are or were merchants, burgesses of Edinburgh, or ministers of Edinburgh,
Canongate, Leith, or West Church, or who have been Governors of, or
benefactors to the Hospital; reserving to Patrons their right of presenting any
Girls who are objects of charity, unless, by the patronage, it be otherwise
restricted, providing they present within a year after every vacancy, otherwise
the presentation shall fall pro ista vice, and the Governors may elect a Girl
to supply the vacancy, qualified as above expressed.

It is provided, that no girls be chosen or presented, either on patronage, or
otherwise, who are under seven, or above eleven years of age. They must be
wholesome, and sound in body and mind at their entry to the Hospital; and,
seeing the intention of this foundation is only to relieve the poor, none are
to be chosen or admitted, until it is certified to the Governors that the
parents are unable to maintain them, or that the children have not whereupon to
maintain themselves; and the Governors are strictly required, on their
consciences, to choose none but such as are objects of this charity. It is also
specially recommended to the Govervours, not to receive into the Hospital a
greater number of children than they can reasonably suppose the stated and
clear revenue will easily maintain and educate, after the reservation of a
certain part thereof, to be added to stock, for incidental expenses, and for
building a new Hospital, when found necessary, as the present House is very old.

The ordinary election of Girls shall be twice in the year, viz. the last
Mondays of November and May, when it is to be considered by the Governors what
vacancies there are, and how many the certain and stated revenue of the
Hospital, making a reserve as above, is able to maintain, that so many,
qualified as above expressed, may be chosen. They shall have lodging, diet,
clothing, washing, and common fires allowed them, besides education, suitable
to the design of this charitable institution.

The Girls may continue in the Hospital until they are seventeen years of age,
and no longer; but, should any of them be guilty of any immorality or
misbehaviour, or be disobedient to the Mistresses, they may be put out of the
Hospital, if the Governors shall think they deserve to be expelled.

It is appointed and declared, that the ministers of Edinburgh, Canongate,
Leith, and West Church, who have been very instrumental in promoting the
interest of the Hospital, and their successors in office, shall jointly have
the presentation of two girls in all time coming; the one unlimited, the other
limited to a daughter or granddaughter of a merchant-burgess of Edinburgh, or
minister of the church of Scotland. And it is likewise hereby declared, that
the successors of the worthy Mary Erskine shall, in all time coming, have the
presentation of four girls, qualified in terms of the contract before mentioned.

STATUTE XII. For securing the Stock and Estate, and safe keeping of Rights and
Writings belonging to the Hospital.
IN respect frequent losses fall out in lending money, it is appointed that no
money belonging to the Hospital shall be laid out or employed, but by warrant
of the Governors, voted by way of balloting, and that either for purchasing
land, or on sufficient heritable bonds, or to the city of Edinburgh, on the
public security, or to two or more responsible persons, bound, conjunctly and
severally, provided the sum lent to them do not exceed five hundred pounds
Sterling.

And that the rights, securities, and other writings, may be safe, and kept in
good order, it is appointed that they shall be lodged in the press now fitted
up, fire proof, in the New Hall of the Hospital.

STATUTE XIII. The Salaries due from the Hospital.
THE Salaries of the Clerk and Officer, of the Governess, Schoolmistresses,
Teaching Masters, and Chaplain, payable quarterly, and left blank in the
Statutes, shall be appointed and filled up by the Governors, after due
consideration and experience, of what may be suitable to be allowed for the
time, which may be augmented or diminished afterward, as they shall see cause.
And none bearing office, or serving in the Hospital, shall take any gift or
perquisite from the children, their parents, or friends, on pain of deprivation.

STATUTE XIV. Power reserved to the Contributors for revising and altering the
Statutes.
FOR the better establishing and improving the government of the Hospital, it
shall be lawful for the donors and contributors, their heirs and
representatives, to meet by themselves or proxies, in the Hall of the Hospital,
as often as they shall find it necessary, or be desired by the Governors, for
the purpose of revising or altering the Statutes, there being always present at
such meetings at least fifteen donors and contributors, whose donations and
mortifications amount to twenty thousand pounds Scots; and it shall be lawful
for them to reconsider the foresaid Statutes and Rules, and alter or innovate
the same, or add thereto, as they shall judge proper, keeping always the
original purposes of the Institution in view; and the articles agreed on
between the Governors and Mary Erskine, contained in the contract before
mentioned; providing that such alterations, innovations, or additions, be
agreed to by at least two thirds of the persons present, and subscribed by
them. And, in case, at any of the said meetings, there shall not be a full
quorum, as above mentioned, it shall be lawful to such as have met to adjourn
from time to time, until they get a full quorum, and proceed as above.

And it is further ordained, that it shall be competent to the donors and
contributors, or one appointed by them, to inspect the accounts and management
of the Hospital; and, for that purpose, the necessary accounts and papers shall
lie open to their inspection on the first Monday of November yearly, from the
hour of ten in the morning to two o'clock afternoon, in the Hall of the
Hospital.

RATIFICATION OF THE STATUTES.
THE Statutes contained in this and the sixteen preceding pages being read, and
deliberately considered, are agreed to, and unanimously approven, by the
General Meeting of Donors and Contributors, and appointed to be punctually
observed and obeyed by all concerned, as the Rules and Constitutions of the
Maiden Hospital founded by the Company of Merchants of Edinburgh and Mary
Erskine, to continue in force until altered by a subsequent Meeting of Donors
and Contributors, conform to the power and faculty reserved to them by the
Fourteenth Statute; Declaring the former Statutes of no force or effect, in
time coming, the Statutes now ordained are delivered to the Governors of the
Hospital, for the rule of their conduct, in managing all the affairs thereof,
and to be printed, together with the act of parliament in favors of the
Hospital, and this Ratification; We Donors and Contributors, and Heirs and
Representatives or Donors and Contributors, whose Donations and Mortifications
amount to thirty-six thousand four hundred pounds Scots, have subscribed these
presents, written by Archibald Burns, clerk to James Forest writer to the
signet, at the Hospital in Bristo, Edinburgh, the tenth day of February one
thousand seven hundred and eighty-three years, before these witnesses, the
said James Forest, and Archibald Burns.

The Principal Statutes, subscribed by all the thirty Contributors present at
the Meeting, are lodged with the Hospital Rights and Writings.

FINIS.

