EXTRACT OF A LETTER TO A GENTLEMAN IN MARYLAND; Wherein is demonstrated the
extreme wickedness of tolerating the Slave Trade, in order to ^avour the
illegalities of our Colonies, where the Two First Foundations of English Law,
(Two Witnesses of God) are supplanted by opposite (and of course illegal)
ordinances, which occasions a Civil Death of the English Constitution, so that
these Two Witnesses may be said to lie dead in all the West India Islands!

LONDON: PRINTED BY JAMES PHILLIPS, GEORGE YARD, LOMBARD STREET. M.DCC.XCIII.

EXTRACT OF A LETTER, etc.
A Remark, which I made many years ago, respecting the illegality of taking up
Slaves that had escaped from their masters, had been useful (I was informed) to
some friends of humanity in America, in their endeavors to protect those poor
oppressed people. I cannot now find a copy of that paper, but the argument was
chiefly built on a reference to a text in Deuteronomy. chapter xxiii. v. 15, 16. -- Thou
shall not deliver unto his master the servant which is escaped from his master
unto thee: He shall dwell with thee, even among you, in the place WHICH HE
SHALL CHOOSE (manifestly as a freeman) in one of thy GATES where IT LIKES HIM
BEST: thou shall not oppress him. This, I observed, was no part of the
abrogated ceremonial law of the Jews; but, manifestly, a moral law, because the
reason of it still remains:-so that it must be of indispensible obligation as
long as the hateful oppressions of Slave-holders afford us any occasions of
exercising this duty to God of protecting the Slaves that escape from their
masters; and consequently I asserted that any colonial law, which opposes this
ordinance of God, by ordering the arresting and delivering up runaway Slaves,
or which, in any way, tends to deprive them of due legal protection, is, of
course, to be deemed a corruption, null and void in itself, as being contrary
to the second foundation of English law. This necessary consequence I urged
from a well known maxim of the English law respecting Statutes, (acts of
Assembly, or acts of Parliament) nec contra RATIONEM, nec contra LEGEM DIVINAM"
(statuta) existunt. (Doct. et Stud. c. 10. p. 35. b.) -- That Statutes exist
not against REASON, nor against the DIVINE LAW," and that "an unjust law is NOT
LAW. "Lex injusta non est lex." Prin. Leg. et Aequit.) And again, that these
two laws, (viz. the Law of Reason, and the Law Divine) "cannot abate, or turn
aside" -- Hae duae Leges declinari non possunt. Doct. et Stud. c. 17. p. 52.

But I have since had occasion to regard these two fundamental laws of the
English constitution, with still more awful attention; and therefore I must
farther remark, that the first foundation, the law of REASON, (as including all
the laws of nature, justice, and natural right) is certainly to be deemed the
law of God, as well as the second foundation (the divine precepts in the Holy
Scriptures), because the former is defined by high legal authority, to be "the
law written upon the heart of man," (and of course is the law of nature) which
cannot therefore be obliterated, nor changed by time or place, but ought every
where, and among all men, to be maintained, because THE LAWS OF NATURE ARE
IMMUTABLE" -- " Lex rationis in cord scribitur, ideo deleri non potest, nec
etiam recipit mutationem ex loco nec tempore, sed ubique, et inter omnes
homines servari debet. Nam JURA NATURALIA IMMUTABILIA SUNT. Et ratio
immutationis est quod recipient naturam rei pro fundamento, quae semper eadem
est et ubique. (Doct. et Stud. c. 2. p. 5.) This amply demonstrates the
propriety of declaring the law of Reason to be the first foundation of English
law; as being "the law of God, written" (as it were) on the heart of man -- It
is that knowledge of good and evil in man, which may fairly be deemed a
participation of "the Divine Wisdom," or of Christ himself, that true light,
which lights every man that comes into the world. (John i. 9.) and of course
renders every man obnoxious, through the knowledge of right and law, to the
divine vengeance for disobedience! Our first parents wilfully assumed this
knowledge, contrary to an express command of their Creator, (being deluded by
the spiritual enemy) and thereby entailed death and condemnation on all their
posterity, laying them under an absolute necessity to obtain redemption by a
still farther participation of the same "Divine Wisdom," or "Word of God."

There is also another legal term or title, for this first foundation of law;
viz. the eternal law, which in our books is properly defined to mean exactly
the same authority as the law of reason, i. e. the supreme reason of DIVINE
WISDOM, by which GOD WILLS that all things created by him, be moved and
directed to a good and proper end. -- LEX AETERNA nihil aliud est quam ipsa
SUMMA RATIO GUBERNATIONIS RERUM IN DEO, sive illa summa ratio DIVINAE
SAPIENTIAE, qua vult DEUS omnia a se condita moveri, et dirigi ad bonum et
debitum finem, etc. (Doct. et Stud. c. 1. p. 2.) -- and again, The LAW ETERNAL,
under another description, is called a perpetual and constant WILL to give to
every one his RIGHT. Lex Aeterna sub alia descriptione dicitur perpetua et
constans VOLUNTAS JUS SUUM UNICUIQUE TRIBUENS. (ibid.) Here then we find an
immovable foundation of justice, of right, of the rights of man, of
righteousness, of the law of nature, etc. for all these terms are parallel, or
of the same import; and are necessarily included in the law of reason or
eternal law, which is properly called the first law -- LEX etiam AETERNA
dicitur LEX PRIMA, et been dicitur prima, nam fuit ante omnes alias leges: et
omnes aliae leges dirivantur ab ea: -- The LAW ETERNAL is called the FIRST LAW,
and well is it called the first, for it was before all other laws; and all
other laws are derived from it. In this solemn view of the first foundation of
English law, it must evidently be deemed "a witness of God," as well as the
second foundation, the written word of God in the Holy Scriptures; and both
foundations may well be expressed together by the more compendious terms of
"natural and revealed religion." In no instance whatever are these TWO
WITNESSES OF GOD more obviously and undeniably resisted than in the toleration
of slavery and the Slave Trade, because these oppressions are iniquities which
militate against both the foundations, and therefore the present public
question, whether the Slave Trade ought or ought not to be abolished, may
fairly be deemed an infallible touchstone to discover the treachery of
pretended loyalists; for no man can be truly loyal to God and his country, who
is so totally devoid of first principles, as to favor slavery! Let those who
have ignorantly done so, recover their credit by redoubled endeavors to
restore the honor and constitutional law of their country, which has been
wounded by their treacherous neglect of the foundations of law, whereby they
will otherwise incur that indelible stain of infamy, which our common LAW
deservedly fixes on all persons who betray the law of the land, Legem terrae
amittentes perpetuam infamiae notam inde merito incurrunt. (3 Inst. p. 221).
But mark the authorities of our common law to this purpose -- "Liberty," is
declared by the maxims of the first foundation, to be "inestimable" -- Libertas
est res inestimabilis (Jenk. Cent. 52.) and Liberty is the greatest jewel.
(Grounds and Rudim. of Law and Equity, p. 196.) and therefore cruel of
necessity must that law be deemed, which augmenteth slavery, and diminishes
liberty -- says the excellent and worthy Chancellor Fortescue, who in very dark
times of prevailing bestial power, nobly asserted the supreme immutable
authority of God's two witnesses, as manifested in the first principles of our
English common law, or legal constitution. "For in behalf of liberty" (says
he), "human nature always implores" (or solicits favor), because Slavery is
introduced by man, and for vice; but LIBERTY is implanted BY GOD, in the very
nature of man: wherefore when stolen by man, it always earnestly longs to
return, as does every thing which is deprived of natural liberty; for which
reason the man who does not favor liberty is to be adjudged IMPIOUS and CRUEL.
The laws of England acknowledging these" (principles,) "give favor to liberty
in every case. "Crudelis etiam necessario judicabitur lex, quae servitutem
augmentat, et minuit libertatem. Nam pro ea natura semper implorat humana. Quia
ab homine et pro vitio, introducta est servitus. Sed libertas a Deo hominis est
indita naturae. Quare ipsa ab homine sublata semper redire gliscit, ut facit
omne, quod libertare naturali privatur. Quo IMPIUS et CRUDEL IS judicandus est
qui libertati non faver. Haec considerantia Angliae Jura in omni casu libertati
dant favorem (Chan. Fort. de laudibus Legum Angliae, c. 42. p. 101."
-- A part of this sentence is cited by Lord Coke, as a maxim of our common
law, -- Impius et crudelis, judicandus est qui libertati non favet. (Co. Lit.
124.) -- viz. Impious and cruel is the man to be adjudged, who does not favor
liberty. The opposite condition, therefore, to liberty, viz. slavery, is
properly declared by one of our oldest English authorities in law, Fleta, to be
" contrary to nature. "Est quidem Servitus Libertati contrarium; item
Constitutio quaedam de jure Gentium, qua quis Domino" (or rather "Dominio")
"alieno CONTRA NATURAM subjicitur," etc. (Fleta, 2d ed. p. 1.)
" (Fleta, 2d edit. p. 1.) which expression of Fleta is really a maxim of the
civil or Roman law (See Inst. Lib. 1. tit. 3. leg. 2.); and though such appeals
in the Roman code to the foundations of law, could not restrain the belluina
potestas of Roman tyranny in any of the ten kingdoms of the beast, as clearly
foretold in the scriptures, nor prevent improper additions to the code under
the name of law; yet surely the friends of Liberty may be thankful to the
Justinian code for the authority of its testimony against slavery: for when the
two first foundations of law shall hereafter be restored, through God's mercy,
to their due power and effect, -- when these two witnesses of God shall stand
upon their feet, and ascend into Heaven, (i. e. be established above all human
authority, and be acknowledged as the irresistible will of God, which must BE
DONE ON EARTH AS IT IS IN HEAVEN;) then shall our deluded Statesmen, Lawyers,
Commercial Politicians, and Planters, be compelled to understand that a more
forcible expression of illegality and iniquity could not have been used than
that by which SLAVERY is defined in the Roman code, as well as by our English
Fleta, -- i. e. that it is "CONTRA NATURAM," "AGAINST NATURE;" for consequently
it must be utterly illegal, a crime which by the first foundation of English
law, is justly deemed both IMPIOUS and CRUEL, and which in the strong
figurative language of God's prophets, under the second foundation of our law,
is compared to the guilt of cannabalism, or eating human flesh, as I have shown
in my remonstrance to the Citizens of London, Viz. 'That there are also many
other odious means of promoting human destruction, to which the guilt of
Man-eating is equally imputable in the Scripture sense of that horrible
depravity, which the sacred Writers manifestly attributed to the oppressors of
the poor, the orphan, and the stranger; to him that used his neighbor's
service without wages, and gave him not for his work; to those that "oppressed
the stranger wrongfully;" and to those, perhaps more particularly, who presumed
to make "private property" of the poor and the stranger, by iniquitous
ordinances, contrary to the foundations of law; depriving them of "judgment," I
mean that protection of the laws, which is emphatically deemed "the judgment of
God," and which all legal Kings and their Judges are still bound by their oaths
to maintain, viz. "judgment," (or "due process of the law,") without respect of
persons. For where this "judgment of God" is even only neglected, there can be
no legal government; but if the neglect of it be actually ordained by
"unrighteous decrees," pretending to give men a right to do wrong, and to
"establish iniquity by a law," the presumption must be heinous in the sight of
the King of Righteousness; for in no other sense were the persons whom the
Prophets charged with "eating up the people," ( flaying their skin from off
them, and chopping them in pieces, as for the pot, etc.) ever guilty of
Man-eating. And therefore this unnatural crime is surely still equally
imputable to the authors and promoters of the like oppressions in the present
times, who literally flay off the skin from off their poor unrewarded laborers
with Cow-skin whips, and cruelly exact all their labors! Even to be silent
when the suppression of such enormities was fairly brought to a national
question, after the clearest proofs of their existence, must be highly
criminal! And it would be uncharitable in me as a Citizen, if I neglected this
fair opportunity of a public charity to warn my fellow citizens, who have
withheld their testimony of abhorrence on this occasion, how far this horrible
guilt of Man-eating is really imputable! The illegal tyrannies by which this
guilt is most obviously incurred are, indeed, at a distance from your sight,'
etc.
and therefore these unnatural crimes of Slavery, and the Slave Trade, must
necessarily be deemed, like all other unnatural crimes, detestable, abominable,
and damnable, both to the souls and bodies of all that wilfully promote them!
The severity of these expressions cannot be restrained without injustice to the
high authorities on which this argument is founded.

It would be an awful inquiry to trace the time when the English Nation was
rendered obnoxious by Slavery, to the application of these horrible epithets,
impious, cruel, etc. And it is wonderful how the unnatural crime could so long
be overlooked, until usage and custom had established in all the British
Colonies, as a right, this enormous wrong; to the perversion of all legal
terms. We cannot conceive that the admission of Slavery into the Colonies has
been intentional on the part of government at home, but merely through want of
a fixed attention to the two first principles of law and religion. But the sworn
Judges of the Colonial Courts (when the oppression first began,) were without
excuse for permitting the evil of Slavery to take root without warning their
Royal Masters of the illegality, knowing that the constitutional law of the
kingdom, is to deny justice to no man without exception, ( nulli negabimus aut
differemus justitiam; Magna Charta.) and knowing that they themselves are sworn
to do justice and judgment without respect of persons, -- and also that under a
legal English Government, there can be but one law for all descriptions of
persons, according to two excellent maxims of the first foundation; "Turpis est
pars quae non convenit cum suo toto," and nihil in lege intolerabilius est
eandem rem diverso jure censeri. (Grounds and Rudim. of Law and Eq. No. 307,)
and consequently that without national reprobacy, there could be no such
personal distinctions in law as SLAVEHOLDER and SLAVE, so that they must be
bound in duty to their King and Country, to prevent in the King's name any such
oppression as Slaveholding. They ought to have known, that the limited temporal
permission which had been granted to the Israelites to hold Slaves, was
absolutely annulled by a subsequent command of God, to let the oppressed go
free, and to break every yoke, (Isaiah c. lviii. v. 5 and 6). There is no
exception to this command, which proves that a total Abolition of Slavery was
at that time, the declared Will of God: which is still more clearly
demonstrated by a future denunciation against the practice of Slaveholders, by
the prophet Jeremiah, just before the Israelites themselves were to be carried
into Slavery for their oppressions and neglect of God's laws.

Woe be to him that uses his neighbor's service WITHOUT WAGES, and gives him
not for his work. These are moral laws of eternal obligation, (though recorded
in the Old Testament) because the reason, justice, and mercy of them are still
obvious; for "ratio legis est anima legis," and therefore surely woe is most
alarmingly due to all governments, or pretended legal establishments, which
sanction such notorious injustice and oppression! Should a total disregard of
the two first foundations of the Engish Law and Constitution prevail, we shall
have not only to dread the infamy incurred, according to the maxim, Legem
Terrae amittentes, etc. but also to look for divine retribution from him who
has promised to destroy the destroyers of the earth, and to lead into captivity
those that led into captivity! And indeed after the most careful investigation
of all the prophetical marks of the antichristian beast, and its image,
compared with preceding times, according to the best Chronological Histories, I
am convinced that the accomplishment and end of the tyranny ( not by human
means, but "without hand") must be nearly approaching! The divine vengeance
seems ready to be poured upon us!

Let not the inhabitants of Maryland and Carolina conceive, that because their
territories are not included within the bounds of the four great monarchies,
the theater of the prophetical examples of Divine vengeance, that they shall be
less liable to the awful effects of it! For be assured that when the ten
kingdoms of Bestial Roman Government are destroyed, the will of God, as
expressed in the two foundations of English law, natural and revealed religion,
(God's two witnesses) will certainly be established "on earth as it is in
heaven," according to the universal prayer of the Christian church. -- Nay, it
will be established under the whole heaven, (Daniel vii. 27.) so that the only
effectual means of avoiding this universal destruction of bestial illegality,
is to acknowledge, reverence, and establish, the two first foundations of
English Law above all other authorities; for that must be the universal effect
of the kingdom of Christ on earth.

If the Legislators and Lawyers of Maryland and the Carolinas, shall be able to
suggest any thing like an argument in opposition to the high legal authorities
which I have cited, they must have more subtle heads and worse hearts than I
am willing to attribute to any one, who is not obviously actuated by the grand
spiritual enemy of man!

GRANVILLE SHARP.


