A GENERAL VIEW OF THE WRITINGS OF LINNAEUS. By RICHARD PULTENEY, M. D. and F.
R. S.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. PAIN, AT THE MEWS-GATE; AND B. WHITE, FLEET STREET. M.
DCC. LXXXI.

ADVERTISEMENT.
AS the Writer of this volume could not, for very obvious reasons, entertain
the most distant intention of standing forth the professed Biographer of
LINNAEUS, he wishes to preclude any undue expectations, by observing that, the
few memoirs relating to the life of this celebrated Professor, which will be
found interspersed in the first part of this View, were almost wholly collected
from LINNAEUS'S own writings, and other printed works; and serve, principally,
to relieve the tediousness of a bare account of books, and to connect in a
better manner the series and occasion of his publications. He regrets that his
sources of intelligence have not been sufficiently copious to enable him to
render these memoirs more equal to his wishes, and more worthy the acceptance
of the public. To those who are conversant with the works of LINNAEUS, he is
perfectly aware that these pages can afford but little amusement and still less
information, and can have no merit in their eye, beyond that of recalling to
their remembrance, a succession of facts and observations, with which they were
before acquainted. They will, however, concur with him in wishing to diffuse
the knowledge of the writings of so great a master, and in endeavoring to
excite an emulation in younger minds, for that science which they cultivate.

All the works of LINNAEUS, as far as they have come to the Author's knowledge,
are noticed in the succeeding pages; but, as most of them were subservient to
his great object the SYSTEM of NATURE, the outlines of that work bear a
principal part in this View of his writings.

The CLASSIFICATION of DISEASES, is but a small part of his works; yet, as
LINNAEUS was an early writer on that subject, which has since excited the
attention of many physicians, and is at this day not sufficiently discussed, it
has therefore been exhibited more largely than many of his other writings.

The AMOENITATES ACADEMICAE, although strictly speaking they are not LINNAEUS'S
own works, have yet so large a share of his authority stamped upon them, are so
intimately connected with his writings, and, it is presumed, are so much less
known than they deserve to be, that it was judged proper to give a brief
account of the whole collection.

The PAN SUECUS having been first presented to the English reader several years
ago, by the Author of this volume, in a periodical publication, is here
subjoined, with additional observations, and some improvements in the general
arrangement of the tables.

Few or no criticisms on the Linnaean system will be found in these pages. No
system yet invented can stand a rigorous examination through all its parts, and
LINNAEUS was, perhaps, better acquainted than any other man with the defects of
his own. The study of nature on scientific principles, notwithstanding the
manifold improvements of later years, may yet justly be considered as in its
infancy, and all arrangements hitherto proposed, have, in their turns, given
way to others. At present the system of LINNAEUS possesses the advantage of a
general superiority in the public approbation: how long it may enjoy this
pre-eminence, time only can discover: in the mean while, it would be a more
agreeable employment, to endeavor to strengthen its basis, supply its
deficiences, and heartily correct its errors, than to object to those anomalies
and imperfections, which will most likely be ever inseparable from artificial
arrangements; and as to natural method, it is as yet so far unknown, that, in
the vegetable kingdom Botanists themselves are not agreed on what principles it
ought to be established.

A GENERAL VIEW OF THE WRITINGS OF THE LATE CELEBRATED LINNAEUS, etc.
CHARLES VON LINNE, the son of a Swedish divine, was born May 24, 1707, at
Roeshult, in the province of Smaland, in Sweden; of which place his father had
the cure, when this son was born, but was soon after preferred to the living of
Stenbrihult, in the same province, where dying in 1748, at the age of 70, he
was succeeded in his cure by another son. We are told, in the
commemoration-speech on this celebrated man, delivered in his Swedish majesty's
presence, before the royal academy of sciences at Stockholm, that the ancestors
of this family took their sirnames of LINNAEUS, Lindelius, and Tiliander, from
a large lime-tree, or linden-tree, yet standing on the farm where Linnaeus was
born; and that this origin of sirnames, taken from natural objects, is not very
uncommon in Sweden.

This eminent man, whose talents enabled him to reform the whole science of
natural history, accumulated, very early in life, some of the highest honors
that await the most successful proficients in medical science; since we find
that he was made professor of physic and botany, in the university of Upsal, at
the age of 34; and six years afterward, physician to his sovereign, the late
king Adolphus; who in the year 1753 honored him still farther, by creating him
knight of the order of the Polar Star. His honors did not terminate here, for
in 1757 he was ennobled; and in 1776 the present king of Sweden accepted the
resignation of his office, and rewarded his declining years by doubling his
pension, and by a liberal donation of landed property, settled on him and his
family.

It seems probable, that his father's example first gave Linnaeus a taste for
the study of nature; who, as he has himself informed us, cultivated, as his
first amusement, a garden plentifully stored with plants. Young Linnaeus soon
became acquainted with these, as well as the indigenous ones of his
neighborhood. Yet, from the straightness of his father's income, our young
naturalist was on the point of being destined to a mechanical employment:
fortunately, however, this design was overruled. In 1717 he was sent to school
at Wexsio, where, as his opportunities were enlarged, his progress in all his
favorite pursuits was proportionably extended. At this early period he paid
attention to other branches of natural history; particularly to the knowledge
of insects: in which, as is manifest from his oration on the subject, he must
very early have made a great proficiency, since we find that he was not less
successful herein, than in that of plants, having given them an arrangement,
and established such characters of distinction, as have been universally
followed by succeeding entomologists.

The first part of his academical education, Linnaeus received under professor
Stobaeus, at Lund, in Scania, who favored his inclinations to the study of
natural history. After a residence of about a year, he removed in 1728 to
Upsal. Here he soon contracted a close friendship with Artedi, a native of the
province of Angermannia, who had already been four years a student in that
university, and, like himself, had a strong bent to the study of natural
history in general, but particularly to Ichthyology. He was moreover well
skilled in chemistry, and not unacquainted with botany, having been the
inventor of that distinction in umbelliferous plants, arising from the
differences of the involucrum. Emulation is the soul of improvement, and,
heightened as it was in this instance by friendship, proved a most powerful
incentive. These young men prosecuted their studies together with uncommon
vigor, mutually communicating their observations, and laying their plans, so as
to assist each other in every branch of natural history and physic.

Soon after his residence at Upsal, our author was also happy enough to obtain
the favor of several gentlemen of established character in literature. He was
in a particular manner encouraged in the pursuit of his studies by the
patronage of Dr. Olaus Celsius, at that time professor of divinity, and the
restorer of natural history in Sweden; since so distinguished for oriental
learning, and more particularly for his Hierobotanicon, or Critical
Dissertations on the Plants mentioned in Scripture. This gentleman is said to
have given LINNAEUS a large share of his esteem, and he was fortunate enough to
obtain it very early after his removal to Upsal. He was at that time meditating
his Hierobotanicon, and being struck with the diligence of Linnaeus, in
describing the plants of the Upsal garden, and his extensive knowledge of their
names, fortunately for him, at that time involved in difficulties, from the
narrow circumstances of his parents, Celsius not only patronized him in a
general way, but admitted him to his house, his table, and his library. Under
such encouragement, it is not strange that our author made a rapid progress,
both in his studies, and the esteem of the professors: in fact, we have a very
striking proof of his merit and seize, inasmuch as we find, that after
only two years residence, he was thought sufficiently qualified to give
lectures occasionally from the botanic chair, in the room of professor Rudbeck.

In the year 1731, the royal academy of sciences at Upsal having for some time
meditated the design of improving the natural history of Sweden, at the
instance particularly of professors Celsius and Rudbeck, deputed LINNAEUS to
make the tour of Lapland, with the sole view of exploring the natural history
of that arctic region; to which undertaking, his reputation, already high as a
naturalist, and the strength of his constitution, equally recommended him. This
tour had been made for the first time, with the same view, by the elder
Rudbeck, in 1695, at the command of Charles XI; but unfortunately the whole
fruit of that expedition, except two or three copies of the Campi Elysii,
perished in the dreadful fire of Upsal, in 1702.

As this expedition could not take place till the succeeding summer, LINNAEUS
spent his winter with his friends and relations in the south; and particularly
paid a visit, in January 1732, to his former preceptor Stobaeus, at Lund; whom
he left in February, to visit his native province of Smaland, and returned to
Upsal about the middle of April, to prepare for his journey. He left Upsal the
13th of May, and took his route to Gevalia, or Gevels, the principal town of
Gestricia, 45 miles distant from Upsal. Hence he traveled through Helsingland,
into Medalpadia, where he made an excursion, and ascended a remarkable
mountain, before he reached Hudwickswald, the chief town of Helsingland. From
hence he went through Angermanland, to Hernosand, a seaport on the Bothnic
gulf, seventy miles distant from Hudwickswald. When he had proceeded thus far,
he found it proper to retard his journey, as the spring was not sufficiently
advanced; and took this opportunity of visiting those remarkable caverns on the
summit of mount Skula, though at the hazard of his life.

When LINNAEUS arrived at Uma, in West Bothnia, about 96 miles from Hernosand,
he quitted the public road, and took his course through the woods westward, in
order first to traverse the most southern parts of Lapland. Being now come to
the country that was more particularly the object of his enquiries, equally a
stranger to the language and to the manners of the people, and without any
associate, he committed himself to the hospitality of the inhabitants, and
never failed to experience it fully. He speaks in several places, with peculiar
satisfaction, of the innocence and simplicity of their lives, and their freedom
from diseases. In this excursion, he reached the mountains toward Norway, and,
after encountering great hardships, returned into West Bothnia, quite exhausted
with fatigue. He seems to have been much struck with the singular use that the
Laplanders make of the Pinguicula vulgaris, which we call Butterwort, or
Yorkshire Sanicle: They receive the milk of the reindeer upon the fresh leaves
of this plant, which they immediately strain off, and set aside, till it
becomes somewhat acescent, and the whole acquires, in a day or two, a
consistence equal to that of cream, without separating the serum; and by this
method it becomes an agreeable food. When thus prepared, a small quantity of
the same has the property of rennet, in producing the like change on fresh
milk. But to return: Our traveller next visited Pitha and Lula, upon the gulf
of Bothnia, from which latter place he took again a western route, by
proceeding up the river of that name, and visited the ruins of the temple of
Jockmock, in Lula-Lapland or Lap-Mark; thence, he traversed what is called the
Lapland Desert, destitute of all villages, cultivation, roads, or any
conveniences; inhabited only by a few straggling people, originally descended
from the Finlanders, and who settled in this country in remote ages, being
entirely a distinct people from the Laplanders. In this district he ascended a
noted mountain called Wallevari, in speaking of which he has given us a
pleasant relation of his finding a singular and beautiful new plant (Andromeda
tetragona) when traveling within the arctic circle, with the sun in his view
at midnight, in search of a Lapland hut. From hence he crossed the Lapland Alps
into Finmark, and traverfed the shores of the North sea as far as Sallero.

These journies from Lula and Pitha, on the Bothnian gulf, to the north shore,
were made on foot, and our traveller was attended by two Laplanders; one his
interpreter, and the other his guide. He tells us that the vigor and strength
of these two men, both old, and sufficiently loaded with his baggage, excited
his admiration, since they appeared quite unhurt by their labor, while he
himself, although young and robust, was frequently quite exhausted. In this
journey he was wont to sleep under the boat with which they forded the rivers,
as a defense against rain, and the gnats, which in the Lapland summer are not
less teazing than in the torrid zones. In descending one of these rivers, he
narrowly escaped perishing by the oversetting of the boat, and lost many of the
natural productions which he had collected.

LINNAEUS thus spent the greater part of the summer in examining this arctic
region, and those mountains, on which, four years afterward, the French
philosophers secured immortal fame to Sir Isaac Newton. At length, after having
suffered incredible fatigues and hardships, in climbing precipices, passing
rivers in miserable boats, suffering repeated vicissitudes of extreme heat and
cold, and not unfrequently hunger and thirst; he returned to Tornoa in
September. He did not take the same route from Tornoa as when he came into
Lapland, having determined to visit, and examine, the country on the eastern
side of the Bothnian gulf: his first stage, therefore, was to Ula, in East
Bothnia; from thence to Old and New Carleby, 84 miles south from Ula. He
continued his route through Wasa, Christianstedi, and Biorneburgh, to Abo, a
small university in Finland. Winter was now setting in apace, he therefore
crossed the gulf by the island of Aland, and arrived at Upsal in November,
after having performed, and that mostly on foot, a journey of ten degrees of
latitude in extent, exclusive of those deviations which such a design rendered
necessary.

The result of this journey was not published till several years afterward,
during his residence in Holland. For the present he only gave in to the academy
a Florula Lapponica, consisting of a very few pages in the Acta Upsaliensia for
the years 1732 and 1734. In this little catalogue the plants are disposed
according to the system which was afterward called the sexual; and which we
should not have mentioned here, but to prove how early Linnaeus had laid the
foundation of that method, which he afterward wrought up to such perfection.

In 1733 he visited and examined the several mines in Sweden, and made himself
so well acquainted with mineralogy, and the docimastic art, that we find he was
sufficiently qualified to give lectures on those subjects, upon his return to
the university. The outlines of his system on mineralogy appeared in the early
editions of the Systema Naturae; but he did not exemplify the whole until the
year 1768.

In the year 1734 LINNAEUS was sent by Baron Reuterholm, governor of
Dalekarlia, with several other naturalists, into that province, to investigate
the natural productions of that part of the Swedish dominions. Each gentleman
had his particular department assigned; and they noted daily the observations
made relating to geography, etc.; but particularly, and as their principal
object, the economical and natural history, and mineralogy. A full account of
these observations was intended to have been published, but the design was laid
aside. It was in this journey that our author firft laid the plan of an
excellent institution, which was afterward executed in a certain degree at
least, by himself, with the assistance of many of his pupils, and the result
published under the title of Pan Suecus, in the second volume of the
Amaenitates Academicae.

After the completion of this expedition, it appears that LINNAEUS resided for
a time at Fahlun, the principal town in Dalekarlia; where he tells us that he
taught mineralogy, and the docimastic art, and practiced physic; and where he
was very hospitably treated by Dr. More, the physician of the place. It also
appears, that he contracted at this time an intimacy with one of that
gentleman's daughters, whom he married about five years afterward, upon his
settling as a physician at Stockholm.

In this journey he extended his travels quite across the Dalekarlian Alps into
Norway; but we have no particular account of his discoveries in that kingdom.
From its situation, however, in the same parallels of latitude and of
longitude, nearly, with Sweden, as well as from the face of the country, but
little variety could be expected; and from the Flora Norwegica of Bp. Gunner,
since published, the vegetable productions of nature appear to be nearly the
same, except that the Norway coast abounds with fuci or sea-wracks, not known
in the Baltic.

In the year 1735, LINNAEUS traveled over many other parts of Sweden, some
parts of Denmark and Germany, and fixed in Holland, where he chiefly resided
until his return to Stockholm, about the year 1739. He here took his doctor's
degree in physic, in June 1735. How clearly the great Boerhaave saw his merit
will appear hereafter. On the present occasion he sustained a thesis under the
title of HYPOTHESIS NOVA de febrium intermittentium causa. It is an enquiry
into the causes of the frequency of that distemper in Sweden, particularly in
Upland, and the south-east parts of that kingdom; which he was inclined to
attribute to a local cause, after the most minute scrutiny into the soil and
situation of those places where this distemper was so remarkably prevalent and
obstinate; and finally proposes, Whether it might not be owing to the strong
impregnation of the water with argillaceous particles? Whether or not he
afterward adhered to this opinion, we are uncertain, as it is but justice to
observe, that he did not republish this tract himself, since it was placed at
the head of the first volume of the Amaenitates, printed at Leyden, as we
believe, without his knowledge, by Dr. Peter Camper. In the mean time we may
observe, that howsoever insufficient this hypothesis may be to solve the
difficulties that have attended the search into the remote causes of this
disease; the advocates of the modern theory, relating to it, may think the
author's facts, of its frequency in low situations, confirm and illustrate in
no small degree their own, according to which it is imputed to miasmata arising
from moist and marshy ground.

In this year LINNAEUS also published the first sketch of his Systema Naturae,
in a very compendious way, and in the form of tables only, in twelve pages in
folio. By this it appears, that he had at a very early period of his life
(certainly before he was 24 years old) laid the basis of that great structure
which he afterward raised, not only to the increase of his own fame, but to
that of natural science.

In 1736, LINNAEUS came into England, and visited Dr. Dillenius, the late
learned professor at Oxford, whom he justly considered as one of the first
botanists in Europe. He mentions with particular respect the civilities he
received from him, and the privileges he gave him of inspecting his own, and
the Sherardian collections of plants. It is needless to say, that he visited
Dr. Martyn, Mr. Rand, and Mr. Miller, and that he was in a more singular manner
indebted to the friendship of Dr. Isaac Lawson. He also contracted an intimate
friendship with Mr. PETER COLLINSON, which was reciprocally increased by a
multitude of good offices, and continued to the last without any diminution.
Dr. Boerhaave had furnished him with letters to our great naturalist Sir HANS
SLOANE; but, it is with regret that we must observe, they did not procure him
the reception which the warmth of his recommendation seemed to claim.

Dr. Boerhaave's letter to Sir Hans Sloane, on this occasion, is preserved in
the British Museum, and runs thus -- LINNAEUS, qui has tibi dabit literas, est
unice dignus te videre, unice dignus a te videri; qui vos videbit simul,
videhit hominum par, cui simile vix dabit orbis. -- This encomium, howsoever
quaintly expressed, yet was in some measure prophetic of Linnaeus's future fame
and greatness, and proves how intimately Boerhaave had penetrated into the
genius and abilities of our author; and, strained as this parallel might be
thought, it is likely however that the opening of the sexual system, so
different from Ray's, by which Sir Hans Sloane had always known plants, and
particularly the innovations, as they were then called, which LINNAEUS had made
in altering the names of so many genera, were rather the cause of that coolness
with which he was received by our excellent naturalist. Probably we have reason
to regret this circumstance; for otherwise LINNAEUS might have obtained an
establishment in England, as it has been thought he wished to have done; and
doubtless his opportunities in this kingdom would have been much more
favorable to his designs, than in those arctic regions where he spent the
remainder of his days. In the mean time, we may justly infer the exalted idea
that Linnaeus had of England, as a land eminently favorable to the improvement
of science, from that compliment which, in a letter to a friend, he afterward
paid to London, when, speaking of that city, he called it "Punctum saliens in
vitello orbis." However, the English naturalists may now congratulate
themselves on having adopted a most excellent disciple of the Linnaean school;
who, with an illustrious associate, shared the perils of a navigation round
this globe, incited by thirst of knowledge alone; and who now enjoys that
general esteem among us which is due to his extensive science, and to his
singular liberality of mind and manners.

One of the most agreeable circumstances that happened to LINNAEUS, during his
residence in Holland, arose from the patronage of Mr. Clifford, in whose house
The country seat and garden of Mr. Clifford was at Hartcamp, about three miles
from Haerlem.
he lived a considerable part of his time, being now as it were the child of
fortune: -- Exivi patria triginta sex nummis aureis dives -- are his own words.
With Mr. Clifford, however, he enjoyed pleasures and privileges scarcely at
that time to be met with elsewhere in the world; that of a garden excellently
stored with the finest exotics, and a library furnished with almost every
botanic author of note. How happy he found himself in this situation, those
only who have felt the same kind of ardour can conceive.

Whilst in Holland, our author was recommended by Boerhaave to fill the place,
then vacant, of physician to the Dutch settlement at Surinam; but he declined
it, on account of his having been educated in so opposite a climate. He
recommended, however, to that department a young German physician of great
merit, who had the misfortune to fall a sacrifice, partly to the climate, and
partly perhaps to ill usage from the governor, in half a year after his
arrival: A circumstance which LINNAEUS has very pathetically lamented in the
Flora Suecica, No 515, when treating of a plant to which he has given this
gentleman's name.

Besides being favored with the particular patronage and friendship of
Boerhaave and Mr. Clifford, as is abovementioned, our author had also the
pleasure of being contemporary with, and of reckoning among the number of his
friends, many other learned persons, who have since proved ornaments to their
profession, and whose merit has most deservedly raised them to fame and honor.
Among these we may properly mention Dr. John Burman, professor of botany at
Amsterdam, whose name and family are well known in the republic of letters, to
whom our author dedicated his Bibliotheca Botanica, having been greatly
assisted in compiling that work, by the free access he had to that gentleman's
excellent library; John Frederick Gronovius, of Leyden, editor of Clayton's
Flora Virginica, and who very early adopted Linnaeus's system; Baron Van
Swieten, late physician to the Empress Queen; Isaac Lawson, beforementioned,
afterward one of the physicians to the British army, who died much regretted
at Oosterhout, in the year 1747, and from whom Linnaeus received singular and
very important civilities; Kramer, since well known for an excellent treatise
on the Docimastic Art; Van Royen, botanic professor at Leyden; Lieberkun, of
Berlin, famous for his skill in microscopical instruments and experiments. On
this occasion it is not foreign to our plan to remark, that LINNAEUS, being
present with several of these gentlemen, at a meeting when the latter was
exhibiting the animalcules in semine masculino, openly declared his opinion,
that these moleculae were not true animalcules; and he appears ever afterward
to have retained the same opinion relating to them. To these may be added also
the names of Albinus and Gaubius, and of others, were it requisite, to show
that our author's talents had very early rendered him conspicuous, and gained
him the regard of all those who cultivated and patronized any branch of medical
science; and to which, doubtless, the singular notice with which Boerhaave
honored him, did not a little contribute.

Early in the year 1738, after LINNAEUS had left Mr. Clifford, and, as it
should seem, when he resided with Van Royen, at Leyden, he had a long and
dangerous fit of sickness; and upon his recovery, went to Paris, where he was
properly entertained by the Jussieu's, at that time the first botanists in
France. The opportunity this gave him of inspecting the Herbaria of Surian and
Tournefort, and those of the abovenamed gentlemen, afforded him great
satisfaction. He had intended to have gone from thence into Germany, to visit
Ludwig, and the celebrated HALLER, with whom he was in close correspondence;
but he was not able to complete this part of his intended route, and was
obliged to return without this gratification.

Our author did not fail to avail himself of every advantage, that access to
the several museums of this country afforded him, in every branch of natural
history; and the number and importance of his publications, during this absence
from his native country, sufficiently demonstrate that fund of knowledge which
he must have imbibed before, and no less testify his extraordinary application.
As these works laid the foundation of his future fame, and distinguished
character, it will be incumbent on us to enumerate them, and give a brief
account of each, as nearly as we can in the order of time in which they were
published, before we accompany our author into Sweden; whither he returned to
receive at length the reward of his merit.

The first of these was the SYSTEMA NATURAE, five regna tria Naturae
systematice proposita, per classes, ordines, genera et species. Lugd. Bat.
1735. fol. pp. 14, in Latin, with the Swedish names annexed. As this is little
more than the general outlines of his work, we shall reserve a fuller account
of it till we come to the enlarged editions; in which it was fully exemplified
by the introduction of the species.

FUNDAMENTA BOTANICA, quae majorum operum prodromi instar, theoriam Scientiae
Botanices per breves Aphorismos tradunt. Amst. 1736, 12o, pp. 35. The science
of botany is in this work reduced to 365 aphorisms, or canons; and what Sethus
Calvisius has said of Ptolemy's canon, mutatis mutandis, may be truly said of
this work. -- Omni auro pretiosior est, si dudum innotuisset, nec adeo in
diversas sectas BOTANICI abiisent, sed RES BOTANICAE, multo melius se haberent.
It passed through several editions, and was published with a comment upon each
aphorism in 1751, under the title of Philosophia Botanica, hereafter to be
noticed.

BIBLIOTHECA BOTANICA, recensens libros plus mill de plantis hucusque editos,
secundum Systema Auctorum natural in classes, ordines, genera et species
dispositos, additis editionis loco, tempore, forma, lingua. Amst. 1736, 12o,
pp. 153, and afterward in 8o, 1751, much enlarged. Botanic writers are in this
work distributed into 16 classes, and it is by no means so unentertaining as
might be expected from the general idea of a catalogue merely; as the author
has frequently subjoined short characters of the books; and at the beginning of
each class, as also in the orders or subdivisions, takes occasion to explain
several of his terms used in his subsequent writings. The preface contains a
short history of the rise and progress of botany, and an acknowledgment of the
aid the author received in the compilation of this work, by his free access to
the libraries of Mr. Sprekelsen at Hamburgh, Dr. Gronovius at Leyden, and
particularly to those of his patron Mr. Clifford, and Dr. Burman, professor of
botany at Amsterdam. Authors are classed in this work as follows: 1. Patres. 2.
Commentatores. 3. Ichniographi. 4. Descriptores. 5. Monographi. 6. Curiosi. 7.
Adonistae. 8. Floristae. 9. Peregrinatores. 10. Philosophi. 11. Systematici.
12. Nomenclatores. 13. Anatomici. 14. Hortulani. 15. Medici. 16. Anomali.


Subjoined to the last edition, we have a biographical table, exhibiting, in
chronological order, the names of 139 botanic authors, from the time of
Avicenna in 981, to Mr. Catesby in 1749, specifying, wherever it was possible,
the year of their birth and death.

The flowering of the Plantain or Banana (Musa paradisiaca) this year, a thing
not seen in Europe before more than thrice, in the garden of our author's
patron M. Clifford, produced a complete history of that plant from LINNAEUS'S
pen, under the title of MUSA CLIFFORTIANA florens Hartecampi 1736 prope
Harlemum. Lugd. Bat. 4o, pp. 46. This piece is drawn up with the utmost
precision, according to the author's own Methodus Demonstrandi, printed at the
end of the Systema, and is a model for Monographers in this way. It is
embellished with two plates, one representing the plant at large, the other,
the parts of fructification separately.

GENERA PLANTARUM eorumque Characteres naturales secundum numerum, figuram,
situm, et proportionem, omnium fructificationis partium. Lugd. Bat. 1737, 8o,
pp. 384. In this work, which exhibits what LINNAEUS has called the natural
characters of the genera of plants, the classes are established upon the number
or situation, or both conjointly, of the stamina, analogically considered as
the male parts; and the orders or subdivisions of the classes, upon the
pistils, analogous to the female parts: and the genera themselves from the
agreement of all the parts of fructification compared with each other, as they
agree in number, figure, situation, and proportion. Hence the Linnaean
characters of plants are applicable to any classical method founded on the
parts of fructification alone, in which respect they have the advantage over
those of all foregoing writers, and will probably stand firm, even although the
classical part of the system should be set aside. This is to be considered as
one of the capital of Linnaeus's works. He tells us, that before the
publication of the first edition, he had examined the characters of 8000
flowers. Those alone who have been accustomed to examine plants with a
scientific view, can judge how arduous this undertaking must have been, and how
great the application that he must necessarily have bestowed thereon, and that
at an early period of life. Neither can any others sufficiently admire that
accuracy with which so great a number of flowers have been examined and
compared, or see the aptitude of that assemblage of terms, which were invented
by LINNAEUS, to express the different figure, situation, and proportion, that
exist in such a variety of subjects. If this was a proper place to expatiate
upon this subject, by extending the idea to all that LINNAEUS has done,
respecting every other part of plants, as considered in their specific
distinctions, it must still farther exalt the merit of the author, and place
him above all praise. At the latter end of this work was given the general plan
of a system invented by LINNAEUS, and founded upon the different kinds, and
arrangement, of the calix or cup of the flower, in plants: but this was omitted
in the latter editions. Also a fragment of that primum et ultimum in botany,
the natural method.

The first edition of this book contained 935 genera: the sixth and last, at
Stockholm, in 1764, has extended the number to 1239, and the Mantissae since
to 1336. It has been thought by some, that the first idea of the sexual method
was received from the writings of Jungius, a learned professor, first at
Helmstadt, and afterward rector of the Gymnasium at Hamburgh, where he died in
1657, and whose works contain an uncommon display of original observations on
the subject of plants; and prove him to have been a most accurate observer of
nature. He has not only discriminated with peculiar nicety, the structure, and
several parts of plants, but he has also, with equal judgment, shown the
impropriety of many of the old generical and specifical distinctions, and has
given rules for forming them anew, that have been of the greatest service to
his successors in the science, and of which they have not failed to avail
themselves. But Jungius did not, however, exhibit any plan, by which it appears
that he laid the basis either of the sexual, or any other system.

Before the conclusion of the same year (1737) our author published the
COROLLARIUM GENERUM, cui accedit METHODUS SEXUALIS, in 8o; the former contained
only the addition of sixty new genera of plants; all which were taken into the
next edition of the foregoing book; and the latter exhibits a brief view of the
sexual system, as far as respects the classes and orders. Neither would it be
of importance to mention a small piece published in the same year, during his
residence with Mr. Clifford, under the title of VIRIDARIUM CLIFFORTIANUM, were
it not incumbent on us to mention all that came from our author's pen.

In this year, 1737, appeared likewise the result of the Lapland expedition, as
far, at least, as relates to the plants of that country; for we are now
deprived of the expectation of ever seeing the Lachesis Lapponica, intended to
complete our author's history of this country through all its parts. This
volume includes the plants of a tract of country not less than 100 Swedish
miles (nearly equal to 600 English) in length, and 50 in breadth, under the
title of FLORA LAPPONICA, exhibens Plantas per Lapponiam crescentes, secundum
Systema sexuale, collectas in itinere impensis Societatis regiae Litterariae et
Scientiarum Sueciae An. 1732 instituto, additis synonymis, et locis natalibus
omnium, descriptionibus et figuris rariorum, viribus medicatis et oeconomicis
plurimarum. Amst. 1737, 8o, pp. 372, tab. 12. This work is much more than a
bare enumeration of synonyms; the preface contains an account of the author's
journey, and his acknowledgment to the members of a literary society, by whose
munificence this work was adorned with the plates, on which are engraven 58 of
the more rare, and chiefly alpine plants. This is preceded by additional
Prolegomena, in which the geographic and natural description of the country is
set forth, and the difference between the Alps and the Desert distinctly
marked; concluding with some observations on alpine plants in general. The work
is interspersed with many very curious observations relating to the
inhabitants, their simplicity of life and manners, their diseases; the animals
of the country; the medical and economical uses of many of the plants;
descriptions at large of such as were not well described before; and critical
observations, in a botanical way, upon others.

To instance briefly a few only of our author's observations. Under

No 16. The dropsy very frequent in East Bothnia; owing to the intemperate use
of spirits.

No 22. The down of the Cotton Grass, used for bedding among the poor, instead
of feathers.

No 62. Astonishing growth of the Great Plantain. The spikes 4 or 5 feet high.
In other situations, the whole plant not an inch.

No 80. The wretched inhabitants sometimes obliged to make bread of the roots
of the Marsh Trefoil. The scurvy unknown in Lapland; although vegetable
productions have scarcely any share in the Lapland diet, which is almost wholly
the recent flesh of the reindeer: a fact which Sir John Pringle has made good
use of, among others, in his discourse "On the means of preserving the health
of "mariners."

No 101. Symptoms of the Colica Lapponica, (Sauvag. Nosol. II. p. 103) a most
excruciating disease, for which the Laplanders use the root of Angelica.

No 103. The deleterious effects of the Cicuta virosa, Water Hemlock, largely
discussed.

No 136. The pernicious effects of the Anthericum ossifragum, Lancashire
Asphodel, on sheep.

No 143, 144, 145. Manifold uses of the black and red Whortleberries, and
Cranberries.

No 160. Various economical uses of the Andromeda polifolia, Marsn Cistus.

No 200. Observations on the gout, whether owing to the use of spirituous and
fermented liquors. Reflections on the health and vigor of the Laplanders.

No 311. The Achillaea Millefolium, Yarrow, used sometimes in Dalekarlia
instead of hops, and said to render the drink very intoxicating.

No 328. Singular economical uses of the Carices, or Sedges, amongst the
Laplanders.

No 341, 342. Uses of the Birch-tree; and the Dwarf Birch, beyond almost all
others. The thick woods of this tree frequently set on fire by lightning, and
consumed for miles. Moxa of the Laplanders prepared from a part of this tree:
their universal remedy in painful diseases.

No 345. The leaves of Sparganium natans, Burreed, preferred by horned cattle
and horses to other grass. Observations on the immense number of Water Fowl,
and Waders, in Lapland, and on their migration.

No 395. Uses of the Polytrichum commune, or Golden Maidenhair; and No 415,
those of the Sphagnum Palustre, or Bog-Moss, among the Lapland women; to which
he has annexed some curious observations relating to the state of the menstrual
evacuations in the sex, in those northern regions.

No 437. Observations on the reindeer, and their food, the Lichen rangiferinus.

No 445. On the Lichen islandicus, on which M. Scopoli has of late written
largely.

No 517. In treating on the Agarics, he recites the baneful effects of the
Oestrus Tarandi, Gad-fly, on the whole economy of the reindeer. More largely
discussed in the Amoenitates. -- But to return:

In this work, moreover, our author has first exemplified, what he ever
afterward labored to bring to its greatest perfection, in all his writings,
and particularly in the Species Plantarum, a work not published till sixteen
years afterward, the specific names of plants, not taken, as had been
customary with former authors, from the color of the flower, relative size of
the plant, smell, taste, place of growth, time of flowering, name of the
discoverer, virtues, uses, duration; none of which are sufficiently permanent:
but from those invariable and essential parts, which fully and clearly
distinguish each species under the same genus, and in the compass of ten or
twelve words convey such an idea of the plant intended, as will more
effectually distinguish it, than the verbose descriptions of many foregoing
authors. LINNAEUS has taken incredible pains with this part of his system,
which is certainly as difficult as any that leads to the perfection of the
science, since it depends upon a nice inspection of every species belonging to
each genus, and of every actual variety belonging to each species.

The plants of Lapland are but few, not amounting to more than 537 species; and
in this number are included upwards of an hundred discovered by Linnaeus in
this journey, not known to be natives of Sweden before; and of which some were
nondescripts: among the former, there seems to be a propriety in mentioning
specially the Campanula serpyllifolia, or thyme-leaved Bell-flower, which, as
it turned out to be a new genus, was appropriated to our author by Dr. J.
Gronovius, and engraved in this volume by the name of LINNAEA.

No part of LINNAEUS'S writings had given more offense to the contemporary
botanists, than the liberty he had taken in changing the generic names of
plants, which had necessarily taken place in many instances, from the rules
established by the Fundamenta. Even DILLENIUS was by no means reconciled to
this innovation. LINNAEUS, who had entertained an high opinion of our English
professor, having said of him -- nullus est in Anglia qui genera curat, vel
intelligit praeterquam Dillenius -- probably, therefore, dedicated to him his
next publication, the CRITICA BOTANICA, in qua Nomina Plantarum generica, et
specifica, et variantia examini subjiciuntur, selectiora confirmantur, indigna
rejiciuntur, simulque doctrina circa Denominationem Plantarum traditur. Lugd.
Bat. 1737, 8o, pp. 270. This is a large comment upon the 7th, 8th, 9th, and
10th parts of the Fundamenta, from Aphorism 210 to 324 inclusive; in which he
has amply explained all his reasons for these alterations; and there were at
that time many who saw the justice of his remarks. Ludwig says, when speaking
of this work -- "rigorosus quidem, sed saepissime faelix botanicorum censor
est." The work is rendered very applicable to use, by two excellent indexes.

LINNAEUS printed, at the end of this volume, Discursus de introducenda in
scholas et gymnasia Historiae naturalis lectione, pp. 24, written by Dr.
Browallius, who afterward defended very ably the system of Linnaeus against
professor Siegesbeck of Petersburgh.

In 1737 was likewise published the most splendid of all our author's writings,
the Hortus Cliffortianus Plantas exhibens quas in Hortis tam vivis quam siccis,
Hartecampi in Hollandia, coluit Vir Nob. et Genesis Georgius Clifford, J. U. D.
reductis varietatibus ad species, speciebus ad genera, generibus ad classes,
adjectis locis plantarum natalibus, differentiisque specierum. Amst. 1737, fol.
pp. 501, t. 32. As this book was printed at the expense of Mr. Clifford, it is
ornamented with an elegant frontispiece, and adorned with some of the finest
engravings of plants that are extant, the drawings for which were made with all
possible accuracy by the late Mr. Ehret. By the munificence of Mr. Clifford,
many of the celebrated botanists received a present of this book. How rich this
garden was in plants, the book will testify. They are arranged, as in all our
author's succeeding works, in the sexual method; the varieties are reduced to
their several species, the natural places of the plants are particularly
noticed, many new genera, and species under former genera, are introduced, with
their descriptions at large, and curious observations interspersed throughout
the whole. And, what must have been more especially acceptable to those who
began to relish our author's system, was, the farther exemplification of his
specific characters, which the vast number of plants included in this work
necessarily led to. Add to this, that from the copious number of synonyms, it
is almost a pinax of every plant therein mentioned; and on this account, as
well as others, will yet retain its value, though superseded in a great degree
by the Species Plantarum. To the curious and critical botanist also it is no
small satisfaction now, to see in this volume, compared with later works, the
progress of the author's own knowledge, manifest by the removes and alterations
that better information enabled him to make. In the dedication our author
enumerates those patrons who have cultivated botanical gardens so greatly to
the emolument of the science: he gives a list of the Cliffortian library, and
annexes two tables, with explanations of all the variety of leaves, according
to his new method of defining them. This addition was very necessary, as the
number of plants synonymed in this volume amounts to near 2,500. We conclude
with Gesner's opinion of this work, in a letter to the celebrated Haller: Opus
sane egregium et acerrimi judicii, nec minoris eruditionis, quo difficulter
botanicus carebit. -- Mihi perplacet ab eo in nominibus specierum notas earum
essentiales exhiberi, quod ante vix quisquam botanicus recte praestitit.

The last book which LINNAEUS published of his own, during his stay in Holland,
was the CLASSES PLANTARUM, seu Systemata Plantarum omnia a fructificatione
desumta, quorum 16 universalia et 13 partialia, compendiose proposita secundum
classes, ordines et nomina generica, cum clave cujusvis methodi et synonymis
genericis. Lugd. Bat. 1738, pp. 656. This work is a very large illustration of
the second part of the Fundamenta, from aphorism 53 to 78, and contains a
compendious and useful view of all the systems of botany, or methods of
classing plants, both general and partial, from Caesalpinus, in 1583, who is
considered as the inventor, to LINNAEUS himself in 1735. To the generical name
in every system, he has added that by which it stands in his own, which is a
great advantage in the use of this book. A new edition, with the requisite
additions, would be very acceptable to the public even now. The systems at
large that are displayed in this book, are those of Caesalpinus, Morison, Ray,
Knaut, Herman, and Boerhaave, founded on the fruit: Rivinus, Ruppius, Ludwig,
and Knaut, on the number of petals in the flower: Tournefort and Pontedera, on
the figure of the same: and of Magnol and LINNAEUS, on the cup of the flower.
After these follow LINNAEUS'S sexual system, and his fragments of the natural
method. We say nothing of the arrangement of particular classes, such are the
composite flowers, the umbelliferous plants, the graminaceous, the ferns, etc.
A very large index, referring to every genus in each system, concludes the
volume.

LINNAEUS, whilst in Holland, sustained a very severe loss in the premature
death of his friend and fellow student Artedi; with whom, as has been before
observed, he had contracted the firmest friendship whilst they resided at
Upsal; insomuch that they had, in case of death, mutually bequeathed to each
other their manuscripts and collections in natural history. Artedi had been
particularly assiduous in arranging anew, and describing all such fishes as had
fallen under his own inspection; and had taken a voyage to England in 1734, to
give more perfection to his plan. Our author, after his death, procured, though
with some difficulty, all Artedi's papers, and put the finishing hand to them,
and published them at Leyden in 1738, in octavo, under the title of Petri
Artedi, Sueci Medici, ICHTHYOLOGIA: sive opera omnia de piscibus, scilicet
Bibliotheca Ichthyologica; Philosophia Ichthyologica; Genera Piscium; Synonymia
Specierum; Descriptiones Specierum. Omnia in hoc genere perfectiora quam antea
ulla. Posthuma vindicavit, recognovit, cooptavit, et edidit, Carolus LINNAEUS.
In this work fishes are arranged in an entire new method, and which our author
adopted with little or no variation, and continued through all the former
editions of his System to the tenth; when he removed the cetaceous order into
the class of the mammalia; and instead of retaining in the remaining orders the
distinctions arising from the bony or cartilaginous texture of the fins; he
established them on the situation of the ventral fins, which he considers as
analogous to the feet in other animals, as they are placed either before,
underneath, or behind the pectoral fins.

In this work Artedi has exhibited an instance of genius, labor, and
application, that cannot fail to excite the greatest regret at his early death.
He has given to Ichthyology that degree of perfection, which his friend
afterward extended through all the animal kingdom, and which must remain a
lasting monument of his abilities. In particular, his descriptions of the
indigenous fishes of Sweden, are scientific to a degree that had never before
been seen; and we cannot sufficiently admire the pains he must have taken to
extricate the synonyms from every author on the subject. Artedi, after his
return from England, was retained, at the recommendation of LINNAEUS, by Seba
of Amsterdam, to complete that part of his Thesaurus relating to fishes, and
was unfortunately drowned in one of the canals in that city. LINNAEUS, in a
short account of the author's life, has lamented his untimely decease, in a
manner which does no less honor to his friend than to his own feelings.

We must now accompany our author into Sweden, whither he returned about the
latter end of the year 1738, or the beginning of the next, and settled as a
physician at Stockholm, where he seems to have met with considerable
opposition, and was oppressed with many difficulties; all of which at length he
overcame, and got into extensive practice; and, soon after his settlement,
married the lady before spoken of. By the interest of Count Tessin, who was
afterward his great patron, and even procured medals to be struck in honor of
him, he obtained the rank of physician to the fleet, and a stipend from the
citizens for giving lectures in botany. And what at this time especially was
highly favorable to the advancement of his character and fame, by giving him
an opportunity of displaying his abilities, was the establishment of the Royal
Academy of Sciences at Stockholm; of which LINNAEUS was constituted the first
president, and to which establishment the king granted several privileges,
particularly that of free postage to all papers directed to the secretary. By
the rules of the academy, the president held his place but three months, at the
expiration of which, he made his ORATION de memorabilibus in Insectis, Oct. 3,
1739; in which he endeavors to excite an attention and enquiry into the
knowledge of insects, by displaying the many singular phenomenon that occur in
contemplating the nature of those animals, and by pointing out, in a variety of
instances, their usefulness to mankind in particular, and to the economy of
nature in general.

During all this time, however, LINNAEUS appears to have had his eye upon the
botanic and medical chair at Upsal, at this time occupied by Rudbeck, who was
far advanced in life. We learn indeed that he was so intent on pursuing, and
perfecting, his great designs in the advancement of his favorite study of
nature, that he had determined, if he failed in procuring the professorship at
Upsal, to accept the offer that had been made to him by Haller, of filling the
botanic chair at Gottingen. However, in course of time, he obtained his wish.
In the year 1741, upon the resignation of Roberg, he was constituted joint
professor of physic, and physician to the king, with Rosen, who had been
appointed in the preceding year on the death of Rudbeck. These two colleagues
agreed to divide the medical departments between them; and their choice was
confirmed by the university. Rosen took anatomy, physiology, pathology, and the
therapeutic part. LINNAEUS, natural history, botany materia medica, the
dietetic part, and the diagnosis morborum.

During the interval of his removal from Stockholm to Upsal, in consequence of
this appointment, our professor was deputed by the states of the kingdom, to
make a tour to the islands of Oeland and Gothland, in the Baltic, attended by
six of the pupils, commissioned to make such enquiries as might tend to improve
agriculture, and arts, in the kingdom; to which the Swedish nation had for some
time paid a particular attention; awakened, as it were, by the desolating wars
of Charles the XIIth, to extend their commerce, and cultivate the arts of
peace. The result of this journey was very successful, and proved fully
satisfactory to the States, and was afterward communicated to the public.

LINNAEUS, on his return, entered upon the professorship, and pronounced before
the university his ORATION de Peregrinationum intra Patriam necessitate, Oct.
17, 1741; in which he forcibly displays the usefulness of such excursions, by
pointing out to the students that vast field of objects which their country
held out to their cultivation; whether in geography, physics, mineralogy,
botany, zoology, or economics; and by showing the benefit that must accrue to
themselves and their country as rewards to their diligence. That animated
spirit which runs through the whole of this composition, renders it one of the
most pleasing and instructive of all our author's productions. That intimate
knowledge which LINNAEUS himself had acquired of his own country by his
repeated travels (fraught as he was too with every requisite for making useful
observations) enabled him to point out with the utmost precision the most
proper objects of investigation, in every part of nature; and his love to his
country gave a zeal to his wishes, that showed him on this occasion to great
advantage; not to add, the aid arising from that selfcongratulation, which he
must feel, having just gained, by his late appointment, the summit of his
wishes.

The ITER OELANDICUM ET GOTLANDICUM, in 8o, pp. 284, were printed at Stockholm,
in 1745, in the Swedish language; as was also the ITER SCANICUM, in 1751, 8o,
pp. 435. We cannot help regretting that these Itinera have not made their
appearance in the English, or some other language besides that of Sweden; for
though, in a country cultivated like ours, many hints, perhaps, might not be
drawn from these volumes, of real importance to agriculture here; yet they are
so replete with curious and philosophical observations, that they could not
fail to be an acceptable present to the public; as the general scope of these
volumes is to adapt natural history to economical purposes. In the Iter
Gothlandicum et Oelandicum, LINNAEUS'S instructions were directed principally
to these particulars: -- He was to endeavor to find some kind of earth proper
for making pottery-ware in imitation of the porcelaine of China: he was to
notice every production of nature that might supersede the necessity of the
importation of any article, used either in physic or manufactures: and in fine,
he was to have a regard to every part of natural history. In the execution of
his plan, however, he went much farther than his commission extended, having
interspersed a number of observations relating to the antiquities of these
islands, the mechanic arts, to the manners of the people, their fishery, and
various other articles. He was, as might reasonably be expected, unsuccessful
in the first part of his commission, since the two islands are almost entirely
composed of limestone, or coral rocks, which abound in a remarkable degree in
the Baltic.

As a proof of the little attention that had been paid to natural history in
Sweden, we may observe, that our author in this journey discovered above an
hundred plants, which before were not known to be indigenous; many of which
were such as are used in physic, and in dyeing. He pointed out to the natives
several plants of great use in rustic economy, and showed them the advantage of
planting the Sea-reed grass (Arundo arenaria) to arrest the sand, and form soil
on the shores; to which it is extremely well adapted by the length of the
roots. In the ITER OELANDICUM there occurs a curious remark in vegetation,
confirming the annual increase of the wood in an oak-tree, in which was
perfectly distinguished the hard winters of 1578, 1687, and 1709, by the
narrowness of the circles in those years. He describes the process for making
tar, as practiced by these islanders; and further, intersperses many
observations relating to mineralogy in general; to iron in particular, with
which Sweden abounds; describes the iron mountain Taberg, (See Phil. Transact.
vol. xlix. p. 30.) the alum mines of Mockleby; the Poma chrystallina, or
aetites marmoreus, which illustrates the formation of chrystals, etc.

In the ITER SCANICUM, performed in 1749, our author treats largely on the
culture of marshy grounds; on the useful and noxious herbs, for instance, the
Stakan, supposed to be the Phellandrium aquaticum, or Water Hemlock, which it
is believed renders horses that eat it paralytic; on the Gramen Mannae, or
Festuca fluitans, the seeds of which are so particularly useful in fattening
geese; on the Agaricus muscarius, etc.

In 1743, on occasion of conferring a degree on Dr. J. Westman, the professor
delivered his third ORATION de Telluris habitabilis incremento: an elaborate
and ingenious defense of that hypothesis, which Sir Isaac Newton, and several
other philosophers, have inclined to, That the proportion of water on the globe
of this earth is constantly decreasing. This leads the professor also to
discuss the 132d section of the Philosophia -- Initio rerum ex omni specie
viventium unicum sexus par creatum fuisse suadet ratio. -- The visible
recession of the waters of the sea in diverse parts of the earth, particularly
apparent in the Baltic, had inclined the Swedish philosophers to this opinion
of Sir Isaac Newton's. The position of the Philosophia, he thinks naturally
deducible from the foregoing hypothesis, and necessarily so from the Mosaic
history. In solving the difficulties attending the latter part of the
hypothesis, he is led by his subject to enter largely into a part of the
economy of nature, which renders his discourse highly interesting,
independently of ali conjectures relating to the main argument: this relates to
the various ways in which vegetables are disseminated, and by which they find
their way to every part of the globe. To this effect winds, rain, rivers, the
sea, animals, etc. are all subservient, as well as the various structure and
properties of the seeds themselves; in illustrating which last affair the
professor has taken great pains, and constructed tables of the genera, founded
on these different properties of the seeds. In the introduction to this
oration, our author turns the attention of his readers to some of the more
remarkable discoveries that had lately been made in natural history and
philosophy; such were those relating to the Polype, Rattlesnake, and the
Senega, etc.; among others also, he mentions a remarkable fact that had been
communicated by Sauvages of Montpelier, respecting the effect of the berries of
the Coriaria myrtifolia, Spec. pl. 1467 (Myrtle-leaved Sumach) in occasioning
instant epilepsy.

The three orations of LINNAEUS are subjoined to the second volume of the
Amoenitates Academicae, printed in 1752.

In 1745, the professor published his FLORA SUECICA exhibens Plantas per Regnum
Sueciae crescentes, systematice cum differentiis specierum, synonymis autorum,
nominibus incolarum, solo locorum, usu Pharmacopoeorum, 8o, Holm. pp. 392,
1745; and again, with many additions, in 1755, pp. 464. The first edition
contains 1140 plants. In the second they are increased, by his own, and the
discoveries of his pupils, to 1296. No generical characters are introduced into
this work, but references made to them as they stand in the Genera Plantarum,
before spoken of. A number of select synonyma is added to his own specific
name, under each plant; and not only the Swedish names in general, but the
provincial ones: highly worthy this of imitation in works of this kind, and
quite necessary in so extensive a kingdom. Many of the rare plants are
described at large, and botanical criticisms added to many others. In the last
edition the author has interspersed a great number of curious observations
relating to the economical and medical uses of the plants; and has particularly
noted those that are capable of being applied to the purposes of dyeing. The
author moreover never fails to mention euporistic medicines, which he seems to
think, perhaps very justly, have not been attended to by physicians as they
deserve. The plan of this work has been a pattern for all succeeding writers of
local catalogues, more especially those who have followed the Linnaean system,
and has been very little improved by any; perhaps excelled by none. The plants
of Lapland are all included in this work; and the preface, besides the account
of Swedish authors on botany, contains a curious division of the several
provinces of the kingdom, in respect to their different soils and situation, as
adapted to particular plants, specifying under each province the plants found
therein.

In 1746 appeared the FAUNA SUECICA, sistens Animalia Sueciae Regni: Mammalia,
Aves, Amphibia, Pisces, Insecta, Vermes; distributa per classes et ordines,
genera et species, etc. Stockholm 1746, 8o; and again, greatly augmented, in
1761, pp. 556. The first edition contained 1350 subjects, the latter
comprehends not less than 2266. Neither in this work are any classical,
ordinal, or generical notes given at large. The world had never seen so
compendious, and it may be truly said, at the same time, so complete a zoology
before. Here, as in plants, the author has given to each animal a new specific
name, expressive, as far as possible, of its essential character. The synonyms
are added, or referred to, from almost every author on the subject, and almost
every animal is moreover compendiously described. Insects make a very
considerable part of this catalogue; near 1700 species, all found in that
kingdom, are enumerated, distinguished, and methodized, in a manner entirely
new, and which has been adopted by nearly every writer on the subject since. We
shall speak more fully of the classification in the abstract intended to be
given of the Systema Naturae. A compendious manual of English Zoology on this
plan, is a work much wanted; though we think it could not fail to enhance its
value, if the tables of the genera were prefixed to each class, and the
characters to each genus, as in the System of our author. Two plates, of some
of the rarer birds chiefly, accompany this volume, on which are explained the
technical terms used in ornithology. The number of each class of animals stands
thus: 1. Mammalia -- 53 2. Aves -- 195 3. Amphibia -- 25 4. Pisces -- 77 5.
Insecta -- 1691 6. Vermes -- 198.


An accident having thrown into the hands of the professor an Herbarium,
consisting of five large volumes of plants, he discovered that it was the
collection of the famous Dr. Paul Herman, which had been made in the island of
Zeylon, by that gentleman, at the expense of the Dutch East India Company. This
Herbarium had been lost for upwards of half a century, until chance threw it
into the hands of M. Gunther, apothecary to the king of Denmark, who sent it to
LINNAEUS, requesting the professor to examine it, and affix the names to the
plants of this superb collection. Its great value, as being collected by so
eminent a man, induced our author to examine the whole with great attention;
and he was thereby enabled to form many new genera, and settle many doubtful
species. He published the result of his labor under the title of FLORA
ZEYLANICA, sistens Plantas indicas Zeylonae Insulae, quae olim 1670 -- 1677
lectae fuere, a Paulo Hermanno Professore Botan. Leydensi; demum post 70 annos
ab A. Gunthero orbi redditae. Holm. 1747, 8o, pp. 254, tab. 4.

This work is yet of use as a pinax of these plants, and as a Linnaean
catalogue of Burman's Thesaurus Zeylanicus, published in 1738, and illustrated
with the figures of upwards of 200 of these plants. Many of the rare species
are described, and a very copious number of synonyms added to several of the
East Indian plants. The Herbarium consisted of about 660 plants, of which the
true places in the system are assigned to upwards of 400, and the remainder
were too imperfect to admit of distinction. This volume is rendered valuable by
a concise history of the progress of botany, from the restoration of learning
in the 16th century; a natural history of the island, and its general produce;
the life of Dr. Herman; a short account of J. Hartog, who was sent by Dr.
Sherard to make collections in this island; and of Burman's Thesaurus
Zeylanicus. LINNAEUS authenticates this Herbarium to have been Herman's, by
showing that the numbers, and the plants, answer to his Museum Zeylanicum,
published in 1717.

We now see LINNAEUS fixed in the situation that was so well adapted to his
character, his taste, and abilities, and which seems to have been the object of
his ambition, and center of his hopes. Soon after his establishment, he
labored to get the Academical Garden, which had been founded in 1657, put on a
better footing, and very soon effected it; procuring also a house to be built
for the residence of the professor. The whole had been in ruin ever since the
fire in 1702, and at the time Linnaeus was appointed professor of botany, the
garden did not contain above 50 plants that were exotic. His correspondence
with the first botanists in Europe, soon supplied him with great variety. He
received Indian plants from Jussieu of Paris, and from Van Royen of Leyden;
European plants from Haller and Ludwig; American plants from the late Mr.
Collinson, Mr. Catesby, and others; and variety of annuals from Dillenius: in
short, how much the garden owed to his diligence and care, in a few years, may
be seen by the catalogue published under the title of HORTUS UPSALIENSIS
exhibens Plantas exoticas horto Upsaliensis Academiae a sese (Linnaeo) illatas
ab anno 1742, in annum 1748, additis, differentiis synonymis, habitationibus,
hospitiis, rariorumque descriptionibus, in gratiam studiosae juventutis. Holm.
1748, 8o, pp. 306, tab. 3. By this catalogue it appears that the professor had
introduced 1100 species, exclusive of all the Swedish plants, and of varieties;
which latter, in ordinary gardens, amount not unfrequently to one third of the
whole number. The preface contains a curious history of the climate at Upsal,
and the progress of the seasons through the whole year. From these observations
we learn, that the greatest degree of heat, in the summer of 1747, at Upsal,
was on the second day of July, when Celsius's thermometer stood at 30 degrees
above 0; that the greatest degree of cold, on the 25th of January 1740, was 28
degrees below 0. In this thermometer the freezing point is 0, and boiling water
100. From seven years observations on the leafing of the oak, it was found
never to push before the 6th of May, or to be retarded beyond the 22d.

About this period it was, that LINNAEUS made a remarkable discovery, relating
to the generation of pearls in the river Pearl-Muscle (Mya Margaritifera, Syst.
1112.) This shellfish must not be confounded with what is called the Mother of
Pearl Shell, as that belongs to another genus, is a sea-shell, and an
inhabitant of the warmer countries only. The shellfish in question is found in
rivers, in all the northern parts of the world; in Norway and Sweden it
abounds; it is found in the rivers of the county of Tyrone in Ireland, and in
those of Donegall; in Scotland, the Don is said to abound with it; and it is
not unfrequent in the rivers of England. This fish will bear removal remarkably
well; and it is said, that in some places they form reservoirs for the purpose
of keeping it, and taking out the pearl, which, in a certain period of time,
will be again renewed. From observations on the growth of these shells, and the
number of their annular laminae, or scales, it is supposed the fish will attain
a very great age; 50 or 60 years are imagined to be a moderate computation. The
discovery turned on a method, which LINNAEUS found, of putting these muscles
into a state of producing pearls at his pleasure; though the final effect did
not take place for several years: he says, that in 5 or 6 years after the
operation the pearl would have acquired the size of a Vetch. We are
unacquainted with the means by which he accomplished this extraordinary
operation, but it was probably published at the time, and considered as
important, since it is certain that the author was rewarded with a munificent
praemium, from the States of the kingdom, on this account. We regret that we
cannot speak more fully on this head; but may observe, that it is probable,
from a paper published many years afterward in the Berlin Acts, that the
method consisted in injuring the shell externally, perhaps by a perforation; as
it has been observed, that these concretions in shellfish are found on the
inside, exactly opposite to perforations and injuries made from without by
serpulae, and other animals.

From the time that LINNAEUS and Rosen were appointed professors at Upsal, it
should seem that the credit of that university, as a school of physic, had been
increasing; and the fact indeed is certain, that numbers of students resorted
thither from Germany, attracted by the character of these two able men: and
certainly in Sweden itself, many young men were invited to the study of physic,
by the excellent manner in which it was taught, who otherwise would have
engaged in different pursuits. We must not deviate into the line of Rosen's
department: suffice it to say, that these two eminent men, by their united zeal
and abilities, failed not to exalt, together with their own fame, that of their
university. LINNAEUS, in teaching the diagnosis morborum, had adopted the plan,
with some alteration, of M. Sauvages's Nosology, of which we shall be led to
give some account hereafter. In the year 1749, he published, for the use of his
students, MATERIA MEDICA, Liber I. de Plantis digestus secundum genera, loca,
nomina, qualitates, vires, differentias, durationes, simplicia, modos, usus,
synonyma, culturas, praeparata, potentias, composita. Holm. 1749, 8o, pp. 252.
The compendious method in which this work is executed, and the several useful
preliminary papers annexed, render it a very useful and instructive manual to
students in medicine. A materia medica of the vegetable kingdom, in which every
simple was ascertained by so able a botanist as LINNAEUS, was a very
considerable acquisition to science. In this volume are arranged 535 subjects,
and several are for the first time reduced to their proper genera; such are the
Ipecacuanha, Pareira brava, Coculi Indici, and others. The method pursued in
this volume is as follows. The author gives,

1. His own specific character of the plant.

2. C. Bauhine's synonym: or, if the plant was unknown to him, that of the
first discoverer.

3. The country where it is produced. In the same line is expressed, by a
single epithet, whether it be an herb, shrub, or tree: whether it be annual,
biennial, or perennial: also, whether it be indigenous; or if not, whether it
thrives well by common cultivation in gardens, or requires defense from the
cold of the winter in Sweden; or whether it will not endure that climate.

4. The Swedish officinal name, what part is in use, or what preparation of it,
if any; and the doses of each.

5. The sensible quality of the plant; whether bitter, aromatic, acid,
astringent, etc.; whether fragrant, foetid, or inodorous; whether gummy,
resinous, or milky. Its reputed quality; whether uncertain, well-known, and
approved; or whether to be cautiously used. Whether chiefly used in physic, or
for culinary purposes.

6. Its reputed effects on the human body, whether purging, emetic, diuretic,
etc.

7. The diseases in which it is most frequently prescribed.

8. The compound medicines into which it enters in the Swedish dispensatory.

At the end of the volume is an index morborum, with the simples appropriated
to each: and an index virium, adapted to a preceding classification, founded on
their qualities or effects, either on the solids or fluids of the human body.

In the year 1749 was published the first volume of a collection of Theses in
8o, under the title of Amoenitates Academicae, seu Dissertationes variae,
physicae, medicae, et botanicae. This publication has been continued, from time
to time, to the completion of the seventh volume in the year 1769. Holm. These
volumes, as soon as published, were constantly reprinted in Germany and
Holland. As these academical dissertations were sustained under LINNAEUS in his
professorial character, and were selected by himself, they have been regarded
as of equal authority nearly with his own writings; and many of them do in a
particular manner extend and exemplify diverse parts of his works, the subjects
having been pointed out by himself, in many instances, for that purpose. For
these reasons we shall, in the course of this volume, give a very brief account
of the purport of each dissertation, since they contain a great variety of
curious intelligence on the subjects of physic and natural history, every where
digested in the most scientific taste.

Whilst LINNAEUS was meditating one of his capital performances, which had long
been expected, and greatly wished for, he was interrupted by a very long and
painful fit of the gout, which left him in a very weak and dispirited state;
and, according to the intelligence that his friends gave of him, nothing was
thought to have contributed more to the restoration of his spirits, than the
seasonable acquisition, at this juncture, of a collection of rare and
undescribed plants.

Upon the recovery of his health, he published his book; PHILOSOPHIA BOTANICA
in qua explicantur fundamenta botanica cum definitionibus partium, exemplis
terminorum, observationibus rariorum, adjectis figuris aeneis. Stockh. et Amst.
1751, 8o, pp. 362, tab. 11. This must be considered as the institutions of the
Linnaean system of botany, and is a work which none, who wish to be acquainted
with the sexual system, can be without, as it is the author's own comment on
his Fundamenta, first published in 1736, and which are comprised in 365
aphorisms, divided into 12 chapters. The author's original intention was to
have explained all these aphorisms at large, in the manner that had been done
in the Bibliotheca Botanica, Classes Plantarum, Sponsalia Plantarum, Critica
Botanica, and Vires Plantarum; but he says his numerous avocations did not
allow him requisite time.

Chapter 1. Exhibits a systematical distribution of the principal botanical
writers, and is that part which is treated of at large in the Bibliotheca.

Chapter 2. Systemata. A view of all the botanical systems, being a compend of the
Classes Plantarum, but here brought down somewhat later, so as to comprehend
the general view of Van Royen's, Haller's, and Wachendorf's.

Chapter 3. Plantae. Explains the terms used in describing the different kinds of
roots, stalks, and leaves of plants.

Chapter 4. Fructificatio. Describes the parts of fructification, and defines all
the terms used respecting their number, figure, proportion, situation, and uses.

Chapter 5. Relates to the sexes of plants, a subject which is more copiously
treated in a paper called Sponsalia Plantarum, printed in the first volume of
the Amoenitates Academicae.

Chapter 6. Characteres. Rules and definitions for establishing the characters of
classes, orders, and genera.

Chapter 7. Nomina. Rules for rightly forming generical names, and those of orders
and classes.

Chapter 8. Differentiae. Rules for establishing the specific characters of plants.

Chapter 9. Varietates. Rules for distinguishing varieties among plants.

Chapter 10. Synonyma. Rules relating to the right disposition of synonymical names
in botanic writings.

The four chapters last mentioned make the subject of the CRITICA BOTANICA, in
which work every aphorism is much more largely explained than in the present.

Chapter 11. Adumbrationes. Rules for properly describing and naming the species,
and for giving their complete history in a scientific manner.

Chapter 12. Vires. Relates to the virtues of plants, as deducible from their
agreement in their characters, as of the same genus, the same natural order, or
class. The subject of this chapter is treated in a more comprehensive manner in
the Vires Plantarum, printed in the first volume of Amoenitates Academicae. To
give a few instances however as illustrations: -- The Scammony, Mechoacan,
Turbith, and Sea Bindweed, are all species of the genus Convolvulus, and all
agree in possessing a purgative quality. The Mallow, Marsh-mallow, and
Cotton-bush, are so many distinct genera, under a natural order, called
columniferous, and agree in being all mucilaginous. Of the umbelliferous
plants, such as grow in dry places are aromatic, and considered as sudorifics
and carminatives: those growing in watery places, on the contrary, are mostly
of a quality to be justly suspected, and not a few of them quite noxious.
Plants of the papilionaceous class are all excellent food for cattle. The
syngenesious, commonly bitters. The coniferous class, all evergreens and
resinous, are considered as diuretics.

Ten explanatory plates are added to this volume, on which are described the
different leaves, and their situations on the stalk, etc. different stalks,
roots, flowers, etc. The first part of these plates, relating to the leaves,
had been given introductory to the Hortus Cliffortianus. Some new terms in
botany* which have been invented since the publication of the Philosophia, may
be found in a paper under the title of Termini Botanici, in the 6th volume of
the Amoenitates.

In this work of LINNAEUS it is difficult to determine, whether we ought most
to admire the genius of its author in his inventive power, or that exquisite
scientific arrangement which he has given to the whole; and which, both
together, constitute this a most excellent performance.

At the end of the volume we meet with several curious fragments: such are,

1. Directions to botanic pupils.

2. The method of constructing an herbarium.

3. Method of conducting botanical excursions.

4. Method of laying out a botanic garden.

5. Plan for naturalists in traveling and constructing their journal; with an
enumeration of all those subjects that demand their attention.

6. Idea of a complete botanist. Some of the principal botanists are here
enumerated.

7. A compend of the philosophy of vegetation.

In 1753, appeared the Professor's Opus maximum et aeternum, the SPECIES
PLANTARUM exhibentes Plantas rite cognitas, ad genera relatas, cum differentiis
specificis, nominibus trivialibus, synonymis selectis, locis natalibus,
secundum systema sexuale digestas. Tom. II. Holm. 8o, 1753, pp. 1200; and a
second time in 1762, pp. 1684. To give this work its utmost perfection, had
been the author's object for many years, and to this all his other botanic
productions are in some measure only preparatory; especially the local
catalogues; as the rightly ascertaining the species is the great object of all
method. In this work Linnaeus takes in every plant that had come sufficiently
under his own inspection; seldom admitting any on the authority of others; and
wheresoever he has done it, the plant is distinguished by a proper mark. The
plan of this work is, in general, agreeable to that of all his other local
catalogues; no other part of the system being exemplified except the species:
and as it is entirely botanical, none of the uses of the plants are here
introduced. Every plant has its specific name, constructed according to the
rules established in the eighth part of the Philosophia Botanica, with a
reference to all, or any of his own works, in which it has been mentioned
before; and the synonym is given, if it be different from the present. Then
follow the synonyms of the best authors, and constantly, where the plant is at
all rare, or newly-discovered, there is a reference to the best figures. The
country in which the plant grows is then added, and frequently a symbol,
expressive of its duration, whether annual, biennial, or perennial.

In this work, for the first time, the professor has given to each plant, what
he calls a trivial name: that is, a single epithet, which may be expressive, as
far as possible, of the essential specific difference, among the species of the
genus: this, however, can take place but rarely; in other instances it is
expressive of some, the most striking and obvious difference; and not seldom it
is a local term; or the name of the first discoverer. The latter method, could
it have taken place, would have had the advantage of conveying, somewhat like a
chronological history of each plant, and at the same time perpetuating due
credit to the discoverer. These trivial names are printed in the margin, to
catch the eye instantly, which is a great advantage. The invention of trivial
names, the hint of which was probably borrowed from Rivini, by assisting the
memory, has much promoted the knowledge of plants, and must be considered as a
capital improvement. Their use in speaking of plants, and forming compendious
catalogues, has been acknowledged by every botanist since the introduction of
them.

In the preface the author gives an ample account of the assistances he
received, and of the pains he had taken, to bring this work to its present
state. To this end, he specifies, the countries he had traveled over; the many
botanic gardens he had visited; the various excellent herbaria that he had
examined, in Sweden, Holland, England, and France; the names of his pupils
educated under him, and their various peregrinations; from all which he reaped
great advantages, as from these he received various new plants: and, finally,
he acknowledges the many liberal communications of seeds and specimens, sent to
him from all parts of the world by the first botanists of the time.

As this work contains all the plants of the known world which had come to
Linnaeus's knowledge, or rather inspection; which, at the publication of these
volumes, appear to have amounted to about 7,300 species, all varieties
excluded, the professed botanist has only to regret, that it could not have
been extended by the author himself, to a complete pinax, and history of every
plant therein described.

In this year also LINNAEUS published MUSEUM TESSINIANUM, opera Ill. Comitis C.
G. TESSIN, Regis Regnique Senatoris, etc. etc. collectum. Holm. 1753, fol. pp.
90. tab. 12. This is a description of the cabinet of LINNAEUS'S first patron
and great friend Count Tessin, at that time preceptor to the Prince Royal, now
King of Sweden, who had spared no expense in collecting a rich museum,
principally consisting of subjects in mineralogy, and particucularly abounding
in fossils of the figured or extraneous kind. The work is in Swedish and Latin;
and the tables represent several scarce and very valuable figured fossils, not
to be seen elsewhere.

The petrifactions or figured fossils in this work, are arranged in four
orders, founded on the different modes of the formation of them.

1. Fossilia, commonly so called; shells, corals, animal remains, unchanged,
except by being deprived more or less of the connecting animal gluten.

2. Redintegrata. Earthy, stony, or chrystalline fossils, formed within any
crustaceous or testaceous body, as in a mould; thus retaining the cast, without
the external coat.

3. Impressa. Impressions only: as of fishes and capillary plants, or ferns,
etc.

4. Transubstantiata. Perfect petrifactions, in which the original organic
parts are perfectly filled up with stony particles, and retaining the exact
structure, externally and internally, of the original body.

In 1754 was published MUSEUM REGIS ADOLPHI Suecorum, etc. in quo Animalia
rariora, imprimis et exotica Quadrupedia, Aves, Amphibia, Pisces, Insecta,
Vermes describuntur et determinantur, Latin et Suetice. Fol. 1754, pp. 135.
tab. 33. This splendid volume is frequently referred to by our author in his
Systema, on account of the figures of so many of the rarer serpents, and
fishes, here engraven. Of the former there are 48 species, and of the latter
32; specimens of which are all preserved in spirits in the royal museum; in the
palace of Ulricksdahl.

The fame which our author had now acquired by his Systema Naturae, of which a
sixth edition, much enlarged, had been published at Stockholm, in 1748, in 8o,
pp. 232, with eight tables, explanatory of the classes and orders; and which
was also republished by Gronovius at Leyden; had brought, as it were, a conflux
of every thing rare and valuable in every branch of nature, from all parts of
the globe, into Sweden. The king and queen of Sweden had their separate
collections of rarities; the former at Ulricksdahl, as has just been
mentioned; the latter, very rich in exotic insects and shells, procured at a
great expense, at the palace of Drottningholm. These our author was employed in
arranging and describing. Besides these, the museum of the royal academy of
Upsal had been augmented by a considerable donation from the king, whilst
hereditary prince, in 1746; by another, from Count Gyllenborg, the year before;
by a third, from M. Grill, an opulent citizen of Stockholm. The contents of
these three collections are given in the first volume of the Amoenitates
Academicae. We mention them here only to show that LINNAEUS now began to enjoy
ample resources in every branch of natural history at home; besides that many
ingenious men, who had been educated under him, were now dispersed into various
quarters of the globe; and that from their letters he received great
intelligence and satisfaction. Seeds and specimens of plants were sent him from
Siberia, by Gmelin; from America, by Dr. Mitchel and Governor Coldingham; from
England, by Mr. COLLINSON; Mr. Ellis; as also from his friends in Holland, and
various other parts of Europe. And thus it will be seen, that he began scarcely
to feel the disadvantages of his northern situation.

We shall now also begin to see the professor in a more elevated rank and
situation in life. His reputation had already procured him honors from almost
all the Royal Societies in Europe. Into the Imperial Academy, he had been very
early received, and distinguished, according to the custom of that institution,
with a classic name, having most aptly been called DIOSCORIDES secundus: and in
the year 1753 he received this honor from the Royal Society of London; and his
own sovereign, truly sensible of his merit, and greatly esteeming his character
and abilities, favored him with a mark of his distinction and regard, by
creating him a KNIGHT of the POLAR STAR. It was now no longer Laudatur et
alget. His emoluments kept pace with his fame and honors; his practice in his
profession became lucrative, and we find him soon after possessed of his
country house and gardens at Hammarby, about five miles from Upsal. He had
moreover received one of the most flattering testimonies of the extent and
magnitude of his fame, that perhaps was ever shown to any literary character,
the state of the nation which conferred it, with all its circumstances, duly
considered. This was an invitation to Madrid, from the king of Spain, there to
preside as a naturalist, with the offer of an annual pension for life of 2000
pistoles, letters of nobility, and the perfect free exercise of his own
religion. An offer not readily parallelled in the history of modern times! That
he did not accept of it is certain, having, after the most perfect
acknowledgments of the singular honor done him, returned for answer, that, if
he had any merits, they were due to his own country.

In the year 1755, the Royal Academy of Sciences at Stockholm honored our
professor with one of the first premiums, agreeably to the will of Count
Sparre; who had decreed two gold medals, of ten ducats value each, to be
annually given by the academy, to the authors of such papers, in the preceding
year's Stockholm Acts, as should be adjudged most useful in promoting
agriculture particularly, and all branches of rural economy. This medal bore
on one side, the arms of the Count, with this motto -- Superstes in Scientiis
amor FREDERICI SPARRE. -- LINNAEUS obtained it in consequence of a paper de
Plantis, quae Alpium Suecicarum indigenae, magno rei oeconomicae et medicae
emolumento fieri possint, and the ultimate intention was to recommend these
plants, as adapted to culture in Lapland. This paper was inserted in the
Stockholm Acts for 1754. Vol. XV.

LINNAEUS also obtained the praemium centum aureorum, proposed by the Imperial
Academy of Sciences at Petersburgh, for the best paper written to establish, or
disprove, by new arguments, the doctrine of the sexes of plants. On this
occasion the professor wrote his DISQUISITIO de quaestione ab Acad. Imper.
Scient. Petrop. in annum 1759 pro praemio proposita: SEXUM PLANTARUM argumentis
et experimentis novis, praeter adhuc jam cognita, vel corroborare vel
impugnare, praemissa expositione historica et physica omnium Plantae partium,
quae aliquid ad faecundationem et perfectionem seminis, et fructus confer
creduntur; ab eadem Academia die 6 Sept. 1760, in conventu publico praemio
ornata. Petrop. 1760, 4o, pp. 32.

Apart from all foregoing arguments, facts, and experiments, brought in support
of this question, the professor has in this little tract sufficiently proved,
by a series of new facts, that the dust of the Antherae, analogically called
the male parts, is absolutely necessary to be shed on the stigma or female
part, in order to render the seed fertile. His theory of vegetation, prefixed
to this paper, is explained more at large in the Prolepsis Plantarum, printed
in the 6th volume of the Amoenitates.

It was, if possible, an additional glory to LINNAEUS to have merited this
premium from the Petersburgh academy; inasmuch as a professor of that society,
a few years before, had with more than common zeal, although with a futility
like that of the other antagonists of our author, endeavored to overturn the
whole Linnaean system of botany, by attempting to show that the doctrine of the
sexes of plants, had no foundation in nature, and was unsupported by facts and
experiments.

The great character of LINNAEUS, and that of his colleagues, particularly of
Rosen, in the medical departments, and their united endeavors, had very
considerably raised the credit of the university of Upsal, as we have before
observed. It is certain, that the number of students are, at this time, nearly
double what they are said to have been in accounts written 30 and 40 years ago.
The emulation excited among the students amply rewarded those gentlemen for
their pains, by the vast harvest of useful information flowing in, particularly
on the subjects of natural history, from their pupils, now dispersed in every
part of the world. Many of these young men, after being properly grounded in
the principles of physic, had, with an ardour which nothing but the strongest
love of science could inspire, voluntarily undertaken the most distant and
perilous voyages, supported by the munificence of particular patrons or
societies, to gratify their taste in the pursuits of natural history, and other
useful knowledge. Several of these young men perished, from change of climate,
or various other causes, and much of the fruit of their labor was lost with
them. Such was the fate of Ternstroem, at Pulicandor, in 1745; of Hasselquist,
who went into Egypt and Palestine, and died at Smyrna, in 1752; of Loefling,
who died in Cumana, in 1756. Of the first of these we have no remains. The
papers of Hasselquist were redeemed by the queen of Sweden, and published by
LINNAEUS, under the title of ITER PALAESTINUM, in 1757, in 8o; and those of
Loefling, under the title of ITER HISPANICUM, in 1758; to each of which is
prefixed a short account of the author. We have also the fruit of Kalm's
journey in N. America, and of the voyage of Osbeck and Toren, who both went
chaplains to Swedish East India ships. These are here mentioned particularly,
as they are all translated, and published since in the English language. We yet
deplore the more recent fate of Forskal, and his unfortunate associates, in
Arabia, and the more so, since his posthumous pieces, published at Copenhagen
in 1775, are sufficient to convince us, that the fruit of that expedition would
have been rich and large, had it not been so unfortunately blasted.

There were also several others, who made less remote journies for the same
purpose; such were L. Montin, who visited Lula-Lapmark in 1749; M. Koehler, who
traveled into the southern part of Italy in 1752; Dr. SOLANDER, who visited
Pitho-Lapmark, and Torno-Lapmark, in 1753, where he made several discoveries,
and brought back diverse rare plants, and other subjects in natural history,
which had escaped the diligence of his great master; D. Rolander, who visited
Surinam and St. Eustatia, in 1755; A. R. Martin, who searched Greenland in
1758, as C. Alstroemer did the southern parts of Europe in 1760. We do not
mention others, who re-visited the isle of Gothland in 1752 and 1760, after
Linnaeus's own tour into that place.

The travels of these gentlemen afforded great sources of information, and
furnished materials for our author, that proved very favorable to the last
editions of his Systema Naturae, and Species Plantarum: insomuch, that we shall
see him exemplifying, in a much more perfect and detailed manner, his System of
Nature.

This work, as far as respected the vegetable kingdom, had been separately and
largely exhibited, as before mentioned, in the Genera Plantarum, and the
species given in the several Florae of our author, and finally in the Species
Plantarum. As yet, however, although it had passed through nine editions,
little more had appeared in the animal kingdom than the generical characters,
with a single specific name; insomuch that the ninth edition at Leyden, in
1756, was contained in a small octavo of 226 pages. This it must be observed
notwithstanding, was only a republication of the author's sixth edition in
1748. The scheme therefore cannot be considered as perfected by the author,
until the publication of the 10th edition, in 1758, the first part of which,
relating to the animal kingdom, makes a volume of 821 pages; and the same part,
in the 12th and last edition, is augmented by the addition of new subjects to
1327 pages. This work therefore, published in two volumes at Stockholm, in 1766
and 1767, is to be considered as having received the author's finishing hand,
as far as possible, since he professes to describe only such animals as had
fallen under his own inspection, except in some instances, where his dependence
upon other authority rendered it justifiable. The title of this enlarged
edition runs thus:

SYSTEMA NATURAE per regna tria Naturae secundum classes, ordines, genera et
species, cum characteribus, differentiis, synonymis, locis. Holm. 1766, I.
1767, II. 1768, III.

TOM. I. The ANIMAL KINGDOM.
In this volume, after a philosophical history of the animal kingdom in
general, our author proceeds to the establishment of the classical characters;
previous to which, he presents us with the natural division of animals, arising
from their different internal structure; an arrangement partly established by
Aristotle, and of which our own great naturalist Mr. RAY has made considerable
use, in the introductory part of his Synopsis Animalium. By this division all
the animal kingdom naturally falls into six classes, as follow: animals having
the HEART furnished with
Two ventricles and auricles: -- Blood warm and red. Viviparous. MAMMALIA.
Oviparous. BIRDS. One ventricle and auricle: -- Blood cold and red. Respiration
voluntary. AMPHIBIA. Breathing by Gills. FISHES. One ventricle, without
auricle: -- Sanies, cold and colorless. Antennated. INSECTS. Tentaculated.
VERMES.

He then gives the natural characters at large of each class, taking in with
the foregoing internal structure, all the differences arising from the lungs,
or other organs of respiration, as gills: from the maxillae, jaws or mandibles:
the organs of generation: those of sensation: the teguments, or outward
covering: and the fulcra, or legs, wings, etc. Our plan does not admit of
introducing these at large.

At the head of each class is given a concise and most instructive description
of the classical character; so methodically constructed, as to include at the
same time an explanation of all the terms appertaining to that class,
concluding with a general mention of the best authors thereon.

After this, our author proceeds to the establishment of the natural characters
of each order of the class respectively. These also we must omit, as
inconsistent with our compendious view of the system, and more especially the
latter classes of this kingdom, where the subjects are so numerous: but in the
four first classes we propose to give the artificial generical characters as
they stand at the head of each order.

Class I. MAMMALIA.
This class comprehends not only all the animals which we call Quadrupeds (the
Lizard genus, or rather the reptiles Pedati, excepted) but also the cetaceous
order, or Whales, Cachalots, and Porpesses. This arrangement of Whales with
Quadrupeds, which did not take place in the first editions of this work, has
not been relished by some very respectable Zoologists who wrote before
LINNAEUS; but our author thinks himself fully justified on account of the
agreement of these animals in the structure of the heart, in the respiration by
means of lungs, in their having moveable eyelids, ears, in being viviparous, in
being furnished with teats, and in other particulars, by which they differ so
materially from fishes, as to more than balance that single agreement in living
in the same element.

The MAMMALIA are divided by our author into seven orders; the distinctions of
which are, in this artificial arrangement, principally established on the
difference in the number, situation, and form, of the three kinds of teeth,
namely, the primores or incisores, called fore-teeth, or cutting teeth; the
laniarii or canini, called dog-teeth, canine, or lacerating teeth; and the
molares, double teeth or grinders. LINNAEUS, notwithstanding, does not entirely
neglect the feet, as will appear from his description of the natural characters
of the orders, as well as from the following systematic arrangement, of this
class.

1. Digitated.
Fore-teeth, none -- BRUTA. 2. Fore-teeth, two. Canine none GLIRES. 4.
Fore-teeth, four. Canine single PRIMATES. 1. Fore-teeth, 6, 2, 10. conical.
Canine single FERAE. 3.

2. Hoofed.
Fore-teeth, above and below -- BELLUAE. 6. Fore-teeth, none above -- PECORA.
5.

3. Destitute of hoofs or claws.
Teeth, various; in the different genera -- CETE. 7.

We shall give the characters as they stand at the head of each ORDER; and then
enumerate the genera, adding to the latter only the abbreviated characters.

I. PRIMATES. Animals furnished with fore-teeth, or cutting teeth: four above;
parallel. Two pectoral teats.

II. BRUTA. No fore-teeth.

III. FERAE. Six, sharp fore-teeth in the upper jaw. One canine tooth on each
side.

There are exceptions in this order. The Didelphis has 17. The Sorex has 19.
And the Erinaceus 20.

IV. GLIRES. Two fore-teeth in each jaw, close together; but remote from the
grinders. No canine teeth.

V. PECORA. No fore-teeth in the upper jaw: six or eight in the lower jaw, very
remote from the grinders. Hoofed feet: inguinal teats.

VI. BELLUA. Fore-teeth truncated. Hoofed feet.

VII. CETE. Breathing apertures on the head. Pectoral fins. Tail placed
horizontally. No claws.

Abbreviated generic characters.
I. PRIMATES.
Howsoever the pride of man may be offended at the idea of being ranked with
the beasts that perish, he nevertheless stands as an animal, in the system of
nature, at the head of this order; and as such is here described, with his
several varieties observable in the different quarters of the globe, in a
manner, and with an accuracy, peculiar to our author, and which we may venture
to say, is no where else to be met with. But man is not left by LINNAEUS, to
contemplate himself merely as such; but he is led to the consideration of what
he ought to be, as an intelligent and moral being, in a comment on the Grecian
Sage's dictate, KNOW THYSELF: by the true application of which, he cannot but
be sufficiently elevated above every humiliating idea which can otherwise arise
from such an association.

2. SIMIA. Ape. Canine teeth, separate. 33 species.
a. Without tails. True Apes. 3: b. With short tails. Baboons. 6. c. With long
tails. Monkeys. 24:
3. LEMUR. Maucauco. Fore-teeth below 6. 5 species. Mongoz, Black Maucauco,
Ringtailed M. etc.
4. VESPERTILIO. Bat. Fore-toes elongated, and connected by membranes,
performing the office of wings. Vampyre, Common Bat, Long-eared, etc. 6 species.

II. BRUTA.
5. ELEPHAS. Elephant. Tusks and grinders only: long proboscis. 6. TRICHECHUS.
Walrus. Tusks above only; grinders formed of a rugged bony substance; hinder
feet formed into fins. The Morse, the Manati.
7. BRADYPUS. Sloth. Grinders only; first grinders long; body hairy. 2 species.
8. MYRMECOPHAGA. Ant-eater. No teeth; body hairy. 4 species.
9. MANIS. Manis. No teeth; body scaly. 2 species.

10. DASYPUS. Armadillo. Grinders only; body crustaceous. 6 species.

III. FERAE
11. PHOCA. Seal. Fore-teeth above 6; below 4. 3 species. Ursine, Leonine,
Common.
12. CANIS. Dog. Fore-teeth 6; and 6: middle ones above; lobated. Faithful,
with all its varieties. Wolf, Hyaena, Fox, Arctic Fox, Jackal, etc. 9 species.
13. FELIS. Cat. Fore-teeth 6; and 6: lower ones, equal: tongue very rough.
Lion, Tiger, Panther, Cat, Lynx, etc. 7 species.
14. VIVERRA. Civet. Fore-teeth 6; and 6: middle ones below short. 6 species.
Ichneumon or Mungo, Coati Mondi, Civet, Genet, etc.
15. MUSTELA. Weesel. Fore-teeth 6; and 6: lower ones close together; 2 placed
inwards. Sea-Otter, Otter, Lesser Otter, the Glutton, Martin, Pole-cat, Ferret,
Sable, Stoat, or Ermine. The Glutton is thought by Mr. Pennant to be the same
animal with the Ursus Luscus, or Quick-hatch, of Linnaeus. 11 species.

16. URSUS. Bear. Fore-teeth 6; and 6: upper ones hollowed. Black Bear, White
Bear, Badger, Raccoon, Quick-hatch or Wolverene, (the same animal called
Glutton.)
17. DIDELPHIS. Opossum. Fore-teeth above 10; below, 8. Virginian, Philander,
Seba 's Murine, Dorsigerous.
18. TALPA. Mole. Fore-teeth 6 above; 8 below. 2 species.
19. SOREX. Shrew. Fore-teeth 2 above; 4 below. Crested, Minute, the least of
all quadrupeds; weighs 1 dram. Water, Murine, Foetid or common.
20. ERINACEUS. Hedgehog. Fore teeth 2 above, 2 below. Common, American,
Asiatic.

IV. GLIRES.
21. HYSTRIX. Porcupine. Body covered with quills. Canada, Long-tailed.
22. LEPUS. Hare. Fore-teeth above, double* Common Rabbet, Cape Rabbet,
Brasilian Rabbet.

23. CASTOR. Beaver. Fore-teeth above truncated, and hollowed. Common, Musk,
Zibet.
24. MUS. Rat. Fore-teeth above subulated. 21 species. Cavy, called Guinea Pig,
Aguti, Javan, Earless, Lemming, Marmot, Earth Rat, Water R. Common R. Mouse,
Dormouse, Jerbua, etc.
25. SCIURUS. Squirrel. Fore-teeth above, cuneated; below, compressed. Common,
Black, Gray, Palm, Striated, Glis, Flying, Java, Flying Cat. 11 species.
26. NOCTILIO. Noctule. Fore-teeth, below bilobated; fore-toes elongated, and
connected by membranes, performing the office of wings. American. 1 species.

V. PECORA.
27. CAMELUS. Camel. No horns; several canine teeth on each side. Camel,
Bactrian or Dromedary, Glama, Pacos.
28. MOSCHUS. Musk. No horns; canine teeth single on each side; upper ones
standing out of the mouth. Tibet Musk, Guinea Musk, an Antelope of Mr. Pennant,
Pigmy Musk.

29. CERVUS. Deer. Horns solid, branched, deciduous; no canine teeth.
Camelopard, Elk, Stag, Rein Deer, Buck, Roebuck, Guinea.
30. CAPRA. Goat. Horns hollow, erect; no canine teeth. Tame Goat, Wild Goat,
Chamois, Rock Goat, Gazell, Egyptian Antelope of Mr. Pennant, Common Antelope,
Bezoar, Dorcas, Ammon, etc. 12 species.
31. OVIS. Sheep. Horns hollow, bending backwards; no canine teeth. Ram and its
varieties; Guinea, Cretan; these two are also varieties, according to Mr.
Pennant.
32. BOS. Ox. Horns hollow, extending outward; no canine teeth. Bull; Bonasus,
the same in a wild state, according to Mr. Pennant; Bison, Grunting, Buffalo,
Dwarf or Indian.

VI. BELLUAE.
33. EQUUS. Horse. Fore-teeth 6 above, and 6 below. Horse, Ass, Zebra.
34. HIPPOPOTAMUS. Hippopotame. Fore-teeth above 6, below 4. River Horse. Mr.
Pennant describes this animal as having 4 cutting teeth only above and below.

35. SUS. Hog. Fore-teeth above 4, below 6. Common; Guinea, considered as a
variety; Pecary; Capybara, Thick-nosed Tapiir of Pennant; Babyroussa.
36. RHINOCEROS. Fore-teeth 2 above, and 2 below. One-horned. Variety with two
horns. See Dr. Parsons on this subject, Phil. Trans. vol. xlii. p. 523, and
vol. lvi. p. 32. Linnaeus thinks this may be removed into the order of Bruta.

VII. CETE.
37. MONODON. Narwal. Two long strait teeth in the upper jaw, perforating the
lip. Sea Unicorn.
38. BALAENA. Whale. Horny laminae in the upper jaw. Whalebone Whale, Fin-fish,
Hump-backed or Pike-headed, Round-lipped.
39. PHYSETER. Cachalot. Teeth in the lower jaw only. Round-headed, Spermaceti,
Crooked-toothed, Plane-toothed.
40. DELPHINUS. Dolphin. Teeth in both jaws. Porpess, Dolphin, Grampus.

This part of the system, taking in a few species described in the appendix of
the third Tome, and in the Mantissa of 1771, contains about 230 species. Mr.
Pennant, in his Synopsis of Quadrupeds, and our learned friend Professor
MARTIN, in his Elements of Natural History, by including some animals that were
unknown to LINNAEUS, and giving the rank of species to several that were
considered by our author as varieties, have extended the number of Mammalia to
289 species.

Class II. AVES. BIRDS.
These are divided by LINNAEUS into six orders, the distinctions of which are
chiefly taken from the beak, but in some genera it has been necessary to call
in the tongue, nares or nostrils, and, in some instances, the feet, and other
parts. We shall give the characters of the orders as they stand at the head of
each; and subjoin the abbreviated generical characters, enumerating the number
of species under each genus.

I. ACCIPITRES. RAPACIOUS. Birds having the upper mandible of the beak
furnished on each side with an angular process.

II. PICAE. PIES. Birds having the beak somewhat compressed on the sides and
unequal on the upper part.

III. ANSERES. WEB-FOOTED. Birds having a somewhat obtuse beak, clothed with a
thin skin; gibbous at the base underneath, wide at the end; the faux or edges
of the base denticulated; the feet palmated or webbed, and formed for swimming.

IV. GRALLAE. WADERS. Birds having the beak subcylindrical, and rather obtuse;
the tongue entire and fleshy; the thighs naked for some space above the knees.

V. GALLINAE. GALLINACEOUS. Birds having the upper mandible unequal, or arched,
and receiving the edges of the lower; nostrils half covered, by means of a
unequal, somewhat cartilaginous membrane; the rectrices, or tail-feathers, more
than twelve; the feet cloven, but the toes connected by a membrane as far as to
the first joint.

VI. PASSERES. PASSERINE. Birds having a conical acuminated beak; the nostrils
ovated, open, and naked.

Abbreviated generic characters.
I. ACCIPITRES.
41. VULTUR. Vulture. Beak hooked; head naked. Condor, Harpy, King of Vultures,
etc. 8 species.
42. FALCO. Eagle. Beak hooked, and bordered with a cere at the base. Eagles,
Hawks, Buzzards, Sparrow-hawk. 32 species.
43. STRIX. Owl. Beak hooked; capistrum, or feathers of the forehead, thrown
over the beak. Horn Owls, Gray Owl, Screech Owl, Little Owl, etc. 12 species.
44. LANIUS. Butcher-bird, or Skrike. Beak nearly strait; upper mandible on
each side, near the end, notched, and furnished with a denticle. 26 species.

II. PICAE.
a. Feet with three toes before, and one long one behind, formed for walking.
66. TROCHILUS. Honey-sucker. Beak incurvated, filiform, forming a tube at the
extremity. 22 species.
65. CERTHIA. Creeper. Beak incurvated, acuminated. 25 species, 1 only English.
64. UPUPA. Hoopee. Beak incurvated, somewhat obtuse. 3 species, 1 English.
48. BUPHAGA. Beef-eater of Mr. Pennant. Beak strait, quadrangular. 1 species.
60. SITTA. Nut-hatch. Beak strait; cuneated at the end. 3 species, 1 English.
52. ORIOLUS. Oriole. Beak strait, conic, very acute. Golden Thrush, etc. 20
species, all exotic.
51. CORACIAS. Roller. Beak cultrated (sharp or cutting) incurved at the end. 6
species, 1 English.
53. GRACULA. Grackle. Beak cultrated, equal, naked at the base. Mino of
Edwards, Saulary, Mairbird of America, etc. 8 species.
50. CORVUS. Crow. Beak cultrated; capistrum reversed. Raven, Crow, Rook,
Royston-Crow, Jack-Daw, Jay, Nut-cracker, Mag-pye, Cornish Chough, etc. 19
species.
54. PARADISAEA. Paradise-bird. Beak sub-cultrated; capistrum or forehead
covered with down. Manucodiata of Edwards, Ray, etc. 3 species.

b. Feet with two toes before, and two behind, formed for climbing.
46. RAMPHASTOS. Toucan. Beak serrated; tongue fringed on the edges. 8 species,
all American.
55. TROGON. Curucui. Beak serrated, hooked at the end. 3 species, all American.
45. PSITTACUS. Parrot. Beak covered with the cere; tongue fleshy. Maccaws,
Parrots, Parroquets, Lory. 47 species.
49. CROTOPHAGA. Tick-eater. Beak rough, upper mandible angulated on each side.
Any of Brasil. 2 species.
59. PICUS. Woodpecker. Beak angulated; tongue vermiform. 21 species.
58. YUNX. Wryneck. Beak smooth; tongue vermiform. English. 1 species only.
57. CUCULUS. Cuckoo. Beak smooth; nostrils marginated. 22 species, all exotic
except one.
56. BUCCO. Barbet of Mr. Pennant. Beak smooth, emarginated, and hooked at the
end. 1 species.

c. Feet, with the middle and exterior toe joined together, nearly the whole
length.
47. BUCEROS. Horn-bill of Mr. Pennant. Beak serrated, furnished with a
protuberance, or horn, at the base of the upper mandible. 4 species.
62. ALCEDO. Kingfisher. Beak trigonal, strait. 15 species, all exotic except
one.
63. MEROPS. Bee-eater. Beak incurvated, somewhat compressed. 7 species.
61. TODOS. Tody, Mr. Pennant. Beak linear, strait, and somewhat depressed.
American. 2 species.




III. ANSERES.
a. Beak denticulated.
67. ANAS. Duck. Beak furnished with membranaceous denticles, and nail at the
end. Swan, Burrow-duck, Goose, Duck, Mallard, Tufted Duck, etc. 45 species.
68. MERGUS. Merganser. Beak furnished with subulated denticles and nail.
Gooseander, Smew, Lesser Dun Diver, etc. 6 species.
74. PHAETON. Tropic Bird. Beak cultrated. 2 species.
73. PLOTUS. Darter of Mr. Pennant. Beak subulated.
b. Beak edentulous.
78. RHYNCOPS. Skimmer of Mr. Pennant. Upper mandible much shorter than the
lower. Sea Crow of Ray. 2 species; nearly allied to the Gull genus.
71. DIOMEDEA. Albatross. Lower mandible truncated. Albatross, Black-legged
Penguin. 2 species.
69. ALCA. Auk. Beak wrinkled transversely. Auks, Puffin, etc. 5 species.
70. PROCELLARIA. Petrel. Nostrils superincumbent, and subcylindrical.
Storm-finch, Fulmar, Shear-Water, etc. 6 species.
72. PELECANUS. Pelecan. Face entirely naked round the base of the beak.
Pelecan, Corvorant, Shag, Gannet, Booby, etc. 8 species.
76. LARUS. Gull. Beak gibbous under the apex. Gulls, Herring Gull, Arctic
Gull, etc. 11 species.
77. STERNA. Tern. Beak subulated, compressed at the apex. 7 species.
75. COLYMBUS. Diver. Beak subulated, somewhat compressed on the sides.
Guillemots, Diverse, Grebes, etc. 11 species.


IV. GRALLAE.
a. Four-toed.
79. PHAENICOPTERUS. Flaming. Beak incurvated, as if broken; denticulated: feet
webbed. 80. PLATALEA. Spoonbill. Beak flattened, and wide at the end. 3 species.
81. PALAMEDEA. Screamer of Mr. Pennant. Beak acutely hooked at the end. Anima
and Cariama of Brasil.
82. MYCTERIA. Jabiru. Lower mandible thick, and turned upwards. American. 1
species.
85. TANTALUS. Ibis. Beak arcuated; throat pouched. Ibis of Egypt, Guara, etc.
7 species.
84. ARDEA. Heron. Beak strait, sharp-pointed. Demoiselle, Crane, Stork, Heron,
Egret, Bittern, White Heron, etc. 26 species.
89. RECURVIROSTRA. Avoset. Beak subulated, thin, depressed, and recurved. 1
species.
86. SCOLOPAX. Curlew. Beak strait, round, rather obtuse at the end. Curlew,
Whimbril, Woodcock, Snipes, Stone Plover, Godwit. 18 species.
87. TRINGA. Sand Piper. Beak roundish obtuse; hinder toe very short, and
placed high. Ruff, Lapwing, Knot, Purr, etc. 23 species.
91. FULICA. Coot. Beak *rising at the forehead and base. Coot, Water Hen, etc.
7 species.
92. PARRA. Jacana.Beak at the base and the forehead carunculated. Chavary of
Jacquin, etc. 5 species.
93. RALLUS. Rail. Beak somewhat carinated; body compressed. Land Rail, Water
Rail, Small Spotted Rail, etc. 10 species.
94. PSOPHIA. Trumpeter. Beak somewhat arched or unequal; nostrils ovated.
American.
83. CANCROMA. Boat-bill of Mr. Pennant. Upper mandible very gibbous. Tamatia
of Brasil. 2 species.

b. Three-toed, formed for running.
90. HAEMATOPUS. Oyster-Catcher. Beak somewhat compressed, ending in a wedge.
Sea Pie. 1 species.
88. CHARADRIUS. Plover. Beak round, obtuse. Sea Lark, Dotterel, Sanderling,
Green Plover, Long-legged Plover. 12 species.
95. OTIS. Bustard. Upper mandible unequal or arched; tongue emarginated or
bifid. 4 species.
96. STRUTHIO. Ostrich. Beak conical; wings unfit for flying. Ostrich,
Cassowary. American.


V. GALLINAE.
97. DIDUS. Dodo. Beak ribbed and sulcated across the upper mandible* face
naked. Hooded Swan of Ray. 1 species only.
98. PAVO. Peacock. Head crested; beak naked. Pea-cock, Chinese Two-spurred
Peacock, etc. 3 species.
99. MELEAGRIS. Turkey. Head covered with caruncles. Turkey, Quan, Horned
Pheasant of Bengal.
100. CRAX. Curasso. Cere investing the whole base of the beak. Cushew Bird,
Curasso, etc. 5 species.
101. PHASIANUS. Pheasant. Legs and knees naked. Common Cock, Pheasant,
Painted, etc. 6 species.
103. TETRAO. Grous. Naked papillose membrane above the eyes. Cock of the Wood,
Black Game, White Game, Partridge, Quail, etc. 20 species.
102. NUMIDA. Pintado. Carunculated wattles, hanging from each side of the
face. Guinea Hen.




VI. PASSERES.
a. With thick beaks. Crassirostres.
109. LOXIA. Gross-beak. Beak conical and ovated. Cross-bill, Gross-beak, Pine
Bullfinch, Bull-finch, Cardinal, Greenfinch, etc. 48 species.
112. FRINGILLA. Chaffinch. Beak conical and acute. Chaffinch, Brambling,
Gold-finch, Canary-bird, Red Pole, Sparrow, etc. 39 species.
110. EMBERIZA. Bunting. Beak subconical; lower mandible the broader, a little
inflexed and narrowed in on the sides. Sea Lark, Bunting, Yellow Hammer, Reed
Sparrow, etc. 24 species.

b. With the upper mandible incurved at the end. Curvirostres.

118. CAPRIMULGUS. Goatsucker. Beak incurved, depressed, ciliated about the
base; nostrils tubular. 2 species.
117. HIRUNDO. Swallow. Beak incurved, depressed. Chimney Swallow, Marten, Sand
Marten, Swift, Pratincole of Kramer. 12 species.
115. PIPRA. Manakin. Beak incurved, subulated. 13 species, chiefly S.
American; a beautiful genus of birds!

c. With the upper mandible emarginated, or notched near the apex.
Emarginatirostres.
207. TURDUS. Thrush. Beak notched, subulated, compressed at the base.
Missel-bird, Field-fare, Red-wing, Throstle, Blackbird, Ring-ousel,
Rose-coloured Ousel, etc. 28 sp.
108. AMPELIS. Chatterer. Beak notched, subulated, depressed at the base.
Silk-tail of Ray, Pompadour of Edwards, etc. 7 species.
111. TANAGRA. Tanager. Beak notched, subulated, conic at the base. 24 species,
mostly American.
113. MUSCICAPA. Fly-catcher. Beak notched, subulated, base ciliated, or
bristled. Pied Bird of Paradise of Ray, etc. 21 species.

d. With strait, entire, small, slender beaks. Simplicirostres.
116. PARUS. Titmouse. Beak subulated; capistrum reversed; tongue truncated.
Ox-Eye, Blue Titmouse, Colemouse, Black Cap, Least Butcher Bird, etc. 14
species.
114. MOTACILLA. Warblers. Beak subulated; tongue jagged; claw of the hind toe
moderately long. Nightingale, Hedge-Sparrow, Sedgebird, White Throat, Wheat
Ear, Black Cap, Red Start, Robin, Wren, Golden-crested Wren, etc. 49 species.
105. ALAUDA. Lark. Beak subulated; tongue bifid; claw of the hinder toe very
long. Sky-Lark, Tit-Lark, Wood-Lark, etc. 11 species.
106. STURNUS. Starling. Beak subulate, but flatted at the apex, and
marginated. Starling, Water Ousel, etc. 5 species.
104. COLUMBA. Pigeon. Beak rather arched, or unequal; nostrils gibbose, and
half covered with a membrane. Wood Pigeon, and its descendant the Common, Ring
Dove, Turtle Dove, Migratory, etc. 40 species.




The specific characters in the class of birds are deduced from a great variety
of particulars. In several, as in the Falcon genus, the color of the cere, or
naked tunic that surrounds the basis of the beak, and the color of the legs,
assist in distinguishing the species. The color of the bird in general is
subject to great variation in different countries, as well as in the same
country at different seasons in the year, as is more particularly seen in the
arctic regions; not to mention that of the sexes in almost all kinds. Our
author therefore does not trust to this, wherever a more permanent mark can be
found. It must, however, be confessed, that in too many instances, it is
necessary to trust entirely to this distinction, howsoever unstable. The form
of the tail, as it happens to be even, cuneated, or forked, is an excellent and
firm note; in the Parrot genus its length, as shorter or longer than the body,
is of great service. In others, the color of the beak, a naked or crested
head, contribute to form the note of distinction. And in fine, nature has
stamped upon others some peculiarity, which points them out immediately; as,
the receptacle of the lower mandible, in the Pelican; two long tail-feathers,
in the Tropic-bird; the direction of the mandibles in the Cross-beak, etc.
Among the common marks, none more frequently occur than the differences of
color in the quillfeathers and those of the tail. This class comprehends
upwards of 930 subjects.

Class III. AMPHIBIA.
This class is so called by LINNAEUS, not because all the subjects of it are,
strictly speaking, capable of living either in air or water; but principally
from their power of suspending or performing the function of respiration in a
more arbitrary manner than other animals. This class is divided into four
orders:

I. REPTILES. REPTILES. Amphibious animals breathing through the mouth by means
of lungs only; and furnished with four feet.

II. SERPENTS. SERPENTS. Amphibious animals breathing through the mouth by
means of lungs only; destitute of feet, fins, and ears.

III. MEANTES. GLIDERS. Amphibious animals breathing by means of gills and
lungs; furnished with arms and claws.

IV. NANTES. BREATHING FISHES. Amphibious animals breathing at will by means of
gills and lungs. The rays of the fins cartilaginous.

Abbreviated generic characters.
I. REPTILES.
119. TESTUDO. Tortoise. Body covered with a shell. Coriaceous Tortoise, Green
Turtle, Hawkshill Turtle, Common Grecian or African Tortoise, Tesselated
Tortoise, etc. 15 species.
121. DRACO. Dragon. Body winged. Flying Lizard, of Bontius, p. 57. 2 species.
122. LACERTA. Lizard. Body naked, furnished with a tail. a. With a compressed
tail: Among these is the Crocodile. b. With a verticillated tail: The Lizard,
Stellio. c. With a round imbricated tail: shorter than the body. The
Chamaeleon, the Geeko, the Skink. d. With a round imbricated tail, longer than
the body. The Iguana, the Guernsey Lizard. e. With the body smooth: four toes
on the fore feet. Common Swift, Water Eft or Newt, Salamander. 49 species.
120. RANA. Frog. Body naked: no tail. Surinam Toad, Common Toad, Surinam
Frog-fish. See Phil. Trans. vol. li. p. 653. Common Frog, Tree Frog, Bull Frog
of America. See Kalm ii. 170, etc. 17 species.




II. SERPENTS.
123. CROTALUS. Rattlesnake. Body and tail underneath clothed with small
shields; tail terminating in a horny rattle. Rattlesnake, etc. 5 species, all
American, and all venomous.
124. BOA. Serpent. Body and tail underneath clothed with small shields; no
rattle. Gigantic Serpent, or Constrictor. Vide Adanson's Senegal, p. 274.
Hog-nosed Snake of Catesby, 2. t. 56, etc. 10 species; not furnished with
venomous fangs.
125. COLUBER. Viper. Body underneath clothed with small shields; tail
clothed with scales. True Viper of Egypt, Horned Viper. See Phil. Trans. vol.
lvi. t. 14. Berus, or English Viper, Natrix or Common Snake, Naja or Hooded
Serpent of Kaempf. p. 565; Black Snake, Kalm ii. p. 202. 97 species, of which
18 are known to have venomous fangs.
126. ANGUIS. Snake. Body and tail underneath clothed with scales only. Javan
fourfooted Snake, an anomaly; Common Slow Worm, etc. 16 species.
127. AMPHISBAENA. Annulated Snake. Body and tail composed of annular segments.
2 species, both American.
128. CAECILIA. Tentaculated Snake. Body and tail wrinkled; not scaly; upper
lip furnished with two feelers. 2 species.



III. MEANTES.
SIREN. Siren. Body biped, and furnished with a tail. Lizard Siren or Mud
Inguana of Carolina. See Phil. Trans. vol. lvi. 189, t. 9. For this uncommon
animal LINNAEUS was obliged to form a new order. See Syst. Not. tom. I. addend.



IV. NANTES.
a. Such as have several branchial holes on each side.
129. PETROMYZON. Lamprey. Seven branchial apertures on each side of the neck.
Lamprey, Lesser, Lampern.
130. RAJA. Ray. Five branchial apertures on each side the neck underneath.
Torpedo, Skate, Sharp-nosed Ray, Rough Ray, Sting Ray, Thornback. 9 species.
131. SQUALUS. Shark. Five branchial apertures on the side of the neck. Picked
Dog-fish, Angel-fish, Balance-fish, Tope, Dog-fish, White Shark, Blue Shark,
Saw-fish, etc. 15 species.
132. CHIMAERA. Chimera. Single branchial aperture, dividing into four within.
2 species.



b. Such as have a single branchial hole on each side.
133. LOPHIUS. Fishing-frog. Two ventral fins; mouth furnished with teeth.
Toad-fish. 3 species.
134. ACIPENSER. Sturgeon. Two ventral fins; no teeth. Sturgeon, Strelet or
Cavear-fish, Huso.
139. CYCLOPTERUS. Lump-fish. Two ventral fins nearly uniting into one
orbicular fin. 3 species. 135. BALISTES. Old Wife Fish. Single ventral fin, or
carene. Sea Unicorn, Old Wife Fish, etc. 8 species.
136. OSTRACION. Bonyskin Fish. No ventral fins; body entirely clothed with a
bony covering. Triquetrous Ostracion, Three-horned, Four-horned, etc. 9 species.
137. TETRODON. Sun-fish. No ventral fins; belly rough or muricated. Ocellated
Sun-fish, Common Mole or Sun-fish, etc. 7 species.
138. DIODON. Porcupine-fish. No ventral fins; body set with acute moveable
spines. Sphaerical, Oblong. 2 species.
140. CENTRISCUS. Trumpet-fish. Ventral fins united; a long moveable spine on
the back, near the tail. Scolopax of Gesner, etc. p. 838. 2 species.
141. SYNGNATHUS. Pipe-fish. No ventral fins; body articulated. Needle-fish,
Pipe-fish, Hippocampus or Seahorse. 7 species.
142. PEGASUS. Dragon-fish. Two ventral fins; upper mandible or beak
denticulated, or ciliated. Flying Dragon of Amboina, etc. 3 species.



This part of the System contains upwards of 290 subjects.

In the REPTILES order, the specific characters of the Testudo genus are
deduced principally from the difference in the shells, and the feet; which in
the Turtles are pinniform, and in the Tortoises digitated. In the Lacerta
genus, from the tail, head, toes, and various other parts; and in the Rana,
from the diversity in the make of the body, and number of the claws on the fore
or hinder feet.

In the SERPENTS order, the specific distinctions have ever been matter of
great difficulty with naturalists, as they were commonly taken from the color,
which is subject to an almost infinite variation. Hence it has happened that
Seba, depending on the colors alone, has, in the opinion of our author,
figured the Boa Constrictor, or Gigantic Serpent, ten times, as so many
distinct species; and the Coluber Naga, or Hooded Viper, fourteen, LINNAEUS at
length discovered a much more certain and permanent note, upon which his
specific characters are solely founded: it was first exemplified in the
Amphibia Gyllenborgiana, and he has since retained it in all his works,
sensible however that it is yet liable to failure: this arises from the number
of the small shields and scales, or rings and rugae of the belly and tail; and
the proportion those numbers bear to each other in the different species: for
example, in our Common Viper the shields of the belly are usually about 146,
and the scales of the tail, that is all below the anus, about 39 or 40: the
shields in our Common Snake about 170, and the scales about 60.

In the NANTES the specific characters are short, but very various in the
different genera, as to the parts of the animal from which they are deduced: in
the Petromyzon and Raia, from the mouth, fins, teeth, etc.; in the latter very
much from the body itself: in the Squalus, from a variety of particulars: in
the Acipenser, from the cirri or beard, and the dorsal shields, or squamae: in
the Balistes, from the fins and tail: in the Ostracion, from the different
angulated form of the body: in the Tetrodon, from differences in the body
chiefly; and in the remaining genera, from the form of the body, and the
differences in the fins.

Class IV. PISCES. FISHES.
In the earlier editions of the Systema Naturae, our author, in the
distribution of FISHES, had followed the method of his friend and fellow
collegian Artedi; whose Icthyology he had published during his residence in
Holland, in 1738. This method, which took in the CETACEOUS order, now among the
MAMMALIA, and the NANTES, now referred to the AMPHIBIA, was established on the
structure or rather situation of the tails in the cetaceous order; and in
others, on the difference in the gills, and the rays of the fins, whether
cartilaginous or bony. In the two last editions, another disposition is
attempted: after having dismissed the cetaceous order to the MAMMALIA, and the
CHONDROPTERYGII or Cartilaginous Fishes, and the Branchiostegi to the NANTES,
our author forms four orders of the bony fishes (which respire by means of
gills only) from the situation of the ventral fins, which he analogically
considers as the feet of the animal, according as they are placed either
before, under, or behind the pectoral or gill fins, or as in one order wanting
the ventral fins.

I. APODES. APODAL. Fishes destitute of ventral fins.

II. JUGULARES. JUGULAR. Fishes having the ventral fins placed before the
pectoral fins.

III. THORACICI. THORACIC. Fishes having the ventral fins placed underneath the
pectoral fins.

IV. ABDOMINALES. ABDOMINAL. Fishes having the ventral fins placed on the
abdomen behind the pectoral fins.

Abbreviated generic Characters.
I. APODES.
143. MURAENA. Eel. Apertures of the gills placed behind the pectoral fins. Sea
Serpent, Eel, Conger Eel, etc. 7 species.
144. GYMNOTUS. Gymnote. Back destitute of any fin. Carapo of Brasil, Electric
Eel, Beaked, etc. 5 species.
145. TRICHIURUS. Needle-tail. Subulated tail without any fin. Mucu of the
Brasilians.
147. AMMODYTES. Lance. Head much slenderer than the body. Sand Eel.
146. ANARCHICAS. Wolf-fish.Grinding teeth rounded. Sea Wolf. In the fossil
state frequent, called Bufonites.
148. OPHIDIUM. Snake-fish. Body ensiform. Bearded Ophidion, Beardless Ophidion.
149. STROMATEUS, Pampus. Body ovated. Pampus of Sloane. 2 species.
150. XIPHIAS. Sword-fish. Upper mandible terminating in an ensiform beak.
Sword-fish of all authors.



II. JUGULARES.
151. CALLIONYMUS. Dragonet.Breathing spiracles on the hinder part of the head.
The Harp, etc. 3 species.
152. URANOSCOPUS. Star-gazer. Mouth flat, opening upwards. Scabrous. 1 species.
153. TRACHINUS. Weever. Anus near the breast. Draco of the old authors. 1
species.
154. GADUS. Cod. Pectoral fins slender, and ending in a point. With a. Three
dorsal fins, and the jaw bearded. Haddock, Torsk, Cod-fish, Bib, Whiting, Pout,
Poor
b. Three dorsal fins; jaw not bearded. Whiting, Cole-fish, Pollack, etc.
c. Two dorsal fins only. Hake, Ling, Burbot.
d. One dorsal fin. Mediterranean. 17 species.

155. BLENNIUS. Blenny. Ventral fins of two rays, small, and not prickly.
Crested, Gattorugine, Smooth, Spotted, Viviparous. 13 species.



III. THORACICI.
156. CEPOLA. Cepole. Mouth opening upwards, body ensiform. Taenia, etc. 2
species.
157. ECHENEIS. Sucking-fish. Top of the head flat, marginated, and
transversely sulcated. Remora, Naucrates. 2 species.
158. CORYPHAENA. Dolphin. Anterior part of the head very obtuse or truncated.
Dolphin of mariners. River Dolphin, Parrot-fish, etc. 12 species.
159. GOBIUS. Goby. Ventral fins united into one ovate fin. Black Goby, Spotted
Goby. 8 species.
160. COTTUS. Bull-head. Head broader than the body. Pogge, Feather Lasher,
Miller's Thumb, etc. 6 species.
161. SCORPAENA. Scorpen. Head set with prickles or beards. Porcus, Scrofa,
Horrida or Tover-fish.
162. ZEUS. Doree. Upper lip projecting, or fornicated by means of a transverse
membrane. Doree, Silver-fish of Brown, etc. 4 species.
163. PLEURONECTES. Plaise.Both eyes on the same side of the head. With the
eyes, a. On the right side. Holibut, Plaise, Flounder, Dab, Sole.
b. On the left side. The Pearl, the Turbot, etc. 17 species.
164. CHAETODON. Pilot-fish. Teeth very fine, thick set, very numerous, and
flexile. Jaculator-fish. Vide Phil. Trans. vol. live. t. 9. Pilot-fish, etc. 23
species.
165. SPARUS. Gilt-head. Teeth very strong; fore teeth sharp; grinders close
set, and obtuse. Sea Bream, etc. 26 species.
166. LABRUS. Wrasse. Connecting membrane of the dorsal fin extending beyond
the extremity of each ray, in the form of filaments. Wrasse, Bimaculated, etc.
41 species.
167. SCIAENA. Cavalhas. A groove in the back to receive the dorsal fin. Umbra,
Jaculatrix. Vide Phil. Trans. vol. lvi. p. 186, t. 8. f. 6. All Mediterranean.
5 species.
168. PERCA. Perch. The gill-covers jagged or serrated. Perch, Basse, Sea
Perch, Ruff. 36 species.
169. GASTEROSTEUS. Stickle-back. Body at the tail carinated on each side;
spines on the back distinct from the fins. Three-spined Common Stickle-back,
Ten-spined, etc. 11 species.
170. SCOMBER. Mackrel. Body toward the tail carinated on each side; spurious
fins, in most species, near the tail. Mackrel, Bonet, Tunny, Horse Mackrel,
etc. 10 species.
171. MULLUS. Surmullet. Head and body covered with large deciduous scales.
Red, Striped, Beardless.
172. TRIGLA. Gurnard. Several distinct appendages placed at the pectoral fins.
Piper, Gurnard, Red Gurnard, Tub-fish, etc. 9 species.



IV. ABDOMINALES.
173. COBITIS. Loche. Body nearly of an equal width quite to the tail. Loche,
Sand Loche or Fossil Loche. See Phil. Trans. vol. xliv. p. 451, t. 2. f. 1,
etc. 5 species.
174. AMIA. Mud-fish. Head rough, bony, and denudated. 175. SILURUS. Sheat. The
first ray of the dorsal and pectoral fins dentated. Sheat-fish, Callichthys;
Piso says, In dry seasons this fish travels over small tracts of land in search
of freshwater. 21 species.
176. TEUTHIS. Liver-fish. Head anteriorly flat, and as if truncated. 2 species.
177. LORICARIA. Helmet-fish. Body invested as with a shelly crust, set with
points. 2 species.
178. SALMO. Salmon. Posterior dorsal fin adipose, and without rays. a. Trouts;
body variegated; teeth manifest. Salmon, Gray, Salmon Trout, Trout, Char.
b. Smelts; dorsal and anal fin opposite. Smelt, Saurus. c. Teeth scarcely
perceptible. Gwiniad, Umber.
d. With four branchiostegous rays only.
29 species. 179. FISTULARIA. Tobacco-pipe Fish. Very long cylindrical beak or
mandible, with the mouth at the end. Tabacaria, Chinensis.
180. ESOX. Pike. Lower jaw the longest; punctated. Pike, Sea Pike, etc. 9
species.
181. ELOPS. Sean-fish. Branchiostegous membrane double; exterior one small, of
five rays. Saurus of Sloane, t. 251. 1.
182. ARGENTINA. Argentine. Vent placed very near to the tail. So called from
the silvery skin of the air-bladder. 2 species.
183. ATHERINA. Atherine. The lateral line silvery. 2 species.
184. MUGIL. Mullet. Inferior mandible carinated inwards. Mullet, Albula of
Catesby.
185. EXOCETUS. Flying-fish. Pectoral fins nearly the length of the body. 2
species.
186. POLYNEMUS. Finger-fish. Several distinct processes or appendages placed
with the pectoral fins. Paradise-fish of Edwards, etc. 3 species.

187. MORMYRUS. Mormyre. Branchial aperture linear, and no cover to the gill.
Caschive of the Arabians, etc. 2 species.
188. CLUPEA. Herring. Belly sharp or keel form, and serrated. Herring, Sprat,
Shad, Anchovy, etc. 11 species.
189. CYPRINUS. Carp. Three branchiostegous rays. a. Jaw bearded or cirrose.
Barbel, Carp, Gudgeon, Tench.
b. Tail fin entire. Carasse, Chub.
c. Tail fin trifid. Gold-fish.
d. Tail fin bifid. Minnow, Dace, Roach, Rud, Bleak, Bream.




The class of Fishes contains about 400 species, but very great additions have
been made to this class by later discoveries: among which those made by Dr.
Forskal, in Arabia, are not the least, as appears by his fragments lately
published.

Great pains were taken by Artedi, and since by Gronovius, and our author, to
distinguish the species by the number of the rays in the fins; and although,
from repeated observations, they are found to agree in many species very
remarkably; yet, in others, they vary so much as not to establish a sufficient
character. At present, in this system, the specifical characters are taken from
a great variety of particulars; amongst which, however, the number of the rays
in the fins is frequently the most distinctive, and whether so or not, it is
subjoined to most species, and usually, as they have been observed by different
authors. The form of the tail, the cirri, or beard at the mouth, the length of
the jaw, the spots and lines on the body, etc. all conspire in their turn to
the same end.

Class V. INSECTA. INSECTS.
No part of the system of nature has undergone a greater change than this
class; neither does our author stand more unrivalled, than in the excellent
arrangement he has given to this branch of natural history; which, before his
time, was nearly without method. It comprehends 87 GENERA, disposed into seven
orders, founded, in most of them, on the differences observable in the number
and texture of the wings. Our intended brevity will not permit a detail of the
genera, in the succeeding parts of the system; we must, therefore, now that we
are descended to the inferior parts of the animal kingdom, only give the
definitions of the several orders, with a few observations. The first order is
called,

I. COLEOPTERA. Insects having the wings covered with two crustaceous cases,
divided by a longitudinal suture.

This order is the most numerous; it contains almost all those insects which go
under the general name of Beetles: and includes upwards of 900 species, ranked
under 30 genera. Among these are the Chafers, Stag-beetles, Leather-eaters,
Carrion-beetles, Tortoise-beetles, Lady-flies, Honey-beetles, Weevils,
Musk-beetles, Glowworm, Spring-beetles, Water-beetles, Blister-beetle,
Rove-beetle, Earwig, and several other genera.

II. HEMIPTERA. Half-winged insects; having the shells or cases
semi-crustaceous, not divided by a straight suture, but incumbent on each other
in the margin. The beak curved inwards.

This order contains about 350 species, under 12 genera; among these are the
Cock-roach, Camel-cricket, Locusts and Common Crickets, Lanthorn-fly,
Flea-locust, Boat-fly, etc. Bug, a numerous genus; Aphis, or Currant-louse;
Cochineal-insect, and others.

III. LEPIDOPTERA. Insects with four wings, imbricated or clothed with fine
scales or feathers: tongue spiral, and coiled up; body hairy.

This order contains only three genera; but the species are very numerous,
nearly 800. The Butterflies, Hawk-moths, and the Moths or Phalenae. Of the
latter, LINNAEUS enumerates 460 species. This being the most beautiful tribe of
insects, has been much sought after, and later entomologists have considerably
increased this number.

IV. NEUROPTERA. Insects with 4 naked, transparent, or reticulated wings; tail
in most kinds without a sting.

Upwards of 80 species in 7 genera; among these are the Dragon-fly, May-fly,
Spring-fly, Pearl-fly, Scorpion-fly, etc.

V. HYMENOPTERA, Insects with 4 membranaceous wings, excepting some few
species, which are destitute of wings; females with the tail armed with a sting.

This is a numerous order; it contains 320 insects in 10 genera; among these
are the Saw-fly or Tenthredo, Tailed-wasp, Ichneumon-fly, Ichneumon-wasp, Wasp,
Be, Ant, and Golden Wall-fly, etc.

VI. DIPTERA. Insects with two wings; furnished also with a balance or club
behind each wing.

This order, under 10 genera, contains near 270 species, among which are the
Gad-flies, Gnats, Common Flesh-fly, Wasp-fly, Horse-fly, Bee-fly, and others.

VII. APTERA. Insects without wings, in either sex.

This order contains 290 species under 14 genera, and falls easily into three
divisions.

1. With 6 legs: The Sugar-mite, Ground-flea, Death-watch, Louse, Common Flea.

2. With 8 to 11 legs: The Tick-spiders, Scorpion, Crab, King-crab, and
Millepede.

3. With numerous legs: The Centipede and Gallyworm.

In forming the genera under each of these orders, the antennae hold a
principal rank, and particularly in the COLEOPTERA; but the author does not
trust to them alone; the elytra or outward cases, the head, the rostrum or
mouth, the thorax, and tail; and indeed in almost every genus, some or other of
them are called in to assist in forming the character.

In the HEMIPTERA, the rostrum gives a note of primary use; but here the
antennae, wings, and feet come in also.

In the LEPIDOPTERA, the antennae and wings form the character.

In the NEUROPTERA, the mouth, wings, and tail.

In the HYMENOPTERA, the mouth, the wings, and the sting.

In the DIPTERA, the mouth or proboscis alone.

In the APTERA, the eyes, the tail, and the number of the feet, etc.

Class VI. VERMES.
The sixth and last class contains the VERMES, which are divided into five
orders. LINNAEUS very early adopted the new system of Peysonnel, Jussieu, and
some others, in introducing the corals and corallines into the animal kingdom,
under the names of LITHOPHYTA and ZOOPHYTA. This system has had great light
thrown upon it by the late excellent Mr. ELLIS, in his history of Corallines,
and several papers printed in the Philosophical Transactions.

As this is by far the most anomalous of all the classes, the characters of the
orders are very various.

1. INTESTINA. Animals simple, naked, destitute of limbs.

This order includes 7 genera; among which are the Guinea-worm, Ascarides,
Earth-worm, Gourdworm, Leech, etc. It contains but 24 species.

II. MOLLUSCA. Animals simple, naked, not included in a shell, but furnished
with limbs.

This order includes 18 genera, containing 110 species. Among these rank the
common naked Snail, Sea Hare of Rondeletius, Doris, Sea Mouse, Nereis, Ascidia,
Actinia, or Sea Anemone, Tethys, Cuttle-fish, Sea Lungs, or Blubbers,
Star-fish, and Echinus, called Sea Hedgehog, and others.

III. TESTACEA. Animals, generally of the foregoing order, but included in a
shell.

This order takes in the whole tribe of shells, consisting of upwards of 800
species, under 36 genera, and disposed in a method entirely new. The three
first genera are the multivalves, the next fourteen bivalves, and the remainder
univalves.

IV. LITHOPHYTA. Composite animals, affixed to, and fabricating a fixed
calcareous base, called Coral.

This order contains 59 species, under four genera: the Tubipora, red tubular
Coral; Madrepores or Brain Stones; Millepores; and another called Cellepore.

V. ZOOPHYTA. Animal composite, resembling a flower, and springing from a
vegetating stem.

This order contains 14 genera, of which nine are fixed, and the other
locomotive: amongst the former rank the Isis or red Coral, Sea Fan, Alcyonium,
Sponge, Corallines, etc.: among the latter, the Polype, Sea Pens, Taenia,
Furia, and lastly the assemblage of chaotic, or microscopical Animalcula. The
species under this order are 156.

The generical distinctions among the INTESTINA arise from the diversity of the
body of the animal, almost solely.

In the MOLLUSCA, from the body and feelers, called tentacula, and from other
parts.

In the TESTACEA, the included animal, the general differences between the
shells themselves, but principally the cardo or hinge in the bivalves, and the
aperture in the univalves, furnish the generic note.

In the LITHOPHYTA, the inhabitant animal, and the form of the coral itself:
and in the ZOOPHYTA, the animal, and the very different forms of the
fabrifications, lay a foundation for the generic notes.

After having thus exhibited a view of the Classes, it remains that we give a
general account of the method pursued in treating on each species. To this end
it must be observed, that throughout the whole system, the classical character,
that of the order, and the generical note, always make a part in the
description of each species. After these, our author begins with his own
specific name for the animal, established upon the most essential difference
observable between that and every other species of the genus; and here it must
be allowed, that he has, in general, happily succeeded, by giving, in the space
of two or three lines, a distinction that more immediately points out the
animal sought for, than the long and labored descriptions of many foregoing
authors. If the specific name is the same that is adopted in any of his former
writings, he refers to it. He has, however, in many parts of this enlarged
edition, formed new names to animals noticed in the former edition, and in the
Fauna Suecica. Where indeed the essential or specific distinction is the point
in view, this must frequently be the case, so long as new species continue to
come in; for, as the essential character of each species results from the most
careful comparison of the whole genus, the introduction of a new one must, in
many instances, so clash with the old, as to require, perhaps, a total
alteration in every specific name of the genus.

After his own specific name, he gives the synonyms, and page of the most
reputed and authentic writers in each class; and particularly refers to those
who have best figured his subject; then the locus natalis, and in many
instances, more especially among the Mammalia and Aves, a short but
comprehensive history respecting the nature, economy, and uses of the animal.
To every animal the author has affixed his trivial name, expressive, most
commonly, of place where it is found, of its color, form, or some quality or
attribute, descriptive, as far as may be, of the animal; or, in a great variety
of cases, where the subject has been well known by a single term, he retains
that as his trivial name. To instance in the Partridge and Quail, which both
belong to his genus established under the name Tetrao: he therefore calls the
former Tetrao Perdix, and the latter Tetrao Coturnix.

It has been objected to LINNAEUS'S classification in various parts of his
system, that he has thrown together subjects too different in their general
appearance and economy, by keeping too closely to one character; to instance
particularly in the MAMMALIA, by confining himself to the teeth. To this it may
be answered, in general, that if only quadrupeds were to be classed, no system
needed to have be built, as their number is so small: but when it is
recollected, that all Nature was under his eye, and that therefore the subjects
were almost infinite, it became necessary to form the basis of every great
division or class, as far as possible, on one simple foundation. And perhaps it
is the observance of this rule that has given LINNAEUS'S system so greatly the
advantage over all foregoing writers. For, as nature does not seem to have
observed any system, ours must be artificial, and will ever have its anomalies.
As an artificial system therefore, that must have the preference, which will
most readily lead to the subject under investigation; in which case it is of
small importance where it is placed, and how far removed from others with which
it seems to bear a similar and general appearance.

We shall close this brief view of the arrangement of animals, by exhibiting
the number of subjects enumerated, all of which are synonymed by the author, in
the 12th edition of his System.

Mammalia 219 Insects 3075 Birds 931 Vermes 1163 Amphibia 291 Various, from the
Mantissae 140 Fishes 398 Total 6217.


With the first tome of the Systema Naturae is intimately connected a work of
the professor's, published under the title of MUSEUM Ludovicae Ulricae REGINAE,
in quo animalia rariora exotica, imprimis insecta, et conchylia describuntur et
determinantur prodromi instar editum. Holm. 1764, 8o, pp. 720. This was drawn
up, and published, by order of the queen of Sweden, who had constructed a
copious and rich cabinet of natural history, at the palace of Drottningholm;
the subjects of which, as has been observed, LINNAEUS had been appointed to
arrange. The great expense her majesty had bestowed in procuring, particularly
insects and fhells, had given this collection an advantage that proved very
favorable to our author, by throwing in his way a multitude of fine and very
expensive objects, which otherwise, probably, he could have had no opportunity
of describing; and these were, fortunately, all collected before the
publication of the enlarged editions of the System.

In this work the exotic insects and shells only are introduced; of the former,
436; and of the latter, 434, with twenty-five of the Mollusca. The insects
chiefly consist of the large and beautiful Lepidoptera; and the shells abound
with all their elegant varieties. These are described at large, with all that
precision, brevity, and accurate arrangement of the several parts, which every
where manifests itself so happily in our author's writings. Both in entomology
and conchology a new language is introduced; and these descriptions may well
stand as models for future writings.

Annexed to this work is the second part, or rather only the prodromus, of the
MUSEUM ADOLPHI Frederici REGIS, in quo animalia rariora, imprimis et exotica,
aves, amphibia, pisces describuntur. 1764, pp. 110. In this additional volume
are described at large 156 subjects of the animal kingdom, all belonging to the
first four classes; and all acquired since the publication of the first part in
1754. Throughout the whole System, LINNAEUS has referred to these books for
descriptions at large to all the exotics: and nothing could be more acceptable
to the critical zoologist, than to see the plan of this volume perfected
through the whole history of animals.

TOM. II. The VEGETABLE KINGDOM.
The second part of the Systema Naturae, relating to vegetables, in all the
editions prior to the tenth, was very compendiously exhibited; the author
having, after his Clavis Classium, only given the names of the genera, with
their essential or abbreviated characters, without touching at all on specific
distinctions, which were reserved for the present enlarged edition of the
System, and for the SPECIES PLANTARUM, a work before spoken of. This volume
contains upwards of 560 pages; and in the twelfth edition of 1767, by the
accession of new materials, is enlarged to 731. It contains, in a most
compendious manner, a view of the whole vegetable kingdom, as far as the
subjects thereof had come under our author's own inspection, disposed according
to that system of which LINNAEUS had been the inventor, founded, as to the
classical part, upon the sexes of plants; a system now almost universally
received. It is in this branch of the study of nature, that this great
naturalist has so distinguished himself. From him botany boasts a new era; and
HALLER, one of the first writers of this age, in the same line of science, and
who alone might dare to rival him, has, with a liberality of mind becoming a
great man, allowed this superiority to LINNAEUS.

Before we proceed to a particular account of this part of the system, it may
not be improper to premise some observations on methods of botany in general,
before our author wrote. It is needless to urge the necessity of method in the
study of nature, as it is the very soul of science; and, amidst such a
multitude of objects which the vegetable kingdom affords, all attempts toward
the acquisition of knowledge without it, must end in uncertainty and confusion.
We have sufficient proofs of this in the writers upon plants before the
invention of systems, and see and deplore the want of them, in the loss of many
valuable articles, not only in the Materia Medica, but in the Materia Pictoria,
and Tinctoria of the ancients. Articles, the virtues and properties of which
appear to have been well ascertained, are now lost to us, for want of a more
scientific arrangement of the subjects, and accuracy in the descriptions of
them.

Botanic writers chose very different methods of arranging plants, not only
before, but since, the invention of systematic botany. The alphabetic has been
much followed, especially in local catalogues. Some have disposed the plants
according to the time of flowering; as Pauli, in his Quadripartitum Botanicum,
published in 1639; Bester, in the Hortus Eystettensis, 1640; and Dillenius, in
the Catalogus Gissensis, 1719. Others have arranged them according to the
different places of their growth; as the authors of the Historia Lugdunensis,
in 1587: and some according to their virtues in medicine. Others again,
observing that numbers of vegetables agreed with each other in their general
habit and appearance, or had a certain harmony and proportion in the form and
disposition of their roots, leaves, flowers, or fruit; in their particular mode
of growing, flowering, or foliation, saw that they naturally fell as it were
into classes, agreeable to such distinctions. Hence their division of trees,
into pomiferae, pruniferae, bacciferae, nuciferae, glandiferae, etc.; of herbs,
into bulbosae, siliquosaeumbelliferae, verticillatae, papilionaceae, etc. These
were so many classes or orders, which nature had so characterized that they
could not escape their notice; and, could all the subjects of the vegetable
kingdom be properly reduced to such combinations, and the whole chain properly
connected, we should then see what is meant by the NATURAL METHOD, that ultimum
et desideratum of botany, of which our author says, however, Nec sperare fas
est, quod nostra Aetas systema quoddam natural videre queat, et vix seri
nepotes. Nevertheless the best writers of the last century, such were John and
Caspar Bauhine, endeavored to preserve the abovementioned arrangement,
although it was in a rude manner. In this they were followed by our own
countrymen Gerard and Parkinson, but as they established no precise definitions
to their classes, so in their subdivisions, or chapters, they paid little or no
regard to the minuter parts of distinction, taken from the fructification;
hence, nothing like generical notes can be discovered in their methods: so that
the only resource, in finding many of their plants, was, to read over their
long and tedious descriptions, which, after all, were frequently insufficient
to distinguish the plant sought for.

That great naturalist Conrade GESNER, who died in 1565, in his 50th year,
appears to have been the first who thought, with any precision, of a method of
classing plants from the flower, or fruit; but he only slightly touches thereon
in his epistles; he lived not to bring any thing to perfection in this way. It
was reserved for Caesalpinus, physician to Pope Clement VIII. to be the first
author who arranged plants in a true systematic manner, in his Libri de
Plantis, published in 1583, in which he establishes the characters principally
from the fruit. It is wonderful, that after his time, though so many eminent
botanists flourished, among whom were the two Bauhines, no one ever thought of
pursuing the plan he laid down, until Morison and Ray, who both published,
nearly together, their separate systems, founded also upon distinctions
principally drawn from the fruit. Since their time, others have labored to
bring their systems to perfection; as Knaut in Germany; Paul Herman, and
Boerhaave, in Holland; and Dillenius, late professor at Oxford, had still
farther perfected Mr. Ray's method, as is evident from the arrangement he has
given to the British plants, in the third edition of that author's Synopsis.

Several elegant systems have also been formed from the flower, as the basis of
the classical character; in considering which, both the regularity and
irregularity, as well as the number of the petals, have been made the principal
distinction. Rivini, at Leipsic, in 1690, was the first who took the flower as
the foundation of his method, as did Ruppius in 1718. But no one carried this
method to such perfection as Tournefort, in 1694, who forms his classical
character from the figure of the flower, and establishes his orders or
subdivisions on the different situation of the fruit, whether above or below
the empalement or receptacle.

Besides these methods, in which the authors have considered one part only,
either flower or fruit, as the base of their systems, several others have been
constructed of late years, in which vegetables have been arranged, as far as
possible, according to what have been called the natural classes; the
foundations of which take in a numerous set of characters, arising from a
combination and agreement in the habit of the plants, as well as their harmony
in the essential parts of fructification. Among these, that of Van Royen, late
professor at Leyden, is among the most elegant attempts toward this ultimum in
botany. This is exhibited in the Prodromus Florae Leydensis, 1740. He is
followed by Gmelin, in the Flora Sibirica, 1747, etc. These authors, as also L.
Gerard, in his Flora Gallo*provincialis, Paris 1761, preserve the natural
generical characters of LINNAEUS almost entire through their systems; and the
latter writer has, with some variations, taken the orders of a natural method,
constructed by B. Jussieu, for his classes. HALLER also planned, and brought to
great perfection, a method of this kind, as is exhibited in his Enumeratio
Stirpium Helvetiae, 1742, and in the Hortus Gottingensis, 1753, which he has
since still more elaborated, in a work of infinite labor and merit, the
Historia Stirpium Helvetiae, 3 tom. fol. 1768.

LINNAEUS himself very early attempted a natural method; but it is evident he
thought there were too many links wanting in the chain, to render it the
readiest guide to botanical science; since he soon deserted it, although he
continued to improve it to the last: however he only reduced the genera into
orders, but did not venture so far as to form the classical part of a system on
that plan. The present learned and indefatigable professor Dr. HOPE, at
Edinburgh, whose zeal and success in cultivating and diffusing the principles
of the Linnaean system are well known, has constructed perhaps the most
elaborate attempt of this kind that the botanists have ever seen. We join with
many others in wishing that he may be enabled to give it all that perfection
which may encourage him to present it to the public.

Methods have also been formed from the different species and arrangement of
the calyx, or cup of the flower in plants. Professor Magnol, of Montpelier,
published in 1720 on this plan; and LINNAEUS himself in 1737, but he did not
pursue it.

Every method of arrangement has its advantage in some respect or other; and
it is surely rather to be regretted, howsoever the flower may claim the
preference, that a method founded in the distinctions of the fruit, should not
also have as it were a secondary place in common use; for, as all artificial
methods are only supposed to be so many succedanea to the natural one, a due
attention to each might tend to illustrate the natural classes, to connect
them, and reduce the anomalies, and so far pave the way to the accomplishment
of that scheme, which, however, will yet by many be considered as quite
impracticable in botany.

LINNAEUS was the first who constituted the stamina and pistils as the basis of
an artificial method of arranging plants; and he tells us, in his CLASSES
PLANTARUM, he was led to this by considering the great importance of these
parts in vegetation. They alone are the essentials necessary to fructification;
all other parts, except the anthera and stigma, being wanting in some flowers;
and the present philosophy of botany regards the former as the male, and the
latter as the female organs of generation in plants. As such indeed they must
be considered analogically, and in a philosophical view; yet, perhaps, the
Linnaean system, admirable as it is, would not have been less acceptable had
the classical terms been expressive only of number and situation, without
regard to the offices of the parts in framing the terms. Ludwig, of Leipsic,
who has endeavored to combine the systems of Rivinus and LINNAEUS, by taking
his classes from the method of the former, and his orders from that of the
latter, has avoided this mode of expression, in substituting the terms
monantherae, monostylae, etc. etc.

The author begins the new and enlarged edition of the Systema Vegetabilium of
1767, by premising a compendious view of the philosophy of vegetation, and then
proceeds to what he calls Delineatio Plantae, something analogous to what he
had entitled, in the editions prior to the 10th, Methodus Demonstrandi
Vegetabilia. Here he introduces all the terms he makes use of in describing
plants, and, by a methodical and apt disposition of them, really explains them
at the same time. After this, he gives the Clavis et Characteres Classium, and
then comes to the system itself.

The prerogative of any artificial system in botany, is supposed to consist in
its keeping together, as much as possible, the genera, in what are called the
natural classes or orders, and thus so far approaching to the system of nature.
All artificial systems being founded on some, or other, or all the parts of
fructification, without regard to habit, will be found in many instances to
break the order of the natural classes, and disjoin genera, which nature seems
to have classed. The more simple and uniform the classical characters of any
system are, the more they are likely to interfere in this respect;
nevertheless, it is pleasing to observe, how well many of the natural classes
are kept together in the Linnaean system; the characters of which enjoy the
advantage of being very simple, and easy to retain in the memory, and of being
founded on the parts of plants as little subject to variation as any whatever:
yet, like all other methods, it has its defects; of which no one was more
sensible than the author himself. There are many instances of particular
species that break through the generical and classical characters of the system
itself: but for these defects there is no other remedy, at present, than that
which our author has applied, in the volume under consideration, and which
ought ever, in arrangements of this kind, to be rigidly observed. Wherever
these anomalies take place, they are mentioned among the fictitious characters,
under the class and order to which the number of stamina or pistils entitle
them to a place.

The sexual system briefly is as follows: -- All known plants are divided into
24 CLASSES; the characters of which are established upon the number, or
different situation, or arrangement of the stamina or male organs; and the
ORDERS, or subdivisions, of these classes, as far as possible, on a similar
number, situation, or arrangement, of the pistils, or female organs.

The first twenty classes contain what the author calls hermaphrodite flowers,
or such as have the stamina and pistils both within the same cup or petals, or
standing on the same receptacle, where those are wanting. Of these twenty, the
first ten classes proceed in an uninterrupted series, from MONANDRIA to
DECANDRIA; the plants of each having as many stamina as the title expresses.

The 11th class is DODECANDRIA, as there are no plants yet discovered which
have only eleven stamina.

The 12th, ICOSANDRIA; such plants as have about 20 stamina, or more; but
always arising from the calyx or corolla, and not from the receptacle.

The 13th, POLYANDRIA; such as have from twenty to even a thousand stamina; but
always arising from the receptacle.

The 14th class, DIDYNAMIA; such as have four stamina, two long and two short.
The essential character of this class does not consist in the number of
stamina, otherwise the plants might be referred to the tetrandria class; but,
in having two of the stamina shorter than the other, one pistil only, and an
irregularly-shaped corolla.

The 15th, TETRADYNAMIA; plants with six stamina, four long and two short.

The 16th, MONADELPHIA; such as have the stamina not distinct at the base, but
united into one body.

The 17th, DIADELPHIA; such as have the stamina united at the base into two
bodies.

The 18th, POLYADELPHIA; such as have the stamina united at the base into
several bodies.

The 19th, SYNGENESIA; such as have the antherae, but not the filaments,
coalescing together, so as to form a tube or cylinder, through which the pistil
is commonly transmitted.

The 20th, GYNANDRIA; such as have the stamina springing from the pistil itself.

The 21st, MONOECIA; such as have separate male and female flowers on the same
plant.

The 22d, DIOECIA; such as have separate male and female flowers on separate
plants.

The 23d, POLYGAMIA; such as have constantly, besides hermaphrodite flowers,
others, either male or female, on the same plant.

The 24th, CRYPTOGAMIA; containing those plants the mode and organs of whose
fructification are not yet sufficiently ascertained; heretofore called
imperfect plants.

The secondary part of the system, the ORDERS, or subdivisions of the foregoing
classes, are established on the number of the pistils or female parts, through
a considerable part of the system; but in other parts, from various characters.
Thus,

The arrangement from number is pursued no farther than through the first
thirteen classes: that is, so long as the classical character, uninterruptedly,
depends on the number of stamina, so long the orders likewise depend on the
number of pistils: but, when situation or different arrangement take place, the
orders are most commonly founded on other distinctions, which we shall briefly
specify.

The 14th class, or Didynamia, is divided into GYMNOSPERMIA and ANGIOSPERMIA:
the former having four naked seeds; the latter having the seeds enclosed in a
seed-vessel.

The 15th, Tetradynamia, has two orders, according to the size and shape of the
pod or shale; SILICULOSA, short; and SILIQUOSA, long.

The orders in the three next classes, Monadelphia, Diadelphia, and
Polyadelphia, are formed from the NUMBER of the stamina.

Those of the Syngenesia class are six: in five of which the plants are
POLYGAMIAE, and in the remaining one MONOGAMIAE; and the differences in the
orders of the former, arise from the different structure or sex of the
floscules, constituting the whole flower.

In the 20th class, Gynandria, the arrangement of the orders arises from the
NUMBER of the stamina, as in the 16th, 17th, and 18th classes.

In the 21st and 22d classes, the Monoecia and Dioecia, the classical
characters of the foregoing parts of the system are adopted as characters of
the orders, as far down as to the Monoecia class itself. Thus the first order
of those classes contains MONANDROUS plants, and the last GYNANDROUS.

The 23d, the Polygamia class, is divided into three orders, as the plants are
MONOECIOUS, DIOECIOUS, or TRIOECIOUS.

The 24th and last class, Cryptogamia, is divided into four orders, containing
the FILICES, MUSCI, ALGAE, and FUNGI.

Some Examples of Plants, throughout all the Classes and Orders of the Linnaean
System; specifying also the Number of Genera under each Order, and the Number
of Species in each Class, synonymed in the Species Plantarum.
Cl. 1. MONANDRIA. 34 species.
Monogynia. 11 Genera; among which are, Canna, Indian Reed, Glass-wort, Mares
Tail. Digynia. 4 Genesis Star-wort, Berried Orach.
2. DIANDRIA. 186.
Monogynia. 29 Genesis Jasmine, Privet, Rosemary. Digynia. 1 Genus. Vernal Grass.
Trigynia. 1 Genus. Pepper.
3. TRIANDRIA. 412.
Monogynia. 29 Genesis Valerian, Saffron, Iris. Digynia. 29 Genesis Most of the
Grasses and Grain, Sugar-cane. Trigynia. 11 Genesis Blinks, Minuartia, Polycarpon.
4. TETRANDRIA. 335.
Monogynia. 61 Genesis Teasel, Scabious, Madder. Digynia. 6 Genesis Pursley Piert,
Dodder. Tetragynia. 7 Genesis Holly, Pondweed, Pearlwort.
5. PENTANDRIA. 976.
Monogynia. 138 Genesis Comfrey, Campanula, Henbane, Buckthorn, Ivy, Periwincle.
Digynia. 170 Genesis Gentian, Carrot, Hemlock. Trigynia. 16 Genesis Elder, Viburnum,
Chickweed. Tetragynia. 2 Genesis Grass of Parnassus. Pentagynia. 9 Genesis Flax,
Sun-dew. Polygynia. 1 Genesis Mouse-tail.
6. HEXANDRIA. 330.
Monogynia. 56 Genesis Narcissus, Lilly, Tulip. Digynia. 2 Genesis Rice, Atraphaxis.
Trigynic. 9 Genesis Dock* Colchicum. Tetragynia. 1 Genesis Petiveria, or Henweed*
Polygynia. 1 Genesis Water Plantain.
7. HEPTANDRIA. 6.
Monogynia. 2 Genesis Horse Chestnut, Trientalis. Digynia. 1 Genesis Limeum.
Tetragynia. 1 Genesis Saururus, or Lizard's Tail. Heptagynia. 1 Genesis Septas.
8. OCTANDRIA. 169.
Monogynia. 31 Genesis Indian Cresses, Heath. Digynia. 4 Genesis Moehringia,
Weinmannia. Trigynia. 5 Genesis Knotweed, Mangrove-grape. Tetragynia. 3 Genesis
Paris, Moschatel.
9. ENNEANDRIA. 19.
Monogynia. 4 Genesis Bay, Anacardium. Trigynia. 1 Genus. Rhubarb. Hexagynia. 1
Genesis Butomus, or Flowering Rush.
10. DECANDRIA. 425.
Monogynia. 50 Genesis Rue, Bead-tree, Arbutus. Digynia. 12 Genesis Saxifrage,
Soap-wort, Pink. Trigynia. 11 Genesis Bladder Campion, Catchfly. Pentagynia. 14
Genesis Sedum, Lychnis, Cockle. Decagynia. 2 Genesis Phytolacca, or Pokeweed.
11. DODECANDRIA. 131.
Monogynia. 20 Genesis Asarabacca, Spiked Willowherb. Digynia. 2 Genesis Agrimony,
Heliocarpus. Trigynia. 2 Genesis Dyers Weed, Spurge. Pentagynia. 1 Genesis Glinus.
Dodecagynia. 1 Genesis House-leek.
12. ICOSANDRIA. 218.
Monogynia. 10 Genesis Myrtle, Almond, Plumb. Digynia. 1 Genesis White-thorn and
White Beam-tree. Trigynia. 2 Genesis Service-tree and Quicken-tree. Pentagynia. 6
Genesis Apple Tree, Medlar, Dropwort. Polygynia. 9 Genesis Rose, Strawberry,
Cinquefoil.
13. POLYANDRIA. 269.
Monogynia. 35 Genesis Poppy, Lime-tree, Cistus. Digynia. 4 Genesis Peony,
Calligonum. Trigynia. 2 Genesis Lark-spur, Aconite. Tetragynia. 3 Genesis Bug-wort.
Pentagynia. 3 Genesis Columbine, Nigella. Hexagynia. 1 Genesis Water-aloe. Polygynia.
18 Genesis Anemone, Ranunculus.
14. DIDYNAMIA. 465.
Gymnospermia. 35 Genesis Mint, Hore-hound, Thyme. Angiospermia. 62 Genesis
Eyebright, Toad-flax, Acanthus.
15. TETRADYNAMIA. 215.
Siliculosa. 14 Genesis Cresses, Scurvy Grass. Siliquosa. 17 Genesis Mustard,
Rhadish, Kale.
16. MONADELPHIA. 181.
Pentandria. 4 Genesis Hermannia, Melochia. Decandria. 3 Genesis European Geraniums.
Endecandria. 1 Genesis Brownaea, or Porto Bello Rose. Dodecandria. 1 Genesis
Pentapetes. Polyandria. 17 Genesis Mallow, Hibiscus.
17. DIADELPHIA. 512.
Pentandria. 1 Genesis Monnieria. Hexandria. 2 Genesis Fumitory. Octandria. 2 Genesis
Milk-wort. Decandria. 27 Genesis Broom, Furze, Lupin, Pease.
18. POLYADELPHIA. 37.
Pentandria. 2 Genesis Monsonia, Cacao, or Chocolate. Icosandria. 1 Genesis
Orange-tree. Polyandria. 7 Genesis St. John's Wort.
19. SYNGENESIA. 905.
Polygamia equalis. Florets all hermaphrodite. 40 Genesis Lettuce, Dandelion,
Thistle, Hemp, Agrimony. Polygamia superflua. Florets of the disk,
hermaphrodite; of the radius, female. 37 Genesis Groundsel, Tansy, Aster,
Chamomile. Polygamia frustranea. Florets of the disk, hermaphrodite; of the
radius, neutral. 7 Genesis Sun-flower, Rudbeckia, Centaurea, Knapweed. Polygamia
necessaria. Florets of the disk, male; of the radius, female. 13 Genesis Marigold.
Polygamia segregata. Florets in separate cups, within a common calyx. 6 Genesis
Globe Thistle. Monogamia. Simple flower. 7 Genesis Cardinal-flower, Violet,
Balsam.
20. GYNANDRIA. 200.
Diandria. 9 Genesis Orchis, Satyrium. Triandria. 4 Genesis Ferraria, Sisyrinchium.
Tetrandria. 1 Genesis Nepenthes. Pentandria. 3 Genesis Ayenia, Passion-flower.
Hexandria. 2 Genesis Birthwort. Decandria. 2 Genesis Helicteres. Dodecandria. 1 Genesis
Cytinus. Polyandria. 8 Genesis Arum, Grass-wrack.
21. MONOECIA. 290.
Monandria. 5 Genesis Horned Pond-weed, Elaterium. Diandria. 2 Genesis Anguria,
Ducks-meat. Triandria. 12 Genesis Bur-weed, Sedge, Sea Laurel. Tetrandria. 8 Genesis
Birch, Box, Nettle, Mulberry. Pentandria. 9 Genesis Xanthium, Amaranthus.
Hexandria. 2 Genesis Zizania, Pharus. Heptandria. 1 Genesis Guettarda. Polyandria. 13
Genesis Arrow-head, Oak, Hasel. Monadelphia. 15 Genesis Pine Tree, Cypress, Ricinus.
Syngenesia. 6 Genesis Gourd, Cucumber, Bryony. Gynandria. 2 Genesis Andrachne.
22. DIOECIA. 157.
Monandria. 1 Genesis Najas. Diandria. 3 Genesis Vallisneria, Willow. Triandria. 5
Genesis Berry-bearing Heath. Tetrandria. 5 Genesis Misselto, Gale, Sea Buckthorn.
Pentandria. 12 Genesis Spinach, Hemp, Hops. Hexandria. 6 Genesis Black Bryony,
Poplar. Enneandria. 2 Genesis Mercury, Frog-bit. Decandria. 4 Genesis Schinus,
Myrtle-leaved Sumach. Dodecandria. 2 Genesis Moon-seed, Cretan Hemp. Polyandria. 1
Genesis Cliffortia. Monadelphia. 6 Genesis Juniper, Yew. Syngenesia. 1 Genesis Butcher's
Broom. Gynandria. 1 Genesis Clutia.
23. POLYGAMIA. 163.
Monoecia. 22. Genesis White Hellebore, Orach, Maple. Dioecia. 10 Genesis Gleditsia,
Ash-tree, Tupelo. Trioecia. 2 Genesis Fig Tree, Carob.
24. CRYPTOGAMIA. 657.
Filices. 18 Genesis Horse-tail, Adders Tongue, Fern. Musci. 11 Genesis Wolfs-Claw
Moss, Goldilocks. Algae. 12. Genesis Liverwort, Byssus, Fucus. Fungi. 10. Agarics,
Mushrooms, Morels.
App. PALMAE. 11.
9 Genesis Date, Coco-nut, Cabbage-palm.
The GENERA are established upon the assemblage of all the parts of
fructification compared together, according to their number, figure,
proportion, and situation. Of these we have spoken before, as they constitute a
large volume in octavo, to which we refer.

But, besides these NATURAL CHARACTERS, or GENERA at large, our author has
invented, for brevity's sake, two other kinds of characters, which he calls
FACTITIOUS and ESSENTIAL. The former serve to distinguish each genus from other
genera of the same artificial order only, by enumerating the most remarkable
differences: these greatly facilitate the labor of a young botanist. The
ESSENTIAL characters, could they be rendered perfect, are designed to
distinguish the genera from each other in the natural orders; but they are not
complete as yet, except in a few instances; and possibly they exist but in a
small number: nevertheless, they are attempted through the whole system, to
save the trouble of turning over the natural characters at large.

As this volume was intended to contain all the plants hitherto known,
consequently the natural characters could not be introduced; but the fictitious
and essential ones are placed, the former at the head of each class, and the
latter before each genus. With each generical name the author refers to the
number where it is exhibited at large, in the last edition of the Genera
Plantarum in 1764, and to the page of the Species Plantarum of 1762, where the
species are detailed and the synonyms added; as he gives in this volume only
the specific name invented by himself.

In forming the last branch of the system, the SPECIFIC names, LINNAEUS has
done more than all the writers on the subject had done before him, and taken
the utmost pains to fix them upon distinctions as permanent and invariable as
possible. This is indeed the ultimate object of all method; and on this plan he
has given new specific names to all the plants that have come to his knowledge:
names, not taken (as had been customary before) from that of the discoverer,
the likeness of the plant to other species, place of growth, time of flowering,
its size, the color of the flower, or of the plant, smell, taste, or virtues
in medicine, or any other such vague, indefinite, or mutable circumstance; but
from some remarkable difference in the root, trunk, stalk, and particularly the
leaf, foliation, ramification, or some other abiding distinction.

Besides these specific names or descriptions, LINNAEUS has invented, and, in
all his works, after the first edition of the Species Plantarum in 1753, has
applied what he calls TRIVIAL names to each plant, consisting of a single
adjunct to the generical name, expressive, if possible, of some essential
distinction of the species: as for instance, integrifolia, laciniata, erecta,
repens, aquatica, montana, etc.: sometimes, of the name of the inventor; and
where, from the laws of his Fundamenta Botanica, he has been obliged to change
the generical name of a plant well known before, and especially if it was an
officinal one, he frequently retains the old generical name as his trivial
epithet. Thus as the Pennyroyal, or Pulegium, really belongs to the Mentha
genus, according to his characters, he therefore calls it Mentha Pulegium. The
Horseradish, known by the old name Armoracia, as it agrees with the Cochlearia
genus, he calls Cochlearia Armoracia.

The VARIETIES of plants, which, for want of fixing true specific characters,
had almost increased the number of plants double what LINNAEUS thinks they
really are, in this work, as in the SPECIES, are totally excluded. Our author
has indeed, in the opinion of many of his contemporary botanists, carried this
matter too far, in disallowing the name of species to many plants that are
thought to have sufficiently permanent distinctions.

To conclude, the space of time elapsed since the publication of the Genera and
Species Plantarum, together with the vast quantity of new materials acquired
from all parts of the world, enabled our author greatly to elaborate this last
edition, and to amend very many generical and specific characters; as also to
make many removes, tending greatly to the advancement and perfection of his
work. Among these removes, many have taken place, particularly in the
Monoecious, Dioecious, and Polygamous classes; which is the less to be wondered
at, since observations have confirmed, that there are plants of these classes
which, in their younger state, have produced only male flowers, afterward both
male and female, and at length only female.

The Species Plantarum contains near seven thousand three hundred plants. In
this volume, the number is augmented by the addition of new plants, and such as
were unknown by our author before, to above seven thousand eight hundred.

It is proper to remark, that this second tome of the System was immediately
preceded by MANTISSA PLANTARUM Generum, editionis sextae, et Specierum
editionis secundae. Holm. 1767, pp. 142. in which are described, as in the
Genera Plantarum, the natural characters at large of forty-four genera, newly
constructed. These are followed by an enumeration of upwards of four hundred
and thirty new species, with their synonyms, as in the Species Plantarum. All
these plants are included in the volume of the System of which we have just
given the account.

TOM. III. The FOSSIL KINGDOM.
We are now to accompany our author into the Fossil kingdom; in which, though
he very early gave a specimen of his method of classing, he did not fully
exemplify, as in vegetables, until the year 1768, when the third tome of the
12th edition of the Systema was published, containing the REGNUM LAPIDEUM. This
volume makes 222 pages, and is concluded with a short appendix of some
unnoticed, or not well described animals and vegetables; together with a
general index of the author's own generical names throughout every part of the
System, distinguishing by a different type the subjects of the three kingdoms,
the whole amounting to 1820 genera.

In arranging Fossils, there have been various methods invented; each of which
have had their patrons, and, for different purposes, each have their advantage.
Some have founded the basis of their system on the figure, color, structure,
and other external and visible characters; yet, scarcely ever trusting solely
to these, they called in the aid of chemistry, so far at least, as the mineral
acids would assist them. Others, as the professed chemists and metallurgists,
have established their arrangement chiefly on chemical principles, as more
immediately leading to the origin of fossil bodies in general; on which it must
be acknowledged, the best basis for a system must be built, when we are happy
enough to get sufficient light for this purpose: and at present, mineralogists
throughout the world seem more intent on this view than ever: and probably the
due consideration and extension of the volcanic system, will open new sources
of information in this way.

This volume begins with LINNAEUS'S own theory of the origin of fossil bodies
in general, and their several combinations into those forms in which we meet
with them in the body of the earth. The methodical and abbreviated manner in
which our author has here given his philosophy of fossil bodies, renders it
incapable of an abstract. He then proceeds to give a synoptical or classical
view of the several systems of arranging those bodies, as they stand exhibited
in the best authors on the subject, beginning with Bromelius, who published in
1730, and enumerates Wallerius in 1747, Woltersdorf in 1748, Cartheuser in
1755, Justi 1757, Anomymus [Cronstedt] in 1758, and concludes with Vogel in
1762. To each of these he has subjoined short remarks relating to their
methods, and theory of fossil bodies, and concludes this introductory part with
an explanation of the terms of art used in his own work.

In these termini artis, our author, with his usual precision, has defined a
set of terms equally new and curious, which are principally adapted to, and
used in, the ultimate and most difficult part of the System, the specific
characters. They are happily framed to express all differences in the figures
of fossil bodies; in their crust, or outward appearance; their superficies;
their component particles, or fibers; in their texture, whether plated,
fissile, etc.; in their hardness; or in their color: the alterations they
undergo by solution, whether by acids, or by fire.

It has been doubted by some of the most respectable mineralogists, whether we
ought to descend below what are called generical distinctions in the fossil
kingdom, so infinitely do the subjects thereof vary, and so imperceptible in
general is that gradation by which they run into each other, in the various
combined forms, in which they are found in the earth. In the mean time, some
distinctions of this kind seem quite necessary in systems established
principally on external characters. Those which have for their basis the
elementary or constituent principles of bodies, as analyzed, may stand with
propriety in the form of synoptical tables, as exemplified in Cronstedt's
mineralogy. LINNAEUS and Wallerius were among the first who attempted the
arduous task of fixing the specific characters: whether future mineralogists
will adhere to, and improve this part of the scheme, time only must show.

In all systems of the fossil kingdom, writers have been more particularly
embarrassed by the earths and stones, especially when those have been more or
less reduced to the state of ores, by the admixture of metallic principles.
Salts, inflammables, and metals, generally falling more easily, and almost
naturally, into their several classes, or orders. The chemical systematics and
metallurgists, begin usually with the earths, considering them as the basis of
stones: LINNAEUS begins with the latter, professing to take a middle way
between the mere metallurgist, and those who characterize from external
appearance only. He divides the whole REGNUM LAPIDEUM into three classes, under
the names of Petrae, Minerae, and Fossilia, each being subdivided into several
orders, the whole comprehending 54 genera. We must only give a general account
of his classical characters, and those of the orders; and enumerate the genera
under each, with some of the most distinguished species.

Class I. PETRAE. STONES.
Fossil bodies originating from a terrene principle by cohesion:

Simple, as being destitute of saline, inflammable and metallic principles, as
component parts thereof:

Fixed, as not being entirely and intimately soluble: and,

Similar, as consisting of homogenous component parts.

Order I. HUMOSAE. Originating from vegetable earth: combustible, and leaving
gross light ashes.

Order II. CALCARIAE. Originating from calcareous marine animal bodies:
becoming light and porous in the fire, and falling into an impalpable powder.

Order III. ARGILLACEAE. Originating from the viscid sediment, of the sea:
somewhat unctuous to the touch, and hardening in the fire.

Order IV. ARENATAE. Originating from the precipitation of rainwater:
extremely hard, striking fire with steel, and by triture yielding a very rough
powder.

Order V. AGGREGATAE. Originating from a mixture of the foregoing, the
interstices usually filled up with quartz, spar, or glimmer.

GENERA of STONES.
I. HUMOSAE. Slaty Stones.
1. SCHISTUS, Slate. Base; vegetable mould: breaking into, Fragments; fissile,
horizontal, plane, opake, yielding to the knife, and combustible.



II. CALCAREAE. Calcareous Stones.
2. MARMOR. Marble. Base; animal earth. Fragments; indeterminate, irregular,
yielding to the knife. Effervescing with acids, though not completely soluble
therein; but easily falling into lime.
3. GYPSUM. Plaster. Base; calcareous earth, saturated with acid. Fragments;
indeterminate, irregular, yielding to the knife, component particles
impalpable. Fixed; not effervescing with nor soluble in acids.
4. STIRIUM. Fibrous alabaster. Base; gypseous earth. Fragments; close,
parallel, yielding to the knife.
5. SPATUM. Spar. Base; calcareous earth, from a dissolved state, formed into,
Fragments; rhombeous, plane, and polished.



III. ARGILLACEAE. Argillaceous Stones.
6.TALCUM. Soap-earth. Base; indurated clay: Particles; impalpable, yielding to
the knife, and somewhat unctuous to the touch; hardening in the fire.
7. AMIANTUS. Asbest, earth-flax. Base; clayey: Fragments; thready.
8. MICA. Talc. Base; clay from a dissolved state, formed into, Particles;
membranaceous shining, tough, separable.



IV. ARENATAE. Sand Stones. Free Stone.
9. Cos. Whetstone. Base; sand conglutinated: Fragments; irregular, subopake,
striking fire with steel: breaking into, Particles; granulated.
10. QUARTZUM. Quartz. Originating from water: Fragments; indeterminately
angular and acute: Particles; uniform, and pellucid.
11. SILEX. Flint. Base; chalk or animal earth conglutinated into an uniform
substance. Fragments; indeterminate, but unequal on one side, and concave on the
other: Particles; uniform.



V. AGGREGATAE. Compound Stones.
12.SAXUM. Rock-stone. Base; heterogeneous; compounded of particles of the
foregoing orders, variously conglutinated.


SPECIES OF STONES.
The PETRAE are divided into five orders.

I. HUMOSAE. Slaty Stones.
1. SCHISTUS. Slate. 13 species; among which are,
2. Tabularis; Table Slate. 3. Atratus; Black Shale. 5. Ardesia; Blue House
Slate. 9. Nigrica; Black Crayon.
II. CALCARIAE. Calcareous Stones.
2. MARMOR. Marble. 15 species.
1. Schistosum; Black stay Marble. 2. Nobile; Parian Marble, and all its
varieties in color and variegation. 3. Florentinum; Florentine Marble. 6.
Rude; White-grain Limestone. 7. Micans; Scaly Limestone.
3. GYPSUM. Plaster Stone. 3 species.
2. Usuale; Common Plaster. 3. Alabastrum; Alabaster.
4. STIRIUM. Fibrous Alabaster. 4 species.
1. Gypseum; Fibrous Gypsum, or English Talc.
5. SPATUM. Spar. 14 species.
a. Soluble in aqua fortis. 1. Speculare; Soft Spar; of different colors. 2.
Duplicans; Refracting Spar. 5. Compactum; Sub-diaphanous compact Spar, of
different colors. 6. Tinctum; Pellucid colored Spar, as spurious Topaz,
Emerald, Sapphire.
b. Not soluble in aqua fortis. 12. Campestre; Felt-Spat.

III. ARGILLACEAE. Argillaceous Stones.
6. TALCUM. Soap-earth, 12 species.
3. Rubrica; Ruddle. 4. Smectis; French Chalk; Soap-earth. 6. Serpentinus;
Serpent Stone. 7. Nephriticus; Nephritic Stone. 9. Corneus; Horn-blend.
7. AMIANTUS. Earth Flax. 10 species.
1. Asbestus; Asbestos. 2. Plumosus; Plumose Asbest. 7. Suber; Mountain Cork.
9. Aluta; Mountain Leather.
8. MICA. Talc. 10 species.
1. Membranacea; Muscovy Glass. 4. Aurata; Gold Glimmer. 7. Talcosa; Green
Talc.
IV. ARENATAE. Sand Stones.
9. Cos. Whetstone. 16 species.
1. Cotaria; Grind-stone. 10. Filtrum; Filtring Stone. 15. Molaris; Mill Stone.
16. Fundamentalis; Building Stone.
10. QUARTZUM. Quartz. 8 species.
1. Hyalinum; Pellucid Rock Quartz. 2. Coloratum; Colored Rock Quartz, yellow,
red, blue, etc. 3. Lacteum; Milky Quartz. 6. Cotaceum; Granulated Quartz. 8.
Nobile; Pebble Quartz.
11. SILEX. Flint. 16 species.
a. Vague or loose Flints.
1. Cretaceus; Common Flint. 2. Pyromachus; Gun Flint. 4. Haemachates;
Egyptian Pebble, Mocha Stone. 6. Opalus; Opal. 7. Onyx; Cameyeu. 8.
Chalcedonius; Chalcedony. 9. Carneolus; Carnelian.
b. Rock Flints.
10. Achates; Agate. 11. Petrofilex; Chert. 13. Jaspis; Jasper.

V. AGGREGATAE. Rock Stones. Compound Stones.
12. SAXUM. Rock Stone. 39 species.
1. Porphyrius; Porphyry, of different colors. 2. Trapezum; Trap Stone. 19.
Granite; Granite. 20. Fusorium; Founder's Granite. 39. Silicinum; Pudding
Stone.
These stones are composed of heterogeneous particles from the foregoing
orders, conglutinated in a various manner.

Class II. MINERAE. MINERALS.
Fossil bodies originating from a saline principle by chrystallization,

Compound, as consisting of a base, united with saline, inflammable, or
metallic principles,

Soluble, perfectly, in the appropriate menstruum.

Order I. SALIA. Sapid bodies soluble in water: distinguished from each other
by their different effects on the organs of taste.

Under this order are arranged, to the great offense of most mineralogists, all
the Gems or precious stones, notwithstanding their texture and insolubility, as
also many other lapidose chrystallized bodies. To this our author tells us he
was led, by considering that all regular polyedrous figures or bodies in the
mineral kingdom, are the result of chrystallization, which can only take place
under requisite and certain degrees of fluidity; and therefore, whether they
are saline or lapidose chrystals, they must owe their figure to the same
uniform principle operating on them in either case, while in the fluid state;
hence, from the similarity of the figure, with the chrystals of nitre, Mountain
Crystal has a place in the same genus: the Topaz with the Borax: the Diamond
and Ruby with Alum. LINNAEUS has given his reasons more at large in a paper
published in the first volume of the Amoenitates Academicae: and has since
added Chrystallos quod subjecerim salibus ne quemquam offendat mutet vocem
salis in chrystalli, si magis placeat, in verbis erimus faciles.

Order II. SULPHURA. Inflammable bodies; flaming and odorous while burning:
soluble in oil: distinguished from each other by their different effect on the
organs of smell.

Order III. METALLA. Metals; shining heavy bodies, fusible in the fire, and
soluble in appropriated acid menstrua: distinguished from each other by
inspection.

GENERA of MINERALS.
I. SALIA. Salts or Chrystals.
13. NITRUM. Nitre. Salt: atmospherical, pungent. A peculiar acid. Crystal: an
hexaedral prism, with hexaedral pyramids. Taste: cold and pungent. In the fire:
fusible and detonating.
14. NATRUM. Natron. Salt: calcareous, sub-alkaline. Crystal: peculiar; a
tetraedal prism, of pentagonal planes, two broad and two narrow, alternately
vertical: each pyramid or extremity forming two plane parallelograms. Taste:
bitter. In the fire: liquefying.
15. BORAX. Borax. Salt: alkaline (doubtful whether it is a natural salt.)
Crystal: octaedral, prismatic; both pyramids truncated. (Crystal sometimes
different.) Taste: mild. In the fire: bubbling: vitrescent.
16. MURIA. Sea Salt. Salt: muriatic, neutral: Crystal: hexaedral; or cubic.
Taste: austere. In the fire: crackling.
17. ALUMEN. Alum. Salt: earthy, acid. Crystal: octaedral, composed of
trigonal planes. Taste: styptic. In the fire: frothing.
18. VITRIOLUM. Vitriol. Salt: metallic, acid, earthy. Crystal: a polyedrous,
rhombic tessera; but subject to variation. Taste: styptic. In the fire:
calcinable.



II. SULPHURA. Inflammables.
19. AMBRA. Ambergrease. The Sulphur: inert. Fume: In smell; ambrosiac. In
color; gray.
20. SUCCINUM. Amber. The Sulphur: inert. Fume: In smell; sweet. In color;
brown.
21. BITUMEN. Bitumen. The Sulphur: inert. Fume: In smell; unpleasant. In
color; black.
22. PYRITES. Sulphur. The Sulphur: charged with vitriol. Fume: In smell;
pungent and acid. In taste; salt.
In color; yellow. Flame: blue. Soluble; in oil. 23. ARSENICUM. Arsenic. The
Sulphur: metallic. Fume: In smell; like garlic. In taste; sweet: In color;
white. Soluble; in heated water, and other liquors.


III. METALLA. Metals.
a. Semi-metals, not malleable.
24. HYDRARGYRUM. Mercury. Metal: fluid, dry, white. In the fire: volatilizing
before ignition. Solution: in aqua fortis, white.
25. MOLYBDAENUM. Wadd. Metal: not fusible, gray, coloring the fingers.
(scarcely a metal.) In the fire: not fusible. Solution: Glass: sub-ferruginous
colored.
26. STIBIUM. Antimony. Metal: friable, white, fibrose. In the fire:
volatilizing after ignition. Solution: in aqua regia, white.



Glass: red with a yellow tinge. 27. ZINCUM. Zinc, Tutenag. Metal: somewhat
malleable, but easily breaking; blueish, white; dull sound. In the fire:
melting before ignition, and burning with a yellowish green flame into a white
light calx. Solution: in aqua fortis, white.
28. VISMUTUM. Bismuth. Metal: somewhat malleable, but very fragile, laminose,
yellowish white. In the fire: fusible before ignition. Solution: in aqua
fortis, water colored: in aqua regia, yellow. Glass: yellowish brown.
29. COBALTUM. Cobalt. Metal: fragile, light gray. In the fire: not fusible.
Solution: in aqua fortis and aqua regia, red. Glass: blue.



b. Metals. Malleable.
30. STANNUM. Tin. Metal: easily malleable, white, crackling on flexure, not
sonorous. In the fire: fusible before ignition. Solution: in aqua regia,
yellow; (in aqua fortis it dissolves, and precipitates into a white powder.)
Glass: white and opaline, difficultly produced.
31. PLUMBUM. Lead. Metal: easily malleable, blueish-white: not sonorous. In
the fire: fusible before ignition. Solution: in aqua fortis, clear water
color. Precipitate: white. Glass: yellow.
32. FERRUM. Iron. Metal: very hard, and difficultly malleable; obscure blueish
gray color: sonorous. In the fire: not fusible till after ignition, and
throwing off sparks in a stronger fire. Solution: in aqua fortis, brown. Glass:
brown, with a slight greenish tinge.
33. CUPRUM. Copper. Metal: hard, malleable, red, sonorous. In the fire: fusing
after ignition, with a green flame. Solution: in aqua fortis, blue: in aqua
regia, or the vegetable acids, green. Glass: unmixed ferruginous colored,
otherwise of a bright blue.
34.ARGENTUM. Silver. Metal: very malleable, bright white, sonorous, perfect,
and indestructible. In the fire: fusing after ignition. Solution: in aqua
fortis, white. Glass: opaline.
35.AURUM. Gold. Metal: extremely malleable, yellow, not sonorous, perfect, and
indestructible. In the fire: fusing after ignition, with a blueish hue.
Solution: in aqua regia, yellow. Glass: purple.



SPECIES of MINERALS.
The MINERAE are divided into three Orders.

I. SALIA. Salts or Chrystals.
13. NITRUM. Nitre. 9 species.
a. Saline.
1. Nativum; Native Salt Petre.
b. Quartzose.
2. Chrystallus montana; Mountain Crystal. 3. Fluor; Colored Crystal: from
the varieties of which are the true Hyacinth, the false Topaz, Ruby, Amethyst,
Sapphire, Beryl, Emerald.
c. Calcareous.
5. Truncatum; Hexagonal, truncated Spar. 8. Suillum; S parry Swine Stone.

14. NATRUM. Natron. 14 species.
a. Saline.
1. Antiquorum; Native, mineral Alkali. 2. Murorum; Aphronitrum. 3. Fontanum;
Epsom Salt.
b. Lapidose.
6. Cristatum; Spatose, decaedrous Natron. 8. Glaciale; Gypseous, pellucid,
fusiform Natron. 9. Selenites; Selenite; rhombic Natron. 13. Hyodon; Pyramidal,
or Dog-tooth Spar.

15. BORAX. Borax. 6 species.
a. Saline.
1. Tincal. Native Borax.
b. Lapidose.
2. Gemma Nobilis; Lapidose, prismatic, pellucid Borax, with truncated
pyramids: yellow, Topaz: pale green, Chrysolite: sea green, Beryl: deep green,
Emerald. 3. Basaltes; Cockle, or Shirl. 4. Electricus; the Tourmalin. 5.
Granatus; the Garnet.

16. MURIA. Sea Salt. 9 species.
a. Saline.
1. Marina; Sea Salt. 3. Montana; Fossil Salt.
b. Lapidose.
6. Phosphorea; Bononian Stone. 7. Chrysolampis; Sparry Fluor, or Derbyshire
Spar.

17. ALUMEN. Alum. 6 species.
a. Native.
1. Nativum; Native Alum, Plumose, etc.
b. Soluble.
2. Commune; Alum Slate. 3. Romanum; Stone Alum, or calcareous Alum Stone.
c. Lapidose.
5. Spatosum; Spatose Alum, or false Amethyst. 6. Gemma pretiosa; Diamond,
Ruby, Sapphire.

18. VITRIOLUM. Vitriol. 8 species.
a. Simple.
1. Martis; of Iron. 2. Cyprinum; of Copper. 3. Album; of Zinc.
b. Compound.
5. Triplum; Vitriol of Iron, Zinc, and Copper. 8. Atramentarium; Vitriols
mineralized with friable Stone; such are, red Chalcitis; gray Sorry; black
Melanteria; yellow Misy.
c. Lapidose.
Tetraedrum; Spatose Vitriol of Zinc.

II. SULPHURA. Inflammables.
19. AMBRA. Ambergrease. 2 species.
1. Ambrosiaca; Gray. 2. Vulgatior; Brown.
20. SUCCINUM. Amber.
1. Electricum; Amber, diaphanous, opake, white, yellow, brown.
21. BITUMEN. Bitumen. 10 species.
1. Naptha; Naphta. 2. Petroleum; Rock Oil. 3. Maltha; Jews Pitch. 5.
Asphaltum; Fossil Pitch. 6. Ampelites; Peat. 7. Lithanthrax; Common Coal, or
Schistose Bitumen. 8. Gagas; Jet. 9. Suillum; Calcareousfoetid Bitumen,
compact, granulated, squamose, spatiform, chrystalline.
22. PYRITES. Sulphurs. 7 species.
1. Nativum; Native Sulphur. 2. Auripigmentum; Orpiment. 3. Chrystallinus;
Chrystallised Pyrites, Marcasite. 4. Figuratus; Figured Pyrites. 5. Ferri; Iron
Pyrites. 6. Cupri; Copper Pyrites. 7. Aquosus; Liver-coloured.
23. ARSENICUM. Arsenic. 8 species.
1. Testaceum; Solid testaceous Arsenic. 4. Sandaraca; Red Arsenic, mineralized
with Sulphur. 5. Sulphuratum; Arsenical Marcasite. 6. Albicans; Mineralized
with Iron.
III. METALLA. Metals.
24. HYDRARGYRUM. Quicksilver. 5 species.
1. Virgineum; Native Quicksilver. 2. Chrystallinum; Cubic, chrystallized
Quicksilver. 3. Cinnabaris; Cinnabar, lamellated, granulated, chrystallized. 5.
Crepitans; pyritical, cupreous, Stone Mercury.
25. MOLYBDAENUM. Black Lead. 3 species.
1. Plumbago; Black Lead, or Wad, sulphur saturated with iron and tin. 2.
Magnesia; Black Manganese. 3. Spuma Lupi; Red Manganese, or Wolfram.
25. STIBIUM. Antimony. 4 species.
1. Nativum; Native Regulus of Antimony. 2. Chrystallinum; Chrystallized
Stibium. 3. Striatum; Fibrous or common Antimony. 4. Rubrum; Red Antimony,
mineralized with Sulphur and Arsenic.
26. ZINCUM. Zinc. 8 species.
1. Chrystallinum; Chrystallized Zinc. 2. Mineralisatum; Mineralized, with
Sulphur and Lead, or Iron. 3. Swabii; Mineralized with sulphurated Iron. 4.
Stibiatum; Fibrose Zinc. 5. Calaminaris; Calamine; Stone Zinc, or Zinc mixed
with martial Ochre. 6. Sterilum; Blend; Mock-lead, black Jack, or
semi-tesselated black Zinc. 8. Rapax; Red Zinc, or micaceous, livercoloured
Zinc.
27. VISMUTUM. Bismuth. 4 species.
1. Nativum; Native Bismuth. 2. Commune; Common Bismuth, mineralized with
Sulphur and Arsenic. 3. Martiale; Martial Bismuth. 4. Iners; Bismuth,
mineralized with Sulphur only.
28. COBALTUM. Cobalt. 4 species.
1. Chrystallinum; Chrystallized Cobalt, with Sulphur, Arsenic, and Iron. 2.
Arsenicale; Mineralized with Ansenic and Iron. 3. Pyriticosum; Pyriticose
Cobalt. 4. Scoriatum; Slag-Cobalt.
30. STANNUM. Tin. 4 species.
1. Chrystallinum; Chrystallized Tin, or Tin-Grains. 3. Amorphum; Tin Stone. 4.
Spatosum; Spatose Tin.
31. PLUMBUM. Lead. 10 species.
1. Nativum; Native Lead. 2. Chrystallinum; Cubic Lead, chrystallized. 3.
Galena; Cubic Lead, mineralized, with sulphurated Silver, Galena. 5. Stibiatum;
Stibiated Lead Ore. 7. Virens; Greenish, Arsenical Lead Ore. 9. Spatosum;
Sparry, Arsenical Lead Ore.
32. FERRUM. Iron. 27 species.
A. 1. Nativum. Native Iron, in grains. B. Chrystallized.
2. Tesselare. Chrystallized Iron.
C. Such as obey the magnet.
4. Chalybeatum; Steelgrained Iron Ore. 8. Selectum; Fine grained Iron Ore. 10.
Commune; Common Iron Ore. 11. Molle; Pyriticose Iron Ore. 12. Talcosum; Talky
Iron Ore. 13. Calcarium; Calcareous Iron Ore. 17. Smiris; Emery.
D. Such as do not obey the magnet.
18. Micaceum; Red micaceous Iron Ore. 22. Haematites; Bloodstone. 23.
Rubricosum; Red Boodstone. 26. Spatosum; Spar-like Iron Ore.
E. Magnetical.
27. Magnes; the Magnet.

33. CUPRUM. Copper. 16 species.
1. Praecipitatum; Copper precipitated upon Iron. 2. Nativum; Native Copper. 3.
Chrystallinum; Chrystallized, octaedral Copper. 4. Fulvum; Pyriticose,
yellowish-green Copper Ore. 5. Purpureum; Pyriticose, purple Copper Ore. 6.
Vitratum; Soft, pyriticose, gray Copper Ore. 7. Cinereum; Sooty, pyriticose,
arsenical Copper Ore. 8. Albidum; White, arsenical, pyriticose Copper Ore. 9.
Rubrum; Indurated, ochraceous, red Copper Ore; sometimes liver-coloured. 10.
Cotaceum; Sandy, ochraceous Copper Stone. 11. Schistosum; green, and blue
Copper Slate. 12. Lazuli; Lapis Lazuli; doubtful, mixed with Silver and Iron.
14. Armenus; Lapis Armenus; blue calcareous Copper Stone. 15. Malachites;
Malachites, green gypseous Copper Stone. 16. Nickelum; Nickel, or Copper
mineralized with Sulphur, Arsenic, and Iron.
34. ARGENTUM. Silver. 9. Species.
1. Nativum; Native Silver, in various forms. 2. Corneum; Horn Silver Ore,
shining, submalleable, and somewhat diaphanous, mineralized with Sulphur and
Arsenic. 3. Vitreum; Glass Silver Ore, lead-coloured malleable Silver Ore,
mineralized with Sulphur. 4. Rubrum; Red Silver Ore, mineralized with Sulphur
and Arsenic. 5. Album; White Silver Ore, mineralized with Arsenic, Copper, and
Sulphur. 6. Cinereum; Gray Silver Ore, mineralized with Sulphur, Antimony,
Copper, and Iron. 7. Arsenicale; Silver Ore, mineralized with Arsenic and Iron.
8. Zincosum; Silver Ore, mineralized with Sulphur and Zinc. 9. Nigrum; Sooty
Silver Ore, mineralized with Arsenic and Copper.
35. AURUM. Gold.
1. Nativum; Native Gold; found in various forms. a. In thin plates or leaves.
b. Solid, or in thick pieces. c. In a chrystalline form.

Gold is also found inbedded in Quartz, in Talc, and Cinnabar; and in Rivers,
in loose grains and lumps, called Gold Dust.

2. Mineralisatum; Mineralized pyritical Gold Ore.
Class III. FOSSILIA. FOSSILS.
Fossil bodies, originated from different modifications of the subjects,
comprehended in the foregoing classes.

Order I. PETRIFICATA. Such fossil bodies as represent in figure certain
animals or vegetables, or parts thereof.

What are called Petrifactions are of various kinds:

1. The true petrifactions are such as have the texture and organic parts of
the bodies entirely filled up with stony particles, either of a calcareous
nature, as is commonly the case: or flinty* and not unfrequently it is
marcasitical.

2. Preserved only and unaltered, as seeming to have lost little except the
animal gluten.

3. Others are only bodies incrustated with stalactite or calcareous matter.
And,

4. Frequently they are only impressions received in their soft state.

Order II. CONCRETA. Slight conglutinations of different kinds of earths.

The specific differences of these bodies arise from the nature principally of
the component parts, whether ochraceous, calcareous, gypseous, spatose,
argillaceous, arenaceous, etc.

Order III. TERRAE. Fossil substances not conglutinated, but usually in a
slightly cohering or pulverized state.

GENERA of FOSSILS.
I. PETRIFICATA. II. CONCRETA.
The generical characters of these two orders are very brief, and they occur in
the subsequent arrangement of the species.

III. TERRAE.
50. OCHRA. Ochres. Earth: precipitated calx or earth of metals. Particles:
colored, and extremely minute.
51. ARENA. Sand. Earth: originated from water. Particles: distinct,
granulated, hard, and scabrous: neither penetrable nor conglutinable by water.
(Not soluble in acids.)
52. ARGILLA. Clay. Earth: originated from the viscid sediment, or mud, of the
sea. Particles: irregular, impalpable, soft, tough, and lubricous. In water:
becoming soft, unctuous, and plastic. In the fire: hardening.
53. CALX. Chalks. Earth: of animal origin. Particles: dry, farinaceous,
friable, coloring the fingers: tinging water: mostly soluble in acids, and
effervescing therein, especially when calcined or burned.
54. HUMUS. Mould. Earth: of vegetable origin. Particles: dry, light, in the
form of fine powder. In water: swelling. In fire: combustible, and leaving
ashes.



SPECIES of FOSSILS.
The FOSSILIA are divided into three Orders.

I. PETRIFICATA. Figured or extraneous Fossils.
36. ZOOLITHUS. Petrifactions of Mammalia. 1. Hominis; Bones of Men; and in one
instance of the whole body. 2. Cervi; remains of the Cervus Tarandus, or Rein
Deer, dug up in Ireland. -- Vide Lowthorp's Abridgment, vol. ii. p. 432. 3.
Ebur Fossile; Fossil Ivory. 4. Turcosa; Turquoise, teeth tinctured by Copper.
37. ORNITHOLITHUS. Petrifactions of Birds, and their Nests. These are scarce,
and are usually stalactitical incrustations only. 38. AMPHIBIOLITHUS.
Petrifactions of Amphibia. 1. Testudinis; of an entire Tortoise. 2. Ranae; of a
Toad. 3. Lacertae; Skeleton of a Crocodile. 4. Serpentis; of an entire Serpent.
5. Nantis; of various Nantes, as of the Raja, Balistes, etc. 6. Glossopetra;
Sharks Teeth, very common.
39. ICTHYOLITHUS. Petrifactions of Fishes. 1. Schisti; Entire Skeletons, with
the Fins, in Slate, of several genera. 2. Marmoris; in Marble, of various
genera. 3. Bufonites; Grinding Teeth of the Anarchichas, or Wolffish.
40. ENTOMOLITHUS. Petrifactions of Insects. 1. Cancri; Petrified Crab,
Lobster, etc. 2. Paradoxus; of an unknown Insect; perhaps a Monoculus. 3.
Succineus; Insects enclosed in Amber, not proper petrifactions.
41. HELMINTHOLITHUS. Petrifactions of Vermes. 1. Hammonites; Cornu Ammonis,
various kinds. 2. Orthocerotes; Straight Nautilus; both these unknown in the
recent state. 3. Conchidium; of an unknown bilocular shell; perhaps a Patella.
4. Anomites; of various Anomiae, unknown in a recent state. 5. Hysterolithus.
6. Craniolaris. 7. Gryphites. Crowstone. 9. Judaicus; Jews Stone, thought to be
spines of Echini. 10. Echinites. 14. Madreporus; Madrepores, of various kinds.
17. Entrochus. 18. Asteria Columnaris; Star Stones; parts of an Encrinus,
lately discovered in the recent state. -- See Phil. Trans. vol. lii. p. 357.
23. Belemnites.
42. PHYTOLITHUS. Petrifactions of Plants. 1. Plantae; of the entire Plant, in
Coal Slate. 2. Filicis; of Ferns, in Slate. 3. Rhizolithus; of Roots, in
Marble. 4. Lithoxylon; of Wood, in various states; as, of Limestone, of Agate,
of Flint, of Sand-stone, and of Slate. 5. Folii; of Leaves, in Slate and
Marble. 6. Antholithus; of Flowers, in Slate, resembling the spike of a
Phalaris, or Canary Grass. 7. Carpolithus; of Fruits, in Coal strata; commonly
cones of the Pine, Nuts, Acorns, etc.
43. GRAPTOLITHUS. Stones resembling Pictures. 8 species. Among which are, 2.
Ruderalis; Florentine Marble or Slate, representing ruins. 3. Dendrites;
representing woods, landscapes, etc. arising from vitriolic solutions,
insinuated between the plates of fissile stones, or in Marble. This process is
now well imitated by art.

II. CONCRETA. Concretes of various kinds.
44. CALCULUS. Animal Concretions. 8 species. 1. Urinarius; Stone in the Kidney
or Bladder. 2. Salivalis; Tartar of the Teeth. 3. Tracheae; of the Lungs. 4.
Bezoar; Bezoar Stones, formed in the Abomasus, or fourth stomach of the Pecora,
or ruminating animals. 5. Aegagropila; Hair Balls, formed in the first stomach.
6. Felleus; Bile Stones. 7. Margarita; Pearls. 8. Oculus; Crabs Eyes.
45. TARTARUS. Vegetable Concretes. 1. Faex; Yeast. 2. Vini; White and Red
Tartar.
46. AETITES. Concretions within the Cavity of Stones. a. True Etites, having a
loose Nucleus.
1. Geodes; with an earthy Nucleus. 2. Aquilinus; with a stony Nucleus.
b. Spurious Etites.
3. Haemachates; Flinty Aetites, with a fixed chrystalline Nucleus, of
quartzose nitre; or Melon of Mount Carmel. 4. Marmoreus; Marble Aetites,
including Dog-tooth Spar. 5. Cretaceus; echinited Aetites, including Fluor
Chrystals.
47. PUMEX. Concretions by Means of Fire. 1. Vulcani; Black Slate Pumice. 2.
Ferri; White Pumice, of Iron Furnaces. 3. Cupri; Red Copper Pumice. 4. Fuligo;
Soot. 5. Cinerarius; Ashes of Volcanos. 5. Molaris; Rhenish Millstone. 7.
Vitreus; Vitreous Pumice, or black and green Iceland Agate.
48. STALACTITES. Concretions by Means of Air. 1. Incrustatum; Vegetable
Incrustations. 2. Stillatitius; Dropstone. 3. Solidus; Solid marmoreous
Stalactite. 4. Flos Ferri; Branched marmoreous Stalactite. 7. Spatosus;
Solidspatose Stalactite. 9. Quartzosus. 10. Pyriticosus. 11. Plumbiferus. 12.
Zeolithus; Red spatose Stalactite or Zeolite.
49. TOPHUS. Concretions in Water. 22 species. a. Metallic Tophs.
1. Ludus; Marly Toph-stone. 2. Pertusus; Tubular, marly, ochraceous
Toph-stone. 3. Marinus; Sandy ochraceous Sea Toph-stone. 5. Tubalcaini; Bog
Iron Ore, in various forms.
b. Simple Tophs.
10. Aluminaris; Alum Toph. 12. Lebetinus; Concretions of Tea Kettles. 14.
Oolithus; Pea-stone, of Hot Springs. 16. Osteocolla; Bonebinder. Vide Phil.
Trans. 1745, p. 378. 21. Lenticularis; Solid black schistose Toph.

III. TERRAE. Earths.
50. OCHRA. Ochres. Earths of Metals. 15 species. a. In the form of Powder.
1. Ferri; Ochre of Iron. 3. Aeris; Green Ochre of Copper. 4. Cupri; Blue Ochre
of Copper. 7. Plumbi; Native Ceruss. 8. Cobalti; Ochre of Cobalt.
b. Plumose, or germinating Ochres.
12. Cuprigo; Copper Blue, Plumose Copper. 13. Stibigo; Flowers of Antimony.
14. Argentigo; Plumose Silver Ore, with sulphurated Antimony and Arsenic.
51. ARENA. Sands. 14 species. 1. Mobilis; Sea Sand. 2. Colorata; Colored
Sands. 6. Glarea; Sand of Heaths. 9. Sabulum; Common Sand. 11. Micacea;
Micaceous or Glittering Sand, writing Sand. 12. Aurea; Gold Sand. 13. Ferrea;
Iron Sand. 14. Silicea; Flint Sand.
52. ARGILLA. Clays, Boles, Marles. 21 species. a. Simple.
1. Apyra; Porcellain Clay. 2. Leucargilla; Tobaccopipe Clay. 3. Porcellana;
China Porcellain Earth. 6. Lemnia; Lemnian Earth. 7. Fullonica; Stone Marrow,
Fullers Earth. 8. Tripolitana; Tripoli, or Rotten Stone. 9. Communis; Brick
Clay. 10. Figulina; Potters Clay. 13. Bolus; Boles of different colors.
b. Mixed.
15. Tumescens; Fermenting Clay. 17. Marga; Marle. 18. Umbra; Umbre. 19.
Nilotica; Marle of the Nile.
53. CALX. Chalks. 9 species. a. Soluble in acids.
1. Creta; Chalk. 2. Marmorea; Mineral Agaric. 3. Conchacea; Shell Chalk, or
mouldered Shells.
b. Not soluble in acids.
5. Palustris; True Mineral Agaric. 6. Gur; Gypseous Gur, or Lac Lunae.
c. Granulated, or sandy.
7. Alabastrina; Alabaster Chalk. 8. Testudinea; Soluble Arenaceous Calx of the
Isle of Ascension. 9. Lenticularis; Lenticular granulated Calx.
54. HUMUS. Moulds. 14 species. 1. Daedalea; Impalpable Vegetable Mould. 2.
Ruralis; Common Black Mould. 3. Pauperata; Depauperated Mould of Heaths. 4.
Effervescens; Spongy Mould of Marshes. 5. Alpina; Alpine Earth. 6. Turfa; Turf.
7. Lutum; Mould of Lakes, Mud-mould. 10. Damascena; Red Mould. 14. Animalis;
Animal Mould.

Three very instructive tables, exhibiting different views of the several
saline and other chrystallized bodies, are subjoined, accompanied by copious
and methodical descriptions of the figures of each; and references to these
bodies, as they occur in the work itself.

GENERA MORBORUM, or CLASSIFICATION of DISEASES.
WE must now look backwards a few years, to consider our author in another part
of his Professorial character. It has been observed, that after his
establishment at Upsal, one of his departments, as a professor, was that of
teaching the Diagnosis Morborum; and to this end he drew up a system, in which,
as in natural history, all diseases were disposed into classes, orders, and
genera, founded on distinctions taken from the symptoms alone, no regard being
had either to remote, or proximate causes. Before we proceed to a particular
view of LINNAEUS'S method of classing diseases, it will be proper to premise,
that a nosology on this plan, the great object of which is to fix
pathognomonics to every disease, had been long wished for by some writers of
the first character in the profession: such were Baglivi, Boerhaave, Gorter,
Gaubius, and Sydenham; the latter of whom has thus expressed himself on this
subject, in the preface to his works: Expedit ut morbi omnes ad definitas ac
certas species revocentur, eadem prorsus diligentia ac (...), qua id factum
videmus a botanicis scriptoribus in suis phytologiis. Yet, amidst that almost
infinite variety and complication of appearances which are seen in diseases,
the difficulty of obtaining sufficient distinctions, by which the genus and
species may be accurately discriminated, must be allowed to be very great; and
possibly is in many instances unsurmountable. Hence, some of the most eminent
physicians have been led to reject all such arrangements as futile, and
impracticable. This, however, has not deterred others from paying attention to
the subject, more especially some of those, who, from their province as
professors, are led to teach the rudiments of the art; and to whom method, in
some form, is absolutely necessary. Systematic writers had used various methods
in the disposition of their subject. Some had chosen the alphabetic; if that
deserves the name of an arrangement: others, after the example of Aretaeus, and
Caelius Aurelianus, had divided diseases, from their duration, into acute, and
chronical. Some had preferred the anatomical order; which, as it presupposes a
knowledge of the seat of the disease, must, not unfrequently, prove fallacious:
Sennertus's is an instance of this kind. However, the aitiological arrangement
has been most followed by the best writers among the moderns; such as Hoffmann,
and Boerhaave; although perhaps not much less fallacious than the anatomical,
since it is in many instances founded on an hypothesis of the writer: and
though Felix Platerus, in his Praxis Medica, published in 1602, had given an
imperfect sketch of a nosology on the symptomatic plan, yet no writer ventured
to pursue his idea, for more than a century after his time; discouraged as it
should seem by the difficulty of the attempt. At length the late professor M.
SAUVAGES of Montpelier, after communicating his scheme to Boerhaave, published
in 1731, in 12mo. the outlines of such a work, under the title of Nouvelles
Classes des Maladies, in which he professes to define diseases, from their
constant and evident symptoms only. In the year 1763, the author augmented his
work, by the addition of the species under each genus, into 5 volumes in 8vo.
Sauvages may be considered as having spent his life in giving to this design a
certain degree of perfection, having enlarged it into 2 quarto volumes, in
which form it was published after his death in 1768: A work, it is to be
presumed, now in the hands of most physicians.

It will easily be imagined, that an arrangement of this kind was too congenial
to LINNAEUS to be neglected by him. In fact, it appears that he very early
corresponded with Sauvages on this subject, that he soon adopted it, and framed
a set of institutes, under the title of GENERA MORBORUM, as a basis of his
lectures in this department. LINNAEUS'S scheme was first published in a thesis
in 1759; but he had taught it in his class for ten years preceding that time.
In 1763, he published it himself in a small quarto; though we do not find that
he ever enlarged it by the addition of the species.

The symptomatic plan of arranging diseases has since been followed by some
other professors of physic; Dr. Vogel of Gottingen having published, in 1764,
his Definitiones Generum Morborum. Dr. Cullen also, who at this time fills the
practical chair at Edinburgh with such deserved reputation, has published a
Synopsis nosologiae methodicae, and has made it the basis of his First Lines of
the Practice of Physic. In 1776, Dr. Sagar, a physician at Iglaw in Moravia,
published a Systema Morborum symtomaticum. 8vo. Vien. pp. 756. His work,
allowing for some alterations and additions, may be accounted an useful
abridgement of Sauvages's: the author, all theory apart, has described the
species under every genus, and subjoined the method of cure. Dr. Cullen, by
omitting many genera, and reducing others to the rank of species only, has so
considerably abridged the whole, as not to have retained more than half the
number of genera, that the foregoing writers enumerate; and in this form he has
published it, annexed to those of the four abovementiond, by which display of
each, their several merits may be compared, and a judgment formed of the
practicability, and use of the scheme in general, which, it must be confessed,
affords a very ample field for cultivation; yet, from that reform which Dr.
Cullen has already made in various parts, it is not, perhaps, too much to hope,
that it is capable of receiving a much higher degree of improvement, in the
hands of those whose genius and industry may prompt them to extend the design
of these writers.

Of LINNAEUS'S method we are led by our plan to exhibit a general view; to
which end, although our prescribed brevity will not admit of giving his
definitions at length, yet it will be necessary to enumerate the names of all
his genera, since nothing short of a view of the whole collectively, could
enable the reader to form a just idea of the author's scheme. Under each class
we shall observe wherein LINNAEUS differs materially from Sauvages, and note
the alterations which Dr. Cullen has made in the disposition of the same genera.

LINNAEUS, in the classification of diseases, has pretty nearly retained the
arrangement of M. Sauvages, although he has altered his terms, and constituted
one more class, with which he begins his method; the Exanthematic, or eruptive
fevers, which, in the systems of Sauvages and Dr. Cullen, form only an order,
or subdivision of a class. He has also changed the order of the classes, and
referred the Vitia, or local external disorders, which are principally the
objects of surgery, to the end of his system. In this he has been followed by
the two succeeding nosologists, Dr. Vogel and Dr. Cullen. The classical
distribution is, however, confessedly not the primary consideration; that of
fixing the generical character, and determining what shall constitute the
specifical, being the first object of every system. To this end a still farther
reduction of the number of genera and species, will probably not a little
contribute.

Class I. EXANTHEMATICI. Fevers attended with eruptions on the skin.
1. CONTAGIOSI. Contagious. 1. Morta. Vesiculary Fever. 2. Pestis. The Plague.
3. Variola. Small pox. 4. Rubeola. Measles. 5. Petechia. Spotted Fever. 6.
Siphylis. Venereal Disease.
2. SPORADICI. Sporadic fevers; not contagious. 7. Miliaria. Miliary Fever. 8.
Uredo. Nettle Fever. 9. Aphtha. Aphthous Fever.
3. SOLITARII. Affecting a part of the body only. 10. Erysipelas. St. Anthony's
Fire.

In this class, as the disease is complicated of fever and eruption, the genus
is defined from the nature of each. To instance, the Variola, or Small pox, is
defined, A disease attended with pustules of an erysipelatous, suppurating,
escharotic kind; at length drying off, and leaving a cicatrix; accompanied by a
fever of the ardent, and malignant kind, with headache and pain of the loins.
The term Pustula, and the others in this class, expressive of the different
kinds of eruption, have their definition in another part of the system. Such as
appear in the Morta, are called Phlyctenae; in the Pestis, Anthraces, or
Bubones; in the Variola, Pustulae; in the Rubeola, Papulae; in the Petechia,
Sudamina.

This class constitutes the first order of Dr. Sauvages's PHLEGMASIAE, and the
third of Dr. Cullen's PYREXIAE class. In both, these genera are preserved
nearly alike, except that the Morta of LINNAEUS is the Pemphigus of those
authors, and the Petechia is considered by Dr. Cullen as only a symptom.

Our author stands alone in bringing the Syphilis into the febrile exanthematic
class. He thinks himself justified, by considering it as attended, in the
advanced state at least, by fever and eruptions. It certainly however ranks
better with the IMPETIGINES.

Class II. CRITICI. Critical Fevers.
1. CONTINENTES. Continual Fevers. 11. Diaria. Diary Fever. 12. Synocha. Ardent
Fever. 13. Synochus. Malignant Fever. 14. Lenta. Slow Fever.
2. INTERMITTENTES. Intermitting Fevers. 15. Quotidiana. Quotidian. 16.
Tertiana. Tertian. 17. Quartana. Quartan. 18. Duplicana. Double Tertian. 19.
Errana. Erratic Fever.
3. EXACERBANTES. Remitting Fevers. 20. Amphimerina. Continued Quotidian. 21.
Tritaeus. Continued Tertian. 22. Tetartophya. Continued Quartan. 23.
Haemitritaea. Semi-Tertian. 24. Hectica. Hectic Fever.

The Genera of the CONTINENTES are determined from the different duration of
each simply.

Those of the INTERMITTENTES from the duration of the intermissions.

The EXACERBANTES, supposed to be compounded of the two foregoing, have their
characters acordingly.

Our author allows the Tertian to be the root of all the FEBRES CRITICI,
although he has, in the foregoing division, kept pretty close to Dr. Sauvages's
method in retaining the distinctions. In this they are not followed by Dr.
Cullen, who denies the existence of a continent fever, and has greatly
simplified this division, having reduced all the CRITICAL fevers to six genera,
and allowing the Hectic to be symptomatic only.

Class III. PHLOGISTICI. Inflammations.
1. MEMBRANACEI. Membranous Inflammations. 25. Phrenitis. Of the Meninges of
the Brain. 26. Paraphrenitis. Of the Diaphragm. 27. Pleuritis. The Pleurisy.
28. Gastritis. Of the Stomach. 29. Enteritis. Of the Bowels. 30. Proctitis. Of
the Anus. 31. Cystitis. Of the Bladder.
2. PARENCHYMATICI. Visceral Inflammations. 32. Sphacelismus. Of the Brain. 33.
Cynanche. Quinsey. 34. Peripneumonia. Of the Lungs. 35. Hepatitis. Of the
Liver. 36. Splenitis. Of the Spleen. 37. Nephritis. Of the Kidneys. 38.
Hysteritis. Of the Uterus.
3. MUSCULORI Muscular, or external Inflammation. 39. Phlegmone. Inflammation
of an external part.

LINNAEUS defines the Phlegmon to be a tense throbbing tumor, or enlargement
of a part, accompanied by fever, and attended with heat and redness. This he
considers as suggesting also the idea of all the foregoing internal
inflammations.

The generical character in the Phlogistic class of our author, does not arise
wholly from the part affected supposed to be the seat of the disease, but from
the genus of the attending fever also. Thus he defines the Hepatitis to be the
Amphimerina, attended with a difficult respiration, cough without
expectoration, hiccup, and a sense of heat and tension in the right
hypochondre. The Nephritis is a Synochus, attended with nausea, hiccup,
eructation, urine various, costiveness, burning lumbago, and numbness down the
thigh.

In this class LINNAEUS has followed Sauvages in dividing the diseases into
MEMBRANACEI, and PARENCHYMATICI, a division neglected by Dr. Cullen, from the
difficulty of determining the seat of the inflammation.

The Phlegmone, being external, is ranked by Sauvages among his VITIA. On the
other hand, Dr. Cullen gives it the first place in his order PHLEGMASIAE; and
has reduced thirteen genera of LINNAEUS'S, and twelve of Sauvages's, to the
rank of species, under the term Phlogosis; further, accounting Abscess,
Pustule, Gangrene, and Sphacelus, as effects only of Phlogosis, and therefore
not entitled to the separate character of genera. Numerous instances of this
kind afford a striking proof of the difficulties attending these arrangements,
in determining what distinctions shall take place between genus and species.

Class IV. DOLORES. Painful Diseases.
1. INTRINSECI. Of the internal Parts. 40. Cephalalgia. Headache. 41.
Hemicrania. Megrim, or pain of one side of the head only. 42. Gravedo. Dull
pain of the Forehead. 43. Ophthalmia. Pain of the Eye. 44. Otalgia. Ear-ach.
45. Odontalgia. Toothach. 46. Angina. Pain in the Fauces, with a sense of
choking. 47. Soda. Burning pain in the Throat, with rancid Eructations. 48.
Cardialgia. Pain at the Heart. 49. Gastrica. Pain of the Stomach. 50. Colica.
Colic. 51. Hepatica. Pain of the right Hypochondre. 52. Splenica. -- of the
left Hypochondre. 53. Pleuritica. Pain of the Side. 54. Pneumonica. Weight, or
load on the Chest. 55. Hysteralgia. Pain of the Uterus. 56. Nephritica. Pain of
the Kidneys. 57. Dysuria. Pain in the Bladder. 58. Pudendagra. Pain in the
genital Parts. 59. Proctica. Pain of the Anus.
2. EXTRINSECI. Of the Limbs. 60. Arthritis. The Gout. 61. Ostocopus. Fixed
Pain in the Bones. 62. Rheumatismus. The Rheumatism. 63. Volatica. Flying Pain
of the Limbs. 64. Pruritus. Excessive Itching.

Our author does not take into the characters of these genera the idea of
fever; and there are several of them used by him as auxiliary terms, in the
definition of other genera.

Dr. Sauvages has a class of five orders under the term DOLORES, disposed in
the anatomical method; under which, most of the foregoing genera are
comprehended.

Dr. Cullen having no such class as the DOLOROSI, is necessarily led to arrange
these genera in different parts of his system; but, with him, the greater
number are either species only, or symptoms, he having admitted only three to
the character of genera, in his PHLEGMASIA. These are the Ophthalmia, Arthritis
or Podagra, and Rheumatismus.

Class V. MENTALES, Diseases in which the Functions of the Mind are disturbed.
1. IDEALES. Those in which the Judgment is principally affected. 65. Delirium.
Symptomatic, or febrile Delirium. 66. Paraphrosyne. Transitory Insanity without
Fever. 67. Amentia. Idiotic Insanity. 68. Mania. Madness. 69. Demonia.
Melancholy, with Idea of Possession. 70. Vesania. Tranquil, partial Melancholy.
71. Melancholia. Fixed Melancholy.
2. IMAGINARII. Those in which the Imagination is principally affected. 72.
Syringmos. Imaginary Sound in the Ear. 73. Phantasma. False Vision. 74.
Vertigo. Giddiness, or false Idea of Gyration in Objects. 75. Panophobia. False
fear of Evil. 76. Hypochondriasis. Hypochondriac Disease. 77. Somnambulismus.
Night-walking, or Noctambulation.
3. PATHETICI. Those in which the Appetites and Passions are principally
affected. 78. Citta. Unnatural Longings. 79. Bulimia. Voracious Appetite. 80.
Polydipsia. Excessive Thirst. 81. Satyriasis. 82. Erotomania. 83. Nostalgia.
Swiss Malady. 84. Tarantismus. 85. Rabies. Canine Madness. 86. Hydrophobia.
Horror of Drinking, with Rigor and Sardiasis. 87. Cacositia. Fixed Aversion to
Food. 88. Antipathia. Aversion to particular Objects. 89. Anxietas.
Restlessness.

In this class, which answers to the VESANIAE of Dr. Sauvages, the genera stand
nearly the same as in that author's arrangement.

They constitute, after great reduction, the fourth order, under the term
VESANIAE, of the class NEUROSES, in Dr. Cullen's system, comprehending four
genera.

Of the IDEALES of LINNAEUS, Dr. Cullen only ranks the Amentia, the Mania, and
the Melancholia, as genera; the Delirium and Paraphrosyne being symptomatic.
The Demonia, Vesania, and Panophobia, rank with Melancholy; under which he has
also brought the Erotomania and Nostalgia, from the PATHETICI. Of the remaining
genera only the Hypochondriasis, and the Hydrophobia, are admitted as such; the
former in the ADYNAMIAE, and the latter among the SPASMI. The Syrigmus, and
Phantasma, are referred to the LOCALES class; and the Somnambulismus to the
Oneirodynia, in the order VESANIAE. The Citta, or Pica, the Polydipsia,
Satyriasis, and Bulimia, belong also to the LOCALES, in the order DYSOREXIAE.
It is justly doubted whether the Tarantismus exists; and the Rabies can
scarcely be separated from the Hydrophobia.

Class VI. QUIETALES. Diseases in which the voluntary, and involuntary Motions,
and the Senses, suffer a Diminution.
1. DEFECTIVI. Defects of the vital Powers. 90. Lassitudo. Muscular Debility.
91. Languor. Debility of Spirits. 92. Asthenia. Extreme Debility. 93.
Lipothymia. Fainting. 94. Syncope. Swooning. 95. Asphyxia. L ong failure of
vital and animal Power; as from Drowning, Mephitism, etc.
2. SOPOROSI. Soporose Affections; or Diminution of Sense and Motion. 96.
Somnolentia. Somnolency. 97. Typhomania. Coma Vigil, of authors. 98. Lethargus.
Lethargy; febrile Somnolency. 99. Cataphora. Coma Somnolentum, of authors. 100.
Carus. Sopor and Insensibility, with quiet Respiration. 101. Apoplexia.
Apoplexy; Sopor, and Insensibility, with Snoring. 102. Paraplegia. Palsy, of
all the Limbs. 103. Hemiplegia. Palsy, of one Side. 104. Paralysis. Palsy, of a
particular Part. 105. Stupor. Transitory Numbness.
3. PRIVATIVI. Diminutions of the Senses. 106. Morosis. Defect of Imagination.
107. Oblivio. Defect of Memory. 108. Amblyopia. Obscure Vision, without
apparent Defect in the Organ. 109. Cataracta. Privation of Sight, with apparent
Defect in the Organ. 110. Amaurosis. Privation of Sight, without apparent
Defect of the Organ. 111. Scotomia. Transitory Blindness. 112. Cophosis.
Deafness. 113. Anosmia. Defect of Smelling. 114. Ageustia. Defect of Taste.
115. Aphonia. Defect of Voice. 116. Anorexia. Want of Appetite. 117. Adipsia.
Want of Thirst. 118. Anaesthesia. Defect of Feeling. 119. Atecnia. Defect of
venereal Appetite. 120. Atonia. Atony; Defect of muscular Power.

The diseases of this class very nearly correspond with the DEBILITATES of
Sauvages; and the two first orders, the DEFECTIVI and SOPOROSI, with the COMATA
and ADYNAMIAE, of the class NEUROSES, in Dr. Cullen's system.

The three first genera of the DEFECTIVI, Dr* Cullen takes no notice of; the
three last he includes under his Syncope, as different degrees only of the same
diminished power of the functions.

Among the SOPOROSI of our author, Dr. Cullen ranks the Carus and Cataphora
under the Apoplexia; and also considers the Typhomania and Lethargus, as
symptomatic of the same. For the like reasons he accounts the Paraplegia, and
Hemiplegia, as different degrees of the same disease, including them all under
Paralysis.

The PRIVATIVI rank under the two first orders of Dr. Cullen's LOCALES, as far
as he allows them to hold the character of genera. The Morosis and Oblivio he
refers to his Amentia. The Scotomia he does not notice. The Cophosis he calls
Dysoecia; the Anorexia stands under his Dyspepsia genus, among the ADYNAMIAE;
the Atonia as a species of Palsy. The Amblyopia under Amaurosis; the Cataracta
under his Caligo. The Anosmia, Ageustia, Aphonia, Anosexia, Adipsia, and
Anaesthesia, under their respective names separately; and the Atecnia under
that of Anaphrodisia.

Class VII. MOTORII. Spasmodic Diseases; Diseases attended with involuntary
Motion.
1. SPASTICI. Spastic, or Tonic Diseases. 121. Spasmus. Cramp. 122. Priapismus.
Priapism. 123. Borborygmi. Rumbling of the Bowels. 124. Trismos. Locked Jaw.
125. Sardiasis. Involuntary or convulsive Laughing. 126. Hysteria. Hysteric
Affection. 127. Tetanos. Rigidity of the Spine, with Sensibility. 128.
Catochus. Rigidity of the Body without Sensibility. 129. Catalepsis. Catalepsy.
130. Agrypnia. Intense Watching. The Pervigilium of Authors.
2. AGITATORII. Convulsive or Clonic Diseases. 131. Tremor. Trembling, without
the Sensation of Cold. 132. Palpitatio. Palpitation of the Heart. 133.
Orgasmus. Subsultus of the Arteries. 134. Subsultus. Twitching of the Tendons.
135. Carpologia. Delirious Fumbling. 136. Stridor. Grating of the Teeth 137.
Hippos. Morbid Nictitation. 138. Psellismus. Stammering. 139. Chorea. St.
Vitus's Dance. 140. Beriberi. Tremor of the Limbs and Body, with contracted
Knees, attended with Stupor and Hoarseness. 141. Rigor. Shaking or Tremor, with
a Sense of Cold. 142. Convulsio. Convulsion. 143. Epilepsia. Epilepsy.
Convulsions attended with Insensibility, opposed to the foregoing. 144.
Hieranosos. Continued Convulsions without Pain, or Loss of Sensibility. 145.
Raphania. Spastic Contraction of the Limbs, with Convulsions and Pain.

Most of the diseases of this class stand in the corrseponding one of Sauvages,
called SPASMI, except the Borborygmus, and the Agrypnia, the latter of which is
referred to the anomalous VESANIAE. He also considers the Sardiasis and Stridor
of LINNAEUS as species only of the Trismos; and the Subsultus he calls
Carpologia.

In Dr. Cullen's system the MOTORII of LINNAEUS make the third order of his
NEUROSES, called SPASMI. Of the Spastici he has the Trismos, Hysteria, and
Tetanos, only as distinct genera, under their respective terms. The Catochus he
refers to the Tetanos, and the Catalepsis is his Apoplexia Cataleptica. The
others are not noticed by him.

Of the AGITATORII, the Tremor Dr. Cullen accounts rather as a symptom of
various disorders. The Beriberi, which he had heretofore ranked with the
Paralysis, he has omitted in the last edition of his Synopsis: the Chorea is
admitted as a genus, and the Hieranosos stands under the idiopathic Convulsio.
The Psellismus is removed to the LOCALES class; and of the remainder, the
Palpitatio, Epilepsia, and Raphania only, retain their place in his system,
under their respective names.

Class VIII. SUPPRESSORII. Affections and Diseases arising from, or attended
with Oppression of the Organs, and impeded Excretions.
1. SUFFOCATORII. Diseases attended with a Sense of Suffocation. 146. Raucedo.
Hoarseness. 147. Vociferatio. Squealing. 148. Risus. Laughing. 149. Fletus.
Weeping. 150. Suspirium. Sighing. 151. Oscitatio. Yawning. 152. Pandiculatio.
Stretching. 153. Singultus. Hiccup. 154. Sternutatio. Sneezing. 155. Tussis.
Coughing. 156. Stertor. Snoring. 157. Anhelatio. Panting. 158. Suffocatio.
Difficult Respiration from Narrowness of the Fauces. 159. Empyema. -- from an
Abscess in the Thorax. 160. Dyspnoea. Laborious, panting Respiration, without a
Sense of Narrowness in the Fauces. 161. Asthma. Chronic, laborious, wheezing
Respiration. 162. Orthopnoea. Acute, sighing, suffocating Respiration. 163.
Ephialtes. Nightmare.
2. CONSTRICTORII. Diseases attended with Constriction. 164. Aglutitio. Impeded
Deglutition. 165. Flatulentia. Flatulence. 166. Obstipatio. Costiveness. 167.
Ischuria. Impeded or suppressed Micturition. 168. Dysmenorrhoea. Suppression of
the Menses. 169. Dyslochia. Suppression of the Lochia. 170. Aglactatio. Defect
of Milk. 171. Sterilitas. Barrenness.

Under the genera of the SUFFOCATORII our author has departed from his usual
rule, in having subjoined to each a note expressive of the intention of Nature
in exciting these affections. Thus, to instance, after defining Suspirium to be
a deep, slow, agitating inspiration, he adds, that the effect is, "that of
expelling the blood from the lungs." Most of the SUFFOCATORII have a place in
Sauvages's system among the ANHELATIONES, but the CONSTRICTORII are scattered
in various parts of his system.

Dr. Cullen has not introduced into his system the lighter affections under
the SUFFOCATORII; which seem to have been defined and explained by LINNAEUS,
principally to use them as auxiliaries in other parts of the work.

In Dr. Cullen's system the Raucedo has a place, as symptomatic only, under the
Catarrh; and again, in another part, as a species of Paraphonia. The Tussis is
also received under the Catarrh; and the Empyema is considered as a consequence
of Pleurisy or Peripneumony. The Orthopnoea, as a genus, is not noticed by Dr.
Cullen. The Dyspnoea is admitted in the last edition, which, with the Asthma,
are the only genera he receives from this order, as he has made the Ephialtes a
species of his Oncirodynia, under the VESANIAE in the class NEUROSES.

In the CONSTRICTORII order, the Flatulentia of LINNAEUS comes under the
Dyspepsia of Dr. Cullen; and the Obstipatio, Ischuria, and Dysmenorrhoea, enter
into the fourth order of the LOCALES, called EPISCHESES; the latter under the
term Amenorrhaea.

Class IX. EVACUATORII. Diseases attended with increased Excretion and
Discharges.
1. CAPITIS. Of the Head. 171. Otorrhoea. Purulent Discharge from the Ear. 172.
Epiphora. Lachrymal Flux. 173. Haemorrhagia. Bleeding of the Nose. 174. Coryza.
Mucous Discharge from the Nose. 175. Stomocace. Bleeding of the Gums. 176.
Ptyalismus. Salivation.
2. THORACIS. Of the Breast. 177. Screatus. Hawking. 178. Expectoratio.
Expectoration. 179. Haemoptysis. Spitting of Blood, with Coughing. 180. Vomica.
Purulent Discharge from the Lungs.
3. ABDOMINIS. Of the Belly. 181. Ructus. Eructation. 182. Nausea. Nausea. 183.
Vomitus. Vomiting. 184. Haematemesis. Vomiting of Blood. 185. Iliaca. Iliac
Passion. 186. Cholera. Vomiting, with Colic and Purging. 187. Diarrhoea.
Dejection of liquid Faeces. 188. Lienteria. Dejection of undigested Aliment.
189. Coeliaca. Dejection of Chyle. 190. Cholerica. Bloody Flux, without Colic.
191. Dysenteria. Bloody Flux, with Colic and Tenesmus. 192. Haemorrhois.
Bleeding Piles. 193. Tenesmus. Needing and frequent Dejection of Mucus. 194.
Crepitus. Dejection of Flatus.
4. GENITALIUM. Of the Genital Passages. 195. Enuresis. Involuntary
Micturition. 196. Stranguria. Strangury. 197. Diabetes. Diabetes. 198.
Haematuria. Bloody Urine. 199. Glus. Mucous Urine. 200. Gonorrhoea. Gleet.
Mucous Flux from the Urethra. 201. Leucorrhoea. Whites. 202. Menorrhagia.
Inordinate Flux of the Menses. 203. Parturitio. Laborious Parturition. 204.
Abortus. Abortion. 205. Mola. False Conception.
5. CORPORIS EXTERNI. Of external Parts. 206. Galactitia: Overflowing of Milk.
207. Sudor. Inordinate Sweating.

This class stands nearly the same as our author found it in Sauvages's
arrangement, under the term FLUXUS; except that LINNAEUS has introduced three
or four genera not in that author; such are the Screatus; Vomica, which is a
species of Sauvages's Anacatharsis; the Ructus; Glus, a species of his Pyuria;
Parturitio, and Mola. He has also taken his orders from the anatomical division
of the parts; whereas Sauvages divides them according to the nature of the
discharge, whether bloody or serous, which must be allowed to be equivocal in
many instances. It has been objected, that Parturition is not a disease;
LINNAEUS however seems only to consider it as such when it proves laborious,
protracted, or unnatural.

Dr. Cullen does not admit more than about a third part of the diseases of this
class into his system. He has the Epiphora, Ptyalismus, Enuresis, and
Gonorrhoea, under their respective names, in an order, called APOCENOSES,
belonging to the class LOCALES. Haemorrhagia is synonymous to his Epistaxis;
Coryza to his Catarrhus; under which he considers Expectoratio as only
symptomatic; and Vomica as the effect of Pleurisy, or Peripneumony. Nausea, and
Vomitus, come under Dyspepsia; the Iliaca, under Colica; the Cholerica,
Coeliaca, and Lienteria, as different species of Diarrhoea; Leucorrhoea, and
Abortus, under Menorrhagia; Stomacace, Haematemesis, and Haematuria, as
symptomatic only. Haemoptysis, Cholera, and Haemorrhois, form distinct genera
in both systems.

Class X. DEFORMES. Diseases occasioning external Deformity of the Body.
1. EMACIANTES. Such as emaciate the Body. 208. Phthisis. Consumption. Wasting
with hectic Fever, Dyspnoea, and purulent Expectoration. 209. Tabes. Wasting,
with hectic Fever, but without Expectoration. 210. Atrophia. Atrophy. Wasting,
with Atony, without Hectic, or Expectoration. 211. Marasmus. Wasting, without
Atony, Hectic, or Expectoration. 212. Rachitis. Rickets. Wasting of the Flesh,
with Enlargement of the Head and Joints, attended sometimes with Flexility of
the Bones.
2. TUMIDOSI. Such as enlarge the Body, or Parts thereof. 213. Polysarcia.
Corpulency. 214. Leucophlegmatia. Emphysematose Intumescence. 215. Anasarca.
Oedematose Intumescence. 216. Hydrocephalus. Oedematose Enlargement of the
Head, with Gaping of the Sutures. 217. Ascites. Dropsy; Oedematous Enlargement
of the Abdomen. 218. Hyposarca. Fixed, partial Tumor of the Abdomen. 219.
Tympanites. Wind-Dropsy. 220. Graviditas. Extraordinary Distention of the
Abdomen during Pregnancy.
3. DECOLORES. Such as deform, and change the Color of the Skin. 221.
Cachexia. Cachexy. Oedematose Paleness. 222. Chlorosis. Greensickness. 223.
Scorbutus. Scurvy. 224. Icterus. Jaundice. 225. Plethora. Redness of the Skin
from Fullness of Blood, attended with Dyspnoea.

This class answers to the CACHEXIAE of Sauvages, and Dr. Cullen; and most of
the genera are admitted into the system of the latter under three corresponding
orders also. The Marasmus is not distinguished by Dr. Cullen from the Atrophy.
The Phthisis has been classed before as the consequence of Haemoptysis. The
Chlorosis stands in the ADYNAMIAE order, in the class NEUROSES: The Graviditas,
Cachexia, and Plethora, have no place in Dr. Cullen's system.

Class XI. VITIA. Cutaneous, external, or palpable Diseases.
The class which corresponds to this in the Sauvagesian system, stands first
under the same term, and is there professedly intended to contain such
disorders as are more immediately the objects of surgery. This character is not
so strictly applicable to that of LINNAEUS'S, or of Dr. Cullen's LOCALES, since
both these contain genera which come under the province of the physician,
independent of manual operation or assistance. In all the systems it is the
most comprehensive class. The congruity of the orders will be noted in our
progress through the class.

1. HUMORALIA. Diseases attended with vitiated, or extravasated Fluids. 226.
Aridura. Wasting and withering of a Part, or Limb. 227. Digitium. Dry Whitlow.
228. Emphysema. Windy Tumor. 229. Oedema. Watery Tumor. 230. Sugillatio.
Ecchymosis. 231. Inflammatio. Inflammation. 232. Abscessus. Abscess. 233.
Gangraena. Gangrene. 234. Sphacelus. Mortification.

In the genera of this order, the appearance of the external part, and that of
the contained fluid, conjointly form the character.

In Sauvages the Aridura, Gangraena, and Sphacelus, or Necrosis, belong to his
class of CACHEXIAE. The Digitium is a species of his Paronychia, and stands
with the remaining genera of this order among the VITIA.

Dr. Cullen neglects the Aridura and Digitium: the Emphysema is his
Pneumatosis; the Sugillatio his Ecchymoma; and the four remaining genera of
LINNAEUS come under his Phlogosis.

2. DIALYTICA. Solutions of Continuity; Fractures, Wounds, etc. 235. Fractura.
Fracture; and, 236. Luxatura. Dislocation of a Bone. 237. Ruptura. Rupture of a
Tendon. 238. Contusura. Contusion. 239. Profusio. Flux of Blood from
Dissolution of Substance. 240. Vulnus. A Wound. 241. Amputatura. A Wound from
the entire Separation of a Part from the Body. 242. Laceratura. Laceration.
243. Punctura. Puncture of a Tendon. 244. Morsura. A Venomous Bite. 245.
Combustura. A Burn. 246. Excoriatura. Excoriation, or Abrasion of the Skin.
247. Intertrigo. Erosion of the Cuticle. 248. Rhagas. Dry Fissure of the Skin.

This order nearly constitutes the seventh of the VITIA class in Sauvages's
system, called PLAGAE; and the seventh of the LOCALES class in Dr. Cullen's,
under the name of DIALYSES. Under Vulnus are comprehended the three succeeding
genera also of LINNAEUS'S. The Fractura constitutes a separate genus: the
Luxatura belongs to the ECTOPIAE order of Dr. Cullen's; the Profusio to the
APOCENOSES; the Intertrigo and Combustura to the PHLOGOSIS genus: the remaining
genera are not noticed in the Cullenian system.

3. EXULCERATIONES. Ulcers; purulent or ichorous Solutions of Continuity. 249.
Ulcus. A suppurated Wound of a fleshy Part. 250. Cacoethes. A spreading,
superficial, weeping Ulcer. 251. Noma. A deep, escharotic, cicatrizing Ulcer.
252. Carcinoma. Cancer. 253. Ozaena. An Ulcer of the Antrum Highmori. 254.
Fistula. A sinous, vaginating Ulcer, with Callosity. 255. Caries. An Ulcer of
the superficies of the Bone. 256. Anthrocace. An Ulcer of the Cavity of the
Bone, with Caries. 257. Cocyta. Pungent Pain, from an Animalcule lodged in the
Part. 258. Paronychia. Whitlow. 259. Pernio. Kibes. 260. Pressura. Phlegmon of
the Finger End: from the effect of Cold. 261. Arctura. Inflammation of the
Nail, from Curvature thereof.

Most of these genera rank with the PLAGAE of Dr. Sauvages's class. The
Paronychia however comes in among the PHYMATA; and the Pressura and Arctura of
LINNAEUS are species only of the Paronychia, as the Pernio is of the Erythema
in the same system.

The first six genera in this order are classed in Dr. Cullen's system under
Ulcus; the Caries is a distinct genus; the Arthocace, Paronychia, and Pernio,
rank under the Phlogosis; and the others are not noticed.

4. SCABIES. Cutaneous Diseases. 262. Lepra. Leprosy. 263. Tinea. Scald Head.
264. Achor. Crusta Lactea, of Authors. 265. Psora. Itch. 266. Lippitudo.
Blear-eyedness. 267. Serpigo. Tetters; Ring-worm. 268. Herpes. Shingles. 269.
Varus. Pimples. 270. Bacchia. Ruby-face, Gutta Rosea. 271. Bubo. A Bubo. 272.
Anthrax. A Carbuncle. 273. Phlyctaena. A watery Pimple. 274. Pustula. A
Pustule. 275. Papula. A hard inflamed Pimple. 276. Hordeolum. A Stian. 277.
Verruca. A Wart. 278. Clavus. A Corn. 279. Myrmecium. A moist, soft Wart. 280.
Eschara. An Eschar.

In Sauvages's system most of these genera stand in the corresponding class
under the orders PHYMATA and EFFLORESCENTIAE; but the Lepra, Tinea, and Psora,
are referred to the IMPETIGINES, in the class CACHEXIAE.

The following are distinct genera in Dr. Cullen's system: the Lepra under the
IMPETIGINES; the Tinea, Psora, and Herpes, under the DIALYSES. The Bubo,
Verruca, and Clavus, form distinct genera, in the same order with the Phlyctena
or Hydatis, being all referred to the TUMORES. Almost all the others rank under
the Phlogosis, as different species of that genus. Lippitudo, Serpigo,
Myrmecium, and Eschara, have no place in the Cullenian system.

The characters of the genera in this order are well adapted to distinguish the
different kinds of Pustules; and are of great use as auxiliary terms, in
defining other genera in different parts of the system.

5. TUMORES. Tumors. 281. Aneurisma. Aneurism. 282. Varix. Varix. 283.
Schirrus. Schirrus. 284. Struma. Struma. 285. Atheroma. Wen. 286. Anchylosis. A
stiff Joint. 287. Ganglion. Tumor of a Tendon. 288. Natta. Tumor rooted in a
Muscle. 289. Spinola. Spina bifida. 290. Exostosis. Bony Tumor.

The three first, and the last of these genera, stand in the corresponding
class of the systems of Sauvages and Dr. Cullen under the same names.
LINNAEUS'S Struma is their Scrofula, and his Spinola the Hydrorachitis. The
Atheroma is the Lupia of Dr. Cullen. The Ganglion is a Condyloma of Sauvages,
but stands in the Cullenian system under LINNAEUS'S term. The Natta is
neglected by Dr. Cullen, but belongs to the Sarcoma of our other nosologist.

6. PROCIDENTIAE. Tumors arising from Dislocation of fleshy or membranous
Parts. 291. Hernia. Rupture. 292. Prolapsus. Prolapsus. 293. Condyloma.
Condyloma. 294. Sarcoma. Fungus Flesh. 295. Pterygium. Web in the Eye. 296.
Ectropium. Reversion of the under Eyelid. 297. Phymosis. Swelling of the
Prepuce. 298. Clitorismus.

The Hernia, Prolapsus, and Ectropium, called Blepharoptosis by Sauvages, stand
among the ECTOPIAE of his system; the Phymosis with the Phymata; and the
remaining genera among the EXCRESCENTIAE.

Dr. Cullen receives into his ECTOPIAE only the Hernia, and Prolapsus. The
Sarcoma he refers to the TUMORES, and the other genera are not admitted into
his system as such.

7. DEFORMATIONES. Distortions of particular Parts, and other Deformities. 299.
Contractura. Rigidity of a Joint 300. Gibber. Gibbosity of the Chest. 301.
Lordosis. Incurvation of the Bones. 302. Distortio. Distortion of the Bones.
303. Tortura. Wrymouth. 304. Strabismus. Squinting. 305. Lagopthalmia.
Retraction of the upper Eyelid. 306. Nyctalopia. Nightsight. 307. Presbytia.
Longsight. 308. Myopia. Nearsight. Pore-blindness. 309. Labarium. Looseness of
the Teeth; as in the Scurvy, etc. 310. Lagostoma. Harelip. 311. Apella.
Abbreviation of the Prepuce. 312. Atreta. Imperforation of a natural Passage.
313. Plica. Plica polonica. 314. Hirsuties. Unnatural Hairyness of the Body.
315. Alopecia. Baldness. 316. Trichiasis. Distortion and Inversion of the
Eye-lashes.

These genera are placed in very different parts of his system by M. Sauvages:
the Contractura, for instance, and the Strabismus, very improperly, as it
should seem, among spasmodic diseases; the Gibber, or Gibbosites, and the
Lordosis, among the EXCRESCENTIAE of the VITIA class; the Nyctalopia, and the
two genera succeeding it, as species of Amblyopia, in the class of DEBILITATES,
as is the Lagostoma, as a species of Psellismus; the Plica under the name of
Trichoma, with the CACHEXIAE; and the Trichiasis, as a species of Opthalmia.

Dr. Cullen receives only five of these genera: the Contractura, Strabismus;
the Presbytia, and Myopia; the two latter as species of his Dysopia, all under
the LOCALES class: the Plica under his genus Trichoma, among the IMPETIGINES in
the CACHEXIAE class.

8. MACULAE. Blemishes on the Skin. 317. Cicatrix. A Scar. 318. Naevus. A Mole.
319. Morphaea. Scurf. 320. Vibex. Purple Spots and Wheals; under the Skin. 321.
Sudamen. Transitory, red, stinging Spots on the Skin. 322. Melasma. Black
Blotches; on the Legs, or other Parts unexposed to the Air. 323. Hepatizon.
Brown itching Morphew. 324. Lentigo. Freckles. 325. Ephelis. Sun-burn.

These lighter affections stand in Sauvages's system either among the MACULAE
or EFFLORESCENTIAE, but he does not allow them all the rank of genera. The
Cicatrix is a species of his Leucoma, as the Morphaea and Melasma are of his
Vitiligo; and the Vibex, and Sudamen, of the Ecchymoma. The Naevus stands under
the same generic name in both; but the Lentigo of LINNAEUS is a species of
Sauvages's Ephelis.

Dr. Cullen has not given a place to these genera in his system.

Our author has subjoined to this distribution of diseases, a brief view of his
Theory of Physic, delivered in that terse, concise, and methodic manner, so
peculiar to himself; and which, as it appears to have been intended entirely
for the use of his pupils, nothing less than the author's own comment can do
sufficient justice to. We should not therefore have taken notice of it, in our
plan, had it not been necessary in order to explain several papers hereafter to
be mentioned in the Amoenitates Academicae. Briefly, therefore, the Linnaean
principles of physic suppose the human body to consist of a cerebrose medullary
part, of which the nerves are so many processes, and which we call the nervous
system; and, a cortical or vital part, including the vascular system and
contained fluids: the former, being the animated part, or that in which the
sentient, moving principle peculiarly resides, is considered as deriving its
nourishment from the subtlest fluids of the vascular system, and its energy
from an electrical principle inhaled by the lungs. Farther, this theory
supposes the circulating fluids to be capable of being vitiated, by principles
which the author chooses to consider either as acescent, or putrid ferments; the
former acting on the serum, and being the exciting cause of critical fevers;
the latter, on the blood properly, or crassamentum, and exciting phlogistic
diseases. The exanthematic class is supposed to be excited by some external
causes, which we call Contagion, and which hypothetically he proposes as being
animalcula. From the incessant attrition of the cortical or vascular system, it
requires perpetual reparation; this is to be effected by an appropriate diet.
From an impropriate diet, or regimen, spring the diseases of this part of the
system, originally and more particularly; these are to be remedied by sapid
medicines, as those of the medullary system are by olids. Hence arises the
author's general division of all medicines, as discoverable by their sensible
qualities, to the taste, and smelling. The Sapids, according to this theory,
acting peculiarly on the cortical part, as the Olids do immediately on the
medullary, or nervous system. In order however to obtain a more complete idea
of the effects of each of these general classes of medicines, each must be
viewed in its most simple state, by which Sapids will appear to be rather what
we call Nutritives; and Olids, more strictly speaking, Medicines. A table of of
the several qualities of medicines, acording to these two general divisions,
closes the Genera Morborum.

In 1766, LINNAEUS published a small piece, under the title of CLAVIS MEDICINAE
duplex, exterior et interior. Holm. 8vo. pp. 29. This small tract may be
considered as a syllabus of his lectures. It is an enlarged view of the theory
just mentioned, connecting it with general Pathology, and the therapeutic part
of physic. In the latter part all simples are arranged in thirty orders,
according to their sensible qualities, agreeably to the theory; which is
displayed more at large in two papers printed in the Amoenitates Academicae,
under the titles of Sapores, et Odores Medicamentorum.

It appears from several parts of the writings of LINNAEUS, that the dietetic
part of physic had been an object to which he had paid much attention; and he
has explained himself in the following manner relating to it: -- In his meae
deliciae, in his plura collegi, quam quod novi alius ullus: -- but, whether our
author's observations on this subject may hereafter be published, we are yet to
learn.

In 1771 was published LINNAEUS'S last work, being the continuation of the
Mantissa, in which the work is carried on to 588 pages, under the title of
MANTISSA ALTERA. Near one half of this volume comprehends additional new genera
and species, and the remaining part a variety of emendations, with some
considerable augmentation to the animal kingdom. These will greatly enrich a
future edition of his works; and in the preface he has earnestly entreated
succeeding editors to pay a proper regard to them.

Besides his separate works, which we have now brought to a conclusion,
LINNAEUS wrote a great number of papers on the subjects of physic and natural
history, which were published in the Acta Literaria Upsaliensia, and in the
Stockholm Acts. The first of these works was begun by Olaus Celsius in 1720,
and continued to the year 1750, and is in Latin, in 5 volumes, quarto. The
latter publication is in the Swedish language, in the octavo form, and has been
continued ever since the establishment of the academy at Stockholm, in 1739, by
king Adolphus. Many of these papers are superseded by the subsequent works of
our author, neither would it be within our plan to give a particular detail of
them: we are therefore only to subjoin a catalogue of these detached pieces,
and regret that it is not in our power to make it more complete; or to add
such, if there be any, as may have been given by LINNAEUS to foreign academies.

In the Acta Upsaliensia are the following papers, written by LINNAEUS.

Florula Lapponica, in 1732. This, as is before observed, was our author's
first publication, and consists only of a bare catalogue of the Lapland plants,
digested into the order of the sexual system, of which it is the first
specimen. The second part of this list appears not till the year 1734.

Animalia Regni Sueciae, in 1736.

Orchides iisque affines, in 1740. This catalogue is accompanied by a copious
collection of synonyms to each species.

Genera Plantarum Nova, in 1741.

Euporista in Febribus intermittentibus. This paper, as likewise several
others, if we mistake not, was published, agreeably to a laudable custom of
that country, in the yearly Kalendars, by which means useful intelligence finds
its way into the most remote and obscure recesses of every kingdom, in 1742.

Euporista in Dysenteria, in 1745.

Pini usus oeconomicus, in 1743.

Abietis usus oeconomicus, in 1744.

The manifold uses of these trees, some of which were not sufficiently known in
diverse parts of the kingdom of Sweden, induced our author to throw together all
that his extensive journeys had enabled him to collect thereon, in these two
papers.

Sexus Plantarum, in 1744.

Sexus Plantarum usus oeconomicus, in 1745. The practical use of this paper is
more particularly an object of all who have the care of gardens, to whom the
sex of plants is no longer a matter of mere speculation.

Theae Potus, in 1746.

Scabiosae novae Speciei Descriptio, in 1744, afterward called by our author,
in his Species Plantarum, Scabiosa Tatarica.

Penthorum, a new genus of plants, from Virginia, described and figured, in
1744.

Cyprini pinnae any radiis xi. pinnis albentibus, descriptio. (Cyprinus
Grislagine, Syst. p. 529.) A fish of the lakes of West Bothnia.

After the institution of the Royal Academy of Sciences at Stockholm, of which
LINNAEUS was the first president, his communications were chiefly made in the
Acts of that body. In these the following papers occur.

Cultura Plantarum Naturalis. Vol. I. for the years 1739 and 1740. This is an
attempt to reduce the art of gardening to scientific principles.

Gluten Lapponum e Perca. ib. p. 221.

Oestrus Rangiferinus, in 1740, p. 121. A description, accompanied with
figures, of the Gadsly, (Oestrus Tarandi, Syst. Not. p. 969.) which is bred
under the skin on the backs of the reindeer, and from which a third of the
fawns not unfrequently perish.

The Glue of the Perch is made from the skins, which are scraped off, put into
a bladder, and boiled to a proper consistence.

Picus pedibus trydactylis. ib. p. 222. A description of the three-toed
Wood-pecker, before that time unnoticed, since figured by Edwards, tab. 114,
and named by our author, in his System, Picus tridactylus, p. 177. It is found
also in Hudson's Bay, and described by Mr. Forster, Phil. Trans. Vol. lxii. p.
388.

Mures Alpini Lemures. ib. p. 326. The Mus Lemmus of the System, p. 80, or
Leming, the wellknown pest of the North.

Passer Nivalis. ib. p. 368. (Emberiza Nivalis, Syst. p. 308.) Greater
Brambling, or Snow Bunting; since more fully known and described.

Piscis Aureus Chinensium. ib. 403. The Goldfish, or Cyprinus Auratus, Syst.
527.

Fundamenta Oeconomiae. ib. p. 411.

Formicarum Sexus. Vol. II. 1741, p. 37. This paper contains the description
and history of five species of Ants found in Sweden, and throws much light on
the economy of those insects.

Officinales Suecicae Plantae. ib. p. 81. In this paper our author informs his
countrymen of several articles of the Materia Medica growing indigenously in
Sweden, and which they had unnecessarily imported.

Centuria Plantarum in Suecia rariorum. ib. p. 179. These were all rare plants
not observed in Sweden before.

Plantae Tinctoriae indigenae. Vol. III. 1742, p. 20. The discovery of plants
adapted to the art of dyeing was one of LINNAEUS'S objects professedly, in his
Iter Gothlandicum, of which we have spoken before.

Amaryllis Formosissima. ib. p. 93. The Jacobaea Lilly described and figured.

Gramen Saelting. ib. p. 146. A description of, and persuasive to, the culture
of the Triglochin Maritimum, Spec. Plant. p. 483, or Sea spiked Grass, which is
the delight of horned cattle.

Faenum Suecicum. ib. p. 191. A recommendation also of the culture of the
Medicago falcata, Sp. Pl. p. 1096; or Yellow Medic, as a substitute for Lucern
in Sweden.

Phaseoli Chinensis species. ib. p. 206.

Epilepsiae Vernensis causa. ib. p. 279.

Jackas Hapuch. Vol. IV. 1743, p. 291. (Arbutus Uva Ursi, Sp. Pl. p. 566.)
Bear-berries. A plant of use in Sweden, both in dyeing and tanning, and
frequently smoked with tobacco; better known since in other parts of Europe, by
the reputation it acquired, for some time, in calculous cases.

Fagopyrum Sibiricum. Vol. V. 1744, p. 117. Polygonum tataricum, Sp. Pl. 521. A
kind of Buck-wheat, which is cultivated, and supplies the want of other grain
for bread, in diverse parts of Tartary and Sibiria.

Petiveria. ib. p. 287. Petiveria alliacea, Sp. Pl. p. 486, described and
figured. An acrid, and even caustic plant, of which the Guinea-hens, in the
West Indies, are said to be extremely fond; thence called Guinea-henweed.

Passer procellarius. Vol. VI. 1745, p. 93. A description of the Procellaria
pelagica, Syst. p. 212. The Little Peterel of Edwards, t. 90. or Stormfinch.

Limnia. Vol. VII. 1746. p. 130. Claytonia Sibirica, Sp. Pl. 294. A curious
plant, discovered by Steller in the most eastern parts of Sibiria, and in the
islands which lie scattered between that part of Asia and North America.

Coluber (Chersea) scutis abdominalibus 150 squamis subcaudalibus 34. Vol. X.
1749. p. 246, t. 6. A most venomous small Snake, found in ofieries and
willowholts, the bite of which is frequently fatal, and much dreaded,
particularly in Smoland. It is a small animal, not more than six inches long,
and is called by the Smolanders, Asping.

Avis Sommar Guling appellata. Vol. XI. 1750, p. 127. The Oriolus Galbula,
Syst. p. 160, or Golden Thrush; described and figured: singular in being a
native both of northern Europe and of Bengal.

Insectum quod frumenti grana interius exedit; described afterward in the
System, under the name of Musca Frit, No 994. ib. p. 179. Our author thinks
that every tenth grain of barley is destroyed in Sweden by this insect; and
that the damage occasioned thereby, cannot amount to less than an hundred
thousand ducats annually.

Emberiza Ciris, Syst. p. 313, or Painted Finch of Catesby. I. t. 44; described
and figured. ib. p. 278.

De Characteribus anguium. Vol. XIII. 1752, p. 206. It has been observed
before, that LINNAEUS first attempted to fix the characters of the Serpents
from the number of the shields and scales of the abdomen and tail. He here
observes, that this character is not sufficiently permanent; but that what is
wanting to complete the number in one, will usually be found in the other.

Novae duae Tabaci species. Vol. XIV. 1753, p. 37; described and figured. They
stand in the Species Plant. p. 259, under the names of Nicotiana, paniculata
and glutinosa.

De Plantis, quae Alpium Suecicarum indiginae fieri possint. Vol. XV. 1754, p.
182. An enumeration of such plants, as the author thought might usefully be
cultivated on the Lapland and Swedish Alps.

Simiae, ex Cercopithecorum genere, descriptio. ib. p. 210; called in the
System, Simia Diana, p. 38.

Mirabilis longiflorae (Syst. p. 252.) descriptio. A Mexican plant, now well
known in our English gardens. Vol. XVI. p. 176.

Lepidii (Cardamines, Syst. 899.) descriptio. A new plant, sent to our author
from Spain, where it was found by M. Loefling. ib. p. 273.

Ayeniae (Pusillae, Spec. 1354.) descriptio. Vol. XVII. 1756, p. 23. An elegant
plant, sent by Mr. Miller to our author. It is figured by Miller, tab. 118; and
by Sloane, tab. 132.

Gaurae (biennis, Spec. Pl. 493.) descriptio. A new plant, from seeds sent by
Mr. Collinson. ib. p. 222.

Loeflingia et Minuartia. Vol. XIX. p. 15. Two new genera of plants, sent by M.
Loefling from Spain.

Entomolithus paradoxus (Syst. Nature. III. p. 160.) descriptus. Vol. XX. 1759.
p. 19. accompanied with figures. A curious fossil, from Count Tessin's museum.

Gemma, Penna pavonis, dictum. ib. p. 23. Our author thinks this fossil is
formed from the cartilage or hinge of the Pearl Muscle. He has called it in the
System, Helmintholithus (Androdamas) Mytili margaritiferi cardinis, viridis, p.
165.

Coccus Uvae Ursi, (Syst. p. 742.) ib. p. 28. This cochineal-insect is very
like the Polish kind, found at the roots of the Knawel, but is double the size,
and yields a very fine red color.

De Rubo arctico plantando. Vol. XXIII. 1762. p. 192. The Rubus arcticus, Sp.
Pl. p. 708, much valued for the sake of the berries; is difficultly cultivated
in the southern parts of Sweden. This paper contains the result of some trials
made to inure it to a more southern clime: they are too operose to prove of
general use.

Observationes ad Cerevisiam pertinentes. Vol. XXIV. 1763. p. 50.

Animalis Brasiliensis, (Muris Aguti, (Syst. p. 80.) descriptio. Vol. XXIX.
1768. p. 26. Longnosed Cavy of Pennant.

Viverrae naricae, (Syst. p. 64.) descriptio. ib. p. 140. An American animal,
nearly allied to the Coati-mondi of Brasil.

Simia Oedipus. (Syst. p. 41.) The Little Lionmonkey, described. ib. p. 146.

Gordius Medinensis, (Syst. p. 1075;) or Guineaworm. One of these animals, half
an ell long, was discovered in a living state at Gottenburgh, and communicated
by the King of Sweden to our author. ib.

Calceolariae pinnatae (Syst. Not. ed. 13. p. 60.) descriptio. Vol. XXXI. 1770.
p. 286. A Peruvian plant, of the Diandrous class, with a labiated flower.

It has been before mentioned, that our author has interspersed, in the Flora
Lapponica, a great variety of curious particulars, relating to the country, and
its inhabitants, their manners, their economy, diseases, etc.: and in the
preface he tells us, that he had it in meditation to give the remaining part of
the natural history. This was to have appeared under the title of Lachesis
Lapponica; but it is with great regret that we must now give up the expectation
of this work. Mr. Pennant has informed us, that he once reminded him of it, and
received for answer, -- nunc nimis sera nciperem:

Me quoque debilitat series immensa laborum,
Ante meum tempus cogor et esse senex.
Firma sit illa licet, solvetur in aequore navis,
Quae nunquam liquidis sicca carebit aquis.
We know not of any other publication of LINNAEUS'S after the Mantissa altera,
in 1771; and indeed, the preface to that work is sufficient to preclude the
expectation of any new performance, if his advanced age had not, of itself,
rendered it sufficiently improbable after that period.

In the spring of the year 1772, Dr. Murray, Professor of Physic and Botany at
Gottingen, a Swede by birth, who had been educated under LINNAEUS, and had long
enjoyed a great share of his confidence and esteem, paid his Preceptor a visit:
he found his faculties unimpaired, and his ardor for the improvement of science
as strong and vigorous as ever. He speaks with great delight of the
satisfaction he received from his company, and in the contemplation and
inspection of his museum at Hammarby; but regretted much to find, that LINNAEUS
had no farther thoughts of publishing a new edition of his System of Nature;
purposing only to give a supplement. However, before Dr. Murray left Upsal, he
prevailed on him to promise that he would transmit to him his additional
observations to the Systema Vegetabilium, in order to enable him to give a
complete edition of that work. This the Professor did; and Dr. Murray performed
it in the year 1774, very much to the satisfaction of all who pursue the
LINNAEAN method. The manuscript additions communicated on this occasion by our
author, together with those collected from the several Addenda, and from the
Mantissae, enabled Dr. Murray to extend this volume to above one hundred pages
beyond that of the 12th edition published in 1767.

It appears that LINNAEUS, upon the whole, enjoyed a good constitution. At
times, however, he had been severely afflicted with an hemicrania; and had not
been exempted from the gout. How much he suffered from this latter distemper,
we have before mentioned, when treating on the Philosophia Botanica. And
notwithstanding the sound state in which Dr. Murray left him, we find, that
very soon after, his memory became somewhat impaired. The consciousness of this
defect was said to have induced him to decline all thoughts of further
publications, and to transmit to Dr. Murray such materials as were in readiness
to complete future editions of his System.

In the summer of 1776, it was known here that his strength was declining
apace, and his infirmities in general much increased, he being unable to take
his usual walks in his garden without assistance. At the latter end of the year
he was seized with an apoplexy, which left him paralytic; and at the beginning
of the year 1777 he suffered another stroke, which very much impaired his
mental powers. These attacks, at his advanced stage of life, showed that
dissolution was not far off. But the disease, which was said to have been the
more immediate cause of his death, was an ulceration of the urinary bladder.
Nevertheless, he languished through the year, and died on the 11th of January,
1778, aged 70 years and 8 months.

To the lovers of science it will not appear strange, nor will it be
unpleasant, to hear, that uncommon respect was shown to the memory of this
great man. We are told, that, on his death, a general mourning took place at
Upsal, and that his funeral procession was attended by the whole university, as
well professors as students, and the pall supported by sixteen doctors of
physic, all of whom had been his pupils. The King of Sweden, after the death of
LINNAEUS, ordered a medal to be struck, of which one side exhibits LINNAEUS'S
bust and name, and the other Cybele, in a dejected attitude, holding in her
left hand a key, and surrounded with animals and growing plants, with this
legend -- Deam luctus angit amissi; -- and beneath, -- post obitum Upsaliae,
die x. Jan. M.DCC.LXXVIII. Rege jubente. -- The same generous monarch not only
honored the Royal Academy of Sciences with his presence when LINNAEUS'S
commemoration was held at Stockholm, but, as a still higher tribute, in his
speech from the throne to the assembly of the states, lamented Sweden's loss by
his death. Nor was he honored only in his own country. The present learned and
worthy professor of botany at Edinburgh, not only pronounced an eulogium in
honor of LINNAEUS, before his students, at the opening of his lectures in the
spring of 1778, but laid also the foundation-stone of a monument to be raised
to his memory; which, while it perpetuates the name and merits of LINNAEUS,
will do honor to the founder, and, it may be hoped, prove the means of raising
an emulation favorable to that science which this illustrious Swede so highly
dignified and improved. This monument consists of a vase, supported on a
pedestal, with this inscription, LINNAEO POSUIT J. HOPE.

The high reputation which this great man has long held among the naturalists
throughout the world, might readily perhaps preclude any encomium from our pen;
since, to all lovers of natural science, his name itself is eulogy, and will
doubtless very long be inseparable from the idea of his extraordinary merit.
Might we, nevertheless, be indulged so far, we hope the following brief
estimate of his talents will be thought just, and easily deduced from an
impartial view of his writings.

Nature had, in an eminent manner, been liberal in the endowments of his mind.
He seems to have been possessed of a lively imagination, corrected however by a
strong judgment, and guided by the laws of system. Add to these, the most
retentive memory, an unremitting industry, and the greatest perseverance in all
his pursuits; as is evident from that continued vigor with which he prosecuted
the design, that he appears to have formed so early in life, of totally
reforming, and fabricating anew the whole science of natural history: and this
fabric he raised, and gave to it a degree of perfection unknown before; and had
moreover the uncommon felicity of living to see his own structure rise above
all others, notwithstanding every discouragement its author at first labored
under, and the opposition it afterward met with. Neither has any writer more
cautiously avoided that common error of building his own fame on the ruin of
another man's. He every where acknowledged the several merits of each author's
system; and no man appears to have been more sensible of the partial defects of
his own. Those anomalies which had principally been the objects of criticism,
he well knew every artificial arrangement must abound with; and having laid it
down as a firm maxim, that every system must finally rest on its intrinsic
merit, he willingly commits his own to the judgment of posterity. Perhaps there
is no circumstance of LINNAEUS'S life, which shows him in a more dignified
light, than his conduct toward his opponents. Disavowing controversy, and
justly considering it as an unimportant and fruitless sacrifice of time, he
never replied to any, numerous as they were at one season.

To all who see the aid this extraordinary man has brought to natural science,
his talents must appear in a very illustrious point of view; but more
especially to those who, from similarity of taste, are qualified to see more
distinctly the vast extent of his original design, the greatness of his labor,
and the elaborate execution he has given to the whole. He had a happy command
of the Latin tongue, which is alone the language of science; and no man ever
applied it more successfully to his purposes, or gave to description such
copiousness, united with that precision and conciseness, which so eminently
characterize his writings.

In the mean time, we are not to learn, that it has been objected as derogatory
to his learning in no small degree, that he has introduced a number of terms
not authorized by classical authority. But, granting this, it ought to be
recollected, that LINNAEUS, in the investigation of nature, has discovered a
multitude of relations which were entirely unknown to the ancients; if
therefore there be any force in the objection, it should first be shown, that
the terms which he has introduced to express these relations, are not fairly
and analogically deduced from the language; since it must surely be granted,
that LINNAEUS could not have spoken the language of natural history, as it is
known at this day, in that of Pliny, or of any classical writer whatever.

The ardor of LINNAEUS'S inclinations to the study of nature, from his earliest
years, and that uncommon application which he bestowed upon it, gave him a most
comprehensive view, both of its pleasures and usefulness, at the same time that
it opened to him a wide field, hitherto but little cultivated, especially in
his own country. Hence he was early led to regret, that the study of natural
history, as a public institution, had not made its way into the universities;
in many of which, logical disputations, and metaphysical theories, had too long
prevailed, to the exclusion of more useful science. Availing himself therefore
of the advantages which he derived from a large share of eloquence, and an
animated style, he never failed to display, in a lively and convincing manner,
the relation this study has to the public good; to incite the great to
countenance and protect it; to encourage and allure youth into its pursuits, by
opening its manifold sources of pleasure to their view, and showing them how
greatly this agreeable employment would add, in a variety of instances, both to
their comfort and emolument. His extensive view of natural history, as
connected with almost all the arts of life, did not allow him to confine these
motives and incitements to those only who were designed for the practice of
physic. He also labored to inspire the great and opulent with a taste for this
study; and wished particularly that such as were devoted to an ecclesiastic
life should share a portion of natural science, not only as a means of
sweetening their rural situation, confined, as many are, perpetually to a
country residence, but as what would almost inevitably lead, in a variety of
instances, to discoveries which only such situations could give rise to, and
which the learned in great cities could have no opportunities to make. Not to
add, that the mutual communication and enlargement of this kind of knowledge
among people of equal rank in a country situation, must prove one of the
strongest bonds of union and friendship, and contribute, in a much higher
degree than the usual perishing amusements of the age, to the pleasures and
advantages of society.

LINNAEUS lived to enjoy the fruit of his own labor in an uncommon degree.
Natural history raised itself in Sweden, under his culture, to a state of
perfection unknown elsewhere, and was from thence disseminated through all
Europe. His pupils dispersed themselves all over the globe, and with their
master's fame, extended both science and their own. More than this, he lived to
see the sovereigns of Europe establish several public institutions in favor of
this study, and even professorships established in diverse universities for the
same purpose, which do honor to their founders and patrons, and which have
excited a curiosity for the science, and a sense of its worth, that cannot fail
to further its progress, and in time raise it to that rank, which it is
entitled to hold among the pursuits of mankind.

Were it in our power minutely to describe the person of our author, in
conformity to the custom of biographers, it would be a matter of small moment,
as the endowments of his mind, and his great talents, have so superior a claim
to attention. In the commemoration-speech, delivered by his friend Dr. Baeck,
physician to the king of Sweden, LINNAEUS'S stature is described as being
diminutive; his head large; his look ardent, piercing, and apt to daunt the
beholder. His ear not sensible to music; his temper quick; his memory good,
though in the latter period of his life liable to fail him sometimes; his
knowledge of languages confined, yet no interesting discovery escaped him. In
summer he used to sleep from ten to three o'clock, in winter from nine to six,
and instantly to cease from his labors when he found himself not well disposed
for them. He was an agreeable companion, of quick sensibility, but easily
appeased. Those who would be gratified by forming an idea of his person, may be
acquainted, that there are extant three halflength prints of LINNAEUS in his
works. Two of these are in octavo, and the other in a halfsheet, or rather
large quarto. The first was prefixed to the Leipsic edition of the Systema
Naturae, printed in 1748, and represents LINNAEUS, as we apprehend, in about
the fortieth year of his age; another, to the second edition of the Species
Plantarum, in 1762; and the larger one to the sixth edition of the Genera
Plantarum, in 1764. In the first and the last of these, which are by much the
better engravings, he is figured in an undress, resting upon a volume of the
Systema, and holding in his hand a sprig of the LINNAEA, a plant so called by
Dr. Gronovius, in honor of his name. In that of 1762, he is represented in a
full dress, with the insignia of the Order of the Polar Star at his breast, and
Aurivillius's inscription underneath: "Hic ille est, cui regna volens natura
reclusit,
"Quamque ulli dederat plura videnda dedit."


The Academy of Sciences at Stockholm have, at their own expense, directed that
an engraving of his portrait should be made at Paris, from an original picture
by the famous Swedish painter Roslin. There is a striking likeness also
exhibited on a large medallion, a'l'antique, of almost two feet in diameter, by
M. L'Archeveque. In England we have an elegant small medallion, fabricated by
those excellent artists Mess. Wedgwood and Bently. It represents LINNAEUS in
profile, when far advanced in years. The bust is white, upon a light-blue
ground, and the Linnaea placed at the breast. This is said, by all who knew the
professor, to bear the greatest likeness. We regret that it is not in our power
to describe the medals which were struck in honor of LINNAEUS by order of
several noblemen of the first distinction in Sweden, particularly that by Count
Tessin's direction, since that nobleman was among the first who discerned and
patronized the merit of our author, and ever bore to it the most public and
honorable testimony. This LINNAEUS has acknowledged in the warmest effusions
of gratitude.

It has been observed before, that the professor married the daughter of Dr.
More, the provincial physician of Dalekarlia, soon after he settled at
Stockholm, in 1739. This lady survived him; and he has left a son, named
Charles, and four daughters. The younger Linnaeus was demonstrator in the
botanical garden at Upsal, so early as the year 1762; having in that, and the
succeeding year, published two Decads of rare Plants, lately raised there,
accompanied with the figures. Not long after he was constituted joint professor
in the botanical chair with his father; and of late years entirely occupied
that department. Since the death of his father, we learn that he has obtained
some of his employments, particularly the professorship of the theory of
physic; and has resigned that of botany in favor of Dr. Thunberg. It has been
said, that he intends to publish a MANTISSA TERTIA, which his father left
nearly finished; also several collections of plants which had been sent to
LINNAEUS, not long before his death, from the Cape of Good Hope, and from
several other parts of the world.

Elizabeth Christina, one of the daughters of our author, made herself known to
the learned world, in 1762, by a discovery which was published in the Swedish
Acts of the same year. It related to a curious, and before quite unobserved
appearance, in the flowers of the Indian Cresses, (Tropaeolum majus) which she
had perceived to emit spontaneously, at certain intervals, sparks like those of
electricity, or rather such as arise from a fulminating powder. This was only
visible in the dusk of the evenings, and ceased when total darkness came on.
She had shown this singular appearance to her father, and other philosophers,
particularly to Mr. Wilcke, a celebrated electrician, who was inclined to
believe that it was an electrical phenomenon.

A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE AMOENITATES ACADEMICAE.
THE collection known under this title consists of seven volumes in 8vo, and
contains 150 theses. It is supposed the first volume was not originally
collected by LINNAEUS himself; but he at least reprinted it very early, and,
that he might not be defrauded of the advantage of these publications, became
the editor of all the succeeding volumes. Something has been said relating to
this collection in the course of these memoirs; to which we have only to add,
that we beg the reader to regard the following pages, as little more than an
enlarged table of contents, intended only to excite a due attention to this
part of LINNAEUS'S works, which the compiler presumes to be less known than it
deserves; and at the same time to entreat him to consider, that it is
impossible, by means of any abridgment, to give an adequate idea of that merit,
and excellent arrangement of the subjects in these volumes, which cannot but
render them an agreeable and useful miscellany, and ornament to the library of
every naturalist, philosopher, and physician.

AMOENITATES ACADEMICAE. VOL. I. Holm. 1749. pp. 610.
1. BETULA NANA. L. M. Klase. 1743.
In this dissertation is exhibited a complete history, accompanied with a
figure, of the Betula (nana) foliis orbiculatis crenatis. Spec. Plant. pp.
1394, or the Dwarf Birch, which clothes the Lapland alps in great quantities,
and is of signal use in the economy of the inhabitants of that arctic region.
The branches furnish them with their chief fuel, and the seeds are the food of
the ptarmigans, or white partridge, (Tetrao Lagopus, Syst. 274.) These birds,
being much esteemed, make a considerable part of the sustenance of the
inhabitants: great quantities are caught in the winter season, and sent to
different provinces. Before LINNAEUS made his Lapland expedition, this Birch
had been considered as a variety only of the common tree of that name; but its
distinct specific characters have since been established. This tree has within
these few years been added to the Flora Britannica, having been found in the
highlands of Scotland.

2. HISTORIA naturalis et medica FICUS. C. Hegardt. 1744.
From the earliest times, the cultivation of the fig tree has been an important
object in all the oriental countries. In this dissertation we are presented
with a history of this genus, of which the writer has enumerated 22 species:
LINNAEUS has however greatly reduced this number, in his Species Plantarum,
since many are varieties effected by culture. That part of the history of this
tree, which for many ages was so enigmatical, and which nothing but the
doctrine of the sexes of plants has completely cleared up, namely the husbandry
or caprification, as it is called, is more particularly worthy of attention,
not only as a singular phenomenon in itself, but as it has furnished one of the
most convincing proofs of the reality of the sexes of plants. Our limits will
not allow us to detail this subject; in brief it is this: -- It is now known,
that the flowers of the fig tree are situated within a pulpy receptacle, which
we call the Fig, or fruit of this tree; of these receptacles, in the wild
fig tree, some have male flowers only, and others have male and female, both
distinct, though placed in the same receptacle. In the garden, or cultivated
fig, these are found to contain only female flowers; which are fecundated by
means of a kind of gnat, (Cynips Psenes, Syst. Not. 919.) bred in the fruit of
the wild fig trees, which pierces that of the cultivated, in order to deposit
its eggs within; at the same time diffusing within the receptacle the farina of
the male flowers. Without this operation the fruit may ripen, but no effective
seeds are produced: hence the garden fig can only be propagated by layers and
cuttings, in these countries, where the wild fig is not known. The process of
thus ripening the fruit, in the oriental countries, is not left to nature, but
is managed with great art, and different degrees of dexterity, so as to reward
the skilful husbandman with a much larger increase of fruit than would
otherwise be produced. A tree of the same size, which, in Provence, where
caprification is not practiced, may produce about 25 pounds of fruit, will, by
that art, in the Grecian islands, bring ten times that quantity.

3. DISSERTATIO de PELORIA. D. Rudberg. 1744.
A description, with the figure, of a very extraordinary variety of the common
yellow Toad Flax, (Antirrhinum Linaria, Sp. Pl. 858.) which was found in
several parts of Sweden, and since in Germany, and engaged the attention of the
botanists very greatly at the time. Indeed its variation is uncommonly
singular. The flower, instead of the ringent, tetrandrous flower of the
Linaria, with a single, corniculated Nectarium, was found with a regular,
monopetalous, pentandrous tube, from the base of which proceeded five Nectaria;
yet, uncommon as this proved, LINNAEUS discovered it to be no other than a
monster, or hybrid plant, sprung from the Linaria, though it does not appear to
this day that its origin on the other side has been sufficiently ascertained.
The habit of the plant, and its sensible quality, agree with those of the
Linaria.

4. De CORALLIIS BALTICIS. H. Fougt. 1745.
In this tract the author, after having traced the history of Corals from the
remotest period of natural history, and considered the several theories that
have at different times prevailed relating to the production of these bodies,
acquiesces in the modern one, which ascribes their formation to Polypes, and
which the late Mr. Ellis, and several other writers, have much confirmed and
illustrated. He then gives a copious description of twenty species, all found
in the Baltic; of which an excellent engraving is subjoined. These bodies are
found in immense masses in some parts of this sea: on the coast of Gothland
there are strata of corals extending through tracts of several miles.

5. AMPHIBIA GYLLENBORGIANA. B. R. Have. 1745.
A detailed description of 24 species of animals, all of the Amphibia class,
which were presented by Count Gyllenborg to the university of Upsal, of which
he was at that time chancellor; and to which he had been a munificent patron,
having interested himself, in procuring to be built and furnished, an
astronomical observatory; in restoring to a state of usefulness the botanic
garden, which had been in ruins for many years; in causing stoves to be
erected, and a house built for the demonstrator: and finally, in having
presented to the university his own museum, collected at a great expense, and
consisting of rare amphibia, insects, corals, minerals, and moreover of many
elegant works of art.

In this tract is exhibited the first specimen of LINNAEUS'S method of
zoological description at large; as also the first attempt to form the specific
character of the Serpents ORDER, from the different number of the rings and
scales of the body and tail, taken conjointly. Former authors generally had
recourse to color alone in distinguishing these animals, which was found at
length to be too unstable, and had given rise to a most enormous multiplication
of the species. This mode of distinction has been since adopted by others, and
is retained in the Systema Naturae.

6. PLANTAE MARTINO-BURSERIANAE. R. Martin. 1745.
J. Burser, a most diligent disciple and friend of Caspar Bauhine, and
afterward professor of physic at Sora, in the kingdom of Naples, who had
traveled almost all over Europe, and had particularly sought for rare plants
in the Alps, had collected in these journeys an Hortus Siccus, contained in 25
volumes, which, after various fates, was given by M. Coijet to the university
of Upsal. The purport of this tract is to illustrate the most rare plants
contained in this collection, and such particularly as were obscurely known to
the collector, and to add to these the specific names, according to the
principles of the Linnaean method: with this view 240 species are here
enumerated.

7. HORTUS UPSALIENSIS. S. Naucler. 1745.
Botanical gardens began to be founded in Europe, so early as the middle of the
sixteenth century: the first was that of Padua, in 1540. The garden of Upsal
was founded in 1657, by Charles Gustavus, under the direction of the elder
Rudbeck. How much this garden owes to LINNAEUS, we have already said, in the
account of the catalogue of plants published by himself in 1748. This history
of the ancient and modern state of the garden given by Naucler, contains a
variety of curious matter on the subject, and is illustrated with a ground-plot
and view of the garden; lists of the succulent plants and others; and, what is
more particularly acceptable, the lives of the Rudbecks, father and son, whose
literary fame is founded, not on botany alone, but on anatomy, and the
knowledge of antiquities.

8. De PASSIFLORA. J. G. Hallman. 1745.
A very methodical history of that beautiful and much-admired genus of plants,
which the Catholics, who first saw it in America, and from the fancied
resemblance of the cross which they perceived in the flower, called Passion
Flower; and which soon held a distinguished rank in the European gardens. M.
Hallman, after a chronological list of those writers, who first exhibited the
several species, from Peter Ciltza and Monardes, down to Dillenius, describes
at large 22 species, and gives their several synonyms, adding afterward a list
of many which are dubious. He subjoins the uses, which the natives of America
make of these plants, principally borrowed from Piso. The whole is ornamented,
and rendered much more useful, by a plate, on which are engraven different
views of the flower, and a figure of the leaf of each species.

The Passion Flower belongs to the gynandrous plants with five stamina, and the
number of species, as they now stand in the system, is augmented to 26, without
mentioning two others, described and figured as new, by M. Jacquin, who brought
them from Carthagena. All the Passion Flowers yet known are natives of the
warmer parts of America only, and not found in any other parts of the globe.

9. De ANANDRIA. E. Z. Tursen. 1745.
The history of a singular Siberian plant, which, during the time of flowering,
was found not to open the calix; and was called Anandria by professor
Siegesbeck, of Petersburgh, who had fancied that it was destitute of stamina,
and having declared himself a strenuous opposer of the sexual system, thought,
by the instance of this plant, to have overturned the whole doctrine of the
sexes of plants; having written a treatise, in which he had asserted, that the
stamina did not constitute the essential parts of the plant, and that the seed
would become fertile without the influence of the Pollen Antherarum. This plant
is syngenesious, and of that genus which we name Coltsfoot. It stands in the
System under the name of Tussilago (Anandria) scapo unifloro, subsquamoso
erecto, foliis lyrato-ovatis; and subsequent observations proved, that in a
warmer situation than its native one, the calix would open, and show a radiated
flower. The controversy, which was managed in behalf of LINNAEUS by Dr.
Gleditsch of Berlin, much extended the knowledge, and favored the
establishment of the Linnaean system, at that time unwillingly received by many
of the older botanists.

10. De ACROSTICO. J. B. Heiligtag. 1747.
A botanical dissertation on a genus of plants belonging to an extensive
natural order, placed in the Cryptogamia class, which we call Ferns; and which
were known to former botanists by the name of Epiphyllospermous plants, since
they chiefly produce their parts of fructification on the back of the leaf, or
frons. After some general observations on the plants constituting this order,
which have also been called Capillary plants, and showing the place they hold,
and their characters in the several systems of Ray, Morison, Tournefort, and
LINNAEUS, the writer proceeds to an ample description of the species of
Acrostica, of which he enumerates seventeen, with their synonyms. This genus is
distinguished by having the fructification spread all over the surface of the
leaf; and the number of species, in the last edition of the System, is
augmented to thirty. They are mostly of American produce, three only being
European, of which two are sparingly found in Britain. They are a singular set
of plants, and have much excited the attention of botanists. A plate
accompanies this tract, on which five of the uncommon species are delineated.

11. MUSEUM ADOLPHO FREDERICIANUM. L. Balk. 1746.
The subject of this paper is strictly zoological: It contains a particular
description of 65 of the rarer kinds of animals, which were presented to the
museum of the university by the late King Adolphus of Sweden, at that time
hereditary prince. These descriptions being drawn up with sufficient accuracy,
and regard to the rules of the Linnaean system, and referred to in the
subsequent zoology of LINNAEUS, yet retain their value. Amphibia, and Fishes,
form the greater part of this collection: among the former we mention
particularly an excellent description of the Chameleon, (Lacerta Chamaeleon,
Syst. 346.); of the Amphisboena Fuliginosa, Syst. 392; of the Crotalus
Horridus, or Rattle Snake: and among the latter, of the Torpedo, which has so
lately excited anew the attention of electricians, as also of that remarkable
fish called Soldigo by the Portuguese (Silurus Callichthys, Syst. 506.) which
Marcgrave and Piso say will travel in dry seasons across the land from rivulet
to rivulet in quest of water. Two copper plates accompany this tract.

12. SPONSALIA PLANTARUM. J. G. Wahlbom. 1746.
Whoever would see all the arguments for, and the result of, those experiments,
on which the doctrine of the sexes of plants is founded, are referred to this
dissertation; as containing, by fat, the most clear, comprehensive, and yet
copious view of that subject. It is professedly a commentary upon the 5th
chapter of LINNAEUS'S Fundamenta, or Philosophia Botanica, from section 132 to
150 inclusive, and contains 49 pages. It is out of our plan to produce any
detail of these arguments; suffice it to say, that although, from the writings
of Theophrastus and Pliny, we learn that the ancients had some idea of an
analogy in this respect, between the animal and vegetable kingdom, drawn
perhaps principally from the artificial mode of foecundating the date-tree,
yet, so crude and erroneous were their ideas, that in many instances they
called those plants male or female, which modern discoveries have taught us are
exactly the reverse. Indeed it does not appear, that any very precise ideas on
this subject were established till late in the last century; and, were it a
matter of importance to determine to whom applause is due for this discovery,
the English might perhaps with justice claim this honor, and bestow it on Sir
Thomas Millington, Savilian professor, who appears to have been the first that
gave the hint to Dr. Grew; since whose time this doctrine has received so much
light, that we presume few people can now doubt the following position, which
briefly contains the whole of what is understood now by this analogy; namely,
That the influence of the farina from the antherae of flowers upon the stigma,
is essentially necessary to give fertility to the seed. If there are any who
yet wish to see what arguments may be adduced against this doctrine, they are
referred to the Anthologia of Pontedera, and to the late Dr. Alston's
Dissertation on Botany. It has been before observed, that LINNAEUS was
honored with a premium from the Royal Academy of Sciences at Petersburgh, for
his excellent Treatise on the Sponsalia Plantarum, in which he is thought to
have most irrefragably proved his position.

13. NOVA PLANTARUM GENERA. C. M. Dassow. 1747.
In this paper are described and established the natural characters of 43 new
genera, all which were afterward taken into the 5th edition of the Genera
Plantarum of LINNAEUS, published in 1754.

14. VIRES PLANTARUM. F. Hasselquist. 1747.
Practical physicians have wished, and some have formed the idea that it is
possible, to deduce the virtues of plants from their agreement in similar
characters of fructification, in habit or agreement in natural orders, or
classes. Mr. Petiver, long since, was among the first that hazarded some
reflections on this subject: see Philosophical Transactions, No 255, and
Lowthorp's Abridgment, vol. ii. p. 704. And the very eminent Dr. HOFFMANN has a
professed dissertation on it, in the fifth volume of his works, p. 58. It is
the intention of the present paper, written by this ingenious but unfortunate
disciple of LINNAEUS, to extend and illustrate the same idea, by this
commentary on the 12th chapter of the Philosophia Botanica; which contains the
general doctrine of this attempt, and an enumeration of those natural or
artificial orders in botany, which are supposed to illustrate and confirm the
possibility of attaining this desirable end. To mention a few instances of this
agreement in character and qualities: The stellated class, in Ray's system, are
mostly diuretics; the asperifoliae, are chiefly demulcents; the umbelliferous
plants, which grow in dry places, are aromatics, particularly the roots and
seeds; but if growing in wet situations, usually partake more or less of a
deleterious quality. The Icosandrous plants of LINNAEUS abound with pulpy and
esculent fruits: the Polyandrous are many of them poisonous: the Syngenesious,
in frequent instances, intense bitters, etc. It most not be concealed, however,
that there are not wanting those who consider both the natural method in
botany, and the deduction of the virtues of simples from these congruities, as
the philosopher's stone of the science; notwithstanding which, there is no
attempt in the improvement of botany, or its true application to the uses of
physic, which ought more strenuously and unremittingly to be pursued, than that
of bringing to all possible perfection the purpose of this dissertation.

15. De CHRYSTALLORUM GENERATIONE. M. Kahler. 1747.
In this tract is discussed at large, that opinion which LINNAEUS early
imbibed, and which led him to ascribe to the operation of one and the same
principle, the regular polyedrous figure of all those bodies, called Chrystals,
acting upon them during their suspension in an aqueous menstruum; and this he
conceived to be equally the case, whether these bodies are what we usually call
saline, or whether they are lapidose, pyriticose, or arsenical; or finally,
whether they are such as are termed metallic salts. Hence arose his arrangement
of figured Spars, Selenite, quartzose Chrystals, including all the gems under
that genus of salt, to which their agreement in figure entitled them to a
place. This opinion gave so much offense to mineralogists, that, most probably,
it rendered his System in the mineral kingdom, much less acceptable than the
other parts of that work had been. In this paper lapidose chrystals only are
considered; many of which are figured, and described, and referred to the
several salts with which they agree in figure. LINNAEUS'S idea on this subject
has been lately taken up, and pursued in a very extensive manner, by M. de Rome
de Lisle, in an Essay printed at Paris, in 1772. It must be confessed, however,
that the greatest difficulties attend the solution of this matter: how far the
further consideration of the volcanic system, which is gaining ground in the
minds of some philosophers and mineralogists, may elucidate the origin of
certain figured bodies, which are said to have a chrystalline or vitreous
basis, time only must show; hitherto it seems to bid fairer toward solving
some difficulties, than any foregoing hypothesis.

16. SURINAMENSIA GRILLIANA. P. Sund. 1748.
The description at large of 25 subjects of the animal kingdom, chiefly
Serpents, collected at Surinam by Mr. Gerret, famous for being among the first
who introduced, and successfully cultivated, coffee in America, and who sent
these curiosities to M. Grill, an opulent citizen of Stockholm, by which means
they came finally into the museum of Upsal. We here meet with an excellent
account of the Rattle-snake; and particularly a description and figure of the
Boa Constrictor, that gigantic serpent, of which we have such copious and
astonishing accounts in Adanson, Piso, Kaempfer, and others. The plate also
presents a figure of the Coecilia Tentaculata, Syst. 293; of the Coluber
Ammodytes, Syst. 376; and of the Egyptian Locust, Gryllus Cristatus, Syst. 699.
all which are amply described.

17. FLORA OECONOMICA. E. Aspelin. 1748.
There is scarcely any morsel in this collection more worthy of regard, or that
has a more useful tendency, than this paper; which is intended to display, and
really contains, in a compendious way, the uses of the indigenous plants of
Sweden, whether in Agriculture, rural Economy in general, in the Arts, or in
culinary uses. It does not profess to deliver their medicinal qualities, that
not being a part of the plan. The plants are enumerated in the order in which
they are found in the Flora Suecica, but no botanical distinctions or
disquisitions are here introduced. We have no work on this plan extant in
England, and are persuaded that something of this kind, on a more extended
scale, written in the language of the country, and adapted to common use, could
not fail to meet with a favorable reception, and would certainly be highly
beneficial, not only by disclosing matter of real and instant information to
many who are ignorant of the various applications that have already been made
of plants which are daily neglected, but, by exciting a spirit of investigation
in general, would doubtless lead to new discoveries. An economical Flora, or
Herbal, is what we have never yet seen; our works that bear the name of Herbals
treat on plants and trees, as if their utility was alone confined to the
purposes of physic, and even here, in a variety of instances, attribute to them
virtues which neither their sensible qualities have justified, nor experience
has ascertained.

We have observed that this work is confined to the native plants of the
country, out of which, as an instance of the variety of subjects that are here
mentioned as objects of economy in various ways, there are not less than three
hundred that have a place in this catalogue.

18. De CURIOSITATE NATURALI. O. Soderberg, 1748.
This concluding paper of the first volume, is a discourse intended as an
incitement to the study of natural history, by a train of well-connected
arguments and observations, drawn from that admirable display of wisdom and
goodness manifest throughout all nature; and from its dignity and importance,
as so immediately connected with utility to mankind: from all which
considerations, the author thinks it entitled to one of the most distinguished
ranks among the objects of human enquiry; and that, so far from being a
frivolous pursuit, it is in every view one of the worthiest employments of the
human mind.

AMOENITATES ACADEMICAE. VOL. II. 1752. pp. 468.
19. OECONOMIA NATURAE. J. J. Biberg. 1749.
It is impossible in an abstract to do any proper justice to this excellent
production; the design of which is entirely physico-theological, and
consequently its scope is various and extensive. The writer first considers, in
general, the Structure of the Earth, its seas, mountains, etc. and the effects
of the change of seasons on all parts of its surface, and on the elements: the
disposition of the Fossil Kingdom, and the various origin of its several
bodies, with their gradual transmutation; from whence, in many instances, arise
their different denominations with us: in the Vegetable Kingdom, the various
means by which the dissemination of seeds is effected, thereby clothing in
every climate the whole surface of the earth, and conducing to the preservation
of animals: in the Animal Kingdom itself, the extraordinary increase of some,
the paucity of others; their means of preservation, and their use, even in
their destruction* to the general economy of nature: all these positions he has
illustrated and confirmed by apt examples, and finally draws this conclusion --
that all nature is most harmoniously arranged, and adapted to produce, upon the
whole, reciprocal good. This paper is among those translated by Mr.
Stillingfleet.

20. De TAENIA. G. Dubois. 1748.
At the time this treatise was written, the subject had more than usually
engaged the attention of the Swedish naturalists and physicians, and
particularly of LINNAEUS, and his colleague Dr. Rosen, the family of the latter
having suffered much from this dangerous animal, as appears by his treatise on
the Diseases of Children, lately rendered into English by Dr. Sparmann.

The author has here described and figured four species, all of which are found
in the intestines of animals, chiefly in those of carnivorous quadrupeds; and
unhappily two of these kinds, but more particularly the T. Solium, too
frequently infest the human body. The specific differences of the Taeniae arise
from the number and situation of the mouths or suckers in each link of this
compound animal, the history of which has employed the pens of many ingenious
men, and is notwithstanding yet involved in considerable obscurity.

The Tape-worms most commonly infesting the human body, are those described by
LINNAEUS under the names of Taenia Solium, and Taenia Vulgaris, Syst. Not. p.
1323, both of which are not unfrequently found extended from the duodenum,
almost through the whole tract of the intestines. Much controversy has been
spent in determining whether these animals have any part that is analogous to
the brain or head in other animals; our author affirms the contrary,
considering them as compound animals, consisting as it were of a chain, every
link of which is a perfect animal, furnished with a mouth, and all its proper
organs, and capable, when separated from its original chain, of propagating its
species, as if by a vegetative power, and independent of any oviparous or
viviparous process. In this idea he is opposed by Dr. Tyson, who has figured
the head of the Taenia Solium in the Philosophical Transactions; (see No 147,
and Lowthrop's Abridgment, Vol. iii. p. 130;) as also by Pallas, in his
Elenchus Zoophytorum, and by some other authors. The Vermes Cucurbitini, or
gourdworms of foregoing writers, are now however allowed to be the descending
or posterior links of the Taenia Solium, and these, according to LINNAEUS, are
again capable of extending themselves, and producing another chain. According
to Pallas, and others, these joints are pregnant with ova. In either case the
reason is at once seen why these noxious creatures are with such difficulty
expelled from the human body. LINNAEUS however does not deny that they are
capable of propagation by ova too; and says, they are found, though much
smaller, in muddy springs; to which Pallas with difficulty assents. LINNAEUS'S
opinion however is confirmed by subsequent observations; and indeed we cannot
but observe, that without allowing them to exist elsewhere than in the
intestines of animals, it is exceedingly difficult to account for the locality
of the disease arising from these worms.

We cannot enlarge on this treatise consistent with our plan; it must be
sufficient to observe, that this dissertation, besides being in itself highly
satisfactory, may be considered as an index also to those writers that are most
worthy of being consulted on the same subject.

21. LIGNUM COLUBRINUM. J. A. Darelius. 1749.
This is a critical enquiry to determine the species of that drug called Lignum
Colubrinum, which it is said the Indian Ichneumon, Weesel, or Mungos, (Viverra
Ichneumon, b. Lin. Syst. 63.) first pointed out to the Indians. This wood the
Zeylanese use as an antidote to the poison of the Hooded Serpent, or Naja,
called also Cobra de Capello; (Coluber Naja, Syst. 382.) of which Kaempfer has
given so extensive an history, as the most poisonous of all serpents. Darelius
prefixes to his enquiry the history of both these animals, of which too many
mavelous things have been related: he then examines into the pretensions of
that drug, which had usually been sold in Europe under the name of Lignum
Colubrinum, (see Dale's Pharmacolog. p. 358.) which is the Strychnos Colubrina,
Spec. Plant. 271. and rejects its claim, inclining at length to bestow it on
the plant described by Kaempfer, under the name of Radix Mungo, p. 557. This
plant was received into the System among the Pentandrous tribe, under the name
of Ophiorrhiza Mungos, and is figured in the Materia Medica of our author. The
root is exhibited in India and in Zeylon, not only as an antidote against the
venom of this serpent, but against the bite of the mad dog, as also in putrid
fevers. Grimmius, who lived long as a physician at Columbo, in Zeylon,
professes to have made great use of it. Our author subjoins several
preparations from this simple, and, from Lockner, presents us with the formula
of the famous Lapis de Goa, in which the Mungos root stands as the first
ingredient. He concludes with an enquiry into the effects of the spurious drug
of this name, the result of which sufficiently agrees with what is related of
the Nux Vomica, to which genus it is referred according to the sexual system.

22. RADIX SENEGA. J. Kiernander. 1749.
As the terror of the Naja is dispelled, in Asia, by the Ophiorrhiza, so is
that of the Rattle-Snake, in America, by the Senega. After premising the
history of the Rattle-Snake, (Crotalus Horridus, Syst. 372.) chiefly borrowed
from Catesby, Dr. Kiernander gives a full botanical and medical history of this
famous plant, which for so long a time the Indians concealed from the
Europeans. The author then recites ten different vegetables, of which the
Europeans, during their endeavors to come at the true Rattle-Snake root, tried
the effects against this subtle venom. Some of these are said to have been not
quite unavailing: at length Dr. Tennent discovered the secret, and found the
plant to be a species of Milkwort, which stands now in LINNAEUS'S works under
the name of Polygala Senega, (Spec. Pl. 990.) and of this genus there are not
fewer than 26 species known. The description of the Senega is accompanied by a
figure of the plant. The root, which is the part alone used in medicine,
affords an acrimony on the palate, perhaps unexampled in the whole Materia
Medica. The author gives the analysis of the root, enumerates its effects as a
sialagogue, diuretic, and expectorant; the various preparations, and their use
in inflammatory diseases, dropsy, gout, rheumatism; in a disease which he
mentions as endemic in Virginia, under the name of Marasmus Virginicus, and
finally as the great specific to the venom of the rattle-snake; to which end
the Indians instantly chew it, swallow the juice, and apply the masticated root
to the puncture. The root of the Polygala vulgaris, which grows so plentifully
in England, appears from experiments to possess the qualities of the Senega,
but in a far weaker degree.

23. GENESIS CALCULI. J. O. Hagstrom. 1749.
Before Dr. Hagstrom comes to the immediate consideration of the origin of the
Calculus of the urinary bladder, he premifes some observations on calcareous
substances in general; and enumerates the several kinds of calculous
concretions, and their situations in the animal body: such are the Calcular
Urinae; Salivae; Pulmonum; Gastricus; Fellis; and the Calculus Podagrae. He
then consisiders the component parts of that Faex Chyli, or Lixivium, the
Urine, and the changes to which it is liable, in smell, taste, and color, by
the different ingesta; under which article he mentions a singular fact of a
gentleman, who after having labored under an inveterate acidity at the
stomach, for which he had taken large quantities of chalk, found his urine
altered so as to have entirely a milky appearance. In considering the immediate
generation of the Calculus, he adopts the Boerhaavian theory, and ascribes it
to chrystallization: this leads him to consider all those circumstances which
favor and accelerate this mode of concreting, and to seek for somewhat
analogous thereto in the human body, as predisposing causes to this malady;
which he finds in Atonia, and the use of acid and fermented liquors. He
finishes the theory by some curious and apt reflections on the great analogy
between this disorder and the gout, and their transitions.

In the therapeutic part, notwithstanding all that had been written relating to
the power of alkaline medicines in dissolving the connecting gluten, and thus
promoting the decomposition of the Calculus, the author does not allow them so
much merit as has been attributed to them by many writers. He is inclined to
give more efficacy to bitters, particularly as Prophylactics, from the idea of
their striking more immediately at the Atonia; and adduces two examples,
communicated to him by the President LINNAEUS himself, of the use of the
Essentia Absinthii in this dreadful disease. This disquisition concludes with
an observation on a milk-diet in the stone and gout, the efficacy of which he
confirms by two well-adapted cases; which however, agreeably to foregoing
observations, prove the necessity, in the gout, of adhering to the regimen,
when once adopted, throughout life. One of these affords a melancholy lesson of
the danger of deserting it, in the case of a French general, who, after twenty
years freedom from the disease, at the age of 70, died in consequence of a fit
brought on by one plentiful meal of animal food.

24. GEMMAE ARBORUM. P. Loefling. 1749.
This gentleman, who afterward, at the recommendation of LINNAEUS, obtained a
pension as naturalist to the King of Spain, and died in his service in America,
has here given us a curious and elaborate disquisition on the Buds of trees, a
part in vegetables which, till this time, had been less attentively examined
than many others.

Gems or Buds are small rounded parts, made up of scales, differently arranged,
situated commonly on the stem, or branches of trees, and containing, in
epitome, the rudiments of either the future flower singly, the leaves singly,
or both flower and leaves. Analogous to the flower, and leafbearing Gem, which
is the most common, is a Bulb placed at the root of many plants, inasmuch as
both contain a future perfect plant, requiring only envelopement, by the genial
effect of heat. These Gems and Bulbs are called by LINNAEUS Hybernacula, as
enclosing the embryo during the winter, and the former are almost confined to
trees of the colder countries. After a requisite account of the subject in
general, Dr. Loefling exhibits a classification of the Gems of 108 species of
trees and shrubs, founded on the different structure and situation of the
various kinds. In consequence of this arrangement, the species of any of these
trees is supposed to be capable of being discovered in the winter season, and
state of defoliation, by the buds alone.

25. PAN SUECUS. N. L. Hesselgren. 1749.
The originality, and singular good tendency and design of this paper, induced
the writer of this volume, several years ago, to throw it into a form more
immediately adapted to an English reader, by referring to English authors, and
it was then laid before the public in the Gentleman's Magazine for the year
1758, accompanied with some notes and general observations. This has enabled
him to annex it, in a still more enlarged form, to this volume.

26. SPLACHNUM. L. Montin. 1750.
Mr. Montin, at the instance of LINNAEUS, had made an expedition the preceding
summer into Lapland, and, amongst other natural productions, had brought back
this curious and uncommon moss, and in this paper gives a complete botanical
history of its genus, called Splachnum, the first species of which, singular
for the elegant form of the heads, had been first discovered by an Englishman,
in Nonway, and communicated to Mr. Petiver. There are three others, of which a
less specious kind is not uncommon on our bogs in England.

Mr. Montin, in this journey, had an opportunity of confirming an opinion,
which LINNAEUS had before conceived, relating to the cause of a most
excruciating colic, to which the Laplanders are often subjected, and which he
describes very particularly in the Flora Lapponica, p. 69: when treating of the
Angelica, which, among other simples, is used as a remedy. Mr. Montin thinks it
clear, that it arises from swallowing in their waters the Gordius Aquaticus, a
species of worm described in the Fauna Suecica, No 2068, well known to Gesner,
and the older writers, under the name of Vitulus Aquaticus, and Seta Aquatica,
as being no thicker than a horse hair.

27. SEMINA MUSCORUM. P. J. Bergius. 1750.
Dr. Bergius, since professor of pharmacy and natural history at Stockholm,
has, in this tract, thrown considerable light on the fructification of the
second order of vegetables in the Cryptogamia class: much more however has been
done since the time he wrote, and it is now thought that the tribe of Mosses
have separate male and female flowers; the former of which usually stand on
long pedicles; the latter are as yet, in most genera, very obscurely
investigated: and LINNAEUS himself appears to be doubtful, whether the dust
which we observe in the heads of mosses, is the Pollen Antherarum, or the seeds
themselves.

28. MATERIA MEDICA E REGNO ANIMALI. K. J. Sidren. 1750.
This enumeration contains 67 subjects, and is executed exactly on the plan of
our author's Materia Medica e Plantis, of which we have before spoken.

29. PLANTAE CAMSCHATCENSES RARIORES. J. P. Halenius. 1750.
A description at large of 26 new Siberian plants, sent to LINNAEUS by Dr.
Gmelin, who had spent almost 10 years, by the command, and at the expense, of
the Empress of Russia, in investigating the natural history of that kingdom.
Amongst these, we may particularly remark that foetid plant, called Cimicifuga
foetida (Syst. Not. ii. 659,) so offensive, and even poisonous, to those
insects from which it receives its name. A decoction of this drastic herb is
used in Siberia (as Gmelin informs us, Flor. Sib. iv. p. 183.) with great
success in dropsies.

It is a curious remark which is suggested by our author, that in journeying
eastwards in Kamtchatka, the botanist sees his nearer approach toward North
America, by the habit of many of the plants; and hence arose a presumptive
proof of the vicinity of the two continents, before real discoveries had
confirmed the truth of it. The author has given a list of several plants, that
are actually the same as are found in North America.

30. SAPOR MEDICAMENTORUM. J. Rudberg. 1751.
After having premised some general observations on all the ancient sects of
physicians, and felicitated the present age on the rejection of all hypotheses
and opinions not supported by experiments; and considered the general
physiology of the human body, Dr. Roberg proceeds to his subject, which may be
regarded as a very instructive comment on the 363d Aphorism of the Philosophia
Botanica, "Sapida in fluida et solida agunt;" under which all vegetable simples
are arranged into eleven classes, founded on distinctions arising from their
sensible qualities, principally as they affect the taste, as follows: 1. Sicca.
2. Aquosa. 3. Viscosa. 4. Salsa. 5. Acida. 6. Styptica. 7. Dulcia. 8. Pinguia.
9. Amara. 10. Acria. 11. Nauseosa.
Under each of these heads respective simples are arranged, and the comment is
subjoined, explaining the mode of their action, and effects, both on the solids
and fluids; and frequently specifying the particular diseases in which they are
employed. A set of apt corollaries are added; and, upon the whole, this little
tract is by no means unworthy the attention of medical students in general, and
especially of those who wish to comprehend the Linnaean theory of physic.

To this volume of the Amoenitates are subjoined the three orations of
LINNAEUS, which, as they make part of his own proper works, have been spoken of
in the foregoing pages of this volume.

AMOENITATES ACADEMICAE. VOL. III. 1756. pp. 464.
31. NOVA PLANTARUM GENERA. L. J. Chenon. 1751.
Chiefly a description of new genera and species of plants, brought from North
America by Dr. Kalm, who had spent three years in that country. Previous to the
descriptions, we have a brief mention made of those who had treated upon the
plants of North America before Kalm. These were Cornutus, the first writer, in
1625; Banister, in Ray's history, 1680; Plukenet, in 1691; Bobart, in 1699;
Ray, in his supplement, 1704; Catesby, 1731; Gronovius, or rather Clayton,
1739; Dr. Mitchell, 1748; Governor Colden, 1743. By the industry of these
writers, botany had been augmented with 77 new genera, to which Kalm added
eight. As Dr. Kalm's plants are all now received into the System, any further
account of this paper is superseded. A plate is added, on which are engraven
seven of the rarer species.

32. PLANTAE HYBRIDAE. J. Haartman. 1751.
The subject of this paper is very intersting in botanic science; and being as
yet somewhat problematical, has exercised the pens of several ingenious men,
but of none perhaps more successfully than that of the late Dr. Gmelin, in his
Sermo academicus, de novorum vegetabilium ortu. Tubing, 1749. Mr. Haartman
allows the possibility of this origin or new creation of vegetables, arising
from the influence of the farina of one species upon the pistil of another,
either of the same or of a different genus, thus producing what is called a
Hybrid plant. Instances of this admixture, and production of monsters in the
vegetable kingdom, have been frequent; but, as in the animal kingdom, they have
not usually been found to perpetuate themselves by producing fertile seeds. The
general effect of culture, and the immense number of species, with which,
particularly, many of the African genera abound, such as the Geranium, Erica,
Mesembryanthemum, etc. very much favor this hypothesis. A catalogue is given
of 34 species of wellknown plants, supposed to have originated in this manner,
specifying those also from which they are suspected to have sprung; and a
comparison is made between the several parts and habit of each, with the
corresponding hybrid offspring, to show the probability of this origin. Another
list of many other plants follows, in which the traces are not so strongly
marked. Among the English indigenous plants, thought to have thus originated,
we mention the Veronica Hybrida, or Welsh Speedwell, which is believed to have
arisen from the Officinalis and the Spicata; as the Sibthorpia Europaea is from
the Golden Saxifrage, and Marsh Pennywort.

33. OBSTACULA MEDICINAE. J. G. Beyersten* 1752.
An enquiry into, and a brief discussion of, the causes that have hitherto
impeded the progress of physic. An ingenious and well-conducted plan, and most
laudable design, which all those who wish well to the art would desire to see
still farther illustrated, by some such character as would command attention,
and give the subject that importance which it demands. Among other obstacles,
the writer mentions -- the force of custom in directing prescription; theories
founded on hypotheses; neglect of nosology; too little attention to reputed
poisons; timid prescription; too small doses; ignorance of apothecaries in
botany, and the Materia Medica; use of compound medicines; ignorance of the
natural classes of plants; etc. -- all which positions are confirmed by
suitable reflections, and examples.

34. PLANTAE ESCULENTAE PATRIAE. J. Hiorth. 1752.
A list of such native plants of Sweden as have been, or in some way or other
may be, objects of culinary use, principally as aliments; to which are added
Condiments, and Succedanea, to several of those articles of exotic luxury,
which the opulent nations of Europe import from distant parts of the world. It
is happily not an object of importance, much less of necessity, to consult such
a catalogue in this nation; but it would be matter of pleasure and surprise to
many, to see the great number of vegetables, which, in a country from its
situation far from fertile, may supply the want of bread. The subjects of this
tract amount to 127, many of which would demand a place in an economical
herbal, adapted to a much milder climate.

35. EUPHORBIA. J. Wiman. 1752.
A complete botanical history of one of the most extensive genera of plants,
several of which have a place in the Materia Medica, which, in the Linnaean
system, stands in the Dodecandrous class, and furnishes greater instances of
anomalies in the habit of the species, than perhaps is elsewhere to be met
with; as it contains not only the Euphorbium, the Esula, and Cataputia of the
shops, but also all the Tithymali, or Spurges, of authors. Fifty-three species
are described in this dissertation, and their synonyms delivered, together with
a general account of their uses in physic. In the Species Plantarum this genus
is augmented to the number of 62 kinds, to which probably more might be added
from Burman's Flora Indica. At this day, the Euphorbia are but little used;
internally, scarcely ever: their extreme acrimony, and drastic powers, being
too unmanageable.

36. MATERIA MEDICA E REGNO LAPIDEO. J. Lindhult. 1752.
Under 72 heads, Dr. Lindhult has comprised all the simples of the Materia
Medica from the fossil kingdom, digested exactly in the method observed by
LINNAEUS himself, in his separate publication of the vegetable Materia Medica.

37. MORBI EX HYEME. S. Brodd. 1752.
Preceding the history of the diseases arising from winter cold in Sweden, Dr.
Brodd gives a general account of the effects of intense cold on the animals of
the country, in changing their color, diminishing the size of the breed in
various species; and in Lapland, he thinks it is instanced in the human race
itself: the state of the atmosphere; the production of meteors; differences
observable in the particles of the snow; effects of various and additional
degrees of cold on the ice of lakes, etc.; extraordinary appearance of the
Aurora Borealis; prognostics of severe winters; and signs of the approaching
remissions of cold; with other curious particulars.

The diseases of the winter season in Sweden are more particularly such as
follow: Perniones, or Kibes, unusually painful and untractable; for the cure,
among other applications mentioned, is the diluted marine acid, recommended by
LINNAEUS himself, who had found it useful among the sailors when he was
physician to the fleet; but this cannot be used when the disease is advanced to
its ulcerated state. Paronychia, or Whitlow, of various kinds, very frequent,
and not seldom attended with dangerous consequences. Congestio Hyemalis, a
species of Catarrh extremely common, and the source of worse diiseases, usually
arising from sudden transitions from heat to cold, and incautious exposure to
the latter: observations on this disorder from the Iter Westro-gothicum of
LINNAEUS. Coughs, universal, sometimes to the entire disturbance of all public
assemblies. Pleurisies, especially among the country people, who indulge in
strong liquors. Peripneumonies, particularly considered as endemic with the
inhabitants about the copper mines. The tract concludes with a compendious view
of the effects of cold, and the phenomenon of winter season, in a set of
corollaries, and a mention of the hard winters in Europe, in 1586, 1665, 1684,
1709, 1740, 1752. In the latter, the lowest point of the thermometer, at Upsal,
was 31 of Celsius's, equal to about 24 below 0 in Fahrenheit.

38. ODORES MEDICAMENTORUM. A. Wahlin. 1752.
An ingenious illustration of the doctrine, which teaches, that those different
sensations excited in the organs of smell by different odours, will lead to the
explanation of the qualities inherent in such bodies; and that from thence they
may be classed, and their general effects on the human body deduced. After a
train of general explanatory and physiological observations, Mr. Wablin
introduces Sir Francis Bacon's contrast between youth and old age, in order
more clearly to illustrate (which he does in a familiar, but striking manner)
the effects of wine and spirituous liquors in their various and progressive
operation on the nervous system, from their first exhilarating effect in a
moderate quantity, to their intoxicating and fatal issue. This he makes, in
some measure, the basis of his reasoning on the effects of other odorous
substances, which he at length arranges into seven classes.

1. Aromatici. Cinnamon; Seeds of Amomum, etc. 2. Fragrantes. Saffron; Jasmin
Flowers, etc. 3. Ambrosiaci. Musk; Musk Crainsbill, etc. 4. Alliacei. Garlic;
Assa Foetida, etc. 5. Hircini. Herb Robert; Stinking Orach. 6. Tetri. Opium;
Henbane; Corianders. 7. Nauseosi. White and black Hellebore; Tobacco.
The specific effects of each of these classes are then briefly explained, and
their reputed mode of operation. This paper may be considered as a comment on
section 362 of the Philosophia, and properly accompanies the Sapor
Medicamentorum, beforementioned.

39. NOCTILUCA MARINA. C. F. Adler. 1752.
Mr. Adler, who went as surgeon in a Swedish East India ship to China, in 1748,
first gives an account of those authors who have treated on the luminous
appearance of the sea water in storms, and in the current occasioned by the
course of ships; and then proceeds to inform us, that it was not till the year
1749, that this phenomenon was certainly discovered to be owing, at least in
many parts of the ocean, to an inconceivable number of minute insects. One of
these is the subject of this paper, and is completely described, and a figure
given, as augmented by the microscope. It is of the Vermes class, and the
Mollusca order, and stands in the System under the name of Nereis Noctiluca, p.
1085, being the first of eleven species there described. Its real length does
not exceed the 6th part of an inch.

Later writers have thrown more light on this discovery, by exhibiting a great
variety of these living Phosphori.

40. RHABARBARUM. S. Ziervogel. 1752.
A botanical and medical history of the Rheum Undulatum, Sp. Pl. 531. described
here under the idea of its being the true Rhubarb, having been sent from Russia
as such by Professor Gerber to Consul Sprekelsen at Hamburgh, and by him
introduced into many gardens. The medical history therefore of this plant must
be transferred to the Rheum Palmatum, which is now generally believed to be the
true Rhubarb, of which a description and figure may be seen in the Phil. Trans.
vol. lv. p. 290. communicated by Dr. HOPE, professor of botany at Edinburgh,
who raised it from seeds sent him by Dr. Mounsey, in 1763, and under whose
culture the plant has greatly thriven, and yielded large quantities of good
Rhubarb. Mr. Pennant has told us, in his late Tour, that the Duke of Athol has
produced it in great perfection, and probably, if particular interests did not
militate against it, the importation of this root might soon become
unnecessary. It is not wonderful that the former plant should have been taken
for the true Rhubarb, as both grow in China, and about the famous wall.

41. CUI BONO? C. Gedner. 1752.
To what purpose are all the researches of the naturalist? A question which
only ignorance or incuriosity can dictate. We will not pay our readers so ill a
compliment, as to suppose they need the conviction here referred to.
Nevertheless, if there are any who wish to see what reasons may be alleged by
the naturalist, against those who object the frivolousness and inutility of his
researches, they will most probably receive some satisfaction from an attentive
consideration of this paper, which is incapable of abridgment, and may be
properly read with the 18th, Curicsitas Naturalis, and 20th Oeconomia Naturae.
The author has introduced a pleasant and instructive allegory, which LINNAEUS
himself was wont to use on these occasions.

42. NUTRIX NOVERCA. F. Lindberg. 1752.
This tract is very recommendable, as containing a compendious view of every
material argument that has been urged to prove the propriety and advantage of
mothers nursing their infants at their own breast. Several observations on the
diseases of children are interspersed, and some local observations, which lose
their force in this country.

This subject has been so ably discussed by several masterly pens in this
kingdom, that we shall only observe, respecting the present tract, that Dr.
Lindberg allows more force, than some of our own writers, to those arguments
which admit of diseases and temperaments being transmissible from nurses to
their foster-children.

43. HOSPITA INSECTORUM FLORA. J. G. Forsskahl. 1752.
The author of this paper begins by giving a general history of all the
material writers on Insects, and the method in which they have treated the
subject, whether in relation to the metamorphoses and economy principally, in
the manner of Swammerdam; or by giving a detail of the species at large also,
as Ray, Reaumur, and De Geer, have done. He then does due honor to the Queen
of Sweden, on account of the magnificent museum which her majesty had
constructed at the palace of Drottningholm, which is very superb in Insects,
Shells, Corals, and Chrystals, etc. He next exhibits his plan: it consists in
arranging all such insects as are natives of Sweden, each under the plant on
which it is found, or on which it feeds; the references being made to the
Fauna, and Flora Suecica of LINNAEUS. It would be highly acceptable to those
who cultivate this branch of natural history, to see this arrangement augmented
by the numerous discoveries that have been made since the publication of this
tract, as it is a part of the history of insects not sufficiently attended to
before; and nothing would conduce more to extend and facilitate the knowledge
of it, or lead more effectually to the means of destroying the noxious species.

44. MIRACULA INSECTORUM. G. E. Avelin. 1752.
Intended to awaken curiosity, and excite attention to the study of insects, by
pointing out the extraordinary instincts and properties with which particular
kinds are endued; many of whose operations were inexplicable, and frequently
attributed to other causes.

Nothing exemplifies this truth more than the history of a minute insect, or
rather worm, of which we have, in this dissertation, the first proper
intelligence; it is very curious, and worthy of notice. In Finland, Bothnia,
and the northern provinces of Sweden, it was not unfrequently that people were
seized with a pungent pain, confined to a point, in the hand, or other exposed
part of the body, which presently increased to a most excruciating degree, has
sometimes been suddenly fatal. This disorder was more particularly observed in
Finland, especially about boggy and marshy places, and always in autumn. At
length it was discovered, that this pain instantly succeeded somewhat that
dropped out of the air* and in a moment penetrated and buried itself in the
flesh. The Finlanders had tried variety of applications to no purpose, until at
length a poultice of curds, or cheese, was found the most effectual in easing
the pain; and the event confirmed, that the insect was allured by this
application to leave the flesh; as on its removal, this worm, no longer than
the sixth of an inch, was found in it, and thus the cause of this painful
disease explained. LINNAEUS himself once suffered from this animal the effect
here spoken of: but we owe the complete history of it, and its place in the
System, to Dr. SOLANDER, who gave it in to the Royal Academy of Sciences at
Upsal. This worm stands in the System under the name of Furia Infernalis, p.
1325; but by what means this creature is raised into the air, is as yet unknown.

45. NOXA INSECTORUM. M. A. Baeckner. 1752.
A curious and useful paper, particularly specifying all those insects that are
more immediately hurtful to animals and vegetables. They are classed in eleven
divisions, according to the several subjects on which they prey, or to which
they bring devastation.

1. Such as are particularly offensive to man. Under this head, the author
seems inclined to favor that opinion which Mr. St. Andre, and some other
French physicians and philosophers have held, in ascribing to Acari the cause
of many cutaneous and contagious diseases.

2. Such as are destructive within doors, to furniture, clothes, grain, etc.
Among these is particularly mentioned the Seed Beetle, (Bruchus Pisi, Syst.
604.) the cause of great destruction to pease in Pensylvania, etc. and which
has found its way into southern Europe. See also Kalm's Travels, i. p. 176,
English edition.

3. To fruit-bearing trees and culinary herbs.

4. To trees, woods, stove and green-house plants.

5. To cornfieldsd, pastures, etc.

6. To horses, horned cattle, and other animals, etc.

The subjects of these three last papers are of great importance in rural
economy, and would come with all possible propriety into an Economical Herbal,
that should specify, in treating upon each plant, the species of insect which
inhabits or feeds on it.

46. VERNATIO ARBORUM. H. Barck. 1753.
A curious essay, perhaps the first on the subject, relating to the Leafing of
Trees in Sweden, being the result of a variety of observations, made at the
request of LINNAEUS himself, in almost all the provinces of that kingdom, and
intended to lead, as if by the dictates of nature, to the true time of
committing the grain to the earth. A table is exhibited, showing at one view
the days on which 19 species of trees, all natives of Sweden, put forth their
leaves in three successive years. The same table shows also the day on which
Barley was sown and reaped in all the same provinces. From another table it
appears, that at Pitha, which lies in about 63 degrees north, from the average
of 12 years, there intervene 85 days between the sowing of barley and its
harvest; and at Upsal, in 60 degrees, the average of six years turned out to be
105 days. It is concluded, upon the whole, that in Upland, the leafing of the
Birch-tree should direct the time for sowing barley; but, that different trees
will best indicate the time in different places. Another curious observation
follows from this paper: that, notwithstanding the difference in the number of
days between the ripening of barley in Lapland and in Upland, it will be found
that the greater length of days in the former country, gives a balance of sun
equal to the greater number of days in the latter.

47. INCREMENTA BOTANICES. J. Biuur. 1753.
A concise history of the rise, fate, and progress of botanic science, from the
first traces of it to the present time; divided into four periods or epochs.
The first includes only the ancients, by whom are understood Aristotle,
Theophrastus, Dioscorides, and Pliny; who, as compilers chiefly, did little but
deliver the tradition of the times; and whose plants, after the commentaries of
a century, cannot be known by their descriptions to this day, so little had
they extended their ideas to specific distinctions; yet we must venerate their
writings, as the only remains of this science transmitted to our times. The
second period commences with the restoration of letters, after the taking of
Constantinople by the Turks, beginning with Brunfelsius, and ending with the
Bauhines. The third, which is called the period of Systematics, is continued to
the time of LINNAEUS, who effected that great reformation in the whole science,
by which it is fixed as on a new basis. The conclusion of this paper contains
some information relating to the introduction of figures cut in wood for the
old herbals; whence it appears, that Plantin, the famous printer of Antwerp,
monopolized almost all the figures of this kind during his time, and became the
principal printer in his day for botanical books. By such means Norton, the
printer of Gerard's herbal, procured from Frankfort all the figures we see in
his book, which had before served for an edition of Tabernamontanus's herbal in
1588.

48. DEMONSTRATIONES PLANTARUM. J. G. Hojer. 1753.
Intended principally for the use of those pupils who attended the botanical
lectures in the Upsal garden, consisting chiefly of a list of the exotics
therein cultivated, as they stood in this year, amounting to near 1450 distinct
species, which, in 59 degrees. 51 min. N. latitude, is no inconsiderable number;
all double flowers and varieties being entirely excluded. After the invention
of trivial names, this list is the first specimen of the use of them in forming
compendious catalogues, and is at once an evidence of the utility of them.
There is an observation in this paper which may appear somewhat paradoxical to
some readers: several of the plants that are natives of southern Europe,
produced seeds this year, without showing any corolla; such were two Cisti,
etc. It may seem strange too that Lapland and alpine plants should perish in
the same situation through cold, but it is true; and the fact is, that in their
native situations, they are, at the change of season, instantly covered with
snow, and thus defended from injury.

49. HERBATIONES UPSALIENSES. A. N. Fornander. 1753.
As the foregoing catalogue comprehends those of the garden, this exhibits the
indigenous plants of the neighborhood of Upsal, as they occur in the simpling
excursions which the professor made with the botanical students, and were
usually performed in about eight days during the course of each summer.

50. INSTRUCTIO MUSEI. D. Hultman. 1753.
The method of constructing a museum for the purposes of natural history in all
its branches, with directions for collecting, preserving, and disposing the
subjects. An enumeration of the best repositories of this kind in Sweden: such
is that of the Queen, rich in shells, insects, and corals: that of the King, in
amphibia, fishes, animals of the Vermes class, in spirits; and the birds of
Sweden: that of Count Tessin, abounding in fossils and gems, shells, pictures,
etc.: that of Chancellor Gyllenborg: that belonging to the Royal Academy:
Stobaeus's at Lunden; and Ziervogel's at Stockholm. The method of drying and
preserving plants for an Hortus Siccus: those of former celebrated botanists
enumerated. A method, perhaps more curious than useful, of casting an
artificial plant, by forming a mould with plaster over a real plant placed in
a vessel, then burning the enclosed plant to ashes, which are to be shook out,
and the cavity filled with melted silver.

This little tract has been published in Holland, for the use of merchants who
deal in the subjects of natural history; and something of the same kind has
been lately done here.

AMOENITATES ACADEMICAE. VOL. IV. 1760. pp. 600.
51. PLANTAE OFFICINALES. N. Gahn. 1753.
The scope of this paper is entirely pharmaceutical; and howsoever it may be
superseded at present, it must have been very useful at the time of its
publication, having been drawn up for the benefit of the apothecaries in
Sweden, in consequence of some new regulations intended by the royal college of
physicians, under the presidentship of Dr. Boeck: and it was also highly
acceptable to others, as being probably the first list of the medicinal plants,
to which the Linnaean synonyms had been accommodated. This paper contains,

1. A catalogue of the vegetable simples of the Materia Medica, amounting to
near 580, specifying the parts of each used in medicine; to which is opposed
the Linnaean generical and trivial specific name, from the Species Plantarum;
marking also, by a different character, all such as the author thinks might be
expunged. Then follow directions for rightly gathering and preserving the
several plants, or such parts of each as are in use.

2. A list of such simples as grow spontaneously in Sweden; many of which had
needlessly been imported.

3. Lists of such as might advantageously be cultivated for medicinal purposes;
to which is finally added, a list of such drugs as are imported from the
several distant quarters of the globe.

52. CENSURA SIMPLICIUM. G. J. Carlbohm. 1753.
A very instructive paper, consisting, after some pertinent observations,
principally of two lists of simples: The first, such as the writer thinks might
without detriment be expunged from the Materia Medica. The second, such as
might advantageously be received into that catalogue; their virtues having been
sufficiently ascertained to justify such an introduction. To this latter, the
author has subjoined, under every article, the quality of the simple, and his
authority in general for allowing each its designed rank. A paper of this
tendency is not unworthy the observation of all those who would improve and
enrich the Materia Medica; and probably considerable additions might be made to
this list. We add the names of these simples.

Acmella. Actaeae radix. Alkannae rad. Baccae Norlandicae. Bella donna.
Britannica herb. Chamaemori baccae. Campescanum lign. Camphoratae herb.
Cassinae folia. Ceanothi rad. Collinsonia. Coridis herb. Conyzae herb. Cotulae
herb. Diervilla. Dulcamara. Elaterium album. Faba Ignatii. Fungus melitensis.
Galium luteum. Geum palustre. Hypocistis. Juglandis fruct. Lobeliae rad.
Lapathi sanguinei rad. Lauro-cerasi folia. Linum catharticum. Linnaeae herb.
Melissa canariensis. Mentha piperita. Monardae herb. Muscus caninus. Muscus
cumatilis. Myrti brabantici herb. Pedicularis. Peraguae folia. Phytolaccae suc.
Profluvii rad. Ribes nigrum. Sabadillae sem. Saponaria nuclei. Scrophulariae
aquat. h. Senegae rad. Serpentum rad. Sophora. Uvae Ursi fol. Vitis Idaeae bac.
Vulvariae herb.
53. CANIS FAMILIARIS. E. M. Lindecrantz. 1753.
This natural history of the Dog, was one of the first complete
exemplifications of zoological description, according to the principles of the
Linnaean school, as laid down in the Methodus Demonstrandi. The writer
considers the whole race as reducible to one species, and distinguished from
other congenerous animals, such as the wolf, fox, hyaena, etc. not only by the
curvature of the tail, which is usually to the left, but by the disposition of
the Suturae Velleris, or ridges formed by the meeting of the several courses of
hair on diverse parts of the body; and the number and situation of the Verrucae,
or* warty risings in the face. In these distinctions, heretofore unnoticed, all
the varieties of this animal agree. Eleven varieties of the dog-kind are here
specified, after which the properties and uses, together with the whole of the
economy of this faithful animal, are fully set forth, and his diseases
described. Our author tells us, that the Laplanders and Dalekarlians are in
possession of some secret by which they instantly disarm the most furious dog,
and oblige him to fly with all his usual signs of fear, becoming silent at
once, and dropping his tail. This art, however, is said not to be unknown in
England.

54. STATIONES PLANTARUM. A. Hedenberg. 1754.
The intention of this paper is to prove, that the knowledge of the Natale
Solum, the natural places of growth of plants, is the true foundation on which
the art of gardening successfully must be built. The author laments that
botanists and writers of Florae have been too remiss in their observations of
this kind; whence numbers of exotic seeds and plants have failed to produce
flowers, or to perpetuate themselves in gardens. He mentions a remarkable
instance in the Nitraria Schoberi, (Spec. Pl. 638.) which remained destitute of
flowers for 20 years in the Swedish gardens; at length LINNAEUS rendered it
fertile, by means of salt scattered about the roots. The knowledge of the
Stationes Plantarum is also equally useful to the practical botanist, in
assisting his researches.

Every plant has its natural situation and soil, in which alone it will thrive,
and out of which, in many instances, no care or culture will preserve it alive.
The knowledge of this axiom, as far as respects indigenous plants, is
applicable to purposes of agriculture, and with this view the author has given
an arrangement of the Swedish plants, divided into six classes, according to
their several places of growth, as follows: 1. Aquatics. 2. Alpine. 3.
Wood-plants. 4. Upland plants. 5. Mountainous. 6. Parasitic.
These are again subdivided; the aquatics, into marine, maritime, marsh, bog
plants, etc. after which follows the definition of the terms, explaining the
nature of these different soils and situations.

55. FLORA ANGLICA. J. O. Grufberg. 1754.
At the time of the publication of this paper, the Linnaean system of botany
had made but small progress in England; to such however as had adopted it, this
must have been a very acceptable present, as being the first arrangement, in
the Linnaean method, that had been given to the English plants; as also the
first of those compendious Florae* in which the newly-invented trivial names
had been exemplified, and which have since been much used, greatly to the
emolument of the science.

The author first discusses the utility of such local catalogues, and of
adhering to the trivial names: he then briefly describes the climate of
Britain, and its different soils and elevations, as favoring the growth of
particular plants; enumerating some of those which are peculiar to England; and
in what way those of Sweden differ from ours. He says Sweden abounds more in
alpine, upland, and wood*plants, than England, which excels in marine plants,
and such as affect a chalky soil, of which latter Sweden is almost destitute.

Having given due praise to the English botanists, and particularly to Mr. RAY,
he subjoins the catalogue; in which there is a reference from each Linnaean
name, to the plant as it stands in the last edition of Ray's Synopsis by
Dillenius. This Flora contains nearly a thousand plants, the Mosses and Fungi
not being introduced. Such as are not found in Sweden, are distinguished by the
Italic type, and of these there are nearly three hundred. A list of upwards of
an hundred, which the author could not investigate, concludes the whole.

56. HERBARIUM AMBOINENSE. O. Stickman. 1754.
The Herbarium Amboinense is one of the greatest and most magnificent botanic
treasures the world ever saw; and which we owe to the singular zeal and
industry of RUMPHIUS, who lived upwards of 40 years in Amboina, and was consul
there under the Dutch East India company. He sweetened the leisure hours of his
life by an uncommon and successful application to the study of natural history,
which he pursued in all its branches, but particularly in botany. He had the
misfortune to lose his family by the fatal earthquake of 1674; and some years
after, having collected his materials for this work, and meditated his return
to Europe, suffered the loss of his sight from a cataract, in which state he
lived 20 years, and died in 1706.

This work comprehends the plants of Amboina, Malacca, Banda, and the
neighboring islands; and, allowing for the time when it was written, contains
excellent descriptions of the several vegetables of the East Indies, with a
copious account of their uses; and though inferior to the Hortus Malabaricus as
to the engravings, excels it in the history of the subjects. There are nearly
one thousand vegetables described in this work, of which a great number were
entirely new to the European botanists: of this number upwards of seven hundred
are engraved.

The manuscript was 30 years in the possession of the Dutch East India company,
and was rescued from oblivion by the interest and extraordinary zeal of the
editor, Professor Burman, of Amsterdam; who, with great industry and skill, has
also extricated the synonyms as far as possible, and subjoined them to each
description. He began this publication in 1741, and finished it in 1750, in
seven volumes folio, except a small supplement, which was not published until
1757. In 1769, the editor rendered his work still more useful, by the
publication of an alphabetical index to these volumes, with the Linnaean
synonyms; together with a like one adapted to the Hortus Malabaricus.

The pupils of the Linnaean school much regretted, that the Herbarium
Amboinense had not been completed before the publication of LINNAEUS'S Species
Plantarum, that the synonyms might have been introduced. To remedy this defect
was the intention of Mr. Stickman's paper, in which the subjects are arranged
in the order of the original work, with the Linnaean name annexed to each; and
afterward, as many as could be extricated, are thrown into a Flora, according
to the Sexual system.

It is to our neighbors the Dutch that the botanists are obliged for two of
the most valuable performances that are yet extant in the history of foreign
vegetables: this of Rumphius, and the Hortus Malabaricus of Rheede. But we hope
that it will not be long before they will be more indebted to an illustrious
Englishman, who, in pursuit of the same object, has encountered the perils of a
circuit round this globe, for a work, which, from his taste, his liberality,
and zeal for the promotion of science, may be expected to surpass those
abovementioned, as well in extent, as in grandeur, and elegance of execution.

57. CERVUS TARANDUS. C. F. Hoffberg. 1754.
In this tract we have a complete history of the Reindeer, (Cervus Tarandus,
Syst. Not. p. 93.) an animal which almost solely constitutes the riches, not
only of the Laplander, but of the other arctic inhabitants of the globe. In
Lapland more particularly, the whole res pecuaria respects this animal, as it
is in that country in a more especial manner domesticated. In summer the
Reindeer feed on various herbs, but reject a considerable number that are
eaten by others. Of the particular species thus refused, the reader is
presented with a catalogue, from the experiments of a curious observer. In
winter, they are solely sustained by the Reindeer liverwort, (Lichen
Rangiferinus) or Coralline Moss, with which the alps of the north are covered.
The Reindeer are obnoxious to many diseases, which are all here distinctly
described, and particularly those arising from the Gad-fly, called after its
name, (Oestrus Tarandi, Syst. Not. 969.) which deposits its eggs on the back of
these animals, and in consequence of which immense numbers of the Deer perish
yearly. See also Flor. Lappon. p. 360.

58. OVIS. J. Palmaerus. 1754.
This dissertation contains the natural history of the Sheep, on the same plan
as that of the foregoing paper, and abounds with many curious observations. The
genus, species, and varieties are described, and many physiological
observations given. A list of those plants which the sheep does not eat,
amounting, from the experiments of the Pan Suecus, to upwards of 140 species;
some pointed out that are particularly grateful, of which number are the
Sheep's Fescue Grass, (Festuca Ovina, Sp. Pl. p. 108.) the Thlaspi Bursa
Pastoris, or Shepherd's Purse; and an enumeration of such as are highly noxious
and poisonous to this animal; such are, Corn Horsetail, (Equisetum Arvense;)
Spearwort, (Ranunculus Flammula;) Lancashire Asphodel, (Anthericum Ossifragum;)
Mouse-ear Scorpion-grass, (Myosotis Scorpioides b;) Wood Anemony, (Anemone
Nemorosa;) Dog's Mercury, (Mercurialis Perennis.)

In treating on the diseases of sheep, the author enquires particularly into
the Dropsy, or Rot, occasioned by worms in the liver, (Fasciola Hepatica, Syst.
p. 1077.) which he thinks are swallowed by the animal in marsh water; and
proposes salt as a preventive of their effects. [See the pathology of this
disease by Dr. Nicholls, in the Phil. Trans. vol. xlix. p. 247. We can only
add, that this paper cannot be less acceptable to naturalists, and lovers of
rural economy in England, than the foregoing to an intelligent Laplander.]

59. MUS PORCELLUS. J. J. Nauman. 1754.
A zoological tract relating to the animal usually with us called Guinea Pig,
the Indian Rabbet of the old authors, and the Cavia of the Brasilians; which
LINNAEUS ranks under the Murine genus, by the name of Mus Porcellus, Syst. p.
79.

The writer treats largely on the manners and whole economy of this little
restless quadruped: his observations are evidently the result of long
acquaintance and attention. He says they are delicate food.

60. HORTICULTURA ACADEMICA. J. G. Wollrath. 1754.
This paper is intimately connected with No 54, the Stationes Plantarum. It
exhibits a compendious system of the principles of gardening, particularly as
applicable to botanical or academic gardens. In the beginning it is laid down
as an axiom, "that the whole depends on a perfect knowledge of the climate of
each plant, and the soil in which it flourishes in its own climate." As a
striking instance of the necessity of paying regard to proper soil, and to
induce curious people who transmit seeds and plants to Europe, to be more
accurate in this particular, the writer mentions that of the Ricotia
Aegyptiaca, (Spec. Pl. p. 912.) which no management could bring to flower and
fruit, until LINNAEUS suggested mixing the Argilla Nilotica, the clay of the
Nile, with the earth in the pot, and which very soon fully succeeded.

The Linnaean terms applicable to the several kinds of gardens are defined, the
heat of the different climates ascertained by Celsius's thermometer, and the
various soils and situations proper to each enumerated.

61. CHINENSIA LAGERSTROMIANA. J. L. Odhelius. 1754.
At the time that LINNAEUS'S great patron, Count Tessin, was chancellor to the
King, and president of the Royal Academy of Sciences, he obtained, by the
concurrence also of M. Lagerstrom, then counselor of the chamber of commerce,
and director of the Swedish East India company, an order, that each ship should
be provided, at the expense of the Company, with a naturalist wholly devoted to
his proper pursuits. To this institution we owe the discoveries made by
Ternstrom, Toren, and Osbeck; and in consequence M. Lagerstrom, who was himself
a man of letters, and a friend to science, procured, at his own expense, a
great number of natural curiosities from China and the East Indies, which he
presented to the museum of the university at Upsal. Among these particularly
was a collection of the medicinal plants preserved in the apothecaries shops in
China; also a Chinese herbal, in 36 volumes in 8vo, of which two consist
entirely of figures.

The tract before us is a scientific description of more than 50 subjects of
natural history, chiefly birds and fishes, collected from China by M.
Lagerstrom. It is still of value, as being referred to from the System of our
author.

62. CENTURIA PLANTARUM. A. D. Juslenius. 1755.
63. CENTURIA II. PLANTARUM. E. Torner. 1756.
These tracts contain the descriptions of very rare, or heretofore undescribed
plants, sent to LINNAEUS from various parts of the world. Those described in
the second century were transmitted by Seguier from Verona; by Sauvages from
Montpelier; by Dr. Burman, who had received his from the Cape of Good Hope; and
some by Mr. Miller of Chelsea. The time elapsed since the publication of these
papers has not lessened the usefulness of them, since they are closely
connected with the Species Plantarum, are referred to in that work, and remain
as so many illustrations of the system of LINNAEUS.

64. SOMNUS PLANTARUM. P. Bremer. 1755.
The subject of this paper, at the time of its publication, excited the
attention of the curious throughout Europe. That nocturnal change to which
certain plants are liable, and which is here analogically called Sleep, is more
particularly manifested in those vegetables that are furnished with pinnated
leaves, and of these the Diadelphous class affords the greater number. The
change consists in the different position which the folioles, or small leaves,
assume in the nightime, from that which they exhibit by day. Slight notices
of this faculty are met with in the ancients; in this paper the observations
have been extended so far, as to take in upwards of 40 species, which are here
enumerated, and divided into ten classes, according to the differences
observable in the position of the leaves, during this sleeping state. The late
Dr. Hill, by a well-instituted set of experiments, fully confirmed the idea,
that this change was owing to the absence of light. His experiments were made
with the Abrus Precatorius, or scarlet Indian Pea, in which plant this change
had been observed by Prosper Alpinus, and in which it is remarkable.

[The novelty of this paper induced the author of this volume, soon after its
publication, to give the substance of it an English dress, and it was published
in the Gentleman's Magazine for the year 1757, p. 315; to which the English
reader, who wishes for further information, is referred.]

65. FUNGUS MELITENSIS. J. Pfeiffer. 1755.
This plant, notwithstanding the name it bears, is very far removed from the
Fungus tribe, since it produces perfectly distinct flowers, and belongs to the
Monandria order of the Monoecious class, and is called by LINNAEUS, Cynomorium
Coccineum, Sp. Pl. 1375. The Maltese Fungus is a parasitical plant, singular in
its form, which is little more than that of a simple stalk, about a finger's
thickness, and six or seven inches long, and in its state of fructification,
the whole plant may be considered as an Amentum, or Catkin. It is found on the
coast of Barbary, in Sicily, and sparingly in Malta, springing from the roots
of trees and shrubs, as does the Asarum Hypocistis, with which it also agrees
in its sensible qualities and effects, and is much esteemed, and used in the
countries above mentioned as an astringent medicine. The writer of this paper
gives us, from the Acta Bononiensia, a detail of experiments made with this and
several other subjects of the same class, to determine their comparative
astringent and antiseptic powers on the human blood; from the result of which,
he tells us, that the author was led to consider this simple as one of the
safest and most powerful astringents.

66. METAMORPHOSIS PLANTARUM. N. E. Dahlberg. 1755.
The subject of this paper will scarcely admit of an abridgment, agreeable to
our contracted plan. In order the more clearly to understand what the author
calls the Metamorphosis Plantarum, he delivers, in a brief way, the Linnaean
doctrine of the physiology of plants; which supposes, that the flower is no
other than the expansion or evolution of the trunk or stem, in the following
arrangement: namely, that the Cortex, or outer Bark, is ultimately spent in
forming the Perianthium, or Cup; the Liber, or inner Bark, in forming the
Corolla or Petal; the Lignum, or woody part, in forming the Stamina or Chives;
and the Medulla, or pithy part, in forming the Pistillum, or Pointal. Hence,
whatsoever causes can disturb the usual, natural, and regular expansion and
evolution of these parts, may be supposed to occasion great variety, and
changes in the appearance of plants; and that such effects are brought about by
change of climate, different soil, situation, air, culture, and perhaps various
other yet unknown causes, is certain. To these sources must be traced the
varieties we observe in the leaves, flowers, and roots, whether permanent, as
is the case in some instances, or not. This doctrine is here illustrated and
confirmed by numerous examples; and the young and inexperienced botanist is
guarded against the delusion, frequently occasioned by the operation of these
causes; which are very extensive in the vegetable creation.

67. CALENDARIUM FLORAE. A. M. Berger. 1756.
The Calendar of Flora is intended to exhibit the progress of the seasons, as
they are manif^sted by the times of the flowering of vegetables; which in each
species appears to be determined from some fixed law of nature; and from the
due observance of which, after a sufficient course of experiments had been
made, the author thinks, that the sowing of grain, and many other branches of
rural economy, dependent on the seasons, might, in every country, be better
regulated, than by the rules in common use. The tables in this tract were
formed from observations made on the common plants of Sweden, in the Upsal
garden, in 1755. This affair is also connected with the return and departure of
migrating birds, and furnishes many curious and useful hints; but we do not
enlarge, as this thesis was translated, and published with an English Calendar
of Flora, by the late Mr. Stillingfleet, to which we refer our readers for more
ample satisfaction. See also the Vernatio Arborum, No 46. of this collection, a
paper strictly connected with the Calendar of Flora.

68. FLORA ALPINA. N. N. Amann. 1756.
The alps of Europe produce a set of vegetables very different from, and
incapable of culture in, the lower situations. The author of this tract, who
was a native of one of the provinces bordering on the alps of Lapland, with a
laudable zeal for the improvement of his country, enquires what kinds of
vegetables might be cultivated in those desert regions to the most advantage,
where so few thrive, where shrubs scarcely ever attain even a moderate size,
and where a tree will hardly grow erect.

To this end, he first enumerates all the alpine parts of Europe, and gives a
list of 400 plants peculiar to those situations. He expresses a wish, that at
the royal, or public expense, a garden might be planted in the alps, to
determine with precision what exotic plants would bear introduction into
Lapland; and concludes by pointing out some of the esculent and medicinal
kinds, as also some that are applicable to dyeing, and other arts, which he
thinks might be cultivated to advantage in that northern region.

69. FLORA PALAESTINA. B. J. Strand. 1756.
Many commentators have employed themselves in determining the plants of the
sacred writings, among whom none are thought to have been more successful than
the late learned Professor Olaus Celsius, in his Hierobotanicon; who was not
only well qualified by his skill in the learned languages, and particularly in
the oriental, but was himself also an excellent botanist. He lamented, that by
a singular fate, whilst the missionaries of the Romish church had, in various
other parts of the world, been very instrumental in improving natural science,
Palaestine had been totally neglected; hence he was doubly solicitous to
recover the collection of his countryman Hasselquist, and much rejoiced that it
was at last redeemed; as he hoped a view of the subjects would throw great
light on his favorite pursuit of illustrating the Phytology of the scriptures.
Hasselquist had particular instructions to attend to this point: how well he
performed this function, is proved by the present Flora, which is chiefly drawn
from his discoveries.

This catalogue is compiled in the same compendious method as the other Florae
of these volumes, after the generical, only the trivial name being cited. The
author has also availed himself of other helps from those travelers, whose
skill in this part of knowledge was indisputable: some plants he has introduced
on the authority of Rauwolf, Prosper Alpinus, Shaw, Pocock, and Gronovius. The
whole number amounts to six hundred species. Mr. Strand has applied Celsius's
names to his list, wheresoever it was possible; but the curious will regret,
that the learned author of the Hierobotanicon did not live to give the public
another edition of his work, after such new materials had come to his hands.

70. FLORA MONSPELIENSIS. T. E. Nathhorst. 1756.
The happy climate, and variety of soil and situation of Montpelier, renders
this Flora one of the most copious of any. The vicinity of some considerable
mountains and forests, and the maritime situation of the place, conspire to
favor the growth of the plants of northern Europe, and of northern Africa,
many of which are common to the East also. This catalogue is compiled from the
Botanicon Monspeliense of Magnol, 1688, and the Methodus Foliorum of Sauvages.
The Flora Monspeliaca has since been greatly enriched by the publications of
Gouan.

71. FUNDAMENTA VALETUDINIS. P. Engstrom. 1756.
The author of this thesis derives the foundation of firm health and vigor of
constitution from two sources: 1st, Good stamina transmitted by parents. 2dly,
Care taken in the education, from the birth to the perfect state of
adolescence. From the first, he thinks, that strength in the nervous system;
and from the second, that strength in the vascular system, must be derived. In
considering his first position, he has, in a concise manner, thrown together a
variety of arguments, which he endeavors to confirm by the most respectable
authorities, to prove that various disorders are transmissible to the
offspring; also, that (independent of the specific disorders thus transmitted
from the parent) others arise in children from enervated and debauched
progenitors. To the first class he refers Mania, Epilepsy, Gout, Stone, and
some others; to the latter, particularly the Rickets. In considering his second
position, he prescribes the appropriate regimen to the mother during pregnancy,
and for the nurse, whom he would always suppose to be the mother: and finally,
concludes with some forcible persuasives to young men, not to defeat these
desirable ends, by a course of intemperance.

72. SPECIFICA CANADENSIUM. J. Von Coelln. 1756.
In the first chapter of this tract, the writer, after presenting us with a
view of the progress of medical science through the several schools and sects
of physicians, and condemning that sarrago of compound medicines, with which
the practice of physic has been so long burdened, considers the return to a
more simple mode of prescribing as intimately connected with its improvement.
This leads him to his subject, which is intended to exhibit and recommend to
the notice of physicians, a number of simples from the vegetable kingdom, used
by the natives of North America, in the cure of their diseases, some of which
may be worth the notice of European physicians. These may be considered as
constituting the Materia Medica of the Indians, among whom, as with other
barbarous nations, all that can be called physic depends entirely on the
empirical application of simples; nor can it be doubted, that long experience
has confirmed the efficacy of many to them.

This catalogue is chiefly compiled from (...) ^artram's appendix, Colden's
papers in the (...) from the communications of (...) is not within our plan to
detail (...) ^^pects of this paper. Among those mentioned by Bartram, we have
the exact method of exhibiting the Lobelia Siphylitica, Sp. Plant. 1320, the
Indian specific for the venereal disease, as delivered to Sir William Johnson,
who purchased it of the Indians at a great price: this is much more largely
treated of by Kalm. The virtues of many of these plants are confirmed by
Colden. The Spigelia Anthelmintica, or Indian Pink; the Phytolacca Americana,
Poke-weed; Polygala Senega; are all considered, and the Geum Rivale, or
Mountain Avens, which is used instead of Peruvian Bark, and that with great
confidence, in North America. The catalogue contains near 40 plants, and the
author finishes by proposing a certain number of these, which appear to be most
worthy of regard, to be cultivated in Europe for medicinal purposes; such are
the Aralia Nudicaulis; naked bastard Angelica. Collinsonia Canadensis; called
Horse-weed. Lobelia Siphylitica; blue Cardinal Flower. Rumex Britannica;
Virginian Water-dock. Polygala Senega; Rattle-snake Root. Actaea Racemosa;
capsular Herb Christopher. Phytolacca Americana; Poke-weed. Geum Rivale;
Mountain Avens.


73. ACETARIA. H. Van der Burg. 1756.
This writer, after having pointed out the advantages and disadvantages of
eating crude vegetables, showing to what constitutions such food is adapted,
and having treated largely on the qualities of Oil and Vinegar, gives a
catalogue, and describes the sensible qualities and powers of the different
vegetables eaten in the various parts of Europe as Sallads. Eighteen different
sorts are here enumerated; most of which are superseded among us by Lettuce,
Endive, Cresses, and Celleri, the latter of which our author thinks
particularly hurtful to such as labor under nervous disorders.

74. PHALAENA BOMBYX. J. Lyman. 1756.
The history of the Silkworm, (Phalaena Mori, Syst. Not. p. 817.) its culture,
and some account of the several species of Mulberry on which the insect feeds:
of these the white is most acceptable, then the red, and black Mulberry. The
writer thinks it probable that silk was first wrought by the Chinese; from whom
the art might pass to the Persians. The Emperor Justinian attempted to
introduce this worm into Italy, but it did not then succeed; neither was the
true culture of it brought to perfection, until about the year 1130, in Sicily,
from whence it spread into other parts of Europe.

The author mentions a species of Bombyx, (Phalaena Atlas, Syst. Not. p. 808.)
the coccoons of which are abundantly larger than those of the Silkworm, and
the silk much stronger; but it is to be regretted that they are difficult to
wind, and are therefore commonly spun. We fear that M. Lyman is rather sanguine
in thinking that the culture of the Silkworm may succeed in so northern a
climate as Sweden.

75. MIGRATIONES AVIUM. C. D. Ecmark. 1757.
This paper is confessedly one of the most complete that has been published on
this curious subject, which is yet involved in considerable obscurity; the
cause of these migrations, with respect to several birds, and the places of
their resort, being yet unknown. With respect to the greater number, it cannot
be doubted but that the facility of finding their appropriate food in distant
countries, in the different seasons, and their security during incubation, have
the principal share in this part of their economy.

Mr. Ecmark observes, that the greater number of migrating birds belong to the
flat-billed order (Anseres), particularly to the Goose and Merganser genera;
and to the Waders, (Grallae): the former mostly breed in the extreme north,
where, from the relation of LINNAEUS, their number almost darkens the air, and
they are driven southward by the freezing of the lakes and rivers. Numbers also
of the small-billed birds (Passeres), especially those with slender bills, are
of the migrating class. The insectivorous retire southwards when our winter
advances, as others in that season visit us for the sake of berries.

It is no small merit in Mr. Ecmark, that in this paper he brings together, in
one view, more completely than any other writer had done, all the known species
of migrating birds, whether exotic, or indigenous to Sweden. He gives a list of
all such as are mentioned in the writings of Catesby, Klein, and Hasselquist;
but the most considerable part of his tract is employed in a methodical
enumeration of the indigenous birds of Sweden, under each of which he mentions,
as fully as is yet possible, the particular times of their several migrations,
the places whither they resort, their food, etc. and intersperses many other
remarks, equally curious and satisfactory to those who wish for information in
this part of natural history.

AMOENITATES ACADEMICAE. VOL. V. 1760. pp. 483.
76. MORBI EXPEDITIONIS CLASSICAE, 1756. P. Bierchen. 1757.
The author of this tract was physician to the fleet of observation, which was
fitted out in the beginning of the last war between England and France, by the
Swedes, to act in conjunction with the Danes, in the north sea. The Swedish
squadron consisted of eight ships of the line, besides frigates. When M.
Bierchen took his appointment in August, he found not fewer than 1900 men on
the sick list; and that the principal diseases were Fluxes, Fevers, and the
Scurvy. The first were attended with great pain in the bowels, extreme
weakness, fever, and a very weak pulse. The Fevers were of that kind which has
been called the Upsal Fever, from its having been remarkably epidemical in that
city and neighborhood. This disease was evidently of that class which is
called putrid, and was much more acute in summer than in autumn. It was
attended with frequent and obstinate haemorrhages from the nose, early in the
disease; a quiet kind of delirium; trembling tongue; twitching tendons;
deafness; petechiae; and vibices on the skin. As the heat declined,
haemorrhages were not so much observed; the disorder attacked with pain and
lassitude of body, vertigo and pain in the head, cough and oppression of the
breast; and was afterward attended with cardialgia, nausea, vomiting, turbid,
and sometimes in the decline, bloody urine. Also great prostration of strength,
weak pulse, and subsultus tendinum, were symptoms of this fever; and many were
seized in the beginning with violent fluxes. The Scurvy seems to have been
attended with no other than the usual symptoms.

Our author appears to have been very solicitous in his endeavors to find out
the cause of the extreme prevalence of this disease in the fleet. In the
Scurvy, besides the use of salted meats, he attributes much to the want of
sufficient exercise on board the ships; and confirms the observations of some
other writers, that the disease, independent of regimen or diet, decreased when
the fleet was out at sea, and consequently the ships more agitated by wind and
waves, and the men more employed; and that it augmented when they were in a
state of inaction in port. He condemns the use of fat and lard, as difficult of
coction, and favorable to the disease. In the cure, he recommends acids; and
says, he used principally the vitriolic: but above all he celebrates the
praises of sourkrout; for the efficacy of which he also cites the authority and
experience of Sir John Pringle.

He considers the Fevers as arising from impeded perspiration, cooperating
with the effects of cold, moist, and foul air; and in this expedition, he
thinks, the insufficiency of proper clothing during the watches might not
unfrequently be found a predisposing cause. He is of opinion that the disease
was contagious; and says, many were cured by the early exhibition of emetics.
In the general method of cure, the practice laid down by our later writers in
England was successfully pursued.

The Fluxes and Dysenteric disorders he ascribes particularly to the prevalence
of saline and putrid acrimony in the food of seamen; aided by foul air, and
want of exercise, and propagated at length by contagion too.

Our author concludes, by suggesting that there are two causes, of a general
and permanent nature, which predispose to these diseases in all naval
expeditions. These are, impure air, and a constant depression of spirits in
seamen, not hitherto sufficiently attended to, and inducing a degree of real
Nostalgia. He seems to be sufficiently aware of the importance of correcting
the first, and recommends strongly the use of ventilators; to the other it is
not easy to apply a remedy. He informs us, that both Swedes and Swiss find the
greatest relief, in the Malady du pais, next to their return home, from strong
exercise: however he hints his wishes, that the pay of the men was advanced, as
one of the best means of inspiring them with cheerfulness and hilarity,
necessary to counterbalance this evil, at least in some degree.

To conclude, the subject of this paper has been so well treated by several
later judicious writers amongst us, that the English physician cannot expect to
meet with much new matter in this dissertation; but it is nevertheless very
worthy the regard of all who wish to make themselves acquainted with the
diseases of the navy.

77. FEBRIS UPSALIENSIS. A. Bostrom. 1757.
The fever here described, which had been remarkably epidemical in diverse parts
of Sweden, but particularly at Upsal, for several years before this time, and
which had by many been supposed to be a new distemper, Dr. Bostrom considers as
of the Remittent class, and common in all other parts of Europe. He has
determined its type to be that of the Hemitritaea of LINNAEUS, (see Genesis Morb.
No 23.) or the Semitertian of authors. In some years indeed, he observes, that
it seemed to have changed its form, was attended with Petechiae, and became
contagious, under which appearance it was named Febris Petechizans, and Febris
Nervosa, when attended particularly with delirium and spasms. In its milder
state, especially in the spring, it assumed a regular quotidian, or continued
tertian type.

In seeking the causes of the frequency of this fever, in Upsal particularly,
our author accedes to that opinion which attributes intermitting and
exacerbating fevers to the effects of moist and foul air, and thinks, from the
situation of the city of Upsal, the closeness of the streets, and especially
from the stagnating canals and waters, that its prevalence in that city may
fairly be referred to this cause. To confirm his opinion, he cites two
remarkable instances of cities rendered free from these fevers, by leading off,
and drying up, stagnant and putrid waters.

In the Prognostics, he says, a stiffness of the neck was not uncommon, and
that it usually betokened a long continuance of the disease; and frequently
ended in convulsions, or other dangerous affections of the nervous system.

The cure of this fever was usually begun by giving gentle emetics, and
repeating them for a few days occasionally; without which it was observed, that
the bark, and other remedies, failed to have their proper effect. Gentle
paregorics and saline medicines were interposed, and the following preparation
of the bark exhibited: -- One ounce was infused in five ounces of red wine for
a few hours, the residuum boiled in water to eight ounces, and three ounces of
syrup of oranges mixed with this tincture and decoction. Of this a dose was
given every two hours. Dr. Bostrom entirely forbids bleeding, having commonly
found it hurtful.

78. FLORA DANICA. G. T. Holm. 1757.
This Linnaean catalogue of the plants of Denmark, is formed principally from
the Viridarium Danicum of P. Kylling, published in 1688, which comprehends
eleven hundred species. A few are introduced into this list from Burser's
Herbarium, and some from the author's own observations.

Dr. Holm was made Professor of Economy at Copenhagen, and died much regretted
in 1759. The plants of Denmark are nearly the same with those of England. [In
that splendid addition to botanic science, which his Danish majesty has made by
his patronage of the Flora Danica, begun in 1762, of which 840 plates are
delivered, nearly four fifths are British.]

79. PANIS DIAETETICUS. J. Suensson. 1757.
The author begins his dissertation by enumerating the several sorts of grain
used for Bread, adding briefly their general qualities, and the estimation in
which they were held by the ancients. He then specifies the various kinds of
bread, whether leavened, unleavened, or fermented; considers it as it is the
general food of man; the nature of it as a nutriment, and the different
tendencies to acescency in the several kinds; condemning the too liberal use of
it by the studious, persons of weak habits, and such as are troubled with
flatulency -- descants upon every part of the process of making it; -- treats
on millstones, and reprobates strongly such as are formed of sand-stone;
quoting instances of their pernicious effects; says, those are best which are
of a talky texture: -- the effects of fermentation, kneading, and the different
degrees of baking bread, biscuit, cakes, etc.; -- the qualities of the
unfermented kinds; and condemns in strong terms the use of hot new bread. He
concludes by briefly reciting the qualities of such as is prepared from Rice,
Turkey-wheat, Millet, and Sago; and mentions the substitutes for bread in
various parts of the world; such are, the Cassava, (Jatropha Manihot, Spec. Pl.
1429;) Potatoes; Yams; Roots of the Sea Rush, (Scirpus Maritimus, Sp. Pl. 74;)
those of Dropwort, (Spiraea Filipendula, Sp. Pl. 702;) of the Clowns-allheal,
(Stachys Palustris, Sp. Pl. 811;) the Lichen Islandicus, Sp. Pl. 1611; the Bark
of the Wild-pine, yet in use in Dalekarlia; Chestnuts; the Seeds of Spurrey,
(Spergula Arvensis, Sp. Pl. 630;) and various others, for which see the Plantae
Esculentae, in the third volume of this work, No 34.

80. NATURA PELAGI. J. H. Hager. 1757.
A general view of the contents of that vast expanse of element, the Ocean; and
a comparison between its inhabitants and those of the Earth: intended to excite
the young and curious voyager to a more close and diligent investigation of
this hitherto almost unknown, but fruitful field of science.

In the vegetable kingdom, Mr. Hager turns the reader's attention to the
Sargazo, (Fucus Natans, Sp. Pl. 1628) which, swimming in a vegetating state,
covers the deep in some places for hundreds of leagues. See Kalm and Osbeck.
The Madrepores and Millepores, which incrust as it were the bottom of the
Ocean, and form banks, that at length rise into islands. The Corallines, and
Seafans, etc. are spread over them, as Grass on the Earth.

But what words can express the myriads that belong to the Vermes class! the
Nereides, which illuminate the Ocean; the Medusae, or Blubbers, food for
whales; the Asteriae; the Scyllaea Pelagica, feeding amongst the Fucus; the Sea
Pens; the Holothuria Physalis, Besanties; the Sepiae; the Argonautae, etc.

It were endless to attempt the Fishes. The various kinds of flying Fishes; the
Bonito; the Albicore; the Tunny; the Pilot-fish, (Gasterosteus Ductor, Syst.
489;) the Sucking-fish, (Echeneis Remora, Syst. 446;) the splendid Dolphin; the
spiny Ostracion, etc. affording perpetual entertainment and instruction to the
curious eye.

Among the Amphibia, the whole Turtle genus, sleeping on the surface of the
wave; the voracious Shark, those tigers of the ocean; the Toad-fish; the
Fishing-frog of America, rioting in the pastures of Sargazo, and feeding on the
Scyllaea Pelagica; called, by the sailors, the Sea Hare.

Above; the feathered tribe, the Tropic-bird, (Phaeton Aethereus, Syst. 219,)
soaring beyond the reach of the eye; the Albatross, (Diomedea Exulans, Syst.
214;) the Man of War-bird, (Pelecanus Aquilus, Syst. 216;) the Shearwaters,
(Procellariae,) skimming the surface; and lastly, the numerous genera of
Diverse, etc.

Of the Mammalia, we admire the enormous Whale; the voracious Grampus; and the
unwieldy Porpess; the armed Morse; and the basking Seal. Finally, these, which
occur even to the most incurious eye, afford but a small sample of what this
element offers to the contemplation of the more curious and inquisitive
observer.

81. BUXBAUMIA. A. R. Martin. 1757.
The history, accompanied with figures, of a small plant of the Cryptogamia
class, (Buxbaumia Aphylla, Sp. Plant. 1570,) singular in being destitute of
leaves: it was first discovered near Astracan, by Mr. Buxbaum, professor of
botany, and member of the royal academy at Petersburgh; since that time, in
diverse other parts of Europe; and was named after the discoverer, by Haller, in
consideration of his having enriched natural history with many new plants, from
his expedition into the countries around the Caspian sea for that purpose.

82. EXANTHEMATA VIVA. J. C. Nyander. 1757.
The origin of contagious diseases has exercised the pens of many ingenious
physicians, and various theories have been invented, all of which are briefly
recited in the beginning of this disquisition. The author had been led by some
singular circumstances to incline to that of Kircher, which ascribes them to
Animalcula, and who has had many followers, especially in France.

He next proceeds to show the several analogies that subsist in the symptoms of
contagious diseases; and as Animalcula have been demonstrated in the Itch, and,
as he thinks, in the Dysentery too; so he tells us, they have been seen in the
Measles, by Langius; in the Pestilence, by Kircher; in the Siphylis, by
Hauptman; in Petechiae, by Sigler; in the Smallpox, by Lusitanus and
Porcellus; as also in the Serpigo, and other cutaneous affections. He then
proceeds to adduce all that occurs in defense of this theory, from the
consideration of facts arising in the following diseases; the Itch; Dysentery,
Hooping-cough, Smallpox, Measles, Plague, and Siphylis.

In the Itch, the existence of the Acarus Siro, Syst. p. 1024,) is
acknowledged, and he thinks it not less certain, that a species of this genus
exists as the cause of Dysenteries: to this opinion the author was led by a
singular fact, that occurred to Dr. Rolander, during his residence in Professor
LINNAEUS'S house; he had been infested with the Dysentery for some time, and
had been relieved twice by taking rhubarb, but the disease recurred, commonly,
at the end of about eight days. He was the only one in the house thus affected;
and was put by the Professor, upon examining his egesta, with a view to prove
the truth of Bartholine's assertion, who relates that he had seen the alvine
dejections full of the most minute insects in this disease. Dr. Rolander's
observation on his own state confirmed the fact; and he afterward discovered,
that these Animalcula were conveyed into his body in water, received from a
vessel made of juniper wood. This Acarus is described in the System, p. 1024.
Our plan will not allow us to follow the author through the whole of his
disquisition, it must suffice to say, that it is ingenious, and well worthy the
attention of all those who wish to be acquainted with the doctrine which it
favors.

83. TRANSMUTATIO FRUMENTORUM. B. Hornborg. 1757.
The purport of this dissertation is to combat, and abolish a long-established
vulgar error, which nevertheless prevailed until the time of Harvey, among some
men of considerable knowledge, and even now still subsists among the vulgar, in
some parts of Europe; namely, that one kind of grain was convertible, by
different soils, into an inferior, distinct, and more useless species: thus,
that Wheat, in an impoverished soil, would change to Rye: this, to Barley:
Barley, into Darnel: this, into Brome-grass: Brome-grass, into Oats. Some of
the ancients carried their belief farther, supposing, on the other hand, that
in fertile lands, the reverse would take place. As these ideas were repugnant
to truth, so they were in many cases unfriendly to improvement. This author,
after having observed, that among the Romans the Res Rustica was held in such
estimation, that even the men of quality themselves disdained not to cultivate
agriculture, laments that in modern times it is too much neglected by the
great; he therefore urges gentlemen to pursue the history and philosophy of
vegetables, through the whole extent of them, as the foundation of practical
improvements. With this view, he refers them to the many excellent papers
thereon, contained in this collection: and from the physiology of plants, the
consideration of the mechanism of them, and particularly that of the parts of
fructification, he shows the futility of the opinion, which he had undertaken
to confute, and particularly levels his arguments against that part of it which
has gained the most belief, and remained longest in the minds of his countrymen
and the peasants, that Oats are mutable into Rye.

No notice is taken in this dissertation of the Secale Cornutum, or Ergot,
which, with other vitiated grain, has been supposed to occasion the Necrosis
Ustilaginea, (vide Sauvages's Nosolog. vol. ii. p. 623.) and which lately
engaged the attention of the learned in England. See Phil. Transact. vol. lv.
p. 106 -- 126, and vol. lii. p. 523 -- 533.

84. CULINA MUTATA. M. G. Osterman. 1758.
In a former paper was exhibited a list of vegetables that are eaten in a crude
state, as sallads. The present is intended to show the change which has taken
place, since the time of the ancients, in the choice of vegetable aliments; by
substituting, instead of what were then used, a number of more bland,
agreeable, and nutritive plants.

In this review of the alteration, which this part of the culinary system has
undergone, the author, under each article, gives a comparative sketch of the
qualities of each, and shows the superiority of the modern substitute: to
mention some of the most material;

The Acorns and Nuts of the primitive days have given way to all the variety of
sweeter farinaceous seeds and roots.

To the Malvaceous tribe of plants, so much used by the Greeks and Romans, has
succeeded the more grateful Spinach. And to the Blite, the Garden Orach.

The rough Borage is supplanted by the acescent Sorrel; and Asparagus has
banished a number of roots, recorded by the Roman writers under the name of
Bulbs, though at this day it is not easy to determine the several species.

Our author, however, thinks that the Parsnip has undeservedly usurped the
place of the Skirret.

The Bean of the ancients, improperly so called, being the roots as well as
other parts of the Nymphaea Nelumbo, Sp. Pl. 730, or Indian Water Lilly, is
superseded by the Kidney-bean.

The Garden Rocket, (Brassica Eruca, Sp. Pl. 932.) eaten with, and as an
antidote against, the chilling Lettuce, is banished by the more agreeable
Cress, and Tarragon. The Apium by the meliorated Cellery, the Pompion, and
others of the Cucurbitaceous tribe, by the Melon; and the Sumach Berries by the
fragrant Nutmeg.

The Silphium, or Succus Cyrenaicus, which the Romans purchased from Persia and
India, at a great price, and is thought by some to have been the Asa foetida of
the present time, is no longer used in preference to the Alliaceous tribe.

To turn from the vegetable to some of the animal substitutes, we may mention
the Carp among Fishes, as having excluded a great number held in high
estimation in ancient Rome.

The change of Oil for Butter; of Honey for Sugar; of Mulsa, liquors made of
wine, water, and honey, for the exquisite Wines of modern times; and that of
the ancient Zyihus, for the improved Malt Liquors of this day, are all recited;
not to mention also the Calida of the Roman Taverns, analogous to our
bewitching Tea and Coffee.

85. SPIGELIA ANTHELMIA. J. G. Colliander. 1758.
A botanical and medical history of the Indian Pink, or Worm-grass, which has
been so much used, and so greatly celebrated, for expelling worms from the
human body.

Dr. Colliander does more than barely treat of the plant, having enumerated the
several kinds of worms infesting the human species; the Ascaris Vermicularis,
and Lumbricoides, Syst. p. 1276, the Lumbricus Terrestris, g. ib. and the
Taenia, Syst. 1324. He then gives a distinct account of the symptoms that
indicate their presence in the human body, and the diseases which they too
frequently occasion: then follows a distinct catalogue of all the supposed
Anthelminthics from the vegetable and mineral classes; and before he comes to
the history of the plant in question, he recites the several simples which have
been considered as Specifics: among these we may note particularly the Fern,
mentioned by Dioscorides as anthelminthic, and lately published in France, as
such, at the expense of the king.

The history of the Spigelia, with a figure annexed, is then delivered at
large, nearly as it stands in Browne's History of Jamaica, and in the Essays
and Observations physical and literary, by Dr. Lining, vol. i. p. 386.

The success of this remedy among the negroes and Indians introduced it into
practice. Dr. Brown administered it in decoction; the North American
physicians give the powder of the root; on which occasion we may observe, that
subsequent observations have proved the South American and North American
Spigelia to differ in specie: the former is figured in Brown, and the latter
in the Essays abovementioned, vol. iii. p. 154. See their botanical
distinctions also, Linn. Syst. Not. ed. xiii. p. 166.

86. MEDICAMENTA GRAVEOLENTIA. J. T. Fagraeus. 1758.
It is a postulatum in the philosophy of LINNAEUS, that "the qualities of
medicines are, in a general way, to be determined by their effect on the organs
of taste and smelling." And further, that the "Sapida, or those which more
sensibly strike the taste than the smell, do principally operate on the
vascular and vital system:" and that the "Olida, or those which more sensibly
strike the organs of smelling, operate on the medullary or nervous system." The
Sapor Medicamentorum of this collection, No 30, may be considered as a comment
on the first part of this general distribution of medicines, distinguished by
the term Sapida; and the present thesis as an explanation of a large division
of the Olida, here called Graveolentia, from their strong and ungrateful smell.

The combinations of Sapids and Olids are innumerable; but that simples,
strictly of the latter kind, do, in a sudden and extraordinary manner, exert
their influence on the nerves, is certain; though our author contents himself
with the fact, without enquiring whether the functions of the nerves are
performed by means of animal spirits, by vibration, the medium of electricity,
or by any other way. And from the Graveolentia, which are the subject of his
thesis, he justly observes, that we derive some of the most powerful remedies.
Of these he gives a catalogue, dividing them into three classes: 1. SUBINSIPID.
2. ACRID. 3. BITTER: each of which is subdivided into two orders, as the
subjects differ in degrees of strength. The Subinsipid contains chiefly the
Narcotics: the Acrid several of the purging, and fetid roots; the fetid gums,
and carminative seeds: the Bitter contains others of the purging roots and
leaves; and some of the bitter herbs. Under each, the author specifies, in
technical terms, very briefly, the quality, and the diseases to which it has
been appropriated.

He then presents us with a concise, but very instructive theory, of the
operation of this division of the Olida; leaving to the consideration of
others, the Suaveolentia: after which, follows a general pathology of those
diseases which are remedied by the Graveolentia.

In treating on the use of external applications, Dr. Fagraeus appears to be
dissatisfied with the common theory of repellents, which are usually drawn from
the styptic class; and thinks, that the first class of Graveolentia, the
Narcotics, which he supposes to induce a relaxation, or temporary palsy, in an
inflamed part, more effectually promote a return of the stagnating and
accumulating fluids into the circulation, than any styptics can possibly
effect, and are therefore more justly entitled to that term.

87. ARBORETUM SUETICUM. D. D. Pontin. 1759.
88. FRUTETUM SUECICUM. D. M. Virgander. 1758.
The design of these papers nearly coincides with that of the Flora Oeconomica,
(No 17.) having for its object the culture of the native trees and shrubs of
Sweden, and some of exotic origin, which time has naturalized, amounting to
106 species. In these excellent papers, no botanical descriptions are given,
the name only by which they stand in the Linnaean system being introduced; the
provinces in which they are most plentifully found; the soil in which they best
thrive; their times of leafing, flowering, and ripening their fruit; their
duration; the best methods of sowing or propagating each; and their uses as
applicable to the arts, but particularly in rural economy, are concisely and
distinctly treated of.

At the end of the Arboretum are subjoined some general rules, to secure the
propagation and growth of trees: and at the conclusion of the Frutetum the
author has pointed out the proper kinds of shrubs for all sorts of hedges,
adapted to different situations and soils.

89. PANDORA INSECTORUM. E. O. Rydbeck. 1758.
Mr. Rydbeck pursues the plan of the Hospita Insectorum, No 43, the completion
of which cannot but be subservient to the art of gardening, agriculture, and
the economy of cattle, in a variety of instances; and is even necessary to
facilitate the enquiries of the entomologist.

The author, in his preliminary sections, presents his reader with a history of
the metamorphosis of insects, from the worm or maggot, through that of the
chrysalis, to the perfect state, when it comes out in its full beauty, and
performs all the functions of its being.

The catalogue, as that of the Hospita, exhibits a list of the vegetables of
Sweden, arranged in the sexual method, and under each is given the insect which
it nourishes. It has this advantage beyond the former thesis, that the insects
are better defined, by the more complete addition of the trivial names, taken
from the enlarged edition of the System of Nature, which had been published in
the interval of these two papers. It is accompanied with a plate, containing
near 50 of the more rare species, with references to the numbers in the tenth
edition of the System.

90. SENIUM SALOMONEUM. J. Pilgren. 1759.
A paraphrase and comment on Solomon's description of old age, which has so
frequently employed the pen both of medical and theological critics. With the
reader's leave, this may be called a physiological and pathological explanation
of the text; not that the author has failed to intersperse suitable moral
reflections. Solomon's allusions are probably too obscure, at this distance of
time, to admit of uncontroverted explanation. The present attempt must be
allowed to be an ingenious one, and worthy of the regard of those who wish to
turn their attention to this subject.

91. AUCTORES BOTANICI. A. Loo. 1759.
We are here presented with an alphabetical catalogue of botanic writers,
amounting to upwards of 350, on the following plan: -- After the name of the
writer, follows the time of his birth; his rank or profession; the period in
which he flourished, commonly taken from the date of his first publication, the
title of which is given in brief; and lastly, the year of his death. The
catalogue takes in some authors yet living.

Such as have been eminently conspicuous for their merit, are, in this list,
denoted by an asterisk affixed to the name. After the alphabetic catalogue,
other arrangements of the fame authors take place; in one, particularly, they
are arranged according to the countries of which they were natives. The
catalogue concludes by pointing out such capital writers as are indispensably
necessary to such as would make any considerable progress in the knowledge and
history of botany.

92. INSTRUCTIO PEREGRINATORIS. E. A. Nordblad. 1759.
After some pertinent instructions to the young traveller for his conduct in
foreign countries, and useful hints relating to those requisite qualifications,
in which, it is to be regretted, too many who travel are deficient, we are
presented with the complete method of keeping a journal, on the most extensive
scale, pointing out whatsoever is worthy of observation. It is not easy to
conceive a plan of instruction on this head more perfectly described; in which
the traveller will not only find his memory much assisted, by having proper
objects of inquiry suggested to him, whether in nature or art, but the method
of arranging them also, greatly facilitated.

One part of his advice is of the utmost importance, without the due and
regular observance of which, nothing will effectually be done. "Nulla dies sine
linea." He must, if he would excel, most strictly observe to enter and arrange
the observations of each day, before the next arrives.

93. PLANTAE TINCTORIAE. E. Jorlin. 1759.
Intended to bring into one general view all the vegetable substances, whether
indigenous or imported, used in the art of dyeing. The author determines the
exact plant from which each is produced, adding short observations on the
colors they yield, and the methods of extracting them. In this Materia
Tinctoria occur many of the indigenous plants of England, not commonly known to
be possessed of any coloring quality; and though their use, at present, may be
superseded by the facility of procuring better from abroad, yet these
nevertheless remain fit objects of inquiry with the encouragers of arts. The
catalogue consists of 100 articles, exclusive of a few from the animal kingdom.
We subjoin the names of those English plants, under the several colors which
they are said to yield.

YELLOWS.
Bark of Buck-thorn, Rhamnus catharticus. Berry-bearing Alder, -- Frangula.
Berbery, Berberis vulgaris. Plum-tree, Prunus domestica. Apple Tree, Pyrus
Malus. Horn-beam, Carpinus Betulus. Root of Meadow Rue, Thalictrum flavum.
Common Nettle, Urtica dioica. Herb, Saw-wort, Serratula tinctoria. Bushy
Hawk-weed, Hieracium umbellatum. Hemp-agrimony, Bidens tripartita. Gale, or
Dutch Myrtle, Myrica Gale. Sweet Willow, Salix pentandra. Birch-tree, Betula
alba. Hedge-nettle, Stachys sylvatica. Spotted-arsmart, Polygonum Persicaria.
Herb, Yellow Loosestrife, Lysimachia vulgaris. Devils-bit, Scabiosa Succisa.
Kidney-vetch, Anthyllis Vulneraria. Common yellow Liverwort, Lichen parietinus.
Flowers of St. John's Wort, Hypericum perforatum.
REDS.
Roots of Ladies Bedstraw, Galium verum. Herb Woodroof, Asperula tinctoria.
Sorrel, Rumex Acetosa. Tormentil, Tormentilla erecta. Purple Cinquefoil,
Comarum palustre.
PURPLES.
Herb, or Tops of Wild-Marjoram, Origanum sylvestre.
BLUES.
Bark of the Ash, Fraxinus excelsior. Flowers of Larkspur, Delphinium
Consolida. Bell-flower, Campanula rotundifolia. Berries of Black Heath,
Empetrum nigrum.
GREENS.
Herb of Ragwort, Senecio Jacobaea. Cow-weed, Chaerophyllum sylvestre. Panicle
of Brome-grass, Bromus secalinus. Common Reed, Arundo phragmites.
BLACKS.
Bark of Oak, Quercus Robur. Water Horehound, Lycopus europaeus.
94. ANIMALIA COMPOSITA. A. Back. 1759.
Under the term Animalia Composita are comprehended the two last orders of the
class of Vermes, making the last links in the chain of animal nature; and thus
connecting it with the vegetable kingdom. These (in opposition to those of the
three foregoing orders of the same class, which live simple and separate from
each other) are called Compound Animals, as being connected together by one
common base or support, either in the form of irregular or rudely-branched
stony masses, of a calcareous nature, as the Lithophyta, or Corals; or, as
fixed to one common stalk more or less branched, as the Zoophyta, or
Corallines, and some others.

In order to give a more perfect idea of the nature of these animals, the
author holds forth the general analogy between animals and vegetables,
principally to show that the former are not, like the latter, endowed with that
multiplicative power of propagating themselves without the particular energy
and exertion of the generative function; whereas the Animalia Composita seem to
unite these powers, since they not only appear to propagate by eggs, or viva
soboles, but also by progressive extension and ramification.

The animals of the LITHOPHYTA, like the Testacea, fabricate their own base of
calcareous matter, forming the whole mass into tubes, each ending on the
surface, in pores or cells, according to their specific difference, where alone
the animal seems to dwell, and extending these habitations progressively, in
the manner of vegetables, leaving the base at length to perish.

The animals of the Zoophyta, containing the Corallines, etc. particularly the
fixed ones, approach much nearer than the foregoing to vegetables, both in
their texture and form in general, arising as if from a root, and forming a
stem and branches, which are beset at the extremities and articulations with
the animals, or Polypes, appearing by the help of glasses like so many flowers.

Since this tract was written, the subject has received much farther
illustration from the discoveries of the late Mr. Ellis.

95. FLORA CAPENSIS. C. H. Wannman. 1759.
In the time of the Romans it was a trite proverb, that Africa was the land of
wonders; and it still remains true, as in these days it affords, both in the
animal and vegetable kingdoms, some of the most stupendous and singular
productions of nature. From the first discovery of the Cape of Good Hope, from
whence Europe has chiefly been furnished with the plants of Africa, their
uncommon aspect, so very different from those of Europe, has attracted the
notice, not only of naturalists, but of all mankind; and as the mildness of
that climate allowed of their cultivation here, they soon became favorites in
the English gardens.

Some of the first Cape of Good Hope plants that were brought to Europe, we owe
to J. Heurnius, who sent them to his brother, a professor at Leyden; and they
are figured in Bodeus a Stapel's Theophrastus, p. 333; among these were the
Indian Reed, (Canna Indica), the Haemanthus Coccineus, Stapelia, the Aletris
Uvaria, and a few others. But the first botanist who visited the Cape was Paul
Herman; he collected 800 species, then unknown in Europe: after him H. B.
Oldenland, a Dane, and J. Hartog, a Dutchman, both made collections of African
plants, which at length falling into the hands of the present able professor of
botany at Amsterdam, Dr. John Burman, he published engravings of ten decads of
the more rare kinds. From these materials chiefly the present Flora is
composed, according to the usual plan, with the trivial names only.

Among the plants of the Cape, there are 38 genera peculiar to that part of the
world, several of which excel all others in the number of species, as well as
in their uncommon and superb appearance. The vast number of species under the
same genus, so frequently met with in that country, strongly favors the idea
of the perpetual new origin of plants; and that many, which elsewhere are only
hybrid, there propagate and become permanent. But Caffraria, beyond all other
countries, abounds with extensive genera of plants: the succulent kinds,
particularly, cover the sandy soil, where nothing but the fact could convince
us that vegetation would in any degree succeed. Such are the Fig-marygolds,
(Mesembryanthema), Aloes, Purslanes, etc. Among the others, we are astonished
with the variety of the Heaths, (Ericae), Gerania, Protaeae, and Gnaphalia.

Since the publication of M. Wannman's thesis, great discoveries in botany have
been made in southern Africa by Thunberg and Sparmann, and by Mr. Masson; and
we have reason to expect a complete account of the plants of that country from
Dr. Laurence Burman, son of professor J. Burman, who has already given us a
compendious list of them in his Flora Indica.

96. FLORA JAMAICENSIS. C. G. Sandmark. 1759.
The author begins his Flora with a general account of the geography of the
island, and its produce; specifying particularly some of the most useful
articles thence imported: as, Guaiacum, Fustic, Ebony, Logwood, Brasiletto,
Mahogany, Indigo, Sugar, Coffee, Cotton, Pimento, and Ginger. He then subjoins
an account of the two principal works, from which his catalogue is compiled;
these are Sir Hans Sloane's History and Dr. Browne's. The former of these
writers appears to have been the first naturalist who visited that island, and
he brought back with him 800 species of plants. The latter is said to have made
a collection amounting to 1200, which, after the publication of his History, he
presented to LINNAEUS. As Dr. Brown followed the Linnaean system, his book is
referred to in this Flora.

97. PUGILLUS JAMAICENSIUM PLANTARUM. G. Elmgren. 1759.
A description of one hundred and thirty species of the more rare among the
foregoing plants, made from Dr. Browne's collection, which was in the hands of
professor LINNAEUS.

98. NOMENCLATURA PLANTARUM. B. Berzelius. 1759.
Contains the vernacular names of the genera of plants, particularly of
European and garden kinds, in Italian, French, English, Dutch, and German,
placed in columns, opposed to the Latin name. It would have been an acquisition
to have had the plan of this paper extended much farther, so as to have
included not only the name of the genus, but that by which each species is
known in the several countries; a thing too much neglected by almost all
writers of local catalogues, although highly necessary to render them more
extensively useful. Nay farther, even the provincial names, if possible, should
be collected, as they are frequently very different for the same plant.
LINNAEUS, in his Flora Suecica, is almost the first and only one who has taken
due notice of, and supplied this deficiency. There is extant on this subject
the Index Plantarum Polyglottus of Mentzelius, published in 1682; but the
writer of this Nomenclator found it insufficient to his purpose: neither indeed
can the plan be completed, otherwise than by the united endeavors of botanists
throughout the world.

99. AER HABITABILIS. J. V. Siefvert. 1759.
The comprehensive nature of the subject, and the concise manner in which the
history of the air is treated in this dissertation, render it impossible to
give a proper abstract in our confined plan. This element is here considered in
all the various changes to which it is subject; its properties under the
different and opposite alterations discussed; its effects on the earth in the
various quarters of the globe; and its influence on the health and economy of
life, and manners of the inhabitants.

1. With respect to its heat and cold in the different quarters of the earth:
of these the general result is given according to the computation of the
Swedish thermometer, or Celsius's, in which (0) is the point of congelation,
and (100) that of boiling water; five degrees in this being equal to nine of
Farenheit's.

2. Its dryness and moisture, and the general effects of those qualities
pointed out. The torpid state of the inhabitants of hot countries during
summer: heat in those countries defoliates trees, as cold does in temperate
climes.

3. Its gravity, and the different degrees and effects of it considered.

4. The effects of the different winds, and their salutary and pernicious
tendencies. That of Calms also. In the Isle of St. Thomas there is a dead calm
for two months, during which the worst diseases prevail.

5. The effects of an hot atmosphere farther illustrated by the state of the
Indians. Diseases thereby produced in more moderate climates.

6. Temperate air, and its exhilarating qualities on the animal creation, etc.

7. Moist air, and the diseases thence arising.

8. Air impregnated with exhalations of various kinds; a comm on cause of
fevers, dysenteries, headache, etc.

9. Stagnant air, in vaults, in subterraneous granaries, and mines.

10. Effluvia from burning substances: instances of their pernicious effects,
largely treated of. Mineral vapors; those from wine, etc. Premature deaths of
the inhabitants of a village in Wermland, attributed to stagnant and putrid
water.

11. The advantages to valetudinarians of changing the air, particularly to
arthritics, hypochondriacs, and others. Finally, although the intelligent
reader may not meet with much new matter in this tract, yet he will see facts
so well illustrated by pertinent observations, that we may venture to pronounce
this short history and philosophy of this element, a useful paper, and well
worth attention.

100. SUS SCROFA. J. Lindh. 1759.
A complete natural history of the Hog, as it appears particularly in its
cultured and tame state; in which the whole economy also of the animal, and its
uses to mankind, are perhaps more completely treated of, than in any other
publication, and which cannot fail to be acceptable and useful to those who
make this animal an object of merchandise.

AMOENITATES ACADEMICAE. VOL. VI. 1764. pp. 486.
101. GENERATIO AMBIGENA. C. L. Ramstrom. 1759.
The author begins his subject with a concise view of the ancient and modern
theories relating to this obscure affair He observes, that the ancient doctrine
of equivocal generation prevailed in general, until Harvey exploded it, and
taught that every animal is generated ex ovo; and that his system may now be
considered as including a double hypothesis: first, that taught by himself,
which supposes the entire rudiments of the future foetus to be present in the
ovum, and only waiting for animation from the vivifying principle, or aura
genitalis masculina; the other, that of the seminal animalcule entering into
the ovum, according to the theory arising from Lewenhoeck's microscopical
discoveries. We have before observed that LINNAEUS very early forsook
Lewenhoeck's theory, in consequence of attending Lieberkuhn's demonstrations.
The argument of the present hypothesis tends to show, that both sexes are
equally efficient in this work; leaning however to the following opinion, "that
the external form, as well as the specific energy, of the vital functions, are
principally derived from the male parent." This is partly the opinion also of
the very eminent Dr. Haller, Phys. 786. Our intended brevity does not allow us
to pursue our author through all his arguments in behalf of his hypothesis; we
must rest satisfied with observing, that after drawing a physiological analogy
between vegetables and animals, he thinks it evident that in both, the male is
most commonly conspicuous in the external form: and this he illustrates by
several examples of hybrid species in both the vegetable and animal kingdom.

102. POLITIA NATURAE. H. C. D. Wilcke. 1760.
Intended to display that perfect order and just subordination of all the
several parts of nature, by which they are rendered mutually subservient to the
conservation of each other, and of the whole; and which, collectively
considered, our author, not unaptly, has named the Police of Nature.

This physico-theological design is pursued nearly on the same plan as that of
the Oeconomia Naturae, No 19, by exhibiting,

1. A general view of the Fossil kingdom, as constituting the surface of the
globe, and as disposed into land and water, hills, mountains, valleys, etc.

2. That innumerable variety of Vegetables, with which the surface of the earth
is clothed and adorned, as adapted to the different soils, climates, and
elevations; and again, as affording nutriment to animals of various kinds.

3. In the Animal kingdom, a general view of their relations to each other, and
the proportion they bear in the scale through the several classes, from the
Vermes up to the highest and most perfect; in which are considered their
specific uses in the general economy.

Our author has illustrated his subject, by adducing numerous examples from all
parts of the Vegetable and Animal kingdom, to show how admirably the whole is
ordained, to contribute to the generation, nutrition, and due proportion of
each, in the grand fcheme of nature and providence.

103. THESES MEDICAE. J. C. D. Schreber. 1760.
In this dissertation, Dr. Schreber delivers a brief view of the Linnaean
doctrine, relating to the anatomy and physiology of plants, in which he
endeavors to sustain the following theses: -- That all plants consist of a
medullary and cortical substance; in the former of which is manifested the life
of the plant, and through which it is perpetuated, either by seeds or buds,
which are considered as the ultimate extension of this part. The cortical part
is considered as the organ of nutrition to the whole. -- That, as in a number
of certain species of plants, which in artificial systems form a genus, we see
a similar proportion and agreement of the parts of fructification, howsoever
different the external form of the whole plant; and as we not unfrequently see
hybrid plants produced, he therefore proposes it as a matter worthy of
speculation, whether, originally, all the species have not been produced in the
same way, by the various admixtures of the farina. From this power in the
medullary part, of perpetuating itself, and modifying the whole internal
structure, the author also deduces the similar qualities which are commonly
found in plants of the same genus, as manifested by the taste and smell.

104. FLORA BELGICA. C. F. Rosenthal. 1760.
A Linnaean Flora of the indigenous plants of the United Provinces, compiled
from the catalogues of Commeline, printed in 1709, and of Dr. David de Gorter,
printed in 1745, at that time professor at Harderwick, and afterward physician
to the Empress of Russia. The author refers to the page for each plant in both
these works. He premises a general account of the country, with respect to its
divisions into provinces, the climate, the inhabitants, the commerce;
enumerates their universities and gardens; then gives concise lists of the
plants found in particular situations, in the canals, for instance, on the
dykes, in the woods, osieries, etc.

The plants of Holland, as far as soil and situation admit, are nearly those of
England; but as the country is destitute of mountains, rapid rivers, alps, and
chalky soil, a great variety are necessarily excluded.

These works are superseded by an enlarged edition of Dr. De Gorter's book,
under the title of this thesis, printed in 1767; and which contains upwards of
1050 species.

105. ANTHROPOMORPHA. C. E. Hoppius. 1760.
The history of the Simia genus, especially as it respects those species which
so nearly approach the human form and feature, is yet involved in no small
obscurity. After a general account of the manners of these animals, the reader
is here presented with an history of four remarkable species.

1. Simia Pygmaeus, the Wild Man of the Woods, described and figured by
Edwards, t. 213. (Simia Satyrus, Syst. p. 34.)

2. Simia Satyrus, of Tulpius, which LINNAEUS considers as the same animal with
the foregoing, differing only in having the abdomen more prominent, and less
furnished with hair.

3. Simia Lucifer, or Homo Caudatus of Bontius, said to exist in Java and
Nicobar, of which travelers have related strange stories. The author describes
this animal on the authority and testimony of Koping, a Swede, who asserts that
he had seen both male and female; nevertheless it may justly be suspected, that
there is somewhat of fable, or much exaggeration, mixed with this relation. The
reader may see more relating to this animal and Koping's book, in a letter from
LINNAEUS himself to the author of "The Origin and Progress of Language," vol.
i. ed. 2d, p. 260, note.

4. Simia Troglodytes, or Orang Outang of Bontius; the Homo Nocturnus, or
Troglodytes of the Syst. Not. p. 33. Concerning these the author takes great
pains to prove that they are really children of darkness, and incapable, from
the extreme dilatation of the pupil, of seeing in the daytime. [The length of
the arms would incline one to rank this creature with the Gibbon of M. Buffon,
or that of which an account, accompanied with a figure, was transmitted by Mr.
De Visme from Canton, and published in the Phil. Trans. vol. lix. p. 72. t. 3.
See also Lin. Mant. alter. p. 521.] Figures of these several animals, taken
from the respective authors, accompany this dissertation.

106. PLANTAE AFRICANAE RARIORES. J. Printz. 1760.
Of all the quarters of the globe, no one displays such luxury and variety in
the production of plants as southern Africa; from whence the European gardens
have derived their most superb and ornamental species. This catalogue contains
the description of a century of the most rare, some entirely new, and others
before imperfectly noticed. It was drawn up by the author from an inspection of
the plants themselves, in a collection sent from the Cape of Good Hope; with a
view of which Dr. Laurence Burman gratified LINNAEUS, when he paid him a visit
in the summer of 1760. Extremely different as the plants of the Cape are from
those of Europe, many of the latter nevertheless thrive well in that climate.
The author has prefixed a list of 70 kinds, which occurred in looking over this
collection. He concludes this paper with a list of African plants, as an
Appendix to the Flora Capensis, No 95, before published in this collection. It
comprehends near 200 species from Oldenland's Herbarium, made in 1695. Mr.
Printz's catalogue is yet of use, as being referred to from our author's
Species Plantarum.

107. MACELLUM OLITORIUM. P. Jerlin. 1760.
Under this title our author includes the plants of the kitchen-garden; and we
are here presented with a catalogue, amounting to 77 kinds, of culinary herbs,
principally such as are found spontaneously growing, or are easily cultured. It
is drawn up on the same plan with LINNAEUS'S Materia Medica, specifying briefly
the duration of each, whether annual, biennial, or perennial; the part of the
plant in use; and the mode of dressing it: after these follows a brief
indication of the taste or other sensible qualities, and their reputed effects
on the human body.

The author divides the culinary herbs into three classes.

1. Roots: and these into fusiform, and tuberous.

2. Stalks: comprehending particularly the young and blanched shoots; as
Asparagus: and the disk of the flower; such is the Artichoke.

3. Leaves: divided into Olera, or boiling herbs, sprouts, and greens; and
Accetaria, or sallads, eaten crude.

Our author commends Parsnips, in preference to Turnips and Carrots, as being
less flatulent, and more nutritive. He condemns the use of Mushrooms: says the
disk, and the young stalks of the Cotton Thistle, (Onopordon Acanthium) may be
eaten, and resemble Artichokes. It is here repeated, that Cellery is
prejudicial to people subject to nervous disorders. The contents of this paper
would enrich an Economical Herbal.

108. MELOE VESICATORIUS. C. A. Lenaeus. 1762.
A complete history of the Meloe Vesicatorius, Syst. p. 679, or the Blistering
Fly or Beetle, an insect of the Coleopterous order, with filiform antennae, and
distinguished from the other genera by the rounded thorax, and gibbous inflexed
head. The species in common use is found all over Europe, more or less, on the
Privet, the Ash, and the Elder; but there are also three others endued with the
same vesicating acrimony, two of which are European, and the other common all
over the East, and particularly in China, where it is used in the shops; and
there are many reasons mentioned by our author to prove, that this last (the
Meloe Cichorii, Syst. 680.) is the true Cantharis of Dioscorides.

After a copious natural history of the insect, our author gives the form of
several vesicating plasters, and prescribes the places and mode of application.
In his last chapter, which is professedly medical, he treats on the internal
and external use of Cantharides, principally considering how far they are safe
and useful as diuretics, when administered internally: under this head he
introduces a case, which furnishes a caution against the use of them as
Aphrodisiacs. After premising some general observations on the action and use
of blisters, he concludes by enumerating all those diseases in which they are
salutary, and those in which they are particularly contra-indicated. In
England, where it is thought the use of blisters is better ascertained than in
some other nations, the intelligent physician will not expect to meet with much
new matter on this subject.

109. DIAETA ACIDULARIS. E. Vigelius. 1761.
It is not surprising, that in a country abounding with iron, chalybeate waters
should be frequent. In fact, these Acidulae are so in Sweden, and their
efficacy has been known, and much extolled in that country, as our author
observes, from the most ancient times. He thinks the inhabitants of those
northern climes were led to the frequent use of the Acidulae, by long
experience of the salutary effects of them as diuretics and tonics, in
remedying the inconveniences arising from a long winter's diet of salted meats,
which disposed the constitution to scorbutic, cachectic, and dropsical
disorders. The later physicians of Sweden have regulated the use, and confirmed
the good effects of them: and Mr. Vigelius, in this dissertation, has, in a
concise, elegant, and perspicuous manner, prescribed the regimen adapted to
such as enter upon a course of these waters, digested under the six well-known
heads of the Non-naturals.

110. POTUS COFFEAE. H. Sparschuch. 1761.
A very circumstantial, botanical, and medical history of the Coffee-tree, and
its fruit, (Coffaea Arabica, Sp. Pl. p. 245.) The writer is one of the last of
20 authors who have written professedly on this shrub, all of whom he
enumerates by name, with the date of their writings, from 1621 to Kalm's
treatise in 1755.

Coffee, originally the produce of Arabia Felix, where the best is now most
successfully cultivated, is called, by the Egyptians, Bon, and is first
mentioned by the Arabians about the year 900. Our author says, it was brought
into Europe about the year 1645, and that the first public coffee-house was set
up at Marseilles in 1671. The shrub itself was introduced into the European
gardens about the year 1710, by means of seeds procured from Arabia, by
Governor Van Hoorn of Batavia, who also first cultivated it in America, at
Surinam.

We are next presented with the classical, generical, and specific character of
this plant; to which succeeds a copious list of synonyms, and the description
at large, as it stands in the Hortus Cliffortianus. The culture of the shrub;
the preparation of the berry; the different times and modes of drinking this
liquor, which custom has established in the various nations; and the
succedanea to this berry, are then discussed. Among the latter are mentioned
Pease, Beans, Beech-nuts, Almonds, Maiz, Wheat, and the seeds of the Sunflower,
(Helianthus Annuus). Vide Gouan. Flor. Monsp. p. 456. Of these he prefers
Almonds, but he observes that they dispose to flatulency much more than Coffee.

In speaking of the qualities and virtues of Coffee, our author thinks it
should rather be classed with medicines, than considered as a nutritive article
in diet. He appears to be no friend to its frequent and indiscriminate use: he
thinks it destroys rather than creates appetite: that it occasions
watchfulness; and promotes flatulence and indigestion, instead of relieving
them, as is generally believed: that it debilitates the nerves, and occasions
tremblings. On this occasion he thinks it worth enquiry, whether it may not
contribute to those sudden deaths which are frequent at Stockholm about the
winter solstice, as they have been observed to happen to such as were
inordinate drinkers of this liquor: that it is antiaphrodisiac, he says, is
generally allowed; and he illustrates and confirms this quality by a pleasant
tale from Olearius's Travels: that it weakens the sight; is noxious to
melancholic, hypochondriacal, and hysterical people: that it promotes
hemorrhages of all kinds; and that a free indulgence in the use of this liquor
cannot be safe, except to the corpulent.

Considered as a medicine, from its heating quality it is forbidden in fevers.
From its stimulating and drying quality, allowed by all physicians, is deduced
its usefulness in corpulency, and in the leucorrhaea. It has been considered as
an anthelminthic; but its ill effects on the tender habits of children, more
than balance any good ones in that way. In soporose affections, in phlegmatic
and corpulent habits, our author allows its use; and from its known effect in
promoting hemorrhages, it must be considered as an emmenagogue. That head-achs
are frequently relieved by Coffee, is confirmed by daily experience; and our
author relates that LINNAEUS himself found it singularly useful in taking off a
cardialgia, with which he was affected at the time he was physician to the
fleet, in 1740; and which he attributed to the effluvia of the hospital, as it
constantly succeeded his morning visits to the sick.

111. INEBRIANTIA. O. R. Alander. 1762.
Inebriants are almost universally derived from vegetables. They are defined by
our author to be such things as affect the nerves in a particular and agreeable
manner, and through them alter and disturb the functions of the mind. They are
proproperly divided into native and artificial; the former chiefly in use among
the oriental and other nations, the latter principally throughout Europe. Of
native Inebriants the following are enumerated, and the mode of administration
and effects of them described.

1. Opium; in use all over the East, and of which the Turks, through custom,
swallow a dram.

2. Peganum Harmala, Sp. Pl. 638. Syrian Rue. The seeds are sold in Turkey for
this purpose; and with these, as Bellonius relates, the Turkish Emperor Solomon
kept himself intoxicated.

3. Maslac, of the Turks, or Bangue, of the Persians; prepared from the dust of
the male flower of Hemp, or from the leaves.

4. Bangue, of the Indians, from the leaves of the Hibiscus Sabdariffa, Sp. Pl.
978.

5. Seeds of various species of the Datura, or Thorny Apple, of which see
Rumph. Herb. Amb. 5. p. 243.

6. Pinang, or Betle of the Indians.

7. Roots of Black Henbane, (Hyoscyamus Niger, Sp. Pl. 257).

8. The Hyoscyamus Physaloides, Sp. Pl. 258.

9. Berries of the deadly Nightshade. Atropa Bella Donna, Sp. Pl. 260.

10. Leaves of Millfoil, (Achillaea Millefolium), are used by the Dalekarlians
to render their beer intoxicating. See Flor. Suec. No 770.

11. Tobacco, and several others less material, are mentioned; such are Clary,
Saffron, and Darnel.

Artificial Inebriants are fermented Liquors from farinaceous seeds; Wines and
Spirits drawn by distillation. With these our author ranks the Nectar of the
gods, and the anodyne medicine of Homer, commonly called Nepenthes; and the
spells by which Medea and Circe produced their enchantments. He then, in a most
striking and lively manner, introduces a fable to illustrate the effects of
intoxicating liquors on the human frame and passions, and after having shown
when they may be safely allowed, concludes with cautions and exhortations
against the abuse of them.

112. MORSURA SERPENTUM. J. G. Acrell. 1762.
In this tract on the venomous bites of Serpents, after a general description
of the structure of this order of Amphibia, and some observations relating to
the Boa Constrictor, Syst. 373, (Gigantic Serpent of the East Indies) and its
capacity of ingorging large animals; of the fascinating power of the Rattle
Snake, with which also, he says, the Coluber Berus, Syst. 377, or Viper, is in
some degree endued; the author describes the mechanism of the jaw, and the
venomous apparatus in Serpents; and these are illustrated with a figure. He
then gives an abstract of Redi's Experiments, and discusses the theory of the
operation of the virus, in the explication of which, he inclines to that of the
mechanical theorists, in attributing the effects rather to an almost
instantaneous alteration induced in the fluids, than to its immediate action on
the nervous system. The symptoms ensuing the puncture of the various species
are then described; those from the Viper particularly; and those of the Asp,
which kills by inducing sopor and lethargy. Three Asps are mentioned by the
ancients; that called Ptyas, he supposes to be the Coluber Ammodytes of the
moderns. See Syst. p. 376, described and figured in the Surinamensia Grilliana
of this collection, No 16. Besides those of the Rattle Snake genus, there are
eighteen of the Viper genus, furnished with venomous organs; of which a list is
subjoined. Among these none strike more suddenly fatal than the Coluber Naja,
called Cobra de Capello.

This author next treats briefly on the various remedies in use among the
ancients, and notes their general inefficacy. He then comes to discuss the
three noted antidotes of Europe, Asia, and America, which are regarded as
specifics, against the venom of the most dangerous kinds, in the respective
quarters of the globe: such are, Oil of Olives, against the Viper of Europe;
the Ophiorrhiza Mungos, against the Naja of Asia, (vide No 21 of this
collection;) and the Senega, against the Rattle Snake of America. There is
nevertheless a small venomous Viper (Coluber Chersea, Syst. p. 377.) in Sweden,
against the bite of which the oil of olives failed to produce its usual good
effects, and the patient died. The author mentions a successful case of the
administration of the Senega in Sweden. He concludes with descanting on the
Psylli of the East, or the Charmers of Serpents; and tells us that M. Jacquin
of Vienna purchased a secret of this kind in the West Indies.

113. TERMINI BOTANICI. J. Elmgren. 1762.
This paper is incapable of abridgment; it is a methodical arrangement and
complete explanation of all the terms, amounting to 673, used in describing
plants, according to the Linnaean method of botany. Somewhat of the same kind
was begun in the Hortus Cliffortianus, and is also prefixed to the enlarged
editions of the System. These terms also necessarily occur, and are explained,
in our author's Philosophia Botanica. In this paper the whole is amplified,
improved, and methodised in so excellent a manner, that no one who would gain
precise ideas on the subject would wish to be without it.

114. PLANTA ALSTROMERIA. J. P. Falk. 1762.
This plant is of American origin, and belongs to the Hexandrous class and
Monogynous order of the System. There are three species, the two first of which
were described and figured by Pere Feuillee in Peru, who ranked them with the
Hemerocallis, or Day Lily. LINNAEUS received the seeds of this singular and
beautiful plant from Cadiz, by means of C. Alstromer, son of a gentleman of
that name, counselor of the College of Commerce in Sweden; and finding it a
new genus, gave it his name. The species, here so completely described and
figured, is the Alstromeria Pelegrina, Sp. Pl. 461. The virtues of this species
are not ascertained, but the sensible qualities of the root rank it with the
Sarsaparilla; and it appears by Feuillee's account, that there is a third
species in Chili, which the natives use as a substitute for the above plant;
and LINNAEUS has hence given it the trivial name of Salsilla.

115. NECTARIA FLORUM. B. M. Hall. 1762.
Dulci distendunt nectare cellas. Virgil. Georg. iv. 164. Hence LINNAEUS gave
the term Nectarium to a particular gland or repository, which in most plants
contains the honey. This part in flowers had been but little noticed before
LINNAEUS raised it to importance; and, in his System, it affords an excellent
mark of distinction, in diverse genera and species.

Our author premises some short observations relating to the glands of plants
in various classes, which are mostly situated on the leaves or petioles. He
then proceeds to the direct design of his tract, which is to point out the
several kinds of Nectaria in flowers, and to specify the different situation of
this part in different classes, orders, or genera. It is therefore an
instructive paper to those who would attain a more complete idea of this
singular, and heretofore neglected part, the use of which, however, is as yet
imperfectly ascertained.

116. FUNDAMENTUM FRUCTIFICATIONIS. J. M. Graberg. 1762.
Having briefly stated the improvement of botany, and defined it as a science,
M. Graberg proceeds to the explanation of his term. Under the word
Fructification, he includes not merely the Corolla, Pericarpium, and Semina,
simply considered, as Tournefort had done, but also the Calyx, Nectarium,
Stamina, and Pistilla. All these parts, therefore, constitute the organs of
fructification, and on which the foundation of all true system must be laid. He
then briefly traces the rise of system from Gesner, through the improvements of
Caesalpinus, Columna, Morison, and Tournefort, down to LINNAEUS, who, by
defining, as above, the parts of fructification, first laid the basis of true
generical distinctions. He then inlarges on specifical distinctions, and shows
what constitutes varieties in plants. He proceeds to consider the generation of
hybrid plants, concerning which he favors the opinion laid down in the
Generatio Ambigena, No. 101 of this collection; that the internal structure, or
parts of fructification in hybrid plants, resemble the impregnated plant, and
the habit, or external parts, that which furnished the farina foecundans. A
singular instance of this kind is brought from the Verbascum genus. Finally, he
proposes a question, whether all the species may not have sprung from one
original in each genus, by hybrid impregnations. He thinks the contemplation of
the numerous species, under many African and American genera, adds weight to
his hypothesis.

On the whole, this paper abounds with curious matter for speculation on this
subject, and is highly worthy the regard of those who would enter more minutely
into the knowledge of botany.

117. REFORMATIO BOTANICES. J. M. Reftelius. 1762.
We are here presented with a very entertaining history of the rise, progress,
and present improved state of botany. To this end it is divided into three
epochs: 1. Under the founders of the science after the restoration of letters.
2. Under the systematics. And, 3. under the auspices of the great Swedish
botanist.

1. Among the restorers of botany, Brunsfelsius, Tragus, Gesner, Fuchsius, and
Cordus, stand foremost in the list. They may be said to close with Caspar
Bauhine, who by his incomparable Pinax, in which he collected all their
synonyms into one work, gave use to their writings and improvement to the
study, which otherwise it could not have acquired.

2. Bauhine having laid this foundation, the knowledge of plants made a rapid
progress in the seventeenth century, and received vast addition from the
discoveries of Cornutus, Marcgrave, and Piso, in America; from those of Herman,
Rheede, and Commelin, in Asia; from Sloane, Plukenet, Petiver, and Sherard;
from Tournefort, and Plumier: during which period also it was reduced to
system, from the hints of Gesner; first, by Caesalpinus, and afterward, more
successfully, by Morison, Ray, and Tournefort.

3. This author dates the epoch of reformation from the first publication by
LINNAEUS in 1735; and then collects together into one view the improvement it
has received from the labors of this great man. He enumerates the several
disciples of LINNAEUS, who assisted him, by their travels into foreign parts;
adds a list of those writers that have followed his method; and closes with a
sketch of what is yet wanting to give further perfection to the science.

118. PROLEPSIS PLANTARUM. H. Ulmark. 1760.
The theory of vegetation built by Malpighi and Grew, on the anatomy of plants,
and that of Hales and others, drawn from what may be called their physiology,
has not been followed in the Linnaean school. LINNAEUS early conceived the idea
of an analogy between plants and animals, and speaks of vegetables also, as
consisting of a medullary and cortical substance, (in the former of which the
proper life and principle of vegetation resides, and by which alone it is
propagated) considering the latter as the organs of nourishment to the former.
This idea seems also to have led him to adopt the opinion of Caesalpinus,
relating to the evolution of these two parts, in the order which is mentioned
in the 66th thesis; namely, that the Cortex, or outer Bark, is ultimately spent
in forming the Perianthium, or Cup of the flower, besides which, it must be
observed, that the leaves are produced from the cortical substance only; the
Liber, or inner Bark, in the Corolla or Petals; the Lignum, or woody part, in
the Stamina or Chives; and the Medulla, or pithy part, in the Pistillum and
Seed.

Principally to confirm and illustrate these data is the design of this thesis,
which in fact is a comment on a part of the 24th section of the Introduction to
the second tome of the System, p. 9, containing a concise view of this
doctrine. Before the author proceeds to his immediate subject, he
recapitulates, with the forementioned, some other principles, relating to the
life and organization of vegetables, and then endeavors to prove, by
appearances observable in plants, that this arrangement of parts, and this
evolution actually exists. As this cannot be so aptly illustrated in annual and
other plants, on account of the tender texture, and quick growth, the author
endeavors to exemplify it from observations made on the bud-bearing trees; in
which he observes, that the full evolution of the parts, from the origin of the
bud to the expansion of the flower, as the final act of vegetation in each, is
a progressive work, the accomplishment of which requires five or six years, and
that it takes place in the following order: That the Leaves, which are
unconnected with the medullary substance, and derive their origin from the
cortical, are the produce of the first year; and in plants and trees that are
furnished with Bracte, or floral Leaves, that such are the issue of the second
year; and the Perianthium, or Cup of the flower, of the third; the Petals of
the fourth; the Stamina of the fifth; and the Pistil, etc. of the sixth. Our
author endeavors to sustain this theory by a number of facts and observations,
tending to corroborate the doctrine advanced in this dissertation.

119. FRUCTUS ESCULENTI. J. Salberg. 1763.
The design of the Plantae Esculentae, No 34, Acetaria, No 73, and the Macellum
Olitorium, No 107, is in this paper pursued, and extended to the esculent
fruits, which are here enumerated to the number of 133, and their nature and
uses briefly pointed out. To which end they are disposed into six classes, as
follow: 1. Berries. 2. Plumbs. 3. Pomaceous Fruits. 4. Podded Fruits. 5. Grain.
6. Nuts.


120. PROLEPSIS PLANTARUM. J. J. Ferber. 1763.
Mr. Ferber, who is probably the same person that has published
Physico-geographical Travels into Italy, endeavors, in this paper, as Mr.
Ulmark has done, to illustrate and confirm the theory of vegetation received
in the Upsal school.

He first treats on the food of plants; which, without entering into any subtle
disquisitions relating to its elementary principles and composition, is defined
to be the watery tincture of the soil, received by the roots, and transmitted
to the medullary by the vascular part of the cortical substance. He establishes
it as a fact, that too great an afflux of nutriment thrown into the cortical
part, retards the fructification, by compressing the medullary. He thinks this
is proved by the state of luxuriant plants in general, and by the effects of
depriving them of this superfluity: on which head he quotes the experiments of
Mr. Fitzgerald, recorded in the Philos. Transact. vol. lii. p. 71, as
confirming the truth of the theory here advanced.

After having established the cortical part as the organ and deposit of
nutriment, he proceeds to show, that heat alone excites to action and vigor,
the life or protrusive and expansive force of the medullary part; which is ever
spent in propagating the plant, by forming buds, bulbs, or seed, as its final
and most perfect issue: and that this intention of nature succeeds in a
proportion equal to the degree of nutriment afforded by the cortical, to that
of the heat administered to the medullary part respectively.

In the second chapter, M. Ferber treats on the origin and evolution of buds;
in which he accedes to the doctrine of the progressive perfection of them,
mentioned in the dissertation just reviewed.

The last chapter is appropriated to the Involution of Plants in the Seed,
Buds, and Bulbs; in which he asserts, that in the seeds of the Nymphaea
Nelumbo, the very leaves of the future plant are visible. In bulbs the rudiment
of the next year's plant is also conspicuous: in like manner buds contain the
perfect plant, although the evolution in these requires a longer process.

Those who would attain a complete idea of the theory of vegetation, advanced
in the works of our author, are referred more particularly to the following
papers in the Amoenitates Academicae, No 24. Gemmatio Arborum, 63.
Metamorphosis Plantarum, 101. Generatio Ambigena, 118, 120. Prolepsis
Plantarum; and to the Introduction to the Vegetable System.

[It may be observed, that there is a set of experiments made by M. Mustel,
printed in the Phil. Trans. vol. lxiii. p. 126, which seem to favor the theory
of vegetation here advanced, as far at least as relates to the cortical
substance being the deposit of nutriment, and the effect of warmth on the
expansive and protrusive force of the medullary. Yet it must be allowed that
too many difficulties attend every theory on this obscurc subject.]

121. CENTURIA INSECTORUM. B. Johansson. 1763.
Insects were scarcely noticed before the time of Conrad Gesner, whose
comprehensive mind extended over the whole field of nature. He, together with
Mouffet, and Aldrovand, may be said to have laid the foundation of
entomological science. To these succeeded another set of writers, who were
principally employed in investigating the economy and surprising metamorphoses
of insects; such were Geodart, Lister, Swammerdam, and Reaumur, to whom may be
added Madam Merian, who took a voyage to Surinam, with the sole view of
gratifying a taste for this branch of natural history.

Nevertheless, after all the researches of these ingenious persons, and the
labors of our excellent Mr. Ray, a defect of system rendered this subject the
most difficult to study of any part of natural knowledge: and it will easily be
granted, that the true era of this science commences with LINNAEUS, who very
early turned his attention to it, and has established that method, which has
been since universally followed, and by which the history of these minuter
animals has been greatly extended.

The present catalogue contains the description of an hundred rare, and mostly
undescribed species, sent to LINNAEUS from Carolina, Pensylvania, Surinam, and
Java.

As all these zoological descriptions are supplemental to, and illustrative of,
the author's Systema Naturae, they yet retain their value; and cannot be
superseded, but by a general history of animals on the same plan.

122. LIGNUM QUASSIAE. C. M. Blom. 1763.
The Quassia Amara (Spec. Plant. p. 552, and p. 1679) or Bitter Ash, as it is
called in the West Indies, is a tree of the decandrous class, the root of which
was brought into use first at Surinam, by a negro, named Quassi, who revealed
its virtues. The medicine was known, but the species and true history was long
undefined, till at length a branch of the tree, with the flower and fruit, was
sent to LINNAEUS from Surinam. The root is the part used; and appears to be the
most pure and intense of all bitters. At Surinam it has acquired a high
character in curing the intermitting, exacerbating, and malignant fevers, so
endemial to that country; and this (as the author asserts) in cases where the
Quinquina has failed. It is given in any form, but most commonly in an aqueous
infusion, in the proportion of one dram to a pint, the dose of which is one
ounce.

The history of this drug is accompanied with a figure of the leaf, and parts
of fructification. Three cases of its good effects (from trials made in Sweden)
are inserted, and which are not confined to fevers only.

[There is a confirmation of its virtues in febrile cases from Mr. Farley of
Antigua, inserted in the Phil. Trans. vol. lviii. p. 81, in circumstances where
the Peruvian bark would not stay on the stomach.]

123. RAPHANIA. G. Rothman. 1763.
The disease here described is defined in the Genera Morborum of our author to
be a spastic contraction of the limbs or joints, attended with convulsions, and
excruciating periodical pains. The author gives a full description of this
disease from the two most capital Swedish writers on the subject. He had seen
it himself, and observes, that it had frequently been epidemical in that
country: moreover, that some physicians had thought it a new distemper. He has
however traced it in the writings of a numerous set of authors, from the year
1596 to 1727; by which it appears to have been common to other parts of Europe.

This dreadful distemper sometimes held the sick for three or four weeks, and
those who perished generally sunk under a diarrhoea, or died in convulsions.
Valerian, Castor, Camphor, and Antispasmodics of the like kind, appear to have
been the most beneficial remedies.

He next brings together in one view the hypotheses of the various authors,
relating to the cause of this malady, some of whom suppose it owing to a
certain constitution of the air, others to vitiated grain, Darnel, or the
Secale Cornutum; which were all rejected as unsatisfactory by Dr. E. Rosen, one
of the last and most intelligent writers on the subject. Our author says, that
in Sweden it always commenced in autumn, was frequent only among the lower
order of people, and consequent upon eating bread made of the new corn. Hence
he sought for its origin in impure admixtures with the grain, and finally his
own hypothesis attributes it to the seeds of the Raphanus Raphanistrum, (Sp.
Plant. p. 935) or Charlock; and hence the name given to the disease. The
dissertation closes with a figure and botanical description of the plant.

The hand of a master is no where more visible, than in the scientific manner
observed by Dr. Rothman in drawing up the history of this disease; and it may
be proposed as a model in its kind.

124. GENERA MORBORUM. J. Schroder. 1759.
Of this arrangement of diseases, as it stands in LINNAEUS'S own publication
made in the year 1763, a detailed account has been given before, to which the
reader is referred.

AMOENITATES ACADEMICAE, VOL. VII. 1769. pp. 506.
125. MOTUS POLYCHRESTUS. C. Lado. 1763.
There are few who do not require rather to be reminded, than convinced of the
many benefits arising from proper exercise. Its signal uses, both as a
preservative and restorer of health, are, in this dissertation concisely, but
very strikingly delineated.

After some general physiological observations on the effects of exercise, the
writer displays its efficacy as a preservative; in strengthening the body,
procuring the most genial warmth, helping digestion, increasing perspiration,
and promoting all the excretions in due time and proportion; in procuring the
most refreshing sleep, and, in valetudinary habits particularly, subduing that
fruitful source of disease, acidities in the first passages.

He then enumerates those diseases in which exercise is to be considered in a
medicinal view. In hypochondriac cases, habitual debility, languid appetite,
obstructions of the viscera, consumptions, asthma, and in various diseases from
laxity, its use has been indispensable.

In speaking of the Hemicrania, he relates that LINNAEUS himself had been
subject to violent paroxysms of that kind, which usually held him 24 hours,
with intervals rarely of little more than a week; and that these fits were
excited by very slight causes, even such as the drinking only a spoonful of
wine: and that after trying ineffectually various remedies, the professor
attributed the restoration of his health to the use of daily morning exercise,
after drinking a large draught of pure water. A case is also related of one
who, from his infancy to his 25th year, had never been free from Ascarides, but
he entirely got rid of them by taking a journey on horseback, as far as Tornoa,
in Lapland.

126. HORTUS CULINARIS. J. C. Tengborg. 1764.
Exhibiting a view of all those vegetables, which are, or which the author
thinks might, advantageously be cultivated in the fields and gardens of Sweden;
and describing, in a succinct way, the manner of propagating the several kinds
of grain; hops, tobacco, saffron; kitchen or boiling herbs, sallads, pot herbs;
fruit trees and shrubs; and finally, plants for ornament; their proper soil,
and the methods of guarding them against the severity of the climate.

127. HIRUDO MEDICINALIS. D. Weser. 1765.
There are nine species of Leeches described in the Systema Naturae, p. 1079.
That used for medicinal purposes is distinguished under the name of Hirudo
(Medicinalis) depressa nigricans, supra lineis flavis sex: intermediis
nigro-arcuatis subtus cinerea nigro-maculata. The anatomical structure and
natural history of this worm, the opinion of the ancients relating to it, the
proper time of procuring it, the method of preserving and applying it, are all
discussed. After this, the author points out those diseases in which the mode
of blood-letting by means of Leeches has been preferred to others: previous to
this, however, he quotes Zacutus Lusitanus for a case, where the Leech, during
its application, made its way into the Rectum, and takes occasion to recommend,
in any similar instance, the immediate injection of salt water; and thinks it
would be equally efficacious in the stomach, if the animal has unwarily been
swallowed, which has sometimes fatally happened.

128. OPOBALSAMUM DECLARATUM. W. Le Moine. 1764.
Among several articles of the Materia Medica, of the production of which
physicians had a very imperfect knowledge, none excited more curiosity than
this drug, called also Balm of Gilead, and Balsam of Mecca, from the place of
its growth: a drug, the virtues of which were highly extolled throughout all
the East, from the most ancient times. Near twenty authors are here mentioned,
who have written professedly on this production, but few had seen the shrub
that produced it. Prosper Alpinus says, he saw the plant growing in a
cultivated state in gardens near Cairo; but it is now doubtful whether that he
saw was the true species, though of the same genus. We owe the full discovery
of the shrub which yields it to Dr. Forskal, one of those unfortunate
gentlemen, who were sent to Arabia Felix, on the expedition planned by
Professor Michaelis, which did so much honor to the late Frederick V. of
Denmark. He saw it growing plentifully in that country, particularly about
Medina, and transmitted a branch to LINNAEUS in 1763. It is now known to be a
plant of the Monogynous order, in the Octandrous class, and belongs to the same
genus with the plant that in America yields the gum Elemi. It now stands in the
System under the name of Amyris (Gileadensis) soliis ternatis integerrimis;
pedunculis unifloris, lateralibus, Mant. 65, Syst. Not. Veg. xiii. p. 299. A
complete history of the shrub, and the virtues of the balsam, are exhibited;
concerning which we need only observe, that modern physicians have found a
substitute in other natural balsams, and therefore do not entertain so high an
opinion, as the ancients did, of the wonderful restorative powers of this drug.
The present age has made us acquainted with the plants which afford the Gum
Elemi, Animae, and Copaiba; we yet wait for the full discovery of the Balsam of
Peru, Ammoniacum, Caranna, Myrrh, Bdellium, and Sagapenum. This tract closes
with a description of the plant, which LINNAEUS honored with the name of
Forskalea. It is figured in Plukenet's Phyt. t. 275, f. 6, and stands among the
Decandriae Pentagyneae, next to the Spergula.

129. DIAETA AETATUM. D. J. Ohrquist. 1764.
A succinct view of the changes which the human body passes through, in the
several stages from the birth to extreme old age, inculcating the due
observance of all those rules respecting diet and regimen, which are best
adapted to give vigor to the constitution, and permanence of health, during
these vicissitudes. Pointing out also, under each period, the disorders
incident thereto, and laying down proper instructions how best to escape the
influence of them.

130. MORBI ARTIFICUM. N. Skragge. 1764.
It is too well known that artificers in various trades are almost necessarily
subject to dangerous and sometimes lingering diseases, which frequently shorten
the period of their lives. Miners, hewers of freestone, workers of metals,
painters, and various others, are notorious instances of this truth. But, as
our author observes, they are not the only sufferers in this way, inasmuch as a
too close application to any business or profession, will ever be attended with
insalutary effects. In this concise view of the diseases of tradesmen, the
author professes to have made all possible use of Ramazzini's work on the
subject; but he has extended that author's catalogue, and availed himself of
subsequent observations from various authors, and interspersed several of his
own. In brief, by confining his view, through the several employments of
mankind, to the immediate operation of causes, and their effects, he has
rendered this tract at the same time agreeable, instructive, and interesting.

131. LEPRA. J. Uddman. 1763.
The distemper here described has been long endemial in Norway, and in several
parts of Sweden, particularly on the eastern coast of the Bothnian Gulf, and
in Finland; also in the islands of Oeland and Gothland. So long since as the
year 1631, a pesthouse was erected in the parish of Croneby, for the reception
of the sick of that neighborhood. Our author defines the Lepra from LINNAEUS'S
Genera Morborum, as "a distemper showing itself in pustules, throwing off dry
scales or scurf; attended with moveable discolored nodes in the flesh, and
rhagades or dry fissures on the skin." No 272. Whether the distemper he
undertakes to give the history of be the same with the Lepra Arabum or
Alexandrina, the Javanensis, and the Americana, of all which he has given the
characters, he does not absolutely determine, as he inclines to think it a
disease various in its appearance. Being a native of Bothnia, he had frequent
opportunities of inspecting it, and describes it under the following
appearances in that country.

It showed itself in tubercles, or nodes, fixed in the fleshy parts, in the
forehead, cheeks, arms, hands, and thighs; these were indolent, moveable with
the finger, and of a livid hue. There were also tubercles of a livid, or
sometimes brownish-yellow cast, in the mouth, palate, fauces, and about the
root of the tongue; ulcers in the nostrils; tumors or thickenings of the edges
of the outer ears; thick lips; feet and hands enlarged and inflamed. And in
some, ulcers, or rather fissures, on the skin, creeping, broad, and deep, with
callous edges, bleeding from slight pressure or handling, but destitute of
pain, as were all the nodes and tubercles, as far as the author ever observed;
but, he says, they were inclined to itch round their bases.

We cannot pursue our author through his enquiries into all the hypotheses
relating to the cause of this disorder, howsoever ingenious; it must suffice to
observe, that he favors the theory of Exanthematic Animalcula, and, from the
frequency of this disorder on the seacoast, where the inhabitants live much
upon fish, and particularly herrings, which abound with the Gordius Marinus
(Syst. 1075) or Sea Hair-worm, adduces a train of arguments to show, that this
distemper probably originates from these worms.

In the cure, he descants upon the viper-broth of the ancients; and remarks,
that the famed viper of the East is a different serpent from ours. He next
treats on the inefficacy of mercurials as vermifuges, and quotes Dr. Scopoli as
observing, that no people are more troubled with worms than those that work in
the quicksilver-mines of Carniola. At length, against this obstinate and
formidable malady, Dr. Uddman informs us, that Dr. Russel's method of cure,
which consists in giving large quantities of seawater, assisted by the other
part of the process, to which were joined frictions with warm and acrid oils,
had been attended with more success than any other.

132. FUNDAMENTA ORNITHOLOGICA. A. P. Backman. 1765.
To all lovers of Ornithology this must have been an acceptable morsel, as
containing the rudiments of the science according to the Linnaean method, and a
full explanation of the terms therein employed. It is divided into four parts.
In the first, the author gives a brief history of Ornithologists, amongst whom
he places Belon and Gesner, as the first authors worth attention, descending to
Aldrovandus, Marcgrave, WILLOUGHBY, and RAY, before any thing like system was
introduced. To these succeed Rudbeck, whose collection of paintings, yet
unpublished, are in the hands of M. de Geer; Albin, Catesby, and Edwards, the
last of whom, from his unwearied diligence, and the opportunities that his
situation at London afforded him, had excelled all others. To these must be
added M. Brisson's publication of Reaumur's collection, as also Klein,
Brunniche, and Barrere.

In the second part, the anatomical structure and external form of this order
of animals are described. First, the form in general; then the particular
parts, explaining under each the terms used in describing them, and in forming
the generical and specific characters. This part is illustrated with a plate,
which has been copied into several succeeding works on this subject.

The third treats on the history of birds; respecting their habitations,
migrations, incubation, and the whole of their natural economy. To which is
subjoined the method of constructing scientific descriptions, and generical
characters.

The fourth exhibits a general view of the use of birds in the police of
nature; in diet, and their utility to man: and here we cannot but note the
Chavaria of Jacquin, a species of the Parra (Syst. p. 260) which is trained by
the Indians in the neighborhood of Carthagena, who breed large flocks of
poultry, that stray in the woods, to defend them against the numerous birds of
prey, no one of which will dare to encounter this bird. It is never known to
desert the flock, and returns every evening to roost. Our author touches on the
prognostics of birds in presaging weather, so well understood by seamen; and
finally, as beautiful and pleasurable objects to man.

133. FUNDAMENTA ENTOMOLOGIAE. A. J. Bladh. 1767.
The knowledge of insects may be said to be the last branch of natural history
that raised its head; notwithstanding which, it has of late attained a high
degree of perfection: nor can it be too much to attribute this to the excellent
arrangement of LINNAEUS, under whose auspices it has extended itself beyond all
other parts of zoology.

The plan of this paper is exactly that of the foregoing, and will amply
satisfy those who wish to enter on the study of insects. In his first chapter,
Mr. Bladh gives a chronological list of 32 writers on the subject, beginning
with Mouffet, who published in 1634, and ending with Schaeffer in 1767. But the
substance of this dissertation has been translated and published in English by
Mr. Curtis, so that any further account of this work is now superseded.

134. FUNDAMENTA AGROSTOGRAPHIAE. H. Gahn. 1767.
M. Gahn professes to have undertaken this tract, partly with a view to aid the
good designs of those societies, which, to the honor of their founders, have
been established in several parts of Europe, for the advancement of
agriculture; with which the subject of this paper is intimately connected.

In this large natural class of plants, called Gramina, are comprehended also
the Cerealia or Grain, and, including all that are hitherto known, do not
amount in the System of our author to fewer than 430 species; in that of others
to many more. Such a number of plants, so nearly alike in their habit as these,
must require numerous subdivisions, and nice distinctions, to discriminate each
species. To effect this is the intention of this tract, in which, after some
curious preliminary observations, relating to the station and uses that nature
seems to have assigned to some particular species, and a list of the common
grasses, classed according to their native places, the author presents us with
an historical account of the principal writers who have treated separately on
this class, exhibiting under each a brief view of their systems of
classification. These are C. Bauhine, Rudbeck, Ray, and above all, Scheuchzer,
who with incredible labor has described all the species. To these might be
added several other writers, who have also illustrated this branch of botany,
particularly Morison and Haller. Then follows the description of the natural
character and habit of a plant of this class, intended to convey a full
explanation of the terms, referring to two explanatory plates, on which is
engraven a flower of each genus.

Various have been the methods invented to class this tribe; our author here
gives them a new disposition, entirely independent on the sexual system,
established on the figure and number of the valves composing the Glume or
Calix; and those of the flower, classed under two general heads, as they grow
either in the form of Spikes or Panicles.

In all natural classes the distinctions of the genera depend on minute
differences, which require very nice discriminations; the author therefore
proceeds to point these out in several instances of this tribe: he has also
added the exceptions that arise under the several genera in various species, an
imperfection that attends all systems. He concludes with a full explanation of
his tables, which are better adapted to convey to a learner a true idea of this
class, than any that we are yet acquainted with; since Schreber's tables are
not adapted to common use in England.

135. VARIETAS CIBORUM. A. F. Wedenberg. 1767.
The immense variety in food, which custom, necessity, and luxury have
introduced, is here in a concise way displayed: the simplicity of some nations,
whether arising from penury or from climate, the Apician luxury of others, and
the various effects of the culinary art, are also briefly pointed out; then
follows a division of aliments into classes, thus, 1. Watery. 2. Dry. 3.
Pinguious. 4. Styptic. 5. Acid. 6. Bitter. 7. Viscous. 8. Salt. 9. Sweet. 10.
Acrid.
Under each are subjoined summary observations, relating to the effects of a
regimen, in which any of these classes form the prevailing part; and to its
tendency in producing particular diseases. The author then speaks on the great
power of custom on the habit, and concludes with inculcating the Ne quid nimis,
an axiom of much higher importance than any of those nice discriminations
relating to the wholesome and unwholesome, which so often perplex the minds,
and disturb the peace of many well-meaning people.

136. FERVIDORUM et GELIDORUM USUS. C. Ribe. 1765.
Dr. Ribe fixes the heat of the human body between 35 and 37 of the Celsian
thermometer, and pronounces all foods and drinks which arise to 40, to be
fervid. He considers the constant and daily use of hot aliments as an abuse
that calls for the strictest animadversion; and shows, by the effects of them
on the solids of the human body, their tendency to produce a variety of
chronical diseases, which he here specifies. Man is the only animal accustomed
to hot foods, and is almost alone affected with carious teeth. Hence he takes
occasion to condemn, in a forcible manner, the custom of drinking hot tea,
coffee, and chocolate, and dissuade his countrymen from the practice of eating
hot bread, boiled rice, puddings, and other like foods, to which perhaps, from
the severity of the climate, the Swedes are more addicted than some other
nations. He does not however conclude this part without pointing out those
cases where tepid, and even fervid liquors, are both allowable and beneficial;
such are some fevers, several of the spasmodic diseases, and those resulting
from rigidity of the fibers.

In the second part, the author reprobates the use of iced creams, jellies, and
drinks; and dissuades especially from a sort of food, unknown among us, though
frequent in Sweden: this is congealed oysters. The pernicious quality of these
he endeavors to prove by several cases. He is also not less decisive in
condemning a kind of iced maltliquor, drunk in Sweden in the summer months.
Observations on the diseases occasioned by the abuses of all these, and a
recital of the advantages of simply cool liquors, conclude this dissertation.

137. POTUS THEAE. P. C. Tillaeus. 1765.
At the time of its publication, this treatise had perhaps the merit of being
the most complete history of this shrub; occasioned by the lucky incident of
its arriving safe in a vegetating state in Sweden, through the care and skill
of Capt. Ekeberg, who is said to be the first that succeeded in the several
attempts that had been made to introduce it into Europe. LINNAEUS had suggested
the putting the seeds into earth just as the ship left China; and the success
confirmed the propriety of his method.

Tea is now known to be the leaves of a plant of the monogynous order,
belonging to the polyandrous class; the flower of which is succeeded by a
tricoccous Capsule. The writer describes the shrub at large, gives all the
synonyms, and mentions those authors who have given figures of it: among these,
Kaempfer's is the only exact one. It was long believed that there was but one
species; but the Green Tea is now said to be the produce of another, which
differs from the Bohea, in having nine petals in the flower, whereas the Bohea
has but six. It is not known to grow spontaneously elsewhere than in Japan and
China, in which latter kingdom it is cultivated in all the provinces from
Canton to Pekin.

Mr. Tilley delivers the mode of preparing the leaves, of which we have a
diffuse and most exact account by Kaempfer, who, having resided two years in
Japan, was enabled to give the most complete information. The origin of the use
of Tea in those countries is too remote to be ascertained, and commerce has now
extended its use to almost every corner of the globe. The high price of Tea, at
its first introduction, induced many physicians to think of a substitute; and
it is well known that Simon Pauli thought the Myrica Gale, Sp. Pl. p. 1453, to
be the shrub itself. Other succedanea are mentioned also by our author; such as
the leaves of the Prunus spinosa, Sp. Pl. 681. Sloe Tree. Origanum vulgar, Sp.
Pl. 824. Wild Marjorum. Rubus arcticus, Sp. Pl. 708. Arctic Bramble. Veronica
officinalis, Sp. Pl. 14. Male Speedwell. Veronica Chamaedrys, Sp. Pl. 17. Wild
Germander. Chenopodium Ambrosioides, Sp. Pl. 320. Mexican sweet Blite. Capraria
biflora, Sp. Pl. 875. Sweet-weed or Goat-weed.


To this part of our author's treatise may be added the well-known
sophistication of Tea practiced by the smugglers, in some of the southern parts
of this kingdom, who have reduced to a regular process the management of the
leaves of the Ash and Elder particularly; which, when prepared, is called
Smouch, and mixed, as is said, in the proportion of one third, with the
ordinary Teas. To what an extent the trade in this sophisticated Tea had been
carried, to the detriment of the trees, may be imagined, when the reader is
informed, that an act of parliament has lately been obtained to prohibit it,
under very severe penalties. But to return to our author.

He next considers the sensible qualities of Tea, its fragrant odor, and
styptic taste; and from its place in the System, botanically considered, with
respect to the natural orders, he thinks it highly probable, that what Kaempfer
relates of its narcotic quality, when green, is consonant to truth. And, from
similar instances, he proves that this quality may readily be thrown off by
that degree of heat which the sudden exsiccation of the leaves require.

In discussing the virtues of Tea, he observes, that the Chinese recommend the
use of it in all lethargic diseases, but condemn it in ophthalmies, colics, and
palsies. From Kalm, he tells us, the Indians of North America knew not the
inconveniences of carious teeth, debilitated stomachs, nor the women difficult
labors, until the introduction of Tea among them. That the physicians at
Hamburgh, Amsterdam, etc. attribute the frequency of the Leucorrhaea among the
women of condition to their indulgence in this liquor. And further, that
Boerhaave ascribed to the sipping hot Tea, a schirrosity in the glands of the
oesophagus, which he met with on dissection, and which he thought a disease not
known to the ancients.

The author subjoins some observations on the important and extensive influence
of Tea in a mercantile view, and as an article of luxury; and concludes with
the history of the introduction of the living plant into Europe, as above
mentioned, hinting also at the possibility of naturalizing it in other
countries. A plate of the Bohea Tea shrub is annexed.

138. POTUS CHOCOLATAE. A. Hoffman. 1765.
We are now come to the last, and what our author thinks the most salubrious,
of the three elegant articles of luxury that the moderns have acquired by the
discovery of the East and West Indies. Chocolate is the produce of an American
intertropical tree, flowering twice in a year, and singular in producing its
fruit from the body or trunk, and not from the branches. It belongs to the
Pentandrous order of the Polyadelphous class; and is distinguished by the name
of Theobroma (Cacao) foliis integerrimis, Sp. Pl. 1100.

We are presented with three methods of preparing Chocolate, as practiced by
the Indians, by the Spaniards, and by others, as follow: The Indians, to one
pound of the roasted nuts, put half a pound of sugar, dissolved in rose water,
and half a pound of flour of Mays, or Indian corn. The Spaniards, to six pounds
of the nut, add three and an half of sugar, seven pods of vanillas, one pound
and an half of flour of Indian corn, half a pound of cinnamon, six cloves, one
dram of capsicum, and whatsoever is thought requisite of the roucou-nut to
improve the color, together with ambergrease or musk, to impart an agreeable
scent. In the other, and more common way, to seventeen pounds of nuts are added
ten pounds of sugar, twenty-eight pods of vanillas, one dram of ambergrease,
and six ounces of cinnamon.

The Vanillas are the pods silled with minute seeds, from a parasitical
climbing plant, described under the name of Epidendrum Vanilla, Sp. Pl. 1347,
belonging to the Gynandrous class, with the Orchides, and like them reputed an
aphrodisiac. Spices are added to give pungency, and mitigate the oleaginous
quality of the nut.

Having detailed the history of the nut, the author considers Chocolate as an
aliment, and in a medicinal view. He recommends it in emaciating diseases, both
as aliment and medicine; and next very strenuously in hypochondriacal cases,
and in confirmation adduces that of Cardinal Richelieu, who, he says, was
restored to health by living on Chocolate. He is not less copious on its good
effects against the Hemorrhoids; in aid of which he relates a singular case,
communicated to him by the President himself.

139. SPIRITUS FRUMENTI. P. Bergius. 1764.
The Arabians have the credit of inventing the alembic, and the distillation of
ardent spirits; which they are said to have used principally, if not at first
entirely, as solvents only, to extract the virtues of simples, and exhibit them
in the form of tinctures. Our author observes from Raymond Lilly, that they
were unknown in Europe at the commencement of the 14th century; but the
distillation of spirit from fermented grain is attributed to Arnoldus de Villa
Nova, about the year 1315. Soon after this time Brandy was made in Sicily,
first from spoiled grapes, and very early became an article of great commerce
at Venice.

Having enumerated the properties of this inflammable fluid from Boerhaave's
chemistry, and described a method of preparing the grain for distillation, as
practiced in Sweden, which is different from ours, the author discusses the
salutary effects of Spirits, medicinally taken, as analeptic, diuretic,
cordial, and stomachic; under all which heads, he lays down apposite rules for
their use. Diluted with coffee, he recommends brandy as a diuretic in calculous
cases. He much prefers it to wine, as a preservative against contagious
dysenteries; and asserts, that this was clearly proved among the seamen of the
Swedish fleet, in the expedition of 1742. He then considers the imprudent use
of it; and, from its power in coagulating the fluids and indurating the solids,
deduces its effects in producing inflammatory fevers, consumptions, dropsy,
jaundice, hemorrhoids, tremors, phrensy, etc. and concludes with some
well-digested observations on the general abuse of fermented liquors, and upon
their influence on society, both in a political and moral view.

140. MENTHAE USUS C. G. Laurin. 1767.
Mint is one of those vegetables which have retained their character in
medicine from the earliest ages, it having been used by the Greeks and Romans.
England, above all other countries, abounds with plants of this genus, of which
there are not less than eleven species mentioned by the English botanists as
indigenous, the Pulegium, which is a true species of Mint, being included.

In the natural orders of botany, Mint is among the verticillated plants, which
are in general supposed to have resolvent and nervine qualities: and from these
powers arise the good effects usually ascribed to this plant, in a variety of
disorders here particularly specified.

141. PURGANTIA INDIGENA. P. Strandman. 1766.
After some preliminary observations relating to the opinions of the empirical
and dogmatic sects in medicine, as connected with his subject, and some
encomiums on the institution of hospitals, as affording a field of observation
and experiment to the physician, which private practice does not allow, the
writer presents us with a catalogue of such vegetables as are endued with a
purgative quality, confining his tract to such as are either indigenous, or
easily cultivated in the gardens of Sweden. Under each he mentions the place of
growth, the part used, its preparation, the dose, the effects, and the
disorders in which it has principally been employed as a purgative. We subjoin
a summary catalogue.

1. Rhamnus Frangula, Sp. Pl. p. 280. Frangulae Cortex. Bark of berry-bearing
Alder.

2. Rhamnus Catharticus, Sp. Pl. 279. Spinae Cervinae Baccae. Buckthorn Berries.

3. Linum Catharticum, Sp. Pl. 401. Purging Flax.

4. Eupatorium Cannabinum, Sp. Pl. 1173. Hempagrimony. Leaves. Root.

5. Genista Tinctoria, Sp. Pl. 998. Dyers-weed. Seeds and Flowers.

6. Prunus Spinosa, Sp. Pl. p. 681. Acaciae Nostratis Flores. Flowers of
Black-thorn, or Sloetree.

7. Berberis vulgaris, Sp. Pl. 471. Berberry Bark.

8. Convolvulus Sepium, Sp. Pl. 218. Root of the great Bindweed.

9. Valeriana officinalis, Sp. Pl. 45. Valerian Root.

10. Bryonia alba, Sp. Pl. 1438, Bryony Root.

11. Sambucus Ebulus, Sp. Pl. 385. Root of Dwarf Elder.

12. Lichen Aphthosus, Sp. Pl. 1616. Fine green Liverwort, or aphthose
Liverwort. The author relates the case of a young woman, to whom this medicine
had been given as an anthelminthic, who voided under its operation, instead of
the usual intestinal worms, a large quantity of the Larvae or Maggots, of the
Phalena Pinguinalis, a species of Moth, described in the System, p. 882.

13. Lycopodium Selago, 1565. Firr Club-moss.

14. Thalictrum aquilegifolium, Sp. Pl. 770. Feathered Columbine, or Meadow
Rue. The Root.

15. Polypodium vulgar, Sp. Pl. 1544. Polypody.

16. Viola odorata, Sp. Pl. 1324. Root. Doubtful.

17. Gratiola officinalis, Sp. Pl. 24. Hedge Hyssop.

18. Asarum europaeum, Sp. Pl. 633. Asarabacca.

19. Rheum palmatum, Sp. Pl. 531. Rhubarb.

20. Mirabilis longiflora, Sp. Pl. 252. The author thinks it probable that the
Jalap of the shops is a root of this genus. Some English botanists have rather
supposed it to be a Convolvulus.

21. Momordica Elaterium, Sp. Pl. 1434. Wild or Spirting Cucumber. The fecula
of the Juice.

The Hedge Hyssop, and Asarabacca, are emetics; and the author thinks the root
of the Sweet Violet is endued with the same quality as the Ipecacuanha, which
is now pretty well determined to be of that genus. See Syst. Not. 2d ed. xiii.
p. 669.

142. SIREN LACERTINA. A. Osterdam. 1766.
A complete history of the Lizard Siren, or Mud-Inguana, of Carolina, a new
amphibious, biped, eel-shaped animal, furnished both with gills and lungs; the
former placed entirely without the body. This animal is so singular in its
structure, as to have occasioned LINNAEUS to form a new order, under the term
Meantes, which is placed between the Amphibia and Nantes. It is sometimes seen
two feet long, and sends forth a cry somewhat like that of the young of the
Duck kind, but more acute and clear. It is described and figured by Mr. Ellis,
in the Phil. Trans. vol. lvi. p. 189.

143. METAMORPHOSIS HUMANA. J. A. Wadstrom. 1767.
An ingenious and elaborate dissertation on the changes which the human system
undergoes in the several stages of life, from the birth to extreme oldage,
divided into twelve periods. Under each of these, Man is considered, with
respect to all those changes which succeed each other, in the structure and
discharge of the several functions of the body; or otherwise, both anatomically
and physiologically; with respect to the diseases of each stage; and finally,
he is throughout contemplated in regard to the powers of the mind, the
affections, and the passions.

This detailed view is succeeded by tables, in which, under the same periods,
is delineated the different temperature of the body; the different degrees of
muscular strength; the powers of motion; the appetites; affections; passions;
the exercise of the mental faculties, and their aptitude to works of genius,
science, and judgment; the powers of speech and oratory; and the whole closes
with a Scala Aetatum, containing all the tables brought together, and
scientifically opposed to each other. This paper is closely connected with, and
properly accompanies, the Senium Salomoneum, No 90, and the Diaeta Aetatum, No
129.

144. CURA GENERALIS. J. G. Bergman. 1766.
In a foregoing part of these memoirs, a short account was given of LINNAEUS'S
Theory of Physic, or his Clavis Medicinae; in which was observed the
distinction that he has made between the cortical and medullary, or in other
words, the vascular and nervous systems of the human body. The present
dissertation is a comment on the first part of the Clavis, relating to the
diseases of the vascular system. Dr. Bergman traces the immediate effects, both
upon the solids and fluids, of any excess or defect in the Air, Nourishment,
Motion and Rest, Sleep and Watching, Excretions and Retentions. The Passions,
as being more immediately connected with the medullary, or nervous system, do
not belong to his scheme. Having discussed the ill consequences of these errors
to the constitution, and remarked the diseases originating from thence, he
turns to the consideration of the old canon, "that diseases are cured by their
contraries," and, agreeably to the theory of his master, that such as spring
from these errors are principally the objects of dietetic medicine, and are to
be cured by Sapids, he produces the several classes of Aquosa, Sicca, Acida,
Amara, Pinguia, Styptica, Dulcia, Acria, Mucosa, Salsa, and shows their power
in preventing and curing diseases; concluding his tract with the distinction
between the rational and empirical physician.

In mentioning the scurvy, and the effects of salted meat, he relates a
memorable instance of an arthritic patient, who, after taking, in one summer,
1800 boles of Mrs. Stephens's medicine, became in the highest degree afflicted
with the genuine scurvy, which he thinks might fairly be attributed to the
quantity of alkaline salt contained in that medicine.

145. USUS MUSCORUM. A. H. Berlin. 1766.
The uses of this class of vegetables in well-cultivated countries, and in
benign climates, can be but little known; in the northern regions they are
conspicuous. The writer, after having mentioned those botanists who have
particularly attended to this class, and given due praise to the matchless work
of Dillenius on the subject, displays the particular advantages of mosses in
the general economy of nature; for instance, the terrestrial Liverworts lay the
first foundation of soil on barren rocks, as the Sphagnum, and many other bog
mosses, do in marshy and boggy places. In human economy, nothing is more
remarkable than the utility of the reindeer moss, in the arctic regions. Many
of the liverworts are ingredients in dyeing; and several mosses have their
place in medicine, among which particularly may be mentioned the Lichen
Islandicus, Sp. Pl. 1611. Iceland, or Eryngo-leaved Liverwort, of the virtues
of which, in consumptions, Dr. Scopoli has written a distinct treatise,
published in the Annus 2 dus Historico-naturalis. Lips. 1769.

The reader will find a paper, written by the author of this volume, on the
uses of this order of plants, in the Philosophical Transactions for the year
1758, vol. l. p. 652 -- 687.

146. MUNDUS INVISIBILIS. J. C. Roos. 1767.
The subjects of this thesis have been much agitated of late years by the
philosophical literati, who have been skilled in the use of microscopes. It
turns principally on the discoveries of the Baron Munkhausen, relating to the
smut of wheat and barley, and to the dust of the Lycoperda, or Puff-balls;
Agarics, and other Fungi; which he has asserted to be no other than the ova of
animalcula: from whence had arisen a doubt, whether mushrooms should be ranked
with vegetables or animals. LINNAEUS adopted, though with great hesitation, the
Baron's opinion, as appears from his Systema Not. p. 1326; but his sentiments
on this subject, after the experiments made by our late Mr. Ellis, who, at his
request, instituted a course professedly to determine this point, do not
appear. The result of Mr. Ellis's enquiry proved the negative, as may be seen
by his papers, published in the Phil. Trans. vol. lix. p. 138, and Gent.
Magazine for 1773, p. 316. Much curious matter on this subject occurs in Mr.
Roos's paper; but we conclude with an important fact, related from the Baron's
book, who recommends the seed wheat to be washed in a lie made of lime and
sea salt; by which practice, for twenty years, he had secured his crop from
smut, although his neighbors around him had sometimes lost a third part of
theirs. In the latter part of the thesis, the author descants on exanthematic
animalcula, and appears to favor that hypothesis; heartily confessing,
however, the difficulties that occur, and concluding with a string of doubts,
proposed by way of queries, relating to this abstruse point.

147. USUS HISTORIAE NATURALIS. M. Aphonin. 1766.
This ingenious discourse, written by a young Russian nobleman, a student at
Upsal, is one of the most entertaining and best-digested papers on the subject,
that this collection affords, and cannot fail to carry conviction with it. It
is divided into two parts: in the first, he displays the necessity of a
knowledge of natural history at large, in leading the way to improvements in
all branches of agriculture, and in gardening: the utility especially of being
acquainted with the indigenous plants of the country, an object greatly
neglected, and which, if more attended to, must lead, as he endeavors to show,
to the improvement of woods, hedges, the culture of barren ground, wet meadows;
to the extirpation of hurtful plants, and the better adapting pastures to the
several kinds of cattle. To illustrate this latter position, he mentions a
memorable fact, related by LINNAEUS in the Iter Scanicum, of a number of goats
which were perishing in an island that abounded with the Reed Bent Grass,
(Agrostis arundinacea) a plant on which horses feed with avidity, and thrive
greatly. Thus also, on the other hand, goats will riot and fatten on the Meadow
Sweet, (Filipendula Ulmaria), whilst horses, and horned cattle especially when
they are young, will not touch it.

The second part abounds with curious observations concerning the economy of
domesticated animals; in treating on which he points out both the most
nutritive and noxious herbs to each species; descending afterward to domestic
fowls, and the inferior parts of the animal creation, which are more
particularly the objects of husbandmen. A plate is added, on which is engraven,
together with a rare species of Henbane, the Actaea Cimicifuga, Sp. Pl. 722,
famous in Russia and Tartary, beyond all other things, for expelling bugs, and
some other noxious insects.

148. NECESSITAS HISTORIAE NATURALIS ROSSIAE. A. De Karamyschew. 1766.
This paper is also written by a Russian nobleman, and is intended to excite
his countrymen to a diligent cultivation of the study of natural history, as a
science eminently beneficial to a rising people. To this purpose he endeavors
to raise their emulation, by showing the progress it has made in the eastern
nations of Europe, displaying its beneficial influences; and by exhibiting the
vast field which the empire of Russia affords. He then gives some biographical
anecdotes of those who have improved the natural history of that country, under
the patronage and command of their sovereigns, from the time of Peter the
First. Such were Messerchmidius, Buxbaum, Gmelin, the last of whom sojourned in
Siberia from 1733 to 1743. Krascheninnikow, Martin, Steller, Amman, and others.
He then recites, from the Museum Petropolitanum, a list of zoological subjects
for further investigation, which, although natives of Russia and Siberia, are
yet very imperfectly known. He endeavors to persuade his countrymen to the
culture of a number of useful vegetables, by presenting them with a long
catalogue of exotics, that have been in some sort naturalized at Abo in
Finland, under the care of Professor Kalm. His tract concludes with a list of
plants which are natives of Siberia, extracted from the MSS. of Heinzellmann,
Gerber, Lerche, and Schober; all which MSS. were in the hands of LINNAEUS. A
figure of a specious Siberian plant accompanies this tract. It is the Fumaria
Spectabilis, Sp. Pl. p. 933.

149. RARIORA NORWEGIAE. H. Tonning. 1768.
The pen of a learned, ingenious, and skilful naturalist is visible in this
agreeable specimen of natural history. The writer first traces the origin of
the science among the Danes, whose monarchs have lately been its celebrated
patrons. Among the principal modern writers stands Gunner, the late Bishop of
Dronthem, who, to the highest merit in his sacred profession, also added an
exquisite taste for natural history, and a consummate knowledge in that
science, as his writings fully testify. Neither is Mr. J. Strom forgotten, who
published, in 1762, a natural history of Sondmore, in the diocese of Bergen.
After this literary introduction, the principal intention of the writer is to
exhibit lists of the more rare subjects of nature, especially such as are not
common in Sweden. Agreeably to this design, we have a catalogue of the peculiar
plants of Norway, the alpine, some other rare species, and particularly of the
Fuci, or Sea Wracks, with which the coast of Norway abounds. Also a list, from
the Dronthem Act;, tom. II. of all the American fruits, which are thrown on the
Norway shore every year, and which have raised much speculation among the
curious, to account for their transmission so particularly to that part of
Europe. The author asks the solution of this difficulty from the learned;
inasmuch as they are sometimes found in no inconsiderable quantity, and so
recent as to germinate, upon being properly secured from the climate. These
fruits are usually the Cassia Fistula: Anacardium, or Cushew Nuts: Cucurbitae
Lagenariae* Bottle Gourds: Pods of the Mimosa Scandens; Sp. Pl. p. 1501, called
Cocoons in the West Indies: Pods of the Piscidia Erythrina, called Dog-wood
Tree by Sloane: and Coco-nuts.

The author next pursues his catalogue through all the classes of animals,
using only the Linnaean trivial names, and referring to the Fauna Suecica, to
Gunner, and to Strom. It may be observed, that the latter writer thinks that
what deceived the fishermen, and by their means Bishop Pontoppidan, under the
appearance of a serpent of the extraordinary length described in his History of
Norway, was no other than a string of sturgeon, which, at the stated time of
the year, follow each other in a line in immense numbers, with only their backs
above water; which might suggest the idea of the waving motion of a serpent.

The remaining part of the tract chiefly respects the medicinal plants, and the
diseases of the country. An account of some vegetable productions, which form
an article of commerce, being exported in considerable quantities, among which
are reckoned the Cloud-berry, (Rubus Chamaemorus, Sp. Pl. 708), and the Lichen
Islandicus, mentioned in the account of the Usus Muscorum, No 145. Then follows
a list of medicines easily obtained, or such as are in use among the country
people. Among these the good effects of the Linnaea borealis, Sp. Pl. 880, in
rheumatic disorders, are well known, and much celebrated. He relates, on the
authority of the President himself, that two men, who had been confined to
their bed for several months by ischiatic pains, were cured in three days by a
strong decoction of it. Its operation appears to have been of the sedative
kind, since the patients were thrown into a sleep, which lasted sixteen or
twenty hours. He confirms the opinion of the Lepra arising from the Hair Worm,
as mentioned in No 131 of this collection; and has some observations relating
to the Colica Lapponum, described in M. Montin's thesis, No 27. The
dissertation closes with the description of an African plant, called by
LINNAEUS Gunnera, in honor of the Bishop of Dronthem.

150. ITER in CHINAM. A. Sparrman. 1768.
We presume this is the same person who afterward made the voyage round the
world with Dr. Forster, in Capt. Cook's ship, and has since traveled over a
large tract of country in southern Africa, in pursuit of those gratifications
which his zeal for natural history enabled him to enjoy. The present voyage,
which was begun Dec. 28, 1765, and finished July 21, 1766, was made with Capt.
Ekeberg, who has been mentioned as having first introduced the tea shrub into
Sweden. This epitome of the voyage consists of little more than an enumeration
of those subjects of natural history, which occurred to the journalist, both at
land and at sea; for as he makes use of the trivial names, all descriptions are
superseded; except that, in the notes, some of those imperfectly known are more
amply detailed.

OBSERVATIONS, tending to show the Utility of botanical Knowledge in Relation
to Agriculture, and the feeding of Cattle: accompanied with a Translation of
LINNAEUS'S Pan Suecus, accommodated to the English Plants, with references to
Authors, and to Figures of the Plants.
THE science of botany certainly holds its most dignified station when
subservient to medicine; but its utility does not terminate in this alone,
though it has too long been considered as having no other connection. This,
notwithstanding, is but a partial, nay even an injurious idea of it, for
nothing has more retarded its usefulness than this contracted notion. It has a
relation, in a variety of ways, to many other arts and sciences. Among which
may be mentioned the art of painting and dying; but of all others Agriculture
certainly claims the strictest relation, some of its most important branches
being greatly dependent upon it, and others, from an happy application of it,
being perhaps capable of further emolument. The subsequent paper, it is
presumed, will, in some measure, illustrate this truth. But howsoever great the
real dignity and importance of this art, yet, it must be allowed, that it has
not been cultivated sufficiently on scientific principles, nor advanced in
equal proportion with other branches of knowledge. It is not many years since
Dr. Home observed, that Virgil and Columella, old as they are, remained almost
the only writers worth consulting upon this subject. The writings of Mr. Heart,
Dr. A. Hunter, Lord Kaims, Mr. Young, and of many others since published in our
own nation, we hope have superseded Dr. Home's remark; and, from that laudable
spirit now diffusing among us throughout Great Britain, for the improvement of
Arts and Sciences, under the protection of our public institutions, we may
expect to see every branch of agriculture studied as it deserves, and attended
with that success which commonly results from the right application of
knowledge to the purposes of human life. On the continent, the Swedes are
making large and daily progress in the improvement of this branch of economics.
In France, Mr. Du Hamel has rendered himself conspicuous by his writings on
this subject; and in various parts of Europe, societies have been formed with a
professed view to this end. We cannot help mentioning, with peculiar pleasure,
that of Padua, over which Dr. Arduin presides, who, by the munificence of the
Venetian state, has a garden allotted for the cultivation of such vegetables as
they wish to subject to experiments in agriculture, dyeing, and other arts. A
noble institution, and worthy of imitation!

Amidst that almost infinite variety of vegetables, with which the beneficent
hand of nature has replenished our earth, those which go under the general name
of Grasses form the principal food of our cattle; next to these, among the
natural classes of plants, none are more acceptable than the diadelphous or
leguminous herbs: of this class is the Clover, so much cultivated in England;
the Saint Foin, or Cocks-head; and the Lucern, or Medicfodder, in France.
Besides these, our horses, horned cattle, sheep, etc. will all, in their turn,
eat with equal pleasure, and some with more avidity, a great variety of other
vegetables. Numerous instances occur where one species of animals will feed
greedily upon those herbs which others refuse to touch, and will even almost
famish rather than eat. Some plants are highly noxious, and even poisonous, to
certain kinds of animals, while they are eaten by others without the least
subsequent ill effect: to instance, the Cicuta Virosa, or longleaved Water
Hemlock, the most virulent plant which grows spontaneously in England, (but
happily is not common) is fatal to cows, when, through scarcity of food, they
are obliged to eat it; yet sheep and horses feed on it with impunity, and goats
even greedily devour it.

-- Videre licet pinguescere saepe Cicuta
Barbigeras pecudes, homini quae est acre venenum.
LUCR. Facts of this kind must, in some measure, have been obvious to the most
incurious of mankind, even in the earliest ages. The first race of shepherds
had daily instances, among their flocks, of the selection and refusal of
particular herbs, and subsequent observations must have multiplied and
confirmed them. But they were still only known in the general, and no
experiments had been instituted to ascertain the precise species thus eaten or
rejected. The facts are, at this time, undeniable. It is well known that
Flag-flowers, Hounds-tongue, Henbane, Mullein, Nightshade, Hemlock, several
Docks, Arsmart, Agrimony, Celandine, several Crowfoots, Marsh Marigold,
Horehound, Figwort, many Thistles, Fern, and other plants, are commonly
neglected by our horses, and horned cattle, and stand untouched, even in
pastures where it might be expected that necessity should constrain them to eat
any thing. These are but a few out of many instances; there are more than is
commonly imagined, and it was desirable, in consequence of these observations,
that a course of experiments should be instituted to elucidate this instinct,
in that part especially of the brute creation which is so immediately
subservient to mankind. The utility of such experiments must be evident, as
they must necessarily lay the foundation of farther improvements in the economy
of cattle. The intelligent husbandman would, by this means, have it in his
power to rid his pastures of noxious and useless plants, and give room for the
salubrious ones.

In this view of the affair, it will be seen that physicians are not the only
persons who may study botany to advantage; many others would find, not only a
fund of pleasure from this study, but numberless other advantages resulting
from the knowledge of the plants of their own country. In the instance before
us, science has opened the way, and surely it is not too much to say, that it
evidently points to greater improvements, in one of the most important branches
of agriculture, as it relates to the economy of cattle. More than this ought
not to be expected from its aid. It is to the intelligent grazier and the
gentleman, well versed in the knowledge of the indigenous plants, fraught with
careful observation, and practiced in the economy of cattle, that the rest must
be owing. Nothing but the want of this knowledge, in such gentlemen as reside
in the country chiefly, can deprive us of the benefit which might otherwise
accrue from reducing it into practice. The eradicating from pastures poisonous
and useless weeds, would be but one, although indeed no mean one, among many
other advantages. Further than this, the husbandman would be better enabled to
suit his several sorts of cattle to the different pastures in his possession,
more to their benefit, and consequently his own. Even in marshy grounds, where
it is a difficult undertaking to mend the soil, the growth of many plants might
be encouraged, and the seeds of others sown, which are highly acceptable to
different kinds of cattle. By degrees too we should undoubtedly be led to the
cultivation of other vegetables besides clover, as fodder; and the foregoing
observations imply, that this might be done in soils and situations where that
would not thrive. Our hay would in consequence be much improved; for although
cattle will eat those herbs among hay, which they reject while green and
growing, yet it does not follow that all are in their dried state equally
nutritive and wholesome. The benefits, in fine, which would arise from a
diligent and general pursuit of these hints, would undoubtedly be various and
extensive, and many more, in all probability, in a course of years, than can at
present be thought of.

Agreeably to these ideas, a beginning has been made, under the auspices of our
celebrated author, whose attempt was truly laudable, and worthy of himself. To
this end, it is indeed certainly the province of the botanist to make the
plants of his own country the principal objects of his attention. This has been
eminently the case with LINNAEUS, and his country will continue to reap the
fruit of his labors. The result of these experiments may be seen in a paper,
called PAN SUECUS, printed in the second volume of the Amoenitates Academicae,
the substance of which, so far as the experiments were made with plants common
to this country, will be exhibited in the subsequent pages.

LINNAEUS conceived the first design of this institution from observations made
in his Dalekarlian journey, which has been mentioned in the course of the
preceding pages: he observed, that his horses left untouched, among other
plants, Meadow-sweet, Great Wild Valerian, Lilly of the Valley, Angelica,
Rose-bay Willow Herb, Marsh Cinquefoil, Mountain Crowfoot Crane's-bill, Globe
Crowfoot, and various shrubs. It was not till several years after, that these
experiments were instituted; in which a number of his pupils were engaged;
eight or nine of whom he mentions by name, and he had himself a large share in
directing and conducting them. More than two thousand experiments were tried
upon the horned cattle, goats, sheep, horses, and hogs: many were repeated ten,
and some twenty times, with the sole view of determining what vegetables these
several animals would eat or reject. It is easy to see that numberless
difficulties must arise in the prosecution of this scheme, and that
imperfection, in a variety of instances, must at last attend their greatest
accuracy. In the mean time, care was taken, as far as circumstances would
admit, that the experiments were made as unexceptionably as possible; and it
must be concluded, that the result upon the whole is true, as they have a real
foundation in those unerring laws of instinct, to which nature has subjected
the whole brute creation. The plants were all fresh gathered, not bruised in
collecting, nor offered to the cattle when they were either almost famished, or
glutted with variety; nor yet in the springtime, when many of them greedily
devour almost any vegetable they can get, sometimes such as are fatal to them,
and which at other times they will not touch. The plants were also, in many
examples, offered to several individuals of the same species.

These trials were made only with the indigenous plants of Sweden, which are
(at least three fourths) the same as ours in England. The plants growing
spontaneously in Sweden, exclusive of the mosses and funguses, amount to about
900 species. Of such a number, in every country, many must be very rare; it is
not therefore to be expected that all these could be brought to trial. Some,
although plentiful in one part of the country, would be very sparingly found in
another. From the result it appeared, that the horned cattle eat of the plants
which were offered to them* only 276 species, and that they rejected 218. The
goats, of 449 kinds, refusing 126. The sheep, of 387, refusing 141. The horses,
of 262 species, refusing 212. And of those which were offered to swine, they
eat 72 kinds, and refused 171.

The Pa^ Suecus, it may be presumed, is but in few hands, at least of such whom
the subject most concerns. It is written in Latin, and put into the most
compendious form imaginable, by inserting only the trivial names of the plants,
and referring to the number in the Flora Suecica, where the synonyms are given.
In this form it is almost useless to persons unacquainted with LINNAEUS'S
writings, and from an English reader is entirely hid. It appeared of importance
enough to be thrown into an English dress, to which end it was necessary to
give it a form different from the original.

So far as the trials were made with plants which are common to both countries,
the result may be seen in the following pages, and they amount to no very
inconsiderable number. Being taken nearly in the order in which they stood in
the original paper, so the sexual system is of course preserved. Yet perhaps a
more apt disposition of them might have been given, by arranging them according
to their usual places of growth.

In order to render it more generally intelligible and acceptable, the English
name of the plant is first given, then the Linnaean generical and trivial name,
by which it may instantly be found, either in LINNAEUS'S own works, or in Mr.
Hudson's Flora Anglica. To these follow three columns. The first contains the
reference to the page in Dr. Hill's British Herbal, which it may be presumed is
in many hands, and which has now superseded, in a great measure, the Herbals of
Gerard and Perkinson, being better accommodated to the purposes of botanic
intelligence, and furnished also with figures. The second column refers to the
page in RAY'S Synopsis of British Plants, where the synonyms of the two
Bauhines, and those of Gerard and Parkinson, are quoted. By this means the
reader is very compendiously directed to a variety of authors on each plant.
For the sake of those who wish to see an accurate figure, a reference to the
Flora Danica is added, a work coming out at the expense of the King of Denmark,
and intended to contain all the indigenous plants of that kingdom, of which 840
plates are already done. Of these above 500 are natives of this kingdom, on
which account it supplies, so far, the want of a work of the same kind here. It
must, however, be observed, that in this column, under the Grasses, those
excellent tables in Morison's Historia On this head it is much to be regretted,
that these tables are not republished separately, with the history of the
Grasses and Grain annexed; a work which, if executed by a proper hand, could
not but be acceptable to all lovers of rural economy. This view might be
rendered still more complete, by extending it to all those plants which are
particularly the objects of this paper.
Plantarum Oxoniensis are referred to. The columns on the other page contain
the result of the experiments, for brevity's sake expressed as in the original,
by numerical characters, which it will be necessary to illustrate. There is a
column retained for every species of animals with which the experiments were
made in Sweden; for, although goats are not so commonly kept with us, as in
that country, yet it will at least be matter of entertainment, if not of
utility, to see what choice of vegetables they will make.

When this figure (1) is made use of, it denotes that the plant is eaten by
that animal to which the column is appropriated; (O.) horned cattle or Oxen;
(G.) Goats; (Sh.) Sheep; (H.) Horses; (S.) Swine. Two units, thus (11) denote
that the animal is very fond of the plant. When the cipher (0) occurs, we are
to understand that the plant is rejected by that animal. When both are found
together in a column, thus (10), or (01), they denote that it was sometimes
eaten and sometimes rejected: the former is supposed to signify, that it was
generally eaten, but sometimes refused; the latter, the reverse. Where no
figure occurs, it is to be understood that no opportunity had been taken of
making a trial of that plant upon those animals. The native place of each plant
is added, and the month in which it flowers, in as compendious a manner as
possible, as this seemed to be a requisite addition; also its duration, whether
annual (A.), biennial (B.), or perennial (P.). To the whole are collected and
subjoined, from the last edition of the Flora Suecica, the Flora Oeconomica,
RAY'S Historia Plantarum, HALLER'S Enumeratio Stirpium Helvetiae, and others, a
few notes, pointing out particularly the noxious plants, or directing the
reader's observation to any other article that seemed worthy of regard.

TABLES of the PAN SUECUS, accommodated to the ENGLISH Plants.
MONANDROUS PLANTS. Hill. Ray. Flora Dan. 1. JOINTED Glasswort. Salicornia
Europaea. A. -- 482.1. 136.1. 303. 2. Mare's Tail: Paddow Pipe. Hippuris
vulgaris. P. -- 481.1. 136. 87. DIANDROUS PLANTS. 3. Privet Bush. Ligustrum
vulgar -- 519. 465. 4. Inchanter's Nightshade. Circaea lutetiana. P. 138. 289.
210. 5. Male Speedwell. Gunner, in the Flora Norwegica, says this species is
more particularly acceptable to sheep. The same author observes, that all the
animals on whom these experiments were tried, greedily eat the Paul's Betony:
Veronica serpyllifolia, which is not uncommon on our dry pastures.
Male Speedwell. Veronica officinalis. P. -- 91.2. 281. 248. 6. Wild Germander.
V. Chamaedrys. P. -- 91.3. 281. 448. 7. Germander Speedwell. V. agrestis. A. --
92.6. 279.4. 449. 8. Ivy-leaved Speedwell. V. hederifolia. A. -- 92.5. 280.7.
428. 9. Common Brooklime. V. Becabunga. P. -- 95.1. 280.8. 511. 10. Long-leaved
Brooklime. V. Anagallis aquat. P. 95.2. 280.9. 11. Narrow-leaved Brooklime. V.
scutellata. P. 95.3. 280.10. 209. 12. Butter-wort, or Yorkshire Sanicle.
Wherever this plant is found, it is a certain indication of a boggy soil. It
has long had the reputation of being noxious to sheep, among our country
people, who believe it gives them the rot, whenever they eat it, which they
will not, but from great necessity: they hence called this plant White Rot.
Parkinson.
Butter wort, Yorkshire Sanicle. Pinguicula vulgaris. P. -- 107.1. *281.1. 93.
13. Vervain. Verbena officinalis. P. -- 356. 236. 628. 14. Water Horehound.
Lycopus Europaeus. P. -- 355. 236. 15. Vernal Grass. Fine hay owes much of its
grateful odor to the abundance of this grass amongst it. Scheucbz. It is one
of the first flowering grasses* in the spring, and is very common in our
fertile pastures.
Vernal Grass. Anthoxanthum odoratum. P. 499. 398. 666. TRIANDROUS PLANTS. 16.
Great wild Valerian. Valeriana officinalis. P. 340.1. 200.1. 570. 17. Marsh
Valerian. V. dioica. P. -- 340.3. 200.3.4. ^87. 18. Lambs Lettuce: Corn Sallet.
V. Locusta. A. 342.1. 201.1. 738. 19. Flag-flower. This ever remains untouched
by all these animals except goats, though every herb around it he consumed to
the ground, Lin* The same observation we have made relating to the Stinking
Gladwyn, which is not uncommon in lanes, and under hedges, in the West of
England.
Flag-flower: Yellow Flower-de-luce. Iris Pseud Acorus. P. -- 472.1. 374. 494.
*20. Stinking Gladwyn. I. soetidissima. P. -- 473.3. 375.3. GRASSES. Morit.
Hist. 8. **20 Long-rooted Bastard Cyperus. Schaenus Mariscus. P. -- 504.1.
426.4. 20. Millet Cyperus Grass. Scirpus sylvaticus. P. 504.5. 426.5. 11.15.
21. Bull Rush. S. lacustris. P. -- 504.1. 428.1. 10.1. 22. Club Rush, or
Aglet-headed Rush. S. palustris 504.6. 429.7. 10.32. 23. Cotton Grass.
Eriophoron polystachion. P. -- 506. 435. 9.1. 24. Mat Grass. Nardus stricta. P.
-- 497.1. 393.2. 7.8. 25. Reed Canary Grass: Great Reed Grass, with chaffy
heads. Phalaris arundinacea. A. 500. 400.1. 6.41.

O. G. Sh. H. S. 1. 0 0 0 1 In salt marshes, common. 8, 9. 2. 0 1 0 0 0 In
standing waters and ponds. 5. 3. 1 1 1 0 In hedges and woods. 5. 4. 1 In woods
and thickets. 6, 7. 5. 1 1 1 1 In dry pastures and woods. 5. 6. 1 1 In meadows
and pastures, very common. 4 -- 6. 7. 1 1 1 1 In dry pastures, common. 5 -- 8.
8. 1 1 1 1 In corn fields and fallow ground. 4 -- 6. 9. 1 1 1 0 In shallow
waters, common. 6, 7. 10. 1 1 1 0 0 With the foregoing. 7, 8. 11. 1 1 1 1 In
watery places, not common. 6. 12. 0 0 0 0 On bogs, especially in the North. 5,
6. 13. 0 0 1 0 By way sides, and waste places. 6, 7. 14. 0 1 1 0 By ditches and
brooks, common. 7. 15. 1 1 1 1 In meadows and pastures every where. 5. 16. 0 1
1 0 0 In woods, hedges, and by waters. 6. 17. 1 1 In moist and boggy meadows.
7. 18. 1 1 Amongst corn, and on corn grounds. 4, 5. 19. 0 1 0 0 0 In watery
places. 7. *20. 0 0 0 Under hedges and bushes, in the South. 7. Bastard
Cyperus. This plant is said to be very noxious, and even fatal to cows that eat
it. Gunner.
20. On bogs, and in salt marshes. 7, 8. 20. 1 1 1 1 0 By rivers and brooks. 7.
21. Bull Rush. The peasants of Sweden, in defect of hay, fodder their cows with
Bull Rushes.
0 1 0 1 In waters. 7, 8. 22. Club Rush. Swine are extremely fond of the roots
of this kind of Rush, and seek it with great avidity; and the peasants of
Sweden stock themselves with these roots for winter food for these animals.
0 1 0 1 1 In brooks and watery grounds. 7. 23. Cotton Grass. Both horses and
cows will eat this plant in its young state, before it throws out the Cotton.
Gunner.
0 1 1 0 0 On bogs. 6 -- 8. 24. 10 1 1 1 0 On dry pastures and heaths. 6, 7.
25. Reed Canary Grass. Cows are very fond of this grass, and the peasants in
the southern provinces of Sweden are sensible of it, and mow two crops in a
year for their use. Fl. Suec.
1 1 1 1 0 By waters, very common. 7.

Hill. Ray. Moris. Hist. 8. Notwithstanding the character this grass acquired
from Le Roque's recommendation, sheep dislike it, neither are cows or horses
fond of it.
26. Cat's-tail Grass: Timothy-Grass. Phleum pratense. B. -- 398.1.2. 4.1. 26.
Meadow Fox-tail Grass. This is amongst the most grateful of all grasses to
cattle.
Meadow Fox-tail Grass. Alopecurus pratensis. P. 498. ^96.1. 4.8. 27. Flote
Fox-tail Grass. A. geniculatus. P. -- 498. ^96.2. 4.15. *27. Rough Cocks-foot
Grass. Dactylis glomerata. P 502.33. 400.2. ^.38. 28. Millet Grass. Milium
effusum. A. -- 500. ^02.1. 5.10. 29. Melic Grass. Melica nutans. P. -- 500.6.
403.6. 7.49. 30. Silky, or Corn Bent Grass. Agrostis Spica Venti. A. 500.4.
405.17. 5.1. 31. Brown Bent Grass. A. conina. P. -- 32. Red Bent Grass. A.
rubra. (nunc Milium lendigerum) A. -- 394.4. 33. Creeping Bent Grass. A.
slolonisera. P. -- 402.2. 34. Fine Bent Grass. A. capillaris. P. -- 404.9.10.
35. Turfy Hair Grass. Aira caespitosa. P. -- 403.5. 36. Mountain Hair Grass. A.
flexuosa. P. -- 407.8.9. 7.9. 37. Water Hair Grass. A. aquatica. P. -- 500.2.
402.3. 38. Purple Hair Grass. A. caerulea, (nunc Melica caerulea) P. -- 404.8.
5.22. 39. Meadow Soft Grass. Holcus lanatus. P. -- 404.14. 40. Creeping Soft
Grass. This is one of the grasses strongly recommended for culture by M.
Schreber, Professor of Economy at Erlang; in his book on this subject, he says
it is peculiarly grateful to cattle, and particularly to sheep.
Creeping Soft Grass. H. mollis. P. -- 404.15. 41. Reed Meadow Grass. Linnaeus
strenuously recommends the culture of this grass, which is common by our river
sides, as a most excellent food, and what horses, cows, and sheep, are
exceedingly fond of.
Reed Meadow Grass. Poa aquatica. P. -- 501.24. 411.13. 6.25. 42. Creeping
Meadow Grass. P. compressa. A. -- 09.5. 43. Meadow Grasses. Amongst that
variety of grasses with which our country abounds, these are the most frequent
in all those pastures that we call fertile and good: there are scarcely any
pastures that do not also contain a variety of other grasses, many of which are
equally acceptable to cattle.
Suffolk Grass: Annual Meadow Grass. Annua. A 501. 08.1. 5.21. 44. Great Meadow
Grass. Poa pratensis. P. -- 409.3. 5.18. 45. Common Meadow Grass. P. trivialis.
P. -- 409.2. 46. Narrow-leaved Meadow Grass. P. angustifolia. A 409.4. 5.19.
47. Quaking Grass. Briza media. P. -- 502. 412.1. 6.45. 48. Crested Dog-tail
Grass. Cynosurus cristatus. P. 499. 398.2. 49. Blue Dog-tail Grass. C.
caeruleus. P. -- 499. 399.4. 50. Field Brom Grass. Bromus mollis. A. -- 501.
413.5. 7.18. 51. Corn Brom Grass. B. arvensis. P. -- 414.8. 7.16. *51. Wall
Brom Grass. B. tectorum. A. -- 413.2. 7.13. 52. Spiked Brom Grass. B.
pinnatus. P. -- 392. 6.4. 53. Barren Brom Grass. B. sterilis. A. -- 412.1.
7.11. 54. Sheep's Fescue Grass. Of all others this grass is the peculiar
delight of the sheep, and they will select it with the greatest care. -- Eodem
destituti colles aut ericeta nec ovibus grata erant. -- This is not the
observation of Linnaeus alone: Gmelin has consirmed it; he tells us, that the
Tartars, who live a migratory life, tending their flocks and herds, always in
the summertime choose places where this grass abounds, on account of its
acceptableness, especially to the sheep. It is found on dry mountainous
pastures in most parts of Europe, and in England is common on downs and
uplands. The superiority of our wool in some parts of England may possibly be
owing to a particular ^ood which the sheep meet with in disferent places; and
it might be worth enquiry, whether this grass may not have a great share in
producing this effect. In general, we know that wool to be the finest which is
bred on high pastures; but all such pastures are not equal in this respect.
Until a better reason be assigned for this difference, may it not be ascribed
to the difference of their food?
Sheep's Fescue Grass. Festuca ovina. P. -- 501. ^10.9. ^.13. 55. Hard and
Purple Fescue Grass. F. rabra. P. 501. 413.4. 56. Small Fescue Grass. F.
decumbens. P. -- 501. 408.11. 1.6. 57. Tall Meadow Fescue Grass. F. clatior. P.
-- 501. 411.15.16. 2.15. 58. Flote Fescue Grass. F. fluitans. P. -- 501.
412.17. 3.16. 59. Meadow Oat Grass. Avena pratensis. P. -- 501. 405.1.2.

O. G. Sh. H. S. *26. 1 1 1 0 In pastures, and on the borders of fields. 7. 26.
1 1 1 1 10 In meadows and pastures every where. 5. 27. 1 1 1 1 0 In watery
places, very common. 6 -- 8. *27. 0 1 1 1 In meadows and pastures every where.
6 -- 8. 28. 1 1 1 In woods and thickets. 6, 7. 29. 1 1 1 In woods and dry
pastures. 6, 7. 30. 1 0 1 In corn fields, among standing corn. 7. 31. 0 11 In
low pastures, common. 7, 8. 32. 0 1 1 In low pastures, not common. 7. 33. 1 1 1
In meadows and about thickets. 8. 34. 1 1 1 On hill^ pastures every where. 8.
35. 1 1 1 10 1 In woods, pastures, in moist places. 7, 8. 36. 1 1 1 1 On dry
pastures. 7, 8. 37. 1 1 1 In marshy wet grounds, not common. 6, 7. 38. 1 1 1 On
bogs, heaths, and marshes. 8. 39. 1 1 1 1 In meadows and pastures every where.
6, 7. 40. 1 1 1 1 In woods and hedges. 7. 41. 1 1 1 About waters* common. 7, 8.
42. 1 1 11 1 In dry places, and on walls. 6. 43. 1 1 1 1 1 In meadows and
pastures every where. 5 -- 9. 44. 1 1 1 1 1 With the foregoing. 6, 7. 45. 1 1 1
1 1 With the foregoing. 6, 8. 46. 1 1 1 1 1 In hedges and woods. 7. 47. 1 1 1 1
In meadows and pastures every where. 6. 48. 1 1 1 In pastures every where. 8.
49. 1 1 1 0 n mountainous pastures, not common. 7. 50. 1 1 1 1 In meadows and
pastures every where. 5, 6. 51. 1 1 1 1 On the borders of fields. 7. *51. 1 1 1
1 On dry pastures, not common. 5. 52. 1 1 1 On dry pastures. 6. 53. 1 1 1 1
About hedges, very common. 6, 7. 54. 1 1 11 1 On hilly and mountainous
pastures. 6, 7. 55. 1 1 On dry pastures, common. 6. 56. On barren moist
pastures, near the sea. 8. 57. Tall Meadow Fescue Grass. Wherever this grass is
found, it indicates the best of soil, and it is among the most acceptable of
all to cattle. Its culture is much enforced by Schreber.
1 1 1 1 In meadows and pastures, not uncommon. 7. 58. 0 1 1 1 1 In ditches and
watery places every where. 6, 7. 59. 1 1 1 1 On heaths, dry meadows, and
pastures. 7.

Hill. Ray. Moris. Hist. 8. 60. Bearded Oat Grass: Haver. Avena fatua. P. --
389. 7.5. 61. Tall Oat Grass. A. elatior. P. -- 501. 406.4. 7.38. and 37. 62.
Yellow Oat Grass. A. flavescens. P. -- 407.5. 7.42. 63. Common Reed. Arundo
phragmites. P. -- 500. 401.1. 8.1. 64. Branched Reed Grass. Cows will sometimes
eat this grass, but it is hurtful to them on account of its purging quality.
Branched Reed Grass. A. Calamagrostis. P. -- 401.2. 8.2. 65. Corn Darnel.
Lolium temulentum. A. -- 395.1. 2.1. 66. Perennial Darnel Ray Grass. L.
perenne. P. -- 395.2. 2.2. 67. Couch Grass is to be found in great plenty in
some parts of Europe in the cornfields, even to the obstruction of the plough.
Gunner says he has seen horses and horned cattle, accustomed to it, eat the
roots with avidity; and that they are collected for this purpose by the
husbandmen.
Dog's Grass, Couch Grass, or Wheat Grass. Triticum repens. P. -- 390.1. 1.8.
68. Sea Lyme Grass. Elymus arenarius. P. -- 390.3. 69. Water Chickweed. Montia
palustris. A. -- 181.16. 352. 131. 70. Wall Barley. Hordeum murinum. A. --
391.1.2. 2.6. TETRANDROUS PLANTS. Flor. Dan. 71. Field Scabious. Scabiosa
arvensis. P. -- 464.1. 191.1. 447. 72. Lesser Field Scabious. S. columbaria. P.
-- 464.2. 191.2. 3^4. 73. Devil's Bit. S. succisa. P. -- 464.3. 191.3. 279. 74.
Little Field Madder. Sherardia arvenss. P. 396. 225. 439. 75. Woodroof.
Asperula odorata. P. -- 398. 224. 562. 76. Squinancy-Wort. A. cynanchica. P. --
399. 225. 77. Ladies Bed-Straw. Galium verum. P. -- 397. 224. 78. Great Bastard
Madder. G. Mollugo. P. -- 397.1. 223.1. 455. 79. Crosswort Madder. G. boreals.
P. -- 397.2. 224.3. 80. Crosswort: Mugweed. Valantia Cruciata. P. 396. 223. 81.
Goose Grass: Clivers. Galium Aparine. A. -- 398. 225.1. 495. 82. Great
Plantain. Plantago major. A. -- 152.1. 314.1. 461. 83. Hoary Plantain. P.
media. P. -- 153.2. 314.3. 581. 84. Ribwort Plantain. P. lanceolata. P. --
153.3. 314.5. 437. 85. Buck's-horn Plantain. P. Coronopus. A. -- 153.6. 315.8.
272. 86. Sea Plantain. P. maritima. P. -- 153.5. 315.7. 243. 87. Burnet.
Sanguisorba officinalis. P. -- 346. 203.2. 97. 88. Dogberry Tree. Cornus
sanguinea. -- 517. 460. 481. 89. Ladies Mantle, Dr. Haller, in his Iter
Helveticum, tells us, that the astonishing richness of the milk in the famous
dairies of the Alps, described by Scheuckzer, is attributed entirely to the
plenty of this plant, and that of the Ribwort Plantain.
Ladies Mantle. Alchemilla vulgaris. P. -- 492. 158.1. 693. 90. Cinquefoil
Ladies Mantle. A. alpina. P. -- 492. 158.2. 49. 91. Broad-leaved Pondweed.
Potamogeton natans. P. 488. 148.1. 92. Perfoliated Pondweed. P. perfoliatum. P.
-- 488. 149.4. 196. 93. Long-leaved Pondweed. P. lucens. P. -- 489. 148.2. 195.
94. Pearl Wort. Sagina procumbens. A. -- 226.2. 345.2. PENTANDROUS PLANTS. 95.
Mouse-ear Scorpion Grass. Myosotis scorpioides. a. P. -- 391. 229.1. 583. 96.
Water Scorpion Grass. M. palustris. b. -- 391. 229.4. 97. Gromwell.
Lithospermum officinale. P. -- 390. 228. 98. Bastard Alkanet. L. arvense. A. --
387. 227.3. 456. 99. Hound's-tongue. Cynoglossum vulgar. P. -- 386. 226.1.

O. G. Sh. H S. 60. 1 1 1 In corn fields, not very common. 8. 61. 1 1 1 About
hedges and bushes every where. 7. 62. 1 1 1 In pastures every where. 7. 63. 1 1
0 1 0 In rivers and lakes, common. 7. 64. 1 1 About hedges, etc. in moist
places about woods. 6, 7. 65. 10 Among the corn. 7, 8. 66. 1 10 11 In pastures,
and by the way sides. 6. 67. 1 1 1 1 0 In sields, and about hedges. 6 -- 8. 68.
1 1 0 1 On the sea coast, not common. 5, 6. 69. 0 0 0 0 About springs and
brooks. 4. 70. 1 1 1 In meadows, and by way sides. 4 -- 8. 71. 10 1 1 1 0 About
corn fields, common. 8. 72. 1 1 1 In dry pastures, common. 6, 7. 73. 1 1 1 1 0
In meadows and pastures, common. 6 -- 8. 74. 0 11 0 1 On plowed or fallow
lands. 7, 8. 75. 1 1 1 1 In woods. 5. 76. 1 1 1 1 0 On upland chalky grounds.
7, 8. 77. 10 1 1 0 0 In meadows, and the borders of fields. 7. 78. 1 1 1 1 1 In
hedges, very common. 6, 7. 79. 10 1 1 1 0 On upland pastures in the North. 6 --
8. 80. 1 0 1 1 0 In pastures, and about hedges and bushes. 5, 6. 81. 1 1 1 1 0
About hedges, very common. 5 -- 8. 82. 0 1 1 0 1 By way sides every where; in
pastures. 6, 7. 83. 0 1 1 0 1 With the foregoing. 7, 8. 84. 0 1 1 1 In meadows
and pastures every where. 6, 8. 85. 1 1 In gravelly ground, and on the sea
coast. 7, 8. 86. 10 1 1 In sea marshes. 6, 7. 87. 1 1 1 1 In pastures, common.
6, 7. 88. 0 1 1 1 In woods and hedges. 6. 89. 10 1 1 1 0 In upland pastures and
meads. 6, 8. 90. 1 1 0 0 0 In mountainous grounds, not common. 91. 1 1 0 0 0 In
waters, common. 8. 92. 0 0 0 0 0 In rivers, frequent. 6, 7. 93. 0 0 0 In rivers
and standing waters. 6. 94. 1 On sandy pastures. 6. 95. Mouse-ear Scorpion
Grass. Constantly refused by all these animals.
0 0 0 0 0 In dry pastures. 4 -- 8. 96. Water Scorpion Grass. This is
considered as only a variety of the former, owing to its place of growth, which
renders the plant larger in all its parts, and destroys the hairyness of its
leaves. It is common in watery places, and the sheep will sometimes eat it, in
which case it is frequently fatal to them, as Linnaeus discovered in his Iter
Gotlandicum.
0 1 0 0 About brooks, springs, and ditches. 4 -- 8. 97. 0 1 0 By the road
sides: dry pastures. 5, 6. 98. 10 1 1 0 0 In corn fields. 5, 6. 99. 0 1 0 0 0
In lanes, and by road sides. 6.

Hill. Ray. Flor. Dan. 100. Comfrey. Symphytum majus. P. -- 391. 230. 664. 101.
Small wild Bugloss. Lycopsis arvensis. A. -- 387.1. 227. 435. 102. Viper's
Bugloss. Echium vulgar. P. -- 388.1. 227. 445? 103. Primrose and Cowslip.
Primula vulgaris. P. 69.1. 284. 194. and 434. 104. Bird's Eye. P. farinosa. P.
-- 69.3. 285. 125. 105. Buck-bean. Menyonthes trifoliata. P. -- 77. 285. 541.
106. Water Violet. Hottonia palustris. P. -- ^8. 285. 487. 107. Water
Pimpernel. Samolus Valerandi. P. -- 66. 283. 198. 108. Yellow Willow Herb.
Lysimachia vulgaris. P. 64. 282. 689. 109. Money Wort. L. Nummularia. P. -- 65.
283. 493. 110. Red Pimpernel. Anagallis arvensis. A. -- 67. 282.1. 88. 111.
Small Bindweed. Convolvulus arvensis. -- 57.2. 275.2. 459. 112. Great Bindweed.
C. sepium. P. -- 57.1. 275.1. 458. 113. Round-leaved Bell Flower. Campanula
rotundifolia. P. -- 70.1. 277.5. 189. 114. Giant Throatwort. C. latifolia. P.
-- 74.1. 276.1. 85. 115. Great Throatwort. C Trachelium. P. -- 74.2. 276.2.
116. Henbane. Hyoscyamus niger. A. -- 55. 274. 117. White Mullein, called also
Cow's Lang-wort, from the great reputation it had formerly with our country
people for inveterate coughs among the horned cattle. Parkinson tells us it was
used in his time, in such cases, w th great success, and it yet retains the
same credit in some parts of Europe. Gunner. Lorsel.
Great White Mullein. Verbascum Thapsus. B ^^. 287.1. 631. 118. Black Mullein.
V nigrum. P. -- 88.4. 288.4. 119. White-flowered Mullein. V. Lychnitis. B. --
38.^. 287.3. 586. 120. Common Nightshade. Solanum nigrum. A. 326.^. 265.4. 460.
121. Woody Nightshade. S. Dulcamara. P. -- 326 1. 265.1. 607. 122. Ivy. Hedera
Helix. -- 516. 459. 123. Honeysuckle. Lonicera Caprisolium. -- 516. 458. 124.
Buckthorn. Rhamnus Catharticus. -- 520. 466. 125. Black Berry-bearing Alder.
The bark of this tree is said to be the most certain purge for the horned
cattle in obstinate constipations of the bowels. Lin. Gunner says, horses do
not eat the leaves, but that cows sometimes will, and that it greatly increases
the milk.
Black Berry-bearing Alder. R. Frangula. -- 520. 465. 278. 126. Spindle Tree.
Euonymus Europaeus. -- 521. 468. 127. Gooseberry Bush. Ribes Grossularia. --
128. Red Currants. R. rubrum. -- 515. 456.1. 129. Sweet Currants. R. alpinum.
-- 456.2. 130. Sea Milkwort. Glaux maritima. P. -- ^8. 285. 548. 131. Autumnal
Gentian. Gentiana Amarella. A. 61.2. 275. 328. 132. Centory. G. Centaurium. A.
-- 62.1. 286. 617. 133. Dodder. Cuscuta Europaea. A. -- 83. 281. 199. and 427.
134. Prickly Glasswort. Salsola Kali. A. -- 159. 818. 135. English Mercury.
Common about Farm-yards. The country people give the root to their sheep in
obstinate coughs. Lin.
Common English Mercury. Chenopodium Bonus Henricus. P. -- 490. 156. 579. 136.
Goosesoot, or Sowbane. C. murale. A. -- 490. 154.2. 137. Common Orach. C.
album. A. -- 490. 154 1. 138. Maple-leaved Blite. C. hybridum. A. -- 490.
154.5. 139. Stinking Orach. C. olida. A. -- 490.2 156.13. 140. Round-leaved
Blite. C. polyspermum. A. -- 490.9. 157.18. 141. Common Elm. Ulmus campestris.
-- 522. 468. 632. 142. Marsh Pennywort. Hydrocotyle vulgaris. P. 419. 222. 90.

O. G. Sh. H. S. 100. 1 0 1 0 0 In moist places and by river sides. 5 -- 8.
101. 1 1 1 1 0 In corn fields and fallow land. 6 -- 9. 102. 1 0 1 0 On fallow
ground, and by way sides. 7, 8. 103. 01 1 1 0 0 In hedges and pastures. 3 -- 5.
104. 0 1 1 1 On boggy mountains in the North. 5. 105. 0 1 10 0 0 In watery pits
and bogs. 6, 7. 106. 1 0 In ditches, bogs, and marshes. 7, 8. 107. 1 1 1 0 In
moist meadows and marshes near the sea. 6. 108. 1 1 10 0 0 By waters. 6, 7.
109. 1 10 1 0 In wet meadows, and about ditches. 6. 110. 1 1 0 In corn fields,
and on sandy places. 5 -- 8. 111. 1 1 1 1 0 In corn sields every where. 6, 7.
112. 0 1 1 1 In hedges, especially in moist places. 7, 8. 113. 1 1 1 1 0 On dry
barren pastures, and on heaths. 8. 114. 1 1 1 In bushes and hedges, not common.
8. 115. 1 0 0 In woods and hedges. 7, 8. 116. 0 01 0 0 0 In waste places, farm
yards, about villages. 6. 117. 0 0 0 0 0 By way sides, in lanes. 7. 118. 0 0 10
0 1 By way sides, not very common. 7. 119. 0 0 0 0 0 In sandy and chalky soil,
not common. 7. 120. 0 0 0 0 0 About dunghills, common. 6, 7. 121. 0 1 1 0 0 In
wet hedges, and woods. 6, 7. 122. 0 0 1 1 In hedges, and woods and thickets. 9,
10. 123. 1 1 1 0 In hedges and woods. 5, 7. 124. 0 1 1 1 In woods, and hedges
and thickets. 4, 5. 125. 0 1 1 In woods, etc. 4, 5. 126. 1 1 1 0 In woods and
hedges. 4, 5. 127. 0 1 10 1 In hedges. 5. 128. 1 1 1 10 In woods and hedges. 5.
129. 1 1 1 1 In hedges in the North, not common. 130. 1 On the coast, in salt
marshes. 7. 131. 1 0 On upland pastures. 7, 8. 132. 10 With the foregoing. 6 --
8. 133. 1 01 1 0 1 On heaths, among corn. 7. 134. 0 0 0 0 0 On the sea coast.
7, 8. 135. 1 10 10 0 0 In farm yards, and waste places, common. 8. 136.
Goosefoot, or Sowbane. This has the character of being poisonous to swine; yet
it appears that these animals will eat it. Almost all the old writers give it
the character of a poisonous plant, and John Bauhine particularly avers, that
it is so to these animals; as do also some of the more modern writers.
1 1 1 0 1 About dunghills and manured spots. 8. 137. 1 1 1 0 11 In cultivated
places, and among corn. 8. 138. 1 1 1 In waste places and cultivated spots. 8.
139. 1 1 1 1 0 In like places with the foregoing, 8. 140. 1 0 1 0 In waste
places, and on dunghills, 8. 141. 1 1 1 1 1 In hedges, etc. 4. 142. Marsh
Pennywort. It does not appear that any experiments were made with this plant.
It is very common in marshy grounds with us, and our farmers are of opinion
that it gives sheep the rot, and thence call it White Rot. In this light
Parkinson mentions it.
On bogs and marshy grounds, 5.

Hill. Ray. Flor. Dan. 143. Sanicle. Sanicula Europaea. P. -- 419. 221. 283.
144. Wild Carrot. Daucus Carota. B. -- 415. 218. 723. 145. Hemlock. Conium
maculatum. A. -- 411. 215.1. 146. Cow Parsnip. The cows are known to be
particularly fond of this plant; and Mr. Ray observes that the rabbits are no
less so.
Cow Parsnip. Heracleum Spondylium. B. -- 401. 205.1. 147. Wild Angelica.
Angelica sylvestris. P. -- 405. 208. 148. Great Water Parsnip. Sium latifolium.
P. -- 408. 211. 246. 149. Water Dropwort. Oenanthe fistulosa. P. -- 407. 210.
150. Hemlock Dropwort. O. crocata. P. -- 407. 210. 151. Common Water Hemlock.
This plant is very common in England. It is a wellknown fact in Sweden, that
horses will eat it, and that it frequently proves fatal to them by inducing a
palsy: this effect, nevertheless, is judged to be owing to an insect, which
inhabits in great plenty the stalks of this herb, and from this singular effect
is called by LINNAEUS, Curculio paraplecticus, when in its perfect state, as
the Larva only exists in this vegetable. The same caterpillar is found in the
Water Parsnip also in England.
Water Hemlock. Phellandrium aquat. B. -- 412. 215. 152. Long-leaved Water
Hemlock. Happily this plant is not very common in England: the roots are the
most virulent vegetable poison that is indigenous here. LINNAEUS, in the Flora
Lapponica, No 103, gives a dreadful account of the havoc it frequently made
among the horned cattle in Lapland, where it is common in the meadows near the
sea, and where these cattle will frequently eat it, upon being first turned to
grass in the spring, though they afterward refuse it: yet they will eat the
roots at all times, which are the most virulent parts of the plant. Bishop
Gunner and Gmelin both confirm these bad effects. It is yet doubtful whether
horses are hurt by it; and certain that goats are delighted with it, and eat it
without any subsequent ill effect: and the roots are collected by the Norwegian
peasants as fodder for those animals.
Long-leaved Water Hemlock. Cicuta virosa. 409. 212.7. 208. 153. Fools Parsley.
Aethusa Cynapium. A. -- 411.2. 215.2. 154. Hemlock Chervil. Scandix Anthriscus.
A. -- 416.7. 220.7. 155. Wild Cicely, or Cow-weed. Charophyllum sylvestre. A.
-- 404.2. 207. 156. Wild Chervil. C. temulum. A. -- 404.1. 207. 157. Burnet
Saxifrage. Pimpinella Saxifraga. P. 409. 213. 669. 158. Herb Gerard: Gout-weed.
Aegopodium Podagraria. P. -- 406. 208. 670. 159. Smallage. Apium palustre. B.
-- 411. 214. 790. 160. Water Elder. Viburnum Opulus. -- 517. 460. 661. 161.
Common Elder. Sambucus nigra. -- 518. 461. 545. 162. Dwarf Elder. S. Ebulus. P.
-- 518. 461. 163. Grass of Parnassus, Parnassia palustris. P. -- 192. 355. 584.
164. Thrist: Sea Gilliflower. Statice Armeria P. 345. 203. 165. Sea Lavender.
S. Limonium. P. -- 343.1. 201. 315. 166. Purging Flax. Linum Catharticum. A. --
195.5. 362. *166. Sun-dew. Drosera rotundisolia. B. -- 187. 356. HEXANDROUS
PLANTS. 167. Ramson. Allium ursinum. P. -- 467.5. 3^0.5. 757. 168. Crow
Garlic. A. vineale. P. -- 467.1. 369.1. 169. Lancashire Asphodel. Anthericum
ossifragum. P. 473. 375. 42. 170. Lilly of the Valley. Convallaria majalis. --
322. 264. 171. Wild Sparagus. Asparagus officinalis. P. -- 325. 267. 805. 172.
Sweet Smelling Flag. Acorus Calamus. P. -- 507. 437. 173. Common soft Rush.
Juncus effusus. P. -- 505. 432.4. 174. Common round-headed Rush. J.
conglomeratus. 505. 432.5. 175. Bulbose Rush. J. bulbosus. P. -- 505. 434.11.
431. 176. Toad Grass. J. bufonius. A. -- 505. 434.12. 177. Common hairy Wood
Rush. J. pilosus. P. -- 502. 416.3. 441. 178. Small hairy Wood Rush. J.
campestris. P. 502. 416.1. 179. Barberry Bush. Berberis vulgaris. -- 520. 465.
180. Water Dock. Rumex aquaticus. P. -- 485. 140.1.

O. G. Sh. H. S. 143. 10 1 0 In woods and hedges, common. 5, 6. 144. 1 1 1 1 In
meadows and pastures, common. 6, 7. 145. 0 0 1 0 By hedges, and on the banks of
ditches. 6, 7. 146. 1 1 1 10 1 About hedges, rivers, and in pastures. 7. 147. 1
1 0 1 In moist woods, in watery places. 6, 7. 148. 0 0 01 1 1 In rivers, ponds,
and marshy places. 7, 8. 149. 0 0 In marshes, and in ditches, common. 7. 150. 0
1 0 By the sides of rivers and brooks. 6, 7. 151. 0 1 1 1 01 In rivers and
ditches, common. 152. 0 1 1 1 On the banks of rivers and ponds, etc. 7 -- 9.
153. Fools Parsley. This is deleterious to the human race, although eaten by
these quadrupeds.
1 1 1 1 1 In corn fields, and on banks of ditches. 8. 154. 1 1 1 Hedges, waste
places; among corn, every where. 5, 6. 155. 10 10 10 10 0 About hedges, very
common: orchards. 5, 6. 156. With the former, every where: orchards. 7, 8. 157.
1 1 1 1 1 On dry pastures. 8. 158. 1 1 1 10 In hedges, and often the pest of
gardens. 6. 159. 10 1 1 0 About waters, especially near the sea. 8. 160. 1 1 1
0 In moist woods, and hedges. 5, 6. 161. 0 0 1 0 In moist hedges. 4. 162. 0 0 0
0 0 In hedges by way sides, in church yards. 7. 163. 0 1 10 1 0 In marshy
meadows, not common. 8. 164. 0 1 1 1 0 In salt marshes, common. 7, 8. 165. 1 1
On the sea coast, and with the foregoing. 166. 1 1 1 On dry and upland
pastures. 5, 6. Sun-dew. Sun-dew is called by the country people Red-rot, on
account of its destructive quality to sheep. Ray.
166. 01 On bogs and heaths. 7, 8. 167. 1 In woods, hedges, and thickets. 5.
168. 01 1 1 1 In meadows and pastures. 5. 169. Lancashire Aspbodel. This plant
is also thought to be very noxious to sheep, whenever through poverty of
pasture they are necessitated to eat it, although they are said to improve much
in their flesh at first, and afterward to die with the symptoms of a diseased
liver. This is the plant of which such wonderful tales have been told by Pauli,
Bartholine, and others, of its softening the bones of such animals as are it;
and which they thence called Gramen ossifragum. Horned cattle eat it without
any ill effect. Gunner.
1 0 1 0 On boggy grounds, not very frequent. 8. 170. 0 1 1 0 0 In woods, not
common. 5. 171. 1 1 1 0 0 About the coast, and in salt marshes. 7. 172. 0 0 0 0
0 In rivers, scarce. 5. 173. 1 1 In and about waters. 5 -- 8. 174. 1 01 Wet
pastures, and woods. 175. 1 1 1 1 In moist marshes and heaths, common. 8. 176.
1 In gravelly soil, about standing waters. 7. 177. 0 1 1 1 In thick woods. 4,
5. 178. 1 1 1 In dry turfy meadows and pastures. 4. 179. 1 1 1 0 0 In woods and
hedges. 5. 180. 0 0 1 0 0 In and about rivers and lakes. 7, 8.

Hill. Ray. Flor. Dan. 181. Curled Dock. R. crispus. P. -- 485. 141.3. 182.
Common Sorrel. R. acetosa. P. -- 485. 143. 183. Sheeps Sorrel. R. acetosella.
P. -- 485. 143. 184. Arrow-headed Grass. Triglochin palustre. P. 505. 435. 490.
185. Sea spiked Grass. Cows are extremely fond of this grass; as indeed they
are of many other maritime plants: and equally so of the foregoing species.
Sea spiked Grass. T. maritimum. P. -- 505. 435. 306. 186. Water Plantain.
Alisma Plantago aquatica. P. 22. 257. 561. OCTANDROUS PLANTS. 187. Rosebay
Willow-herb. Epilobium angustif. -- 147.1. 310. 289. 188. Hairy Willow-herb. E.
hirsutum. P. -- 147.2. 311. 347. 189. Smooth Willow-herb. E. montanum. B. --
147.3. 311.4. 190. Common Heath, or Ling. The bees are thought to get more
honey from Ling than from any other plants; but what is produced from it has a
reddish cast, and is therefore not so much valued.
Common Heath, or Ling. Erica vulgaris. -- 523. 470.1. 677. 191. Whorts:
Whortle-be^ries. Vaccinium Vitis Idaea. -- 516.1. 457.3. 40. 192. Black Whorts:
Bilberries. V. Myrtillus. -- 516.3. 457.2. 193. Cranberries. V. Oxycoccus. --
324. 267. 80. 194. Golden Saxifrage. Chrysosplenium. P. -- 491. 158. 365. 195.
Perennial Arsmart. Polygonum amphibium. -- 487. 145.9. 282. 196. Dead or
spotted Arsmart. P. Persicaria. A. 487. 155.4. 702. 197. Water Pepper. P.
Hydropiper. A. -- 487. 144.1. 198. Knot Grass. P. aviculare. A. -- 487. 146.
803. 199. Black Bindweed. P. Helxine. A. -- 486. 144. 744. 200. Herb Paris, One
Berry. Paris quadrifolia. P. 323. 264. 139. ENNEANDROUS PLANTS. 201. Flowering
Rush. Butomus umbellatus. P. -- 35. 273. 604. DECANDROUS PLANTS. 202. Winter
Green. Pyrola rotundifolia. P. -- 85.1. 363.1. 110. 203. Marsh Cistus.
Andromeda polifolia. P. -- 523. 472. 54. 204. Maiden Pink. Dianthus deltoides.
P. -- 162. 335. 577. 205. Knawel. Scleranthus annuus. A. -- 493. 159. 504. 206.
White Saxifrage. Saxifraga granulata. P. 189. 354. 514. 207. Bottle Campion.
This plant is common with us on the borders of cornfieldsd, and Gunner says it
is among the most acceptable herbs to cows. Its cultivation has on this account
been recommended in foreign publications.
Bottle Campion. Cucubalus Behen. P. -- 164.2. 337.2. 208. White and Red
Campion. Lychnis dioica. P. 166.8. 339.9. 792. 209. Chickweed. Alsine media. A.
-- 179.1. 347.6. 525. 210. Purple Spurrey. Arenaria rubra. A. -- 184.2. 351.9.
740. 211. Corn Spurrey. Spergula arvensis. A. -- 184.1. 351.7. 212. Sea
Chickweed. Arenaria peploides. -- 181.14. 351.12. 624. *212. Mouse-ear
Chickweed. Cerastium viscosum. A. 18^.2. 348.3. 213. Marsh Mouse-ear Chickweed.
C. aquaticum. P. 179.2. 347.4. 214. Cockle. Agrostemma Githago. A. -- 166.6.
338.5. 576. 215. Meadow Pink. Lychnis Flos Cuculi. P. -- 165.4. 338.4. 590.
216. Wood Sorrel. Oxalis Acetosella. P. -- 80. 281. 217. Orpine. Sedum
Telephium. P. -- 36.1. 269. 686. 218. Stone Crop: Wall Pepper. S. acre. P. --
38.6. 270.5. 219. White-flowered Stone Crop. S. album. P. -- 38.3. 271.7. 66.
DODECANDROUS PLANTS. *219. Sun Spurge. Euphorbia Helioscopia. A. -- 150. 313.
725. 220. Purple spiked Loosestrife. Lythrum Salicaria. P. 218.1. 367.1. 671.

O. G. Sh. H. S. 181. 0 0 In meadows, pastures, and by way sides. 6, 7. 182. 1
1 1 1 1 In meadows and pastures, common. 5, 6. 183. 1 1 1 1 On downs, uplands,
fallow fields, etc. 184. 1 1 1 1 1 In moist and marshy meadows. 7, 8. 185. 11 1
1 1 1 In salt marshes, common. 5, 6. 186. 0 1 0 1 0 In waters, plentifully. 6,
7. 187. 1 11 1 0 0 In woods and hedges, in the North. 7, 8. 188. 10 1 1 1 0 In
watery places, about rivers, etc. 7. 189. 1 10 In woods and wet places. 6. 190.
1 10 10 1 0 On barren mountainous ground. 6 -- 9. 191. 1 1 1 1 0 On mountains
and heaths, in the North. 4, 5. 192. 0 1 0 0 On heaths, and in woods. 4. 193. 0
1 0 0 1 On turfy boggy grounds, in the North. 5. 194. 10 0 0 0 In shady thick
woods, and about springs. 4. 195. 0 1 1 1 1 In and about rivers and ditches. 6,
7. 196. 0 1 1 1 0 In meadows, waste places, corn fields, etc. 8, 9. 197. 0 0 0
0 0 In and about ditches and moist places. 7, 8. 198. 1 1 1 1 1 By the way
sides, waste places, very common. 6, 9. 199. 1 1 0 0 0 Corn fields, gardens,
manured places. 6 -- 9. 200. 0 1 1 0 0 In shady woods and thickets. 5, 6. 201.
0 0 0 0 0 In waters. 6. 202. 0 1 0 0 0 In woods and groves, in the North. 6, 7.
203. 0 1 0 0 On bogs and wet turfy grounds, in the North. 4. 204. 1 1 1 1 0 On
heaths and dry pastures, not common. 6, 7. 205. 0 1 1 In corn fields and
gravelly grounds. 8. 206. 0 1 0 0 0 In dry meadows and pastures. 5, 6. 207. 1 1
1 1 0 On fallow lands, and among corn. 7. 208. White and Red Campion. The same
author relates that this plant is thought by some of the peasants in Norway to
cause staling of blood in the horned cattle.
1 1 1 1 1 In woods, and about hedges, every where. 5 -- 7. 209. 1 0 10 1 1
Every where in moist and shady places. 210. 1 1 Dry sandy grounds, and on the
sea coasts. 6, 7. 211. Corn Spurrey. This plant has been cultivated as food for
cattle, and is thought by some writers on agriculture to deserve more notice
than has hitherto been paid to it.
10 0 1 1 1 Among corn, and on fallow ground. 8. 212. 1 1 1 On the sea coast.
6, 7. *212. 0 1 0 1 In meadows and pastures, very common. 5. 213. 1 1 1 In
moist places about ditches and rivers. 7. 214. 1 1 1 Among the corn, very
common. 6. 215. 1 1 1 In moist meadows and pastures. 6. 216. 01 1 1 0 1 In
woods, and under shady hedges. 4. 217. 1 1 1 0 1 About hedges, old walls, and
in pastures. 8. 218. 0 1 0 0 0 On walls, on rocks and mountains. 6. 219. 1 0 On
walls, thatch, etc. not common. 6, 7. *219. 0 01 01 1 In kitchen gardens, and
sometimes in corn fields. 7. 220. 1 1 1 1 0 By the banks of rivers and lakes.
7.

Hill. Ray. Flor. Dan. *220. Dyer's Weed. Reseda Luteola. A. -- 208. 366. 221.
Agrimony. Agrimonia Eupatoria. P. -- 345. 202. 588. ICOSANDROUS PLANTS. 222.
Black-thorn. Prunus spinosa. -- 518. 462. 223. Bird's Cherry. P. Padus. -- 518.
463. 205. 224. Wild Service Tree. Crataegus torminalis. -- 514. 453. 798. 225.
Haw-thorn. C. Oxyacantha. -- 515. 453. 634. 226. Quicken-tree: Mountain Ash.
Sorbus aucuparia. 514. 452. 227. Wild Pear Tree. Pyrus communis. -- 514. 452.
228. Crab Tree. P. Malus. -- 514. 452. 229. Common Dropwort. Swine are
extremely fond of the roots of this plant, and will make great devastation in
pastures where they find it.
Dropwort. Spiraea Filipendula. P. -- 24. 259. 635. 230. Meadow Sweet. S.
Ulmaria. 7. -- 23. 259. 547. 231. Common Briar, or Dog Rose. Rosa Canina. 515.
454. 555. 232. Burnet Rose. R. spinosissima. -- 515. 455. 398. 233. Raspberry
Bush. Rubus Idaeus. -- 521. 467.4. 788. 234. Common Bramble. R. fruticosus. --
521. 467.1. 235. Dewberry Bush. R. caesius. -- 521. 467.3. 236. The Wood
Strawberry. Fragaria vesca. P. 2. 254.1. 237. Silver Weed. The same animals are
not less fond of the roots of this plant, which have somewhat the taste of
parsnips; and Ray informs us that they were formerly eaten in this country, as
they still are in less happy climates. Gunner.
6. 256. 544. 238. Cinquefoil. P. reptans. P. -- 3. 255.1. 239. Spring
Cinquefoil. P. verna. P. -- 3. 255.3. 240. Tormentil. The roots of Tormentil
being an excellent astringent, are used by the farmersi n Holland as a remedy
against the staling of blood among their cattle.
Tormentil. Tormentilla erecta. P. -- 7. 257. 589. 241. Purple Marsh
Cinquefoil. Comarum palustre. P. 5. 256.2. 636. 242. Avens: Herb Bennet. Geum
urbanum. P. -- 8. 253.1. 672. POLYANDROUS PLANTS. 243. Yellow Water Lilly. It
is remarkable that scarcely any animals, except bogs, will touch this plant,
and they will eat both roots and leaves, and fatten by their use. Flor.
Oeconomic.
Yellow Water Lilly. Nymphaea lutea. P. -- 223. 368. 603. 244. White Water
Lilly. N. alba. P. -- 223. 368. 602. 245. Red Poppy. Papaver Rhaeus. A. -- 142.
308. 246. Long rough-headed Poppy. P. Argemone. A. 143.5. 308. 247. Greater
Celandine. Chetidonium majus. -- 146. 309. 542. 248. Herb Christopher. Actaea
Christophoriana. P. 320. 262. 498. 249. Lime Tree. Tilia Europaea. -- 523. 473.
553. 250. Dwarf Cistus. Cistus Helianthemum. P. -- 170. 341. 101. 251. Lark
Spur. Delphinium Consolida. A. -- 42. 273. 683. 252. Columbines. Aquilegia
vulgaris. P. -- 41. 273. 695. 253. Water Aloe. Stratiotis Aloides. P. -- 140.
290. 337. 254. Pasque Flower. Anemone Pulsatilla. P. -- 10. 260. 153. 255. Wood
Anemone. A. nemorosa. P. -- 12. 259. 549. 256. Meadow Rue. Thalictrum stavum.
P. -- 347. 203. 257. Lesser Spearwort. Ranunculus Flammula. -- 17.10. 250. 575.
258. Pilewort. R. Ficaria. P. -- 10. 246. 499. 259. Sweet Wood Crowsoot. R.
auricomus. P. -- 16.6. 248. 665.

O. G. Sh. H. S. *220. 0 0 1 0 0 In waste places in chalky grounds. 6. 221. 0 1
1 0 0 About hedges and the borders of fields. 6. 222. 1 1 1 In hedges, common.
3, 4. 223. 10 1 1 0 1 In woods and hedges, not common. 5. 224. 1 1 In woods and
hedges, not common. 4. 225. 1 1 1 1 In hedges. 5. 226. 1 1 1 1 1 In woods and
hedges. 5. 227. 1 1 1 1 With the foregoing. 4. 228. 1 1 1 1 With the foregoing.
5. 229. 1 1 1 0 1 On upland pastures. 7. 230. 0 11 1 0 1 In moist meadows, and
by rivers and brooks. 6 -- 8. 231. 1 1 1 0 1 In hedges. 5, 6. 232. 1 1 1 0 1 In
heaths, among furze, in gravelly soil. 6. 233. 01 1 1 0 1 In woods and
mountainous places. 5, 6. 234. 1 1 In hedges every where, and thickets. 5 -- 9.
235. 1 1 1 0 With the former in moist places. 6, 7. 236. 10 1 1 0 0 In woods,
and under hedges. 4, 5. 237. 1 1 1 1 1 By the road sides; in low pastures. 6 --
8. 238. 1 1 1 1 In like places with the foregoing. 6. 239. 1 1 1 1 On dry
barren pastures. 5, 6. 240. 1 1 1 0 1 In dry woods and pastures, common. 6, 7.
241. 01 1 10 0 0 In bogs and marshes. 6. 242. 1 1 1 10 1 In hedges, woods, and
thickets, common. 6 -- 8. 243. 0 01 0 0 1 In rivers, ponds, and ditches. 8.
244. 0 01 0 1 With the foregoing, but not so common. 7. 245. 1 1 1 0 In corn
fields, arable ground. 6, 7. 246. 1 1 0 On arable lands. 6. 247. 0 0 0 0 0 In
waste places. 5, 6. 248. Herb Cbristopher. This is one of the poisonous herbs
to cattle, but is happily scarce in England, and not found elsewhere than in
woods.
0 1 1 0 0 In woods, in the North. 5, 6. 249. The leaves of the Lime Tree are
in some parts of Europe laid up as fodder for sheep and goats. Bees get their
finest honey from these trees. Cows are fond of the leaves, but they are said
to vitiate the milk.
1 1 1 1 In groves and vistas cultivated. 7. 250. 1 1 1 0 On dry, and
particularly chalky downs. 7. 251. 0 1 1 10 0 Among standing corn, rare. 6.
252. 0 1 01 0 0 In woods, in the North. 6. 253. 0 1 In the fenny countries. 6.
254. 0 1 1 0 0 In mountainous pastures. 4. 255. Wood Anemone. Horned cattle,
when removed from higher grounds into woods and woody pasturage, frequently eat
this herb, and many observations have proved that it causes the bloody flux
among them. Lin. Gunner.
10 1 1 0 0 In woods, thickets, and hedges. 4. 256. 1 1 1 1 10 In wet pastures,
and by river sides. 6, 7. 257. 0 0 0 1 0 In marshy grounds, common. 6 -- 9.
258. 0 1 1 0 In meadows and pastures every where. 4. 259. 1 1 0 0 In woods and
hedges. 4.

Hill. Ray. Flor. Dan. 260. Crowfeet, or Butter Cups. Scarcely any of these
plants are relished by the cows or horses, from their biting taste; the
Round-leaved Water Crowfoot, the Upright Meadow Crowfoot, and particularly the
Various-leaved Crowfoot, are constantly left untouched, while growing. The
acrimony in these plants appears to be dissipated in the hay, into which they
often enter in a large proportion.
Round-leaved Water Crowfoot. Ranunculus sceleratus. A. -- 16.8. 249.1. 571.
261. Upright Meadow Crowfoot. R. acris. P. -- 16.4. 248.4. 262. Creeping
Crowfoot. R. repens. P. -- 15.2. 247. 795. 263. Bulbous Crowfoot. R. bulbosus.
P. -- 15.1. 247. 551. 264. Various-leaved Crowfoot. Aquatilis. P. -- 17. 249.
376. 265. Marsh Marigold. It has been conjectured that the yellowness of the
butter is in many places owing to the cattle having fed on the large yellow
flowers of this plant; which is however a great error, as cows do not touch the
plant, although they pare the ground around it.
Marsh Marigold. Caltha palustris. P. -- 34. 272. 668. 266. Globe Flower.
Trollius Europaeus. P. -- 33. 272. 133. DIDYNAMOUS PLANTS, with naked seeds.
267. Bugle. Ajuga reptans. P. -- 372. 245. 268. Water Germander. Teucrium
Scordium. P. 373. 246. 593. 269. Wild Thyme. Thymus Serpyllum. P. -- 350. 230.
270. Wild Basil. T. Acinos. A. -- 362. 238. 814. 271. Great wild Basil.
Clinopodium vulgar. P. -- 364. 239. 272. Wild Marjoram. Origanum vulgar. P.
-- 357. 236. 638. 273. Mints. All Mints are thought to have the property of
retarding or preventing the curdling of milk. Hence it is that in some places,
toward the latter end of the year, when herbage is scarce, and the cows are
necessitated to eat these plants in more considerable quantities, the
dairy-woman has difficulty to make her cheese.
Corn Mint. Mentha arvensis. P. -- 351.1. 232.1. 512. 274. Water Mint. M.
aquatica. P. -- 352. 233. 673. 275. Ground Ivy. Glechoma hederacca. P. -- 369.
243. 789. 276. Stinking Horehound. Ballota nigra. A. -- 370. ^44. 277. Common
Horehound. Marrubium vulgar. 363. 239. 278. Cat-mint. Nepeta Cataria. P. --
360. 237. 580. 279. Betony. Betonica officinalis. P. -- 361. 238. 726. 280.
Hedge Nettle. Stachys sylvatica. P. -- 359. 237. 281. Clowns Alheal. S.
palustris. P. -- 367. 242. 282. Nettle Hemp. Galeopsis Tetrahit. A. -- 366 6.
240. 283. Narrow-leaved Alheal. G. Ladanum. A. -- 368. 242. 284. White Dead
Nettle. Lamium album. P. -- 365. 240. 594. 285. Red Archangel. L. rubrum. A. --
365. 240. 523. 286. Great Henbit. L. amplexicaule. A. -- 365. 240. 752. 287.
Motherwort. Leonurus Cardiaca. B. -- 364. 239. 727. 288. Self-heal. Prunella
vulgaris. P. -- 362. 238. 289. Hooded Willow Herb. Scutellaria galericulata. --
370. 244. 637. -- with capsules. 290. Toad Flax. Antirrhinum Linaria. P. --
108. 281. 291. Least Toad Flax. A. minus. A. -- 112. 283. 502. 292. Yellow
Rattle, or Cock's-comb. Rhinanthus Crista Galli. A. -- 121. 284. 293. Common
Lousewort. Pedicularis sylvatica. -- 120.1. 284.3. 225. 294. Marsh Lousewort.
P. palustris. P. -- 120.2. 284. 295. Crested Cow wheat. Melampyrum cristatum.
A. 124.2. 286. 296. Common Cow-wheat. M. pratense. A. -- 124. 286. 145.

O. G. Sh. H. S. 260. 0 1 0 0 In watery places, common. 5, 6. 261. 0 1 1 0 0 In
meadows and pastures, common. 6, 7. 262 1 1 In meadows and pastures every
where. 5, 6. 26. With the foregoing every where. 5. 264. 0 0 0 0 0 In rivers
ditches, ponds, etc. ^ -- 6. 265. 0 1 1 0 0 In moist meadows and brooks. 4.
266. 0 1 1 0 1 In mountainous pastures, in the North. 5, 6. 267. 0 1 1 0 0 In
moist meadows and pastures, and woods. 5, 6. 268 0 1 1 0 0 In the fens, common.
8. 269. 1 1 0 On day pastures, common. 7, 8. 270. 10 0 10 1 On chalky, g avolly
downs. 7, 8. 271. 1 1 0 About hedges, and in dry pastures. 7. 272. 0 1 1 1
About hedges and bushes. 7. 273. 0 1 01 1 0 On arable land and corn grounds. 8,
9. 274. 1 0 In wate y places, and by rivers, ponds, etc. 275. 0 0 1 10 0 Under
shady hedge, and in woods. 5, 6. 276. 0 0 0 0 In waste places and by hedges,
every where. 7. 277. 0 0 0 0 On arable land, dry pastures, and waste places.
278. 0 0 1 0 0 By hedges, and on upland pastures. 7. 279. 0 1 On heaths, and in
woods, common. 7, 8. 280. Hedge Nettle. Horses abominate this plant. Cows,
notwithstanding its foetid smell, will eat it, and Gunner says it undoubtedly
increases their milk greatly.
01 1 1 0 0 In hedges and woods every where. 7, 8. 281. Clowns Alheal. The
roots of this plant are among the acceptable food of swine: they are indeed
sapid enough to have supplied in some seasons the want of bread to the human
species.
0 0 1 0 0 In watery places, and about rivers. 8. 282. 0 1 1 0 0 On arable
grounds, and borders of fields. 8. 283. 1 1 1 0 On arable grounds, 7, 8. 284.
10 1 1 0 0 About hedges, and in waste places. 5, 6. 285. 0 1 1 1 In waste
places, and on arable land. 5. 286. 1 1 1 On arable grounds, very common. 6.
287. 01 1 1 1 0 On dunghills, and among rubbish 7. 288. 1 1 1 10 In meadows and
pastures every where. 8. 289. 1 1 1 0 0 About waters, and watery places. 8, 9.
290. 0 10 01 0 0 About hedges, and dry barren pastures. 7. 291. 1 0 1 0 01 On
arable land, and among corn. 6 -- 9. 292. 10 1 1 10 In meadows and pastures,
common. 6, 7. 293. Louseworts. These plants are very noxious to cattle, when
through penury, or other causes, they are induced to eat them. Gunner affirms,
that it is very common for cattle, that are removed into pastures where the
Marsh Lousewort abounds, to die suddenly from staling of blood. He observes,
that such as are bred where it is plentiful, either do not eat it, or are not
hurt by it. It is too common with us.
0 0 In boggy marshy meadows and heaths. 6, 7. 294. 0 1 0 0 01 In moist and
marshy meadows and pastures. 6. 295. 1 1 1 In woods, not common. 7. 296.
Cow-wheat. Cows are extravagantly fond of this plant, and the richness, as well
as yellowness, of the butter, in some places, is with great reason attributed
to the abundance of this plant in the pastures, Flor. Lap. No 240.
11 1 1 0 0 In woods, very common. 7, 8.

Hill. Ray. Flor. Dan. 297. Common Eyebright. Euphrasia officinalis. -- 122.1.
284. 298. Red Eyebright. E. odontites. A. -- 122.2. 284.2. 625. 299. Broom
rape. Orobanche major. P. -- 127. 288. 300. Knobby-rooted Figwort.
Schrophularia nodosa. 114. 283.2. 301. Toothwort. Lathraea squamaria. P. --
128. 288. 136. TETRADYNAMOUS PLANTS. 302. Whitlow Grass. Draba verna. A. --
259. 292. 303. Mithridate Mustard. Thlaspi campestre. A. -- 269. 305.1. 304.
Shepherds Purse. T. Bursa Pastoris. A. -- 260. 306. 729. 305. Dittander:
Pepperwort. Lepidium latifolium. 261. 304. 557. 306. Narrow-leaved wild Cress.
L. ruderale. A. 268.1. 303. 184. 307. Scurvy Grass. Cochlearia officinalis. B.
-- 266. 302. 135. 308. Horse Rhadish. C. Armoracia. P. -- 261. 301. 309. Gold
of Pleasure. Myagrum sativum. A. -- 263. 302. 310. Woad. Isatis tinctoria. B.
-- 254. 307. 311. Great Tower Mustard. Turritis glabra. A. 249. 293. 809. 312.
Wild Navew, or Rape. Brassica Napus. B. 240. 295. 313. Wild Mustard, or
Charlock. Sinapis arvensis. A. 242. 295. 678. 314. Water Rhadish. Sisymbrium
amphibium. P. -- 265. 301. 315. Flix Weed. S. Sophia. A. -- 251. 298. 528. 316.
Hedge Mustard. Erysimum vulgar. A. -- 238. 298. 560. 317. Treacle Wormseed. E.
cheiranthoides. A. -- 250. 298. 731. 318. Winter Cresses, or Rocket. E.
Barbarea. -- 237.4. 297. 319. Jack by the Hedge: Sauce alone. E. Alliaria. P.
235. 293. 320. Cuckoo Flower. Cardamine pratensis. P. -- 346. 299. 321. Bitter
Cresses. C. amara. P. -- 246.2. 299. 322. Charlocks. The pests of our
cornfieldsd, and which have been thought to give a most unwholesome quality to
bread when the seeds abound in grain.
White and Yellow flowered Charlock. Raphanus Raphanistrum. A. -- 244. 296.
323. Sea Rocket. Bumas Cakile. A. -- 257.2. 307. 324. Sea Colewort. Crambe
maritima. P. -- 257.1. 307. 316. MONADELPHOUS PLANTS. 325. Crow foot Cranes
bill. Geranium pratense. P. 198. 360. 326. Herb Robert. This plant is in great
reputation with some farmers, on account of its prevailing virtues against
staling of blood, and the bloody flux in cattle: in which cases it is said to
be the best among a great variety of means commonly used upon such occasions.

Diadelphous Plants. A general view of this class shows at once how very
acceptable they are to almost all cattle. Cows and sheep refused none, and
horses not more than three out of the whole number with which they were tried.
They afford the richest food for cattle, and are cultivated in diverse parts of
Europe with all possible attention. With us the Common Purple Tref il, or
Clover, is mostly sown. Lately some trials have been made with the Saint Foin,
339, and some have thought it answers better than Clover. I say nothing of the
exotic Lucern.

Among these Plants, the Kidney Vetch, 327, is particularly acceptable to
sheep, insomuch that separate cultivation of it has been recommended; but it
will not succeed well except on chalky grounds.


Herb Robert. G. Robertianum. B. -- 196. 358. 694. 327. Round-leaved
Cranes-bill. G. rotundisolium. A. 196. 359.10. 328. Common Dove's*foot
Cranes-bill. G. molle. A. 196. 359.11. 679. 329. Hemlock-leaved Cranes-bill. G.
cicutarium. A. 199. 357.2. 330. Common Mallow. Malva sylvestris. B. -- 25.1.
251.1. 331. Dwarf Mallow. M. rotundifolia. A. -- 25.2. 251. 721. 332. Vervain
Mallow. M. Alcea. P. -- 27. 252. DIADELPHOUS PLANTS. 333. Common Fumitory.
Fumaria officinalis. A. 348. 204. 334. Common Milkwort. Polygala vulgaris. P.
-- 81. 287. 516. 335. Dyers Weed. Genista tinctoria. -- 523. 474. 526. 336.
Liquorice Vetch. Astragalus glycyphyllus. -- 293. 326. 337. Kidney Vetch.
Anthyllis Vulneraria. P. -- 290. 325.

O. G. Sh. H. S. 297. 1 1 1 1 0 In meadows and pastures, very common. 8, 9.
298. 1 1 1 1 On the borders of fields, and on arable ground, 8, 9. 299. In dry
pastures. 5. 6. 300. 0 1 0 0 0 In woods and moist hedges. 7, 8. 301. 0 1 1 0 0
In shady places at the foot of mountains: rare. 302. 10 1 1 1 0 On mole hills,
in dry pastures. 4. 303. 10 1 0 0 1 On arable land, and in corn fields. 6, 7.
304. 1 1 1 1 1 Every where in fields and waste places. 3, 4. 305. 1 1 1 0 In
meadows and pastures: rare. 6, 7. 306. 1 1 0 0 On the sea coasts: rare. 6. 307.
1 0 0 0 On the sea coasts. 4, 5. 308. 0 0 0 0 0 In waste places, and about
ditches. 5. 309. 1 1 1 1 In flax fields. 6. 310. 1 0 0 0 On the borders of
fields, and on arable land: rare. 7. 311. 1 1 1 0 1 In pastures, particularly
of a gravelly soil. 5. 312. 1 1 1 On the banks of ditches, and among corn. 5.
313. 1 1 1 10 1 The pest of arable land and standing corn. 5. 314. 1 1 1 1 1 In
watery places, meadows, and brooks. 6. 315. 1 01 1 10 0 In orchards, about
ruins, highways, and commons. 7. 316. 0 1 1 0 0 By the way sides, and under
walls, waste places. 5. 317. 1 1 1 1 1 In corn fields: scarce. 7. 318. 1 10 10
0 0 In ditches and watery places, very common. 319. 1 1 0 0 0 On banks about
hedges, very common. 5. 320. 10 1 1 0 0 In moist meadows and pastures, every
where. 4. 321. 10 1 With the foregoing; especially on boggy soil. 4. 5. 322. 0
0 1 The pest of corn fields in England. 6, 7. 323. 1 On the sea shores. 6. 324.
1 1 1 1 1 On the sea shores. 5. 325. 1 1 1 1 1 On the borders of moist fields,
meadows, etc. 6, 7. 326. 1 0 1 0 Under shady hedges, and in woods. 4 -- 6. 327.
0 1 1 0 About hedges, way sides. 7. 328. 1 1 With the foregoing, and about
hedges, common, 5, 6. 329. 1 10 1 By the way sides, borders of corn fields. 4
-- 6. 330. 1 1 Every where by hedges and in waste places. 5 -- 10. 331. 01 0 1
1 1 In the like places with the foregoing. 6 -- 10. 332. 1 1 1 1 In lanes,
hedges, and the borders of fields. 7 -- 9. 333. 1 10 1 0 0 In corn fields,
arable land, on banks, etc. 4 -- 6. 334. 1 1 1 0 On upland pastures and heaths,
common. 5, 6. 335. 1 1 1 1 On coarse pastures, and the borders of fields. 336.
1 1 1 1 0 In meadows, pastures, and about hedges. 337. 1 1 On dry, chalky
pastures. 7, 8.

Hill. Ray. Flor. Dan. 338. Wood Pease; Heath Pease. Orobus tuberosus. P.
280.2. 324. 781. 339. St. Foin; Cockshead. Hedysarum Onobrichis. P. 293. 327.
340. Narrow-leaved Everlasting Pea. Lathyrus sylvestris. P. -- 280. 319. 325.
341. Common Yellow Vetchling. Uncommonly grateful to cattle; as is also the
Common Yellow Vetchling. L. pratensis. P. 280. 320. 527. 342. Common Vetch, or
Tare. Vicia sativa. A. -- 283. 320.1. 522. 343. Bush Vetch. V. Sepium. P. --
283. 320.2. 699. 344. Tufted Wood Vetch. V. sylvatica. P. -- 285.4. 322.4. 277.
345. Common tufted Vetch. Both these are very common in our best meadows and
pastures.
Common tufted Vetch. V. Cracca. P. -- 285.3. 322.3. 804. 346. Smooth-podded
Tine Tare. Ervum tetraspermum. A. -- 285.2. 322.2. 95. 347. Hairy podded Tine
Tare. E. hirsutum. A. 285.1. 322.1. 639. 348. Sea Pease. Pisum marinum. P. --
278. 319. 338. 349. Bird's-foot Prefoil. Lotus corniculata. P. -- 314. 334.
350. White Trefoil. Wherever this plant occurs spontaneously, and abounds, it
is always considered as an indication of the goodness of the soil; and this is
a thing well known to all farmers.

The richness of all meadows and pastures is naturally owing to their abounding
principally with the Trefoils, and others of the same class, with a due mixture
of the more acceptable Grasses.


White Trefoil. Trifolium repens. -- 302.1. 327.1. 351. Honeysuckle Tresoil, or
Clover. T. pratense. 302. 328. 352. Hop Trefoil. T. agrarium. A. -- 307. 330.
558. 353. Lesser Hop Trefoil. T. procumbens. P. -- 307. 330. 796. 354. Melilot.
T. Melitotus officinalis. B. -- 308. 331. 355. Yellow Lucern, or Medick.
Medicago falcata. 311. 333. 233. 356. Melilot Trefoil. M. lupulina. -- 308.
331.2. 357. Rest-harrow, or Cammock. Ononis arvensis. P. 310. 332.
POLYADELPHOUS PLANTS. 358. St. Peter's Wort. Hypericum quadrangulum. 175 7.
344.7. 640. 359. St. John's Wort. H. perforatum. P. -- 174.1. 342.1. 360. Hairy
St. John's Wort. H. hirsutum. P. -- 175.4. 343.4. 802. SYNGENESIOUS PLANTS.
361. Dandelion. Leontoden Taraxacum. P. -- 441. 170. 574. 362. Rough Dandelion.
L. hirsutum. P. -- 442.3. 171.3. 363. Hawkweed with bitter roots. L. autumnale.
P. 438. 164.1. 501. 364. Long-rooted Hawkweed. Hypochaeris radicata. P. --
438.2. 165.6. 150. 365. Spotted Hawkweed. H. maculata. P. -- 439.11. 167.17.
149. 366. Creeping Mouse-ear. Hieracium Pilosella. 441. 170. 367. Broad-leaved
bushy Hawkweed. H. sabaudum. 440. 167.1. 368. Succory Hawkweed. Crepis
tectorum. A. -- 438.3. 165.9. 369. Sowthistle. Sonchus oleraceus. A. -- 437.
163. 682. 370. Tree, or Corn Sowthistle. S. arvensis. P. -- 437.7. 163. 606.
371. Ivy-leaved wild Lettuce. Phrenanthes muralis. P. -- 436.4. 162.5. 509.
372. Yellow Goatsbeard. Tragopogon pratense. B. 442. 171. 373. Nipplewort.
Lapsana communis. A. -- 443. 173. 500. 374. Wild Succory, or Endive. Cichorium
Intybus. B. 443. 172. 375. Burdock. Arctium Lappa. B. -- 432. 197. 642. 376.
Carline Thistle. Carlina sylvestris. B. -- 449. 175.

O. G. Sh. H S. 338. 1 1 1 1 In woods; and sometimes in meadows, etc. 5. 339. 1
1 1 11 On chalky meadows and pastures. 7. 340. 1 1 1 1 In woods and hedges. 7,
8. 341. 1 1 1 1 0 In woods, hedges, meadows, and pastures, every where. 7, 8.
342. 11 1 1 11 Cultivated: and often wild in corn fields. 343. 1 1 1 1 1 In
meadows, pastures, hedges, and woods. 5. 344. 1 1 1 1 In hedges and woods. 7,
8. 345. 1 1 1 1 01 In woods and hedges, common, and in pastures 346. 1 1 1 1 On
tilled grounds, and among corn. 6. 347. 1 1 1 1 With the foregoing. 6. 348. 1 1
1 1 On the sea shores. 7. 349. 1 1 1 1 10 In meadows, pastures, woods, every
where. 7, 8. 350. 1 1 1 1 0 The pride of meadows and pastures. 5 -- 9. 351. 1 1
1 11 1 With the former. 5 -- 9. both perennial. 352. 1 1 1 1 In sandy pastures,
corn fields. 6. 353. 1 1 1 1 In meadows and pastures, common. 5 -- 8. 354. 1 1
1 1 1 In hedges, and in the borders of corn fields. 6, 7. 355. 1 1 1 1 On the
borders of fields, not common. 7. 356. Melilot Trefoil. This plant, which is
exceedingly common, is notwithstanding much less agreeable to cattle than the
rest of the Trefoils. This observation occurred to Plukenet, who called it
Medica pratensis lutea non grata jumentis; and Linnaeus has informed us
particularly that future observations have confirmed the remark.
1 1 1 10 In pastures every where. 5 -- 8. 357. Rest-harrow, or Cammock. A
decoction of this plant has been much recommended to horses laboring under a
stoppage of urine. It is the pest of some cornfieldsd; but in its younger
state, before the plant has acquired its thorns, is a most acceptable herb to
sheep.
1 1 11 0 0 On barren pastures, way sides. 6 -- 8. 358. 1 1 1 0 0 In moist
hedges, and the banks of brooks. 359. 1 1 1 0 0 In hedges and bushes, common.
7. 360. 1 0 In hedges and bushes, very common. 7. 361. 01 1 10 0 1 In meadows
and pastures, every where. 4 -- 6. 362. With the former every where. 5, 6. 363.
0 1 0 1 1 With the foregoing, very common. 8. 364. 1 In meadows and pastures,
common. 5 -- 7. 365. 1 1 01 1 1 In mountainous pastures: scarce in England. 7.
366. Creeping Mouse-ear. Very common on our dry pastures, and sometimes eaten
by sheep; to which animals Ray says it is very hurtful from its powerful
astringent quality.
01 1 10 0 On uplands and dry pastures, common. 5. 367. 1 1 1 1 1 In hedges and
woods, common. 7, 8. 368. 1 1 1 1 1 In meadows and pastures, very common. 6 --
9. 369. 1 1 11 1 In manured grounds, corn fields, waste places. 370. 1 1 11 In
corn fields and about hedges. 7. 371. 1 1 11 1 In shady lanes and woods. 7, 8.
372. 1 10 1 1 11 In meadows and pastures. 6. 373. 1 0 1 1 1 In hedges and waste
places, kitchen gardens. 6, 7. 374. 0 1 1 0 1 On the borders of corn fields. 7,
8. 375. 1 1 0 0 0 By the way sides, waste places, etc. 7, 8. 376. 0 1 On dry
pastures. 6.

Hill. Ray. Flor. Dan. 377. Cotton Thistle. Onopordon Acanthium. B. -- 430.
196. 378. Spear Thistle. Carduus lanceolatus. B. -- 429. 195. 379. Musk
Thistle. C. nutans. B -- 428. 193. 675. 380. Dwarf Carline Thistle. C. acaulis.
P. -- 429. 195. 381. Soft or gentle Thistle. C. beterophyllus. -- 428. 193.1.
109* 382. Thistle upon Thistle. C. crispus. A. -- 429. 194.2. 621. 383. Marsh
Thistle. C. palustris. P. -- 429. 194.4. 384. Saw-wort. Serratula tinctoria. P.
-- 431. 196. 281. 385. Corn Saw-wort, or Way Thistle. S. arvensis. P. 428. 194.
644. 386. Trifid Water Hemp Agrimony. Bidens tripartita. A. -- 461. 187. 387.
Whole-leaved Water Hemp Agrimony. B. cernua. A. -- 461.2. 187. 388. Dutch, or
Hemp Agrimony. Eupatorium cannabinum. P. -- 453. 179. 745. 389. Tansy.
Tanacetum vulgar. P. -- 461. 188. 390. Mugwort. Artemisia vulgaris. P. -- 463.
190. 391. Wormwood. A. Absinthium. P. -- 462. 188. 392. Sea Wormwood. A.
maritima. P. -- 462. 188. 393. Mountain Cudweed. Gnaphalium diuicum. 454. 181.
394. Upright Cudweed. G. sylvaticum. B. -- 453.2. 180 2. 395. Black-headed
Cudweed. G. ultgmosum. A. 454.5. 181.6. 396. Coltsfoot. Tussilago Farfara. P.
-- 446. 173. 595. 397. Butter-bur. T. Petasites. P. -- 452. 179. 398. Golden
Rod. Solidago Virga aurea. P. -- 449. 176. 663. 399. Ragwort. Senecio Jacobaea.
P. -- 450. 177. 400. Groundsel. S. vulgaris. A. -- 451. 178. 513. 401. Blue
flowered Fleabane. Erigeron acre. -- 448. 175. 402. Elecampane. Inula Helenium.
P. -- 449. 176.^ 728. 403. Middle Fleabane. I. dysenterica. P. -- 447. 174.
410. 404. Small Fleabane. I. Pulicaria. A. -- 447. 174.2. 613. 405. Sea
Star-wort. Aster Tripolium. P. -- 448. 175. 615. 406. Corn Marigold. This plant
infests the cornfieldsd in many parts of Europe, and in Denmark there was a law
enforcing the farmers to rid their fields of it.
Corn Marigold. Chrysanthemum segetum. -- 456. 182. 407. Great Daisie. Very
common in our pastures, but unacceptable to cows; neither is the common Daisie
relished by them.
Great Daisie. C. Leucanthemum. P. -- 459. 184.1. 408. Sweet Chamomile.
Anthemis nobilis. P. -- 459. 185.2. 409. Stinking Mayweed. A. Cotula. A. --
460. 184.3. 410. Corn Chamomile. A. arvensis. B. -- 459.1. 185.4. 411.
Feversew. Matricaria Parthenium. B. -- 460. 187. 674. 412. Corn Feversew. M.
Chamomilla. A. -- 459. 184. 413. Milfoil: Yarrow. Achillea Millesolium. P. --
458. 183. 737. 414. Sneeze-wort: Goose tongue. A. Ptarmica. P. 457. 183. 643.
415. Common Daisie. Bellis perennis. P. -- 459. 184. 503. 416. Great Knapweed.
Centaurea Scabiosa. -- 433. 198. 417. Common Knapweed. A harsh and ungrateful
plant to cows and sheep, but impossible (...) extirpated, th^^^h very common in
our best meadows and pastures.
Common Knapweed. C. nigra. P. -- 433. 198. 418. B ue Bottle. C. Cyanus. A. --
433. 198. 419. Common Cudweed. Filago germanica. A. -- 453. 180. 420. Least
Cudweed. F. montana. A. -- 454. 181. 421. Hairy Sheeps Scabious. Jasione
montana. A. 71.6. 278. 319. 422. Dogs Violet. Viola canina. P. -- 204. 364.
423. Panfies; Hearts Eafe. V. tricolor. A. -- 205. 365.9. 623.

O. G. Sh. H. S. 377. 0 0 0 In waste places: and on fallow grounds. ^. 378. 01
01 0 1 0 Waste places, about hedges; fallow lands. 379. 10 0 0 1 On uplands and
fallow grounds abundantly. 380. 0 0 On day pastures: heaths and downs. 7. 381.
1 1 1 1 0 In marshy pastures, not very common. 382. 1 1 1 1 About ditches and
hedges. common. 6. 383. 11 In marshy pastures, and in woods. 7. 384. 0 1 1 10 0
In woods, and barren pastures. 7. 385. 10 1 11 1 0 By the way sides, and on
fallow grounds. 386. 1 0 1 0 0 In marshy grounds, and about waters. 7, 8. 387.
1 0 In ditches, and watery places. 7, 8. 388. 0 1 0 0 0 About waters, and moist
hedges. 7, 8. 389. 1 0 1 0 0 On high pastures in the North, and by rivers in
the South. 8. 390. 1 10 0 1 0 About hedges, corn fields, and wastes. 8. 391. 1
10 1 1 0 In waste places, and by road sides. 8, 9. 392. 0 0 0 1 On the fea
coast. 8. 393. 0 0 1 1 1 On dry upland pastures in the North. 5. 394. 1 In dry
woods and pastures. 8. 395. 0 0 In watery places, and where water has
stagnated. 8. 396. 10 1 1 0 0 In moist waste places, and among corn. 3. 397. 1
1 1 1 In moist meadows by rivers and brooks. 3, 4. 398. 1 1 1 1 1 In woods,
hedges, and among furze, on heaths. 399. 1 In meadows, pastures, and by way
sides. 7. 400. 1 1 0 0 1 In manured waste grounds every where. 401. 0 0 On
upland dry pastures, among bushes. 402. 0 1 0 1 0 In hedges of moist meadows.
7, 8. 403. 01 0 0 In watery places; about banks of rivers. 404. 0 0 1 0 In
moist places, and where water has stagnated. 405. 1 1 10 1 0 In salt marshes.
8. 406. Among corn too plentifully. 6, 7. 407. 0 1 1 1 0 In meadows and
pastures, every where. 5. 408. 1 1 1 0 In damp places on heaths, etc. 7, 8, 9.
409. 0 01 01 0 0 In and about corn fields: farm yards. 410. 1 1 10 With the
former. 7, 8. 411. In waste places, and about hedges. 6. 412. 1 1 1 0 0 In corn
fields. 6. 413. 10 10 1 1 1 In meadows and pastures. 5 -- 7. 414. 1 1 1 1 1 In
moist woods and meadows. 8. 415. 1 1 1 1 1 In every pasture. 3 -- 9. 416. 0 1 1
1 1 In and about corn fields. 6, 7. 417. 10 1 10 1 10 In meadows and pastures,
common. 7, 8. 418. 1 1 1 0 0 Among the corn. 7. 419. Cudweed, so called because
husbandmen formerly gave it to cattle that did not ruminate freely.

A general view of the syngenesious class, shows at once the vast difference
between this and the diadelphous; of the former we see great numbers are
rejected by cows, and by sheep more particularly.


0 0 By the way sides, and in dry pastures. 6, 7. 420. 0 0 1 On sandy heaths.
6, 7. 421. On downs and heaths. 6, 7. 422. 1 1 1 0 1 On heaths. 4. 423. 1 1 0 0
10 On corn grounds. 5 -- 9.

Hill. Ray. Flor. Dan. 424. Sweet Violet. Viola odorata. P. -- 204. 364.1. 309.
425. Hairy violet. V. hirta. P. -- 205. 365.8. 618. 426. Touch me not.
Impatiens noli me tangere. A. 207. 316. 582. GYNANDROUS PLANTS 427. Male Orchis
Salep. Orchis maj^ula. P. -- 474. 376.3. 457. 428. Female Orchis. O. morio. P.
-- 474. 377.4. 253. 429. Male handed Orchis. O. latifolia. P. -- 474. 380.19.
266. 430. Red handed Orchis. O. cono^sea. B. -- 476.21. 381.21. 224. 431.
Female handed Orchis. O. maculata. P. -- 476.20. 381.20. 432. Frog Orchis.
Satyrium viride. P. -- 476.22. 381.22. 77. 433. Twayblade. Ophrys ovata. P. --
478. 385. 137. 434. Grass Wrack. Besides the utility of this plant as an
excellent manure in certain places, and for making mounds or walls (which will
stand, when well constructed, for a vast number of years) cows and horses will
frequently leave their pastures to feed in the seawater itself upon this plant.
Gunner refers to an instance of some horned cattle that were very well
sustained, through a severe winter, by the help of this plant only. Its utility
for mounds against the encroachment of the sea, in apt situations, is well
known, and there are instances of its having stood in this way for upwards of
eighty years.
Grass Wrack. Zosiera marina. P. -- 533. 52.1. 15. MONOECIOUS PLANTS. 435.
Spiked Sedge. Carex vulpina. P. -- 503.28. 423.8. 308. 436. Prickly Sedge. C.
muricata. P. -- 503.32. 424.12. 284. 437. Bastard Sedge. C. Pseudo-Cyperus. P.
-- 503.12. 419.12. 438. Bladder Sedge. C. vesicaria. A. -- 503.14. 420.14. 647.
439. Great brown Carex or Sedge. C. acuta. P. 503.2. 417.1. 440. Burr-seed.
Sparganium erectum. P. -- 506. 437. 441. Cats-tail. Typha palusiris. P. -- 506.
436. 645. 442. Common Nettle. Urtica dioica. P. -- 484. 139. 746. 443 Lesser
Nettle. U. urens. A. -- 484. 140. 739. 444. The Alder Tree. Betula Alnus. --
510. 442. 445. The Birch Tree. B. alba. -- 510. 443. 446. Arrow Head.
Sagittaria Sagittifolia. P. -- 21. 258. 172. 447. Feathered Water Milfoil.
Myriophyllum spicatum. P. -- 489. 150. 681. 448. Lesser Burnet. Poterium
Sanguisorba. P. -- 346. 203.1. 449. Common Oak Tree. Quercus Robur. -- 509.
440. 450. The Beach. Fagus sylvatica. -- 509. 439. 451. The Horn-beam. Carpinus
Betulus. -- 513. 451. 452. The Hasel Nut-tree. Corylus avellana. -- 509. 439.
453. Scotch Fir. Pinus sylvestris. -- 510. 441. 454. Common Fir, or Pitch Tree.
P. Abies. -- 510. 441. 193. 455. White Bryony. Bryonia alba. P. -- 318. 261.
813. DIOECIOUS PLANTS. 456. Bay-leaved Sweet Willow. Salix pentandra. 513. 449.
457. Common White Willow. Salix alba. -- 513. 447. 458. Herbaceous Willow. S.
herbacea. P. -- 513. 448.7. 117. 459. The Osier. S. viminalis. -- 513. 450.21.
460. The common Sallow. S. capraea. -- 513. 450.16. 245. 461. Sea Buckthorn.
Hippophae Rhamnoides. -- 512. 445. 265. 462. Sweet Willow Dutch Myrtle. Myrica
Gale. 510. 443. 327. 463. Common Hop. Humulus Lupulus. P. -- 482. 137. 464.
White Poplar. Populus alba. -- 512. 446. 465. Black Poplar. P. nigra. -- 512.
446.

O. G. Sh. H. S. 424. In hedges and ditches; in woods. 3. 425. 1 1 1 1 With the
former. 3. 426. 0 1 0 0 In moist shady places in the North. 8. 427. In meadows
and pastures; among bushes. 5. 428. 1 0 In moist meadows and pastures, common.
429. 1 0 In meadows and pastures. 5, 6. 430. 1 1 0 With the foregoing. 6, 7.
431. 10 0 1 0 In moist meadows and pastures, and woods. 6. 432. 1 In dry
pastures. 5, 6. 433. 1 1 In moist wools and thickets. 5, 6. 434. 01 1 1 In the
shallow salt waters abundantly. 435. Sedges are coarse and unwholesome food for
those cattle that are obliged to eat them, and are said sometimes to occasion
great flatulence, and disorder.
1 1 0 In watery places, and by the banks of rivers. 7. 436. 1 1 In marshy
meadows and woods. 5 -- 8. 437. 1 1 1 On the sides of rivers. 7. 438. 1 1 1 In
watery places, and about rivers. 6. 439. 1 1 1 1 0 Common in watery places
about rivers, etc. 440. 01 0 0 1 1 In standing and slow running waters. 7. 441.
1 0 In like places with the foregoing. 7, 8. 442. Nettles are eaten by sheep
and cows, while the plants are young.
0 0 0 0 In waste places every where. 7. 443. 0 0 0 0 In waste grounds, and
arable land. 8. 444. 1 1 1 1 0 In moist woods and hedges. 7. 445. 1 1 1 1 0 In
like places with the former. 7. 446. 01 1 1 1 In waters, and about ditches and
rivers. 6. 447. 0 0 In stagnant waters. 6, 7. 448. 1 1 1 1 On downs, especially
in a chalky soil. 7. 449. 1 1 1 1 The pride and glory of our woods. 4. 450. 1 1
In hedges and woods. 5. 451. In woods, and copses. 5. 452. 1 0 0 In woods,
copses, and hedges. 3. 453. 10 01 0 Wild in Scotland. 5. 454. 1 0 With the
former. 5. 455. 0 1 0 0 0 In hedges, woods, and thickets, common. 5. 456. 1 1
Frequent in the North of England. 4. 457. 1 1 1 1 By waters, and in woods and
hedges. 4. 458. Herbaceous Willow. Acceptable to cows and horses. Gunner says
the latter will leave grass to feed upon it.
1 1 On boggy mountains. 6. 459. 1 1 1 1 By waters. 4. 460. 1 1 1 1 With the
former. 4, 5. 461. 0 1 1 1 On the sea coast, not common. 4. 462. 0 1 0 1 On
bogs, in heathy grounds. 5. 463. 1 1 1 1 1 In wet hedges. 6. 464. 10 1 1 1 In
hedges about rivers. 3. 465. 1 1 1 1 About rivers, and in watery places. 3.

Hill. Ray. Flor. Dan. 466. Asp, or trembling Poplar. Populus tremula. 512.
446. 467. Dogs Mercury is absolutely poisonous to sheep, which will sometimes
eat it. Our own, observations, many times repeated, have taught us that horses
will not touch it.
Dogs Mercury. Cynocrambe perennis. P. -- 483. 138. 400. 468. French Mercury.
C. annua. A. -- 483. 139. 469. Black Bryony. This is not a Swedish plant; it is
common in our hedges, but horses refuse it.
Black Bryony. Tamus communis. P. -- 319. 262. 470. Common Juniper. Juniperus
communis. -- 511. 444. 471. Yew Tree. That the Yew is poisonous to horned
cattle and horses, is proved beyond all doubt. Several cases of its fatal
effects have fallen under our own knowledge. A memorable one occurs also in the
Phil. Trans. vol. xlvii. p. 195.
Yew Tree. Taxus baccata. -- 512. 445. POLYGAMOUS PLANTS. 472. Sea Purslane.
Atriplex portulacoides. -- 490. 153.11. 473. Wild Orache. A. hastata. A. --
489. 151.1. 474. Narrow-leaved Orache. A. patula. A. -- 489. 151.2. 475. The
Ash Tree. Fraxinus excelsior. -- 522. 469. 476. Black-berried Heath. Empetrum
nigrum. P. -- 511. 444. CRYPTOGAMOUS PLANTS. 477. Corn Horse-tail is said to be
very noxious to horned cattle and sheep, both by Gunner and others; and
Loeselius says it brings on abortion, if pregnant ewes eat it.
Corn Horse-tail. Equisetum arvense. P. -- 531. 130.2. 478. Wood Horse-tail. E.
sylvaticum. P. -- 531. 130.4. 479. Marsh Horse-tail. E. palustre. P. -- 531.
131.9. 480. River Horse-tail. E. fluviatile. P. -- 531. 130.1. 481. Smooth
Horse-tail. E. limosum. P. -- 531. 131.10. 482. Female Fern, or Brakes. Pteris
aquilina. -- 528. 124. 483. Common Polypody. Polypodium vulgar. -- 526. 117.
484. Common Male Fern. P. Filix mas. -- 527. 120. 485. Stone Fern. P. fragile.
-- 528.7. 125. 401. 486. Hart's Tongue. Asplenium Scolopendrium. -- 525. 116.
487. Adder's Tongue. Ophioglossum vulgatum. -- 530. 128. 147. 488. Common
Fucus, or Sea Oak. F. vesiculosus. -- 40.4. 489. Sweet Fucus. Fucus
saccharinus. -- 39.1. 416. 490. Thread Fucus. F. Filum. -- 40.3. 821. 491.
Brown Boletus. Boletus bovinus. -- 11.2.

O. G. Sh. H. S. 466. 1 1 0 0 In woods, particularly in boggy soils. 467. 0 1 1
In woods and thickets, and under hedges, 4, 5. 468. In waste manured places:
gardens. 9. 469. 1 In woods, thickets, and hedges. 6. 470. 1 1 1 On heaths and
mountains in the North. 471. 0 1 1 0 On mountainous grounds. 3, 4. 472. 1 1 1
On the sea shores, common. 8. 473. 1 About dunghills; and on the sea shores. 8,
9. 474. 1 1 1 1 In waste places, and about hedges. 8. 475. 1 1 1 0 0 In woods
and hedges. 3, 4. 476. 0 10 0 0 On mountainous boggy places in the North. 4, 5.
477. 0 1 10 0 On moist corn land. 3, 4. 478. Wood Horse-tail. Horses are
extremely fond of this, and where it is abundant, as is the case in some of the
northern parts of Europe, hay of this alone is made for their use; as also of
the River Horse-tail, which the cows like, and it is thought to increase their
milk.
1 11 In shady moist woods. 4, 5. 479. 1 In marshes. 6. 480. 10 1 11 1 1 In
watery places, and about rivers. 5. 481. 0 1 0 10 In shallow waters and
marshes. 6. 482. 0 01 0 0 0 In woods, and on heaths, very common. 483. 01 0 On
old walls, and stumps of trees. 484. 0 1 0 In woods, hedges, and shady lanes.
485. 1 1 1 In rocky places in the North. 486. 0 0 0 In shady, stony boggy
places under hedges. 487. 01 01 In moist meadows and pastures. 488. Fucus. All
these Fucuses are eaten by cows; but Gunner says the Thread Fucus is not only
acceptable to them, but very wholesome.
1 1 On the sea coast. 489. 1 On the same. 490. 11 On the same. 491. 11 1 1 Not
uncommon in our woods.

A CATALOGUE OF THE WRITINGS and PUBLICATIONS of LINNAEUS: With References to
the Pages in which they are mentioned in this Volume.
SYSTEMA NATURAE sive Regna tria Naturae systematice proposita, per Classes,
Ordines Genera and Species. Edition 1. Lugd. Bat. fol. maxim. 1735. -- Page 16.
This is comprised in twelve pages; and is the outlines only of the succeeding
editions. The Swedish names are annexed. 2. Holm. 8vo. page 80. 1740. Revised
and augmented by LINNAEUS himself, with the addition of the generical
characters, and names to the subjects of the animal kingdom. 3. Halae. 4to.
oblong. p. 70. 1740. By J. Langen, in Latin and German. 4. Parisiis. 8vo. p.
108. tab. 1. 1744. By Bernard Jussieu; with the addition of the French names;
otherwise the same as the second edition. 5. Halae. 8vo. p. 88. 1747. By M. G.
Agnethler. With the German names; otherwise the same as the second edition. 6.
Holmiae. 8vo. p. 232. tab. 8. 1748. -- Page 60. Embellished with a print of the
Author. Augmented by the introduction of the essential characters of the genera
of plants; and by the addition of the species to the animal and fossil
kingdoms. 7. Lipsiae. 8vo. p. 232. tab. 8. 1748. By a Bookseller; with the
German names. 8. Holm. 8vo. p. 136. 1753. In the Swedish language. The
vegetable kingdom by Haartman; the fossil by Moller. 9. Lugd. Bat. 8vo. p. 228.
t. 8. 60. 1756 -- 54. By Dr. Gronovius, with a few additions to the animal
kingdom; otherwise copied from No 6. This edition was also printed at Lucca, in
1758. 10. Holm. 8vo. 2 tom. 1758. -- 60. Tom. 1. p. 821. Animal kingdom.
Enlarged by the addition of the synonyms. Tom. 2. p. 560. Vegetable kingdom.
Enlarged by the addition of the species under each genus.
11. Lipsiae. 8vo. very faulty. 12. Holm. 8vo. 3 tom. 1766, 1767, 1768. Tom. 1.
in 2 parts, p. 1327. Animals. 60. Tom. 2. p. 736. Vegetables. -- 110. Tom. 3.
p. 236. Fossils. -- 131.
Vindob. 8vo. 3 tom. 1, 1767. 2, 3, 1770. From the foregoing; the pages
corresponding. 13. Gottingae et Gothae. 8vo. 1774. Page 210. Tom. 2. only, by
Dr. Murray, with Linnaeus's additions and emendations.
HYPOTHESIS NOVA de febrium intermittentium causa. Harderovic. 4to. 1735. 10.
Also, in the first volume of the Amoenitates Academicae, printed at Leyden,
1749. --
FUNDAMENTA BOTANICA. Amst. 12mo. p. 36. 1736. -- 17. Aboae. 4to. p. 32. 1740.
Stockholm. 8vo. p. 23. 1740. Amst. 8vo. p. 51. 1741. Parisiis. 8vo. p. 26.
1744. Halae. 8vo. p. 31. 1747.
BIBLIOTHECA BOTANICA. Amst. 12mo. p. 153. 1736. Halae. 8vo. p. 124. 1747.
Amstael. 8vo. p. 220. 1751. -- 17.
MUSA CLIFFORTIANA. Lugd. Bat. 4to. 1736. 18.
GENERA PLANTARUM. Lugd. Bat. 8vo. p. 384. 935. genera. 1737. -- 20. Lugd. Bat.
8vo. p. 527. 1021. genera. 1742. Parisiis. 8vo. p. 413. 1021. genera. 1743.
Halae. 8vo. p. 441. 1090. genera. 1752. Holmiae. 8vo. p. 580. 1239. genera.
1764. 20. Viennae. 8vo. 1767.
VIRIDARIUM CLIFFORTIANUM. Amst. 8vo. 1737. -- Page 21.
COROLLARIUM GENERUM: et METHODUS SEXUALIS. Lugd. Bat. 8vo. 1737. -- 21.
FLORA LAPPONICA. Amst. 8vo. 1737. 21 -- 25.
CRITICA BOTANICA: cui accedit Browallii discursus, de introducenda in scholas
historiae naturalis lectione. Lugd. Bat. 8vo. 1737. -- 25.
HORTUS CLIFFORTIANUS. Amst. fol. 1737. 26.
Artedi Icthyologia. Lugd. Bat. 8vo. 1738. 29.
CLASSES PLANTARUM. Lugd. Bat. 8vo. 1738. 28.
ORATION de memorabilibus in INSECTIS. In the Swedish tongue. Holm. 8vo. 1739.
In Low Dutch. Lugd. Bat. 12mo. 1741. In Swedish: enlarged. Holm. 8vo. 1747. In
Latin: with the two succeeding, in the Amoenitates Academ. vol. ii. 1751. --
31.
ORATION de peregrinationum INTRAPATRIAM necessitate. Upsal. 4to. 1742. -- 33.
Lugd. Bat. 8vo. 1743.
ORATION de TELLURIS HABITABILIS INCREMENTO. Lugd. Bat. 8vo. 1744. -- 36.
ITER OELANDICUM et GOTLANDICUM. In the Swedish tongue. Holm. 8vo. p. 344. tab.
2. 1745. -- 33.
FLORA SUECICA. Holm. 8vo. p. 392. tab. 1. 1745. Holm. 8vo. p. 464. tab. 1.
1755. -- 37.
Animalia Sueciae. Holm. 8vo. 1745. Described, and the synonyms annexed.
FAUNA SUECICA. Holm. 8vo. p. 411. tab. 2. 1746. Holm. 8vo. p. 559. tab. 2.
1761. -- Page 38.
FLORA ZEYLANICA. Holm. 8vo. tab. 4. 1747. 40.
ITER WESTROGOTHICUM. Holm. 8vo. p. 284. 1747. tab. 5. In the Swedish language.
HORTUS UPSALIENSIS. Holm. 8vo. 1748. 41.
MATERIA MEDICA, de plantis. Holm. 8vo. 1749. -- 44. Lipsiae. 8vo. 1772.
Vindobon. 8vo. 1773.
Amoenitates Academicae. 7 tom. 8vo. -- 45. Tom. 1. Lugd. Bat. tab. 15. 1749.
220. Lipsiae. tab. 17. 1749. Tom. 2. Holm. et Amst. t. 4. 1751, 1752. -- 237.
Tom. 3. Holm. et Amst. t. 4. 1756. 249. Tom. 4. Holm. et Amst. t. 4. 1760. 265.
Tom. 5. Holm. et Amst. t. 3. 1760. 288. Tom. 6. Holm. et Amst. t. 4. 1763. 317.
Tom. 7. Holm. et Amst. t. 7. 1769. 343.
PHILOSOPHIA BOTANICA. Holm. 8vo. 1751. 46. Viennae. 8vo. 1755. Viennae. 8vo.
1763. Viennae. 8vo. 1770. Berolin. 8vo. 1779. By J. G. Gleditch.
ITER SCANICUM. Holm. 8vo. p. 434. t. 6. 1751. -- 35. In the Swedish language.
SPECIES PLANTARUM. 2 tom. Holm. 8vo. 1753. 2 tom. Holm. 8vo. 1762. -- Page 50.
2 tom. Vindob. 8vo. 1764. From the Stockholm edition, the pages corresponding.
MUSEUM TESSINIANUM. Holm. fol. 1753. 52.
MUSEUM REGIS ADOLPHI. Holm. fol. max. 1754. -- 53. Haselquistii, Iter
Palaestinum. Holm. 8vo. 1757. 58. Loessiingii, Iter Hispanicum. Holm. 8vo.
1758. 58.
Both published by LINNAEUS, from posthumous papers; in the Swedish tongue.
Oration regia. in Swedish. Upsal. fol. 1759.
DISQUISITIO de sexu PLANTARUM. Petrop. 4to. 1760. -- 56.
GENERA MORBORUM. Upsal. 4to. 1763. -- 166.
MUSEUM REGINAE ULRICAE: et MUSEI REGIS ADOLPHI. Tomi 2di prodromus. Holm. 8vo.
1764. -- 108.
CLAVIS MEDICINAE. Holm. 8vo. 1766. -- 200.
MANTISSA PLANTARUM, Generum editionis sextae, et specierum editionis secundae.
Holm. 8vo. 1767. -- 130.
MANTISSA ALTERA, cum Appendice Regni Animalis. Holm. 8vo. 1771. -- 201. The
separate papers written by LINNAEUS, and published in the Acta Upsaliensia,
from the years 1732 to 1744, are enumerated in page -- 202. Those which were
published in the Stockholm Acts, from the year 1739 to 1770, are enumerated --
Page 203-209. In Novi Commentar. Academiae Scientiarum Imperialis Petropolitan.
Tom. vii. p. 315 -- 320. an. 1758, 1759, 4to. 1761, a paper, De NITRARIA,
planta obscura explicata. 268.
DISSERTATIONS CONTAINED IN THE AMOENITATES ACADEMICAE.
I. BOTANICAL.
1. Botanical and Medical Histories of particular Genera or Species of Plants.
1. BETULA nana. Dwarf Birch-tree. Page. 222. 2. Ficus. History of the Fig Tree
Genus. -- 222. 3. Peloria. Hybrid kind of Toad-flax. 224. 8. Passiflora. Genus
of Passion Flower. 227. 9. Anandria. Coltsfoot with a connivent Calyx. -- 228.
10. Acrosticum. Acrosticum Genus described. -- Page 229. 21. Lignum Colubrinum.
Officinal Snakewood. -- 240. 22. Senega. Rattle-snake Root. -- 241. 26.
Splachnum. Splachnum Moss described. 245. 35. Euphorbia. History of the
Euphorbium Genus. -- 252. 40. Rheum. History of the Rhubarb Plant. 256. 65.
Cynomorium. Maltese Fungus described. 278. 81. Buxbaumia. Buxbaum's Moss. --
296. 85. Spigelia. History of Worm-grass, or Indian Pink. -- 301. 110. Coffea.
History of the Coffee Shrub. 325. 114. Alstromeria. Genus Alstromeria
described. -- 331. 122. Quassia. History of the Quassi Root. 340. 128.
Opobalsamum. Balsam of Gilead Shrub. 345. 137. Thea. History of the Tea Shrub.
-- 355. 138. Chocolata. Chocolate Tree and Nut. 358.
2. Particular Collections of Plants.
29. Plantae Camtchatcenss. Rare Plants from Kamtchatka. -- 247. 62. Cent. I.
rarior. Plant. 1st Century of rare Plants. -- 276. 63. Cent. II. rarior. Plant.
2d Century of rare Plants. -- 276. 97. Pugillus Jam. Plant. Rare Jamaica
Plants. -- 314. 106. Plantae Africanae. Rare African Plants.
3. Florae; or Lists of the Plants of particular Countries, systematically
arranged.
55. Flora Anglica. The Plants of England. Page 269. 56. Flora Amboinensis. The
Plants of Amboina. -- 270. 68. Flora Alpina. Alpine Plants. -- 281. 69. Flora
Palaestina. The Plants of Palestine. 281. 70. Flora Monspeliensis. The Plants
of Montpelier. -- 283. 78. Flora Danica. The Plants of Denmark. 293. 95. Flora
Capensis. The Plants of the Cape of Good Hope. -- 311. 96. Flora Jamaicensis.
The Plants of Jamaica. -- 313. 104. Flora Belgica. The Plants of Holland. 320.
4. Miscellaneous Botanical Papers.
6. Plantae Burserianae. Burser's rare Plants. 226. 12. Sponsalia Plantarum.
The Sexes of Plants. -- 230. 13. Genera Plant. nova. New Genera of Plants. --
232. 24. Gemmae Arborum. Buds of Trees. -- 244. 25. Pan Suecicus. The Swedish
Pan. -- 245. 27. Muscorum Semina. Seeds of Mosses. -- 246. 31. Genera Plant.
alia. New Genera of Plants. -- 249. 32. Plantae Hybridae. Hybrid Plants
described. -- 250. 46. Vernatio Arborum. Foliation of Trees. 261. 48.
Demonstrationes Plant. Demonstration of Plants in the Upsal Garden. -- Page
263. 49. Herbationes Upsaliens. Plants of the Botanical Excursions round Upsal.
264. 54. Stationes Plantarum. Natural Soils of Plants. -- 268. 64. Somnus
Plantarum. Sleep of Plants. 277. 66. Metamorphosis Plant. Cause of Varieties in
Plants. -- 279. 67. Calendarium Florae. The Calendar of Flora. -- 280. 83.
Transmutatio Frumenti. Transmutation of Grain. -- 298. 91. Auctores Botanici.
List of Botanic Writers. -- 306. 98. Nomenclatura Plantarum. Vernacular Names
of Plants. -- 314. 113. Termini Botanici. Terms of the Linnaean Botany
explained. -- 331. 117. Reformatio Botanices. Improvements in the Science of
Botany. -- 334. 134. Fundamenta Agrostographiae. Scientific History of the
Genera of Grain and Grasses. -- 352. 47. Incrementa Botanices. Origin and
History of Botany. -- 262. 115. Nectaria Florum. Honey Glands of Flowers. --
332. 116. Fundamenta Fructificationis. Essential Parts of Fructification
demonstrated. 333. 118. Prolepsis Plantarum. Philosophy of Vegetation. -- 335.
120. Prolepsis Plantarum. Philosophy of Vegetation. -- Page 337.
II. LITHOLOGICAL PAPERS.
4. Corallia Baltica. Corals of the Baltic Sea. 224. 15. Chrystallorum Genera.
Formation of Chrystals. -- 233.
III. MISCELLANEOUS.
7. Hortus Upsaliensis. History of the Upsal Garden. -- 226. 17. Flora
Oeconomica. Economical Uses of Plants. -- 235. 18. Curiositas Naturalis.
Reasons for the Study of Natural History. -- 236. 19. Oeconomia Naturae.
Economy of Nature. 237. 41. Cui Bono? To what Use, Natural History? answered.
-- 257. 50. Instructio Musei. Method of constructing Museums for Natural
History. 264. 60. Horticultura Academica. Science of Gardening. -- 275. 87.
Arboretum Suecicum. The various uses of the indigenous Trees of Sweden. 304.
88. Frutetum Suecicum. The various Uses of the indigenous Shrubs of Sweden.
304. 92. Instructio Peregrinatoris. Instructions for Travelers. -- 307. 93.
Plantae tinctoriae. Vegetables used in dyeing. -- 307. 102. Politia Naturae.
Police of Nature. -- 318. 145. Usus Muscorum. Uses of Mosses. -- 366. 147. Usus
Historiae Naturalis. Uses of Natural History. -- Page 368. 148. Necessitas
Hist. Not. Rossiae. Necessity of promoting the Study of Natural History in
Russia. -- 369. 149. Rariora Norwegiae. The more rare subjects of Natural
History in Norway. 370. 150. Iter Chinense. Natural Productions in a Voyage to
China. -- 373.
IV. MEDICAL PAPERS.
14. Vires Plantarum. Virtues of Plants determined from their natural
Characters. -- 232. 23. Calculi Generatio. Origin of the Stone in the Bladder.
-- 242. 28. Materia Medica ex Animalibus. Animal Substances used in Physic. --
247. 30. Sapor Medicamentorum. Virtues of Plants determined by the Taste. --
248. 33. Obstacula Medicinae. Impediments to the Improvement of Physic. -- 251.
36. Materia Medica ex Lapidibus. Fossil Substances used in Physic. -- 253. 37.
Hyemis Morbi. Diseases of the Winter Season. -- 253. 38. Odores Medicamentorum.
Virtues of Plants determined by the Smell. -- 254. 34. Plantae esculentae.
Esculent Plants of Sweden. -- 251. 42. Nutrix Noverca. Persuasive to Mothers to
nurse their own Children. -- 257. 51. Plantae officinales. List of the
officinal Plants of the Swedish Mat. Medica Page 265. 52. Censura simplicium.
Articles to be expunged from, and introduced into the Materia Medica. -- 266.
71. Fundamenta Valetudinis. Foundation of good Health and a strong
Constitution. -- 283. 72. Specifica Canadensia. North American Plants of
singular Virtues. -- 284. 73. Acetaria Cibaria. The Sallads of Europe. 286. 76.
Morbi Nautarum. Diseases of Seamen. 288. 77. Febris Upsaliensis. The Upsal
Fever. -- 291. 79. Panis Diaeteticus. The different kinds of Bread. -- 293. 82.
Exanthemata Viva. Exanthematic Animalcula. -- 296. 84. Culina mutata. Change of
Vegetable Aliments since the Times of the Ancients. -- 299. 86. Medicamenta
graveolentia. Foetid Medicines. -- 302. 90. Senium Salomoneum. Solomon on
Oldage, explained. -- 306. 99. Aer habitabilis. Brief History of the Air. 315.
103. Theses Medicae. Medical Propositions. 319. 107. Macellum olitorium.
Culinary Herbs. 322. 109. Diaeta acidularis. Regimen under the use of
Chalybeate Waters. -- 325. 111. Inebriantia. Narcotics and Inebriants. 328.
112. Morsura Serpentum. The Bite of venomous Animals. -- 329. 119. Fructus
esculenti. Esculent Fruits. -- 337. 123. Raphania. Acute epidemic Epilepsy.
Page 341. 124. Genera Morborum. Classification of Diseases. -- 166 -- 200. 125.
Motus polychrestus. Benefits of Exercise. 343. 126. Hortus culinaris. Culture
of Kitchen Garden Plants. -- 344. 129. Diaeta Aetatum. Regimen for the
different Stages of Life. -- 346. 130. Morbi Artificum. Diseases of Tradesmen.
347. 131. Lepra. Leprosy of Bothnia and Finland. 347. 136. Fervida et Gelida.
The Use and Abuse of hot and cold Food and Drink. 354. 139. Spiritus Frumenti.
Spirituous Liquors. 361. 135. Varietas Ciborum. Effects of Variety in Foods. --
353. 140. Menthae Usus. Virtues of Mint. -- 361. 141. Purgantia indigena.
Vegetables of a purging Quality indigenous in Sweden. 361. 143. Metamorphosis
humana. Changes incident to Man in the different Stages of life. 364. 144. Cura
generalis. Cure of Diseases by the Regulation of the Non-naturals. -- 365.
V. ZOOLOGICAL.
1. Descriptions of particular Animals.
20. Taenia. History of Tape Worms. -- 238. 39. Noctiluca Marina. Phosphoreal
Nereis. 255. 53. Canis familiaris. Natural History of the Dog. -- 267. 57.
Cervus Tarandus. Of the Reindeer. 273. 58. Ovis Aries. Natural History of the
Sheep. 273. 59. Mus Porcellus. Of the Cavy, or Guinea Pig. -- Page 274. 74.
Phalaena Bombyx. Of the Silkworm. 286. 100. Sus Scrofa. Natural History of the
Hog. 316. 108. Meloe Vesicatorius. History of the blistering Beetle. -- 323.
127. Hirudo Medicinalis. Natural History of the Leech. -- 344. 142. Siren
lacertina. The Siren, or Mud-Iguana. -- 363.
2. Descriptions of particular Collections.
5. Amphibia Gyllenborgiana. Count Gyllenborg's Cabinet of Amphibious Animals.
-- 225. 11. Museum Principis. Rare Animals presented to the University Museum
by Prince Adolphus, described. -- 230. 16. Surinamensia Grilliana. Mr. Grill's
Surinam Serpents. -- 235. 61. Chinensia Lagerstromiana. Chinese Productions in
Natural History -- 276. 105. Anthropomorpha. Animals of the Simia Genus
described. -- 320. 121. Centuria Insectorum. A Century of rare Insects. -- 339.
3. Miscellaneous Zoological Papers.
75. Migrationes Avium. The Migration of Birds. -- 287. 43. Hospita Insectorum.
Insects referred to the Plants on which they are found. 258. 44. Miracula
Insectorum. Properties of some extraordinary Insects described. Page 259. 45.
Noxa Insectorum. Noxious Insects enumerated. -- 260. 89. Pandora Insectorum.
Insects referred to their appropriate Plants. -- 305. 80. Natura Pelagi. View
of the Contents of the Ocean. -- 294. 94. Animalia composita. Structure of
Corals and Corallines, etc. -- 310. 101. Generatio ambigena. Theory of
Generation. -- 317. 132. Fundamenta Ornithologiae. Institutions of Ornithology.
-- 317. 133. Fundamenta Entomologiae. Institutions of Entomology. -- 351. 146.
Mundus invisibilis. Dissertation* on Microscopical Animalcula. -- 367.
MISTAKES.
Page 14. line 20. after Suecica, add Edit. I. 17. -- 15. for abiisent, read
abiissent. 23. -- 15. for 346, read 364. 43. -- 10. dele would have. 122. --
19. for 335, read 235. 140. -- 16. for granite, read Granites. 202. -- 30. for
sexus, read sexus. 203. -- 30. for trydactylis, read tridactylis. 205. -- 5.
for Faenum, read Foenum. 207. -- 8. for indiginae, read indigenae. 209. -- 19.
for nciperem, read inciperem. 227. -- 8. dele given. 240. -- 27. for 358, read
327. 240. -- 30. for 557, read 577. 250. -- 2. for intersting, read
interesting. 301. -- 24. for 1276, read 1076. 323. -- 18. for Acetariae, read
Acetaria. 336. -- 27. for Bracte, read Bracteae. 346. -- 21. for Forskalea,
read Forskoblea. 370. -- 18. for 933, read 983. 384. -- 34. col. 3. for 1. 15.
read 11. 15. ibid. -- 26. col. 3. for 87, read 687.

