NEW DISCOVERIES AND IMPROVEMENTS In the most considerable Branches of Anatomy
and Surgery.

Wherein FOUR of the most dangerous Operations are prevented, viz.

I. The great Use of the Curve-Catheter, in a Suppression of Urine, and easing
the racking Pain of the Stone in the Bladder. II. RUPTURES of all Kinds cured
without Cutting. III. The DIVEDED TENDON cured without Stitching. IV. The
WHITE-SWELLING cured without Dismembering. V. The best Method for the Reduction
of Fractures, and Dislocations. VI. The Nature of Gunshot, and other Wounds;
and of the Errors committed in Bleeding. VII. The True Seat of the Gonorrhaea
demonstrated; and Cure of the Venereal Disease. VIII. Of the Circulation of the
Blood in the Foetus, and the Nourishment thereof. IX. Of the PARTS of
Generation in Women, etc.
The whole proposed by way of Instruction; and Illustrated with CASES and CURES,

By Mr STUART, Surgeon.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR. M.DCC.XXXVIII.

TO Ambrose Dickins, Esquire;
Serjeant-Surgeon to his MAJESTY.
SIR,
WHEN Interest does not Bias, Authors choose for their Patrons Persons honored
with Affluence of Applause in their Professions.

In your, early Years you discovered an inquisitive Spirit, and a pleasing
Disparity in Understanding.

This was the Motive on which Mr Barnard, Sergeant Surgeon of perpetual Memory,
adopted you in Marriage to his Daughter his only Child. By inheriting his
Fortune, and high Station with general Approbation, you discover a Modesty, and
Rectitude of Manners which can result only from Learning, and a superior
Knowledge.

As Head of the Faculty, and a Debt to your Merit, I address this short
Treatise to you.

You will perceive that it contains many Discoveries in Anatomy, and Surgery.
Being wrote to a Pupil it wants an Explanation in some Circumstances: This I
will make to you on the first Intimation which I shall take as a Command,
rather a Sanction; this I never will violate.

Though your Approbation will be my Fame, and your Favor a great Purchase, I
will subscribe implicitly to your Sentiment.

It is just that the Defects, and Blemishes should return upon me.

As to my Education you will read where I had it.

Undeserved Honor detracts from the Giver.

Therefore we receive Pleasure in paying our Acknowledgments to a Person
transcending in Virtue.

Honor, Ambition, Fortune, Happiness, and Inclination, the strongest Motives
in Nature will always prompt me to court a Correspondence with you, if it be
not a Crime.

I am, SIR, Your Most Obedient, Humble Servant Alexander Stuart.
LONDON, March 25, 1738
THE CONTENTS
OF the Reduction of Fractures and Dislocations. Page 3. Of Gunshot, and other
Wounds. p. 9. Cases and Cures. p. 12. Of Ruptures, and their Cure, p. 19. Of
White-Swellings, etc. p. 23. Of the true Seat of a Gonorrhaea, and its Cure. p.
29. Of the Circulation of the Blood in the Foetus, and of its Nourishment. p.
30. Of the Parts of Generation in Women, the Law of Formation, etc. p. 45. Of
Errors in Bleeding. p. 52. Of the Stone, and its Cure. p. 53.
The Author's Business not permitting him to attend the Press, the Reader is
desired to correct the following

ERRATA,
PAGE. 9. Line 14. read Nervosum. p. 10. l. 8. r. Despumate. ibid. 18. r.
Heterogene. ibid. 20. Missentery. p. 11. l. 10. r. knew nothing, p. 18. l. 6.
r. Hollidays not excepted. p. 19. l. 13. r. Tendonous, p. 20. l. 19. r.
Miserere, ibid, 24. r. Bowel, p. 25. l. 6. r. apposite. p. 35. l. 8. r. Hernia
Guttteris. p. 40. l. 16. BOTAL, an eminent Anatomist at Paris, who found out
this Canal of Communication. p. 41. l. 1. r. an. p. 44. l. 10. r. Ragnoides.

LETTERS, directed to Tom's Coffee-House in Covent Garden Post-free, will come
safe to the Author of this Treatise.

INSTRUCTIONS Anatomical and Chirurgical.
In a LETTER to a PUPIL.
SIR,
IN search of Things, laudable and praiseworthy, Ambition is a Virtue. Prior to
other Men, those of our Profession are required to pursue their Progressive
Improvement in this Case; but we must climb the Hill; Virtue sits of Top. Care
is painful; the Charge of Men, and Women's Lives, and Limbs revolves the
Surgeon's Breast. To retain his Tranquillity he is to proceed in his Business,
according to the received Maxims, and approved Method of the best
Practitioners. Learning gives Tranquillity of Mind; it points the Road to
Reputation and Riches.

IT is a Maxim among Infidels to speak well of all Men as far as Virtue will
permit; Slander is base, and does recriminate. It is far from me to derogate
from the Masters of your Hospital, St. Tho -- s.
but who among such Folks imparts his Knowledge, and if they do, ought not
young Men to proceed in their Research: Reputation lost, is hardly retrievable;
we are not to risk this rashly: On the other Hand, the World is apt to form a
great Idea of a Surgeon of an enterprizing Genius; they presume that his
Knowledge is well founded; so they may, being attended with Success. Temerity
puts a Man off his Guard; this is subject to great Danger.

THE Reduction of Fractures, and Dislocations is a great and necessary Article
in a Surgeon's Business; to decline this, is inconsistent with his Character,
see himself postponed to a country Fellow, in all other respects inferior to
him. Granting that many of those People set Bones at random, you will not
easily be believed in saying so, even when they miscarry. There is Reason to
retort, that good Surgeons fail in this Case, though Men are required to speak
Truth, it would be a Hardship on Surgeons to tell all which they know, or
believe: they would confess that sometimes the Swelling confounds them in
distinguishing the Species of Fractures, particularly Luxations. This
Reflection ought to put young Surgeons under an indispensible Obligation to
distinguish the great Variety also of Sub Luxations, and be familiarly
conversant with the ^^her Rules of Art, to arm against C^^^^ngencies. When you
have ^^^n instructed in the Osteology, the Myology, and the Angiology, the
History of the Bones, the Muscles, and the Blood Vessels, you will cut without
Danger, by the Dis^ and Re-place of the Head of the Bone, see how and where the
Muscles and Ligaments are banded, and relaxed; then from the intense Pain, the
privation of Motion, and the Position, judge where the Distortion is made,
notwithstanding the Swelling. This Rule will direct you in adjusting the
Extension, and in moderating the Violence.

WHEN the Femur, the Thigh, is dislocated backward; I mean when the Head of the
Bone is under the Gluti, or Fleshchi, the three Extensor Muscles of the Femur,
all Authors, as well as other Surgeons, agree, few contradict, that the
Reduction is impractible, by Reason that the Head of the Bone cannot be
removed; especially in that the Ligament, Tarsor, being broke, the Bone will
not keep in it is Place: I will demonstrate how this Luxation may be reduced,
and by what Means the Ligament restored.

RULES will be given respecting Fractures, particularly the Oblique, and
Transverse-Fracture of the Femur, the Thigh bone, which cannot be felt, by
Reason aforesaid.

EXCELLENT Directions Will be given to keep the Compound-Fracture free from
Pain, and without the exfoliating the Bone, cure the Wound with Facility, and
Promptitude. In departing from these Rules the menacing Accidents rising high,
the Life of the Diseased is cast away, or hangs in doubt.

YOU will be apprized of an Error in a reputed great Author: Wiseman.
this for many Years has been a stumbling Block to his Practising-Successors,
and sometimes fatal to the Subject, if he escaped with his Life, he underwent a
long Weakness, and not seldom a Deformity in his Limb. I am acquainted with a
Gentleman, a shameful Example of this Error in two great Surgeons in Concert,
one of them a Grandee of the first Class; the Afflicted deplores the
Remembrance of his Sorrow, and the Loss of the Use of his Elbow; these in a
great Measure might have been prevented, with no danger of his Life, or
Lameness, little Pain, loss of Time, or Expense comparative.

BY the Indication of the Pulse, and of the Urine, you may betimes animate your
Digestive, then by change of Dressing turn gradually the redundant Discharge to
Incarn the Wound, and generate, and confirm the Callous: This Practice must
needs be just, seeing that by certain Tokens in the Matter or Discharge, this
is known to be the Chyle, and indeed the native Balm of the Blood which cures
all Wounds. In this Case, Old People seldom recover their Strength; the Spirit
and Balsam of the Blood is evaporated: This is become Cadaverous.

IF I do not take upon me to determine the controverted Hypotheses in Theory,
it is not improbable but in this I shall make a pleasing Advance.

IN this Sentiment you will find yourself in Condition to distinguish Books;
was I to speak my Opinion of them, I must own that there are not many worth
reading. It is not hard to comprize in a Sheet or two of Paper, what is
material in some of the best of them, particularly those of the Practice of
Surgery.

WITH a copious, and beautiful Variety of Topics, you shall have the Occasional
Method of Internal Prescription, to digest Wounds of the Brain, and Wounds of
the Viscera. Of all other, Gunshot Wounds in the Joints are formidable to
Nature. Application of actuating, fortifying, and resolutive Medecines of
various Kinds not generally known are to be made according to the Exigency of
the Wound: the Surgeon is to steer his Course, as it were, between Charybdis
and Scylla, a Rock, and a Sand, as they term it. Without adding Fuel to the
burning Fever, he is to cherish the Genus Nervosam; from thence the interessing
Soul sends continually Succors of Animal Spirits in Aid of Nature in the
unequal War with her united cruel Enemies Pain, Fever, Thirst, Burning,
Watching, Delirium. In Failure of these Spirits to rarify, and animate the
condensing Blood, to digest the Wound, alleviate the Pain, and support or
strengthen the Heart, laboring under the redoubling Pulse, the mortal Symptoms
prevailing; the noble Organs ceasing to perform their Vital and Animal
Functions, the Soul deprived of her Power, is forced to depart.

YOU should learn to despamate, secern, and transfer the dangerous Rellux of
purulent Matter oppressing the Blood, and Animal Spirits with Restlessness,
Fever, Delirium, the Hickok, Lethargy, Apoplexy, Convulsions, etc. the
Harbinger of Death.

UPON a sudden Suppression of Sweat sometimes this becomes a Hetorene Humor,
and with pungent Pain vellicats the Intestines, the Missentory, the Pleura, the
Mediastinum, the Pericranium, and other Parts greatly subject to Resentment. Of
all Cases this embarasses the Surgeon; Secretion being the Work of Nature he
cannot appoint the Time, nor till this is accomplished hardly obtain a Respite,
or Cessation of the Violence: This seems to have been the late Case of a great
King which for what we could perceive his Physicians and Surgeons knew, yet
like a Starrost with his Hand on his Sabre in Senate, they were for defending
their Argument in the Antichamber.

Laudanum is our great Anodyne, this we are forbid; it restrains the
Transfusion of the Animal Spirits on which depends the Function and Formality
of the Parts, also the Energy of the secerning Blood. A continued Use of this
Medicine may render the Disease incurable, or of a long Duration. Purging and
Bleeding interrupt Nature: She has chose to deliver herself by the
denographical, or culicular Glands, and will not be controuled. Perspirating,
Alexipharmic, and Volatile Medicines are of a little Effect till toward the
Crisis; Nature alone maintains the Conflict; Hence it happens that sometimes
she does not overcome till from a Vernal Solstice chiefly, the Blood has
received an Accession of Warmth to ferment, and discharge in the Surface.

SOME Years ago I tended a Gentleman who upon drinking cold Water when hot, and
Sweating was seized with a violent Pain in the nervous Tunicle of his Bowels.
After a tedious Indisposition a large Abscess was formed in his Groin. Though I
opened the Swelling as soon as it fluctuated: The Blood and Spirits were so
tainted, and charged with this foreign Humor, that he had an accelerated, a
low, and an irregular Pulse; was delirious, had cold clam Sweatings, an Hickok,
a Diarrhea and a Gangarene round the Border of the Wound; also an advanced
Mortification on the Inside of That Knee. In five or six Days the Wound
discharged so many Quarts of a lixive, ganger Lymph: When the Mortification was
stopped and a Separation made one might turn his Hand in the Wound quite to the
Peritoneum in sight. Now the mortal Symptoms began to remit: In less than five
Weeks the Wound was sicatrized. You will agree that the Cure depended on proper
Internals; had there been a Defect in the Dressings he must have perished, so
he would had I fatigued him with Pain.

BETWEEN two and three Years ago, one Mrs Gyles, had for Year before, a
continual Diarrhea, or Lienterria; the Chyle, or Nourishment, ran off, the
greatest Part of it before it entered the Lacteals. In the Spring of the Year a
large, cold, white, fluctuating Swelling grew on her right Hypondria below the
Ribs. From the beginning she had an aching Pain shooting deep into the Liver;
the Seat or Source of her Indisposition; a suppressed Sweat transferred. A
considerable Surgeon in Town told her to be well advised in whom she trusted,
and that he did not open the Swelling too soon. In about a Week I stopped the
Looseness: In eight, or nine Days more the Swelling became warm, and reddish,
but frightfully increased in Bigness: I told her now was the Time; she
yielding, I opened the Swelling with a Lancet; there was a Basin of a Quart and
half a Pint of formed Matter caught; here and there streaked with Blood, toward
the End. She, and others who saw the shifted Cloths and Bedding did believe
that in 48 Hours the Wound did run a Gallon, and in four Nights two Quarts
more; in all Six Quarts. The Return of the Diarrhea was what I apprehended
most: This happened the first Night attended with cold, clam Sweating, a
trembling Pulse, and Fainting; so again the second Night; and were as often
taken off. In few Days more she mended daily, and in three Weeks was quite
well: Then she grew Fat, Healthful, and Strong. She is lately married to James
Tailor, a White-smith in Hatfield-street.

IN five Weeks I cured a Gentlewoman of a large Mortification in her Loins
extending on the Os Sacrum, and the Coxis, to affect the Sphinctures of the
Anus, and the Bladder, cut off the Course of the Spirits, that she rendered her
Excrements involuntary. In the beginning she had a Fever of the Spirits, a
Delirium, cold Sweatings, and a Syncopa.

THESE Cures well understood, and the Medicines given will, with Variations, be
a Precedent in many Grand Cases; nor are the Internal Things mentioned in any
Book on such Occasions; yet which no Phycisian, or Surgeon, speaking without
Prejudice, can disavow: They will, and must needs own that if any one ever was,
these People, all of them by Medicine, were brought back from the Gates of the
Grave.

WHAT deserves Remark; there was no Ruburb, or Astringent, no Opiate, or
Theriaca given in the Diarrhea, the Cortex suspends, or restrains Secretion; so
does Laudanum: This shuts the Avenues of the Nerves, binding, or centering the
Animal Spirits, it leavens the Blood, and opposes Digestion and Reunion. I
shall occasionally speak farther of these Medicines, and how they may be given
safely; here they would have been mortal by Reason of the Nervous Fever.

IN case of a Collection in the Mediastinum, De Verney says we may trepan the
Sternum. He was Professor of Anatomy in the Royal Garden at Paris, and probably
the greatest that ever lived, taken throughout. He Illustrated his
Demonstrations of all Parts of the Body with his comparative Anatomy of Horses,
Calves, Dogs, Cats, Fowl, Fish, Frogs, Eggs; including his public Lectures, and
Course of Operations. His Course of Anatomy lasted from the Beginning of
September till the end of March, all the Week (Sundays, and Holidays excepted)
from Morning till Night, an Hour at Noon allowed. He was Forty Years
Royal-Professor; had read all valuable Books; was thought to be one of the
greatest Orators in France. Being of easy Access his Scholars had a fair
Opportunity of Improvement. His Papers would have made a Volume little less
than a Church-Bible; but they never were published. Few can judge of the Loss,
yet this may easily be perceived in the Defects, and Impertinencies in Men's
Discourse and Writings on this Subject, some who hold their Heads high.

YOU shall see the several Intentions practiced to restrain the Affluence of
Suppuration, which procrastinates, and defeats the Cure of Wounds, and renders
Ulcers sinous, callous, and fistulous, then by exalting, and displaying,
rebating, and correcting the Blood, render this subservant to your Purpose.

YOU will be entertained with an Essay on the Hernia of the Parts, will learn
to disengage the Intestine Ilion strangled in the tendous Perforation of the
great Oblique, the external Muscle of the Abdomen; and how to prevent the
Return of the Ilion into the Inguin, or Groin. Such is the Force of a few
external Medicines, that they effect the Cure of the Rupture in People advanced
in Years, if I do not say without help of a Truss, this I have done, upon
considering them well, and how they are adapted to several Purposes
cooperating, you will perceive that they bear the greatest Congruity to
Reason, and Probability of Success; should they fail, or fall short in what is
promised, others are appointed to sustain the Effort, strike off the Symptoms
as they arrive. In fine, you shall have a System of Prescriptions to traverse
the Train of Appearances, and anticipate the dangerous Operation of the
Bubonocele or strangled Rupture even when the vermicular, the peristaltic, or
natural Motion of the Intestines is inverted, and they vomit their Excrements
as in the Micere, or Iliac Passion.

ASK at Mr Baker a Cooper in Nottingham-street: I cured his Wife of a
strangling of the Bowels attended with violent Pain and Sickness, when without
Passage downwards, she for Eight Days vomited every thing that she took.

WHEN on this Occasion, and probably in this Manner, you have had the good
Fortune to redeem, or ransom Men from Death; you should fence them with
Strength, brace the unbended Muscles, and the expanded Tendons, restore the
Resort of the relaxed Ring, to withstand the Protrusion of the Intestine, and
of the Epiploon into the Ain, or Inguin, and the Scrotum, the Seat of the
Bubonocele, and of the Complete Hernia.

I have a Sheet of Paper wrote throughout on the Cause and Cure of the Rupture.

FROM the long and oftentimes repeated Experience which I have had of my Method
of Cure of the Rupture, I will, and do engage to take only Twenty Shillings for
Things, nor will I ask more if I do not cure the Diseased absolutely, if
through Neglect, or otherwise they do not profane the Use of my Medicines. I
will, put them to no Pain, Trouble, or Inconveniency farther than to wear a
Cotton-Truss 10 or 12 Days till my Medicines do take Place.

YOU will take Notice that this Promise is to be understood with some
Exceptions, or Restrictions, respecting great Age and Weakness.

MR Mitchell, Colourman over against Haberdashers Hospital in Hoxton; had his
eldest Son born with a Complete Rupture. I cured him at Ten Years old.

A Scholar at the Latin Boarding School at Edmonton was lately cured by me of a
complete Rupture on both Sides the Intestine, or Bowel, quite down in the
Scrotum. Send to Mr Harrow Master of the Boarding School.

YOU shall learn to supercede successfully the Stitch, or Suture of the Tendon,
cure the Wound, and recover the Use of the Part sooner, and with far less Pain,
than by the Operation.

THE Cure of the painful Anchylose, or White Swelling in the Joint, is a
Consideration of no little Import, and known but to a few. You shall see how to
give a present Judgment of this, and cure all curable Kinds; this will go far.
I have wrought Miracles of this sort, so may you with help of my Thesis on this
Subject.

I have an Essay on the Circulation of the Blood in the Foetus, and on the
Nourishment of the Foetus.

WHAT is alluring to the Ear: You shall hear a Discourse on the Parts of
Generation in Women, and on the Law of Formation, the Pre-existence of
Lineaments in the Ovum.

I will annex an Essay on the Passions and Affections, accounting for them from
the near, and familiar Consent of the Various Plexus of Nerves, and the
intimate Correspondence of the Animal Spirits reciprocating in them.

You shall be convinced of the Certainty of extracting the Stone in the
Urethra, without Danger of having the Wound remain Fistulous.

To many opposite Digressions on the other great and necessary Heads of Anatomy
and Surgery; I will give a Process on the Bronchocele, the glairous Swelling of
the Glands Thyroides, threatening a Suffocation from the Pressure of the
Swelling on the flexible Part of the Annular Cartilages of the Aspera Arteria.

ABOUT a Year ago, I opened an Ulcer in the Roof of Captain Hughes's Mouth: I
exfoliated, and took out the Bone of the Pallat. Inquire at Mrs Starky's in
Deanstreet, by Red-Lyon Square. The Captain will show the Bone, and that the
Wound stands sound, nor can you perceive any Alteration in his Speech.

THREE Years ago I opened and cured a Scrofolous, or King's Evil Swelling in a
Gentlewoman's Neck. Inquire at Mr Kitchen's Baker in Buckle-street, by Red
Lyonstreet, Goodman Fields.

AN eminent Surgeon in Town will witness, that when with Three Bolusses of
fourteen Grains of my Panacea I fluxed a Man Thirty Days; I opened the
ulcerated Skin of his Nose. I cauterized the carious Bones several Times: I
took out the Bridge, the Ossa Nasalia, both of them, and without sinking the
spungy Bone underneath to make a Blemish; I cured him also of an Ulcer in his
Throat large enough to receive a small Apple; an Exostosis on his Wrist, and
one on the second Joint of his great Toe; of all which he held well several
Years, till he died of another Distemper. I recovered a Woman brought to Bed in
the Height of her Flux under all the dengerous Circumstances of a great
Effusion.
Other Surgeons give 150 Grains of Mercurius Dulcis, or more; consequently my
Method of cure of the Venerel Disease is much safer, nor is it less effectual,
than a Flux raised by Unction, whereas their Method of Salivation comes far
short in Certainty.

I saw a great Surgeon in Town give fourteen Grains of Mercurius Dulcis, and
seven Grains of Turbith Mineral, or yellow Mercury, for one Dose in a
Gonorrhaea, a running of the Reins as they call it. He told me that the
Brotherhood speak as they please, but this is what they give, and even in
greater quantity, whereas I do not exceed ten Grains of my Panacea, and that
castrated of its vitriolic corrosive Points, in which is the Danger: It is by
this Means that so small a Quantity of my Panacea raises a Salivation. It is
true that I mix another Powder; but you shall be satisfied that this has no
Relation to Mercury of any kind; nor is it Subject to ill Consequence.

TURBITH Mineral causes worse Effects: Of this I give none; It weakens, and
relaxes the Medul Spinalis, or Back Bone Marrow, the Root of the Nerves of the
inferior Parts that they cannot receive the Animal Spirits, nor indeed the
Impression of the Imagination to push them. Thus defrauded of Spirits, the
Stamen of Sense, and Motion, the Muscles of the Loins lose their Action and
Strength, more or less.

OLD Gleets proceed from what the French call a Debility, or Laxness of the
Vessels, the Emunctory of the Prostates. Purging makes the Case worse:
Astringents are dangerous. I stop Gleetings of a long standing by tempering the
Heat and Ferment of the Humor, by a Medicine absolutely safe, and pleasant to
take.

You will expect that I should give my Opinion of the Seat, or Source of the
Gonorrhaea. We are commanded to strive for Truth; this obliges me to speak
affirmatively in Contradiction to a Book on the Hypothesis of the Lacunae, and
the Patrons of this Theory. Of Dr Cockburn.


Monsieur De Verney, the Gentleman already mentioned, showed an Ulcer in the
Prostates, of a Man who had this Distemper when he died. I heard him also say,
that from thence came the Matter or Discharge in this Case.

THE Prostates lie on the depending part of the Bladder near the Sphincter, and
the Erector Muscles of the Penis. The Inflammation, and Swelling of the Ulcer,
is soon communicated to those Parts through the porous Tunicles of the Bladder,
from this it is easy to account for the Heat, the Stoppage, and Strangury of
the Urine, also for the Pain and Cordee in the Time of Erection.

WHAT I am going to say will cast the Balance, and determine the Controversy
on my Side, absolutely.

IT is manifest that a Discharge of Matter must come from a Wound. Consistent
with this Demonstrative Proposition it is found that the Excoriation, or Ulcer
of the Prostates-Glands is always antecedent to the Gonorrhaea, whereas that of
the Lucanae does not happen of some time after, sooner, or later, according to
the Heat, and Sharpness of the Urine, and of the Running from the Prostates, so
the Excoriation or Ulcer of the Lacunae can be only an Effect, or Consequence
of those Symptoms: I mean that the Heat, and Sharpness of the Urine, and of the
vitiated Discharge of the Ulcer in the Prostates passing often through the
Urethra does chafe, and fret the thin and tender Membrane of the Lacunae, so
occasions an Ulcer, or Excoriation in this Part.

IN a long and great Discharge the Prostates are found to waste, and in the End
to shrink, and shrivel to almost nothing, while the Excoriation of the Lacunae
remains without Alteration. These Reasons rise to a Demonstration of my
Assertion. The Experiment may soon be made in the Hospitals.

THE Succus or Juice of the Prostates, is the Vehicle which conveys the
Volatile Semen into the Uterus. When this is spent, and the Prostates withered,
Men become incapable of Procreation, but fertile Nature recovers some, as by a
Miracle.

AS in the Prostates, a long, and great Discharge of Matter or Nutritious Juice
from the Lacunae would run sinous the cavernous Body of the Penis, and give as
little Trouble to cure it.

WE should find it impractible to restore the Masculine Proportion of the Penis.

BUT these Accidents do not happen; therefore the Seat of the Gonorrhaea, is
not in the Lacunae.

I was bred in St Thomas's, Hospital, under Mr William Coatesworth: After this
I was two Years under the celebrated De Verney at Paris, and in the Hospitals
there.

A great Man in Town was my Pupil: Now he is a Physician, he does not scruple
to own that he formed himself chiefly on the Anatomy, etc. which I taught him.
His Father was a Surgeon of good Account; he chose me to educate his Son
preferable to any Man in Town; so he used to say. I have bred several other
Surgeons: Some of them are much sought to in setting Bones.

DR James Keill was a Gentleman no less valued for his Integrity than his
Knowledge in Anatomy; I have inserted a Certificate from him.

TAKE down in Writing three or four remarkable cases in Cure in your Hospital
according to the Number and order of your Queries, I will Account for the
Appearances from the Fabric, the Function, and Situation of the Parts.

HAVE you a mind to hear something previous: Inquire out a Professor of
Anatomy. I will meet him at his appointed Time, and Place, to answer and
question him on this Subject. If he thinks fit the controverted Points shall be
submitted to the Wardens of Surgeons Hall, or to two other Professors, or
Physicians, and a third to adjudge.

SIR,
THE Swelling in your Lady's Throat is what Surgeons call the Bronchocele, or
Hernia Gutterii; but to speak in particular; I say it is a Distention of the
Glands Thyroides. They are two in Number situated on the opposite Sides of the
Larynx, and the superior Part of the Aspira Arteria sinking to the flexible
Part of the Anular Cartilages. The use of these Glands is to strain from the
Blood, a vicous glairous Liquor, to lubrify the Cartilages of the Larynx to
facilitate their Motion. They as well as other Glands are greatly subject to
cold Defluxions. They are the principal Fountains, and Recervatories of the
Lympha. Thus we may believe that this cold Humor is also sent thither from the
salivary Sources, and other Glands adjacent. It is easy to think that as the
Thyroides Glands swell, and take up a greater space, they press the flexible
part of the Anular Cartilages aforesaid, obliging them to yield; they straiten
the Trachia Arteria: This occasions the great Difficulty of Breathing, and
threatening of Suffocation.

ON this principle we render Reason for the loss of her Voice: The Recrurent
Nerves suffers a Compression: Animal Spirits are wanting in the Muscles to play
the Cartilages of the Larynx to form the Voice. She is worse when with Child,
on Account that the Blood and Humors are more determined to the superior
Parts, especially in that as the Abdomen grows big it presses the Diaphragma
against the Lungs, so lessens the Capacity of the Thorax, and hinders
Respiration. Parallel to this is the Case of Dropsical People always oppressed
with shortness of Breath: I mean in the true Ascites when the lower Belly is
filled with Water.

THE great Swelling gives Reason to believe that the whole Substance of these
Glands is sapped, and distended with this cold Humor like a sponge in Water;
the sojourn of which has rendered their Texture so extremely lax, that they
will not recover their Resort; consequently not admit of cure. Hence it is hard
to promise more than to prevent an Extremity; for which if Purging, Bleeding,
espesially Sweating, fortifying, discussing, drying, and corrugating Spirits,
with the Emplastrum, Divinum, Diasulpharis de Ranis, and Saponis spread and
embrocated frequently with Os Succini redificati should not prove effectual one
may venture to apply a Caustic on each Side the Aspira Arteria, thereby
procuring a plentiful Suppuration, the Humor may bedrained, and the Swelling
sunk, but remembering that Digestion depends on the sweet Influence of the warm
Blood, and Spirits in the Parts, of which in some Sort, this Swelling being
deprived, it may be feared that the Wound will languish and ulcerate.


On the Circulation of the Blood in the Foetus, and on the Nourishment of the
Foetus.
WAving the exploded Opinion of the Ancients concerning the Manner of
Nourishment of the Foetus; The Foetus is nourished by the Blood.
without Doubt this depends principally on the Blood, or rather on the
assimulating Chyle.

THE Epigastric Artery of the Mother transfuses incessantly into the Placenta,
The Blood brought into the Placenta.
the Secundine, or Afterbirth a determined Quantity of Blood. This is received
by the Vena Umbilicalis, the Navel String, The Navel-String receives the Blood
from the Mother.
and carried in the Porta through the Liver, thence in the Conduit Venae, to
the Vena Cava, which empties in the Right Ventricle of the Heart of the Foetus.
The Blood circulated in the Foetus
This Machine put into Contraction sends what Blood can pass through the
Foramen Ovale, and the remainder into the Arteria Pulmonaris: But Nature to
favor the feeble Pulse of the Heart as wanting the Succor of Respiration
shortens also the Course of this remaining Blood. She pushes it through the
famous Canal of Communication, called also the Canal Botel, which joins the
Artery and Vein of the Lungs. There is no more Blood sent into the Substance of
the Lungs, than is necessary for their Nourishment.

Without making the Circuit of the Lungs this second Portion of Blood, is also
sent into the left Ventricle of the Heart. This Engine armed with strong
musculous Fibers throws the Blood through the Aorta, and it is Productions to
all Parts of the Body.

As the Blood returns to the Placenta in the Umbilical-Artery, it is absorbed
by the Epigastric Vein and brought back to the Heart of the Mother. In this
Manner, the reciprocating Circulation is continually carried. It is by Means of
the forementioned Canal of Communication, that some Diverse, having it still
open, can abide so long under Water. Such People cannot easily be hanged, the
blood, which upon straitening the Aspera Arteria, to hinder Respiration, would
re-gorge and extravase in the Lungs retires to the Heart by this abandoned
Passage, to keep up a regular Sistole and Diastole, in alternate Contraction
and Relaxation of the Ventricles of the Heart, by which the Blood, measured by
the Auricles, is received and cast abroad to all Parts of the Body. On this
depends the natural Life: In losing the Animal Spirits, and warmth of our
Blood, we lose our Lives gradually.

Death is an Univeasal Repose, or Cessation of Motion.

The second way of Nourishment of the Foetus.
WE are not to omit that the Inside of the Uterus, to which the Placenta
adheres, is clothed with abundance of Glands. They continually strain from the
Blood a lacteous Liquor; this mixing again with the Blood in the Secundine is
sucked up, or pushed into the Umbilical-Vein, so goes to the Foetus.

The third Source of Nourishment of the Foetus.
The third Source of Nourishment of the Foetus is remarkable, it is the great
Quantity of Nutritious Juice in which the Foetus floats in the Chorion and
Amnios, the Tunicles, or Membranes, our clothing in the Womb. This Juice has a
milky chylous Taste; it passes or is drawn through the Nostrils down into the
Stomach, and lessens in quantity as the Foetus grows in Bigness, so that a^ the
Birth there is little or none left. As to the Objection that such a Liquor has
been found in the Stomach of Monsters who had no Nose or Mouth; perhaps this
might be only the Salivo, or s^m^ th^^^ less considerable to sheath the
Menstrum of the Stomach, and the supposed Meconio, the Mucus of the Rectum,
where it is well known that the Faeces receive their Smell, their Color, and
Consistence; but I submit the Solution of these preternatural Cases to the
Judgment of the College.

THE Raynoides, or third Membrane, is not found in the Human Foetus, for this
does not urine We do not Urine in the Womb.
. The Glandula Renalis performs the Office of the Kidneys. As this has no
Excretory, or Third Canal, doubtless the Serum, or Urine is brought back with
the Blood in the Emulgent Vein.

An Essay on the Parts of Generation in Women, and on the Law of Formation, the
Pre-existence of the Lineaments in the Ovum.
THE Pre-existence of Lineaments in the Ovum, is the only Hypothesis on this
Subject reducible to the mechanical, or geometrical Principle, in which alone
is Certainty. Though this is new, yet being highly curious and instructive, the
greatest Physicians and Anatomists receive it readily. I shall with a parallel
Example describe it in Terms so easy, and familiar, chaste or seemly, that,
without Offense, this with a little Attention, or Instruction may in general be
understood by the fair Sex: They will see with Pleasure that this concerns them
in a high Degree, Childbearing Women particularly.

THOSE of our Profession who know most; scruple not to conclude and report,
that all the Generations of Men were lodged in the Loins of Eve: The Name
signifies Mother, and is meant the common Mother.

GOD made of One Blood all Nations of Men.

THEY compare the Ovarium of a Woman to a Bunch of Grapes, Twelve, Sixteen,
Twenty or More in Number. In each of these Ova, or Eggs, the Lines or
Lineaments of a Male, or Female, all of them, according to the great Fiat, are
already ready there. In their Turn as they become the nearest to what they call
the Trump, the Head, or Extremity of the Tuba Falopiani, an Apendage of the
Uterus, the Matrix, or Womb, the Eggs become receptive of the Impression of the
Semen of the Male in the amorous Congress.

IN the Height of the Caress, the transporting, the rapturous Influence of the
Spirits, and of the ardent Semen, darting through the Tuba, dresses or distends
the Trump. Now like a Hand this does embrace the Ovun, so that the volatile,
the essential, or spiritous Part of the Semen penetrates, warms, fecunds,
enlivens, and determines the Egg to receive progressive Nourishment from the
circulating Blood of the destinated Mother.

THUS the Conception claothed with it is proper Membranes; the Chorion, and the
Amnios, our Vesture in the Womb, and with the Placenta, or Secundine, all of
them of the first Formation growing too big to hang upon the Ovarium, wanting
also sufficient Nourishment does loosen, and separate. Now the impregnated Ovum
is received by the Trump, and brought down through the Pipe, the second, or
counter use of this Tube. Excepting one this is the most admirable piece of
Mechanism in Anatomy.


THE inner Orifice being shut, the Placenta cleaves to the Uterus, and becomes
a new and greater Source of Nourishment from the Blood of the Epigastric Artery
of the Mother.

(...) bilical-Vein, the Navel String, and goes to the Conception. Thus by the
recurrent Vessels the Blood does alternate to the Mother.

NOW the Lines, or Lineaments of the Conception begin to unfold, and range by
the increasing Blood pushing.

IN This manner the Conception becomes an Embryo, and this a Foetus which by
Degrees growing to Maturity, and straitened for want of Room, the Placenta also
separating, falling away like ripe Fruit, or Leaves from a Tree, the Infant
seeks to dislodge: Bearing on the Neck of the Womb, the Weight raises the
Throws of Labor.

To prove what they here advance, Anatomists husk or skin the Seed of a
Pine Tree Apple, then holding it before the Sun they show the Top, the Trunk,
and the Root of the Tree which it was to produce.

THIS they take as a Demonstration of their Hypothesis of the Pre-existence of
Lineaments in the Ovum, on the Plea, that the Law of Formation is general.

Whiston believes that Generation is nothing but Nutrition, or Augmentation of
the Parts; so it is, the Ovum being impregnated as aforesaid becomes
susceptible of Nutrition, and Growth.

THIS Subject will be improved in Relation to the double Conception, and the
parted Ovarium.

IN the two foregoing Essays Women will see with singular Satisfaction the
Time, and Manner of their Conception, and all the Alterations, and Accidents
which do or may happen to them till their Delivery. Seeing that by Means of the
Placenta the Child does only stick, or cling to the Womb, this may separate, or
part by a Fall or other Violence. Perceiving the Danger, Ladies will naturally
form to themselves a Regimen, or Manner of Living to prevent Abortion, or
Miscarriage.

THEY will no longer believe the imposed Absurdity of bringing a Son, or a
Daughter, at their Wish, or Desire.

THESE things will be easily understood and give no little Pleasure in reading
them.

Of Bleeding.
FROM the Observation which I have made on many Peoples Arms, and the great
Accidents which happen often, it is evident that the Danger in Bleeding is
little understood, few know how to shun it. You shall learn to Bleed easy, and
be made absolutely safe in all Cases.

WAS the Use of the Curve-Catheter generally known, and practiced it would in a
great Measure set aside the cruel Operation of Cutting for the Stone. Having
Recourse to this Instrument, few would expose to so doubtful an Event.

THE Reverend Mr John Richardson, Preceptor to Baptist Noel Earl of
Gainsborough, was for many Years almost incessantly tormented with a
Suppression of Urine, and Strangury from a Stone in the Bladder. Sometimes he
has staggered about the Room with convulsive Pain.

THE first time that I introducted my Curve-Catheter he urined through this
Instrument, and the Pain did remit. Next Day I turned a second Time the ragged
Stone on the Smooth Part, and his Pain and Provocation went off. Excepting some
short Fits of Pain, and Strangury he urined regularly for three Months. In
using may Catheter in this Manner three or four Times a Year, he enjoyed a Life
of Tranquillity for Six Years till he died, 1706. He was Fellow of Emanuel
College in Cambridge, and his Vindication of the Canon of the New Testament,
will perpetuate his Venerable Character in the learned World.

HOW many are tormented with a Suppression of Urine, and Strangury from
drinking Stale Beer, or pricked Wine, sometimes an Obstruction happens from an
Excrescence in the Neck of the Bladder, or in the Urethra. In all which Cases
the afflicted may expect. Relief from my Catheter.

I glide this Instrument under the Pubis into the Bladder, with either Hand
from above-below, or below-above, without Pain, or Blood even in fencing with
the Stone, if the Passage be not already excoriated. With this Instrument we
push the Stone twice with the Curve, the Conoex and the Concave Part having as
it were a greater hold, this gives a better Chance to turn the Stone than when
they strike with the Point of the Strait-Catheter. Now the Stone returns on the
ragged Side to keep up the Pain, and Provocation.

Dr Keill's Certificate.
Northampton, Dec. 18, 1708.
I Believe Mr Stuart to be a very good Surgeon, and well qualified to perform
any Operation in Surgery.

James Keill.

FINIS.

