MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS.

VIZ. I. Of Company and Conversation. II. Of Solitariness and Retirement. III.
Of Nobility. IV. Of Contentment. V. Of Women. VI. Of the Knowledge of God, and
against Atheism. VII. Of Religion. VIII. Of Kings, Princes, and the Education
of a Prince. IX. Of Greatness of Mind. X. Of the Education of Children. XI. Of
Law. XII. Of Man. XIII. Of Old Age.


WITH The Life and Conversion of St. Mary Magdalen, with some Reflections upon
the Conversion of the good Thief; also, the Life and Conversion of St. Paul.

By Sir RICHARD BULSTRODE, Knight. Envoy at the Court of Brussels, from King
Charles II. and King James II.

Published, with a Preface, by his Son WHITLOCKE BULSTRODE, Esquire

LONDON: Printed for JONAS BROWN, at the Black Swan without Temple Bar. MDCCXV.

To the Right Honorable CHARLES EARL of HALLIFAX, First Lord Commissioner of
the Treasury, one of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, etc.
My LORD,
THE Obligations I have received from your Lordship for many Years past, and
the Continuance of them to this Time, do justly call for a Public
Acknowledgment, on the first Opportunity I had to make it.

Having nothing of my own worth Presenting to your Lordship, I have, with your
Permission, dedicated some Essays of my Father's to your Lordship's Perusal.

I know how delicate a Taste your Lordship has; that you have adorned your Mind
both with University and Polite Learning; so that were I not entirely satisfied
that the Thoughts in them are not common, (and were they not my Father's, I
should say) that they are writ in the smooth Style of a Courtier, with the
Spirit and Air of a Gentleman, and with the Strength of a Man of Letters, I
should not have presumed to have inscribed your Lordship's Name before them.

How he was qualified to write these Essays, the Preface mentions; I shall only
add, that during the Time of his Foreign Embassy, which lasted about Thirty
Years, he laid out his Hours between Books, Men of the most polite Parts, and
Affairs of the greatest Moment.

He had the Pleasure of near twenty Years Retirement before his Death, (which
was at a hundred and one) to recollect his Observations of Men and Things, and
put them in the Dress in which your Lordship sees them.

There are some of them indeed that seem not to have passed his last Hands,
which therefore are not so correct as they would have been, had he lived to
have finished them. But when I consider, that the first Draughts of a Raphael,
Titian, or Reuben, are preserved with great Care, though not finished, I thought
it best to let them pass as they are.

The many great Services your Lordship has done the Public have been expressed
by so many, that it will be hard to avoid Repetition.

However, for a Nobleman, at the Head of Affairs at Court, to move with a great
Regard to the Liberty and Property of the Subject, steady to the Reformed
Religion in the worst of Times, that advances not Prerogative beyond its legal
Bounds, that has the Good of the Nation at Heart, and that acts with great
Sincerity, are Virtues that can never be sufficiently admired by all true
Englishmen, and particularly by,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Faithful, and Most Obedient Servant, WHIT.
BULSTRODE.

THE PREFACE.
I Think it necessary to give some Account of the Author of the following
Essays, and likewise of the Essays themselves; the rather, because being
Posthumous Works, the Genuiness of them might be otherwise doubted.

As for the Author, Sir Richard Bulstrode, he was the Son of Edward Bulstrode
of the Inner Temple, Esquire whose Reports are extant; he came abroad into the
World well stocked with University Learning; was bred at the Inner Temple,
called to the Bar, and practiced as a Barrister, 'till the Civil Wars breaking
out, put a Stop to the Current of the Law; and being then a young Man, and of
an active Spirit, betook himself to the Army, and was of the Royal Side; where
he behaved himself so well, that in a little time he was made Adjutant-General
to the Army of King Charles the First. After the Return of the Royal Family, he
had a Place at Court; some time after he was appointed to be at the Court of
Brussels, as Resident from King Charles the Second; on whose Death he was made
Envoy by King James the Second to the same Court, his whole Ministry there
being about thirty Years; during which Time he held Correspondence with most of
the Courts of Christendom (as I find by his Letters made up into Annals, which
I have by me.)

When his Royal Master retired to France, he went after him, and submitted to
his Fortune, and lived there in Retirement about twenty Years; during which
Time he had Opportunity to compose the following Essays, which were the Result
of his own Experience.

He had been a diligent Observer of Mankind, through a long Series of Time,
having lived to an Hundred and one; had the Experience of Courts, the
Conversation of Men of the first Quality, Generals, and Men of Polite Learning:
And having had great Variety of Fortune himself, was best able to inform
Mankind what is proper to be done in those several Parts of Life, in which he
had been exercised.

He looked back upon Life, after many Years enjoying it, with a truer View,
than Men usually do forward; for we look through a magnifying Glass at Things
to come, and think them much bigger, and more excellent than in Truth we find
them. The Prospect of Canaan from Mount Nebo, was more ravishing even to Moses,
than the Enjoyment of it was afterward to the Israelites, or would have been
to himself. Solomon could not have spoke so feelingly of the Vanity of the
Pleasures of this Life, had he not taken a full Draught of them. The Freedom of
the Author's Conversation, in his younger Years, (being a Man of a warm Temper,
a great deal of Wit and Generosity) having kept what we call the best Company,
gave him an Opportunity of looking back on the Miscarriages, which young
Gentlemen are subject to, with useful Reflections and Remarks, and of speaking
more justly of those Errors, than Closet Moralists usually do.

The Author would have sent me the following Essays, to have published in his
Lifetime, had not the War between England and France hindered it; but dying
before that ended, he gave Directions to his Lady to send them to me by the
first Opportunity; which she accordingly did, being all of his own Hand Writing.

So much for the Author.

As to the Essays themselves:

I. Essay of Company and Conversation.
That of Company and Conversation, shows him to have read Mankind very thoroughly.

The Caution of choosing ones Company, when to speak, and when not, when to
break a Jest, and when not, is very fit for all young Gentlemen to know; his
short, but smart Reflection on obscene Discourses, is a Proof of his Knowledge
of the Government of the Tongue.

He Inveighs against the Sin of scoffing at Religion and profane Swearing, with
great Sharpness and a moving Sorrow. When a good Man hears his Friend traduced,
he defends him if he has Opportunity, or is in Pain for want of it: Much more
should every Christian be concerned, when he hears that Name profaned, which
ought not to be mentioned without Reverence.

Nor does Detraction and Flattery escape a just Censure, though he lived and died
in a Court.

His Rules of Conversation, with Superiors, Equals and Inferiors, are well
weighed and considered. As most Men are free and open at Meals, the Account he
gives of his Witty Master King Charles the Second, at his private Suppers, with
some select Persons, Men of Wit, is very entertaining.

One General Rule he lays down, that should go through all the Parts of
Conversation, and that is Integrity, which is a Virtue too seldom practiced. He
avoids the Pedantry and Motoseness of severe Cynicks; and though he highly
commends pleasant Conversation, Wit, Music, and diverting Tales; yet he wisely
cautions against Picquant Jests, which often breed Quarrels; and in all these
Freedoms, has let nothing slip from him, that is contrary to the Rules of good
Ethics.

Mirth thus guarded with Innocence, makes the Cup of Life go down pleasantly,
and leaves no Stain behind it, to wound the Conscience. He has truly said, that
some Persons and Cases are privileged from Jests. As Men's Deformity, Meanness
of Intellectuals, Poverty, etc. which puts me in Mind of a Gentleman, whose Wit
lay only in ridiculing others; and having a poor Man that worked for him,
(whose Shape was not deformed) would be often telling him he would give him
five Pounds to sit for his Picture. The Man thought 'twas in Derision, would
never be brought to it, but gave him this sharp Answer, That he would give five
Pounds to laugh at a poor Man, but would not give him a Shilling to buy him a
Dinner.

Which Gentleman, though he had then about two thousand Pounds a Year, yet
afterward lived to want a Shilling to buy himself a Dinner.

His Account of Conversation with well chosen Friends is very delightful and
instructive. I know nothing of this World comparable to the Pleasures of
Conversation, with wise, honest and ingenious Friends, except in the
Consciousness of doing our Duty to the most High, and the Relations we stand
in, and the Peace of Mind, (I had almost said Rapture) that results from thence.

His Advice to Women, as to their Conversation with Men, is fit for all Ladies
to know; and so it is for Men, that intend Chastity, not to be too Conversant
with pretty Women; for it is ill making Gunpowder in a Smith's Shop.

II. Essay of Solitariness and Retirement.
His Thoughts of Retirement are very philosophical, just, and of great Weight;
and the prudent, and cautionary Rules he gives therein, of great Use. He writes
very feelingly on that Subject, as what he found by Experience; the Art of
Conversation, and the Art of Retirement, seem to comprehend the whole Scene of
humane Life, of both which he appears to have been a perfect Master, and to
have given proper Directions in each State and Condition of Life; he allows the
Vigor of Life to be spent in public Services, and the Remainder in
Retirement, and useful Reflections for the Benefit of Mankind. If he has
carried Retirement to greater Heights, than Men attached to the World can
allow; it should be considered, that when one is writing on a Pleasure, at a
time when one enjoys it, it is hard to keep within the Bounds of moderate
Expressions. His lofty Strains, nevertheless though true, may not appear so to
them who stand at a Distance, and have no Taste thereof.

To speak freely of this Matter, I think these Rules touching Retirement should
be observed.

First, To have such a competent Fortune, as may answer all the Circumstances
of Life, when the Profits of Employment are quitted. For to be pinched in the
Materials of Life, in old Age, is a miserable State, especially to a generous
Mind.

Secondly, To have the Mind furnished with such Knowledge, while the Life was
active, as may sufficiently employ it, when contemplative.

Thirdly, To have ones Passions detached from the World, and to have little or
no Thirst after it.

Fourthly, To consecrate the latter Part of Life to the more intense Service of
God, in Contemplation and Devotion, and in Benefactions to the Necessitous; and
to endeavor to produce some Fruit, for the good of the Public, for the
present and future Age.

More particularly; I think that a Retirement to a convenient House and
pleasant Gardens, near a Church, where daily Devotions may be had; a good
Library, a near Friend, and the Exercise of Philosophical Experiments, with
Beneficence to the Needy, is the safest and best Retirement for a wise Man.
These Things will fill up the Space of Life, with Innocence and Pleasure.

III. Of St. Mary Magdalen's Life and Conversion, with some Reflections on the
Conversion of the good Thief.
As for the Essay of Mary Magdalen's Life and Conversion, and of the Conversion
of the penitent Thief, he has made many curious Observations thereon, with very
useful Reflections. In the Author's Discourse on this Subject, he has rather
played the Prelate, than the Gentleman, and having read the Fathers hereon, has
been a little tainted with their Gingle.

He has drawn it out to a Length, with so strong a Fancy and Invention, that
one would rather have thought to have been a Man of Thirty than Ninety, when he
wrote it. In the winding up however of that Essay, his Exhortations to the Love
of our Savior, and Contempt of the World, have great Force and Energy.

IV. Essay of the Life and Conversion of St. Paul.
It Is a hard Matter for a Man that writes on a Divine Subject, and who consults
what the Fathers have said thereon, not to run into their Style, and conform to
their way of Expression. And thus the Author has done in this, as well as in
the preceding Essay; yet his Remarks on the Jewish Customs, of the Manner of
their Education of their Youth, what Josephus says of the sower Disposition of
the Pharisees, of which Sect Paul was a Member, of his wonderful Conversion and
indefatigable Labor in the Ministry, are worthy of Observation.

The Truth is, the wonderful Event of spreading the Gospel, by Means so very
improbable, and in humane Appearance so unlikely, does manifestly show the Hand
of God assisted therein.

V. Essay of Nobility.
He has truly distinguished Nobility into four Parts. The Beginner, Advancer,
Continuer, and Ruiner of Families; and has set forth the Duty of a Nobleman,
and the Gracefulness of it, when joined to Virtue, in a very agreeable Manner.
The gaining Honor by Military Performances, he holds much preferable to what
is obtained by Commerce; when the Soldier and the Scholar meet together, they
make a great General; witness Zenophon and Caesar amongst the Ancients, and Sir
Walter Raleigh and General Stanhope, now Secretary of State, amongst the
Modern. Yet I cannot but say, that when that late War between England and
France shall be writ by a good Hand, the Duke of Marlborough will shine as
bright in our English Annals, as any General either ancient or modern.

The Scotch have a good Proverb, That an Ounce of Mother's Wit, is better than
a Pound of Clergy. By Clergy they mean Learning.

VI. Essay of Contentment.
His Essay of Contentment under adverse Fortune, and the many noble Examples he
brings of great Men in Adversity, and the weighty Reasons he gives for a quiet
Submission to the divine Providence in Affliction, are so genuine and natural,
that one may easily see they flow from a Mind exercised by long Trial in that
Condition. The afflicted of any sort, may here draw Waters of Consolation, to
give Peace and Rest to their Minds.

His Arguments for Contentment under Afflictions, are very apt to soften the
Passions, and allay the Fury which Men generally exercise under that State, and
reduce the Mind to a wise and sober Resignation to the Will of God. He has writ
in none of his Essays any thing above the Nature of a brave and a good Man, and
particularly on this Subject; he seems rather to have vented the Dictates of
his own Mind, under the various States of Life, through which he had passed,
than offer at Conjectures which he never felt. He that sets a Pattern above
humane Life, may please the Fancy, but will never satisfy the Judgment of the
Reader. In giving Rules for the Conduct of humane Life, in the various Events
of it, we should rather write like Divines and Philosophers than Poets. His
Definition of Good and Evil, is more instructive than that of Zeno, or any of
the Stoics; for he calls that Good which makes a Man the better, and that Evil
which makes one the worse, be that Condition rich or poor, great or low, easy
or painful.

VII. Essay of Women.
His Description of Ladies, shows his Observations of them to be very accurate;
they are beholden to him; for he has said very few things of them. I would give
them this Caution, not to be too free with young Gentlemen, for they who will
indulge to the extreme Bounds of Virtue, will easily slip within the Pale of
Vice. So thin a Partition, so easy a Transition there is, between the one and
the other. The Fly that buzzes about the Candle often, generally has her Wings
burnt at last. The Person that would avoid burning of Shins, must sit at some
Distance from the Fire. When Nature is raised by Fooleries, Virtue slips out of
the Room.

VIII. Essay as the Knowledge of God, and against Atheism.
His Description of the Vanity of Arts and Sciences, without the Knowledge of
God, is a Truth self-evident: For all the Knowledge of this World is calculated
only for the Meridian of this Life, and reaches no farther; but the Knowledge
of God reaches to Eternity. And as Travelers returning to their own Country,
give a pleasant Relation of things curious, which they have met with in Foreign
Parts; so the Knowledge we acquire, and Observations we make of God's moral
Government of this World, of the Revolution of States and Kingdoms, and of the
natural Production of his admirable Works, may serve us to entertain even
Angels in the Kingdom of Heaven. For though Angels excel us in Wisdom, Power, and
the Knowledge of some things; yet their Wisdom, Power and Knowledge are
circumscribed; for none of these Qualities are infinite but in God; they are
ignorant of some Things: Omniscience is the Attribute only of the most High:
The Redemption of Man in its full Latitude, they did not know. Holy Writ tells
us, that Angels were desirous to look into it, and that they were informed of
it by the Church. But be that otherwise; By the Study and Knowledge of the
divine Operations, of God's natural Government of the World, we arrive at the
Knowledge of God himself; for his Majesty is known by his Works, the
Contemplation of which brings infinite Pleasure to them who delight therein.

As for Atheism, holy Writ tells us, 'twas the Fool that said in his Heart
there was no God. And indeed nothing but a Fool could have thought or said so,
and he had only the Folly of saying it in his Heart, but not the Impudence to
express in it Words: Surely as he that sees a fine House, must conclude an
ingenious Artist contrived it, and some Person must build it; for that Stones
and Timber cannot erect themselves into a regular Building, without some
skilful Builder; so he that looks on the Frame of this World, must acknowledge
an infinite wise God, that made and governs it: The Belief of which, to a
virtuous Man, is a mighty Support in the Day of Trouble.

IX. Essay of Religion.
He has set in a true Light, the Advantages of Religion, to Communities in
general, and to private Persons in particular, sufficient to recommend it to
the Practice of the World. His Complaint of the Ignorance of Christians, with
respect to their Religion, and that they take up their Religion as they do the
Fashion of their Clothes, according to the Custom of the Country where they
live, has been true, 'till of late Years, even in this Reformed Country; but
the Charity Schools that have been erected and dispersed through all the Parts
of this Kingdom, by charitable Persons, and Books of Instruction given away by
them, has dispelled the gross Ignorance of the common People, so that now they
can give a better Account of their Religion, than People of a better Education
in Popish Countries, where the Darkness still continues, and must do so, where
the reading the Bible is denied the People, and Ignorance held to be the Mother
of Devotion.

X. Essay on Kings and Princes, and the Education of a Prince.
His Essay of Princes and their Education has such masterly Strokes in it, that
I could wish, for the Good of Mankind, that all young Princes would read and
consider the same, and put the excellent Advice therein given, into Practice;
the Good and Peace of the World so much depending on the virtuous and wise
Disposition of the Princes thereof: The mighty Talents which God has entrusted
them with, will make up a vast Account for them to answer, at the tremendous
Day of Judgment, which they should often think of, and that would make them
better than they generally are.

The Offenses they often give, are so great and many, and of so universal a
Nature, and the Miseries brought on Mankind thereby, so general, that should
they read and consider the Woe denounced by our Savior against those who give
Offense, it would make the stoutest hearted Prince in Christendom tremble.
Witness that Prince, who proudly styles himself le Grand; who makes War upon
his Neighbors, French King's Reasons for Declaring War against the Dutch in
1672.
for no other apparent Reason, but because he cannot dissemble his Indignation
against them (for pretended and sham Affronts) without Diminution of his own
Glory. His Power to conquer was the true Reason, Disrespect the pretended.

That Prince who keeps an Army of three or four hundred thousand Men in
constant Pay, has so many Wolves in Hire, ready to devour Mankind, whenever he
lets 'em loose; and has put the rest of Christendom into a Necessity of keeping
up standing Armies, to prevent being surpised and conquered by him.

Even in times of Peace, such Armies corrupt and debauch a whole Nation;
wherever they come they leave the Stains of Uncleanness behind them, and
infect the Place by the bad Example they give. What has this Prince to answer,
for so many Millions of Offenses, which the Soldiery of Europe have given,
originally flowing from him?

St. Austin calls such Princes, the worst of Homicides, in destroying the Souls
of their Subjects.

And our Author tells us, that Kings are not to be esteemed happy by their
Conquests, but by using their Power, in advancing God's Honor and Service,
which will tend to the good of their People.

XI. Essay of Man.
Though the Author has set forth the Prones of Man to do Evil, yet he has told us
the Cure is in our own Power; he meddles not with the Theological Points,
whether we can do Works of our selves, worthy of the divine Acceptance, ex
Congruitate, or ex Condignitate. He speaks in this Essay rather like a Moralist
than Divine; yet does very well show us the Folly of running the Hazard of an
Eternity of Misery, for a few Moments of sensual Pleasure.

I am entirely satisfied that it is more easy to mortify an unlawful Desire
by Thought and Consideration, joined with Addresses for the divine Assistance,
than to sat it by Enjoyment. He that would quench an impure Desire by
Enjoyment, is like him that would throw Gunpowder into the Fire to extinguish
it. Enjoyment stops the Current for the present, but the next Tide of Blood,
fired from the Imagination of the last Enjoyment, makes it boil over into a
more impetuous Torrent. In a Word, Man is the worst or best of Creatures on
this side Heaven.

He that gives way to his sensitive Appetite, and indulges therein, is worse
than a Brute; for Brutes have some natural Checks or Instinct, that confine and
restrain their Sensations within moderate Bounds; but a Debauchee lets loose
all his five Faculties to an universal Indulgence, even farther than Nature
will afford him Strength. On the contrary, the good Man who makes Reason his
Pilot, and Revelation his Pole Star, sails through the stormy Billows of this
World with Peace and Contentment, and having Men's consciarecti, does in a
manner anticipate the Joys of Heaven, by fixing his Treasure there before hand,
and by a strong Imagination of what is to come, tastes them in this present
Life.

XII. Essay of Greatness of Mind.
There are abundance of Examples, both ancient and modern of great Men that have
sacrificed their Lives for the good of their Country. Dulce est per Patria
mori, is an old Adage. Fame and the Hope of immortal Glory have carried Men on
to very desperate Attempts, and Things that at first View have seemed
impracticable to the Cautious and wary, have nevertheless by bold and resolute
Men been carried with Success.

He that sets no Value on his own Life, has generally the Life of any other
Man in his Power. But I think true Greatness of Mind rather consists in
conquering one's self, than the World; Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima
Vincit.

A Man of a wildfire Spirit, may roam about the World, with a Parcel of
Soldiers at his Heels, and burn and consume half the Univers, which in the
modern Language, we call a Man of Valor, great General, invincible, always
victorious, etc. and yet be the worst of Men, the worst of Friends; and all the
while he is doing of Mischief, may be gratifying a wicked Passion; may wish
with the Tyrant, that all Mankind had but one Neck, that he might cut it off at
one Blow. But he that considers the State and Condition of Life he is placed in
here, that he has a Body that has Appetites and Desires, strong and vigorous
toward sensual Objects, and to enjoy them in a prohibited Degree; and that he
has a rational Nature, that should steer and govern his sensitive Faculties,
and bring them to act within Bounds; that there is a revealed divine Law, that
commands him to lead a holy Life; on which Considerations, he sacrifices the
Desires of the Body to the Divine Precepts, and suffers Afflictions with
Resignation to that Hand from whence they come; this Man, in my Opinion, is
greater than Caesar or Pompey; Job had more passive Valor than Alexander the
Great. But we have Roman Examples of mere Heathens, that refused the Riches and
Honors of the World, and retired to an obscure and private Life; witness
Quintus Cincinnatus, who was ploughing at his little Farm, when the Senate of
Rome sent to him to come and appease the Sedition in the City; which when he
had so done, he returned back to his Farm again, and would accept no Reward.
Soon after he was sent to again, to head the Romans against a foreign Enemy
that invaded their Country; he went, and was made Dictator, beat the Enemy,
rescued his Country, laid down the Fasces, refused the Lands and Treasure
offered him for his good Services, being contented with the Reward only which
Virtue brings with it, i. e. the Pleasure of a good Conscience, which results
from doing one's Duty, and returned back to his petty Farm.

XIII. Essay of Children.
We take a great deal of Care in our Breed of Horses; and some are so curious to
do the like in their Dogs; while at the same time there is an universal
Negligence in the Choice of Wives; the greatness of the Portion being the chief
Thing aimed at; whereas a good Understanding should be principally desired: A
silly Woman, especially if she be of a low and mean Spirit, generally bringing
foolish or sheepish Children. There is no less Carelessness in the Education of
Children in their tender Years. What People attend them. Foolish Nurses, and
weak Women being generally the first Persons they converse with, after they are
able to talk. What Idle Impressions, and silly Ideas must such Children have,
that are thus accosted, as soon as their Faculties are able to receive any
Impression. The idle Tales of such Women, who frighten Children from crying by
Stories of Hob-Goblins, Spirits, and such Fooleries, have made them, when of an
adult Age, afraid of being in the Dark, and of something, they know not what.
They teach them Pride, and to value themselves upon their Clothes, by asking
and showing them where they are fine, which Folly accompanies the Female Sex
usually to their Grave; nor are foppish Men free from that Vanity.

They teach them Revenge and Folly at the same time, by pretending to beat
another by a Blow or Pat from the Hand of the Child.

They teach them lying and Folly, by telling Miss, 'twas not she that cried,
but one behind the Curtain. Thus taught, comes the abused Infant on the Stage
of the World; whereas the most discreet and prudent People should be attendant
on Children, to make proper Impressions upon them at first, for these stick
longest with them; as for the more riper Years, the Author has spoke so fully
that I shall add no more.

XIV. Essay of Law.
The Benefit of Laws and living by Rules, are so evident to every Understanding,
that there needs but little to be said in Commendation thereof.

There is scarce any Nation under Heaven, however despotick and absolute the
Prince is, but yet has some certain Rule or Law for the general Conduct of
humane Life, with respect to the Public; yet when the Prince is absolute, the
Subject is little better than a Slave, Law being but a Cobweb to him, which he
can easily break through, whenever he pleases. That the People conform their
Lives after the Example of the Prince, and chief Magistrate where they reside,
the Author has very justly observed, which ought to be a Lesson to all Princes
and Magistrates, to act with great Caution, that their bad Example may not lead
the common People, or those of a common Understanding, into Vices. Regis ad
exemplum totus componitur Orbis. And here I cannot but say a Word of the
Benefit of our English Laws, which both Foreigners that live here, and Natives,
have great Reason to be thankful to Providence for. The Laws of England secure
every Man's Property and Liberty, no Man forfeits either, but by the
Transgression of some known positive Law. The Magistrate cannot commit any
Subject to Prison, without a Breach of the Laws; if he does, he is answerable
for it to the Party injured. The Judge determines not according to Arbitrary
Power, but according to known and stated Rules. But this Subject has been so
much spoken of, that I think it not necessary to say any more thereon.

XV. Essay of old Age.
As no Man writes more feelingly of Afflictions, than he who gives his Thoughts
a Vent under that Condition; so no Man can write so truly of the Circumstances
of old Age, as he that keeps his Understanding well to an hundred, the which
the Author did, as appears by his Essays, some of which were writ at near that
Age.

The Respect he challenges, as due to old Age especially, when furnished with
Wisdom and Knowledge; and the Consideration of good Services done to the
Public, is a Tribute, that I think ought not to be denied it. But nothing can
make the Mind of an old Man more calm and sedate, more bright and shining, than
a Retrospect of a long Life well spent, in a zealous promoting the Honor of
God, and the Good and Welfare of Mankind; for every Man's Life is to be
estimated by its Usefulness. Integrity of Mind, a love of Truth in the Soul,
and the Consciousness of doing all we can, for our most munificent Benefactor,
to whom we are riding post in old Age, makes that Scene of Life full of Joy and
Pleasure. St. Paul was full of Rapture, when he was going off the Stage of
Life, though by a violent Death. But few Courtiers come within this Character;
for to them generally Falsehood and Deceit are as natural, as bowing and
cringing; and as for Truth, it has no Place in their Souls. They join
themselves to a Party, that they may mount up to be the Head of it, with no
other View, but to betray and destroy it, and to aggrandize themselves thereby.
Oh! blessed Sincerity, oh happy Integrity! But this wicked State of Life is as
ancient as Seneca the Tragedian, witness these Lines, Colit hic Reges, calcet
ut omnes,
Perdatque aliquos, nullumque levet,
Tantum ut noceat, cupit esse potens.


Whitlock Bulstrode.

ERRATA.
PAge 18, Line 23, for utjust read unjust. p. 27, l. 12. for is, r. it. p. 66.
l. 2. for nimo r. Nemo, p. 68. l. 4. for their r. they. p. 73. l. 24. for
surely 1. often. p. 77. l. 17. after is, add by Fortune, not by Nature, and p.
93. l. 12. for Habit, r. Habitare, p. 99. l. 8. for ritanda r. evitanda. p.
130. l. 19. for eriscerated, r. eviscerated. p. 138. l. 8. for Doctors, r.
Booters. p. 140. l. 27. for Rhetorition, r. Rhetoritian. p. 161. l. 23. for
divise, r. divite. l. 24. for Origire, r. Origin. p. 222. l. 7. after Descent
add of. p. 228. l. 21. for ferimus r. fecimus. p. 255. l. 11. for unrully r.
unruly. p. 269 l. 10. for Desent r. Decent. p. 285. l. 29. for when r. then. p.
287. l. 25. after de add to. p. ^66. l. 29. for Concasum 1. Conclusum p. 385.
l. 6. after it is add our.

ESSAYS ON Various Subjects.
Of Company and Conversation.
WHEN God created Adam, who the first Moment was a perfect Man, yet he was not
made to be entirely detached, and to live independent of his Kind; for though he
had nothing in Prospect but Plenty, Pleasure, Innocence, and Security, and by
the Dignity of his Nature was set above the Society of mere Animals, yet God
saw his Being imperfect without a Helper, and that his Happiness was not
complete whilst he remained Solitary; wherefore God miraculously relieved him,
by dividing him, to unite him, and made one Part of him a Companion for the
other, to maintain his Reason with a more equal Converse; for which End God
ordained Speech, from whence we derive all the Advantages of Society, and
without which Men would have been useless to each other. For by this we possess
the most valuable worldly Blessings, Friendship and Society, which are esteemed
amongst the Pleasures of the first Magnitude, the Comfort of Life depending
upon Conversation, Humane Society being like the working of a Arch-Stone, where
all would fall to the Ground if one Piece did not sustain another; and yet
Company is so dangerous, and Speech so liable to be depraved, that what was
intended for our Advantage is become the Source of all our Misfortunes. For
Original Sin came first out of the Mouth by Speaking, before it entered hers by
Eating, and therefore the due Management of that Member may justly be reputed
one of the greatest Mysteries of Wisdom and Virtue, since we find to our
Sorrow, the first Use Eve made of her Tongue was to talk with the Tempter, and
from that Discourse to tempt Adam, who was no sooner fallen, but he makes a
frivolous Excuse less able to cover his Sin than the Fig Leaves his Nakedness;
And this Viciousness of the Tongue has descended from the Infancy of the World
even to this Day, for amongst our greatest Depravations there are none more
Notorious than that of Speech; For we do not only fall by the Slipperiness of
our Tongues, but we deliberately train them to Mischief, and what was first
intended for the Benefit of Humane Society, is now become the great Disturber
of it, we living in an Age wherein we count it a part of our Birthright to let
loose our Tongues, and to use the Spur where we should hold the Bridle; whereby
Conversation is generally Corrupted, and he that Converses has almost as many
Snares as Companions, there being scarce any single Man, but by his Discourse,
Example, or Behavior, does recommend to us, or imprint in us, or by a kind of
Contagion insensibly infect us with some Vice or other; so that Conversation,
which was intended to cultivate our Minds and civilize the World, has turned
it almost to a Wilderness. Upon this Account some Men will take a Pett at
Mankind, and walk into the Deserts to avoid Company, when it is more prudential
to stand their Ground, and to fence against the Inconveniences that may
happen; and if they fear bad Company they should keep close to Men of Virtue,
and stand carefully upon their Guard; it being more reasonable to be
conversable for the sake of the Good, than to fly from every Mortal for fear of
meeting with bad People: If every Man were possessed with this Shiness, not only
States and Kingdoms, but even Humane Nature would be destroyed; for to what end
was Speech given to Man, if it were not for Entertainment of each other? And
must we quit our Station, and turn Savage by our selves, and suffer no Company,
for fear of Bad? This is to take Things by the wrong Handle, for nothing but
our own Miscarriages ought to affect us, and not those of other People.

It Is certain that all Men's Bodies are naturally of the same Clay, the
difference of Education only is the Potter's Hand that forms them into Vessels
of Honor or Dishonor; there being no humane Means more effectual toward
ripening and sharpning Men's Intellects, giving them an edge and quickness for
Conversation, than good Education, because it takes them in that Age wherein
their Faculties are, as their Joints, pliable and tractable, and so capable of
being by Exercise improved into great Degrees of Strength, Activity and
Ability: So that one of the greatest Blessings which Man can receive at God's
Hands, is the favorable Blessing of good Education, which polishes and
purifies Nature as one would do a precious Stone wholly defiled with Earth; and
this makes Men become like Angels, when without it the best Natures would still
dwell in Brutishness. Now since after good Education, it is a great Part of
Wisdom as well as Breeding, to learn what is convenient, and to take the true
height of our Acquaintance, who conversing with our Minds, cast upon them
either Graces or Deformities; It will therefore be highly necessary for young
Gentlemen, who are tender of their Honor and Credit, to be more than
ordinarily careful of being too venturous of any Company, and to be very
curious in taking an exact Survey with what Persons they may safely and
decently Converse, and how they ought to Behave themselves therein.

It is usual with Physicians, in infectious Times, to forbid most strictly the
smaller Excesses and Exorbitances of Diet, as apt to breed any Distemper,
because every small Accident of that Kind (through the Malignity of the Air) is
then likely to turn into the Plague: So now that Atheism and Profaneness are
rife in the World, and spread much, and Debauchery is so predominant and
contagious, that we daily see many Men of virtuous Dispositions and good
Inclinations, (which would have grown to Abilities) to be by ill Company most
perniciously Corrupted; some Cautions herein seem therefore highly necessary:
For as if we Breath in an infectious Air we shall suck in Diseases, so if we
live in bad Company we shall soon add to their Number, and learn their Vices
and Imperfections.

There is nothing more dangerous for young Gentlemen than to mistake themselves
in the Choice of their Company: This is a Point of such Importance, that upon
it depends the whole Course of their Lives and Manners; the frequenting with
wicked Men brings us acquainted with Vice, makes us behold it without Emotion,
by Degrees we begin to act it with some Pleasure, and Time breeds in us a Habit.

Principiis obsta sero Medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
St. Augustine well expresses the Danger of this, saying, "It is a Nail driven
into a Post with a Hammer, which after the first and second Stroke may be drawn
out with little Difficulty, but being once driven up to the Head, the Pincers
can take no hold to draw it out, which cannot be done but by Destruction of the
Wood.

He that lives in this great Theater of the World, should in the first Place
learn how to suit himself into sundry Habits, that he may be enabled in this
Comedy to represent many Persons, no Man being fit to appear upon this Stage
till he knows how to Act his Part to the Life; and therefore he must labor to
have his Mind made pliable, which may stoop and rise according to the several
Conditions and Capacities of Men he associates with, not fearing to speak to
the Greatest with due Observance, nor disdaining to converse familiarly with
the Meanest, respecting Goodness wherever he sees it, which he shall as often
find under a Russet Coat as under a Velvet Cassock, and with Moral honest Men
as soon as with the more Learned; for Conversation has made very accomplished
Persons without the Assistance of Learning, the World being a great Book which
instructs continually, Conversations are living Libraries, not at all inferior
to Books; Good Conferences are like Flints, which from a cold and dark Heap
produce Heat and Light, if Men strike them one against the other; and the
familiar Discourses of two or three good Wits may be more advantageous to us
than the empty Disputations of many Pedants together, and they vent more in one
Hour than we shall read all Day in a Library.

There is nothing that puts better Thoughts in a Man than a good Companion; for
Example has the force of Precept, and touches the Heart with an Affection to
Goodness; and not only the frequent hearing, but the very seeing of a Wise Man
delights us.

The best Rule herein is to associate with those who may be the better for us,
and we for them; these Respects are mutual; for while we teach we learn: It is
not Safe to trust our selves with much Company; whosoever goes much abroad, he
scarce comes home the same Man he went out, something or other discomposes him;
for it is with our Minds, as it is after a long Indisposition with our Bodies,
we are grown so tender that the least Breath of Air exposes us to a Relapse.

There is certainly much Pleasure and Satisfaction in communicating our
Thoughts, and in the Intercourses of Friendship well chosen; and therefore
Seneca said, If Knowledge and Wisdom were offered him, on the Terms of a
Secret, and that he must not speak of it, he would positively refuse the
Present. And Tully in his Offices tells us, If a Person had all the Blessings
of this Life, yet if he was kept from all Company, and never to see or converse
with Men, he had much rather Die, than Live in such Condition.

Now the first Step to Conversation is our outward Carriage and Comportment,
wherein the less we are constrained, our Actions and Thoughts seem thereby more
Innocent: The Differences of Men are easily read in their Behavior, and a
short Observation of that will often tell us as much as a long Conference. Some
Men's Carriage is like a Verse, where every Syllable is measured; but where
there is so much Care about the Outside, there is commonly a Remisness in what
belongs to the Mind; it being as rare to see starched complimental Man Wise, as
to see a Woman Valiant. There is a sort of Men who have an earnest Application
to make every thing sit right about them, which strikes too deep into their
small Stock of Thoughts to allow it Furniture for any thing else, and therefore
to do right to these finespun Gentlemen, Conversation is too course a Thing for
them, and it is best to leave them to their Tailor, with whom they will live in
better Correspondence than with any other Company. Indeed, a good Presence and
handsome Mein, sorted with Valor and Wisdom, does a Man excellent Service, (if
he spoils it not with Affectation) and carries with it (as Queen Elizabeth used
to say) Letters or Recommendation; and if I am rightly informed, this was the
only Thing that brought the great Duke of Buckingham into Favor with King
James I. by seeing him at a Masque in Court. Certainly, if our outward
Comportment be good, the adorning the Mind does double that Excellency; if ill,
it will make it good, when the Mind performs what the Body promises not. Our
Behavior should be like a well-made Suit of Clothes, more proper than gaudy,
more fit than fine. In our outward Carriage, all manner of Affectation is
unseemly, there being nothing more becoming a Gentleman than a native Freedom
therein, a Gracefulness of Behavior setting off much when it is not
constrained. Dancing is good, and adds Grace to a Man, when he well performs
it; but a Man must not set himself to it as if he made it his Trade. Dancing
makes the Body free, and not so stiff but to move gracefully; and a Man's Skill
is therein perceived though he stands still: But whoever intends to make it his
Master-peice, one may call it excelling in a Mistake, which is no good
Commendation, as a late great Lord said. It is a great Advantage to be a good
Actor; for Action is a kind of Expression, and Words well chosen are agreeable,
when they express Things that please; so all that is expressed by the Face and
Body is well received when done with a good Grace. But we must not here
mistake: For there are those that are sometimes Actors of Nothing, as well as
those that are Speakers of Nothing: The Action and Air of the Countenance have
certain Charms, which have a great Influence on our Minds: An Oration spoken by
a good Orator appears great and lofty, though penned in common Terms, and
compounded of ordinary Conceptions; and many Preachers have in their Pulpits
charmed their Auditors, whose Sermons in Print were scarce worth Reading: I
have heard Verses recited in a good Tone, which have been admired, which being
read by another, their Esteem was much diminished; and it is probable the Reason
of this Alteration proceeded from the Harmony which was then wanting: We should
not look upon this as strange of good Orations, and agreeable Conferences, if
we call to mind that of Musical Instruments, touched by the Hands of an
exquisite Master; there are some Tones which inspire Sadness, and sweetly
incline our Souls to Languish; and there are Airs which Rejoice and make our
Hearts Merry, and pleasingly compel our Feet to Dance their Time.

In Conversation, it is not enough to have Wit, but he must be an extreme
well-bred Man to know how to be pleasant in Conversation, amongst Persons that
know how to Judge; because most Men have not a delicate Taste, nor are able to
discern what is best; and it often happens that such Persons are taken, nay
even charmed with certain ridiculous Parts they play to them; but though these
Fooleries are current amongst some, yet well-bred Persons do not love such kind
of Buffoonry, and those that use them are rather the Subjects of Scorn than
Laughter, to those that rightly understand: Such are half-witted Men, who have
a tinsel Wit, which shines amongst those who cannot Judge, Petty Merchants of
small Conceits, who have an empty Habit of Prating without Meaning, they always
aim at Wit, but generally make false Fire

It Is true, we cannot show too much Wit in pleasant Conversation; yet a Man
must have a great Care not to show himself too forward, as if one would appear
ready to make Jests and speak fine Things: There is something of a free way,
which cannot be well expressed, which has a much better Effect; but yet it is
not good to be too Reserved, nor affect Singularity; an open and complaisant
Carriage has very great Charms to attract Love: However, what Advantage soever
any one has, he must be pleased with others, if he would have others pleased
with him: And if we like not our Company, let us withdraw from them; but whilst
we are in Company, we should carry our selves so, that we should be acceptable
to those with whom we Converse, though we have no Kindness for them. As for those
who think to Revenge themselves by a cross Carriage, they do themselves more
Injury than they do to others. The Love of Society is Natural, but the Choice
of our Company is Matter of Prudence, and the Conscience of giving good Example
is one of the greatest Obligations any Man can lay upon the Age he lives in.

It is indeed a fair Step toward Happiness and Virtue, to delight in the
Conversation of good and wise Men, and where those cannot be had, it is best to
keep no Company at all. When Men are Good and Virtuous, they are as good alone
as in Company, but most Men are of themselves the worst Company they can keep;
let such therefore Converse with others, and avoid themselves; but he that
cannot secure himself in Privacy, shall be much more exposed in Public. Many a
Ship is lost in the Harbor, but more in the Ocean. There are some Persons
whose Company we cannot too much frequent; it is certain, by seeing them often,
besides the Improvement we have by being with them, we gain a good Esteem to
our selves, as we Perfume our selves unawares by walking amongst the Jessamins
and Orange Trees. Witty Men, who are well-bred, always say something that
pleases, and seldom do any thing which has not some Mark of Worth and
Breeding; and by conversing with and observing them, we may not only inform our
selves of such Things as are necessary to be known for the making an
accomplished Man, but we also learn how to apply them, and likewise so far as
to know when it is proper and mannerly to be Silent: But we must know how to
distinguish, for we shall often hear very good Things come from Men, who behave
themselves with as much Becomingness as can be disired; yet many times this is
but borrowed Language, and the Actings of a Part, and therefore we must not
regard so much that which appears Polite and Regular, as we do certain other
Things, which show whether there be a Foundation, and that the Understanding
goes farther, and is of larger Extent.

We find in some Men a certain Plausibleness of Carriage, which pleases in
young People, but yet passes away like a Flower or a Dream, and we shall often
see these Men become the Neglect and Scorn of those who once admired them; but
a well-bred Man has more solid Virtues, though he be less busy and forward to
show himself in the World; and if we love a Man for his good Breeding and
Honesty we shall always love him. Yet it is not enough to have a fair Outside
to make a Man agreeable; that which is of greatest Importance, is the Will
regulating our Intellectuals, and taking Care that our Head and our Heart be in
good Order; for no Man can ever be Excellent without having a good Heart and
much Wit.

An accomplished Person, though of never so much Wit, ought not to be too
Confident of himself; for the more he Excels, the more Care he ought to take
not to Prescribe to the Company; for naturally every Man is afraid of a Master
Wit, and Men do not love to be hectored out of their Opinions, it being
esteemed the common Birthright of Mankind, that every Man to opine and judge
according to the Dictates of his own Understanding, and not of another's; and
therefore a Magisterialness in Opinion is very unbefitting Men in Conversation,
for it does not only fasten upon our Nature, but upon the better Part of it,
our Reason: Freedom is the endearing Thing in Society, and where that is
controlled, Men are not very fond of Associating themselves. It Is Natural for
us to be uneasy in the Presence of those that assume an Authority over us; as
Children care not for the Company of their Parents or Tutors that govern them.
And Men will care less for theirs, who would make them Children by usurping a
Tutorage over them. This Peremptoriness in Conversation renders Wise Men
disobliging and very troublesome, and Fools ridiculous and contemptible, we
seeing none so peremptory as halfwitted People, who have just enough to excite
their Pride, but not so much as to cure their Ignorance: This is the Effect of
a mean and imprudent Education; a Man who has converst only with the lower
Sort of Company, who durst not dispute nor examine his Assertions, thinks the
same false Coin will pass over the World, which went current amongst his Petty
Comerades; And we may observe this Fault is most usual amongst young Men, who
have come raw into Company with good Fortunes and ill Breeding. And therefore
those Persons are most to be esteemed, who show their Wit without offending any
one; and such are usually hated, who make use of Wit only to the displeasing of
others; and a Wise Man ought to avoid the Company of such, it being a small
Advantage to have Wit, if we do not make use of it for gaining the good Opinion
and Love of the World. We ought to deal with others, with that Patience,
Respect, and Moderation, which we expect from them, not setting forth our own
Opinions imperiously, nor rejecting the Opinion of others arrogantly,
remembering that we are all enwrapped in a deep Mist, and that all our Reasoning
is but groping in the Dark; and therefore we should pass gently over the Errors
of our Neighbors, to oblige them to the like Account: But many Gentlemen are
so far from this generous Humor, that they always behave themselves
disdainfully in Company, as if they could not set a just Value upon themselves
without the utjust Contempt of others. But this Pride is commonly a Wind that
blows only one Way, down Hill upon those below him, upwards they breath gentler
Gales, it being one of their most studied Faculties, to perform all Acts of the
highest super-errogating Civility to those above them; Now there is nothing
that makes a Man more distasteful to Company, than this haughty Humor, it
being not only Pride but Inhumanity, to attribute so much to the Prerogative of
Birth, as not to show Affability and Respect to the Meanest.

The Conversation of those who are bred in Armies is not commonly very
pleasing, but in Recompense, they are said to be Men of Honor and Reputation,
as if that would excuse their Wants in every Thing else, when there is nothing
so disgusting as to be disagreeable and morose in Company. This is like certain
Women, that pretend to Virtue, who value themselves much upon their being Coy
and Fierce, which makes Men think all is counterfeit and affected, and that
they are easier gotten, than those who observe good Manners and Breeding, and
are as Affable as these are Severe. Such Women are like those peevish
Mistresses, who think they have a License to Kick and Scratch, provided they do
not Kiss, as if Ladies could not be honest without being rude. A confident yet
a modest Carriage, which is neither mean nor sullen, having nothing which
savours not of Goodness and Honesty, is that which is most esteemed in the
World, and takes with every Body: Women who have most Wit, like best a discreet
Reservedness in Men, those being usually disappointed of their Aims, who throw,
as it were, their Hearts at Ladies Heads, and at the first Dash tell them more
of their Love, than can in any probability be true, and many times more than
they desire to hear.

In our Conversation, it is good Advice to spare and thriftily to order that
which a Man knows, and though he has that in his Head which is better than
Silence, yet he ought to be more willing to hear, than to speak, to learn, than
to teach; it being a great Folly to be more ready to show all that is in us,
rather than to learn Knowledge of another, to spend our own Stock, rather than
to get new. When we hear we receive, when we speak we give, and though it be more
glorious to give, yet it is more profitable to receive; and therefore a just
Moderation herein is best, not to be over-Silent nor Talkative, the first
showing Stupidity or Scorn, the last Giddiness of the Brain: Prudent Men will
therefore speak no more than to bring on Discourse, and will give others their
turns of Speech; a Civil Guest will no more Talk all, than Eat all the Feast.
It is a great Advantage to know how to Speak and to Write; when either smells
too much of Study it pleases not; the general Opinion is, that Men should Write
as they Speak, and Speak as they Write; but we seldom do either, as we wish we
could: In order to this, it were good when we Write to imagine we are Speaking,
that we may not put in any Thing that is not Natural, or which may not be
spoken in Company; and when we Speak, we should fancy we are Writing, that we
may not say any Thing that is not fitting: Many People are said to Speak well
who cannot Write well, but I doubt there is a Mistake herein, for some Men may
seem to Speak well in Appearance, when they do not in Effect: For when a Man
really excels in Speaking, he may do the same in Writing; but this latter
requires more Care, and one may Write well, without knowing how to Speak well,
for we usually see those who make it their Business to Write well, have
commonly a languishing Way of Speaking; for to Speak well, is not only to make
our Thoughts be understood, but to express our Apprehensions, which are two
very different Things; and there is no greater sign that a Man well understands
himself, than to be able perspicuously to Speak to the Understanding of
another; and our Discourse should always be measured by the Aptness of it to
whom it is Addressed; for unless our Speech be fitted to the Capacities of
those we Discourse with, though it be never so elaborate, it will rather Confound
than Edify.

Thus, the best Art of Speaking shows it self under a natural Dress; it is like
plain natural Beauty, those that are the most Perfect show themselves least,
and when our Words smell of Art and Study, one may conclude, they that say them
have but little of either, or else that they know not how to make use of them.
This is the Fault of those that Speak so, that they cannot be understood but by
the Learned: We should therefore to our Power rather mean Wisely, than speak
Learnedly, much less Affectedly; for those whose Tongues run Proud after Words,
are of very little Use, but amongst such Ears as call a Bag-Pipe Music, for
their Lips open like a Purse without Money, and their Tongues like a Fencer
before a Pageant, stir, but not strike. A Gentleman should talk like a
Gentleman, that is, like a Wise Man; his Knowledge ought to be general, he
should have a Taste of every Thing, he should not be a Slave to one Science,
one Knowledge is but Part of the House, like a bay Window, no Man will build
his House so maimed, much less himself, he must be Complete.

All those who have given Rules for Civil Life, have, in order to it, put very
severe Restrictions upon the Tongue, that it run not before the Judgment. 'Twas
Zeno's Advice to Dip the Tongue in the Mind before one should Speak; and
Theophrastus was used to say, It was safer trusting to an unbridled Horse, than
to intemperate Speech; and daily Experience confirms this Aphorism, for those
who set no Guard upon their Tongues are hurried by them into a thousand
Indecencies, and very often into real considerable Mischiefs; and whereas Men
should keep a Lock upon their Lips, they give their Tongue the Key of their
Heart, and the Event has been often as Unhappy, as the Proceeding was
Preposterous.

And as our Words must be the Product of our Judgment, so they must be
temperate and decent, mixed with Courtesy and Civility; for he that has calmed
his Passions, has nothing to betray them to rash and rude Language, which is a
Foam cast up only by the Billows of a turbulent Mind, and can never be the
Issues of a serene composed Temper; neither does any thing Charm us more than
gracious Language, Quae ne illos quidem quos damnat offendit; a pregnant
Example of which was seen in the last Age, at the Trial of the Earl of
Strafford, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, in the Year 1642. where, amongst others
that were appointed by the House of Commons to Manage their Impeachment against
him, there was one eminent Lawyer, who urged very smartly against his Lordship,
but yet with great Respect and Civility of Language; And when the Earl came to
Reply, as he did to every one, he said he had been very roughly handled by most
of the Pleaders; but that he was very much beholding to one civil Gentleman
amongst them, (naming the former Person) who, though he had touched him nearer
the Quick than any other, yet he was obliged to return him Thanks, because he
had cut his Throat with a clean Knife: Thus we see good Words are afforded at
the same Price as ill, and are not only cheap, but prevalent upon all Occasions.

Next to this Graciousness of Language, we should be very careful that our
Speeches carry Integrity with them, Candor and Ingenuity being most esteemed
in Discourse: Those who have upright Hearts, their Judgment (how small soever)
will be still the same, but those who have many Turnings and Doubles in their
Heart, never have a right Understanding, there is always some counterfeit
Light, which gives them false Appearances, and then their Artifices and Craft
show they have not Parts sufficient to effect their Designs by fair and honest
Ways; whereas the way that pleases worthy Persons, is that Freedom of
Plain-Dealing. What a Gracefulness so clear a Source gives to all the Actions
of our Life? How it beautifies our Words and Thoughts? And how pleasing a Thing
it is to Speak well, when so much Sincerity goes along with it? And though one
may not perhaps be Happy in all Things by following this Maxim; however, one is
sure at least to gain the Esteem and Affection of those who understand true
Merit, nothing being so commendable in Conversation as to have an upright and
sincere Heart, which seems to be the Foundation of Wisdom.

Speech was given to Man as the Image and Interpreter of the Soul: It is anime
index and speculum, the Messenger of the Heart, the Gate by which all that is
within issues forth, and comes into open Veiw: And therefore the Philosopher
said well to the Child, Loquere ut te videam, Speak that I may see thee, that
is the Inside of thee; for as Vessels are known whether they be broken or whole
by their inward Sound; so is Man from his Speech, which carries with it not
only a great Influence, but a great Discovery of our Minds; and Integrity
herein is the public Faith of Mankind. With all sorts of Men we should deal
ingeniously yet reservedly, saying what we think, but thinking more than we
say, it being not good to say at all Times all that the Heart thinks, though
all that the Heart thinks be good. Freedom of Speech is sometimes to be
foreborn, least we give others Power thereby to lay hold on the Rudder of our
Minds; for in all there are some Places weaker than others, and prudent Men
will take heed of lying uncovered that Way: It Is true there may be possibly in
Discourse a Fault of Omission; but this is a right hand Error; a Man may be
sometimes sorry he said no more, but very often that he said so much: God has
given us two Ears and one Mouth, that we ought to Hear more than to Speak; we
have no Ear-Lids to keep us from Hearing, and often must Hear against our Will;
but our Mouth shuts naturally, and we may keep our Tongue from Speaking, unless
by Intemperance we lose that Privilege of Nature.

The Truth is, our Tongue is so slippery that is easily deceives a heedless
Guard, Nature has given it some unhappy Advantages toward it, it being the
most ready for Motion of any Member, and therefore is to be the more carefully
managed; the chiefest Rules to be prescribed herein, are Sufficiency and
Pertinency, a Man should not only know what to say, but what not to say, for in
Speech enough is better than all; Words are but the Lacquies of Reason, of
which to send more than will perform the Business is superfluous, and the
Discretion in Speaking, is not so much in Speaking few Words, as in Speaking
none Impertinent; otherwise the Dumb were Born with great Advantage, if we must
retrench the Use of the Tongue, instead of moderating it.

A wise Man's Words must be weighty and material; they are weighed in the
Balance, says the Son of Syrach; and therefore a Gentleman's Discourse should
be such as might answer that Character, no Man ever attempting to put Froth and
Bubbles into the Scales.

When Zeno heard a young Man full of Talk, Aures inquit in linguam defluxere,
he said, His Ears were fallen into his Tongue; intimating thereby, that they
should Hear much and Speak little: The Truth is, when People are very young,
they cannot Judge rightly of any Thing; and it happens either by Experience,
Reflections, or meeting with some intelligent Persons, they come to be of
another Mind, and despise that which they once so much admired, and many Times
laugh at themselves, when they examine themselves without Flattery. It is
certain, he that always Talks adventures himself too far, thereby depriving
himself of Observation, which is the great Advantage of Society, and from
whence comes Experience and Wisdom: Herein we should imitate cunning
Shopkeepers, who show their Wares in a half Light, upon Occasion we should
Speak but sparingly, and rather Starve than Surfeit our Auditors. Our
Discourses must not be too florid in the beginning; it is a Thing much to be
wished, that all which one says be good and fine, according as the Subject
merits; but we must proceed by Degrees; Nature is in this, as in all other
Things, a very knowing Mistress; consider how She proceeds insensibly, the
fairest Day when it begins to break and appear, has so little Light, that it
is hardly discernable whether it be Day or Night; and nothing is so great a
sign that the way of Speaking is noble, as when it leaves some certain Things
to be apprehended without Speaking them; and therefore it is good to know when
to give over, and to proceed to other Matters, or at least we should give them
another Face and Turn, because Diverversity seems not tedious.

To make our selves be heard with Pleasure, we must say such Things as others
will be glad to hear, and say them pleasantly, which is the best way to make us
be beloved; besides, when we please others well, we are likewise better pleased
with our selves. Excellent Painters never draw all, they still allow something
for you to exercise your own Imagination, and always leave you more to find out
than they discover; The Graces appear very rarely, and even when they are seen,
they will not be considered full faced nor uncovered; in the same manner we
should not open our selves too much; and in our Discourses we should observe
this as a general Rule, Either to Speak fitly, or to be Silent wisely; for many
by their Silence may pass for Wise Men, whom Speech would presently discover
otherwise. When the Ass disguised himself in the Lyon's Skin, he frighted all
the Beasts, and even the cunning Fox, till he heard him Bray. Pro certo scias
nisi rudentem audivissem and te ego timuessem: Unlearned Men, which seem of
Ability to Strangers, are quickly discovered by their Loquacity, and those that
speak much in Company seldom speak well, for they that well understand
themselves know not how to dwell in Talk. Long Discourses, says Plutarch, like
over-feather'd Arrows, shoot beyond the Mark, and by wearying the Attention,
ordinarily lose both Game and Labor. Aristotle answered a Man well, who having
held him in a long Discourse, in the end begged his Excuse, telling him he
might have saved his Apology, for he had not minded what he said. And it was a
smart Reply of Theocritus to an ill Poet, repeating many of his Verses, and
asking which he liked best, answered, Those which he had omitted: And indeed,
the Company of such who Talk much to little Purpose, ought as little to be
regarded; for if a Man be vain and trifling in his Discourses, both he that
hears, and he that answers, will be equal Losers of their Time. And if we shut
our Ears to trifling Discourses, much more carefully ought we to keep our
Hearts from drawing in the Breath of obscene Discourses, which are the very
Pest of Conversation. We should herein imitate Xenocrates the Philosopher, who
being asked an obscene Question, and giving no answer, being again importuned
to Answer, said well; De tali re te hominem vanum interrogare decet, me autem
respondere nequaquam: Obscene Speeches, like Oil falling upon Linen, will
spread much; and as the Poison of the Body enters by the Mouth, so the Poison
of the Heart enters by the Ear; and therefore those who have Honesty in their
Hearts, will have only civil and modest Words in their Mouths.

Next to Modesty in our Conversation, we must be careful not to be too
inquisitive into other Men's Affairs; and if we would be persuaded to affect a
wholesome Ignorance therein, it would much conduce to our Ease and Innocence; for
it is the Itch of the Ear that breaks out at the Tongue, and were not Curiosity
the Purveyor, this Trade would soon be set aside. The Boy in Plutarch being
asked what he carried hid under his Cloak, answered well, That he therefore
carried it so, that the other might not know it. An unseasonable Inquiry into
Things shows a great Weakness and Folly in the Inquiror.

When Socrates was asked by a curious Person, What was done in the next World;
he told him, He had never been there, nor spoken with any that came from
thence. St. Augustine tells us, Curiosus est qui ea avide scrutatur quae ad se
non pertinent, studiosus vero qui diligenter ea perquirit, quae ad se attinent.

We shall see some Men very inquisitive into the Religion of their
Acquaintance, being very shy of discoursing with Men of differing Persuasions,
and put on an angry Zeal against them, believing they are fighting God
Almighty's Quarrel, and therefore grow into a hardened Severity against all who
dissent from them; And we shall frequently see Men, whose Manners and
Conditions are very conformable in all the necessary Obligations of Human
Society, to avoid each others Company, and grow unsociable to each other,
merely because the one cannot think as the other does: Whereas our Opinions
come from our Heads, our Affections from our Hearts; and therefore a wise Man
will no more trouble himself about his Companions Religion, than about the
Religion of his Physician or Lawyer: The Offices of Friendship which one Man
owes to another, having nothing to do with that Consideration; and Men do not
so much question, whether their Servants be Virtuous, as whether they be
Diligent, which is the Thing for which they make use of them. But yet this is a
pernicious Error, for Men to think themselves no otherwise concerned in their
Servants, than they are in their Horses and Oxen, to look upon them only as
another Species of working Cattle; and, so they do their Business, care not how
arrant Brutes they be: Whereas Gentlemen should consider, that they with
themselves are common Servants to one great Master; and that the Subjection of
one to the other, is but the wise Economy of their Lord, who has made the one
as Stewards or Supervisors to regulate the rest, and then it will appear a
great Unfaithfulness to neglect this Charge; for though they receive Wages, they
are not below their Care, Nature having made no such Distinction, and Returns
of Kindness and good Usage are as much their Due to such of them as deserve it,
as their Service is due to their Masters when they require it. But leaving this
Digression, there are others so far from this Niceness, that in their
Discourses they despise and mock at Religion, because they would not be under
the Restraints of it; Religion is against them, and therefore they set
themselves against Religion; and it is observable, that those who upon other
Subjects their best Friends must needs acknowledge to be sufficiently dull, yet
can talk very wittily in derogation of Religion, with some kind of salt and
smartness; and because Religion frets them, it makes them wynch and fling, and
gives them some kind of Wit and Sharpness in rallying against it. These are
Persons that never say any Thing well, but what is ill to say; and therefore we
must be very careful to distinguish between what exacts the Title of Wit from
our Judgments, and that which appears but such to our Corruptions: This
profane Liberty is too much used in our Nation, and has crossed those Seas
which environ England, which is not so happily severed from the World's Vices,
as from its Continent: But I wonder how such Men should have the Fortune to be
esteemed Wits, only for Jesting out of the common Road, and for making bold to
scoff at those Things, which ought to be reverenced of all Mankind; But we are
fallen into such a profane and skeptical an Age, as takes a Pleasure and Pride
in unravelling almost all the received Principles of Religion.

However, we must not think the worse of Religion, because some Men are so bold
as to despise and deride it; for it is no Disparagement for any Person or Thing
to be Laughed at, but to deserve to be so; there being nothing so excellent but
a Man may find Ways to traduce it, and therefore we ought not to have the less
Reverence for the Principles of Religion, because idle and profane Persons can
break Jests upon them, for a little Wit with a great deal of ill Nature will
easily furnish a Man for Satyr; there being nothing so Sacred, which by the
petulancy of Wit, may not be made ridiculous; and those Buffoons which do so,
spare neither their Souls nor Reputation to show their Abilities, by profane
more than ingenious Sallies: But it were happy if Men would use a nobler
Exercise for their Wits, than to persist in their scoffing Humor, which is not
only an Enemy to Religion, but to every Thing else that is worthy; and yet we
shall see some Men so profane, as to make use of Scripture Phrases to give a
relish to their most insipid Discourses; and were it not for this Magazine, a
great many Men's Raillery would want Supplies, and they would be very Mute
without this Topic. In our Conversation, we should carefully avoid the
customary Sin of Swearing, which has none of those Allurements which other
Sins have; such Men play the Platonic to Damnation; and the great wonder is,
that we see none who own God more in their Oaths, than those that dis-own him
in their Lives; a great Absurdity of Wickedness, to have a God to Swear by,
none to Believe in, none to Pray to. There is indeed such a Deluge of Impiety
and Profaneness at this Day overflowing our afflicted Nation, that it has
brought down most terrible Judgments upon it: Wickedness is now become the Mode
and Fashion amongst them; so that Men there begin now to fear the Singularity
of being Innocent; and a Man may with less Scorn appear there in the antiquated
Habit of our Forefathers, than to own the obsolete and condemned Qualities of
true Piety, Loyalty, Duty and Sobriety; And what Temptation is it to the Vulgar
to be Wicked, when their Superiors have beaten the Path before them: When
Gentlemen are Atheistical, Clowns will think themselves very modestly Wicked if
they be but Profane; and when they hear their Betters swear, they will soon
find they are as well qualified for that part of Greatness as the best. It were
very happy for our Nation, if those Seducers of the People would sound a
Retreat to their misled Followers, and would teach them Religion, Obedience,
and Submission, as they have formerly led them to Impiety and Disobedience.

But to return to our intended Discourse; Gentlemen in their Conversation ought
never to reveal Secrets. Our Eyes, Tongues and Looks, are the Windows and Doors
of our Hearts, we should therefore be cautious to keep every thing from
breaking out, which may be safelier hid than revealed. The Wits of futilous
Persons are like the Vessels of the Danaides, that emptied as fast as they
filled; that which comes in at the Ear, goes presently out at the Mouth,
because Indiscretion, which directs to hearken, as lightly as to Speak, lets
fly out, as easily as lets in, and disperses as soon as collects. These publish
what they know, only that they may be telling of News, an itch wherewith their
Tongues are strangely overrun, who can as well hold a glowing Coal in their
Mouths, as keep any thing Secret which they think new, which is a most childish
Vanity, and Men must have Souls of a very low level, that can think this a fit
Entertainment: These Men not having usually Depth enough to supply themselves
out of their own Store, can therefore let nothing pass by them, no more than a
Mill, which is always going, cannot afford any Water to run waste. Now these
Men are more Impertinent, and not less Injurious than the most Malicious;
Anacreon, who was choked with a Grape-stone, died as surely as Julius Caesar
with his Three and twenty Wounds; and a Man's Reputation is as soon fooled and
prated away, as maliciously Betrayed, nay perhaps more easily; for where the
Speaker can least be suspected of Design, the Hearer is the apter to give him
Credit; and this way of insinuating, is like those Poisons taken in at the
Pores, which are most insensibly sucked in, and the most difficult to expel.
These Men are so perpetually Busy, and continually employed in finding Faults
with others, that they cannot look toward themselves; and whilst they put
false Dresses and Varnishes to hide their own Deformity, they cannot allow the
least Imperfection of another's to remain undetected. If these Men would look
into their own Hearts, they would find such work for their Inquisitions and
Censure, that they should not be at leisure to Ramble abroad for it: Now such
as Busy themselves with Tales of their Neighbors, and entertain Company with
them, furnish their Wits, as young Girls do their Closets, with Shells and
Gew-Gaws; and since they bestow their Time so ill, they should Study the
Anatomy of Flies; and to punish their Bodies as well as their Minds, they
should live only upon Shrimps, wherein there is more Business than Meat: It is
indeed a gross Error to think (so we speak in Truth) we may declare any Man's
Faults, for we must as well speak in Charity as Truth, and yet many Men will
slide easily into Detraction, thinking it no great Matter, not considering the
smallest Sins are the Devils greatest Stratagems; and if Satan fetter us, it is
indifferent to him, whether it be by a Cable, or by a Hair: St. Augustine
therefore, who was sensible of the commonness of this Vice, had this following
Distick written over his Table. Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere vitam,
Hanc mensam vetitam noverit esse sibi.
The Truth is, we should never in our Discourses make absent Persons the
Subject of our Mirth; those Freedoms which we use to a Man's Face, are commonly
more moderate and equitable, because we expose our selves to the like from him;
but Backblows are disingenious, showing we intend not a fair Trial of Wit, but
a cowardly Murder of a Man's Fame: But some Men think their Wits to be
a-sleep, if they dart not out something that is piquant, and pierces to the
Quick, but this Vein ought to be bridled. Parce puer stimulis, and fortius
utere loris. There is great difference between Saltness and Bitterness, and no
Weapon cuts so deep as a reproachful Word, neither is any Wound longer in
curing; And those Jeers are most resented which touch a Man's Reputation,
chiefly that of Wit and Discretion, of which even Fools seem wary, and few will
confess their Ignorance: The Reproaches of Wit are like the Corrodings of Aqua
fortis, they ingrave and indent Characters that can never be defaced; a dull
Reproach quickly vanishes, no Person thinking it worth remembering, but when
it is steeled with Wit, it pierces deep, leaving such Impressions in the
Fancies of the Hearers, that it sometimes happens to survive both Speaker and
Hearer, and carries it self to Posterity: Many a poor Man's Infirmities had
been confined within a narrow Compass, had not some picquant strain of Drollery
scattered and dispersed them; And therefore those who rejoice in Point of
Reflection upon each other, that love to disparage and backbite their
Fellow Creatures, and gratify their proud and haughty Humor in Derision of
others, should read those excellent Verses, which to this Purpose St. Prosper
gives us in this following Epigram: Culpare in quoquam quae non sunt nota,
malignum est,
Praesertim quae sunt cognita, si bona sunt.
Non pateant faciles saevis rumoribus aures,
Quae nescire juvat credere non libeat
Linquantur secreta Deo, qui si quid opertum est
Inspicit, and nullis indiget indiciis.


Defamation is certainly one of the most unkind Designs that one Man can have
upon another, every Man being naturally tender of his Reputation, which yields
a Perfume even after Death, and a Man's Reputation can hardly be tossed without
receiving some Bruise; the heavy Scandals under which some Men have lain,
having taken their Rise only from some Inadvertence or Indiscretion; and even
doubtful Accusations leave a Stain behind them, and often prove indelible
Injuries to the Party accused: And as in the Case of Stealing, it is
Proverbially said, If there were no Receivers, there would be no Thieves; so in
this of Slander, if there were fewer Spreaders, there would be fewer Forgers of
Libels, the Manufacture would be discouraged, if it had not these Retailers to
put off the Wares. A Man may sometimes do Things which to God and his own
Conscience are abominable, and yet keep his Reputation with Men, but when his
secret Crimes are detected, then he becomes infamous; so that though his own Sin
be the material Cause, yet the Discovery is the formal Cause of his Infamy; and
he that has divulged his Fault stands accountable for all the Consequences
that flow from that divulging.

Some Men are maliciously apt to run down the Reputation of any that stand in
their way either of Pleasure or Preferment: When Joseph's Chastity had changed
the Scene of Potiphar's Wife's Passion, she presently fixes the Crime upon him:
So when Ziba had a Mind to undermine Mephiboseth in his Estate, he first
practices upon his Fame in a false Accusation: And how often have we seen in
our Time these Scenes reacted; and though many Men have been Wicked enough to
commit this Crime, yet none have been so Impudent as to avow it; all Crimes
have had their Abettors, only this Sort of impudent and lying Slander is so
much the Dregs and Refuse of wicked Men, that none have yet had Chemistry
enough to Sublimate it, and to bring it into such a Reputation, that any Man
would think fit to own it, till our last infamous Age of insulting Vice, where
this Wickedness has not only been admitted into Practice, but appears also
barefaced, which did always before keep on the Vizard; for no Man had ever the
Confidence before to own himself a false Accuser of his Brethren, till that
most wicked Age, which has not only permitted, but encouraged and rewarded Men
for being false Accusers, to the eternal Reproach of our Nation, and of them
that suffered it.

Next to avoiding the Conversation of these forementioned, we should be
cautious of Conversing with such who Censure and Judge severely of other Men's
Actions, which is one of the highest Violations of Charity; and a good Man will
never make severe Constructions, but set every Thing in the fairest Light, and
put upon it the most candid Interpretation that the Matter will bear, which is
of great Importance to the Reputation of our Neighbor: For he that gives the
first ill Character of a Man, fixes the Stamp, which ever after goes current in
the World, it being the Business of many to lay on more Load, but of few to
take it off; for most People lessen their own Beam into a Moat, and magnify
their Neighbor's Moat into a Beam: They turn the reverse End of the
Perspective to represent their own Faults small and at a distance, and shuffle
the other End to their Neighbor, to make theirs seem great. Now such as make
bitter Invectives against other Men's Faults, and indulge and palliate their
own, show their Zeal lies in their Spleen, and consider not so much what is
done, as who does it. A Man that affects an extraordinary Splendour of
Reputation, is glad to find any Foiles to set him off, and will therefore let
no Fault nor Folly of another enjoy the Shade, but bring it into open Light,
that by such Comparison his own Excellencies may appear the brighter; But this
shows a degenerous Spirit, and because he wants solid Worth, on which to bottom
his Reputation, he is feign to found it on the Ruins of other Men's. Diamonds
sparkle in the Sunshine, it is but a Glowworm Virtue that owes his Luster to
the Darkness about it. Tacitus gives it as an ill Inclination of Domitian the
Emperor's Temper, That he employed himself in catching and tormenting Flies,
and that he turned his Scepter into a Fly-flap, and was therefore justly
esteemed an Enemy to Flies, and a Fly to his Enemies; and truly they fall not
under a much better Character, either for Wisdom or good Nature, who snatch up
all the fluttering Reports they can meet with to the Prejudice of their
Neighbor.

Whosoever has a tender Side, the World will be sure to find it, and to put
the worst Color on all that Man says or does, give an Aggravation to every
Thing that may lessen him, and a spightful Turn to every Thing that may
recommend him; But that Wit is much misemploy'd, that is wholly directed to
discern the Faults of others, when it is necessary to be used to mend and
prevent his own: When we do not frequently turn our Eyes inward, to see what is
amiss within us, it is a sign we have an unwelcome Prospect at home, when we
care not to look upon it, but rather seek our own Consolation in the Faults of
those we Converse with.

Indeed, some Men's Tempers are so malign, that they wish Ill to all, and
believe Ill of all Men, like Timon the Athenian, who professed himself an
universal Man-Hater: It Is certain there are some, in whose Ears nothing sounds
so harsh as the Commendation of another, and nothing so melodious to them as a
Defamation. Plutarch gives an apt Instance of this upon Aristides's Banishment.
When a mean Person had proposed Ostracisme, being asked, What Displeasure
Aristides had done, he replied, None, and that he knew him not, but that it
grieved him to the Heart, to hear every one call him a Just Man. I verily
believe some of our keenest Accusers in these Days might give the same Answer;
for no Man that is eminent either for Piety, Loyalty, or Moral Virtue, but he
shall have many invidious Eyes upon him, watching for his Halting; and if any
the least Obliquity be espied, he is used worse than the vilest Malefactor, for
such are tried but at one Bar, but these are arraigned in all Companies and in
all Discourses.

Next to rash Censurers, Flatterers are most dangerous, who may be compared to
Flies that have pretty shining Wings for two or three hot Months, but the least
cold Weather makes an end of them; or rather like the Heliotrope, open only
toward the Sun, but shut and contract themselves at Night. Let the Object of
their Adoration be but eclipsed, they can see none of those Excellencies which
before dazzled their Eyes, and their old Idol is often made a Sacrifice to
their new, and all malicious Discovery is made of their falling Friend, to make
an Interest in their rising one. There are such Crowds of Examples of this Kind
in our Age and most unhappy Kingdom, that it is fitter to furnish Precedents
for the future, than to borrow any of the past Times.

This is certainly the most horrid Crime that could be committed, and the
blackest Color wherein we can view a Parasite; and as an Ape has a peculiar
Deformity above other Brutes, by that awkard and ungraceful Resemblance he has
to a Man; so a Flatterer is infinitely more hateful, for being the ugly
Counterfeit of a Friend. A Pretense of Friendship and Kindness is now become
the general Bait to all base Projects, all the woolfish Designs that have been
lately acted upon our English Stage, have walked under this Sheeps Clothing;
and as the World goes, Men have more need to beware of those who call
themselves Friends, than those who own themselves Enemies, because the one
traitorously Betrays you, whilst you expect no better from the other.

It was heretofore the Character given of the English, by an ingenious Person,
That they were both excellently Endowed, and rarely tempered by God and Nature,
and were the most piously affected of all others; and that there were not in
the whole World either better Catholics or better Protestants; that there was
no Nation under Heaven more remote from ill Nature and Revenge, nor Men who
were more honestly and even more naturally Just, nor so far distant from using
base Treachery of every Kind. But, alas, the Race is now spoiled by mixture,
and we are no more what we were, every one endeavoring to Deceive and Delude
each other; and that Freedom and good Nature, (which was thought peculiar to
England) which is a kind of Balsom to the whole Life of Man, (and without which
Life is no better than a Punishment, both to others, and most of all to a Man's
self) is banished out of our Nation, and those Flowers of Virtue, which were
thought to grow no where else but in our Island, are now degenerated into Weeds
of Flattery, Treachery, and Undermining: Now the Suppression of this Vice
depends upon those Persons to whom it is addressed; let but Princes entertain
such Parasites with a severe Brow, and with sharp Expressions of Dislike, these
Leeches will immediately fall off. In Sparta, when all Laws against Theft
proved ineffectual, at last they fixed the Penalty upon them that were robbed,
and that did the Business; and if it were made amongst us as infamous to be
Flattered, as it is to Flatter, I believe it might have the same Effect.

Plutarch gives an excellent Example of a Man that could not be persuaded to
Flatter, in the Person of Philoxenus, who being a good Poet, and despising some
dull Poetry of Dionysius the Tyrant, he was by him condemned to the Quarries;
where having been for some Time, he was by the Mediation of Friends recalled;
and at his first Appearance, Dionysius showed him some other of his Verses,
which he thought his Masterpiece; which, as soon as Philoxenus had read, he
made no Reply, but called to the Guards to carry him back again to the
Quarries; a brave Example of a Heathen Poet, who preferred a corporal Slavery
before a mental.

As it is a great Part of Wisdom not to be flattered, so it is to pass by the
Reproaches of others: Herein we should imitate Socrates, who being informed of
some derogating Speeches one had used of him behind his Back, made only this
Reply, Let him Beat me too, when I am absent, I care not^ However, it is good
to shun the Company of those who take Pleasure in exposing others to Contempt
and Derision, as one would avoid the Heels of a Horse that Kicks every one he
can reach.

It is the height of Incivility to abuse Persons in Discourse; to abuse
Inferiors argues a mean contemptible Spirit, Superiors is dangerous; to abuse a
Friend is to lose him; a Stranger, to lose your self in his and the World's
Esteem: We should therefore endeavor to keep a fair Reputation with all
Persons, with Superiors it is good to be humble and complaisant, not low and
flattering, with Equals grave not morose, with Inferiors courteous and fair,
not sullen nor impetuous.

It Is an indiscreet Thing for a Man in Company to take Exceptions; and if he
have any Defect in his Person, which he suspects Men are apt to make Derision
of, it is a Folly to vex himself or quarrel at it; but the best way to prevent
others in their Scoffs of this kind, is, first to speak, and let them know as
much as they can tell him; and then he ought with a manly Courage, to contemn,
as unconcerned, the Indiscretions and Follies of others: It is no sign a Man is
sound, who complains because one touches him. In my younger Days, I knew an old
merry Droll, who much frequented Company, who having in his Youth taken a great
Liberty to rally upon married Persons, in his declining Age took a Wife, where
every one might have had her for his Money; and the first Treatment of any
Friend in his Conversation, was still the Discourse of his own Marriage, to
prevent all that could be said against him.

And as we should not be troubled when others tell us of our Imperfections, so
on the other hand we should never Praise our selves: It is a great Blemish for
a Man to be the Trumpet of his own Excellencies; he who puts a modest Rate upon
his own Deserts, does best multiply his Fame, but he that speaks in his own
Commendations, does as if he meant to Sell himself. And if the most
accomplished would but seriously consider his own Imperfections, how many
Things he wants, and how few he knows, and those how lamely, he would make use
of his Reason and Discourse, not for Commendation of himself, but to gain
Instruction from others. Such Men's Company is very troublesome, who are only
accustomed to the Admiration of themselves, thinking nothing besides them
worthy of Regard; if these unbred Minds were made acquainted with those
Excellencies which God has bestowed on other Men, they would not think
themselves like Gideon's Fleece, to have sucked up all the Dew of Heaven; they
would find perhaps they rather answered the other Part of the Miracle, and are
drier than their Neighbors: And if such will needs be reflecting on
themselves, let them compare their Crop of Weeds and Nettles with that of their
Corn, and then they must either think their Ground is Poor, or themselves very
ill Husbands.

Now the way to Profit by Conversation must come from our selves, our Question
is the Fire, that draws out either the Quintessence or the Dreggs of Things;
and therefore the usefullest Part of Discourse is to give Occasion by asking
Questions, by intermingling our Discourses with Tales, with Reasons, and
telling of Opinions, it being a Testimony of as much Knowledge, to ask a
pertinent Question, as to give a pertinent Answer: But herein a great Regard is
to be had in what Company we do it, for great Men love not to be asked
Questions, unless where Questions may pull out the Thread of their own Praises:
He that in Discourse questions much, shall undoubtedly learn much, if he apply
his Questions to the Skill of the Persons with whom he Discourses, and put them
upon those Things they understand best; for thereby he shall do them a
Kindness, in giving them Occasion to please themselves in Speaking, because
every one loves to Speak of that wherein he is most expert, and himself shall
continually gather Knowledge, by fetching from every one the best that is in
him; for when Men are reduced to Speak of those Things wherein they are most
conversant and skillful, the conversing with them is an excellent School: But
we shall commonly see Men take the contrary Course, choosing rather to Discourse
of any other Profession than their own, supposing it to be so much new
Reputation gotten; but this way a Man shall never come to Perfection: As for
Tales, to tell a Story well, to continue it in a handsome Method, clothing it
with suitable Expressions without Impertinencies, and to represent therein
Persons and Things to the Life, is one of the best, and perhaps one of the
hardest Parts of Conversation. The late King Charles II. my Master, of Glorious
Memory, had a most particular Talent of this Kind, and was wonderful pleasant
in Conversation; and used, very frequently soon after his Restoration, to have
his private Sallies in the Winter-Evenings, to divert himself with some
particular Persons of Wit, whom he still chose to Sup with him, where I had the
Honor diverse Times, by his Majesty's Command, to wait upon him at Supper; (for
he would then have none of the Grooms of his Bedchamber with him.) In these
Divertisements the King permitted those who Supped with him to make use of
their Wits in telling some pleasant Stories, and in quick and handsome
Repartees, wherein the King had an excellent Vein, and would as well take as
give without Offense; which Liberty was always used with great Respect by those
who had the Honor to Sup with him; which were usually, ( Hannibal Sested, base
Brother to the then King of Denmark) the Duke of Ormond, the Lords Carlingford,
Wentworth, and Crofts, with Sir Frederick Cornwallis, Sir John Mynnis, and
sometimes Tom Killigrew. In these Conversations, I have heard excellent
Discourses, witty Repartees, mingled with pleasant Tales, wherein the King had
so great a Faculty, that scarce any Thing could be said, which he would not
Parallel with some pleasant modern Story, which He would tell with such Grace
and Quickness as charmed all the Company; but when he found them warmd with
Wine, and that their Wits began to be piquant and sharp, and to Sting each
other, the King would always then interpose his Royal Authority, and would
stroke over the severe Nips they gave each other, by throwing Dust upon them,
telling them, Good Jests ought to bite like Lambs, not Dogs; to Tickle, not
Wound: Wherein his Majesty showed great Prudence, for we have seen in our Days
many Examples of the Mischiefs that have happened by too severe Railleries; in
such Fencings Jest has proved Earnest, and Florets have been turned to Swords,
and not only the Friendship, but the Men have fallen a Sacrifice to the Jest:
It Is sure we shall die in Earnest, and it will not become us always to live in
Jest; But the Gift of Raillery in this Age has devoured the more solid
Qualifications, and is accounted the greatest Accomplishment; a strange
inverted Estimate, to prefer the little Ebullitions of Wit before solid Reason
and Judgment; if these Men should accommodate their Diet at the same Rate, they
should eat the Husk rather than the Pease, and feed upon Froth and Bubbles.

There is nothing more becoming a Gentleman than a Cheerfulness in
Conversation, every Thing being by so much the more lively and cheerful, as it
comes nearer to its Creation, and nothing has more light and sprightfulness in
it, than an ingenious conversable Integrity: Virtue is the Mind's constant
Health, the Pulse of it still beats true and evenly; she is sprightly without
Levity, free without Discomposure, and conversable without Coyness or
Cheapness, as free from Stupidity as Lightness, from being a Log as a Squib.
Besides, a Vivacity of Spirit is usually accompanied with such a kind of Wit as
makes us acceptable in Conversation: Cheerful Persons being graceful in all
they do, are most valuable in Company; For who had not rather associate himself
with a Merry conceited Humor, than with a Cynical Wise Man? Many Men indeed
blame Mirth because they cannot endure it; which is to blame the Sun, because
Owls cannot endure the Brightness of it; as if we should Quarrel with Light,
because our weak Eyes are dazzled with its Beams.

There are some Men whose Dispositions lead them to fasten and feed on
Miseries, and to glide over the Pleasures of this Life; which puts me in Mind
of what passed betwixt Diogenes the Cynick, and Aristippus the Courtier, who
passing by Diogenes as he was at Dinner in his Tub, Diogenes said to him, If
you could content your self, as I do, with Bread and Garlic, you would not be
the King of Syracuse his Slave: And you, replied Aristippus, if you knew how to
live with Princes, you would not make such bad Cheer. It Is true, this morose
and pedantick Philosophy is not designed for a Gentleman, they are born to be
Sociable, and ought to understand all the Maxims of the World; Complaisant
Humors, assisted with this practical Knowledge, gain the Friendship of all
People, because they know how to set forth gracefully the Talents of Nature.

There is no Means so powerful and apposite to divert the fixed and intent
Cares of the Mind, and to exhilerate a sorrowful Heart, as pleasant Company and
Music, which mollifyeth our Minds, and stays the tempestuous Affections of it,
if there be any Dregs of Cares that lie lurking in our Thoughts, most
powerfully it wipes them all away. They say, Alexander one Day excited by the
Music of a Harp, took Arms, and played the Part of a Common Soldier David
himself charmed the Evil Spirit in the Body of his Father-in-Law, by the
Sweetness of his Harmony; and we daily see the Terror of Death cannot so much
affright Soldiers, as the Sound of Drums and Trumpets does animate them; the
Singing of the Nurse makes the Child quiet; which evidently demonstrates the
powerful Effects of it in Nature it self; and the very Laboring Men find
Satisfaction in it, who Sing in their Work; and without doubt, the Voice
persuades and instructs much more than Reading, the first being accompanied
with certain Spirits which we may call Living, the other is nothing but the
Pourtraicture of the Thoughts of a Dead Man.

Sir Thomas More in his Vtopia, makes Music an Appendix to every Meal; and
Epictetus esteems a Table without it to be no better than a Manger: Lewis XI.
says Comines, at the Interview betwixt him and Edward IV. of England, invited
him to come to Paris, and told him as a great Part of his Entertainment, that
he should hear most sweet Voices, exquisite Music, and should not want the
Company of fine Ladies, and the Cardinal of Bourbon to be his Confessor; which
he thought sufficient Endearments to such a sensual Prince as Edward IV.

Indeed, innocent Mirth and pleasant Company whet out Wits, quicken our
Fancies, and make us afterward more fit for any Employment: A merry Heart is
the life of the Flesh, says Solomon, and Gladness prolongs his Days; and is
highly useful, when it is only our Divertisement, not our Business; but the
excess of it is very ill-becoming, and to set our Wits on the Tenter-hooks for
so slight a Purpose, is abominable: But merry Humors, though they have a great
Pleasantness in them, are obnoxious to many, because if Jests (wherein they are
most conversant) be well received by some, yet they offend more than they
please, and create more Enemies than Friends: For though Points of Wit be very
fine in Discourse, yet if they be made so sharp as to draw Blood, those that
use them may have Occasion to repent of them. It Is true, flashes of Wit give us
a pleasant Light, so long as they burn not; but this Liberty must be bounded
with Caution; for Wit should rather serve for a Buckler to defend by a handsome
Reply, than a Sword to wound others, though with never so facetious a Reproach:
In these Rencounters therefore the Charge should be Powder and not Bullets; and
we must take heed, that we pass not from this familiar Freedom of Drollery,
which causes Mirth, to severe Scoffing, which provokes Scorn, endangers
Quarrels, and gives an Umbrage of a spiteful Intent.

This pleasant kind of Wit is a Talent usually given to Youth to play withal,
and it is a pretty Gift to begin the World with, if they understand the right
Use of it; otherwise it is an unruly Engine, wildly Striking, sometimes a
Friend, and not seldom the Engineer himself. Sharp Speeches therefore which fly
abroad like Darts, are to be tenderly used; for though they be Shot at others,
they are many Times thrown back upon themselves: As when the Earl of Rutland,
who had been instrumental in the Preferment of Sir Thomas More to be Lord
Chancellor of England, and thinking the Chancellor did not show him that
Respect he merited, meeting him accidentally, he told him in Reproach, Honores
mutant Mores, alluding to his Name; which the Lord Chancellor sharply returned
upon him, telling him, It was not true in Latin, but in English, That Honors
changed Manners, which was the Lord Rutland's Surname. Thus we shall see some
Men's Wits whip Opposition, and manifest the Quickness of their Dexterity in
the Shapness of their Returns, (like the Artisans Weapon, that makes his
Enemies Arms his Enemies Destruction) and by a nimble Repartee, turns the Words
spoken upon the Speaker himself. There is much Pleasure in this kind of Wit,
there being no such Stillatory as a quick Brain, which refines and makes use of
whatsoever comes within the Pan for its Reception. But those Gentlemen who have
this Satirical Vein, and make others afraid of their Wit, had need be afraid of
other Men's Memories; for many times, after they have given others Occasion to
Laugh, they are made themselves to Cry.

The Rules to be given herein, are carefully to observe Times, Circumstances,
and Persons, knowing when to Jest, and when not; to use apt and handsome
Repartees, natural and not affected, that have more Salt than Gall, speaking
what is just and proper upon every Occasion, which is better than fine
Conceits, which yet are liked, if they be good; but Equivocations, Quibbling
with Words, and Puns, which have only the appearance of Wit, are ridiculous,
and yet these have brought some Men of very ordinary Parts into Credit. There
is as much difference between Jests picked up here and there, and those that
come from the Springhead, as betwixt wise Discourses, and harmonious
Fooleries, between a solid Sufficiency, and what is painted; a Jest should
never be served up but once, when it is Cold the Vigor and Strength of it is
gone. Many refuse to wear Buff because it is lasting, and a Man of Wit will not
Apparel his Brain in Durance. It is therefore pleasant to mingle Jest with
Earnest, for nothing pleases more than Variety; and it is a dull Piece of
Service to tire any Thing too far: But as all Creatures by secret Instigation
love to be doing that in which they are most able, so these Men of Wit being
delighted to hear themselves Talk, cannot contain themselves within a Mean, nor
have Patience sometimes to be Silent, so that we may justly wonder such absurd
Persons should speak so well: Now there are some Limits wherein these kind of
Wits ought to be circumscribed, there being certain Persons and Things
privileged from Jesting, as Religion, Matters of State, great Persons, any
Man's present Business of Importance, and any Case that deserves Pity: To Play
upon any Man's Unhappiness or Deformity, is inhumane, and Men may be as
oppressive by their Parts, as by their Power; and God did no more design the
meaner Intellectuals of some for Triumphs to the Vanity of the more acute, than
he did the Possessions of the less Powerful, as a Prey to the Avarice and
Rapine of the Mighty; and it is a much greater Barbarism to reproach a Man that
wants the Gifts of Nature, than him that wants those of Fortune; for a Beggar
may have impoverished himself by his own Fault, but in Natural Defects there is
nothing to be charged, unless we will arraign that Providence which has so
disposed: And those whom God has blessed with higher Degrees of Sagacity and
Quickness, ought not to look down upon others as Objects of their Contempt and
Scorn, but rather of their Care and Pity, endeavoring to secure them from
those Mischiefs to which their Weakness may expose them, and their Folly should
neither dismount our Wisdom, nor violate our own Integrity: But the World is
grown to that pass, that Men will rather put stumbling Blocks in the way of the
Blind, and pull away the Crutch from the Lame, that they may Sport themselves
to see them Tumble, such a delight we take in improving the Imperfections of
others, that it is become the great Excellency of this Age to be dextrous at it.
But good Nature is willing to interpret Things to the best Sense, to take
Things by the right Handle, and will never go to the rigor of the Matter, nor
break out at others Misfortunes; for to be touchy and peevish in discovering a
Fault, to kindle like Gunpowder at the least Spark, is a sign we are perfectly
wrapped up in our own Interest, and that we have nothing of Sweetness or Balsom
in our Blood. We must therefore endeavor to sweeten our Humor, and keep the
Ferment down; and though the World be full of malicious Men, yet by this we shall
disappoint the Pleasure of ill Nature, break the Force of an Affront, and make
the Injury fall upon us like Hail upon Tiles, rattle without Mischief, and at
last to tumble into Dirt.

To jest at Calamities, is a great sign of ill Nature: When Caninius, a Consul
of Rome, died the same Day he was made Consul, Cicero would needs put a Jest
upon that Accident, and said, O vigilantissime Consul sub quo nimo pransus est,
nemo caenavit, nemo dormivit, magnum prodigium vidimus, Caninio Consule, non
sensimus ver, non estatem, non autumnum: The State, says he, has had a
vigilant Consul of Caninius, that never Slept in all his Consulship. But this
was justly thought a Fault in Cicero, for Calamities are not to be the Subject
of Jests. I love Jests well, said a Wise Man, but not the loss of my Friend;
and those who lose themselves to show their Wit, are much like Heliodore Bishop
of Tricca in Thessaly, who having wrote the Ethiopick History very politely and
elegantly, but withal somewhat loosely and wantonly, was thereupon summoned by
a Provincial Synod, who told him, His Work did more endanger the Manners than
profit the Wits of his Readers, as nourishing loose and wanton Conceits in the
Heads of Youth; and therefore they gave him his Choice, either to retract his
Book, or leave his Bishopric; whereupon he rather chose to resign his Place in
the Church, than to lose the Reputation of his vain Wit. And every Age shows us
remarkable Examples of this Kind; for Sharpness of Wit commonly carries with it
two ill Companions, Pride and Levity; ingenious Persons miscarrying in nothing
more than in too much pleasing themselves in the Goodness of their own
Conceits; where sometimes the like befalls them, which happened to Xeuxis the
famous Painter, who having pictured to the Life an old Woman, so pleased
himself in the Conceit of his Work, that he died with Laughing at it.

Being thus prepared with outward and inward Furniture for Conversation, it is
necessary to consider how and where to bestow it; for he that is provident of
his Time, will be also Prudent in the Choice of his Company, and Choice of his
Actions, least the first engage him in Vanity, and the latter by being
Criminal, in throwing himself and his Time away.

This World is linked together by Love, and Men by Conversation; and one of the
g^eatest Pleasures we enjoy herein, (if duly weighed) is the sweet Society of
Friends and Relations, which multiplies our Joys and divides our Griefs; there
being no stricter Union upon Earth, than that of a virtuous Friendship; and
nothing can be more Satisfactory than to Improve and Benefit that Person who is
thus become a Part of us.

Men of Quality love to deck and embellish the Place where their inhabit, and
Friends dwell in each other, and therefore cannot but be delighted in
beautifying and adorning those Minds they have thus chosen to live in, by
purging them from all Foulness, and rendering them as splendid and illustrious
as is possible, and certainly there is nothing more ravishing than a Friendship
thus entertained: That Calamities attend it as well as Comforts, is but a weak
Objection; for what Goodness is there without Temptations, and what Happiness
in this World not to be transformed: It is the Gracefulness of every Thing that
makes it valued; Gold, whilst it is in the Mine, is good for nothing; when it is
cut and beaten into the thinness of Leaf-Gold, it is wasted and blown away, and
quickly comes to nothing; but when it is tempered with such an Allay, as it may
receive a Stamp and Impression, then it is Current and Useful.

Thus Cynical Men, who out of Pride of their own Parts disdain Company, and can
no more endure Conversation than Owls the Daylight, like Gold in the Bowels of
the Earth, their Parts are useless and good for nothing, who cannot without
Offense walk the Public Ways; they are Saints indeed in private, and live only
to God and to themselves; but being called forth into common Life, they are
like Bats in the Sun, and utterly ignorant of Public Affairs. And the
Conversation and Friendship of those whose End is only Civility and mutual
Visits, like Leaf-Gold they are blown away with every little Wind of Distaste,
or Neglect of Ceremony; and in an equal Degree to these are they to be
reckoned, who are Amici inter prandium and sartaginem, ad ostium tabernae
fratres and amici, ad ostium carceris neque fratres neque amici: But the useful
and profitable Conversations which give a right Stamp and Impression to our
Minds, are those Friends that will be Supporters to us in our Prosperities,
Safeguards in our Difficulties, Counselors in our Doubts, and Comforts in our
Adversities. With these we ought to contract a strict Acquaintance and
Inwardness, and to embrace their Company upon all fitting Opportunities, using
herein a wise Moderation, which carries with it both an Honor and Grace of
Manners; for to seek Company and to fly it, are two Extremes to be blamed; to
shun all Company argues a Contempt of others, and makes us generally hated; and
to seek too much after them, is a sign of Idleness in our selves, and makes us
slighted: We must love our Neighbors as our selves; and to show that we love
them, we must not avoid their Company; and to show that we love our selves, we
must sometimes be alone, and take Pleasure in our selves. The Italians have a
very significant Proverb, which says, Measure it a hundred Times before you cut
it off; meaning you should stand upon your Guard, till you discover the
Inclinations of those you converse with, and therefore we should be careful of
laying out our Friendship too lavishly at first, since like other Things it
will be so much the sooner spent: Neither should it be of too quick a Growth,
for the Plants which shoot up too fast, are not of that Continuance as those
which take more Time for it: We shall see some who have hot and cold Fits of
Friendship, that shall hug you one Day, and not know you the next; this
Unevenness of Temper is by all Means to be avoided in Conversation; a good Man
will always keep a steady Course of Friendship, which may run like a smooth
Stream, and never change, but be a perpetual Spring; for we cannot find the
Gust and Relish of a true and fixed Conversation, till we come to a great
Freedom with each other; for they that converse only as Strangers, are always
under some Restraints and Uneasiness, and do never open themselves freely the
one to the other.

In the long Experience I have had in the World, I have seldom, if ever, found
any Man's Company worth enjoying, that did not begin with some Difficulty, if
not Prejudice; for Conversation, like Oysters, is nothing the better for
opening so easy, and so soon. Neither is there any more dangerous
Acquaintance, than that overhasty Familiarity contracted betwixt good Fellows,
as we call them in England, who usually begin their Friendship in the Entry,
and strike it up in the Cellar, where Servants are disciplined to be the
Ministers of their Masters Luxuries, whose Vices seldom miss to be taken up by
them, as if they were the Badges to witness to whom they belonged. There is no
greater Mark nor Discovery of a Man, than to judge him by the Company he keeps,
it being impossible but that he shall much resemble them, and partake some of
their Qualities. Si juxta claudum habites, sub claudicare disces, says
Plutarch: Bad Company is very contagious to the wisest and best settled Men.
What befell Joseph was out of Contagion, frequenting the Egytian Court learnt
him to Swear by the Life of Pharaoh. Dum spectant oculi laesos, laeduntur and
ipsi, Multaque corporibus transitione nocent. I remember Aristotle in his
Problems makes a Question, Why Health does not infect as well as Sickness, a
diseased Person often communicating his Infirmity, never his Health; the Reason
is, says he, because the Health of the Body has no transient Force on others,
and is personal and not communicative. But Malvezzi tell us, it is, for that
Nature in Providence drives away the Evil from it self, and thriftily reserves
that which is Good; and for this Reason it is, says he, that those who have the
Plague are desirous to come into Company, that they may give it to others; and
by the same Reason, those who have ill Qualities in them, will be sure to work
and apply their Vices, like Rust, into the nearest and purest Mind.

Edward II. of England was a sad Example hereof; for his alter idem, his great
Favorite Gaveston, was a Man of excellent Parts of Body, and of no less
Endowments of Mind, being both valiant and witty; and if his Valor could as
well have made the King valiant, as his Riot made him riotous, there might have
come some Good of their extraordinary Conjunction; but seeing Virtues are but
personal, and Vice communicative, it made the King not only more Vicious than
he would have been, but Vicious where otherwise in all Appearance he would not
have been. The Consideration of this most mischeivous and dangerous
Conversation, caused Seleucus to make a Law, wherein he forbad all Company with
wicked Men. And Charondas the Lawgiver punished those for wicked, who
frequented Lewd Company. Neither was it a sufficient Answer, which Antisthenes
gave, when he was told of his Conversation with wicked Men, That Physicians
live amongst the Sick; for though they help sick Men's Health, they surely impair
their own, by continual visiting and touching diseased Persons: But yet this
must be favorably understood; for there is no Rank or Quality of Persons so
absolutely excluded from our Conversation, but only such a Degree of ill
Company, as may Poison and Corrupt the Good; for in nearer than Company, our
Friend, and in somewhat nearer than him, our selves, we must allow some
Inordinaries, and many Grains of Allowance must be given to make the best of us
Current: There may be likewise Occasion sometimes of conversing with ill Men,
not for Society, but Business, and for Reformation, as our Savior converst
with Publicans and Sinners. And therefore no Man is so tied up, as to come in
no Company but good Men; for he that cannot live amongst the wicked, must seek
for another kind of World than this, and for more perfect Creatures than
Mortals: It was not ill said of the Philosopher, Omnes odit qui malos odit: He
that hates ill Men hates all Men: And if a Man will love none but honest Men,
where will he find any Exercise, any Object of his Love? If a Man will hold
Friendship with none, do Offices of Society to none but good-natured and
sociable Men, he will leave many necessary Businesses undone: The frowardest
and perversest Man may be good for some particular Occasion; a crooked Piece of
Timber is not thrown aside, it is good for some Uses; the very Flesh of a Viper
is made an Antidote, being mingled with other Simples and Ingredients, and by
good Company and kind Usage many an ill Man is bettered. And since a Magistrate
ceases not to be a Magistrate for being an ill Man, much less does a Man cease
to be a Man, and so to have Title to those Duties of Conversation and Business
which are rooted in Nature, because he is of an ill Disposition. It is indeed a
great Part of Wisdom to contract Friendship and Inwardness with none but good
Men, that so by our Intimacy with them we may participate of their Goodness;
for Men are not like Bees, whose Sweetness makes Things of another Nature
Sweet, it must be good we receive, and then perhaps we shall make it better,
but if ill, we make it worse.

Some Naturalists say, there is a way of Castration in cutting off the Ears,
that there are certain Veins behind the Ears, which if cut, cause Barrenness;
our Ears are the Aqueducts of Knowledge, and if we cut those, that is, intermit
our Conversation with good and wise Men, this will prove a Castration to our
Understanding. The Advantages we receive hereby was well intimated, in that
which Socrates said to Eschines, who seeing every Body give Socrates something,
he said, Because I have nothing else to give thee, I will give thee my self: Do
so, says Socrates, and I will give thee back again to thy self, better than
when I received thee: And certainly the Conversation of well-disposed Men, who
have most looked into the Affairs of the World, and have studied Men as well as
Business, is a great Improvement of our Understanding, and Fortifier of our
Judgment, especially if they be Men of Years, Experience, and Virtue, and famed
for Wisdom, for their Testimony is of greater Force, and something is always to
be learned from them. For where Wisdom holds with Age, and Memory has not
unthriftily spent her Comings in upon Time, their Conversation is certainly the
wisest Book; there is only one Fault accompanies them, their great and
unwearied Desire of Talking, which seems troublesome to many that hear them;
yet I must confess, in my younger Days, I have ever heard such with Delight,
and did at all Times most joyfully accept what they delivered, who are of all
others most able to instruct Youth; and surely there is much Reverence owing
that Age, which deserves a fatherly Respect and Honor from us.

A Gentleman in Conversation should be Affable, not Imperious, knowing Humanity
and Gentleness is a common Debt to Mankind, and therefore will not contract his
Civility into so narrow a Compass, that it shall swell into Compliments to them
above him, and not suffer one Drop to descend on those beneath him, but will so
dispose its Streams that all Channels may be filled with it: But some
Gentlemen, like the Pharisee, think they are not like other Men, and having
mounted themselves aloft, look down upon all below them, as little and
contemptible creeping Things of the Earth; not considering that the distance
betwixt noble and mean Men, is only valuable, as a Defense against base and
ignoble Practices, true Greatness consisting in despising not the Persons, but
the Errors of the Vulgar.

It is great Prudence in Gentlemen to associate themselves, as near as may be,
with Persons of their own Rank and Quality; for in such kind of Friendships
well chosen, consists the Fruit and Utility of Conversation.

To keep Company with great Men is very dangerous; and he that soars in so high
a Sphere, runs the hazard of Icarus; for if great Men love his Company, it is
either for their Pleasure, because he has Wit, and tickles their Fancy, or he
has Parts which they make use of for their own Advantage; and it is common
with them, never to quit or advance such Persons, but still feed them with
Hopes, that their Dependence may be wholly upon them; and when such great Men
die or are disgraced, their Fall is the Ruin of their Dependants. My Lord
Chancellor Bacon wittily resembles such (who have Intimacy with and Dependence
upon great Men) to Fasting Days, which stand next to Holy Days, but otherwise
are the Leanest Days in the Year. The wise Historian tells us, Nunquam secura
cum potente societas. The Danger of such Acquaintance is well represented in
the Fable of the Lion, the Fox, and the Ass, who keeping Company together, they
went one Day a Hunting, where the Lion having taken a great Prey, he bid the
Ass divide the Spoil, who put all into three equal Portions, which so much
offended the Lion, that he immediately killed the Ass and devoured him, and
then commanded the Fox to divide, who put all into one great Heap, and set by a
little Morsel for himself; and being asked by the Lion, How he knew so wisely
to divide, answered well, The Fortune of my Brother Ass has taught me: And if
I had as well understood the Moral of this Fable when I learnt it at School, as
I did afterward by dear-bought Experience, I had not stood so long in the
Ass's Place; but sero sapiunt Phryges.

Now there are some Men so far from this Humor, that they always keep Company
with mean Persons, and those below them; whereas there can be no true
Friendship, but betwixt Equals: And therefore wise Men will not only avoid
conversing with such who are much Superior, but also with those who are much
Inferior, not only in Degree, but in Parts, for tanti eris aliis quanti tibi
fueris; and that our Thoughts and Designs will be such as our Companions are,
and low Fortunes breed many times degenerous Purposes, and he that makes
himself an Ass, invites others to ride him; and it is a very mean Ambition to
be the best in the Company, it being an experienced Truth, That he who desires
always to be the best Man in the Company he keeps, shall soon become the worst
of any Company he comes into.

And yet this Conversation, though bad, is not so dangerous as keeping Company
with Fools, Folly being no good Tutor to teach Wisdom; neither can a wise Man
contract Friendship with a Fool, their Qualities being so far different: For
when any Man is taken with another's Conversation, it is a great Argument that
they are both of the same Sentiments, but a Fool serves for nothing, but
sometimes to divert an ingenious Man, and no other use can be made of him.

But those who love Multitudes are in worse Danger than in keeping Company with
Fools; for such live in a Crowd, and a Herd is not Company; the very smell of
them offends a wise Man, and where the Crowd of Men is, there is the Crowd of
ill Customs; and since it is hard to avoid Temptations when they come single,
How shall we escape them when they come upon us in a full Body? How can we
think of any thing but Ill, when we see nothing that is Good? Young Gentlemen
who are newly come into the World with great Fortunes and ill Breeding, seek
great Meetings, and Sin for Company to gain Experience. And therefore it is no
wonder they are entangled in Debts, and made a Prey to Cheaters, and embroiled
in Quarrels, so long as they frequent such Conversation. It was in such kind of
Company I conceive Seneca meant, when he said, He never went amongst Men but he
came home a worse Man that he went out.

Amongst wise Men, the principal End of Company is Conference, and Conference
to be bettered by is not usually met with in Crowds, where Men meet not like
Bees to make Honey, but like Wasps, who love to feed in Dung; in such Company
you shall hear Men speak neither honestly nor temperately, Slander or Flattery
engrossing all their Discourse, so that no Man can be bettered by their
Conversation, the chattering of Magpyes being better Music than a Consort of
such senseless Persons; nay, a Desert is to be preferred before such debauched
Companions, for the wildness of the Place is but unchearful, whilst the
wildness of Lewd Persons is infectious.

Besides these, there is another Conversation, which is that of Women; and though
young Gentlemen are generally pleased to think this a very innocent Diversion,
yet none is more dangerous, especially as to the Woman's Part, and proves often
a more pernicious Calamity than that which thrusts Men into Hospitals; Such Men
as spend their whole Time, like Sardanapalus, amongst Women, and yet pretend
Chastity, are ridiculous.

If these hear of a beautiful Woman, what Contrivances and Designs do they lay
first to see her, and then to corrupt her, and make it their great Business, as
well as Trade, for their Agents and Factors to spring such Game; and upon these
Occasions, those will liberally Sacrifice all their Time, of which, when any
charitable Office would borrow from them some Minutes, they are then such busy
Persons, they can by no Means afford it; but to go in quest of such Game, to
have the Company of Women is their only Delight and Pastime: But Ladies must
take heed of such dangerous Conversation; and especially by how much the more
lively they are, they are the more liable to be hurt, as the finest Plants are
the soonest Nipt by the Frost.

The World is a dangerous Stage for Women, where Virtue alone will not defend
them, unless joined with much Prudence; they must have both for their Guard,
and not stir without them, and all little enough, for the Enemy being abroad,
they are sure to be taken if they be straggling. Their Behavior therefore must
ever incline strongly toward the reserved Part, the deceitfulness of the Age
we live in having made this Caution highly necessary: For though most Men seem
indeed Plantonick Lovers, and so at first as humble Gallants they are only
admitted for Trophies, yet they very often become Conquerors, and from Admirers
grow into Masters. Besides, the World is not so great a Fool, as not very well
to know, that frequent Visits made to handsome Women soon grow Suspicious, since
we know all Men are pleased with what is Handsome: Stimulus carnis, is a
natural Vice in all Men, and Lust is no way better restrained, than by keeping
far from such Creatures.

He that will avoid committing Sin, must shun the Occasions; for the best
Philosopher cannot make me believe, but that every Man naturally is pleased
with a savory Morsel: And they that make Profession of not staining their
Reputation with Spots of Uncleanness, ought to shun all that allures thereunto;
for it is not only a great Piece of Folly, but an infinite Rashness worthy to
be punished, to make Gunpowder in a Smith's Shop, with Hopes to make People
believe there is no Danger in it.

Some learned Physicians affirm, and Anatomists do also tell us, When a Woman
bears Twins, if they be both of the same Sex, they are enwrapped in one Film,
but if of different, wise Nature parts them; And if Nature thinks not fit to
lodge a Brother and Sister together in so tender an Age, this certainly teaches
us, that Persons of different Sexes cannot live safely together; and those who
rely upon their Strength and Virtue, in such Occasions, are certainly more
Rash than Wise: And those young Ladies who promise to themselves never to go so
far, as to be gained, nor to admit any but indifferent Favors, such as
Civility allows; and after having given Way to more than they should, they find
a Precipice, where they expected only Entertainment: And that Woman who will
allow her self to go to the utmost Extremity of every Thing that is Lawful, is
so very near going farther, that those Gentlemen who lie at Watch, will begin
to Count upon her: For Men are apt to turn every Thing that a Woman does to the
hopeful Side; But yet few are so Impudent as to make an Application, till they
see something which they are willing to take for an Encouragement.

And therefore it is much more honorable and safer for Women to prevent such
Forwardness, than to go about to cure it; nothing being with more Care to be
avoided by them, than such a kind of Civility, which may be mistaken for an
Invitation

I wish many imprudent Ladies had not found the Truth of this, Men often
stealing from little Favors to greater, and still carry on their Designs, till
many Times they change their Entreaties into Threats, and their Softness into
Violence; and then those Women find too late, that true Simplicity is abused,
when it deals with falsified; the fear of losing their Reputation, after having
given some Advantages which they ought not to have done, has debauched many
Women, and therefore they ought to be very cautious what Men they admit into
their Company, and of granting the least Civilities. For as the Sun shining
upon a Looking-Glass melting the Quicksilver, presently causes Spots; so if a
young Gentleman do but look upon a beautiful Woman, a Flame of Love presently
arises: The ancient Philosophers knew this well, which made them prescribe
Absence for the Remedy of Love, that Men should not see their Mistresses: But
she knew it better, who said to her Lover, Discede, discede, a foculo meo, nam
si te vel minime, igniculus meus afflaverit, ureris infime. And what Propertius
says is most true: Crescit enim assidue spectando cura puellae,
Ipse alimenta sibi maxima praebet amor.


In the last Place, there are some Conversations which are neither good nor
bad, profitable for nothing, but only Recreation, Men who seem as it were made
for no other Purpose but to divert from serious Affairs: And since even Saints
themselves have had their Divertisements, and that all Persons are allowed some
Breathing-time of humane Delight, we may therefore safely spare these Men that
Leisure, which is set apart for our Conversation, and sometimes lend our selves
to them, that we may be the better enabled to return to our serious Employments.

Of Solitariness and Retirement.
THERE is nothing so Prejudicial to Action, as to be always in Action; for the
Mind, like the Body, is tired, by being always in one Posture, to be too
serious breaks it, to be too diverting loosens it; so that to unbend our
Thoughts, when they are too much stretched by our Cares, is not more natural
than necessary. The Eye sees not the Objects touching it, but those only
remote, and the Understanding continually plunged in Affairs, is not so quick
and piercing, as his, who sometimes retires from Public Employments:
Experience teaches us, that the Eye having lost its quickness by much looking
upon the Light, recovers its vigor again in the Dark; and as the most curious
Gravers are obliged to look sometimes upon green Flies, to recollect again
their scattered Sight; so the Spirit, being weakened and distracted with variety
of Affairs, ought to recover its Force in the Privacy of some small Retreat. In
the Heat and Tumult of Business, Reason has not Power to give Conduct to
active Life, Man having but an imperfect Understanding without Meditation, and
therefore as Bees must retire to the Honey, after they have gathered the Matter
from Flowers; so it is necessary, that we retire into our Selves, to gather the
Fruit of our Experience, otherwise we shall be but ill Husbands of the Wealth
we have gotten.

Indeed, the Fruit we gather from our many Days of Company is very little, we
scatter much in Conversation, we gather but small Profit; but for the few Hours
we spend in Retirement and Recollection the Return is very considerable, and
the greater Portions of our Time we lay out this way, the more Treasure we lay
up for our Selves hereafter. This inward Consideration is a large and powerful
Study, to such as can seriously Taste and Employ themselves therein. It is the
Nourishment and Life of our Spirit, and Nature has favored it with this
singular Privilege, that there is nothing we can do so long, neither is there
any thing more easy, more natural, or more our own, than to meditate and
entertain our Thoughts.

Thus, as often as the Mind (interrupted in its Operation by external Objects)
would have the Body to be still and quiet, it presently betakes it self to
Retirement, when neither Wife nor Children, Kindred nor Business, nor
whatsoever else can make any Trouble, are to be seen, all Things being excluded
that can disturb: But since this solitary Employment and Entertainment of our
Selves, is either one of the best or the worst Things we can undertake; it must
not therefore be in Vanity, much less in any Thing that is Vicious, but in
Study, in profound Knowledge, and in the diligent Culture of our Minds.

He that will withdraw himself, must first prepare to receive himself: It is
not Wisdom to let the Spleen govern us, to over-drive Nature is to draw a
Blemish upon our Judgment; Men that retire should first examine the Difficulty
of the Enterprise, for without this preliminary Prudence, a Man may
over-burthen his Shoulders, and soon wade out of Depth. And though Solitude
promises fair, and is a strong Engagement to a retired Person, yet it is to
many better in Prospect than in Possession: It is a great Folly to trust our
selves if we cannot govern our selves, and he had need be very well assured of
himself, that falls into his own Hands, for it often happens, that none are
more dangerous than our own; and therefore wisely says the Spaniard, God keep
me from my self.

That Man is much mistaken, who thinks Solitude a Sanctuary against all Vices:
It is good against such as proceed from without us, but it has its inward and
spiritual Difficulties. And though the Devil be busy in all Places, yet he takes
Solitude to be his Ground of Advantage, from whence oft-times he plays his
Batteries with most Success. Thus we see he ventured to attack our Savior
himself, when he found him in the Wilderness, to show it is most dangerous for
those to be alone that are not Masters of themselves; there being no Security
from Danger by running away from the World, especially if Melancholy drives us
to Solitude, which makes the Mind uneasy, and ill Thoughts are no Foreign
Commodity, but purely of our own Growth, which are most dangerous in Solitude;
for many Men, who have well preserved themselves in Company, have been lost in
Solitude. Lot was Chaste even in the City of Sodom, yet defiled in his Cave. To
an Imprudent unadvised Man Solitude is a dangerous Staff; and it is to be
feared, that whilst he Walks alone, he entertains more and worse Company than
himself, Men's Vices many times giving them the Taste of Solitude, making them
so much shun Company and seek the more Elbow-Room. For a Man may as well fail
alone as in Company, there are ways for it, until such time that he has framed
himself such, as to become Sibi Theatrum, that he so much respects his Reason
and fears his Conscience, that he cannot without Shame stumble or trip in their
Presence, that he dare not halt before himself, but bears a kind of Reverence
and Respect unto himself, which next to Religion is the chiefest Bridle against
all Vice. Cicero in this Case gives an excellent Direction, Observentur species
honestae animo: Let honest Ideas still represent themselves before our Mind.
Let us, says Seneca, represent Cato, Phocion, and Aristides, to our
Imagination, (in whose Presence even Fools would hide their Faults) and
establish them as Comptrollers of all our Actions.

It is certainly a rare Thing, Vt satis se quisque vereatur; That every Man
should sufficiently stand in Awe of himself: We should win so much upon our
selves, as to be able in good Earnest, and willingly to be left alone, to quit
the World if need be, to dwell and delight in our selves: We must break those
Bonds asunder that fasten and bind us to each other; and not so tie our selves
to the Things of this World, that our Felicity depend upon them, but reserve a
Storehouse for our selves, (what need soever happen) wherein we may secure and
establish our true Contentment and principal Retreat. This Storehouse is a
wise Man's Mind, which moves and turns within it self, and is well contented to
keep it self Company, and enjoy it self: And when the World frowns upon us, and
that we are barren of Employments, we ought then to betake our selves to the
secret Improver of Minds, Contemplation, thereby adorning our House within, and
make it ready, if for Guests that is for Business, and if they come not, it is
no matter, it will be the better for us to live in. Thus we must bring home our
Cogitations to our selves, that our Contentment may depend upon what is within
us, neither seeking nor disdaining Employment, but cheerfully go on either with
or without it, with a calm and undisturbed Mind. For this World is a Comedy,
where every Man acts that Part which Providence has assigned him; and as it is
esteemed more Noble to look on than to act, so there is no securer Box from
which to behold it, than a safe Retreat, it being easier to feel than express
the Pleasure that may be taken in standing aloof off, and in contemplating the
Reelings of the Multitude upon the Stage of this World.

There is no Counsel more proper for Men than the Philosopher's, Tecum habit,
to dwell at Home, and not to suffer any Thing to steal us away from our selves;
there is neither Profit nor Pleasure worth so much, that we should go abroad to
seek it. Even amongst Pagans the wisest looked upon the Things of this World as
Lumber rather than Furniture, as Things which they needed not, and retired
within their own Breasts, which they called their Home, there to enjoy Virtue
their only Good: And many of the Epicurean Sect (who proposed to themselves no
other End but their own Contentment) did bereave themselves of all sensual
Delights, and contemned the Glory and Pomp of all worldly Wealth and Greatness,
for the only Pleasure of Contemplation. But now a wise Christian, that may
within his own Breast enjoy both Virtue and God himself, has much higher
Advantages, and more Reason to keep within that Home, and to look upon Things
without with an indifferent Eye. That Man therefore forgets his Origin and his
Dignity, that puts his Soul out of Possession of her self, by running
perpetually after Hopes that fly from him; whereas he should abandon the
Pleasures of this Life, and bid adieu to all manner of Vanities, shunning all
Passions that may any way impeach the Tranquillity either of Mind or Body,
making God the only Object of his Contemplation: He that thus retires, draws no
Man's Envy upon him, he reigns by himself, and all the Pomp which Greatness
draws after it, is not comparable to that which he enjoys in Secret; for as
that Man must needs be accounted most Happy, that is likest unto God; so Man's
chiefest Happiness must needs consist in the Contemplation of his Divine
Majesty and of his Works. And indeed, nothing but the Supports of Religion, and
a Spiritual Retreat, upon that sole Account, can make a Man fit to entertain
himself, withdrawing upon the Score of Religion. Thus to shut up the Prospect
of this World, that we may take the better View of the other, is a prudent
Precaution: Thus we untwist our Affections, and slide off from the World,
before the World slips from us; thus to retire is the best Improvement of
Solitude, and to be thus Alone is the way to bring us to the most desirable
Company.

To Retire for Quiet and Thinking is commendable, Amici fures Temporis, says
the Lord Bacon. Conversation is a Thief that steals away a great Part of our
Time, and usually stuffs our Memory with Rubbish; Solitude is a great Relief in
such Cases, and wise Men are glad to get clear of the Crowd for fresh Air and
Breathing. It is not Noise and Flashes, Thunder and Lightning, that make fair
Days, but it is the Sun's casting a clear and pleasing Light, with gentle
Gales; so a Life led in sweet Tranquillity (which is the work of Reason) is
much preferable before all the great Successes which the World admires, and
which are nothing but the Extravagancies of Fortune: In Retirement, we taste
the Sweet of a quiet Repose, and entertain our selves with Freedom; nay, we
live more in two Days of Retreat, and we are more sensible of what Life is,
than in two Years full of Business and Trouble, and we see greater Things in
Retirement than abroad in the World: For what do we see great in the World,
unless it be perhaps an Army, the Siege of a Town, or the Court of a Prince? We
are quickly accustomed to these, which only appear great to us at the first
Sight. But in Retirement, we look upon the different Works of Nature, the Sun
rising and setting, a still Night, and those Planets which so majestically Roll
over our Heads, which we continually admire. It is observed by learned
Physicians, that those who dwell farthest from the Sun, (if in any convenient
Distance) have longer Life, better Appetites, Digestion and Growth, than others
who dwell not so remote from the Heats thereof; Such Advantages, and much
greater, have their Minds, who are well removed from the Scorchings, the
Dazzlings and Exhalings of the World's Glory, into a private Retirement:
Whereas those who live in the Throng of Business and Company, their Minds lose
their Rest and Tranquillity, and many times after a Man has lost his Rest, he
loses his Labor also.

It is a great Misery for a Man never to be his own; too much Acquaintance
makes us Strangers to our selves; the more we converse with Men, the less we
converse with God, and the Content which we may expect by our Conversation with
Men, is lost by too much Conversation. I know Society is one of those
Satisfactions which are reckoned amongst the Pleasures of the first Magnitude
in this Life; but when we consider that the Advantage of Society consists not
in seeing each other, but in rational Conversation, it will appear, that
Solitude is much more Satisfactory; for what Pleasure can be received in
talking of new Fashions, of great Purchases, of Advancement or Ruin of
Favorites, Victories, or Defeats of stranger Princes and Armies, some of which
are the usual Subject of ordinary Conversation; and in Courts and great Cities,
Men neither seek nor find any other Divertisement, than visiting each other,
reviewing their Habits, talking of new Fashions, or of the Weather, or some
such pitiful Stuffs; and if Men discourse upon more serious Subjects, they are
sure to be contradicted, which often causes Quarrels. Besides, in these
Rencounters, Men are tempted to betray their Ignorance, or their Malice, in
either of which they are esteemed Blockheads or Quarrelsom: And if we converse
with those who speak with more Address than our selves, we repine at our own
Dullness, and envy their Acuteness; and if we converse with Duller than our
selves, we are soon weary, and fret at our being in ill Company: And if by
chance we accompany our Equals, then we are upon our Guard, to catch all
Advantages, that we may be thought more knowing; and we are so interested in
this Point of Honor, that such Conversation rather vexes than recreates, and
many Persons make themselves cheap upon these Occasions, whom we had highly
valued if we had frequented them less.

That Man who dwells upon himself, and is always conversant with himself, rests
in his true and proper Center; and therefore he that has learnt Wisdom from
the Folly of others, and the Miscarriages of his own Actions, will be content
to see the Crowd afar off, and not any more thrust into it, but retire within
himself: It is true indeed, there is no Place but there are means in it to do
Well or Ill; a Man may live alone in the Throng of a Palace, but if he may
choose he will avoid the Sight of it: If need require, he will endure the Court,
but if he may have his Liberty, he will be alone; for Contagion is catching in
a Throng, and a Man must either imitate the Vicious or hate them, and both are
dangerous: He that is careful to avoid Occasions, starves his Sin; those are
rare Men that can live in the midst of Temptations and not fall: Nemo diu tutus
periculo proximus, and quae licita, sunt ritanda, propter vicinitatem illiciti.

We have never greater Cause to consult our best Wits, what we are to do, and
how we are to carry our selves, than when Preferment or Public Employments are
offered us. It was no idle Question asked by an eminent Man, Whether if great
Places or Employments were offered us, we should refuse or admit them? wherein
the diverse Abilities of Men are to be considered: He that has Strength and
Wisdom to manage such Places may receive them; but he that would live quietly
ought not to entangle himself with more than he can manage; let him try, Quid
far recusent, quid valiant humeri; the strong and virtuous Man may possibly
meet and encounter Temptations with Advantage, which the more cautelous will
avoid; and in one of these two Ranks every good Man is found; and we may well
compare them to Hannibal and Fabius, the first always calling for Battle, the
other evermore declining it.

There are indeed several Degrees of Solitude, and those wisely retire, who
being harrassed with the Fatigues of a Public Life, foreseeing ill Weather,
are willing to put into Port, when keeping out at Sea might endanger the
Vessel: When the Winds go cross, it is Prudence to furl the Sails: Thus that
great Prince Charles V. when he found his Success began to fail him, he
presently withdrew.

To be able to check our Enemy, to encounter Occasions, to act our Part upon
the common Stage of this Life, and yet to keep our selves Upright, this is
indeed truly to live; but to avoid Occasions, to overcome the World by retiring
from it, argues a wise, though in the World's Opinion, a weak and fainting
Spirit, who think there is no greater Argument of Imperfection in a good Man,
Quam non posse pati solemn, non multitudinem, not to be able to appear in
Public without Offense, and who can only live to God and himself, Vtilis ipse
sibi, fortassis inutilis orbi: Though this indeed be the weaker Side, yet
certainly it is the safer, rather than by an improvident Fool-hardiness, to
thrust our selves upon Occasions, which we are unable to manage without Offense.

There is not amongst Men a greater or more frequent Error committed than in
this Kind; for in most Things of this World, Men that have no Skill in them,
will be content to acknowledge their Ignorance, to give Place to better
Experience, and will advise and consult with every one in their proper Mystery;
but let Offer be made of Places of Honor, Money or Preferment, no Man will
excuse himself, or acknowledge his Ignorance or Weakness to manage them;
whereas our Errors are no where so dangerous, as in the unskillful managing of
these Things; and therefore it is better to be cautious and wary, than strong
and hardy: Malo cautior esse quam fortior, fortis saepe captus est, cautus
rarissime: We read in Holy Scripture of a Race of Men so much greater in Bulk
than ordinary, that Men of common Size seemed but as Grasshoppers to them; yet
we find the little Men were always too hard for them, and drove them out;
because the Giants depended upon the Opinion of their Strength and Hardiness,
the others upon their wary Wit and Policy; and it commonly happens so in this
World, and we shall find that far more have perished by unadvisedly venturing
upon the Things of this World, than by sober and discreet Retiring.

But many Men over-rate themselves, whose Expectations being great, when they
are not caressed and humored in their Folly, they presently grow chagrin and
sick of the World, and fall into a Fit of Retirement and Melancholy, and will
keep no longer Company with any. These Men, like Children when crossed, grow
sullen in a Corner; but he that thus shuns Company and retreats, retires only
like a Beast to his Den.

We have seen many Examples, where Greatness has ruined several Persons, who
lived with much Honor and Reputation before. Nero, Tiberius, and some others,
enjoyed the Repute of Noble Souls before their mounting the Imperial Throne,
which brought them new Vices with their Honors, and made them as much surpass
others in their Debauches, as they did in their Power; so that Public
Employment is scarce to be wished for, seeing Men are tempted thereby to commit
the greatest Crimes. Moses, who was the Meekest of Men, whilst he lived in the
Wilderness; yet when Providence advanced him, he so highly offended God, that
all his former Services could not obtain the Liberty of his entering into the
Land of Canaan.

And though at the Creation God found it not good for Man to be alone, and
therefore gave him a Companion; yet to show the Hazard of being in Company,
even Adam could not live one Day in it, and be Innocent; for the first News we
hear of him after Eve was associate with him, is, That he had forfeited his
Native Purity.

When God intended to converse with Moses, he called him from the populous Camp
to the Top of Mount Sinai; and Christ did not disclose the Glories of his
Transfiguration at Jerusalem, but on the Top of the Mount of Olives: When God
did discipline his beloved, yet rebellious People of Israel, he chose first the
Wilderness, then the two Captivities to be his School.

History tells us of many, who out of their Skill and Strength have given free
Entertainment to the World, and have made large use of it, in all ways of
Greatness and Expense, when their Time and Hour came, would rather have gone
out of some poor Cottage, than out of a Princely Palace, and lived with no
Noise in the World, that so they might have died in Peace: Charles V. the
Prince of Parma, and sundry others, though they lived in all Pomp and State, yet
at their Death they desired to be buried in a Capuchin's Habit; and if they
thought, to die in a State of perfect Sequestration from the World was so
precious, how much more available had it been to live in it? For thus to die,
not having thus lived, is nothing else but to give Sentence against their own
Life; for we shall not appear before God as we died, but as we lived; to
profess Desertion of the World at one's Death, as most do, is only to be buried
in a Capuchin's Hood.

It was a notable Answer given by the Philosopher to Pyrrhus, who when he told
him, He would Conquer Greece, then Rome, and so all the World: Cyneas asked
him, Why he would give himself so much Trouble; to which Pyrrhus answered, He
would do it, that he might afterward live happily and merrily with his
Friends; but Cyneas replied sharply, He might live so presently, and not take
so much Pains for it.

Men that are still busied in Public Affairs, whose Mercurial Genius inclines
them to a restless Life, they (like Moses on Pisgah) see Retirement, their Land
of Canaan afar off, but without Hopes of Enjoyment: And we have seen some great
Men, who would never leave Employments till outed of them, like Whales and
other great Fishes that never come on Shore till they are wounded, and then
these Men have praised Retirement, not to satisfy their Reason, but their
Revenge; yet even this Proceeding of theirs commends Retirement, since even the
distressed expect a Protection there, for Distress makes Men run where they may
expect Help: And certainly those, who after possessing great Places in Courts,
have been unexpectedly disgraced, will be more really convinced of its
Slipperiness, than such as never found the Effects of so much Revolution: Nay,
those Men who seek greedily after Public Employments, pretend thereby a Design
for Solitude. Thus Merchants seek about the World, that they may gain so much
as may afford them the Convenience of a Retirement: And Soldiers have often
nothing to sweeten their Anxieties, but the remote Prospect of some good
Garrison for a Retreat. And Caesar himself said, Aliquando mihi licebit mihi
vivere, He would have his spare Hours, esteeming that Part of his Life to
belong to others, which was spent on other Men's Employments.

Now the wonder is, that the same Impulse which hurries Men to desire to be
Great that they may be Masters, should not with far more Reason carry them to
be Solitary, where they are free from those Necessities, and have none to obey
but God and Nature, Masters who command us nothing but what were fit for us to
do, though we were not commanded.

This Consideration has made many Holy Fathers retire into Deserts (where they
scarce had any other Nourishment but their own Juice, nor any other Company but
God) that they might tend the Work of their Salvation without Disturbance:
There they did as it were descend into their Sepulchers by deep and holy
Meditation; and from those Hermitages enriched the Treasure of the Church, with
their Divine Works confuting Gainsayers, and increasing the Stock of Holy
Learning.

But it has not been unusual for some Men to retire from the World, and yet
look back at it, as Lot's Wife at Sodom, and oftentimes to keep their Hearts in
it: Thus did many of the Philosophers who left the World in Effect, but not in
Affection; for in their Retirements they had nothing but their Arms and Legs
out of the Throng, their Minds and Intents were still engaged, and they only
went back that they might leap the better, and with a stronger Motion make a
nimbler Offer again into the World: These Men did not take the right way, they
thought they had totally taken leave of all Business, that they might live at
more Leisure and greater Ease; but they mistook themselves, and only exchanged
one Employment for another; for though they had shaken off the Court and Public
Employments, they had not taken leave of the principal Vexations of Life, nor
had discharged themselves nor their Minds of the Burdens which oppressed them;
they had not so ordered it, that their Contentment depended wholly upon
themselves, and that they could live alone in good earnest, and at Ease:
However, Men may converse with the World, and yet leave it; we may find
Retiredness in the greatest Cities, we may pass through a Crowd and not mingle
with it; and we may enjoy our selves in a multitude of unknown Persons, as if
they were the Personages of an Arras Hanging.

Every Ship that sails must needs have some Part of the Ship under Water; every
Man that lives in this World must have some of his Labors spent upon the
World; but as that part of the Ship by which a Man sails is above the Water, so
that part of us which is above the Earth, we must remove it from the World.
Thus some who have attained to that Sublimity of Mind, as to be above all
worldly Cares, though they meddle with the World as being of the World, yet they
do it so safely, that they cleave not to it, nor are astonished to leave it.

Thus many great Men, after the Fruition of all Earthly Honors, have much
preferred Solitude; As Snatocopias King of Bohemia, after the Loss of a Battle
against the Emperor Arnold, he retired into a Desert, where having lived
several Years with three poor Hermits, he at his Death told them, There was no
Greatness preferrable to the Tranquillity of that Solitude he had enjoyed with
them, which he esteemed as true Happiness; whereas that Life he had led upon
his Throne deserved more the Title of Death than Life: And Similis a great
General to the Emperor Adrian, after all his Honors and Preferments, retired
into the Country for seven Years before his Death, and caused this Epitaph to
be written upon his Tomb: Here lies Similis of a very great Age, who yet lived
but seven Years; relating only to the Time of his Retirement.

It was nobly observed by that great Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who was also a
Philosopher, That a Weaver or a Cobbler would willingly sequester themselves
from all Company, that they might prosecute their several Trades; and yet Man
cannot retire himself that he may admire the Creation, and exercise his own
Soul, which is the great Trade of a rational Creature, and of a true
Philosopher: And since Gain can prevail so far with Men, as to make them
renounce Society, and esteem Company an idle Folly, why should not we reflect
upon the great Advantages of Retirement, both as to Morality and Devotion,
which are much preferrable to those Things which are in themselves but Trifles
if not Burdens. For certainly Solitude has more Pleasures in it, than any
Public Employment, for it drives us into Contemplation, which is so charming,
that it may rather be said to ravish than please, committing so open a Rapture
upon our Souls, that it puts them almost into a State of Separation.

Thus the old Hermits, Members of the Catholic Church, are often remarked for
being as far transported out of themselves, as they had formerly transported
themselves out of the World: And even amongst the Heathens, we find Pythagoras
almost distracted with the Satisfaction he conceived in finding out his
Demonstrations: And Pliny was so delighted with the Pleasure of contemplating
the Rarities of the Mountain Vesuvius, as for farther Inquiry he approached so
near, that he lost himself in the Flames of it.

What Calmness and Contentment did Archimedes show in the midst of the Ruins of
Syracuse, being so pleased with his Demonstration, and so busy about his
Knowledge and Contemplation, as he heard not the Noise and Clamours of the
Enemy, and could not spare so much Time from his Intendment, as to ask Life
from the rude Conquerors, when he was interrupted and killed by them. Here was
a Tranquillity which looked gloriously through Danger and Death: It is not Pomp
and shining Robes that give Grace to the Body, but it is the Mind within the
Body.

Socrates, that great Master of Breeding, tells us, That young Men should be
instructed, Men in the Flower of their Age exercised in well-doing; but old Men
should withdraw themselves, and retire from all worldly Affairs: It being no
less than highly necessary, that a space of Time should be interposed, between
the Business of Life, and the Day of Death, that when they come to leave the
World, they may have nothing else to do but to Die. And whosoever has laid up
in his Mind wherewith to entertain himself in the Shadow and Retirement of his
Age, will look upon that temperate Climate of his Time as the most sweetened and
digested part of his whole Life, free from the Hurryings of all the other, he
then treats himself with the best Company, that of his own Thoughts and
Observations; and with the Philosopher, when others are sorry he is grown Old,
he is only sorry that he was ever Young. Indeed, when Decrepitness kills
Experience, when Age acts the Prologue to Death, and draws the Curtains before
our Senses, it is then high time to give that Life leave to think only of
Death, and to prepare for its last Journey: For it is a Right and Justice Men
owe themselves, who have given their most active and flourishing Age to the
World, to give their declining Age to Solitude and Retirement, and since they
have lived long enough for others, they ought to give the Remainder of their
Lives to themselves to call in these Thoughts and Intentions; and since God
gives them leisure to prepare for and order their Remove, they ought to make
themselves ready, to disintangle themselves from their worldly Engagements, and
since they have hitherto lived Swimming and Floating, they should come now, and
Die in the Harbor; it being but reasonable for that Man to shake off Society
that can bring nothing to it; he that cannot Lend, let him take heed of
Borrowing; and when our Forces fail us, it is then a part of Prudence, as well
as Safety, to retire. But for Men in the Strength of their Manly Vigor, that
are endowed with public Abilities, and excellent Ornaments, the use whereof is
only in Society, for such to retire for their Ease or Idleness, and to do good
to none but themselves, is very injurious to the Public, and resists not only
Reason but Goodness, both which join in guiding us to common Good. A Man of
excellent Parts, who thus retires under Pretense of meditating, and leaves no
Fruit of his Meditations to the World, is like the River of Jordan, whose fair
and quick Water is lost in the Lake of Sodom, called the Dead Sea. This is to
Die living, to lose the Quickness of the Mind in the Gulf of unprofitable
Idleness; it is indeed leaving the World in the worse Sense, for it is a
forsaking Mankind, and denying to Society that Service and Duty which we owe it.

For if Men of Public Employments and Professions should husband all their
Time so thriftily, as not to give any Part thereof to Business, but bestow it
all in Retiredness, yet even thereby they would contract a Guiltiness: As the
Eagle were very unnatural, if (because she is able to do it) she should perch
a whole Day upon a Tree, staring in Contemplation of the Glory and Majesty of
the Sun, and in the mean time let her young Eaglets starve in their Nest.

Both ancient and modern Histories have furnished us with Examples of some
Kings, who have willingly resigned their Kingdoms, and deposed themselves; but
whether they did this merely out of a Desire to live retiredly, or to satisfy
their Sons being arrived at Years fitting to Rule, that so they might see the
Succession settled in their own Blood, or to shun the Tumults of Rebellion, or
out of Fear of some potent Enemy, or unaptness of Government, are great
Questions left as yet undecided in the World. But if any Prince has done so
gallant an Action, (which is so strongly withstood by human Nature) as to
renounce a Kingdom, by Virtue of a Soul inamoured of that Felicity which is
enjoyed in a private Life, and that out of a welldisposed Mind he preferred the
Peace of Retirement before the Hazards and Trouble of Reigning, and that
divested himself of his prosperous earthly Condition, purely that he might be
Happy, that Prince was not only truly Wise, but was undoubtedly more bound to
God for giving him that Power, and that Performance, than for making him a
King. But that King who shrunk under the weight of Government, where Men ought
to show the greatest Worth, or has renounced his Kingdom out of Poorness of
Spirit, that Prince is much to be blamed, for that the true Moderation of Soul
is seen in gallantly undergoing Cases of Adversity, and not in losing a Man's
self in Prosperity.

Indeed, Prudent Men, that know themselves not able to withstand the
Temptations of the World, will wisely and timely retire from it: Staggs, when
they find themselves too fat, are said to retire for Safety to the Woods and
Thickets, knowing that being burdened with their own Weight, they are not able
to run if they should be hunted; which, if true, shows a great Providence in
Nature. And if we seriously consider, we shall find that Multitude and
Abundance are far more troublesome, than Solitariness and Want; in Abstinence,
there is only need of one Duty, but in the conduct and use of many Things
diverse Duties are required. Thus the Calling of a King or Prelate, is far more
difficult than that of a Monk or Hermit, and the Sociable Life is much harder
than the Solitary, by how much it is more easy for a Man to live altogether
without a Wife, than in all Points duly to live and maintain himself with her;
and therefore Sir Thomas Overbury, a very ingenious Man, was used to say, That
next to no Wife, a good Wife was best: For he that has Wife and Children,
Servants, Estate, and Business, has without comparison a more troublesome Task,
than he that has none of all these, and has only to do with himself: Facilius
est domi latere, quam foris se posse sufficienter custodire: And therefore
Speculative judicious Men do discreetly and piously, that leave the Employments
of the World which require the whole Man, to give themselves some Intervals to
the Office of Men, as they are Men and Christians.

Such Retreats as these are most commendable, where Men sequester themselves
from the Troubles of the World, that they may the better vacare Deo and
studiis: For thus they do more good living out of the World than in it; Neither
do such Men as these embrace Solitude out of meanness of Spirit, or for
weakness of Parts, as not fit to attain Greatness, or not able to bear with the
World, but they do it purely, that they may arrive at that Happiness which is
usually enjoyed in a retired virtuous Life.

History affords us many Examples of Men, who have known how to compass the
Prime Places and Supreme Dignities both in Church and State, who have had the
Acquisition of Wealth and Greatness in their Power, though not in their Aim, and
who have with much Honor relinquished Riches to embrace Poverty, and to enjoy
Solitariness and Retirement, having voluntarily left the most gainful and
weighty Employments, and after a full Fruition of all earthly Happiness and
Pleasure, have taken a solemn Leave of the World, whilst yet Fortune smiled
upon them. A great Example in this kind, was Quintus Mutius Posthumous, that
Noble Roman, who having been taken from the Plow to be Consul, after he had
governed that People and conquered their Enemies, he returned to his former
Employment; and being ready to leave the Senate, he called for his Balance, and
by putting the Fasces, the Mark of his Office or Authority in one Scale, and
his Plow in the other, did let the Senators see, those Imperial Ensigns were
far the lighter, and so took his leave of the Senate, and returned to his Plow.
Such Men as these are truly Happy, who have left Cares and Troubles for
Calmness and Quiet, they possess a Happiness, which Kings can neither keep
themselves, nor suffer amongst their Neighbors; These are so far from
complaining of the World, that they are content to forget it, and are resolved
neither to have War nor Commerce with it, having founded a Retreat to all their
Passions, as well the pleasing, as the troublesome.

But we shall find few Men that will be content to do this Thing seriously;
sudden Wishes and indeliberate Proffers and Attempts to renounce the World are
but rash Pangs of seeming Mortifications. There are not many that will be
content with a mean Estate, that will neglect Wealth and Abundance, and desire
God not to heap too much upon them, but to abate of his Portion: There are but
few that will with Daniel refuse the King's Delicacies, and feed upon Pulse,
and with the great St. Paul take Pleasure in Necessities: Many indeed will tell
us, They are resolved to quit the World both in Mind and Body, but Custom is a
Thing we often fall into by flying it, and we shall not unfrequently hear Men
swear they will not swear. I verily believe many of our Loyal Countrymen have
had so sad Experience of this World, and do so little desire to learn that
which they are ignorant of therein, that they would be very glad to forget what
they already know of it, and do really wish they were like some of those
Hermits, that inquired how Cities were made, and what kind of Thing a King or a
Commonwealth was?

There is no Voice sounds better in a sober Man's Ears, than that which cried
to Arsenius, Fuge, sede, tace; which counsels Men to give themselves
Satisfaction by their quiet retiring: Creed mihi qu been latuit, been vixit,
said a wise Man: But yet wheresoever we are, or in what Condition soever, (if
we can but tell our selves what and where we would be) we may make any Place or
State happy to us: For we are so composed, that if Abundance or Glory scorch or
melt us, we have an earthly Cave (our Bodies) to go into by Consideration, and
cool our selves; and if we be frozen and contracted with lower and dark
Fortunes, we have within us a Torch, a Soul brighter and warmer than any
without, we are therefore our own Umbrella's, and our own Suns.

But as all Shadows are of one Color, if we respect the Body from which they
are cast; so all Retirings into a shadowy Life, are alike from all Causes; only
the Employments, and that upon which we bestow our Time, gives it the Tincture
and the Beauty. Thus our Shadows upon Clay will be dirty, and in a Garden green
and flowery; so in our Retirements, if we only converse with Earth, we shall be
like it, that is, unlike our selves: But if we be engaged in more refined and
intellectual Entertainments, we shall be something more than our selves, that
is, than this narrow Circumference of Earth speaks us, the Soul being always
like the Object of its Delight and Converse; and therefore well says the Roman
Orator, Erigimur and latiores fieri videmur, humana despicimus contemplantesque
supera and caelestia, haec nostra ut exigua and minima contemnuntur.

However, it is not enough to be only separated from the Converse of People;
for though we have freed our selves from the Court and from the Market, yet we
are not thereby free from the principal Torments of our Life; though we change
Places never so often, yet may our Vices follow us even into immured Cloisters:
The hollow Rocks, the wearing Hair-Shirts, and continual Fasting, rid us not
always from them, for a Holy Habit cleanses not a foul Soul. And as Socrates
being asked, Why one who had been long abroad, had not more improved himself by
Travel, answered well, Because he had not left himself behind him when he went
to Travel: So before a Man leaves the World, if he do not first discharge both
himself and his Mind from the Burden that presses her, Retiring will but stir
it the more, and press it the harder, as a sick Man takes more Hurt than good
by changing Place: It is but settling an Evil instead of removing it, and if we
cast back a kind Look upon what we have left behind, we still carry our Fetters
along with us, and are not at Liberty. We ought therefore first to recover our
selves from our selves, for without managing our Superior Part, all the Pains
taken about the Inferior is to no purpose: And he that only changes his Cloth
of Gold for a Monk's Habit, and his Point de Venice for a Demi Collar, shall
without doubt be a Loser by the Bargain: It is indeed no such easy Matter, as
many Men believe, to make a safe Retreat from the World, to truss up our
Baggage, and bid our Company farewell; this is a Burden which few Men can take
up handsomely: For a Man to anticipate the Accidents of Fortune, to deprive
himself of his present Advantages, is an Action of extreme Difficulty, as well
as of an extraordinary Virtue.

But though the doing these Things seem very severe to our worldly Imaginations,
and to those who never had Experience in themselves of this noblest Operation
of the Soul; yet does this retiring produce so great Effects, and carries with
it such spiritual Charms and Delights, that should good Fortune her self come
in Person to find them out, who are thus withdrawn, to invite them again into
the World, yet would they shut their Doors against her; and though she should
tell her Name, she should not be admitted. The Religious retired Man is an
inverted Pyramid, Earth has but the least Point of it; A Soul that dwells in
Heaven will not dabble in this impure Mud, or stoop to be a Copartner in the
Delights of the Creatures, that have nothing but Beast in them; and though it be
necessitated by its relation to Flesh to a terrestial Converse, yet it is like
the Sun without contaminating its Beams.

Thus Religious Persons, when they come abroad into the World, partake not of
any worldly Humor, they can safely look upon the Throng, and (more truly than
Socrates at the Olympian Games) give God thanks, that he has made them not to
need those many Things which others so vainly and violently pursue: Their
raised Contemplations enlarge and ennoble their Spirits, and infinitely advance
them above the ordinary Level; Such Souls as these (that were only lent the
Earth, to show the World their Folly in admiring it) possess Delights, which in
a manner antidate Immortality, and (though at an humble distance) resemble the
Joys above, they receiving here some Anticipations of immortal Delights, as
Pledges of their eternal Rewards; for there want not Examples of some, who have
had their Souls elevated to such a height of intellectual Contemplation, that
God has made them as it were, in some measure, Patterns of the Happiness of
the Life to come, which he has sometimes vouchsafed to show us here below, to
make us in Love with the Piece above in Heaven.

This Divine Contemplation is, promus and condus coeli and situla gratiae; it
opens to us all the Treasures of Heaven; This remedies all our Sorrows, settles
and composes all our Distractions, and ravishes our Spirits with unspeakable
Delights; to which purpose St. Francis de Sales says most Divinely; We see the
Restraints which Religious Persons put upon themselves, we discern their
outward Bitterness, but we are not able to apprehend their inward Sweetness and
Delight; the very Fire and Flames were to the Martyrs, Flowers and Perfumes.

How injurious a Scandal is it therefore, which we are apt to cast upon
Religious Persons, representing them with angry and stoical Countenances, and
defaming them with melancholy and unsociable Humors, believing Retirement to
be a State, wherein the Soul contracts a Rust, which cankers its own Substance,
and makes it unpleasant to others; Whereas our Savior assures us, there is no
Life so pleasant and happy; and though he himself is said never to have Laughed,
yet his Countenance is said ever to have been Smiling, and in full Condemnation
of morose Humors, it was prophesied of him, Quod non esset tristis in his
Conversation.

It is indeed an ill way of judging, That Men cannot have Piety in their Hearts
without Austerity in their Looks, (a Virtue stuck with Bristles is too rough,
when adorned with Flowers it will be willingly entertained) a cloudy
discontented Face is not the only, or best sign of Devotion, very merry Men
have been very holy and devout Men: No Man loves to see such Religious, whose
Thorns he is afraid will scratch him; for Christian Philosophy has nothing in
common with the Cynick; this disguiseth, the other reforms; the one composes
the Countenance, the other regulates the Spirit; the truly Religious are
Austere to none but themselves, their Thorns prick no Body else; it being a
Vulgar Error to believe, that those which retire with the greatest Strictness
should not have their Diversions; all the Hours of their Lives are not equally
Serious, neither are all their Sayings, Sermons; it being a Right most proper
to them of all others, to have this Olium laetitiae, this Balm of their Lives,
this spiritual Alacrity, which does even dignifie their Service to God; For
these seek it where it is to be found, and therefore we may be sure they gather
it from the right Tree, it being the only Fruit of a good Conscience; and since
that is to them a continual Feast, there is no Reason but they should be Merry
at it: This is the Substance of all their Actions, and their constant Triumph,
having this they want nothing, Quamvis ipsis nihil est, nihil deest: All their
Treasure lies in the Temple of Wisdom, which they do so well improve, that they
become living Books to them that converse with them, illustrating their Minds
without Prejudice to their Sight, their Instructions having much more of Power
and Life, than Reading can possibly be capable of.

Of St. MARY MAGDALEN's Life and Conversion; with some Reflections upon the
Conversion of the Good Thief.
BEING in a Place and Season where every Thing begins to Bud, I must do so too,
and vent some of my Thoughts; though perhaps, as all other Buds are yet without
Taste or Virtue, these Lines may be also dull and insipid; and though the
Pleasantness of the Season invites me, it does not much please me, since I see
every Thing refreshes, but I wither and grow Older, but not Better, my Strength
diminishes, and my Load grows heavier.

There are certain Rules for the Body's Infirmities, which if rightly observed
will effect their Cure; but for the Diseases of the Mind, there is no Rule, for
our own Taste and Apprehension, which should be the Judge, is the Disease it
self.

I am now no more transported with Jollity, and the love of Company, having at
present Loads heavy at my Heels, which bring to my Thoughts my ill Fortune, my
old Age, the Duties of a Man, of a Subject, of a Husband, of a Father, with all
the Encumbrances of a numerous Family; these Thoughts deject me into Sadness
and Melancholy, and from thence into a serious Contemplation of the Troubles
and Miseries of this Mortal Life; which have farther induced me, in this Time
of Solemn Devotion, to entertain my Thoughts upon some Divine Subject, the
better to compose my Mind and submit my Will to the Orders of Divine Providence.

I know well, as no Beauty, so no Discourse has all Voices, even in the worst
Faces some Eyes see Features that please, in the best some others see Lines
they like not; some out of Affection may Plat a Laurel for that Head, on which
others in their Opinion would bestow a Thistle, which may perhaps be my Fate:
However, I am not ambitious to hang the Ivy-Garland at my Door, least I should
seem like those Hosts that use to meet their Guests upon the Way, and promise
beforehand a fair and ample Entertainment; Let it please my Reader rather to
see and allow his Cheer, and then according to his own Palate he may disgust or
relish the Cookery.

I doubt not but many an accurate Quill on the Wing of Contemplation has
already taken a high Flight upon this Subject; my only Plea shall be, He that
cannot Soar like the Eagle, may be allowed to Flutter like the Sparrow.

The Scripture is every where full of Variety, like a Garment of several
Colors, and upon the same Loom of Holy Writ, diverse Workmen may according to
their several Fancies draw out some curious Threads of Observation; and that
Brain is very unhappy that meets not with some traverse of Discourse more than
it has borrowed from another's Pen; yet I will not contemn the Judgment of the
Wise, nor refuse to learn from any Instructor. I never read but of one foolish
Cock that refused a Pearl though found on a Dunghill: Men's assueta operi per
mill volumina s^lers
Ambulat, atque suos aliquid se ponit in usus.


The laborious Be is the Emblem of a working Brain, which Creature is set
before us for a Copy of Industry; it is not always droning upon one Flower, but
throws her light aerie Body upon a second, so to a third, till her Thighs are
loaded with a large Collection. It is no less indeed than a wonder, that of
almost the Shadow rather than the Substance of so very small a living Creature,
Nature has made so incomparable a Thing. I had rather imitate this laborious
Insect, than challenge to my self Arachne's Motto, Mihi soli debeo. I had
rather bind up in this Posie, some choice Flowers, which I have here and there
chosen and culled from the Gardens of several Authors, than boast my self with
that little Arabian, that I have eriscerated my self, and spun a Web out of my
own Bowels.

Having therefore imposed this Task upon my self, and finding nothing more
particularly described in the New Testament, than several remarkable Passages
of the happy St. Mary Magdalen, I have thereupon thought fit to make her the
principal Subject of this Discourse, adding some Reflections upon the
Conversion of the Good Thief, and upon what happened to St. Mary Magdalen in
the Pharisee's House, what afterward in her own, and her Sister Martha's, and
what after Christ^s Death and Resurrection.

Who this Woman was is much controverted, and is sooner questioned than
answered: I know such Problematical Disquisitions, which have more Subtilty
than Usefulness, (as Erasmus on this very Quaere says) are superfluous; and of
them we may say, as the Philosopher did of the Athenian Shops, How many Things
are here which we need not: And therefore I shall omit these Disquisitions, and
will not be curious where the Scripture is silent: Whosoever she was, she still
carries the Name of what for some time she was, A Woman that was a Sinner.

We commonly see some artificial Pictures, which according to diverse Sights and
Aspects, represent diverse Things; such an admirable Piece, with a double
Resemblance, has St. Luke (an excellent Painter) here delineated in the most
lively Colors. Look on one side, You shall see a lascivious Woman offering her
self to Sale in the most tempting Manner; step on the other side, You may
behold an admirable Convert, attended with a Retinue of Graces: View it which
way you will, here is the word, Ecce, Behold, like a Curtain before some exact
Piece of Workmanship, which likewise has a double Reference to the Power of
Christ who drew this Sinner, and to his Mercy who received her.

In this noble History are several weighty Circumstances like so many Wedges of
Gold in a rich Mineral, and one Ingot appears at the Head of the Mine, Behold a
Woman, which is a Word of Emphasis and Energy, and if this Star stand over the
House, a Jesus is within: Here, like Janus, it looks backward and forward; and
so I shall discourse of this Woman both as a Sinner, and as a Penitent. And if
it shall seem distastful, that I insist a little longer than perhaps the Reader
may judge necessary on the particular Sin, for which this Woman was publicly
noted, let me put him in Mind of the Answer which the Comic Poet gave, who
being accused of having brought a Lewd debauched Ruffian upon the Stage, and so
setting a bad Example to young Men: It Is true, says he, I brought such a Man
on, but I hanged him before he went off, and so I gave them a good Example.
Here is a better Lesson to be learned: All Women may accept this Woman as a
Pattern to imitate, and even the best may learn somewhat from her Story. For
how sinful soever she may appear at first, let us suspend our Censure till the
last Act, then we shall find how she became a lebete, phiala, of a Caldron
boiling with Lust, a Crystal Vial of pure Chastity; how she that at first was
running apace into the Dead Sea, did speedily turn into the Path to Paradise.

I shall begin with her Fall, and consider her first as a Sinner.

But alas! who is not so? Had she not been a Sinner she had been a Miracle; he
that knows himself to be a Man, knows himself to be a Sinner, for in the Loins
of our first Parents we all sinned; so that it is absurd to suppose a
Separation of Sin from Man's Nature: In our Conceptions through that Original
Pollution, we are all warmed in unclean Blood, and still we continue ponere
Adam super Adam, to add new Sin to our Original Sin: This Hereditary Poison is
inbred in every Man, and the Sullage of Adam's Clay sticks fast to us: By
Adam's sinning all his Seed are become sinful, and all his Offspring, as in a
continued Line, do like corrupted Branches of a rotten Tree, still bring forth
corrupted Fruits.

The most perfect and glorious Light in the World is the Sun in the Firmament,
yet has he his Paralax, and his Variation: And what Son of Adam was ever
found, through the Zodiac of whose Life an Ecliptic could not be drawn? A Man
without Sin is like the Mountain of Gold, or the Philosopher's Stone, which
have no Existance but in Theory and the Operation of the Understanding. In
Scholastical Speculations you will hear the Noise of such a Being, but you
shall no sooner find him than the Echo in the Poet, Quem non invenis usquam,
esse putas nusquam: Such Utopical Perfection is only an idle Dream of the
Donatists. It is the Voice of an Apostle, In many Things we offend all. Nothing
more certain, than that Corruption has deep Root in God's peculiar People: Even
their best Works (and they too like Solomon's Sculpture, a little upon a Pillar
rare and few) will but weigh light in the Scales of the Sanctuary. As the
Curtezan Lais said, Philosophers did sometimes knock at her Gates, as well as
other Men; so the best Men are often overtaken by human Frailties; let the best
do what they can, they are but imperfectly Good, in some Matter or other they
step aside from God's Commands. It is a Truth as clear as the Sun, that the
Seeds of Sin are in all Men, the Seeds not the Practice; there is not in all
the same Eruption, but there is in all the same Corruption. Some are Kytes,
others Hawks, and the rest Eagles, and yet all from the same Eyrie; he that
bears Humanity about him, he that is clothed with Flesh and Blood, cannot but
Sin: And yet though we cannot avoid being Tempted, yet we may shun the Commission
of Sin. It is one Thing to dart and glance a wanton Desire, and another to
court and plead for it. Though the Motions of Flesh be alike in all Men, yet the
humouring those Motions is not so. It is one Thing for a Man to Sin, another to
give himself over to the Commission of Sin. This continuance in any notorious
Sin, is not only a Grave to the Soul, but a great Stone rolled to the Mouth
thereof to keep it down.

What Erasmus says of Paris, That after a Man has used himself to the odious
Scent of it, it grows more and more agreeable to him, is too true of Sin, which
by long Entertainment becomes Customary, and not easy to be dismissed.

We know that an expert Swimmer, being under Water, feels not the weight of a
full freighted Ship of a thousand Tuns riding perpendicularly over his Head; so
whilst we swim in the Custom of any pleasing Sin, we are insensible of the
Burden of it; for frequency of Sin does flesh us in Immodesty, assiduity in
Impudence, and that Sin is almost incurable that is steeled by Custom; which is
a true Character given of this Woman, who is not described as a Woman who had
sinned, but a Woman that was a Sinner; it was not a transient, but a permanent
Condition, that gave her that Denomination, her long continuance in her Trade
had branded her with this Title, A Woman that was a Sinner.

This Woman was of a Noble Descent, and (as is generally received) was
remarkable for a luxurious and incontinent Life; and in those loose Days,
wherein Herod erected his Theaters and Amphitheaters, Debauchery was very much
encouraged. And however Wantons may flatter themselves, and take that for true
Doctrine, which the unwise Tutor sometime spoke in the Comedy, Non est creed
mihi, adolescenti; It is no such Fault in a young Man to follow Harlots; yet it
is such a Sin, as commonly drives to the Devil at once, a Sin which once
indulged becomes what may be called a pleasant Madness.

History tells us of a certain Well in Epirus that will quench Firebrands if
put into it, and yet when they are quenched it will presently set them on Fire
again: Like this Water is a lascivious Woman, when she quenches the Lust of
the Body for a time, she sets it on Fire afterward much more wittily:
Therefore Fonseca the Spaniard has Emblem'd this Vice by the Phoenix, which
does revive and renew her self by the Fire which she kindles by the Motion of
her Wings. Thus we mourn perhaps, and bewail, and repent, of the Sin we have
committed, and desire to give it over, that it may Die with us, but with the
Wings of our Thoughts we blow those Coals afresh, and make them Flame more than
before.

Thus we walk the Round, first we act a Sin because the Thought pleases us,
then we think that Sin over again, because the Act has pleased us; and amongst
the great variety of Sins, there is none more plausible, nor more pleasing to
Nature than Wantonness: How many set their Souls burning in the Flames thereof,
and (as Nero did when he had set Rome on Fire) behold them with Transport and
Delight? How many silly Wretches, like the foolish Lark, whilst it plays with
the Feather, and stoopeth to the Glass, are caught in the Fowler's Net? For a
lascivious Woman (to give a short but true Character of her) is the Devil's
Pitfall, a Trap to catch our Souls: Her Eyes, like free Doctors, live upon the
spoil of Stragglers; she baits her Desires with a Million of prostituted
Countenances, her displayed Breasts, and loose Glances, Locks wantonly waving
over her Shoulders, her artificial Complexion, (the Counterfeit of the Great
Seal of Nature) her curled Hair, (the Sophistry of the old cunning Serpent) her
high Washes and Paintings are so many Lures to bring the Adulterer to the Snare.

But chaste Thoughts will check and never stoop to such Enticements; For when
Fire falls on Fuel that is wet it presently goes out.

When Potiphar's Wife, one of the greatest Ladies in Egypt, did inordinately
affect, impudently solicit, and, in a manner, force the Modesty of her good
Servant Joseph, how much rather did he leave his Garment than his Virtue? Nor
did he rescue himself from Adultery and Danger by Violence to her Person, nor
neglect the Duties he owed her as a Servant, but with the hazard of his Name,
Life and Liberty, he made an innocent Escape to preserve his better Garment of
Chastity.

The Arabian Proverb is elegant, Obstrue quinque fenestras ut luceat domus,
Shut the five Windows that the House may be lightsome; cleanse the Limbeck of
the Senses, least thence some Pollution drop into the Soul. If at once we would
overcome the Temptation and the Tempter, we must resolve, with Alipius, to shut
our Eyes when we come amongst Vanities; for the Eye is the first Part that is
struck in such Engagements, upon the first Assault it yields up our strongest
Fort: The Eye besides is the vainest of all the Senses, it takes extreme
Delight to be cheated; one of the Pleasures of the Eye is the Deception of it,
and how easy is that Sense deluded which delights to be deceived.

The ancient Philosophers before Aristotle, that held Vision to be performed by
an Emission of Beams, imagined the Eye to be of a fiery Nature, wherein they
were confirmed by observing, if the Eye had a Blow, Fire seems to sparkle out
of it: But certainly, how watery soever better Experience has found the
Substance of the Eye, it is spiritually fiery, both actively and passively;
passively for that it is inflamed by every wanton Beam, actively it sets the
whole Heart on Fire with the inordinate Flames of Concupisence: Thus Sichem saw
Dinah and defiled her; Viderunt Oculi, rapuerant pectora flammoe, no sooner did
he see her than his Breast was inflamed with Lust. Thus Amon fell sick for
Tamar's Sake, his Desire of her began at the first Interview. Thus when David
walked upon the Roof of his Palace, and discovered from thence a beautiful
Woman washing her self; here was Mulier long, libido prope, for his petulant
Eye recoiled upon his Heart, and smote him with vicious Desires. Yet it is not
the Eye it self, (for what is that but the Beauty of the Face, the bright Star
of the Orb it moves in) but the Viciousness of the Eye that is to be condemned;
when we talk with our Eyes, then it is that we sin with them. But I dare not
enlarge upon this Subject for fear of committing that which was a noted Fault
in Marcellus the Rhetorition, (as Suetonius tells us) that lighting on a Figure
he would pursue it till he forgot the Matter in hand; I will therefore return
to discourse more particularly of this Woman, so sinful in her Life, so hateful
for her Lust, and so devoted to Incontinence, that she was become a common
Scandal: For by her bad Example she made the City so infamous, that she might
more fitly be called, peccatum Hierosolymae quam peccatrix, the Sin of
Jerusalem, rather than a Sinner in Jerusalem, as Petrus Chrysologus observes,
because the whole City shared the Disgrace which she deserved.

Sin is Sin wherever committed, whether before a Multitude, or in a Desert; yet
the more public the Fact is, the greater is the Scandal, and this Woman's
Offense was the more notorious, because she was a City Sinner.

I confess that no Place can secure one from Temptations, which come in too
hastily and uninvited, like rough Winds from every Corner of the Sky, and in
such Number, as if each Minute were computed by them.

We are apt to Fall, because we are Mutable, but we do not commonly Fall except
some Occasion be given; and how full is the World of such Occasions? Our common
Adversary, the Devil (who has a thousand Ways of attacking us) finds how apt we
are to stumble at something or other in our way: He knows which way our
corrupted Nature bends, he sifteth out what will work upon our Affections and
Dispositions, and with that he wooes our Consent to Sin; like a skilful Sailor
he marks the Wind, and accordingly hoisteth up or strikes Sail; or, like a
cunning Poet, he gives every Actor a Part agreeable, and makes a perpetual Use
of the Bent of our Nature: Thus has he a Wedge of Gold for covetous Achan, a
Crown for ambitious Absalom, and a Dinah for Sichem. And the Concurrence of
Time and Place are his principal Engines, which serve to give Aim to such
Faults as our Nature is too apt to commit without a Prompter; then surely in a
corrupt debauched City are more Invitations to Sin, than in private Cells. In a
large Concourse of People you will find many Brokers of Villainy, who live upon
the Spoil of the unthinking Part of Mankind. Where many Pots are boiling there
must needs be much Scum; where Multitudes of Strangers meet, where Variety of
Delights entertain the Eye, it is more difficult to avoid Temptations, for our
Nature herein is like Fire, which, if there be any Infection in the Room, draws
it to its self, or like Jeat, which, omitting all more noble and precious
things, attracts only Straws and Dirt.

It was in a City where this Woman lived, where by her lewd Example she drew in
others to offend, and her Example was more prejudicial because she was of a
good Family: Satan's Infections many times send their Influence through some
great Star into lesser Bodies, for Example is like a Stone thrown into a Pond,
which makes Circles which dilate themselves till they are stopped by the Banks;
or like a Plague Sore which infects the Bystanders and Lookers on.

I do not find the Name of the City set down, yet many are bold to affirm it
was Naim, others will have it Jerusalem; wherever she lived she was too well
known in her Time, and having already showed what her Offense was, I will not
lay my Finger again upon that Blot; and having thus far drawn the black Lines
of her Life, I will now look on the other Part, and consider her as she has
put off the Sinner, and as she is now become a Penitent.

Scipio (as Livy says) never looked so fresh, nor appeared so lovely to the
Eyes of his Soldiers, as after his Recovery from a dangerous Sickness in the
Camp; so neither does the Soul ever seem more beautiful than when she is
restored to Health after some dangerous Conflict. The Palladium was very much
esteemed by both Trojans and Graecians, not so much for the Matter or
Workmanship, as because it was snatched out of the Flames of Troy; so no Soul
is more precious in the Sight of God and his Angels than that which is snatched
out of the Fire of Hell, and Jaws of Death.

To see Men turning from God to the World, from Piety to Profaneness, is as
common as lamentable, every Day's Experience shows us such Sights. But to see
Men return to God, is as happy as wondrous to Men and Angels; and what is more
strange, we see the first Disciples that came to Christ were such as were most
desperately enthralled to Satan. The Magi, Publicans, Harlots, the Thief, the
Blasphemer, etc. This shows the Depth of Christ's unspeakable Mercy; who of the
knottiest and most crooked Timber can make Rafters and Cielings for his own
House: Thus he can call a Zachaeus from a Toll-booth to be a Disciple, and
Matthew to be an Apostle, and this sinful Woman to be a Convert; who it seems
came to Jesus in Simon the Pharisee's House, who had invited Christ to eat with
him.

She came not (as the staring Multitude) to glut her Eyes with the Sight of a
Miracle and his glorious Person, nor (as did the Centurion or the Syrophenitian
Woman, or the Ruler of the Synagogue) for Cure of her Sickness, or in behalf of
her Friend, or Child, or Servant, but (the only Example of this sort of coming)
came for a Cure not of any bodily Grief or Malady, but for her Sins. She came
with Remorse and Regret for them, to lay her Burden at Jesus's Feet, to
present him with a broken and penitent Heart, a weeping Eye and great
Affliction; for she came humbling her self, and fell down before him weeping
bitterly for her Sins, pouring out a Flood of Tears large enough to wash the
Feet of Jesus, which she wiped with the Hairs of her Head.

Purgata recessit
Per gemitum propriique lavans in gurgite fletus
Munda suis lacrymis redit and detersa capillis.
But amongst all the Demonstrations of God's Mercy, we can never enough
magnify his Goodness and Power in the Conversion of the dying Thief, who was
execrable amongst Men, and a Blasphemer of God: My Soul is lost in Amazement
when I think of him; the Offender came to die, nothing was in his Thoughts but
his Guilt and Torment: Christ was silent when he reviled him, and being yet in
his Blood, Christ said, this Soul shall live; his good Spirit so breathed upon
him, and the Force of his Grace worked so instantly and powerfully, that his
last Hour was his first, wherein he knew his Savior to be God. In ipso Crucis
candelabro Sol resplenduit: The Sun did shine upon him from the Candlestick of
the Cross: The Light whereof was so powerful, that it awakned this drowsy
sleeping Thief, leaving him so well instructed, that he presently burns with a
zealous Impatience; he cannot hear the Revilings of his Companion, but suddenly
he becomes a Convert, chiding his Fellow-sufferer, saying, Do not thou fear
God, seeing thou art in the same Condemnation. He confesses his Sins, We
receive the just Rewards of our Deeds, But this Man has done nothing amiss;
wherein he shows himself a Doctor to preach; and lastly he becomes a Martyr
praying, Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom: He that before had
in his Eye nothing but present Death, is now lifted above his Cross, in a
blessed Ambition, Lord remember me when thou comst into thy Kingdom. Is this
the Voice of a Thief or of a Disciple? Dic o Latro, ubi Thronus ex Saphyro, ubi
Cherubin, and exercitus coeli, ubi Corona, Sceptrum and purpura, ut Eum dicas
Regem. Tell me, O Thief, what induced thee to style him King. Where is his
Throne? Where are the Cherubin and the whole Host of Heaven? See thou any
other Crown than that of Thorus, any other Scepter than strong Iron Nails
driven up to the Head through the Palms of those blessed Hands, any other
Purple but his Blood, any other Throne but his Cross? What do thou see that
can persuade thee to call him King? O Faith greater than Death! that can look
beyond a Cross at a Crown, beyond Dissolution at a Remembrance of Life and
Glory; as no Disciple could be more faithful, so no Saint could be more happy;
Nam juxta fluenta plenissimae gratiam simul accepit and gloriam; For Grace and
Glory with a full Tide both at once came flowing in upon him. The Reward every
way out-weighed the Request, Magis velox erat praemium quam petitio, and
ubetior gratia quam precatio; It was a greater Favor (says St. Leo) to put
this so discreet and humble a Petition into this Thief's Heart, but a much
greater Favor to give him so good and quick a Dispatch. St. Cyprian says, Quid
tu Domine Stephano amplius contulisti. What could the Martyr St. Stephen enjoy
more, or that beloved Disciple that leaned on Christ's Bosom? Or what could the
long Services of those that endured the Heat of the Day obtain more at God's
Hands? But God gives them this Answer, I do thee no Wrong, did not thou agree
with me for a Penny.

Some Laborers were working hard in the Vineyard from the first Hour, others
from the third, others began at the ninth when the Sun was setting; first came
Adam, then Noah, after him Abraham, and the rest of the Holy Prophets; but this
Thief came at the Sunsetting, and he that in the Morning was on his way
toward Hell, is in the Evening with his Lord in Paradise. For no sooner had he
cried, Lord remember, but Christ answers him immediately, I say unto thee, and
promises thou shall, and seals that Promise with a Verily, and promises more
than is asked, and that soon, Verily I say unto thee, thou shall this Day be
with me in Paradise.

So soon as Christ afforded this Thief any Call, he came; and yet this Thief's
Conversion is become a Proverb, and satisfies and serves a Sinner in all Cases
of a late and Deathbed Repentance; But they that urge him as a Precedent,
ought to consider that this Thief was not converted at last, but at first; and
when we can find out such another Day, we may expect such another Mercy, a Day
that opened the Graves of the Dead, a Day that divided the Veil of the Temple
it self, a Day which the Sun durst not see, a Day that saw the Soul of God (if
I may so say, seeing that God was Man too) depart from Man; there shall be no
more such Days, and therefore we must not presume upon such Mercy.

To the Chief of the Apostles, St. Peter, Christ says, Whither I go thou can
not come; but to this Thief, he says, This Day thou shall be with me in
Paradise. So soon did Christ bring this Thief to that height of Faith, that
even in that low Estate upon the Cross, he prayed for a Spiritual Kingdom;
whereas the Apostles themselves (whom Christ had estated in Heaven, and had
given them Reversions of judiciary Places, twelve Seats to judge the twelve
Tribes) yet in that Exaltation, when Christ was ascending, they talked to him
of a Temporal Kingdom. Sic facit fides innocentem latronem facit infidelitas
Apostolos criminosos. Christ infused so much Faith into this Thief as justified
him, and leaves the Apostles so far to their Infirmities as endangers them.

This Thief came to know those Wounds that were in Christ's Body were his own
Wounds in the Body of his Savior, so he came to declare perfect Faith in
professing Christ's Innocence, perfect Hope in the memento mei, and perfect
Charity in rebuking his Companion: He was such a Thief as deserved Praise and
Wonder, who had a good Bargain of Death, and was the better and longer lived
for being Hanged, for he was thereby made Partaker of Christ's Martyrdom and
Kingdom: And this Thief has done nothing but what we may all do, if we will
lay hold on that Grace as he did: Assumemus vocem latronis, si nolumus esse
latrones, ut sedeamus a Dextris, pendeamus a Dextris: Let us be content to
suffer, but suffer in the Right, suffering as a Malefactor is somewhat too much
on the Left Hand; and yet even that Suffering does bring many to the Right
Hand, being joined with a true and hearty Repentance, which is as a City of
Refuge to fly unto, it is the happy Plank that has saved many a Soul from the
Gulf of Despair, the Board which after Shipwreck will carry us safe unto Land;
and it is not ill compared to a Phaenix's Nest, wherein the Old Adam is
consumed to Ashes, out of which arises a new Man of God; for Conversion is a
Sacred Riddle, wherein when we are Born, we are Buried; and when we are
quickened we are killed, and when we are mortified we are raised. Thus Nineve
was overthrown and yet not overthrown, it was overthrown by Sin, and built
again by Repentance. He that is a skillful Penitent does cunningly play this
After-game, and a Sinner after his Recovery for the most part seeks God more
fervently, and is more fearful of Relapsing, than before of Sinning; like wild
Beasts breaking from their Toils, they are more cautious for the future, and
the Saints come out of the Bed of their Sins, as Hezekiah did out of his sick
Bed, more Humble, more Holy, more Penitent; as the Eagle that is wearied, comes
out of the Water, into which she has dipped her Wings, with a more towering
Ascent toward Heaven than ever. Dum peteret Regem, says Martial, when Mutius
Scaevola missed his Aim, and instead of killing Porsenna, slew one of his
Secretaries by mistake, he presently offered that Hand which gave the Blow as a
willing Sacrifice to the Flame, which Hand grew famous for being deceived; and
it had been less Reputation to have struck his Enemy to the Heart, than to
punish it so stoutly for missing its Aim; upon which the Poet took Occasion to
say, Major deceptae fama est and gloria dextrae,
Si non errasset, fecerat illa minus.
Without any change, I may apply it to Mary Magdalen's Conversion: Si non
peccasset fecerat illa minus. She would not have been so famous, had she not
sinned; neither is this a Parodox; for what an Enemy would upbraid by way of
Reproach, is the greatest Praise that can be; their very Sins do honor some,
as the Devils did Mary Magdalen, who are mentioned for her Glory, since we do
not hear of them until they were cast out; For Repentance is a Supercedeas that
discharges Sin, making God to be merciful, Angels to be joyful, and Man to be
acceptable: And as St. Austin affirms, It is a greater Deliverance, a mightier
Miracle, and a bigger Grace, that a Sinner should be Converted, than that being
converted he should afterward be saved: Here we see Mary Magdalen being now
touched with Repentance for her former Sins and Vanities, like the thirsty and
panting Heart in the extremity of Heat, does eagerly long for the cooling
Springs Her Soul was deeply wounded with the sting of her Sins, it stuck so
fast that she could not get it out, therefore with the wounded Deer she comes
to the Sovereign Dittany to expel it; the Pool of her Conscience was troubled,
and with the descending Angel instantly she steps in for a Cure; for ut
cognovit venit, as soon as she knew where Jesus was, she makes haste to him;
And the Zeal with which she approaches Christ is very remarkable. Christ was
at Dinner in a Pharisee's House, where we may observe by the way, that Christ
frequented Feasts, and we do not find he was ever invited to any Table and
refused it; if a Pharisee or a Publican invited him, he made no difficulty to
go, the end of his going indeed was not to Eat, but to gain Souls to God, and
to fulfill the Will of his Father, which was his Meat and Drink: And at whose
Table did Jesus ever Eat, and left not the Host a Gainer? When Zachaeus
entertained him, Salvation came that Day to his House, with the Author of it;
and now when this Pharisee entertained him, his Table was honored with the
public Remission of a Penitent Sinner. But how comes this Woman to thrust her
self into this Pharisee's House? Certainly great was her Faith, since no
Disadvantage could affright her from coming to Jesus, not the Frowns, nor the
Censure of a rigid Host, who darted from his Eyes Disdain and Scorn, seeing so
notorious a Strumpet come to the Upper Chamber where he entertained his
Company, and that too in Christ's Presence, who knew her wicked Life, and (no
doubt) was offended at her Action. A Pharisee's House might have seemed indeed
an unlikely Place to find a Savior in, and it was very improper to serve in
Tears at a Banquet: Certainly the Holy Spirit moved on the Waters: Doubtless
this Woman had heard from our Savior's Lips, in his Heavenly Sermons, many
gracious Invitations of all distressed and sin-burthen'd Souls, and now at
length she was entangl'd in the Net of his Heavenly Doctrine: For our Savior
(as St. Chrysostom says) has two sorts of Nets, a one of Wonders, another of
Words; in the former of these he caught those many that believed on his Name;
by the latter he enclosed his very Enemies, even those very Officers that were
sent to apprehend him, and bring him before the High Priest; and still does our
Blessed Savior spin out the Thread of his Love, to an infinite Length, to try
whether we will lay hold on it. He does angle for us, he sits in Heaven, lets
down the Line of his Love, and Baits it with his Mercy, to see whether we will
swallow it, that he may catch our Souls; with such a Hook was this Woman taken,
she had treasured up his Sayings in her Memory, she had observed that he not
only pardoned Sinners, but received them into his Presence, she had observed
the Passages of his Power and Mercy, and a deep Remorse wrought in her self,
for her misspent Life; and surely, had not the Spirit of God wrought upon her,
ere she came, she had neither sought nor found Christ. For those good Graces
which God finds in us, are like the Silver which Joseph found in Benjamin's
Sack, of his own putting in. If his Hand does not move the golden Cymbal, it
will give no pleasant Sound, for our Will herein is like a lower Sphere, which
receives its Motions from some first Mover. And we may believe, the Holy Spirit
first breathed, and then that Blast begat the Shower of Tears which Mary poured
out; for first; Thus she being first moved by the Spirit of God, comes in and
finds Christ whom she sought; she comes into his Presence not empty handed, but
with a precious Confection of Ointment of Nardus, the chief of all Ointments,
which she intended to bestow; this delicate odoriferous Perfume, she brings in
as rich a Vessel, a Box of Alablaster; she used likewise a good Decorum, she
did not presently pour out her Ointment upon the Feet of Jesus; but (observing
a decent Order in her Repentance, and in this her laudable Action) first she
gives the Sacrifice of a broken Heart, she stood behind at Jesus's Feet, her
Eyes sufficiently testified her godly Sorrow, which dropped down Tears as fast
as the Arabian Trees their medicinal Gums: She wept so plentifully, that with
those Streams of Penitence she began to wash his Feet, and did wipe them with
the Hairs of her Head, to show her Abjection or Neglect of her self: Thus
cunningly in Abasement of her self does this humble Penitent, like the
Syrophenitian Woman, like a Dog, lick her Master's Feet; at the Feet of Christ
she makes a general Sacrifice of all those Things wherewith she had offended
him: Quot habuit in se oblectamenta, tot de se fecit Holocausta.

Peccavit meretrix oculis, labrisque, comisque,
Inde luunt crimen lumina, labra, comae.
Her Eyes, her Lips, her Hair, her Ointment, all the Instruments of her Sin,
were turned at her Conversion into the Means of Life; as the Israelites that
gave their Jewels to the making of a Calf, did afterward bestow them upon the
Lord's Tabernacle; such was this Woman's Practice, who having now taken leave
of her former Vanities, and disrobed her self of all her rich Ornaments, does,
like an excellent Apothecary, that knows how to mix his Medicines, make a most
sovereign Antidote out of a most deadly Poison.

She used to send forth her alluring Beams into the Eyes of the lascivious
Paramours, therefore from her Eyes flow a Deluge of Tears, shallow enough to
bear the Ark of her Sorrow; she had made her Lips the Incitements to Lust, and
Inlets to Vanity, but now they sanctify themselves with their Respect to the
Son of God; her Hair, which she had so often curled at her Glass, does now
serve for a Towel to dry his Feet; her odoriferous Perfume, wherewith she used
to make her self acceptable to her amorous Companions, she bestows on those
sacred Feet which her Eyes had watered, her Hair dried, and her Mouth kissed.
And this strange Circumstance of her anointing was scarce done to any but
Christ, nor to him but by this Woman: It was esteemed so great an Ecstasy of
Love and Adoration, that to anoint the Feet even of the greatest Monarch, was
long unknown in all the Pomps and Greatness of the Roman Prodigality. It was
not used (as Pliny says in his natural History) till Otho taught it Nero, in
whose Instance it was by Pliny reckoned for a Prodigy of unnecessary Profusion,
and in it self it was a Present for a Prince, and an Alablaster Box of Nard
Pistick was sent as a great Present from Cambyses to the King of Aethiopia.

But was the Ointment so precious, and she so poor that she could not bring a
Napkin? certainly she wanted not fine Linen to have dried Christ's Feet with;
but to show her hearty Devotion, and sincere Humility, her Shame, her Tears,
her godly Sortow were not enough, she still seeks farther to make her self more
vile, and of no Price before Christ; she her self is the Servant that waits on
him; from her self do fall the Dews of Water that wash his Feet; and as her
Eyes were the Ewer, so her Hairs were the Towel, using the chiefest Ornament of
her Head in the meanest Office of our Savior's Feet; and thus she seems to
climb up toward Heaven by the same Rounds of that Ladder by which she was
formerly going down to Hell.

When Simon the Pharisee observed this Woman so busy in the Expression of her
Religion and Veneration of Jesus, he thought within himself, this was no
Prophet that did not know her to be a Sinner, and that would suffer her to
touch him. For although the Jews Religion did permit the Harlots of their own
Nation to live and enjoy all the Privileges of their Nation, except only that
their Oblations were refused: Yet the Pharisees (who pretended to a greater
Degree of Sanctity than others) would not permit them to civil Usages, or
Benefits of ordinary Society, and thought Religion it self and the Honor of a
Prophet was concerned in the same Superstitiousness. And therefore Simon made
an Objection within himself, which Jesus knowing (who understood his Thoughts
as well as his Words) made an Apology for her and himself by a civil Question,
expressed by way of Parable of two Debtors, to whom a greater and a smaller
Debt respectively was forgiven, both of them concluding, that they would love
their merciful Creditor in Proportion to his Mercy; which was Mary Magdalen's
Case, who because she had much forgiven, loved much, and expressed it in
Characters so large, that the Pharisee might read his own Incivility and
unhospitable Entertainment of the Master, when it stood confronted with the
Magnificency of Mary Magdalen's Charity and Penance, the last of which she
sufficiently expressed by her Tears.

Such is God's Goodness, that he has placed in the Eye both the Disease and
the Cure, the Faculty of Seeing, and the Sluice of Tears, that they who offend
by Seeing, may be recovered by Weeping. Tears are the Favorites, that have the
Ear of the King of Heaven; they are our Bills of Exchange which he allows, and
returns them with what Sums of Blessings we desire; so long as we pay him this
Type of our Devotion, so long is our Tenure safe, and our Title to his Goodness
and Mercy unquestionable.

This Sovereign Water will recall a Sinner to the Life of Grace, though never so
far gone. These heavenly Showers are the Streams of Jordan which cure our
Leprosy, the Silim to cure our Blindness, the Bethesda to heal our Lameness
and Defects of Obedience; never was the Poison of any Sin so cold, but the Hand
of Repentance could thaw it; never was the Flame of any Sin so hot, but the
Tears of Repentance could cool it: Magis frugiferae Lacrymantes vineae. The
bleeding Heart, like the dropping Vine, is for the most Part fruitful. I cannot
here express my Thoughts of Mary Magdalen's Tears in a better Strain than that
of the Poet. Magdala, dum tristi vitiorum compede vincta,
Solvendam Domini se jacet ante pedes
Quam dulces fundit lacrymas! quam nobile flumen
Nascitur ex oculi divise font sui!
Pactolus tali se vellet origire nasci,
Vellet and auriferi nobilis unda Tagi.
Illi etenim solum voluunt sub fluctibus aurum:
At fluit ex oculis plurima gemma suis.


Her Ointment indeed was precious, but her Tears were more so, her Tears were
her best Advocates to plead for Mercy at the Throne of Grace: Interdum lacrymae
pondera vocis habent: For sometimes Tears have as much Force as Words. She
spoke not, for she knew she was before one who knew the most retired Thoughts,
and most private Desires of her Soul; what need her Tongue speak, when her
Eyes, her Hands, her Gesture, her Countenance, and her whole Behavior, spoke
her Desires.

Amongst other Things observable in the greater and more solemn Feasts of the
Jews, there were some Ceremonies used by them as Preparations to their Feasts,
which Josephus tells us were Three. First, Their Salutation, which was shown
either by Words, or some humble Posture of the Body, sometimes by Prostrating
their whole Body, sometimes by Kissing the Feet, as in this Passage, and
commonly by an ordinary Kiss of the Cheek, as a Pledge of their welcome to
their Guest. The Second was the Washing of their Feet before they sat down to
Eat. The Third Compliment was pouring Oil upon the Head. In all which
Observances, Simon (though of the formal Sect of the Pharisees) was defective.
Insomuch that our Savior taxes him of this neglected Office in his
Entertainment, Thou gave me no Water for my Feet, etc. And well might the
Pharisee read his own Fault in the Praise Christ gave of this Woman, so well
seen in the Customs of her Country, in redoubling of her Kisses of an humble
Thankfulness on those Sacred Feet.

To Repent then is to Kiss the Feet of Jesus, and it is all one to be sorry for
our Sins, and to love him; this is confirmed by our Savior's Words, who
denominates this whole Action from Love. Christ says not, she wept much, she
sorrow'd much, but she loved much, and by all means she sought to express her
great Love, which great Mercy raised. For nothing she had was too dear, with
her most precious and fragrant Ointment she anointed our Savior's Feet, that
rich and costly Testimony of her Love she bestowed freely, for she did not drop
but pour, not a Dram or two but a whole Pound, not reserving any, but breaking
the Box, and pouring it all out: What went before was the Sacrifice of a broken
Heart, with that first Sacrifice she adored the Divinity of Christ, this last
she tendreth to his Humanity: The first Shower of her Tears were Tears of
Sorrow and Repentance; the latter, which overtook the first, were Tears of Joy
and Love. And so pleasing to Christ were all the Actions of this perfect
Penitent, that he not only defended her against the Pharisee, in preferring her
Kindness to the Entertainment of his House; but against Satan and the Powers of
Hell, in forgiving her many Sins without any Enumeration of them. This is the
Substance of what passed betwixt Jesus and Mary Magdalen in the Pharisee's
House; but I cannot leave this happy Convert there, but must follow her to
Bethany, to see her Comportment there, and at our Savior's Death, and after
that at his Resurrection.

Jesus having left Jerusalem in the 3d Year of his Public Ministry, after he
had Wept over it, he came to Bethany, where he met with another sort of
Reception than he had at the Holy City; there he Supped; where Martha making
great Preparations for his Entertainment, to express her Joy and Affection to
his Person, desired Jesus to dismiss her Sister Mary from his Feet, who sat
there Feasting her self with the Food of Angels, the Words of God, unmindful of
providing for his Entertainment; But Jesus commended her Choice, and though he
did not expressly refuse Martha's Civility, yet he preferred Mary's Religion.
Here Mary Magdalen (who had spent before one Box of Nard Pistick upon our
Lord's Feet as a Sacrifice for her Conversion) now bestowed another in
Thankfulness in restoring her Brother Lazarus to Life, and consigned her Lord
to his Burial; and here too she met with an evil Interpreter, Judas an Apostle,
one of Christ's own Family, pretended it had been better to have given it to
the Poor; but it was Malice and the Spirit of Envy that spoke, not Religion.
For he that sees an Action well done, and seeks to undervalue it, by telling
how it might have been done better, reproves nothing but his own Spirit; For a
Man may do very well, and God will accept it, though to say he might have done
better, is to say only, that Action was not the most absolute and perfect in
it is Kind; but the End of that Man best showed his present Meaning; and at the
best it could be no other than a rash Judgment of the Action and Intent of Mary
Magdalen, and by his declaiming against her he made tacit Reflections upon his
Lord for suffering it; and yet it is not intimated in the History of the Life
of Jesus, that Judas had any Malice against the Person of Christ; for when
afterward he saw the Matter was to end in the Death of the Lord, he repented;
but a base unworthy Spirit of Covetousness possessed him, and the Relics of
Indignation for missing the Price of the Ointment burnt in his Bowels, with a
secret dark melancholy Fire, and broke out into an Action which all Ages of the
World could never Parallel: To what end was this waste of Ointment, says Judas,
for it might have been sold for more than Three hundred Pence, and been given
to the Poor; but Jesus said, Let her alone, why trouble you her, she has
wrought a good work on me.

As this was well intended, it was well taken by Christ, and approved of by all
present except Judas, who liking his own Gain better than any Scent in the
Apothecaries Shop, seeing that spent on his Master's Head, which he wished in
his own Purse, grumbled at it; and that with so colorable a Pretense, that it
was a needless Expense, a Waste, and that it might have been bestowed much
better for the Relief of the Poor, as that Judas drew some of the Disciples to
favor the Motion, and to dislike Mary Magdalen and her Action; so that both
they and he joined in one Bill; but he of wretched Covetousness of Mind, and
they of a simple plain Intent and Purpose, thinking all that was wellspoken was
well-meant; so that the Action was not brought only against her that bestowed
it, but against Christ that admitted it. Whereupon he pleads her Cause, not
only excusing her, but commending it as a good Work And yet the Ointment was
not so pleasing to his Sense as her Gratitude was to his Spirit; for he then
declared, that the Ointment which filled the House with the Scent, should fill
the whole World with the Report of it; and as far as the Gospel should be
preached, so far should the Remembrance of her Action reach, as well for her
Commendation, as for our Imitation.

Thus we see Things well done are oftentimes ill taken, and often good
Intentions want good Constructions. No Person had such Experience of this as
Mary Magdalen: The Scripture records three several Virtues of hers, and in each
of them she was murmur^d at. When in the Bitterness of her Soul, she showed her
Repentance by Tears, Simon the Pharisee did what he could to Disgrace her: When
sitting at Christ's Feet, Martha her Sister complained of her to Christ; and
now here again the third Time, when in an honest regard of her Duty, she is
showing her Thankfulness for Comfort received, Christ's own Disciple speaks
against her. So that if she washes Christ's Feet with Tears it contents not, if
she anoints his Head with Balm its Matter of Displeasure, and if she Sits still
and says nothing, it is all one, still Mary Magdalen is in Fault, her Doings
ever stand awry: This is the Fortune of all that follow her Steps; even Christ
himself could neither have his Feet anointed, but Simon the Pharisee, nor his
Head anointed, but Judas his Apostle, speaks against it.

But we must not leave Mary Magdalen here; for notwithstanding these great
Discouragements and Rebukes, which she received from Judas and some of the
Disciples, she neglected not her Duty, nor left her Lord till his Death; for
loving Christ more than her Life, she followed him in his Journey to his Death,
attending him when his Disciples fled, being more willing to Die with him, than
to Live without him. She was last at his Cross, and first at his Grave, staid
longest there, and was soonest here; she could not rest till she was up to seek
him, sought him before the Day lighted her; she stood by the Grave, where faint
Love uses not to stand; we bring our Friends to the Grave, and there leave
them, but come no more at it, nor stay longer by it; but Mary Magdalen did, and
she only and none but she, as we shall see by the Sequel of this Discourse.

We find in the whole Tenor of the Gospel, that God observes a mixture of much
spiritual Power and Glory, with much outward Meanness: The Gospel is called a
rich Treasure in an earthen Vessel; the Mystery conveyed is precious, but the
Means of Conveyance mean and contemptible; The whole Mystery of Christ is made
up of Power and Meekness; his Conception was by the Holy Ghost, of a pure
Virgin, but the outside Mean, his Blessed Mother, an Earthen Vessel, the
Spouse of a poor Carpenter; his Birth published by an Angel, but discovered
first to poor Shepherds; his Lodging pointed out by a Star, and yet his Cradle
but a Manger, his Nursery but a Stable: Being in the Wilderness he was attended
by Angels; but see the poor Outside, he was amongst wild Beasts; in his Agony
he was full of Trembling and Horror, but then he received Comfort from Heaven
by an Angel; at his Death he was Crucified with Thieves, but yet the Powers of
Heaven and Earth trembled at it: The Tidings of his Resurrection were told by
an Angel, but spread through the World by poor weak Women. Had Flesh and Blood
had the Management of the News of his Resurrection, it would have been first
published to the College of the Apostles, and St. Peter should have had the
first Intelligence by a Vision of Angels directed to him. Kings and Princes
make known their Minds to inferior People by their Great Officers and
Ministers, but the Court of Heaven takes other Measures. God employs poor, and
in the Eye of the World, contemptible Men, to declare his Will to the
Potentates of the World: And this was the grand Objection made by the mistaken
Pagans to Christ and his Disciples, that Christianity was set on foot by such
abject and mean Persons as Christ made choice of; but that which begat in them
Contempt and Scorn, ought to fill us with Wonder and Admiration.

And to make Amends for that Observation, that no good Angel ever assumed the
Likeness of a Woman, here are Women (of whom M. Magdalen was chief) made
Angels, i. e. (as the original signifies) Messengers and Publishers of the
greatest Mystery of our Religion; for M. Magdalen, with other devout Women,
(who not considering the Resurrection of Christ) went with a pious Intention to
do an Office of Respect and Honor to the Body of their Master, which they
meant to embalm in the Tomb, where they thought to have found it; there was
God, the God of Life, dead and laid in a Grave, and here was Man, a dead Man
risen out of the Grave; here are Angels of Heaven employed in so low an Office
as to instruct Women, and Women employed in so high an Office as to instruct
the Apostles; here are angelical Women, and evangelical Angels; Angels made
Evangelists to preach the Gospel, and Women made Angels to be Instructors of
the Church.

Now though it has been doubted whether the blessed Virgin was there when this
passed at the Sepulcher, yet that Mary Magdalen, and Mary the Mother of James
and Salmone were there is certain.

They came to embalm the Body of Jesus, (for the Rights of embalming amongst
the Jews used to last forty Days) and their Love was not satisfied with what
Joseph had done; but herein they were very inconsiderate, for that was only
done upon such Bodies as were extenerated and embowell'd, and then filled up
and plastered about with Spices and Gumms to preserve them from Putrefaction,
when they were to be carried into remote Parts; but of these re-embalmings,
after the Body had been laid in the Sepulcher, I never read, neither seems it
to have been possible for these Women to have come at the Body of Christ: And
by the Winding Sheet of Christ, which is kept in Savoy, it appears that that
Sheet stuck so close to the Body, as that it did, and does still retain the
Demensions of his Body, and the Impressions and Marks of every Wound that he
received in his Body; so that it would have been no easy Matter for these
Women to have pulled off that Sheet, if it had been fastened to his Body with
nothing but his Blood: But if (as some Authors say) his Body was carried loose
in the Sheet which is showed in Savoy, from the Cross to the Sepulcher, and
then taken out of that Sheet and embalmed by Nicodemus, and wrapped up in other
Linen upon those Spices and Gums which he bestowed upon it, and then buried
according to the Manner of the Jews, whose Custom it was to swath the Bodies of
the Dead, as we do Children, all over, (for so Lazarus came out bound Hand and
Foot with Grave-cloaths) how could these Women think to embalm the Body of
Jesus so swathed and bound up as that Body was? for certainly it was the Body
not the Grave-cloaths they meant to embalm, and it seems strange that no one
has touched upon this Doubt: All Expositors make good Use of their Piety and
devout Care of their dead Master, but of the Impossibility of their coming to
the Body, of the Irregularity of their Undertaking that, and proceeding so far
in that which could not possibly be done, there is no mention: Indeed
Crysologus says, saeva passionis procella turbaverat, that a bitter Storm of
Passion and Consternation had so disordered them, as that no Faculty of theirs
could perform their right Function: and praefervose caecutiebant, Earnestness
had so discomposed and amazed them, as they discerned nothing clearly, nor did
nothing orderly. Another inconsiderate Action of these Women was, the removing
the Stone of the Sepulcher, for they had prepared their Gumms, and were on the
way to the Sepulcher before they thought of that; then they stop, and say one
to another, who shall roll away the Stone from the Sepulcher. Yet they still go
on, and their Love answers the Objection, not knowing how it should be done;
but yet resolving to go through all Difficulties, but never think how they
should pass the Guard that was set at the Tomb. But when they came there, they
found the Guard affrighted and removed, and the Stone rolled away; for a little
before they arrived there had been a great Earthquake, and an Angel descending
from Heaven had rolled away the Stone and sat upon it; with the Terror of his
Appearance and the Earthquake, the Soldiers were astonished, and were like dead
Men; and some of them ran to the High Priest and told what had happened:
Hereupon the Women finding the Door open, entered into the Sepulcher, and
missing the Body of Jesus, M. Magdalen ran to the Eleven Apostles, complaining
that the Body of our Lord was not to be found; they thought this Story the
Product of a weak and frightened Fancy; however Peter and John ran as fast as
they could to see; for the Unexpectedness of the Relation, the Won^f the Story,
and the Sadness of the ^n, moved them. They presently ^ed to the Garden, but
John being ^ounger and the nimbler, out-ran ^ompanion and came first thither,
^e he only peeped but went not in, ^r out of a Fear in himself, or a great
^rence to our Savior; Peter, though ^d in the way, was before in his (...) and
being older and more consi^e, came and resolutely entered in^e Sepulcher, where
he found no^ but the Linen Clothes lying to^er in one Place, and the Napkin
^ad been about his Head wrapped ^her in another; which being dis^d with so much
Care and Order, ^'d that our Savior's Body was not ^n away by Thieves, (as the
Jews ^d have it) who use to be more care^ consulting their own Safety and ^pe,
than of leaving things orderly ^s'd behind them.

^y this time M. Magdalen was come (...) again to the Sepulcher where the ^r
Women had stayed for her, and (...) the Angel speaks to them, and ^s them of
another gross Absurdity, ^ebukes them for it, Why seek ye the ^g amongst the
dead? Why him who is the Son of the living God, the Prince of Life, who has
Life in himself, and who is Life it self, amongst the Tombs of dead Mortals?
What makes you think of arming him with Gumms against Putrefaction, who told
you before he was not subject to Corruption but would rise again? M. Magdalen
also fell into such another Error: For when the Angel had told her at the
Sepulcher, He is not here, for He is risen, as he said; yet when she came
running to Peter, she said nothing of the Resurrection, never thought of that,
but poured her self out in that Lamentation, they have taken away our Lord.
Whereas if she had considered, she must necessarily have known from the Angel's
Words, that no Man had taken away the Lord, that no Man had laid him any where
else, but that by his own Power he was risen: But as in this Storm of Passion,
they left Christ's Promise, that he would rise, unconsider'd, never remembered
the rolling of the Stone from the Door of the Sepulcher, neither did they
consider the Impossibility of coming to Christ's Body to do the Office they
intended: Their Devotion was awake, but their Consideration was not so; however
they did not lose all the Benefits of their pious and devout Intention; for the
Angel did not forbear to comfort them with, Do not ye fear: Let them continue
in Fear that remain in Unbelief, and have no God to comfort themselves in. Let
those mercenary Soldiers that are hired to watch the Sepulcher fear, and never
recover; but why should You fear who see none but us, your Fellow-Citizens in
the Service of God, if your Conversation be in Heaven as it is, if you do truly
seek that Jesus who is risen that he might go thither.

It seems the other Women, who came with M. Magdalen, and stayed till Peter and
John had been there to make Trial of M. Magdalen's Report, as they were speedy
in coming, and diligent in searching Christ, so they were in haste to be gone
when they could not find him, and fearful of farther seeking, and their
Departure commends M. Magdalen's staying behind: To the Grave she came before
them, from the Grave she went to tell them, thither she returns with them, and
there she stays behind them; a stronger Affection fixed her, and so fixed her,
that she had not Power to remove thence.

To stay whilst Company stays that is the World's Love, but Peter is gone, and
John is gone, and the Women are gone, and she left alone, and to stay alone
shows constant Love. She stood and wept, she wished to find Christ, and
therefore wept for his Absence, whom she dearly loved whilst she had him, she
bitterly bewailed him she thought lost; and having lost the Sight of her Life,
she desired to dwell in the dark, choosing Christ's Tomb for her best home, and
there stood weeping; she abandoned the Living for the Company of the Dead; and
now it seems that even the dead have forsaken her, since the Body she seeks is
taken away from her: It was Love induced her to stand, and Sorrow forced her to
weep; her Eye was watchful to seek, whom her Heart most loved to enjoy; and her
Feet in a Readiness to run, if her Eye could chance to espy him. But as she
watched to find her lost Lord, she wept for having lost whom she had loved, for
as first she mourned for the Departure of his Soul out of his Body, so now she
lamented the taking his Body out of the Grave; for though her first Sorrow was
because she could not enjoy him alive, yet she hoped at least to have found him
dead; to which purpose she had prepared her Spices, and provided her Ointments,
to pay him the last Duties: And though Joseph and Nicodemus had already bestowed
a hundred Pound of Myrrh and Aloes, which was as well applied as Art and
Devotion could desire, yet such was her Love, that she would have thought any
Quantity too little without the Addition of her own; she came therefore now
intending to embalm his Corpse, as she had before anointed his Feet; and as in
the Spring of her Felicity she had washed his Feet with her Tears, bewailing
unto him the Death of her own Soul, so now she came in the Depth of her Misery
to shed them again for the Death of his Body. But when she saw the Grave
opened, and the Body gone, the Labor of embalming was prevented: But the Cause
of her Tears increased, and though she found no Use for the Spices, yet she found
how to employ her Tears, now as much afflicted for his Loss, as before she had
been pleased at his Presence. But since weeping without searching was to no
Purpose, her weeping hindered not her Inquiry, her Sorrow dulled not her
Diligence; she often stooped and looked into the Grave, but why should she now
look in, since Peter had been in the Tomb, and John had looked in before.
However she will not trust either Peter's or John's Eyes, nay she will not
trust her self, she will suspect her own Senses, she will rather think she
looked not well before, than leave off looking. And thus hoping in Despair, and
despairing in Hope, she stood at the Sepulcher without fear, because she
thought now nothing left that ought to be fear^d. But with what Hope or with
what Heart could she stand alone at the Tomb, when the Disciples were gone; for
her Eyes had seen, and Peter's Hands had felt, that the Lord was not there; the
empty Winding Sheet did also confirm it, and yet nothing could make her believe
it; her disappointed Love had drowned both her Mind and Memory so deep in
Sorrow, and so amazed her Senses by his Absence, that all remembrance of his
former Promises was diverted with the Crowd of present Troubles; for doubtless,
had she remembered him, as she should have done, she would not have thought the
Tomb a fit Place to seek him in, neither would she have mourned for him as
dead, and removed by the Treachery of others, but joy'd in him, as revived by
his own Power; but Sorrow had quite stupify'd her Senses, distempered her
Thoughts, discouraged her Hopes, awaked her Passions, and left her no other
liberty than to weep, she wept therefore; and as she was weeping, she stooped
down, and looked into the Sepulcher, and saw two Angels in White, one at the
Head, and the other at the Feet, where the Body of Jesus had been laid: Angels
in a Grave! a strange Sight! never seen before: That sure was a Place fitter
for Worms than Angels. They were in White too, a Color expressive of Joy,
Heaven mourned at his Passion, the Eclipse of that Day showed them all in
Black, but at the Resurrection they rejoice, they are now all in White, even
the Heavens and Angels. They were sitting, the one at the Head, the other at
the Feet, which may be referred to Mary Magdalen's having anointed his Head and
his Feet, they sat at these two Places, as it were to acknowledge so much for
her Sake: Between the Angels there was no striving for Places; he that sat at
the Feet was as well contented, as he that sat at the Head; but with us, both
Angels would have been at the Head, never a one at the Feet: And they said unto
her, Woman, why weepest thou? They asked her, Why she wept? believing she had
no Cause, all was in Error, Tears of Grief, but false Grief, imagining him to
be dead that was alive; she wept because she found the Grave empty, which, God
forbid, she should have found full, for then Christ must have been dead still;
for want of Belief in his Resurrection, she believed he was carried away; she
erred in so believing; there was Error in her Love, but there was Love in her
Error; and it was a great Argument of her Love, to call him Lord, after he had
suffered the most opprobrious and ignominious Death, such as would have made
many blush to own him.

When she looked first she saw no Angel, and then of a sudden looking down, she
saw two; yet the suddenness and gloriousness of the Sight moved her not at all,
she seemed to have no Sense of it, but wept on, which was strange; for here
methinks her good Fortune exceeds her Hopes, and where her last Sorrow was
bred, her first Succor arises, for she sought but one, and she found two; one
dead Body was the Cause of her Errand, and she found two alive; her Weeping was
for a Man, and her Tears have found Angels, who invite her to a Parley, and seem
to pity her Case. They sit at the Tomb, to show they are no Strangers to her
Loss, they spoke to her, as though they had some special Message to deliver to
her; and if she had asked them concerning her Master, they were the likeliest
to give her a satisfactory Answer, and to have told her the Cause of their
coming, and the Reason of her Lord's remove; but nothing could move her to
admit Comfort, or to entertain any Company, for having vowed her self to Christ
alone, except to him, she will neither lend her Ear, nor borrow others Help:
Besides, whatever they could tell her, if they told her not of him, and
whatsoever they told her of him, if they told her not where he was, both their
telling, and her hearing, were but a wasting of Time; for she came not thither
to see Angels, but him who made both her and them, and to whom she owed more
than to Men and Angels; and being full of wavering Uncertainties, and perplexed
Thoughts, she began to think, if she staid there by the Tomb where he was not,
she should never find him; and if she would go farther to seek, she knew not
whither; to part with the Tomb was Death to her, and to stand helpless by it
would do no good; so that all her Comfort was, that she must either stay there
without Help, or go without Hope: Then she blamed her self, for leaving him
when she had him, thus to lament him now she had lost him, and for departing
when it was time to stay, and returning when it was too late to Help;
forgetting what her Master used to say, when he told her, He would rise again
the third Day: But why does she torment her self with these tragical Surmises?
Does she think the Angels would sit still if their God were not well, did they
serve him after his Fasting, and would they despise him after his Decease? If
in the Garden he might have had Twelve Legions of Angels, (as he said) Is his
Power so gone with the Life of his Body, that he could not now Command them?
Was there an Angel found to help Daniel to his Dinner, to save Toby from the
Fish, and to defend Balaam's poor Beast from his Master's Rage? And is the Lord
of Angels of so little Concern, that if his Body wanted it, no Angel would
defend it? But she saw two there to Honor his Tomb; and how much more careful
would they be to do Homage to his Person? She might well think they would not
Smile, if she had just Occasion to Weep, they would not so gloriously sit in
white, if a black and mourning Weed did better become them.

But why did her Sorrow question so much about the Place where they had laid
her Lord? might not she better suppose, that he was in Paradise; for since he
came to repair Adam's Ruins, and to be the common Parent of our Redemption, as
Adam was of our Original Infection, 'twas reasonable, that having endured all
his Life the Penalty of Adam's Exile, he should after Death re-enter upon a
Possession of that Inheritance which Adam lost. And besides, if her Sorrow at
the Cross had not made her as Deaf, as at the Tomb it made her Forgetful, she
could not but have remembered what he himself said to one of the Thieves, That
the same Day he should be with him in Paradise.

Whilst Mary Magdalen thus lost her self in a Labyrinth of Doubts, mixing Tears
with her Words, and warming them with Sighs, she saw the Angels with a kind of
Reverence as though they had done Honor to one behind her; whereupon she turned
back and saw Jesus standing, but knew not that it was him. For when Jesus saw
that nothing would give her Comfort but himself, that no Angels, no Sight, no
Speech of others would serve, then her Lord comes, and from seeking him dead,
she finds him alive; but first he comes unknown, stands by her, and she did not
suspect that it was he; she not only knew not that 'twas Jesus, but mistook him
for the Gardener: Proper enough it was, and fitted well with the Time and
Place, it was the Spring, and in a Garden, and she did not mistake in taking
him for a Gardener, though she might seem to err in some Sense; yet in another
Sense she was in the right: For in a Spiritual Sense, Christ may be said to be
a Gardener, for of the first the fairest Garden that ever was, Paradise, he was
the Gardener, it was of his Planting, and ever since it is he that makes all
our Gardens Green, sends us Yearly the Spring, and all the Herbs and Flowers we
gather in the Season: And it is he that gardens our Souls too, and weeds out of
them whatsoever is prejudicial to or destructive of his Word sown in our
Hearts. He sows them with the true Roots of all Christian Virtues, waters them
with the Dew of his Grace, and makes them bring forth Fruit to Eternal Life.

Besides all this, Christ on the Day of his Resurrection was most properly a
Gardener, and that a strange One, who made such an Herb grow out of the Ground
that Day, as the like was never seen before, (except in the Instance of Lazarus
raised by him) a dead Body to shoot forth alive from the Grave.

But was it possible that Mary Magdalen could forget Jesus, whose Faith had
fixed him in her Understanding, her Love in her Will, both Fear and Hope in her
Memory, for him her Eye weeps, her Thoughts greive, her whole Body faints,
her Soul languisheth, and there was no Part of her that was not busy about
him; and yet she had forgotten him; his Countenance and Voice assure her, his
Words witness it, her Eyes behold him, and yet she knew him not: But there was
such a Shower of Tears between her and him, and her Eyes were so dimmed with
weeping for him, that though she saw the Man, she could not discern Jesus; and
therefore as he seems to her a Stranger, he asks the same Question of her
which the Angels had, only quickens it a little with Woman why weepest thou,
whom seek thou? If she seeks Christ, why knows she him not? and if she knows
him, why does she seek him whom she sees? It is a common thing with us to seek
a Thing, and when we have found it, not to know we have.

Scarce three Days ago she saw him hanging on a Tree with his Head crowned with
Thorns, his Eyes full of Sorrow, his Ears filled with Blasphemies, his Mouth
fed with Gall, his whole Person mangled and disfigured, his Arms and Legs
racked with violent Pulls, his Hands and Feet boar'd with Nails, his Side
wounded with a Spear, his whole Body torn with Scourges and goar'd with Blood;
and yet Christ asks her, Why she weeps? and not without Cause does he ask
this Question, because she would have Christ alive, and yet wept because she
did not find him dead: She was sorry he was not there, and for that very Cause
she should rather have been glad; for if he were Dead she might have expected
to see him there, but his not being there was a sign he was Alive: But she
still taking Jesus to be the Gardener, said unto him, If thou have carried him
from hence, tell me where thou have laid him, and I will take him away: To ask
Christ for Christ seems somewhat strange, which however it falls out in other
Matters, here it was safe, even when we seek Christ, to pray Christ to help us
to find Christ, for we cannot come to him except he draws us: But Mary Magdalen
seems something more harsh to Christ than to the Angels, to them she complains
of others, saying, they have taken him away: But she seems to charge Christ, at
least to suspect him of the Fact, as if he had looked like one that had been a
Robber of Graves; her if implies as much, but Love, as it fears where it need
not, so it suspects without Cause. But St. Bernard speaks to Christ for her:
Domine amor quem habebat in Te, and dolor quem habebat de Te, excusat eam apud
Te, si forte erravit circa Te. The Love she bore him, the Sorrow she had for
him, may excuse her, if she were in any Error concerning him, in her saying, Si
sustulisti. Her Affections seem to transport her, (as she says) no Man knows
what, to one a mere Stranger to her, and she to him, she talks to one thrice
under the Name of him, if thou have taken him, tell me where thou have laid
him, and I will fetch him; alas poor Woman, she was not able to lift him, there
goes more than one or two either to the carrying of a Corpse; as for his, it had
more than a Hundred Pound weight of Myrrh and other Odours upon it.

She charged not the Angels with his Removal, nor seemed to mistrust them, for
she did not request them to inform her where he was laid; but now she judges
the Gardener to be the Author of her Loss, being almost fully persuaded, that
he was privy to the Place, and acquainted with the Action; and though she was not
altogether in the right, yet she was not much in the wrong, and erred with such
aim, that she missed very little of the Truth.

But since she was so desirous to know where Jesus lay, Why did not she name
him when she asked for him? She says only she will take Him away, her Courage
seems above the Strength of a Woman, neither does she remember that all Women
are weak, she promises without Condition, she makes no Exception, as if
nothing were impossible that her Love suggesteth. It was indeed wonderful, that
Love had so bereaved her of Sense, that though she saw the Angels, she could not
see Jesus. She sought for one, whom when she had found she knew not; and not
knowing him when she found him, she sought for him when she had him: But alas,
how could poor Mary believe, that after her Lord had lived so long, labored so
much, died with such Pain, and shed such showers of Blood, he should come to no
higher a Preferment, than to be a Gardener; Was a sorry Garden the best
Inheritance her Love could have imagined for him, or a Gardiner's Office the
highest Dignity she could allow him? It had been better he had lived to have
been Lord of her Castle of Magdalen, than with his Death so dearly to have
purchased so mean a Post.

But her Mistake has in it a farther Mystery, though her Sight was deceived, she
thought not amiss; For as our first Father in his State of Innocence was placed
in a Garden of Pleasure, and his first Office was that of a Gardener; so the
first Man that ever was in Glory, appeared first in a Garden, and presented
himself in the likeness of a Gardener, that the beginning of Glory might
resemble that of Innocence and Grace. And as that Gardener was the foil of
Mankind, the Parent of Sin, and Author of Death; so this was the Raiser of our
Ruins, the Ransom of our Offense, and the Restorer of Life. In a Garden, Man
was deceived and ensnared by the Devil. In a Garden, Christ was betrayed and
apprehended by the Jews. In a Garden, Adam was condemned to eat his Bread in
the Sweat of his Brows; And after a Free-Gift of the Bread of Angels in the
last Supper, Christ did earn it us, with a Bloody Sweat of his whole Body; And
as by Disobedient eating the Fruit of a Tree, our Right to the Garden of
Paradise was forfeited by Adam; so by the Obedient Death of Christ upon a Tree,
a far better Right is now settled; And as when Adam sinned in the Garden of
Paradise, he was then apparelled in the Skin of a dead Beast, that his
Clothing might betoken his Grave, and his Livery of Death agree with his
Condemnation to Die; so to defray the Debt of that Sin, in this Garden Christ
lay clad in the dead Man's Shroud, and buried in his Tomb, that as our Evils
began so they might end, and such Places and Means as were the Premises of our
Misery, might be also the end of our Misfortune; and for these Reasons Mary
Magdalen was allowed to mistake, that we might be informed of the Mystery, and
see how aptly the Course of our Redemption did answer the Process of our
Condemnation.

But why could not Mary Magdalen as well see what in truth Christ was, as what
in show he seemed to be? but she thought so to have found him as she left him,
and she sought him as she saw him last, being so overcome with Sorrow for his
Death, that she had neither room nor respite in her Mind, for any hope of his
Life, and therefore she asked the Gardener, If thou have carried him hence,
tell me where thou have laid him, and I will take him.

But one would be ready to think her Master was very unkind to leave her so
long without Comfort, and to punish her so much, who so well deserved Pardon:
She did not follow the Tide of his better Fortune, to shift sail with the
Stream; she left him not in his lowest Ebb, she revolted not from his last
Extremity; in his Life she served him with her Goods, in his Death she departed
not from his Cross; and after Death she came to dwell with him in his Grave.

But now Christ begins to take Pity on her, her Tears were too mighty Orators
to let her Suit fall, though they pleaded at the most rigorous Bar, they tie the
Tongues of all Accusers, and soften the rigor of the severest Judge, they win
the Invincible, and bind the Omnipotent; when they seem most Pitiful, they
have the greatest Power, and being most Forsaken, they are more Victorious: For
this Water her Heart had been long a Limbeck, sometimes distilling it from the
Weeds of her own Offenses, with the true Fire of Contrition, sometimes of the
Flowers of Spiritual Comforts, with the Flames of Contemplation; and at other
times out of the bitter Herbs of her Master's Miseries, with the Heat of a
tender Compassion. Her Tears, that were heretofore the Proctors for her
Brother's Life, were now the Inviters of those Angels in the Monument for her
Comfort, and the Suitors that shall be rewarded with the first Sight of her
revived Savior. For when Christ saw all was in vain, that neither Men nor
Agels, nor himself (so long as he kept himself a Gardener) could get any Thing
out of her, but that her Lord was gone, he was taken away, and that nothing but
Jesus could yield her any Comfort; He is no longer able to contain, but even
discloses himself, and that by his Voice; And now Christ is found alive, that
was sought Dead. A Cloud may be so thick as to hide the Sun from our Sight, the
Sun must scatter that Cloud and then we may see its Light: Here is an Example
of it: A thick Cloud of Heaviness had so obscured Mary Magdalen's Eyes, that
she could not see him through it, this one word, these two Syllables Ma-ry from
his Mouth dispels all the Darkness; no sooner had his Voice sounded in her
Ears, but it drove away all the Mist, dries up her Tears, opens her Eyes, and
she knows him, and answered him with her wonted Salutation, Rabboni: Thus the
Gardener did his Part, brought Mary Magdalen from a dead and drooping, to a
lively and cheerful Estate; She sought Christ dead and imprisoned in a
Stony-Grave, and finds him both alive, and at full liberty; She sought him in a
Shroud more like a Leper than himself, left as the Model of the utmost Misery,
and the only Pattern of the bitterest Unhappiness, and now she finds him
invested with Robes of Glory, the Owner and Giver of all Felicity. She that had
so long sought without finding, wept without Comfort, and called without
Answer, is now fully satisfied with this one word, Mary, having heard him call
her in his wonted Manner, and usual Voice, this one word restored her Senses,
enlightened her Mind, quickened her Heart, and revived her Soul.

But why did Christ choose to be made known to her by the Ear, rather than by
the Eye, by Hearing rather than by Appearing, because her Eyes were holden,
till her Ears were opened? The Philosophers tell us, Hearing is the Sense of
Wisdom, and in Matters of Faith the Ear goes first, and is of more use, and to
be trusted before the Eye. No sooner had Christ's Voice sounded in her Ears,
but she knew forthwith it was he; and being ravished with his Voice, and
impatient of Delays, a sudden Joy so overprest her, by so unexpected a
Presence, and so many Miracles laid at once before her, that she could no more
proceed in her own, than give Christ leave to go forward with his Speech; but
falling at his sacred Feet, she offered to bath them with Tears of Joy, and to
kiss his late grievous, but now most glorious Wounds. But Christ forbad her,
saying, Touch me not: This seemed a strange Rebuke to Mary, who when dead in
Sin, she touched his mortal Feet, and now being alive in Grace, she was denied
to touch his glorious Feet, being commanded from that for which she was before
commended by our Savior. Alas! What Harm had there been if he had suffered her
to touch him? Before his Passion, many desired and strove to touch him, and
there went Virtue out of him, even while he was Mortal, but now he was Immortal
in all likelihood much more Virtue would proceed; Christ was not used to be so
tender of being touched; at several Times and Places he suffered the rude
Multitude to crowd and thrust him, and much ruder Touches at his Passion: Why
suffered he them then, and why suffered he not her now? she had touched before
both his Head and his Feet, and anointed them both, and she now brought Odours
in her Hand to Re-embalm him; It was early, and yet by that time she had given
very good Proofs of her Love: She was early up, came first to the Grave,
returned and called Peter and John, staid last at the Grave, had been at such
Cost, taken such Pains, had wept so much as to refuse Comfort, even when
offered by Angels, till she had found Christ she was a Stranger to Consolation,
and now having found him, that she must not touch him, seems very hard; one
poor Touch had been but an easy Recompense for all her Pains and Sorrow; But
if we look into the Reason Christ gives, it is yet more strange, Touch me not,
for I am not yet ascended, as if he had said, when he was Ascended then she
should; but if standing upon Earth by him, he is not to be touched, when he is
taken up into Heaven no Arm can reach him there.

There is a Time and Place for Noli me tangere. The World began with a Noli me
tangere. The first Words God spoke then were, Touch not the forbidden Fruit:
But Christ is not the forbidden Tree but the Tree of Life, to be touched and
tasted, that we may live by him; but this touch me not was not on Christ's
Part, but on Mary's, no Let in him to be touched, the Let was in her, she
might not touch him; would Christ have Men to touch him, and not Women; for St.
Thomas put his whole Hand into the Place of his Wounds, and put him to no Pain
at all; and certain Women met him in the way after his Resurrection, amongst
which was M. Magdalen, and he then suffered them to touch him, and take him by
the Feet: So that it seems this Prohibition was not Real but Personal, not
absolutely but not at that time; which shows all was not well with M. Magdalen,
something was amiss, she must have been to blame in the Manner of her Offer;
she must have been a little too forward it may be, and not have used all the
Respect she should have done: For as soon as Christ cried Mary, she answered,
with her wonted Term, Rabboni; and as she saluted him with her usual Word, so
after her Custom she went toward him, and would have touched him, not in such
a Manner as was fitting to be observed, nor with that Regard which his new
glorified Estate seemed justly to require, for that which was enough to Christ
a few Days past, was not so now: She poor Woman was defective in her Judgment
out of an Excess of her Affection, she thought he had been Rabboni still: It
seemed to her that Christ was now as her Brother Lazarus was after his
Resurrection; that Christ had risen neither more nor less but just the same he
was bebefore, to be saluted, approached, and touched as formerly he had been.

It seems she was not before so carried away with Sorrow, but she was now as
far gone in the other of Joy, and so forgot her self in offering to touch him
no otherwise than she did before: Her Case was like St. Peter's in the Mount,
who knew not what he said, when he proposed the building of three Tabernacles;
she knew not what she did, being so surprised with the sudden Joy, as she had
no Leisure to recollect her self, to weigh the wonderful great Change this Day
wrought in him: For when her Judgment was better settled, she did touch him but
then it was upon her Knees, down at his Feet, another manner of Gesture than as
it seems she first offered.

It Is true he gave St. Thomas leave to touch, whose Faith was in his Fingers
Ends; he then believed not, was in Doubt, thought he had been a Ghost, and to
clear that Doubt he was suffered to touch him; St Thomas, and M. Magdalen, or
whoever touched Christ on Earth, if they had not been more happy to touch him
with their Faith, than with their Hands, they had received no Good at all by
it; it was much better with Faith to touch the Hemm of his Garment, than
without it to touch any Part of his Body; touching was the proper Cure for St.
Thomas's Disease; but so it was not for M. Magdalen, who was sure the Voice she
heard was that of Rabboni, she had no need to be confirmed in that. Her Disease
was of another Sort, not want of Faith, but want of due Regard; Thomas touched
because he believed not, she touched not because she misbeliev'd; he touched
that he might know Christ was risen; she touched not that she might know, he
was not so risen as she imagined, that is as in former times she knew him. And
Christ did hereby silently tell her, there was a great Difference between a
glorious and a mortal Body, between the Condition of momentary and eternal
Life, and that she should rather with Reverence fall down afar off, than with
such Familiarity approach to touch him; that she was first to embrace him with
a firm Faith, then she should touch him with more worthy Hands; and therefore
he commanded her to go about that which required more haste, to run to his
Brethren and inform them, that he would go before them into Galilee, and there
they should see him; and so M. Magdalen, preferring her Lord's Will to her own,
obeyed his Command in departing, but thought her self but an unfortunate
Messenger of most joyful News, being banished from her Master's Presence, to
carry News of his Resurrection; and going in this perplexed Manner, she meets
by the way the other holy Women, (who first came with her to the Grave) whom
the Angels had then assured of Christ's Resurrection, and as they all passed
toward the Disciples, Jesus met them, saying, All Hayle, and so they came
near, and took hold of his Feet, and adored him; then he said unto them, Fear
not, go tell my Brethren that I go into Galilee, there they shall see me.

Thus Christ applied a Lenitive to assuage M. Magdalen's Pain, after the sharp
Corrosive which had grieved her tender Wound, which was made rather by
Ignorance than Error, and was as soon cured as known, and therefore she was now
admitted to kiss his Feet.

She had indeed great Favors granted her, not only to see Angels, but to see
Christ, and him first of all; and more than that, to be employed by Christ upon
a heavenly Errand, and no Reason for this but that she loved much. We cannot
say she believed much, since she believed no more than just as much as the High
Priest would have the World believe, that he was taken away by Night: Her Faith
cannot be commended, but her Love cannot but be praised, of which she gave good
Proofs to Christ both living and dead. St. Augustine tells us the Reason why
Christ suffered her not to touch him, was to wean her from all sensual and
fleshly touching, to teach her a new and true Touch; for her touching of his
Body, which she desired, would last but forty Days, and he therefore taught her
another Touch, that might serve to the World's End.

But St. Gregory says, Christ's forbidding her to touch him, was to save Time,
he being desirous to dispatch her upon an Errand better pleasing to him, and
that required more haste; he was careful that his Friends might receive Comfort
with the first, and therefore he bids her go with all speed, for that it would
do them more good, to hear of his Rising, than it would do her to stand and
touch him. It was a great Honor to Mary Magdalen, to be the Messenger of these
blessed Tidings, there is no harsh Term in this Message; for though his Disciples
fled from him, forsook him, and forswore him, he has forgotten and forgiven
all, he does not cast them off, as they did him, but sends to them by the Name
of Brethren: But this special Honor that was done to Mary Magdalen, was
withal a silent blaming the Disciples, for sitting at Home so drooping in a
Corner, that Christ not finding any of them, is feign to seek a new Apostle,
and finding her where he should have found them and did not, to send to them by
the Hand of her whom he first found at the Sepulcher, and by this Mary Magdalen
ought to be satisfied; for to be thus sent to be the Messenger of these blessed
Tidings is a more special Honor done to her, than if she had been let alone,
and been admitted to touch Christ, which she so eagerly desired; for we may be
sure Christ would never have enjoined her to leave the better and take the
worse, to forbear to touch him, to make the more haste to them, if that had not
then been the better Employment. The Reason why Christ bids her go and tell
them, That I ascend, was, because he knew they would say, Oh! He is risen, We
shall have his Company again as we had before; but by sending them word of his
Ascending, he gave them warning betimes, that he Rose not to make any Abode
with them, or to Converse with them on Earth, as formerly he had done. He knew
this would be a hard Lesson, and would trouble them much, for they were still
over addicted to his Bodily Being with them; here they would have detained him,
built him a Tabernacle here, and by their good Will, would never have let him
go from hence.

This was their Error, and to rid them of this Earthly Mind, thus striving to
affix him, and keep him here on Earth, he shows them they were much mistaken,
and sets them right: When Christ was risen, he was not far from ascending, and
if we be risen with him, we must no more look down into the Grave, nor fix our
selves on Earth, but strive to ascend with him also.

All Things in Heaven and Earth do so, rising they ascend presently: In Heaven
the Stars are no sooner risen above the Horizon, but they are in their Ascent,
and never leave ascending, till they come to the highest Vertical Point. In
Earth, the little Spires that peep out of the Ground now at this Time (Nature's
time of her Yearly Resurrection) they are no sooner out but up they shoot, and
never leave to aspire till they have attained the full Pitch of the Growth
allowed them by Nature; so should we from our Birth always ascend, nor ever
stop, till we reach the highest Perfection our Nature is capable of.

In our selves it is not strange for earthly Men to have earthly Minds, and
having Clay for our Original, that our Souls should cleave to the Dust; so it
is with us, though so it ought not to be: The very Heathen Poet saw, that though we
be made of Earth, we are not made for Earth: That an Heavenly Soul was not put
into an earthly Body, to the end the earthly Body should draw it down to the
Earth; but rather that the Soul should lift it up to Heaven, and so much is
shown by our os sublime and vultus ad sydera, the very Frame of our Body that
bears us up thitherward; for though we are born in this World and live in it, yet
we belong to another Corporation, we are Denizens of another Country, and Free
of that City which is above, whose Builder is the Lord.

Thus we see by what happened to Mary Magdalen, and the other devour Women,
that they were not only capable of Religious Offices, but that they were early
in their Religious Work, they began betimes. There is but one Parable that
tells us, That they that came late to the Labor, were as well rewarded as the
earliest, and that is no Encouragement to late Comers, as not so much
respecting the different Ages of a Man, but different Year of the World. And
let that Parable be understood after the Vulgar way of interpreting it, yet we
should remember that these that were called at the last Hours came as soon as
they were called. Mary Magdalen, and these Women, were also earnest and
sedulous; and though their Devotion was carried upon Things that could not be
entirely done, yet God cast no Cloud of Discouragement upon them, but exalted
and maintained their Holy Confidence, and accepted their Devotion; for where
the Root and Substance of the Work is Piety, God often overlooks some Errors in
Circumstance as inconsiderable.

Let therefore Mary Magdalen be our Pattern, let us learn from her, that we may
find Christ; if we seek him early and diligently, we shall meet him: Let us
learn of her to fear no Dangers in quest of Christ, and to think of no Comforts
without him; let us rise with her in the Morning of our good Motions, and let
them not sleep in Sloth, when Diligence may execute them; let us run with
Repentance to our sinful Hearts, which instead of being Temples (through our
Faults) are become Tombs to Christ: Let us roll away the Stone of our former
Hardness, remove all heavy Loads of Sin that oppress us, and look into our
Souls, whether we can there find Christ; If he be not there within us, let us
stand Weeping without, and see him in other Creatures; seek him, and not his,
seek him for himself, and not for his Gifts; If our Faith have found Christ in
a Cloud, let our Hope seek to see him: If our Hope has led us to see him, let
our Love seek farther into him: Let us seek him truly, and no other for him;
seek him purely, and no other Thing with him; seek him only, and nothing
besides him; and if at the first Search he appear not, think not much to
persevere in Tears, and to continue our seeking as Mary Magdalen did. Let us
stand upon the Earth, tread under us all worldly Vanities, and touch them only
with the Soals of our Feet; that is, with the lowest and least part of our
Affections; and to look better into the Tomb, let us bow down our Necks to the
Yoke of Humility, that with lowly Looks we may find him, whom swelling and
haughty Thoughts have driven away: And if we can perceive in the Tombs of our
Hearts, the Presence of Christ's two first Messengers; that is, at the Feet,
Sorrow for the bad that is past; and at the Head, Desire to a better that is to
come; entertain them with Sighs, and welcome them with Penitent Tears, and let
us not cease seeking till we find Christ.

Thus preparing our selves with Diligence, coming with Speed, standing with
fixed Hopes, and stooping with humble Hearts, if we crave with Mary Magdalen,
no other Thing of Jesus but Jesus himself, he will answer our Tears with his
Presence, and continue with us for ever.

Of the LIFE and CONVERSION of St. Paul.
ST. PAVL was born at Tarsus, the Metropolis of Cilicia, a City vastly rich and
populous, wherein an Academy was furnished with Schools of Learning, where
there were Scholars that excelled in all Parts of Polite Literature. Those of
other Places, and even Rome it self, was beholden to it, as Strabo tells us,
for many of its best Professors, and therefore it was made a Roman Munificium,
invested with many Privileges, by Julius Caesar and Augustus, who granted to
its Inhabitants, the Honors and Immunities of Citizens of Rome.

The Parents of St. Paul were Jews of the Tribe of Benjamin; we find him
described in Scripture by two Names, the one Hebrew, the other Latin, probably
referring both to his Jewish and Roman Capacity; the one Saul, a Name frequent
in the Tribe of Benjamin, ever since the first King of Israel of that Name was
chosen out of that Tribe: In Memory whereof they were wont to give their
Children that Name at their Circumcision: His other Name Paul was assumed by
him as some think at his Conversion, to show his Humility, though others think he
had two Names given him at his Circumcision, Saul relating to his Jewish
Original, and Paul referring to the Roman Corporation where he was born: Or if
this Name was taken by him afterward, it was probably done at his Conversion,
according to the Custom of the Hebrews, who used many Times upon extraordinary
Occasions, especially upon entering into a more strict and religious Course of
Life, to change their Names for new ones; which is also usual with our
Religious in some Orders, to change their Names, following therein this
Apostle, who changed his Name from Saul to Paul after his coming into the
Ministry; and yet some think he borrowed that Name from Sergius Paulus the
Roman Lieutenant; But St. Chrysostom tells us, it was from his low Stature,
being but three Cubits high; and therefore says, Tricubitatis ille, tamen
coelum ascendit: I will not presume to clear this Difficulty, but leave it to
better Judgments.

Saul in his Youth was brought up in the Schools of Tarsus, fully instructed in
all the Liberal Arts and Sciences: He was also Taught a particular Trade,
according to the known Maxim and Principle of the Jews, That he who does not
teach his Son a Trade, learns him to be a Thief. They thought it not only fit,
but a necessary Part of Education, for the wisest and most learned Rabbis to
be brought up to Manual Trades, whereby, if there was Occasion, they might be
able to maintain themselves; which Custom was taken up by the Christians,
especially by the Monks of Primitive Times, and is continued to this Day
amongst the Reformed Orders in God's Church; who together with their strict
Profession, and almost incredible Exercises of Devotion, many take upon them
particular Trades, whereat they daily Work, not for maintaining themselves in
particular, but for the Benefit of their whole Community. The Trade of Saul was
that of a Tent-maker, whereat he Wrought, even after he was called to be an
Apostle; and though this was but a mean Course of Life, yet it was a gainful
Trade, especially in those Countries where frequent use was made of Tents.

Saul having ran through the whole Course of his Studies, and laid the sure
Foundations of human Learning at Tarsus, he was by his Parents sent to
Jerusalem to be perfected in the Study of the Law, and put under the Tutorage
of Gamaliel, who was a Doctor of Law, and reckoned a Person of great Wisdom and
Prudence, a Man of chief Note and Authority in the Jewish Sanhedrim, and
President of it when our Blessed Savior was brought before it. Under this
great Master was Saul educated in the Knowledge of the Law, wherein he made
such large and quick Improvements, that he soon excelled his Fellow Pupils; and
amongst the various Sects at that time in Jerusalem, he was specially Educated
in the Principles and Institutions of the Pharisees, of which Sect was both his
Father and Master, whereof he became a most earnest and zealous Professor; and
Josephus, though a Pharisee, gives this following Character of them: Lib. 171.3.
"That they were a crafty and subtle Generation of Men, and so perverse even to
Princes themselves, that they would not fear many times to Affront and Oppose
them; and so far had they insinuated themselves into the Affections and
Estimations of the Populacy, that their good or ill Word was enough to make or
blast any one with the People, who implicitly would believe them, let their
Report be never so false or malicious:" Certain it is, They were infinitely
Proud and Insolent, Surly and Ill-natured, they hated all Mankind but
themselves, and censured those who would not be of their Opinion and Way, as
Reprobates. They were extreme zealous to gather Proselytes to their Party, not
to make them more Religious, but more fierce and cruel, (much like some, who
think all Religion confined within the Bounds of their own Sect, that none but
they were the Godly, and that all other Persons were Sons of the Earth) and
therefore they endeavored especially to Inspire all their Party with a mighty
Zeal and Fervency against all that differed from them; so that if any did but
speak a good Word of our Blessed Savior, he should presently be prosecuted to
Death.

These dogged and ill-natured Principles, together with their unmerciful
Behavior, they endeavored to varnish over with a more than ordinary Pretense
and Profession of Religion, and were especially diligent, in what cost them
little, the outward Instances of Religion, as frequent Fasting, long Praying,
with demure and mortified Looks, in a whining and affected Tone. Saul was
deeply leavened with the active and fiery Genius of this Sect, not able to bear
with any opposite Party in Religion, especially if late or new; insomuch, that
when the Jews were resolved to do Execution upon St. Stephen, Saul stood by and
kept the Clothes of them that did it; whether he was any farther engaged in his
Death, we know not; but this was enough, loudly to proclaim his Approbation and
Consent, for God chiefly respects the Heart; and if the Vote be passed there,
that writes the Man guilty, though he stirs no farther, it being easy to murder
a Man by a silent Wish, or a passionate Desire. In all Moral Actions, God
judges by the Will, and reckons the Man a Companion in the Sin, who, though
possibly he may never actually join in it, does yet inwardly applaud and like
it.

The Storm thus begun, increased apace, and a violent Persecution began to
rise, which miserably afflicted and dispersed the Christians at Jerusalem, in
which Saul was a Prime Agent, raging about in all Parts with a furious and
ungovernable Zeal, searching out the Christians, beating them in the
Synagogues, compelling many to Blaspheme, imprisoning others, and procuring
their Death: He was a sort of Inquisitor to the High Priest, by whom he was
employed to find out those Christians who preached against the Law of Moses;
and after having made a strange Havoc at Jerusalem, he addressed himself to
the Sanhedrim, and there took out a Commission to go down and ransack the
Synagogue at Damascus, where many Christians that were persecuted fled for
Shelter, Saul resolving to bring up those he found there to Jerusalem, in order
to their Punishment and Execution: But God who designed him for a Work of
another Nature, stopped him in his Journey; for as he was traveling with his
Companions upon the Road, not far from Damascus, on a sudden, a Gleam of Light,
which exceeded the Splendour of the Sun, darted from Heaven upon them, whereat
being very strangely amazed and confounded, they all fell to the Ground, and a
Voice called to him, saying, Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? To which he
replied, Lord, Who art thou? Who told him, He was Jesus whom he persecuted,
because what was done to the Members, was done to the Head, that it was hard
for him to kick against the Pricks: That he now appeared to him, to make Choice
of him for an Apostle, and Witness of what he had now seen, and should after
hear, that he would stand by him, and preserve him, and make him a glorious
Instrument for the Conversion of the Gentiles: This said, he asked our Lord,
What he would have him to do? Who bad him go into the City, where he should
receive his Answer. Readiness Companions, who were present at this Discourse,
heard a confused Sound, but no distinct articulate Voice, neither saw they him
that spoke to Saul; and probably they being Ignorant of the Hebrew Language,
wherein Christ spoke to Saul, they heard the Words, but knew not the Meaning of
them.

Thus, when Saul was wasting the Church, dispersing the Disciples, destroying
the Christians, following them from the Synagogues into the Streets, from
thence into their Houses, when he breathed out Threatenings and Slaughter; the
Lord without any Expostulation might have poured down Vengeance upon him, he
might have commanded what Punishment he pleased to have served the Execution of
Wrath against him: But if ever Mercy and Judgment met together, here it was,
Judicium misericordiae, and misericordia judicis, a Voice and a Stroke, the one
striking down to Earth, the other lifting up to Heaven, a Light shining from
Heaven, and a Light shining to direct him to Heaven, a Light shining to him
that was in Darkness and in the Shadow of Death, to bring him from the Snare of
Darkness into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God: He that was the Way met
him in the Way, he that was the Light met him with a Light, he that was the
Word met him with the Voice of a Word, Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me?

It was a gracious Favor of the Lord to vouchsafe to Question with him; but to
call him by his Name, and to ingeminate that Name, that was a sign of his great
Affection and Commiseration: It was a Voice indeed, the Voice of the Lord,
mighty in Operation: This Voice struck him from his Horse to the Earth, struck
him from his Presumption, Persecutest thou me? Yet the Voice was not more
Powerful than Merciful: It was (as Chrysologus says) Suaviter fortis, and
fortiter suavis; the heaviest Fall, and yet the happiest Fall that ever any
had; it was his Fall and his Rising. Thus a Dumbness unto Zachary, was not a
dumb Instructor, it taught him Faith against another time; so Blindness sent
unto Saul, took away his Blindness, making him see more in the Ways of Life,
than all his Learning gathered at the Feet of Gamaliel could have Revealed unto
him

Saul by this time was gotten up, but though he found his Feet, he lost his Eyes,
being struck Blind with the extraordinary Brightness of the Light, and was
therefore led by his Companions into Damascus, in which Condition he there
remained three Days together Fasting; and at this Time we may probably suppose
it was, that he had the Vision and Ecstasy mentioned by him.

There was at this time at Damascus, Ananias, one of the Seventy Disciples, a
very Devout Man, and probably the first Planter of the Christian Church in
Damascus, and though a Christian, yet of great Repute amongst the Jews: To him
Christ appeared, and directed him to the Street and House where Saul of Tarsus
then Lodged, who was then at Prayers, and had seen him in a Vision coming to
him, to lay his Hands upon him, that he might receive his Sight; Ananias
startled at the Name of Saul, having heard of his bloody Temper and Practices,
knowing upon what Errand he was come to that City, was sore afraid: But Jesus
quickly made his Fears vanish, by telling him he mistook the Man, that he was
now become a chosen Vessel to Preach the Gospel both to Jews and Gentiles, and
before the greatest Potentates of the Earth, telling him what great Things he
should do and suffer for his Sake. Hereupon Ananias went forthwith to him, laid
his Hands upon him, and told him, Jesus had sent him to him, that he might
receive his Sight, and be filled with the Holy Spirit, which was no sooner said
but done, and thick Films like Scales fell from his Eyes, and his Sight
returned; then he was Baptized and solemnly initiated into the Christian Faith;
after which, he soon joined himself to the Disciples of that Place, to the
great Joy and Wonder of the Church, that the Wolf should so soon become a Lamb.
He that was the Mouth of Blasphemy, is become the Mouth of Christ: He that was
the Instrument of Satan, the Organ of the Holy Ghost: As says St. Chrysostom,
Being yet upon the Earth, he is an Angel; and being yet but a Man, he is
already in Heaven. What was done upon him wrought upon all the World; he was
struck Blind, and all the World saw the better for it.

St. Chrysostom calls him a Universal Priest, that Sacrificed not Sheep and
Goats, but even himself; and not only that prepared the whole World as a
Sacrifice to God, but so absolutely did he Sacrifice himself and his State in
this World, as that he chose rather to be Anathema, separated from Christ, than
that they should; but whether that was not out of an over vehement and
inconsiderate Zeal to his Brethren, is too high a Point for me to undertake to
judge.

After these Words, Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? he was no longer Saul,
there was an immediate change of Affections: Here Is another manner of
Lycanthropy, than when a Lamb is made a Wolf; for here is a Wolf made a Lamb, a
Bramble is made a Vine, unprofitable Tares become good Wheat, and the last is
made first: He that was Born out of Time, has not only the Perfection, but the
Excellency of all his Lineaments. Saul was breathing Threatenings and Slaughter
against the Church, when he was in the height of his Fury, Christ laid hold on
him; this was for the most part Christ's Method of Curing: When the Sea was in
a tempestuous Rage, when the Waters covered the Ship, and even shaked that
which could remove Mountains, even the Faith of the Disciples, then Christ
rebukes the Wind and commands a Calm: When the Sun was gone out as a Giant to
run his Course, (as David speaks) then God by the Mouth of another Josuah, bids
the Sun stand still: When the unclean Spirit foamed and fumed, tore and rent
the possessed Persons, then Christ commanded them to go out: Christ staid not
here till Saul being made drunk with Blood was cast into a Slumber, as
satisfied with the Blood of Christians, in the midst of his Fit Christ gave him
Physic, in the heat of his Madness he reclaims him.

St. Paul gives this Evidence against himself, I persecuted this way unto
Death; What could he say more against himself? And then says Christ to this
Tempest be quiet, to this glaring Sun stand still, to this unclean Spirit come
forth And in this Sense St. Paul calls himself abortivum, a Person born out of
Season: For whereas the other Disciples and Apostles had a sort of a Growth
under Christ, and were first his Disciples, and after his Apostles: St. Paul
was born a Man, an Apostle, not carved out as the rest in Time, but an Apostle
poured out, and cast in a Mould, as Adam was a perfect Man in an instant; so
was St Paul an Apostle, so soon as Christ took him in Hand: For St. Paul was
not in the Number of the Apostles at the Descent the Holy Ghost; But then he
had more than an equivalent Evidence of his Mission; For when he traveled from
Jerusalem to Damascus, the Heavens were opened, and our Blessed Savior himself
spoke to him, whereupon the Company were astonished, and St. Paul struck Blind
with the Glory of the Vision; and afterward being cured by a Miracle at
Damascus, he had no Assistance from the rest of the Apostles, his Instructions
came all from Christ immediately. And it cannot be denied that St. Paul in some
Kind, and upon some Subjects, is as Eloquent as ever Man was, not inferior to
Demosthenes, whom some think he had read, or some other excellent Orators. His
Speech to Agrippa has as much Force and Address, and much more Greatness of
Mind and noble Freedom, than any thing we meet with in the best of the Heathen
Orators: It Is true, the Advantage of St. Paul's Education was great, he had his
Cause and his Master to assist him, but yet he met with great Difficulties and
Hazards in the Execution of his Function: For he was to oppose the Religion of
the Jews, to alter the Customs which Moses had delivered, and to decry the
Expectation of a Temporal Messiah; he charged them with the highest Crimes
imaginable, and told them plainly, That they had betrayed the Savior of the
World, and killed the Prince of Life: And this he told the obstinate Jews, who
were hardened in Prejudice, and bigoted to Error and Superstition, for which
they pleaded Antiquity: St. Paul declared to the Sanhedrim, that Jesus whom
they had murdered was raised from the Dead, was a Prince and Savior, and that
it was from him they were to expect Remission of their Sins; with this severe
sharpness St. Paul treated Faelix Viceroy of Judea, to whom he talked so freely
and so pertinently, that the Viceroy forgot his Character, and trembled before
him.

And yet the Truth is, the Beginnings of our Religion were very unpromising;
the first Undertakers began with a slender Force, and there was a strange
Disproportion between the Cause and the Effect; for humanly speaking, if twelve
private Men should now make an Expedition against the Grand Signior, they would
in all Probility be as likely to succeed, as the Apostles were in their
Enterprise when our Savior left them. But herein certainly the Providence of
God, for the Prevention of all Doubts and Scruples was great, in that he would
not lay the Foundation of Christian Religion, as not in the force of Arms, so
neither of Eloquence and artificial Speech, which is often insisted upon by St.
Paul, Not with Wisdom, nor the Excellency of Speech, nor with enticing Words:
And it is worthy our Consideration, how it was possible for a few poor Men, so
low in Interest and Education, to break through the Opposition of Jews and
Gentiles, bafle their Learning, despise their Powers, and make them renounce
their Ancient Belief, and that Life they were most in love with. But though they
were short in their natural Capacities, their wonderful Success is an
undeniable Proof of a Divine Power that assisted them; as Chrysologus most
admirably tells us. Petrus and Andreas, Jacobus and Joannes, germanitas
combinata, ingeminata pauperas, in Apostolorum principes eliguntur, pauperes
censu, loco humiles, viles art, obscuri vita, labor communes, addicti
vigiliis, fluctibus mancipati, negati honoribus, injuriis dati, sed in istis
quantum vilis mundanus videbatur aspectus, praetiosus tantum animas Dei
intuitus tunc ridebat. Erant censu pauperes, sed innocentia locupletes, loco
humiles, sed sanctitate sublimes, viles art, sed simplicitate praetiosi,
obscuri vita, sed vitae merito perlucentes, labor communes, sed proposito
singulares, addicti vigiliis, sed ad coelestes victorias jam vocati, fluctibus
mancipati, sed fluctibus non demersi, negati honoribus, dicati magis honoribus,
non negati, injuriis dati, sed non injuriis relicti. Pertrus Chrysologus. Sermo
28. which show the particular Gifts that Christ had given to his Apostles.

Now to magnify his Mercy and Glory more particularly to St. Paul, and to take
away all Occasion of Despair, Christ did upon so many great Disadvantages draw
St. Paul to him, whom he brought to that remarkable height on a sudden, that
the Church celebrates the Conversion of no Man but this: She does not consider
the Martyrs as Born till they Die, till the World see how they persever'd to
the End, she takes no Knowledge of them: Wherefore she calls the Days of their
Death, their Birth-Days: She does not reckon they are Born till they Die: But
of St. Paul she makes assured the first Day, nay the first Minute, the first
Moment, and therefore celebrates his Conversion only. And as Christ dealt with
St Paul, so God deals with us, he will first cast us down before he will raise
us up, he will first break us before he will make us in his Fashion. The Lord
only knows how to Wound us out of Love, more than that how to Wound us into
Love, not only with him that Wounds us, but into Love with the Wound it self,
with the very Affliction that he inflicts upon us. The Lord knows how to strike
us so, that we shall lay hold on the Hand that strikes us, and kiss the
Instrument that wounds us: God brings to the Gate of Death, and by that Gate he
leads us to eternal Life: He kills us here that we may live for ever; he puts
us low here that we may be exalted hereafter: And he has not discovered, but
made that Northern Passage to pass from that Frozen Sea of Calamity and
Tribulation, to the heavenly Jerusalem. There are some Fruits that ripen not
without Frosts; there are some Natures that dispose not themselves to God but
by Afflictions; And as Nature looks for the Season, and does not produce any
Thing before; so Grace looks for the Assent of the Soul, and does not perfect
the whole Work, till that come. It is Nature that brings the Season, but Grace
the Assent, and till the Season for the Fruit, till the Assent of the Soul
come, all is not done.

This should be our Consolation, that how low soever God is pleased to cast us,
though it be to the Earth, yet he does not do it to cast us down, but to bring us
home. And Death it self is not so much a banishing us out of this World, as it
is a Visitation of our Friends that lie in the Earth; neither are any nearer of
Kin to us than the Earth it self, and the Worms of the Earth.

Of NOBILITY.
OBSERVING the several Alterations in Nobility, we shall find Four Principal
Actors on the Theaters of Great Families: The Beginner, Advancer, Continuer,
and Ruiner. The Beginner, is he, who either by his Virtues, Merits, or Riches,
refineth himself from the Dross of the Vulgar, and lays the Foundation of his
House: An excellent Workman indeed, who not only brings his Tools, but makes
his Materials: But yet Ancient Nobility seems no just Ground to be Proud, and
have a high Opinion of our selves, because it is borrowed. Those great Actions,
wherein we had no Share, cannot be any part of our Commendation, especially if
we have not Abilities to imitate them; Et genus and proavos and quae non
ferimus ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voco.
That Man must be very Poor, who has nothing of his own to appear in, but must
Patch up his Pedigree with the Relics of the Dead, and with the Tomb-stones
and Monuments of his Ancestors. Next comes the Advancer of Nobility, who
improves the Patrimony of Honor he receives, and what his Ancestor found
Glass and made Crystal, he finds Crystal and makes it Pearl: Indeed, if a Man
could bequeath his Virtues, Merits and Courage, by Will, and settle his good
Sense, Learning and Resolution, upon his Children, as certainly as he can his
Lands, a brave Ancestor would be a mighty Privilege and great Advantage to his
Posterity. Next is the Continuer of Nobility, who keeps his Nobility alive,
and passes it to his Children, neither marring nor mending it, but sends it to
his Son as he received it from his Father: Now this Advantage only by Birth is
often the effect of a Sloathful and Effeminate Life, when Men will attempt
nothing, either in the Field, or in their Closets; when they will neither
Trouble themselves with Study; nor be contented to expose themselves to the
Weather, which Laziness renders them insignificant to the great Purposes of
Life; such Men think it a great Addition to their Birth, to stand at the Bottom
of a long Parchment Pedigree, and that their Blood has run through the
Channels of Honor for many Ages: But alas! This Antiquity consists only in the
continual Frugality of the Family, who being once possessed of an Estate, had the
Discretion to keep it, and so has the Advantage of Living in a better House,
and Eating and Drinking better than those who want a Fortune. Indeed, if
Ancient Nobility did convey to us any Advantage of Body or Mind, and that every
Generation grew wiser, stronger, handsomer, or longer-liv'd than other; if the
Breed of a Man's Family were thus improved, then indeed the Quality of their
Arms would be contrary to their Clothes, the one would always grow better, the
other worse for Wearing. The last is the Ruiner of Families, who basely
degenerates from his Ancestors; so that Nobility in him has run so far from
its first Starting that it is tired, and whilst he lives he is no better than
his Grandfather's Tomb, without carved over with honorable Titles, within full
of Emptiness and Corruption: Such noble Men as these last, look upon it as one
of the best Perfections of Nature, to Dress themselves well, and to come
handsomely into a Room; but let me tell these Ceremony-Gentlemen, that I think
it much better, that a Man's Parts should lie in his Head rather than in his
Heels. Indeed, in some Persons well-born there is a peculiar Nobleness of
Temper in them. A Man may distinguish their Quality by the Air of their Faces,
which are good Accomplishments, and recommend them to Company with some
Advantage; but then Men must not be fond of these small Formalities, nor
magnify them too much. I know in England, that a plain Gentleman of an ancient
Family is accounted a Person of better Quality than a new made Knight, though the
Reason of their Knighthood was never so Meritorious; and therefore many such
Gentlemen have refused to be Knighted, but I think they were much in the wrong:
For the Reason why those who are placed in that Degree of Honor, precede
others who are afterward raised in the same height, is for Encouragement of
Industry, to make Men forward to exert their earliest Endeavors to deserve
well of the Prince or State. It is but reasonable, that Merit should be
considered, of what Date soever it is, and a worthy Action ought as well to be
considered and rewarded, as one of the same Kind was a thousand Years since: If
the Inheritors of Ancient Honor have not by Personal Additions improved that
Stock which was granted to their Ancestors, there is no Reason it should be
valued above the same Degree (Precedence excepted) which is given now: For to
affirm, That a Family raised to Nobility by King Charles or King James, is not
as good as one raised by the Conqueror, is a Reflection upon those Kings; and
it supposes their Judgment and Authority less considerable, and that the
Fountain of Honor is dried up. Honor is not like China Dishes, which must lie
some Ages under Ground before it comes to any Perfection. In taking a true
Esteem of Nobility, we are not so much to consider its Antiquity, as the Merit
of him to whom it was first granted, and the Distinction which the Prince put
upon it.

No Man will affirm an old Shilling to be better than a new Half-Crown, or an
old brass Medal dug out of the Ground long since, to be more Valuable than the
same Weight in Gold. If a Man were to pay a Debt, the late King James's Image
upon a Piece of Gold would be more serviceable to him than Caesar's old Coins,
which are only valued for their Usefulness, because they often rectify
Chronology, and explain History, and retrieve us several material Parts of
Learning, which had otherwise been lost.

Conquerors made Soldiers ambitious to follow them, by sharing the Fruits of
their Conquests with them; and when their Successors had not Estates sufficient
to Reward all the glorious Actions and eminent Services which Persons did for
them, being persuaded that a Man of Courage values nothing so much as Honor,
which distinguishes him from other Men, they invented Knighthood, which without
exhausting their Treasure, would gain them the Honor of their Subjects, and
inflame all others with an extreme Desire to make themselves worthy of the same
Honor; and it was for this Reason that they created Knights, either just
before the Battle to make them engage more resolutely, or presently after it,
to recompense those that had the greatest Hand in the Victory. Thus Nobility is
a Quality acquired by virtuous Actions and eminent Services, which some Persons
have performed to the Prince and State; and though Fortune should have more
Influence than Merit, upon the dispensing of these Qualities, yet the same
Judgment is still to be made, because Princes are subject to their Passions,
rewarding more bountifully and raising higher some of their Servants than
others: But if a Man be advanced for engaging himself in an unjust Quarrel, he
has no better Pretense to Honor than a resolute Highwayman may challenge; and
the Marks of all Favors that either come by servile Flattery, or a dextrous
Application to the Vices of their Princes, are rather infamous than honorable
to their Posterity, being enobled for those Qualities for which they should
have been punished: It is a lessening to a Man's Nobility when the Reasons or
Grounds of it are unknown, and when the first Principles of Honor happen to be
thus Course and Counterfeit, it is not in the Power of Time to mend them, when
the Rise of a Family is owing to such an Original; a Man has a particular
Reason not to flourish too much upon the Gifts of his Fortune, since there is
so much Alloy in it. Nobility raised by Arms, when lawfully undertaken, is
certainly more great than that which comes by Commerce. The Profession of a
Soldier has a particular Title to Honor: It is more Noble than the rest; and
no wise Man will ever envy or lessen the just Character of Military Glory: The
Courage of a Soldier does his Country not much Service after his Death; the
Consequences of his Valor seldom reach beyond his Death; so there are few the
better for it except those he engages for. A Martial Man, unless polished by
Learning, is usually sour in his Behavior. The old Heroes were none of the
genteelest Men; Achilles, though a great Soldier, was very rugged and morose in
his Conversation. The Advantages of Learning are certainly very great; without
some share of this, War it self cannot be successful; nay, without the
Assistance of Letters, a Man can never be qualified for any considerable Post
in the Camp. For Courage without Conduct is not fit to Command, and many times
does more hurt than good. It is Learning that teaches a General the Successes
and Events of Actions in former Ages: It instructs him how to take Advantage of
his Enemies, and to avoid those Miscarriages which have been fatal to others
before him: It teaches him how to Fortify and Assault, how to manage the
Difference of Ground and Weather; and the Advantages of Learning are more
lasting than those of Arms. Learning in a Commander is like a Diamond set in
Gold: I do not intend that a Commander should be versed in thorny
School-Questions, but in History, which is a silent Study and reserved Work:
Those that are not versed in it, have Cricks in their Necks, and cannot look
backward, nor see behind them the Actions which long since were performed:
History makes a young Man to be old, without gray Hairs, being privileged with
the Experience of Age, without the Infirmities or Inconveniences thereof: Nay,
it is not only making Things past, present, but inables one to make a rational
Conjecture of Things to come: For this World affords no new Accidents, but in
the same Sense wherein we call it a New Moon, which is the Old one in another
shape, and yet no other than what has been formerly. Old Actions return again,
furbished over with some new and different Circumstances.

Those that are only Continuers of their Honor or Nobility, deceive the
Desires and Hopes of their Friends: Good is not good, when proceeding from
them, from whom far better is expected. Youthful Virtues are so promising, that
they cannot come off at riper Age with Credit, without performing something
that may advance the Honor of their Family, and build their Houses one Story
higher than they found them.

If our Ancestors have gained Honor by the War, we should enquire whether it
were in a just Cause, and whether Enterprises or Advantages were gained by
Bravery, or whether by Chance or Treachery; for a great many Persons have
ventured far, and yet continue in their first Obscurity; and I have known some
in my Time, that are now grown great Men, only by having the good Fortune to
fall under the Notice of their General, and being sent by him with the good
News of a Victory, they have been highly Rewarded and Advanced. Such Men as
these are thrown up Hill by another Man's Arms, and made considerable by
Chance-Medly, their Merits having been very inconsiderable, or rather nothing
at all, when other Men in the same Battle performed much more signal Service
than that former Person; yet their Courage was never Rewarded, but lost in the
Crowd and Tumult of the Action, and got nothing but Blows for their Pains;
whereas the other are become Great, not by their Genealogy, but by good
Fortune, and having their Tongues well hung, and telling their Story
handsomely, which was their greatest Merit. Men that are thus preferred, should
remember that there were others which ventured further, and performed more
considerable Service, which miscarried as to any private Advantage, because
they were not so lucky to give an Account to him that was able to Reward: So
that we daily see many Persons, well furnished for Employments and Honor, go
out of the World, as obscurely as they came into it, only for want of a good
Occasion to bring them into Light: Now such Men as beforementioned, who have
received so valuable Consideration for their small or no Services, ought to
acquiesce, and not press too much, being Gentlemen only of the first Head, and
should therefore manage their Advancement obligingly, for by treating People
roughly, they do but expose themselves, and reproach their own former Condition.

Now he that is truly Noble, has far different Sentiments, his Greatness is
easy, obliging, and agreeable, so that none have just Cause to wish him Less.
He is sensible it is the Part of true Nobility to be affable in his Converse,
and generous in his Temper: He is equally removed from the extremes of Pride
and Baseness, and as Prosperity does not make him Haughty, so neither does
Adversity make him Demean himself, he scorns either to trample upon those below
him, or to cringe to the greatest Monarch.

Ancient Nobility is very glorious, when it is found with Virtue, which adds new
Splendor to the Honor of his House, and challenges Respect from all; but Lewd
Greatness is nothing but the Rigor of Vice, having both Mind and Merits to be
uncontroulably Lewd: And a debauched Son of a Noble Family, is one of the
intolerable Burdens of the Earth; and the good Education he has had, is an
Auxiliary to his Shame, and the Brightness of his Ancestors makes his Darkness
more notorious. To be Good and Great is an excellent Commendation; but he is
more to be valued that is Good whose Father expired a Clown, than the vicious
Son of the greatest Lord, though his Lineal Descent be never so high; For Virtue
in a Man of obscure Parents is like an unpolished Diamond which lies among
Pebbles, which though neglected by the Vulgar, yet the wise Lapidary takes it up
as a Jewel.

Of CONTENTMENT.
IF Peace, as most believe, establishes the Throne of Happiness, and safely
guards it, it is Contentment alone that crowns it; if Safety be the Fort,
Contentment is the Magazine. Peace without Contentment is but Lethargy, Safety
without it is but a Prison, but Contentment without both is a Kingdom: If
without following Peace, a Man becomes his own Enemy, if without endeavoring
Safety he be his own Traitor, without enjoying Contentment he is his own
Troubler; the Discontented Man has neither Neighbor, nor Friend, nor indeed
himself. It Is not in the rich Fool's Barns, nor in Ahab's ravished Vineyard,
nor in Achitophel's knack of Wit, no nor in wiser Solomon's dear-bought
Experience; no, it is a quiet Contentment of Spirit that a Man possesses
himself. A Man may pick a Quarrel with himself in the midst of all worldly
Happiness, without this Charm of Self-Contentment: The Truth is, Discontent is
the Bone that the Devil throws into every Man's Mouth to gnaw upon, and break
his Teeth with. You shall hardly find any Man, that complains not of some Want,
though it be but Want of his own Will; Things go not right, if they run not upon
the vertiginous Wheels of his own Fancy; the poor Man thinks the World
unequally dealt, and the rich Man thinks so too, because the Care, together
with the Keys, hang so heavily about him; the Scholar thinks the Soldier has
all the Money, and he again, that the other has all the Ease; the single Man
wants a Wife, and the married Man wants no less in that he wants not a Wife;
and Men strive to vexthemselves by their own Discontents, and flatter
themselves in not doing what they should do, by presuming what they would do,
were but their Condition other than it is, not considering that every Estate
has its Weights as well as Wings, and that the true Pleasure of Life is to be
free from Perturbation, to enjoy the present (without any anxious Dependence
upon the future) not to amuse our selves either with Hopes or Fears, but to
rest satisfied with what we have, for he that is so wants nothing; the great
Blessings of Mankind are within us, and within our reach, but we shut our Eyes,
and like People in the dark, we fall foul upon every thing we search for,
without finding it, an equality of Mind makes every Man his own Supporter;
whereas he that is born up by any thing else may fall; it is a contented Mind
that makes a Man Happy; there must be a Constancy in all Conditions, with such
an indifferency for the Bounties of Fortune, that either with them, or without
them, we may live Contentedly.

It is the part of a great Mind to be temperate in Prosperity, and resolute in
Adversity. There are some that will close and grapple with ill Fortune, and
will come off victorious; but there are others again so delicate, that they
cannot so much as bear a scandalous Report; which is the same thing, as if one
should quarrel for being justled in a Crowd, or dashed as he walks in the
Streets: A brave Man must expect to be tossed, for he is to steer his Course in
the Teeth of Fortune, and to work against Wind and Weather.

The greatest Cause of Impatience grows not so much from the Force of Calamity,
as from the Reluctance of the Mind of him that suffers it; this raises the
Billows within, for though the Calamity may be rough and beyond our Power to
extricate; yet when it meets with a Mind as tumultuous as the Calamity, it
raises a Storm, as when the Wind and Tide are contrary, which may endanger the
Vessel.

He that violently contends against Misfortunes, is like one bound with strong
Bonds, his struggling gauls him more than his Bonds would otherwise do, and a
proud Spirit contributes more to his own Uneasiness, than his Cross does: But
Calmness of Mind breaks the force of the Calamity, and the contented Man looks
upon his worst Condition to be less than he deserves, for so long as we live in
this World, there is no Condition so troublesome but it may be worse: If we be
Poor and under a Cloud of Ignominy and Reproach, yet if we have our Health of
Body and Composedness of Mind, that is more than we deserve; nay, if we be under
a Complication of Misfortunes, so long as our Lives are spared, there is Hope,
and we must be Patient under all Conditions, submitting our selves entirely to
the Will of God; and that not only as an Act of Necessity and Duty, but as an
Act of Choice and Prudence, since all the Successes of our Life are under the
Government of Providence, and we may be assured, that God will either in due
time remove them, or support us under them.

Temporal Afflictions are Spiritual Physic, being administered by the no less
tender than skillful Hand of Providence; but we, like foolish Patients,
embitter our Condition, by chewing the Pills which we should swallow; we mingle
our Passions with our Crosses, and through Impatience struggle with our Yoke,
thereby making our Burden more heavy, and our Afflictions the more grievous:
God's Love is fatherly for Ease, as well as motherly for Tenderness; as a
Father he will sometimes humble his Children by Afflictions, sustaining them
with his Hand, not as a Mother, still indulging them in Delights: He does
always send his Staff with his Rod, his Grace with his Affliction, to Instruct,
Support and Comfort us Wherefore it is well said, That all the Troubles and
Distresses that befall us, though bitter Arrows, yet they come from the sweet Hand
of God, whose special Providence over us is such, that he afflicts us in Mercy:
God's Patronage and Protection is not like that of Men, who as Salvian says,
They offend the Miserable by defending them; like the thorny Bush, to which in
the Storm when the poor Sheep run for Shelter, they lose their Fleeces: But God
is a Sun and a Shield to those in Affliction; A Sun to enlighten them in the
midst of Darkness, and a Shield to defend them in the midst of Dangers; and by
his Spiritual Providence he then saves, when we seem to be past Succor; and
therefore we have reason, not only patiently to submit, but cheerfully and
contentedly to bear any Condition which he dispenses, and with an implicit
Faith to resign our Wills to his, being assured it is infinitely more Wise and
Just than ours.

Seneca says, Optimi milites ad durissima mittuntur; the stoutest Soldiers are
put upon the hottest Service; and so the best Men upon the sharpest Sufferings.
It is a mark of a General's Esteem, when he puts an Officer upon a Post of
Danger, who does not say his General uses him ill, but does him Honor; and so
should we say that are commanded to encounter Difficulties: A Master gives his
hopeful Scholars the hardest Lessons; so God deals with the most generous
Spirits; and we are not to look upon the cross Encounters of Fortune, as a
Cruelty, but as a Contest. God tries and hardens us, the familiarity of
Misfortunes brings us the Contempt of them, and that Part is strongest which is
most exercised; the Seaman's Hand is callous, the Soldier's Arm is strong, the
Tree that is exposed to the Wind takes the best Root. Those People that live in
a perpetual Winter, in extremity of Frost and Want, where a Cave, a Lock of
Straw, or a few Leaves, is all their Covering, and wild Beasts their
Nourishment; all this by Custom is not only made tolerable, but when once it is
taken up by Necessity, by little and little it becomes Pleasant to them. Why
should we then account that Condition of Life a Calamity, which is the Lot of
many Nations? Our Life is a Warfare; and what brave Man would not rather choose
to be in a Tent than in a Shambles? Fortune seems to encounter a fearful Man,
there is no Honor in the Victory, where there is no Danger in the Way to it.

She tries Mutius by Fire, Rutilius by Banishment, Socrates by Prison, Cato by
Death; It Is only in adverse Fortune and bad Times, that we find great Examples:
Mutius thought himself Happier with his Hand in the Flame, than if it had been
in the Bosom of his Mistress: He was a Man only of a Military Courage, without
the help either of Philosophy or Letters; who when he found he had killed the
Secretary instead of Porsenna the Prince, burnt his Right Hand to Ashes for the
Mistake, and held his Arm in the Flame till it was taken away by his very
Enemies. And Porsenna did more easily Pardon Mutius for his intent to kill him,
than Mutius forgave himself for missing of his Aim: He might have done a
Luckier Thing but never a Braver. Metellus suffered Exile resolutely, Rutilius
cheerfully; Socrates disputed in the Danger; and though he might have escaped,
refused it, to show the World how easy a thing it was to subdue the two great
Terrors of Mankind, Death and Pain. The Action of Rutilius was commended by
his very Enemies, who upon a glorious and public Principle chose rather to
lose his Country, than to return from Banishment; the only Man who denied any
thing to Sylla the Dictator, who recalled him; but he not only refused to come,
but retired farther off: Let them, says he, who think Banishment a Misfortune,
live Slaves at Rome, under the imperious Cruelties of Sylla; He that sets a
Price upon the Heads of Senators, and after a Law of his own Institution
against Cutthroats, becomes the greatest himself. Is it not better for a Man
to live abroad in Exile, than to be massacred at home? It Is not the Torment,
but the Cause we are to consider; and in suffering for a good Cause, the more
Pain the more Renown; and we must look upon our Banishment and Hardships as
Acts of Providence, which suffers Particulars many Times to be wounded, for
Conservation of the whole: Besides, God chastizes some People under appearance
of Blessing them, turning their Prosperity to their Ruin.

What was Regulus the worse because Fortune made choice of him for an eminent
Instance of Patience; he was thrown into a Case of Wood, stuck round on the
inside with pointed Nails, so that which way soever he turned his Body it
rested upon his Wounds; his Eyelids were cut off to keep him waking, and yet
Mecaenas was not happier upon his Bed than Regulus upon his Torments. It has
pleased the Gods, says he, to single me out for an Experiment of the Force of
humane Nature. Indeed no Man knows his own Strength or Value but by being put
to the Proof; the Pilot is tried in a Storm, the Soldier in a Battle: No Man
can be happy that does not stand firm against all Contingencies and
Misfortunes, for the more we struggle with our Necessities we draw the Knot the
harder, the more the Bird flutters in the Snare, the surer he is caught; so
that the best way is to submit and lie still, under this double Consideration,
that the Proceedings of God are unquestionable, and his Decrees not to be
revoked. That Man is only Happy that is unmoved with any external Misfortune,
or at least so little moved, that the keenest Arrow in the Quiver of Fortune is
but as the prick of a Needle to him rather than a Wound, and all her Weapons
fall upon him as Hail upon the Roof of a House, that crackles and skip off
again without any Damage to the Inhabitant.

Some Philosophers have searched so far for Arguments of Comfort against Pain,
as to doubt whether there was any such thing as Sense of Pain; and yet when any
great Evil has befaln them, they could sigh, and groan, and cry out as loud as
other Men. Others have held that Afflictions are no real Evils but only in
Opinion, and therefore a wise Man ought not to be troubled at them: But he must
be a very wise Man that can forbear being troubled at things that are
troublesome. Others would delude this Trouble by a graver way of Reasoning,
viz. that these things are fatal, and therefore we ought not to be troubled at
them, it being in vain to be troubled at what we cannot help. But Augustus made
a sharp Reply to one that ministered this Comfort to him, Hoc ipsum est, says
he, quod me male habit. This was so far from giving any Ease to his Mind, that
it was the very thing that troubled him. But the best Moral Argument of
Patience is, the Advantage of Patience it self: That is, to bear Evils as
quietly as we can is the way to make them lighter and easier; but to toss, and
fling, and to be restless, is good for nothing but to fret and inrage our Pain;
it is like Men in a Fever, who infinitely increase their Heat by their tumbling
and tossing more than if they lay still; and thus we gall our Sores, and make
the Burden that is upon us sit more uneasy, and like the Ship that is not
broken by the Rock but by its own violent Motion against it; and therefore we
must so manage our selves under Afflictions, as not to make them more grievous
than indeed they are.

If we give way to our Passions, we do but gratify our selves for the present,
in order to our future Disquiet; but if we resist and conquer them, we lay the
Foundation of perpetual Peace and Tranquillity in our Minds. The more we
gratify our Lusts, the more craving they will be; Crescit indulgens sibi diras
hydrops, every Lust has a kind of hydropick Distemper, the more we drink the
more we shall thirst, so that by retrenching our inordinate Desires we do not
rob our selves of any Pleasures, but only the trouble of farther
Dissatisfaction.

He that enjoys the greatest Happiness in this World, does still want one
Happiness more to secure him for the future what he possesses at present; and
if the Enjoyments of this Life were certain, yet they are unsatisfying; it is a
hard thing that every thing in this World can trouble us, but nothing can give
us Satisfaction. I know not how it is, but either we or the things of this
World, or both, are so fantastical, that we can neither be well with these
things nor without them: If we be hungry we are in Pain, and if we be full we
are uneasy; if we are poor we think our selves miserable, and if we be rich we
commonly really are so; if we are in a low Condition we fret and murmur, if we
chance to get up and are raised to Greatness we are many times farther from
Content than before; so that we pursue the Happiness of this World just as
little Children chase Birds, when we think we are very near it, and have it
almost in our Hands, it flies farther from us than it was at first: Indeed the
Enjoyments of this World are so far from affording us Satisfaction, as the
sweetest of them are most apt to satiate and cloy us: All the Pleasures of this
World are so contrived as to yield us very little Happiness; if they go off
soon they signify nothing, and if they stay long we are sick of them: After a
full Draught of any sensual Pleasure, we presently loath it, and hate it as
much after the Enjoyment as we searched it and longed for it in Expectation:
But the Delights of the other World, as they still give us full Satisfaction,
so we shall never be weary of them, every Repetition of them will be
accompanied with a new Pleasure and Contentment: In the Felicities of Heaven
two things will be reconciled, which never met together in any sensual Delight,
long and full Enjoyment, and yet a fresh and perpetual Pleasure; it would
embitter the Pleasures of Heaven to see an End of them, though at never so great
a Distance: But God has so ordered things that the vain Delights of this World
should be temporary, but the substantial Pleasures of the next World be as
lasting as they are excellent.

That Man is truly happy who is tempted to no anxious Fore-casts for future
Events, knowing nothing can happen in Contradiction of that Supreme Will in
which he has Sanctuary, which will certainly choose for him with that
Tenderness that an indulgent Father would for his Child that casts its self
into his Arms: When our Will is thus enrolled with God's, all Calamities are
unstringed, and even those things which seem most repugnant to our sensitive
Natures, are yet very agreeable to our Spirits. There is no Face of Adversity
so formidable which set in this Light will not look amiable; let us but make
sure of Resignation, and Content will flow into us without our farther
Industry. Socrates said rightly of Contentment, opposing it to the Riches of
Fortune, that it is the Wealth of Nature, for it gives every thing that we have
learnt to want and really need; and Resignation in our present State bestows
all things that a Christian not only needs but can desire: It Is the Usurpation
of our Will over our Reasons which breeds all the Confusions and Tumults within
our own Hearts, and there is no possibility of curbing its Insolence but by
putting them into safe Custody, by oommitting it to him who alone can order our
unrully Wills, and nothing but Experience can inform us of the Serenity and
Calm of that Soul who has resigned his Will to God.

It is certain in the Course of the World, there must be a greater number of
Crosses and Troubles than of external Comforts, nay there is scarce any Comfort
but, like Jonah's Gourd, it has a Worm at the Root of it, which not only
withers the Comfort it self, but creates greater Trouble and Sorrow than the
Comfort it self has if entirely enjoyed; so that in all worldly things the
Stock of Troubles is three times greater than that of Comforts; so true is that
of Job, A Man is born to troubles as the Sparks fly upward; why therefore
should a Man sink into Discontent, because the World does but follow its own
natural State?

It Is certain a prudent Man is like the Elixir, it turns Iron into Gold, makes
the most sour Condition of Life not only tolerable but useful and convenient;
for a wise Man will mould and frame his worst Condition into a Condition of
Comfort by his Patience, and he that can content himself with the good Temper
of his own Heart, has no Reason to be discontented with his Condition, since if
it be not good he can make it such, the Mind being the chief Matter either in
Content or Discontent: We need no other Proof than that of Ahab and Haman, the
one a great King the other a great Favorite to a mighty Monarch full of Wealth
and Honor, yet a covetous Mind in the one, and a proud Mind in the other, made
the former seek for a little Spot of Ground, and the latter grew so highly
discontented for want of the Knee of a poor Jew, that it withered all his
Enjoyments. Patience and Resignation give us Possession of our selves, we then
remain Masters of our Passions, and though there be Storms, and Tempests, and
rolling Seas without us, yet all is calm within; and though I want something that
others have, yet I have somewhat that many better than I want: If I want Wealth
yet I have Health, if I want Health, yet I have Children, which others want.
Thus we should learn Contentment, by considering others Wants and our
Enjoyments, and not learn Discomforts from others Enjoyments; though these are
only moral Considerations, yet they are of much Use and Moment, and carried the
Heathens a great way in the Virtue of Patience. But we are furnished with a
more excellent way, because no Affliction befalls us but is reached out to us
from the Hand of Divine Providence, from whom we have our Being: The general
State of Mankind in this World is a State of Trouble and Affliction, and is so
incident to all Degrees and Conditions of Mankind, that no Person of whatsoever
Age or Sex but has a Part in this common State of Mankind. And we find Men in
all Ages, that only by the Direction of natural Light, have calmed their
Disquiets, and reasoned themselves into Contentment, under the greatest and
most terrible Pressures; Men, who, amidst the acutest Torments, have still
preserved a Serenity of Mind, and have frustrated Contempts and Reproaches by
disregarding them; and surely we shall give a very ill Account of Christianity,
if we cannot do as much with it as they did without it.

The greatest Cause of Discontent is, that Men have no definite Measure of
their Desires; it is not the Supply of all their real Wants will serve their
^urn, their Appetites are precarious, and depend upon Contingencies; they
hunger not because they are empty, but because others are full. Many would like
their own Portion well enough, if they had not seen another whose Portion they
liked better. Ahab might well have satisfied himself with the Kingdom of
Israel, had not Naboth's Vineyard lay in his way: Haman could find no Gust in
all the Sensualities of the Persian Court, because a poor despicable Jew denies
his Obeisance; and thus every one of our Passions keeps us upon the Rack, till
they have obtained their Designs. If we will create imaginary Wants to our
selves, why do we not create an imaginary Satisfaction to them. 'Twere the
merrier Frenzy of the two, to be like the mad Athenian, who thought all the
Ships that came into the Harbor his own, than to be still tormenting our
selves with unsatiable Desires; For we generally find those that are farthest
removed from Want, are so from Content too; they take no notice of the real
substantial Blessings they enjoy, and go in quest after some fugitive
Satisfaction, which, like a Shadow, flies still faster in proportion to their
Pursuit. A strange Folly, thus to court Vexations, and be miserable in Chimera.
We chew the Cud upon Gall and Wormwood, and embitter our own Lives merely by
these imaginary Sufferings; nor do we only fright our selves with Images of
past Calamities, but we lay romantic Scenes for Distresses, and raise Alarms
to our selves: We do nicely and critically observe every little adverse
Accident of our Lives, and let a whole Current of Prosperity glide by without
our Notice; like little Children, our Fingers are never off the sore Place,
till we have picked every light Scratch into an Ulcer: Whereas, if we cast up
our Accounts justly, we shall find our Receipts have infinitely exceeded our
Disbursements, and that for the few Mites of Obedience we have paid to our
Creator, we have received Talents of Mercies from him; but instead of
entertaining our selves with the pleasanter Parts of God's Dispensations to us,
we always pore upon the harsher, and look upon our Misfortunes through all the
magnifying Optics our Fancies can supply; and we are so full of our selves,
that we can see nothing beyond it. Every Man expects God should place him where
he has a Mind to be, and though we are apt to tax it as a great Injustice in a
Prince, when he indulges any thing to a private Favorite to the public
Disadvantage, yet so unequal are we, that we murmur at God for not doing that
which we murmur at Men for doing. We must consider that other Men have the same
Appetites with us, and if we dislike an inferior State, why should not we
believe others do so too; and we must not think God should be more concerned to
humor us than those Multitudes of others who have the same Desires. Every Man
would be above and superior, and if no Man were below, no Man could be above:
So in Wealth, most Men desire more, but every Man does at least desire to keep
what he has, how then shall one Part of the World be supplied, without the
Diminution of the other, unless there should be as miraculous a Multiplication
of Treasure for Men's Avarice, as there was of Loaves for their Hunger. It was
a good Answer which an Ambassador of an oppressed Province gave to Anthony, If,
O Emperor, thou will have double Taxes from us, thou must help us to double
Springs and Harvests. And sure God must be at the Trouble of a new Creation,
make a double World, if he should oblige himself to satisfy all the
unreasonable Appetites of Men; the Truth is, we have generally in us the worser
Part of the Levellers Principles, and though we can very contentedly behold
Multitudes below us, yet we are impatient to see any above us; and thus we
create Torments to our selves by our own Repinings, which only sets us farther
from our Aims.

It is observable of the first two Kings of Israel, who were of God's immediate
Election, that he surpised them with that Dignity when they were about a mean
Employment, the one seeking his Father's Asses, the other keeping his Father's
Sheep; and surely he that sits down with this Acquiescence, is a happier Man
than he that enjoys the greatest Worldly Splendour, but infinitely more so than
he who impatiently covets what he cannot attain, for such a Man puts himself
upon a perpetual Rack, keeps his Appetites up to the utmost Stretch, and yet
has nothing wherewith to satisfy them; for either we are troubled for the Want
of something we desire, or at the suffering something we would avoid. And there
is no Man who soberly recollects the Events of his Life, but must confess that
he has sometimes desired Things that would have been to his Mischief, if he
had had them; and on the other side, when he has obtained what he desired, it
has been to him a Punishment, rather than a Satisfaction; whereas by our
Acquiescence under the Ills we suffer, the Bitterness is taken off from all our
Afflictions, there being nothing which so much purifieth us, if we do not
frustrate their Efficacy by our irregular Management under them.

Afflictions wean us from the World; we read in the Story of the Deluge, so
long as the Earth was covered with Waters, the very Raven was contented to take
shelter in the Ark; but when all was fair and dry, even the Dove finally
forsook it; and it is much so with us, the worst of Men will commonly in
Distress have Recourse to God, when the best of us are apt to forget him in the
Blandishments of Prosperity: We should not therefore give our Hearts to any
external Thing, but let all the Concerns of the World hang loose about us,
whereby we shall quit them insensibly, whenever they are called for. We must
not look to be carried into Heaven upon Beds of Ivory, nor from the Noise of
Harps and Viols to be immediately wrapped up into the Choir of Angels: We may
certainly often find that those Events which we have entertained with Regret,
have, in the Consequences, been very beneficial to us, of which I am still a
living Testimony; for all the good Fortune and Promotion, which by their late
Majesty's Grace and Favor I attained to, was occasioned only by the Dexterity
I then showed in giving such good Account of Affairs abroad, whilst I was then
in Prison at Bruges. Nay, sometimes the Inhumanity of a Man's Relations are the
Occasion of his Advantage; thus the barbarous Malice of Joseph's Brethren was
the first Step to his Dominion over Egypt; and it is a common Observation in
Families, that the most discouraged Children usually prove better than the
Darlings; and there is nothing more ordinary than for that which one esteems a
great Calamity to become the Foundation of our future Happiness.

A low Condition is a terrible thing in Sound and Opinion, and that is all: Some
Men are banished and stripped of their Estates, others are poor in Plenty, which
is the basest sort of Beggary, for to spare of what a Man has, not only what
he may need, but what he does need, is not only to walk with a Man's Horse in
his Hand, but to carry the Saddle too; and of the two it is a great deal better
to die a Beggar than to live a Beggar. We usually condemn Villains to the
Mines, and he that labors first to get Money, and then locks up his Money from
himself, condemns both himself and it but again to the Mines, as if he envied
both their very Being above Ground. Poverty is not a thing to be wished no more
than War, but if it be our Lot, we must bear our Misfortunes as becomes wise
and honest Men; we do not pray for War, but for Generosity and Courage in all
the Extremities of War, if it happens. Afflictions are but the Exercises of
Virtue, and an honest Man is out of his Element when he is idle: It is a common
Argument against the Justice of Providence, in the matter of Reward and
Punishment, the Misfortunes of good Men in this World, and the Prosperity of
the wicked; but alas, Misfortunes come by Divine Appointment, and to those that
are good Men even for that very Reason because they are good: Prosperity shows
a Man but one Part of humane Nature, no Body knows what such a Man's good for,
neither in Truth does he understand himself for want of Experiment. Temporal
Happiness is for weak and vulgar Minds, but Calamity is the Touchstone of a
brave Mind, that resolves to live and die free and Master of it self; and
Adversity is best for us, for it is God's Mercy to show the World their Errors,
and that the things they fear and covet are neither good nor evil, being the
common and promiscuous Lot both of good Men and bad; if they were good only
the good should enjoy them, and if bad only the wicked should suffer them: A
wise Man carries all his Treasure within himself; and what Fortune gives she
may take, but he leaves nothing at her Mercy: He stands firm and keeps his
Ground against all Misfortunes, without so much as changing Countenance, he is
Proof against all Accidents: He is a Friend to Providence, and will not murmur
at any thing that comes to pass by God's Appointment, and never any Man was
broken by Adversity that was not first betrayed by Prosperity. The Truth is, we
are generally mistaken in the Nature of Good and Evil, and have not the true
Measures of it; that is truly good which makes a Man the better, and that truly
evil which makes a Man the worse; if Prosperity makes me thankful, munificent
and humble, then it is good for me, and makes me better, but if it makes me
proud it is evil for me: If Adversity makes me clamorous and murmur it is ill for
me, but if it makes me humble, sober and patient then it is good; and let every
Man impartially take the Measure of the very same Man in each Condition, he
shall find ten to one receive more Mischief by Prosperity than Adversity. There
is a strange Witchcraft in Prosperity which gets ground upon our Mind and
Virtue, especially upon our Humility, for Worldly Grandeur secretly steals away
that Virtue, and impairs it sooner than any other; Pride is the Devil, that
usually haunts and waits upon Worldly Greatness: How many Men have we seen,
that under the greatest Pressures and Calamities of Poverty and Reproach have
yet kept up their Reputation, but in the warm Beams and Sunshine of Prosperity
have cast off their Goodness, as the Traveller did his Cloak in the Fable, and
became as great Oppressors and debauched Livers, as if they had never heard of
Heaven or Hell. True Humility is a great Guard upon the Soul of a Man against
these Rocks and Hazards; an humble Man looks upon all his Prosperity and Plenty
not as his own, but as it is the Disposition of the great Master of the Family
of Heaven and Earth, Talents entrusted to him as a Steward to employ for his
Master's Service and Honor, and not for his own Grandeur and Pleasure; Our
Vices are the Vermin that are commonly bred in us by the warm Influences of
Prosperity.

We do not compare the Good of others with our Good, nor their Evil with our
Evil, but with an envious Curiosity we amass together all the desirable
Circumstances of our Neighbor's Condition, and with a prying Discontent we
ransack all our Grievances, and confront to them; this is but a thin Piece of
Sophistry; and we change the Scene, we compare our Neighbors and our selves in
Point of Mortality, where we make his Vices as much exceed ours, as our
Calamities did his in the other Instance. However this is the pleasanter kind
of Deceit, for a Man has some Joy in thinking himself less wicked than his
Neighbor, but no Comfort in thinking himself more miserable. Indeed if we
could use our Eyes aright, and see Things in their true Shapes, a Competency
would be more pleasing than Abundance, and the envied Pomp of Princes, when
balanced with the Cares and Hazards annexed, would rather make a wise Man fear
than desire Preferment; and if a Man well understood the Right, he would rather
choose to wield a Flail than a Scepter; and indeed there is no greater
Unhappiness than the fond Admiration of other Men's Enjoyments, and Contempt of
our own: But if we would begin at the right end, and look with as much
Compassion on the Adversities of others, as we do with Envy at their
Prosperities, every Man would find Cause to sit down contentedly with his own
Burden.

David, the Man after God's own Heart, was no less signal for his Afflictions
than for his Piety; he was sometime an Exile from his Country, and after being
settled in his Throne, what a Succession of Calamities had he in his own
Family; the incestuous Rape of his Daughter, the Retaliation of that by the
Murder of Ammon, and that seconded by the rebellious and barbarous Conspiracy
of Absalon; his Expulsion from Jerusalem; the base Revilings of Shimei; and
lastly, the Loss of his darling Son in the Act of his Sin. It is an ill-natured
thing for any Man to think himself more miserable, because another is happy,
and yet it is this thing alone, by which many Men have made themselves
wretched, having created Wants to themselves, from the envious Contemplation of
other Men's Abundance. Whenever God administers to us a bitter Cup, we may be
sure the Ingredients are medicinal, and such as our Infirmities require; he
durst not trust our intemperate Appetites with unmixed Prosperities, the
Lascivousness whereof, though it may please our Palates, yet it may engender most
fatal Diseases. But alas, we do not understand our own Interest, because we do
not rightly understand what we are our selves. We consider our selves merely in
our animal Being, our Bodies, and when we are invaded there, we think we are
undone, though that Breach be made only to retrieve that diviner Part within us,
oppressed with the Flesh about it, for our Body is to our Soul but as a Garment
to the Body, a desent Case and Cover; and certainly he must be a mad Man that
would not rather have his Clothes cut than his Flesh, and we ought not to
repine that our Souls are cured at the Cost of our Bodies; and our impatient
Resistances do only frustrate the medicinal Part of our Afflictions, and our
Murmurings may ruin our Souls but will never avert any of our outward
Calamities.

To make a right Estimate of this World, we should consider it as a Stage, and
our selves but as Actors, and to resolve that it is very little material what
Part we play, so we do it well; a Comedian may get as much Applause by acting
the Slave as the Conqueror, and he that acts the one to Day, may to Morrow
reverse the Part and personate the other; and certainly he that has well
impressed upon his Mind the Vanity and Vexation of the World, cannot be much
surprised at any thing that befalls him in it. We take the magnifying Glasses
of Discontent when we view our own Miseries and others Felicities, but look
upon our Enjoyments and their Sufferings through the contracting Optics of
Ingratitude and Incompassion. It is a very ill-natured thing for any Man to
think himself more miserable because another is happy, and yet this is the very
thing by which alone many Men have made themselves wretched, creating Wants to
themselves merely from the envious Contemplation of other Men's Abundance.
Lucifer was happy enough in his original State, yet could not think himself so
because he was not like the most High, and by insolent Ambition forfeited his
Bliss; and those do perfectly transcribe his Copy, who cannot be satisfied with
any inferior Degree of Prosperity but what their Impatiencies with other Men's
Enjoyments of what they cannot attain. God never articled with the Ambitious to
give him Honors, with the Covetous to fill his Bags, with the Voluptuous to
feed his Luxury; if therefore we expect to be satisfied let us modestly confine
our Desires within the Limits God has set us, and then every Accession which
he superadds will appear a Bounty.

The best Expedient for Contentment is to confine our Thoughts to the present.
We often heap fantastic Loads upon our selves by anxious Presages of things
which perhaps will never happen, which is one of the greatest Follies
imaginable; for either the Evil will come, or it will not; if it will, it is
sure no such desirable Guest that we should go on to meet it, we shall feel it
time enough when it comes, we need not anticipate our Sense of it; but if it
will not come, what extreme Madness is it for a Man to torment himself with
that which will never be, to create to himself Engines of Tortures, and by such
chimerical Afflictions make himself as miserable as the most real ones could
do? therefore let us rest our selves upon that admirable Aphorism of our
Savior's, sufficient unto the Day is the Evil thereof. A querilous repining
Humor is one of the most pernicious Habits incident to Mankind, but yet as
deformed People are most often in Love with themselves, so this crooked Piece
of our Temper is of all others the most indulgent to it self; it will nourish
it self with Chimeras, suborn a thousand imaginary Distresses, and is impatient
of any Diversion, loves to converse only with it self: Men cherish this Disease
of their Mind, and improve their Torment, roll and chew the bitter Pill in
their Mouths, and by devoting all Thoughts to the Subject of their Grief, keep
up an uninterrupted Sense of it, as if they had the same Tyranny for themselves
which Caligula had for others, and loved to feel themselves die. This Word
Calamity has an ill Reputation in the World, the very Name is more grievous
than the thing it self; what need any Man complain if he can turn that into a
Happiness which others count a Misery? a wise Man is never surprised, in the
midst of Plenty he prepares for Poverty, as a prudent Prince does for War in
the Depth of Peace; our Condition is good enough if we make the best on it, and
our Felicity is in our own Power. Every Man should stand upon his Guard against
Fortune, and take heed to himself when she speaks him fairest. A brave Man
looks upon himself as a Citizen, a Soldier of the World, in despite of
Accidents and Oppositions he maintains his Station, and is more ambitious of
being reputed Good than Happy. Mutius lost his Right Hand with more Honor than
he could have preserved it; he was a greater Conqueror without it than he could
have been with it, for with the very Stump of it he overcame two Kings, Tarquin
and Porsenna. Rutilia followed Cotta into Banishment, she staid and she
returned with him too, and soon after she lost him without so much as shedding
a Tear; a great Instance of her Courage in his Banishment, and of her Prudence
in his Death.

Many Men have longer Intermissions from Afflictions than others, yet none are
totally exempt from them; and that Man who has lived to the ordinary Extent of
the Age of Man, will find his Crosses and Sufferings have out-weighed the
treasure of his Comforts in this Life: The poor Man reckons it his Affliction
that he wants Wealth, and the rich Man is not without his Affliction, either in
the Loss of it, or for fear of losing it.

Men in Prosperity cannot suppose a Change in their Estates; a healthful Man
can hardly think of dying; the Reason is, that our present Condition falls
under our present Sense, and takes up our whole Consideration, and things that
are not yet are only present by Contemplation, which does not so strongly
affect the Mind, because it has not the like Strength of Impression upon the
Mind as that which is present and sensible; whereas an Apprehension of a
disadvantageous Change of our Condition, admirably fills a Man with such a
Temper of Spirit as becomes his changed Condition: But a Man in Prospetity,
that never puts himself under the sad Thoughts of a Change of his present
Happiness, if such a Change befalls him he is at his Wits end, he is surprised
and overwhelmed with it, being taken before he is prepared: It is certain it is
a very great Improvidence for a Man to be learning those Virtues, when the
present Necessity calls for the Use of them; it is like a Thief who is to learn
to read when he is to pray his Clergy.

Affliction does not so much endanger a good Man to lose his Innocence as
Wealth and Honor do; let any Man observe either in himself or others, we are
all equally the worse for Prosperity, and it is a far greater Difficulty to
manage a prosperous Fortune, than a low and afflicted Condition; and therefore
those are securest from Affliction that use their Prosperity with Equality of
Mind; because they keep a Check upon their Corruptions, and so stand in less
need of this Physic; for my Part, I have quite forgot that ever I was
prosperous, and my ill Fortune does now the less trouble me; and I can well and
truly say with Seneca: Stet quicunque volet potens
Auloe culmine lubrico:
Me dulcis saturet quies,
Obscuro positus loco,
Leni perfruar otio.
Illi mors gravis incubat,
Qui notus nimis omnibus,
Ignotus moritur sibi.
Let him that will ascend the tottering Seat
Of courtly Grandeur, and become as great
As are his mounting Wishes; as for me
Let sweet Repose and Rest my Portion be.
Give me some mean obscure Recess, a Sphere
Out of the Road of Business, or of Fear
Of falling lower, where nothing may annoy
Or hinder my Retirement to enjoy.
Death is a mere Surprise, a very Snare
To him that makes his Life its greatest Care,
To be a public Pageant known to all,
But unacquainted with himself, does fall.


When Job was scraping his Sores upon the Dunghill, he said, Lord when I was in
Prosperity I heard thee, but now in my Affliction I see thee; which shows
nothing gives a more intimate Knowledge of God than to be surrounded with
Tribulation; the Soul in Prosperity grows proud, deaf and careless, so that she
must smart in the Senses to be made sensible. We are not to be wrought upon but
when afflicted and in Misery: Jonas in the Whale's Belly, the Prodigal in the
Pig-sty, the Sick in hi Fever, the Lascivious in his Sweating-tub, then they
recollect themselves; but when in Sports and Pastimes, sailing in a Sea of
Plenty and Delights, all our Senses are shut up, and no Passage open: Solid
Virtue, like a Rose amidst Thorns, seldom springs forth but in the Soil of
Crosses, Afflictions and Austerities. Those Men are truly virtuous who take as
it were with the same Relish the Gall of Misfortunes and the Honey of
Prosperity: No stormy Seasons hinder their Journey, and that which distracts
the soft and effeminate is to them Matter of Repose and Joy; all Things that
pass under the Name of Adversity are not so but to the wicked, who make ill use
of them in prising the Creature more than the Creator. The Delay our blessed
Savior made in sending Succor to his Disciples, endangered by a Storm at Sea,
sufficiently hints unto us the Pleasure God takes to see the Just row against
the Stream, tug and wrestle with all the Force they can against the Storms and
Afflictions of this World: And therefore it is well observed, that God laid
open Job to all the Assaults of Satan, but with this Reserve, that he touched
not his Life, and this not in regard that Death would have eclipsed the Glory
of that great Champion, but because he would not be deprived of such a
Combatant, to whose Conflict God with his blessed Angels were intent with much
Satisfaction, and so would not lose the Pleasure of seeing that stout Skirmish
fought to the last, betwixt him and his Enemy; and something to this Purpose
St. Gregory Nyssen declares upon God's proceeding with the Israelites, in
commanding them to set up a brazen Serpent, at the Sight of which those who
should be bitten by those venomous Creatures might immediately find their Cure;
and asking the Reason why God did not take a shorter Course by destroying all
those Serpents, which had given an end to the Plague; he at last satisfies
himself with this Reason, that whilst the Hebrews beheld the sovereign
Medicament in casting up their Eyes to Heaven, they might thereby have Occasion
to consider from whence they received their Deliverance, which otherwise that
gross ungrateful People would soon have forgot; so that to draw them to pay
what they owed to his Goodness, he was feign to lengthen out their Afflictions.

Some Men are tired with whatever they have enjoyed in this World, and expect
no greater Satisfaction should they live a thousand Years; every Pleasure
appears but the same in different Forms, and they all agree in leaving us
afflicted with the same or greater Pain they found us in. We walk here on Earth
in an enchanted Castle of Shadows and Mockeries, our whole Life is full of
Vanity and Mistake; every Man's Fortune is but a Repetition of Ixion's, we
court Clouds instead of Divinities, and our most charming Fruitions consist in
Emptiness.

Resignation and Tranquillity are the golden Mean, and he that steps over this
Line on one side or the other, falls into the same Vanity which he bemoans or
ridicules in the rest of Mortals. I have perused many Books, and conversed with
more Men, yet none of them can inform me what I am my self; for in this Life we
are faign to peep into the World through the close Windows of our Senses, which
are so darkened with the Dust our Passions raise, besides the natural Dullness of
our Compositions, that we are faign to use the Optics of our Philosophy to
help our Sight: Yet after all we are still pur-blind, and so are like to be
during this mortal Life.

Many great Princes have exchanged the toilsome Glory and royal Fatigues of
Empire for the sweet Tranquillity and Ease of a Country Farm, and the wholesome
Exercises of Agriculture: Thus Dioclesian quitted his Throne for the sake of a
private Life, and those Hands which had been accustomed to weild a Scepter,
became at last voluntarily familiar with the Spade, the Plough, and the Harrow.
So Grand Cyrus, Monarch of the Persians, used to boast of the Gardens planted
and sowed with his own Hands; so may Louis le Grand well boast that he has
exceeded all his Predecessors, nay even the Poets themselves in their best
Descriptions, in the Gardens and Waterworks he has made at Marly, Versailles
and Triannon. It Is certain the Fabii, the Lentuli, the Ciceros, and Pisoes
derived their Names from those kind of Vegetables which they signify, and which
their Fathers took delight in planting: Was not Abraham a Herdsman, and Moses
the Prophet familiar with God, and David the Prince of Poets, and the most
illustrious Heroes amongst the Greeks and Romans, and other Nations, were
Keepers of Sheep, Goats and Oxen; and the Arabians are so at this Day, with the
Tartars and other Nations of the East.

We are all subject to various Changes and Vicissitudes in this mortal State;
our Lives are alternatively chequered with Good and Evil; Virtue and Vice have
their Turns in the Series of most Men's Actions, Prosperity and Adversity in the
Course of our Lives, and no Man can with Truth boast the contrary, for we are
all born to be Adventurers which happen in the Pell-mell of humane Conversation.

It is impossible to express to the Life the Pleasure that a Man feels in
Solitude, when free and undisturbed he can for many Hours behold the Motions of
the Moon and Stars, which raise pious Thoughts and Contemplations within his
Breast; his ravished Soul is ready to break Prison with Joy, when it is inspired
with certain Demonstrations of Eternity, after which a Man is nauseated with
the narrow Principles of ignorant Men, and hates to profane his Reason with the
vain Discourse of self-conceited Fools and Idiots, a Man is then cloyed with
Life, and wishes to die amidst such charming Speculations.

The Cast of an Eye many times discovers the secret Sentiments of the Heart, so
does a shrug of the Shoulders, a pout of the Lip, or any other artificial
Gesture; they are all significant and expressive of what Affections and
Thoughts we harbor within. There are some secret Characters in every Man's
Face which speak the Nature of the Person; we read the hidden Qualities of Men
at the first Dash; some Men have the very Signature of Virtue in their Faces,
and hence are lasting Friendships often contracted.

I have spent the Spring and Summer of my Life in Vanity, Error, and Ignorance,
it is time I should provide for the Winter of my Age a stock of solid Wisdom and
Virtue.

It is as natural for the vulgar to inveigh against generous Souls, as it is for
Dogs to bark at the Moon, and yet that Planet is not moved at the Snarles of
inviduous Animals; so Souls truly noble contemn the Censures of the inferior
Part of Men.

God is pleased so to dispense his temporal Blessings, that he which has least
has enough, not only to oblige his Acquiescence but his Thankfulness; though
every Man has not all he wishes, yet he has that which is more valuable than
that he complains to want. We must keep our Desires at home, and not suffer
them to ramble at things without our Reach: God has placed none of us in so
barren a Soil, in so forlorn a State, but there is something perhaps in it
which may afford us Comfort. But if in a sullen Humor we will not cultivate
our own Field, because we have perhaps more mind to our Neighbor's, we may
thank our selves if we starve; the despising of what God has given us is but a
cold Invitation to farther Bounty, this complaining Humor is a Sickness of the
Mind, a perpetual Craving of the Appetite without any Possibility of
Satisfaction, and is the same in the Heart which the Caninus apetitus is in the
Stomach: The Generality of Mankind being commonly made unhappy, not by any
thing without them, but by those restless Impatiences that are within them. And
if Israel, the Lot of God's own Inheritance, that People whom he had singled
out from all the Nations of the World, could forfeit God's Favor by their
Unthankfulness, sure none of us can suppose we have any surer Entail to it. As
God loves a cheerful Giver, so he loves a cheerful Receiver; and we should soon
leave off murmuring if we did but seriously consider, that God owes us nothing,
and that whatever we receive is an Alms and not a Tribute. Diogenes being asked
what Wine drank the most pleasant, answered, that which is drunk at another's
Cost; and we can never miss of this Circumstance to recommend our good Things
to us, for be they little or much they come gratis. It is the Character of an
ill Nature to write Injuries in Marble, and Benefits in Dust; and however some
may acquit themselves of this Imputation as to Men, yet none can do so in
Relation to God; and though he neither will nor can do Injury, yet we receive
every cross Accident with great Resentment, whilst his real Benefits are not at
all observed. It Is true, some Men's Impatiences have risen so high, as to cast
away Life because it was not clothed with all the Circumstances they wished;
and though in an angry Fit many Men have with Jonas wished to die, yet ten to one
should Death then come, they would be as willing to resist it as was the Man in
the Apologue, who wearied with his Burden of Sticks flung it down and called
for Death, but when he came found no other Occasion for him but to be helped up
again with his Bundle. It Is certain our Repinings proceed not from any Defect
of God's Bounty, but from the malignant Temper within us; and as it is an
easier thing to satisfy the Cravings of a hungry Appetite, than to cure the
nauseous Recoilings of a surfeited Stomach, so certainly the Discontents of the
poor are more easier allayed than those of the rich; the Indigence of the one
has contracted his Desires into a narrow Compass, but the other, who has his
Desires stretched and extended, is capable of no Satisfaction: Alas! our Body,
with all its Enjoyments, is but the lowest Instance of God's Bounty; it is but a
decent Case for that inestimable Jewel within it; the Soul, like the Ark, is
the thing for which this whole Tabernacle was framed. The more intellectual
Powers wherewith it is endued have exercised the Curiosity and raised the
Admiration of the great Contemplators of Nature in all Ages; and though the
simplest Man knows he has the Faculties of Imagination, Apprehension, Memory
and Reflection, yet the learned cannot affirm where they are seated, or by
what Means they operate. And considering whereof we are made, our Preservation
is no less a Work of Omnipotence than our first framing; nay perhaps it is
rather a greater, for we have now the Principles of Decay within us, which tend
to Dissolution; we want the Supplies of several things without us, the Failing
whereof returns us again to our Dust. The Air which refreshes us may at another
time starve us, the Meat that nourishes us may choke us; nay, there is no
Creature so inconsiderable which does not at some times serve us, and which may
not at any time (if God permit) ruin us; and if the divine Providence did not
draw out the better Properties of these Creatures for our Use, and restrain the
worser for our Security, we should quickly return to our Dust. And if the
ebbing and flowing of the Sea put the Philosopher into such an Ecstasy, that he
flung himself into it, because he could not comprehend the Cause of it; in what
perpetual Raptures of Admiration may we be, who have every Minute within us and
about us more and greater Wonders in our Favor, when we deserve the Divine
Power should rather exert it self in our Destruction. Aristippus being bemoaned
for the Loss of a Farm, replied with some sharpness upon his Condoler, You have
but one Field, and I have three left; why should I not rather grieve for you?
intimating, That a Man is not so much to Estimate what he has lost, as what he
has left; and we may easily be convinced, that even in our worse Estate, our
Enjoyments are more than our Sufferings, and God's Acts of Grace do out-number
those of his Severity to us.

There is no Man that can with Reason affirm himself to be the most unhappy
Man, there being innumerable Distresses of others which he knows not of: Many
Sorrows may lie at the Heart of him that carries a smiling Face, and many a Man
has been an Object of Envy to those who look only on the Outside, who yet to
those that know his private Griefs appears more worthy of Compassion. Solon
seeing his Friend much oppressed with Grief, carried him to the Top of a Tower
that overlooked the City of Athens; and showing him all the Buildings, said to
him, Consider how many Sorrows have, do, and shall in future Ages inhabit under
all those Roofs, and do not vex thy self with those Inconveniences which are
common to Mortality, as if they were only yours: It was the saying of Socrates,
That if there were a common Bank made of all Men's Troubles, most Men would
choose rather to take those they brought, than to venture upon a new Dividend,
but think best to sit down with their own: He is an ill Member of a Community,
who in Public Assessments will shuffle off all Payments; and he is no better,
who in this common Tax, which God has laid upon our Nature, is not content to
bear his share. A sick Fortune produces wholesome Counsels, and we reap this
Fruit by adverse Fortune, that it brings us at last to Wisdom; whereas
prosperous Fortune, like a strong Gale upon a strong Current, carries a Man in
a trice out of the sight of Quiet; and if it be not well regulated, it is so
far from easing us, that it proves an Oppression to us; and a busy fortunate
Man in the World, calls many his Friends, that were at most but his Guests, and
Men flock to him, as they do a Fountain in hot Weather, both to exhaust and
trouble him.

Of WOMEN.
THERE is much to be said in the Praise and Dispraise of Women; as we are
Riddles to our selves, so that Sex is in a much higher degree Mysterious; for
Women have Ways by themselves unknown to Men, their Windings and Turnings are
as intricate as those of Serpents; and if Daedalus were now alive, (though once
the Glory of Labyrinth-makers) he would be troubled to trace Women in all their
secret, wild, unknown Maeanders; and yet it is clear, that Women's Inclinations
are not only oftentimes better, but their Resolutions greater than Men's; and it
is observed, that as they are generally more virtuous than Men, so when they
deviate to Vice, they are more hardened in it.

The great Actions in which they have born a part, speak the Excellencies of
their Nature: Judith in Sacred Writ is remembered with great Glory; and Lucretia
in the Roman History, by her Resolution, has raised her self an eternal
Monument; neither must that Noble Virgin Clelia be forgot, who being given in
Hostage to King Porsenna at the Siege of Rome, she escaped her Guards by Night,
and mounting a Horse she found in the way, she swam over the Tyber into Rome;
whereupon, and upon what Mutius had a little before done and said, Porsenna (as
if terrified by the stupendous Resolution of the Romans) consented to a Peace.

And though some out of Wantonness of Wit, and Extravagancy of Paradoxes, have
called the Abilities of Women in question; yet those Abilities best appearing
in Matters of Religion and Government, we are in neither of these without
Examples of able Women. The last Age gave us so great a Queen for Government,
as scarce any former King did equal; and this Age such a Queen-Dowager to our
late King, that if Plutarch were again in being to write Lives by Parallels, he
would not find for her Majesty a Parallel amongst Women, since no Age has seen
her Equal for Beauty, Piety, Virtue, Generosity, and other most Eminent
Abilities and Princely Endowments.

The World indeed (which is no just Judge) will scarce allow Women to be Wise;
and because they are generally commended enough for other Qualities, the World
therefore delights to lessen on one Side, what it is forced to allow on the
other: For we usually find in Women a Delicacy of Wit not common to Men,
neither are Men's Actions commonly attended with so much Gracefulness as
Women's; and Ladies are more skilful than Men in what they do, whether it be the
Advantage of pleasing be more Natural to them, or that finding their great
Strength to lie there, they make it more their Study from their Childhood: And
where Women have submitted themselves to as good Education as Men, their Sex
has not prejudiced them from being great Examples to others; and this Sex has
always been esteemed and found by the English worthy of Empire, and when it
has been enthroned, it has bestowed great Felicity upon the Nation, neither
has it given Place to the other Sex for illustrious Qualities, and the highest
Virtues.

In the Venetian Story we find certain Matrons of that City were sent in
Quality as Ambassadresses to an Emperor, with whom that State had occasion to
treat; And in the Eastern Parts of the World, it is usual for Women to be
Ambassadresses; and in Affairs of Religion, Women have ever had a great Hand,
though sometimes on the Left as well as the Right; sometimes their abundant
Wealth, sometimes their Personal Affections to Churchmen, and sometimes their
indiscreet Zeal; many times the Voices of great Men, both in Civil and
Ecclesiastical Assemblies, have been in the Power and Disposition of Women: And
hence it is, that in the old Epistles of some Popes, we find as many Letters of
those Popes, to the Emperors Wives, Mothers, and Sisters, as to the Emperors
themselves.

It would be a kind of unpardonable Envy to conceal some other Excellencies of
Women, and the Advantages they have of us in many Respects: Some Hebrew
Doctors, from the different Names of Adam and Eve, draw Arguments to prove the
Dignity and Perfection of the Female Sex, in that Adam signifies Earth, but Eve
expresses Life. And they affirm, That every Name which God imposed on any
thing, describes its Nature and Quality, as a Picture represents the Original;
and therefore by how much Life is to be esteemed more than Earth, by so much
more excellent, in the Opinion of these Rabins, is Woman, than Man: They
endeavor to strengthen this Opinion, by showing, that God having made Man, and
then surveyed the System of his Works, found nothing more excellently and
divinely framed than Woman, and therefore in her rested and commenced the
Sabbath, as if he could not make the Idea of another Creature more perfect than
her, or as if he did not esteem the Universe it self complete, without the last
and most accomplished of his Works: And as the End is always first in the
Intention, and last in Execution, Woman therefore being the last Work of the
Creation, it is thereby evident that she was the chief Design and Aim God
Almighty had in building this immense Fabric, which he furnished and adorned
with infinite Riches and Delights, and then introduced Eve as into her Native
proper Place, there to reign as absolute Queen over all his Works: And besides,
the particular Place of her Creation does much exalt her, in that she was
formed in Paradise amongst the Angels, whereas Adam was made in the common
Waste amongst the Brutes: But the most prevailing Argument is from the
stupendous Beauty of that Sex, which like finer sorts of Clouds in Summer,
seem to ingross the Splendour of the Sun, and to reflect his Beams on the World?
How matchless is indeed a Woman's Form? What dazzling Majesty environs her from
Hand to Foot? Can you gaze on her lovely Countenance without Astonishment, or
fix your Eyes upon her without an Ecstasy? Indeed, so admirable is the Figure,
Voice, and Mein of a beautiful Woman, that he is wilfully Blind, who does not
see, whatever Beauties the whole World is capable of, are concentred in that
Sex. Yet after all this, they have their dark Side too, like the rest of mixed
Beings: They are the Frontier Passes of the World above and of that below, the
Gates of Life and Death, the very Avenues to Heaven or Hell, according as they
are used; like Fire they will warm and refresh a Man, if he keeps at a due
distance; but if he approach too near, they scorch and blister him; or like the
other Element of Water, they are very good and serviceable, whilst kept within
their Bounds, but let them once break down the Banks of Modesty, they will
threaten all with Ruin: In a word, It is neither safe to Vex them in the least,
or Humor them too much; the excess of Fondness, as well as the defect of
natural Love, may equally undo us; Prudent Generosity is the only Method of
making our selves happy in the Enjoyment of them. The frequent and familiar
Converse Women are allowed with Men, within the Bounds of Modesty, both in
England and France, is a great Advantage to them; and certainly the Italians
and Spaniards, in their so great strictness to this Sex, do much Err; for
besides the Injustice they act, in depriving them of that Liberty which God and
Nature allows them, it is impossible they should ever become more Virtuous by
being confined to the Melancholy of a Cloister, which must necessarily indulge
and minister loose Thoughts, when if they converst in the World, they might
improve themselves by Knowledge, and the Diversions they would receive from the
Company of others, which would keep them from thinking of Ill so frequently.

The present Jews of this Age, and Turks, have an odd Opinion of Women,
believing they are of an inferior Creation to Man, and therefore they exclude
them, the first from their Synagogues, the other from their Mosques, which is
not only Partial but Profane; for the Image of the Creator shines as clearly,
if not more, in the one, as in the other; and I believe there are as many
Female Angels in Heaven as Males, though in Heaven there be many Mansions; to
which may be added, that there went better and more refined Atoms to the
Creation of Woman than there did of Man.

It Is true, it was a weak Part in Eve to yield to the Seducements of the
Serpent, but it was a weaker Thing in Adam to be tempted by Eve who was the
weaker Vessel. The Ancient Philosophers had a better Opinion of that Sex, they
ascribed all Sciences to the Muses, all Sweetness and Morality to the Graces,
and Prophetic Inspirations to the Sibylls; and we find in all Authors high
Examples of the Virtues of Women; And if they did but consider what an
Ascendant they have upon Men, and that though they were the Source of all our
Miseries, yet we still adore them, they would be something more complacent; for
it is certainly a sign of good Nature to be amorous of Women; and he is looked
upon as a Monster, or degenerate Person, who feels no Warmths of Passions for
that lovely Sex: Women were sent into the World on purpose, as many think, to
blow up those gentle Flames, which sublimate our grosser Mould, and make us
more refined: The Love of Women is riveted in our Nature, and our Blood must
first grow Cold before this Flame can be extinguished; nay many times it is
more fervent, though of a short Duration, in our latest Hours than in our Prime:
As when the Oil which feeds a Lamp is almost spent, the startled Flame begins
to rouse it self and burn afresh, as if it would feign subsist a little longer,
and then it crackles and flashes with greater Noise and Luster than before, but
presently expires; so does this Amorous Fire, when we are nearest our
Dissolution, begin to trouble us most, and makes our Souls blaze with Fevers of
Desire and Grief, knowing its Period is near. I know some Women are as Shadows,
the more you follow them the faster they fly from you; and they are of that odd
Humor, that to feed their Pride, they will starve those Natural Passions which
are owing from them to Men: I confess, Coyness becomes some Beauties, if
handsomely acted, and a Frown from some Faces penetrates more, than the soft
Glances of a mincing Smile; but if this Coyness or those Frowns savor of
Pride, they are odious, if not ridiculous; for it is a true Rule, where this
kind of Pride inhabits, Honor sits not long Porter at the Gate.

There are indeed some Beauties so strong, that no Batteries can do any good
upon them; there are others that are tenable a good while, but will incline to
Parley at last, and that Fort which begins to Parley is half won: For my own
Part, I think of Women what Philip of Macedon thought of Cities, There is none
so Inexpugnable but an Ass laden with Gold may enter into it; and as the
Spaniards say, Presents may rend Rocks; Pearls and golden Bullets may do much
upon the most impregnable Beauty that is. And yet I knew an English Lord that
sent a little Dog to a Lady he esteemed much, with a rich Collar of Diamonds;
she took the Dog, but returned the Collar; but what effect it wrought after I
cannot say. It Is a powerful Sex; they were too strong for the first, the
strongest, and the wisest Man that ever was; and yet for all their Strength, in
Point of Value, the Italian says, (I will not say truly) That a Man of Straw is
worth a Woman of Gold. In fine, the best Advice I can give in this Case, is,
When Women are perverse, retire handsomely, there being as much Honor to be
got in a handsome Retreat, as in a hot Pursuit; and by this Retreat you will
get a greater Victory than you think of, for you will Overcome your self, which
is the greatest Conquest that can be made.

Those do great wrong to Ladies that esteem them unable to govern a State,
since History tells us, That the Female Sex is not only worthy to bear the
Scepter, but that Ladies have preserved and enlarged the Kingdoms of Spain,
England, Denmark, and Sweden, who never flourished so much as under the two
Elizabeth's, Margaret and Christina: Never King of England was better obeyed
than Queen Elizabeth; the Commanders freely acknowledged their Victories
proceeded as much from the happy Genius of their Queen as from their own
Valor: And Elizabeth of France, Wife to Philip IV. would have re-established
the Affairs of Spain, if the Impertinency of a Favorite had not held her at a
distance from the Councils of the King her Husband: They are not all
sufficiently qualified to Rule, neither are Men. There are but few Women
indeed, because the Malice or Envy of Men keeps them off from showing their
Abilities, and making their Prudence and Generosity admired; and if there were
as many Women as Princes upon the Throne, we should often find Female
Accomplishments superior to ours, there being many Ladies worthy to Govern, and
would be many more, if they were instructed and brought up to great Affairs
from their younger Years.

On the Knowledge of God, and against Atheism.
WITH whatsoever other Knowledge a Man may be endued, he is but ignorant who
does not know God, the Duty he owes Him, and the way to praise Him, who can
make him happy or miserable for ever. Though a Man could know all that Nature or
Art requires, could attain to a Mastery in all Languages, and sound the Depths
of all Arts and Sciences, could discover the Interests of all States, the
Intrigues of all Courts, the Reasons of all civil Laws and Constitutions, and
give an Account of the History of all Ages, and yet should want the Knowledge
of God: All this would be but an impertinent Vanity, and a glittering kind of
Ignorance. Such a Man would be undone with all his Knowledge, and be like the
Philosopher, who gazing upon the Stars fell into the Ditch. For true Wisdom
regards our own Interest, and he is not a wise Man who does not take Care of
his own Concerns.

Nothing can more effectually undermine the Foundation of our Happiness, than
to banish the Belief of a God out of the World; for if there were no God, Man
would be in a worse Condition than Beasts, who are only sensible of present
Pain, and when it is upon them they bear it as they can, not being apprehensive
of Evils at a Distance, nor tormented with the Prospect of what may befall them
hereafter; but Man is liable to these Evils and many others, which are so much
the greater, because they are aggravated by the sharp Reflections of our own
Thoughts, and if there be no God we are wholly without Comfort, and without any
other Remedy than what Time will give; But if we believe there is a God that
takes Care of us, this must be a mighty Comfort to us, both under our present
Affliction, and the Apprehension of Evils at a Distance, for in that Case we
are secure, that either God by his Providence will prevent the Evils we fear,
or will support us under them when they come, or will make them the Occasion of
a greater good to us, by turning them either to our Advantage in this World, or
the Increase of our Happiness in the next.

Atheism has struck on a sudden into such a Reputation, that it scorns any
longer to sculk, but shows it self more Publicly than most Men dare do the
contrary; nothing passes for Wit that has not its Stamp, and with it there is
no Metal of so base Alloy but will go current; every dull Man that can but
stoutly disdain his Maker, has by it secured his Title to Ingenuity: And yet
it is impossible for any Man who sees only the smallest part of the Universe,
to doubt of a Free and Supreme Being, until by the Sense of his Wickedness it
becomes his Interest there should be none; for certainly there never was any
Man who said there was no God, but he wished it first.

'Twas good Counsel given to the Athenians, to be very careful Philip of
Macedon was dead, before they expressed their Joy at his Death, least they might
find him alive to revenge their hasty Triumph; and so let the Atheists be sure
there is no God, before they presume thus to defy him, least they find him at
last assert his Being in their Destruction.

The great Mystery of Atheism, is, that Men are wedded to their Lusts, and are
resolved upon a wicked Course, and so it becomes their Interest to wish there
were no God, and to believe so if they can; so that nothing but the Power of
vicious Inclinations sways Men's Minds toward Atheism, and when Men's Judgments
are once biased, they do not believe according to the Evidence of Things, but
according to their Humor and Interest; for when Men live as if there were no
God, it becomes expedient for them that there should be none, and then they
endeavor to persuade themselves so, and are glad to find Arguments to fortify
themselves in that Persuasion.

That there have been many false Gods devised, is rather an Argument that there
is a true One, than that there is none: There would be no Counterfeits but for
the sake of something that is real; For though all Pretenders seem to be what they
really are not, yet they pretend to be something that really is: There would be
no Brass Money if there were not good and lawful Money: Bristol Stones would
not pretend to be Diamonds, if there never had been any Diamonds: Those two
great Counterfeits, Lambert Simuel and Perkin Warbeck, had never been set up in
Henry VII's Time, if there had not once been a real Plantagenet and Duke of
York: So the Idols of the Heathens, though they were set up in Affront to the
true God, yet they rather prove there is One, than the contrary.

It is evident to common Sense, that Man is not sufficient of himself to his
own Happiness; he is liable to many Miseries, which he can neither prevent nor
redress: He is full of Wants which he cannot supply, and of Infirmities which
he cannot remove, and obnoxious to Dangers against which he cannot provide:
Consider a Man without God's Protection, and he is sure of nothing he enjoys,
and uncertain of every thing he hopes for. He Grieves for what he cannot help,
Desires what he cannot obtain; Courts Happiness, which flies from him the
farther he pursues it. His Hopes and Expectations are bigger than his
Enjoyments, his Fears and Jealousies more troublesome than the Evils
themselves: So that the Atheist deprives himself of all Comfort that the
Apprehensions of a God can give a Man, and yet is liable to all the Trouble and
Disgust of those Apprehensions.

Of RELIGION.
MOST People take up their Religion for a Fashion, and receive it according to
the Country where they are born, and are therefore of that Religion; and the
Reason why we are Christians rather than Jews, Turks, or Heathens, is because
Christian Religion had the Fortune to come first in our Way, and bespeak us at
our Entrance into the World. The Christian Religion may make Archymedes's
Challenge, Give it but where it may set its Foot, allow but a sober Advertence
to its Proposals, and it will move the whole World: It comes with most
convincing Arguments, but these must first obtain Attention, before they can
force Assent. They will most infallibly weigh down the Scales, if you try and
examine their weight.

But it is to be feared we are so stupid and unconcerned, that all the
persuasive Rhetoric of the Gospel will make no Impression upon us, all the
Avenues of our Reason are so blocked up, that they will find no way of
approaching. We are like the Indian Serpents Philostratus mentions, Proof
against all Charms, but such as with their glittering Splendour assault our
Eyes. Nothing moves us but what courts our Senses, and what is not gross enough
to be seen, we think too nice to be considered. The Form and Name of
Christianity Men find ready to their Hands, and it costs them no Labor to call
themselves Christians, as they do French or English, only because they were
born within such a Territory, and have taken up their Religion as part of their
Fate, the Temper of their Climate, the Entail of their Ancestors, the
Profession of it descends to them by way of Inheritance, and like young
careless Heirs, they are never at the Charge to Survey it, to inform themselves
of the Revenues of it, what Burden it lies under, or what Advantages it
promises.

It is to be feared that of those vast Multitudes that have entered the
Baptismal Vows, most of them weigh it as little when they should perform it, as
they did when they made it, and have no other Notion of Baptism, but as a
Custom of the Place, or a Time of Feasting, and consider no farther
Significancy in those Spiritual Bonds, than they did in their Swaddling Clothes;
and can give no better account why they took on them Christ's Livery, than why
they wear such Garments as the common Fashion of the Country prescribes them:
But where Men are so Ignorant, it must necessarily infer, their Parent's
Negligence either in not infusing, or their own stubborn Perverseness in
resisting Instruction. But it is more probable to conclude the former, since if
Children were early instructed, Knowledge would insensibly insinuate it self
before their Years had armed them with Obstinacy enough to make Head against
it. And when by the Parent's Remissness the proper Seed-time is lost, the Soil
grows stiff and untractable, the Labor of Learning averts their Childhood, and
the Shame of it their Manhood, and they grow old in their Ignorance, and are
ready to leave the World before they come to know any thing of that which is to
succeed it. This is a common and despicable Case, which loudly accuses their
Parents, who thus wretchedly hazard their Children's greatest Concernment. And
as it was a Fault in their Parents to let their Children want those necessary
Infusions, it is surely so in themselves, to let their riper Years continue in
that Ignorance, having scarce ever thought of their Religion, since they could
their Lesson to avoid Correction. And then it is no wonder if they pass in the
same Forgetfulness with other the Occurrences of that slippery Age: But if to
some their Memory has been so faithful as to retain those early Impressions
which were made in it; yet alas, it avails little; for a Man's Remembrance of
his Creed may tell him there is a God, and that he is Almighty; but if his
Reason be so much asleep as not to infer from thence the Necessity of
Reverencing and Obeying him, he may repeat the Creed every Day, and yet be an
Atheist.

The Difficulty of removing what is imprinted in us by Education is very hard;
that which Men take in by Education being next to that which is Natural; and
most Men owe the Principles of their Religion to their Education, or Climate
wherein they were Born, being bred up either to confirm those Principles their
Parents instilled into them, or by a general Consent proceed in the Religion of
their Country, there being a Geography of Religions as well as Lands, and every
Climate is not only distinguished by their Laws and Limits, but circumscribed
by their Doctrines, not considering whether true or false, but only according
to their Interest: And if we consider the Lives of most Men of all Conditions,
we shall find the Honors and Pleasures of the World, which we renounced in
Baptism, are the very Gods which share the World amongst us.

Though we have seen Overturnings of States and Kingdoms, and great Changes, yet
the true Church, that adores that God that was ever adored, subsists without
Interruption, and that Religion which has always been opposed, still subsists.
It has many a Time been almost extinguished, yet God has always been pleased
to raise and recover it by Wonders of his Goodness and Power; and what is also
very observable is, That it has never submitted to yield or bow to the Will of
Tyrants, Let us but take a serious View of the Apostles chosen by Jesus Christ:
Those Persons that were Ignorant and Unlearned, of a sudden were found
sufficiently able to put to Silence the wisest Philosophers, and Courageous
enough to oppose the greatest Kings or Tyrants that resisted the Christian
Religion which they Taught and Preached. If we see a Miracle, say some Men, we
would be Converted; they think there is no more in Conversion, but to believe
there is a God, when the Devil does that and trembles; but true Conversion
consists in Humbling our selves before the Savior of the World, whom we have
so often Povoked, and who might justly every Minute destroy us; to confess, we
can do nothing without him, and that we have deserved nothing but his
Displeasure. It consists in acknowledging that there is a great Enmity betwixt
God and us, and without a Mediator we could have had no Access nor Favor.

I know very well, that good Men may and often do blemish the Reputation of
their Piety, by over-acting some Things in Religion, by an ungrateful Austerity
and Sourness, which Religion does not require; a substantial, discreet and
unaffected Piety makes no great Noise nor Show, but expresses it self in a
constant serious Devotion, accompanied with good Works and Kindness, which
makes a Man pleasing both to God and his Neighbor: Religion makes Men obedient
to Government, and conformable to Laws; it makes Men Peaceable to each other,
it heals the Natures of Men, and sweetens their Spirits; it corrects their
Passions, and mortifies all those Lusts, which are the Causes of Enmity and
Divisions: If Men would live as Religion requires they should do, the World
would be a quiet Habitation: And the true Reason, why the Societies of Men are
so full of Tumult and Disorder, is, Because there is so little true Religion
amongst them; so that if it were not for some small Remainders of Piety and
Virtue, which are yet scattered amongst Mankind, humane Society would in a
short Time disband and run into Confusion, the Earth would grow wild and become
a great Forest, and Men would turn Beasts of Prey one toward the other: So
that Religion has so great an Influence upon the Felicity of Man, that it
ought to be upheld out of Regard to their Temporal Peace and Prosperity, as
well as to their Eternal. Religion does qualify all Sorts of Men, and makes
them in Public Affairs the more Serviceable, Governors apter to Rule with
Conscience, and Inferiors for Conscience Sake the willinger to Obey. And it is
a great Truth, That all Duties are by so much the better performed by how much
the Men are more Religious from whose Abilities the same proceed; and if
Magistrates, who are employed about the Public Administration of Justice,
follow it only as a Trade for Gain's-Sake, the Formality of Justice will then
only serve to smother Right, and that which was necessarily ordained for the
common Good, will be the Cause of common Misery.

Religion has a Superiority above all other Things, and is as necessary to our
living Happy in this World, as it is to our being Saved in the next; without it
a Man is an abandoned Creature, one of the worst Beasts Nature has produced,
and fit only for the Society of Wolves and Bears, and therefore in all Ages it
has been the Foundation of Government. and therefore as nothing is better for
being Sour, it would be hard Religion should be so, which is the best of
Things, and is so Cheerful, and so far from being always at odds with good
Humor, that it is inseparably united to it, and nothing of Unpleasantness
belongs to it. A Virtue stuck with Bristles is too rough, it must be adorned
with some Flowers, or else it will be unwillingly entertained; so that even
where it may be fit to Strike, do it gently; and where one takes Care to do it,
he would wound others more, and hurt himself less by soft Strokes, than by
being harsh and violent.

Most People keep to that Religion which is grown up with them, thinking that
the best; and the Reason of staying in it upon that Ground, is somewhat
stronger for Women, than will be allowed for Men, who are bound to search the
Truth.

Though Kings be Gods on Earth, yet they are Subjects of Heaven, and accountable
to God: Religion in a King strengthens his Authority, it procures Veneration,
and gains a Reputation; and in all Public Affairs, so much Reputation is
really so much Power; and even in Men of low Degree, Religion will command some
Reverence and Respect: But in Persons of eminent Place and Dignity, it casts a
Luster upon them, and by a strong Reflection doubles the Beams of Majesty; as
the clearness of the Eye disposes for a quicker Sight, so the clearness of the
Mind disposes us to more perfect Acts of Religion. Few Things are well learnt
but by easy Precepts, those well infused will make them Natural, and we are
never sure of retaining what is valuable, till by continual Habit we have made
it a Piece of us.

We must not think the Rewards of Heaven, like ripe Fruit upon a full laden
Bough, should stoop down to us, to be taken by every idle and wanton Hand: That
Heaven should be prostituted to the lazy Desires and ordinary Endeavors of
Slothful Men. God will not so much disparage eternal Life and Happiness, as to
bestow it upon those who have so low an Opinion of it, as not to think it worth
taking Pains for. We must use our best Endeavors, doing what we can, and then
we may expect God's gracious Assistance: But when Men expect Religion should
cost them no Pains, and that Happiness should drop into their Laps without any
Labor on their Part, and that God should snatch them up into Heaven when they
Die, as he did the good Thief, they will at last find themselves much mistaken
in their Measures: It Is troublesome at first, I confess, for a Man to begin a
new Life; but when he begins to habituate himself to a Religious and Virtuous
Life, the Trouble will soon go off, and unspeakable Pleasure succeed in its
Place. It was an excellent Rule, which Pythagoras gave to his Scholars,
Optimum vitae genus eligito nam consuetudo faciet jucundissimum: Resolve always
to do what is most reasonable, and Custom will soon make it Easy. And those,
who upon Pretense of the Difficulties of Religion, abandon themselves to a
wicked Course of Life, may easily be convinced, (though perhaps when it is too
late) that they took more Pains to make themselves Miserable, than would have
been to bring them to Happiness.

The Difference betwixt an Atheist and an Enthusiast is this: The Atheist
thinks nothing Unlawful, as believing no God to judge him: An Enthusiast thinks
every Thing that comes into his Head not only Lawful, but the Inspiration of
God, and as such is prompted with a fiery Zeal to propagate it with the Hazard
of his Life, the overturning of Government, and embroiling the World: And when
a Man is once fully possessed with this Spirit, which works upon his
Imagination, his Reason is wholly clouded, his Discourses are inconsistent, he
has nothing in his View but his present Impulse, and as that alters, he pursues
the quite contrary, with the same Vehemence, not reflecting that it is opposite
to his former Sentiments. Now this is most certainly a great Excess of Pride,
which yet recommends it self to many wellinclined and religiously disposed
People, under the Notion of Abstraction from the World, of Humility, and
Self-Denial: For what greater Exaltation of ones self can be imagined, and
indeed Rebellion against God, than to think my self exempted, upon account of
my own Holiness, from those Institutions which God has appointed, and from that
Authority which he has ordained amongst Men, and by whose Hands he does
dispense his Blessings to us? What greater Delusion than to think, that we can
contrive a shorter and safer Way to Heaven than that which God has commanded
us? Not to be contented with that Station wherein he has placed us, but to
raise our selves above that Order by which he governs the World, (who as long
as they administer Justice are to be revered as God's Vicegerents upon Earth;)
to despise Dominion, and speak Evil of Dignities, which is a sign of
Reprobation: It is no less, than assuming the Power of God to our selves, to
usurp his Throne, and as far as in us lies to take the Government of the World
out of his Hands: All this is the Effect of Enthusiasm: All the Looseness and
Wickedness of this Age is to have no Principles, but guided wholly by our
Humor and Fancy; and most of the Heresies or Schisms which have divided the
Church came from this Fountain.

St. Augustine tell us, That the mighty Success and strong Prosperity of the
Romans was a Reward given them by God for their eminent Justice and other
Virtues: As to particular Persons, the Providence of God are promiscuously
given in this World; so that we cannot certainly conclude, God's Love or Hatred
to any Person by any thing that befalls him in this Life: But God deals
otherwise with Nations, because Public States and Communities, as such, can
only be rewarded and punished in this World; for in the next, all Public
Societies will be dissolved, and every Man shall give an Account of himself to
God: The great crying Sins of a Nation cannot hope to escape Public Judgments,
which God may defer for a Time to give People a longer space of Repentance, but
sooner or later they have Reason to expect his Vengeance. God has Leaden Feet,
but Iron Hands, he is longere he punishes, but strikes home at last; and
usually the longer Punishment is delayed, it is the heavier when it comes.
Experience in all Ages has made this good We find through the History of the
Old Testament the interchangeable Providence of God, toward the People of
Israel, always suited to their Manners. They were constantly Prosperous or
Afflicted, as Virtue and Piety flourished and declined amongst them. And thus
God deals with all others: The Roman Empire, whilst that People remained
Virtuous, was firm and strong as Iron; but upon Dissolution of their Manners,
the Iron was soon mixed with miry Clay, and the Feet upon which that Empire
stood were soon broken.

Of KINGS and PRINCES, and the Education of a PRINCE.
THERE are found admirable Occurrences in the Lives of all Men, but much more
in Princes, who moving in a higher Sphere, their Actions are more conspicuous
and worthy to be transmitted to Posterity, as Instructive to their Successors:
And though Prosperity is more agreeable to our Nature, yet Adversity is more
Beneficial, when Princes make a right Improvement of it, to shun those Rocks
whereon some Princes have been split.

It is very necessary to accustom a young Prince to divert himself amongst
pleasant Men; one cannot find a more sure and less painful Way to render him a
most accomplished Prince, than having such Courtiers about him in his Youth;
(but the Difficulty is to find such:) A Prince will not fail to learn
insensibly the Manners and Actions of those; and whatsoever he gains that way
becomes Natural to him. Those that are near him should make use, as much as is
possible, of that way to Instruct him; it being absolutely necessary, that
those who have Wit, and are well-bred Men, should not only be received by the
Prince, but that Means be taken to find them out, for commonly such Men are not
over-forward to show themselves: They know how to be Content with their own
small Fortunes; and besides, such Men are so rarely met with, that those who
understand them, need not fear to be troubled with too many of them; for I do
not remember, in all my Time, (who have spent many Years in the World) to have
seen so few of them as at present.

To make a Prince speak well, it is necessary to mix a little Art and Study,
and a Prince ought to have something of both; for to the completing of a
worthy honest Man, there is nothing more necessary than well-Speaking and
well-Doing: What Gracefulness so clear a Source gives to all our Actions? How
does it beautify our Words and Thoughts? How amiable a Thing it is to Speak
well when Sincerity goes along with it?

Young Princes are commonly more Active than Speculative, and most easily
carried away with the Pleasures of the World; yet there are some, who by Nature
are serious enough, and are capable to retire into themselves, as King Charles
the First, and King James the Second. It were to be wished, that a young
Prince, be neither too Active, nor too Serious, the best Temper is to partake
of both, and be able to pass with Ease from the one to the other. Some Attempts
might be made to give a young Prince the Apprehension of certain Things with
which Children are not to entertain themselves, as surpassing their ordinary
Capacity; for though a Child understands not at first what is said to them, yet
it prepares him against another time, and they are as little Essays of Reason,
which come not all at once. It is necessary for him that would attain Virtues,
to begin gradually at the lowest Step, to guard his Senses, and set a watch
upon the Avenues of his Passions, for Man becomes neither perfectly Virtuous or
Vicious all at once; and Jesus the Son of Syrach has said, He that contemns
little Things shall fall by little and little. The smallest Occasion suffices
to say something that pleases; and it is of much Importance to form a Prince's
Will agreeably, for then he will take Pleasure to hearken to a Man that has
Judgment and Wit, and will be desirous to be instructed by him: And if Persons
about a Prince have a Grace in their Words and Actions, the Prince will retain
the Manner how to behave and express himself. This agreeable way of Talking is
of great Consequence, and the surest way to acquire it, is to let such as have
and practice it, come into the Prince's Company: Those Princes who are young,
and understand not all that is said to them, want often that some Body put them
in Mind; and when Princes keep Company with such, they take some Observations
which they should never have of themselves; and we our selves find, if many
Things had been discovered to us in our Youth, which we have since found by our
own Experience and Reflections, we had saved much Time; and one Word to the
Purpose then, had made us comprehend a World of Things, which we know not, nor
shall ever know whilst we live: But we reflect not on those Opportunities till
we have lost them, and we are not aware of them, till it be too late: All the
World commits Faults, but the greatest are only perceived.

Those who have the Education of young Princes should endeavor to make them
Love or Hate that, which deserves the one or the other, that the Prince may
have a good Taste or Discernment, for this would make him understand what he
should Learn, and the Means to be excellent in it: For if a Prince had
beforehand a right Apprehension of Good and Evil, the very Course of Things
would instruct him, and the Aversion to what is Evil, whenever he saw it,
would be sufficient to avoid it: A young Prince cannot have too curious a Taste
to discern betwixt true and false Pleasures, and not to be deceived in either.
The most agreeable way of instructing, is, to do that Well, which we see others
do Ill, by which we make our Life more easy: Besides, those that are about a
young Prince, should endeavor, that the Wit and Heart of the Prince should be
disposed as they ought to be: It Is true that Wit finds out the way to attain
Perfection, but the Heart is necessary to put in Practice what is judged to be
the Best; and that which we call the having a good Taste or Discernment is
oftenest found in a young Prince, who is usually born with more than an
ordinary Genius; though a late Eminent Philosopher holds, That all Children
Naturally have near the same Capacity, and that the chief Difference proceeds
from the Care that is taken to inform Children: But I think the first Advantage
is rather to be ascribed to a happy Birth, and that Art does afterward perfect
it; and I have always believed we should not so much wish for any thing in a
young Prince, as Wit, it being impossible not to have it, if he be Educated in
the Company of some People; as to the learning by ones self, it very seldom
happens that the Mind, without some extraordinary Help, takes the right Course
to do it: It Is true indeed, our late King Charles the Second was a very
excellent and knowing Man, and had a great Insight into Men and Manners; though
in his Youth, by the Reason of our intestine Troubles, and the Rebellion raised
against his Royal Father, he was Taught very little; yet he had an excellent
Governor in his tender Years, which was the Marquis of Hartford, and after him,
the Earl of Newcastle; but when that Prince went Generalissimo into the West of
England, his Highness had the poorest and weakest Man for his Governor that I
ever saw; yet they who had Interest in the Prince, and were near about him,
instructed him in so pleasant a Way, that he was most agreeable in
Conversation; And when he came to the Throne, if he had loved Business as well
as he understood it, he had been one of the greatest Princes of the last Age;
but he was wholly addicted to his Pleasures, and Chamber-Practice, which much
shortened his Days; and yet he may be reckoned amongst the most admired Princes
of his Time, who had formed and instructed himself amongst the best-bred
Princes in Europe.

A young Prince should never be over burdened with a long Chain of
Instructions; his Tutor should rather choose to speak few Things, and let each
Precept take its Effect, and should give the Prince a Reason of all he tells
him; so that the Prince of his own Accord might insensibly make the Application
to himself; it being much better to enlighten his Understanding, than to charge
his Memory.

And above all Things, he should teach the Prince to be Free and Affable, which
Virtues make Princes to be beloved; and it is of great Consequence for a young
Prince to have the Art of making himself be beloved: When Majesty and Civility
are mixed together, it makes Men find with Pleasure that such Princes are their
Masters. The more Princes condescend, the more ready are their Servants to
submit, especially if they be well-bred Persons, who never presume too much.
The most Eminent Princes were wont to communicate freely, and were very
familiar: Caesar was so with his own Soldiers, which so charmed them, that when
they fought for his Glory, they found nothing difficult, and were not
apprehensive of Danger, (Heaven takes those Hearts into its Protection,) and in
fighting Fifty Battles, which Caesar did without losing one, he was always very
Active, and yet never received any Hurt: Such Princes are always beloved; and
though Fortune (which is ever inconstant) leaves their Side, yet Glory and Honor
never forsake them.

Caesar was of this Number: He had nothing in him, which savored not of
Grandeur; he was brave and full of Civility; he would hazard his own Person, to
save the meanest of his Soldiers. He loved all those that loved his Fortune; he
shared with them the Glory, as he did the Danger; he understood well how to
make himself be Beloved, Vt Ameris, Ama, which is a sure way if it be performed
handsomely; the principal Secret consists in managing it so, that the Persons
whom one loves should be glad of it.

There is nothing so much to be feared in a young Prince, as giving him an ill
Master; for the best Natural Parts would be but of little use, if Care be not
taken to improve them: One can never take any thing right without having learnt
it; and who can believe that either to do a Thing well, or to do it better, if
one does it well, that Study can ever hinder it: We see in all Exercises, how
much good Masters are necessary; and it were very strange, that the Body should
be capable of Instruction, and not the Mind; for what likelihood is there, that
Practice and good Masters are effectual to make a young Man skillful in riding
the Great Horse, and that to the making of an accomplished Person, they should
both be needless.

The Body and the Mind are seldom as one would wish; but the Defects of the
Body seem more difficult to be corrected; for the Mind is naturally supple, and
may be redressed if a right Course be taken; and the Reason why it falls out
otherwise is, when we learn to do a Thing of an ill Master, one learns to do it
ill; and it is much more difficult to choose good Masters for framing the Mind,
than for the Body, for the Advantages of the Body are much more remarkable than
those of the Mind: To be able and wellbred to such a Degree as one would have a
great Prince, one cannot know too many Things, if we have Skill to make a right
Use of them, and know how to Value them; but to have read much, or to have
learnt a Number of different Opinions, discovers nothing of Certainty; for we
know nothing well but what we see clearly, and that which we can make others
see presently, and understand if they be clear-sighted, and we should mistrust
all which we see as through a Cloud, and which we cannot make plain to the
Sight of another. There are some Princes who would have been very gallant Men,
if Care had been taken at first to put them in a right way, and to have showed
them what was to be done. For a great Prince, upon whom the Happiness of the
Public depends, by whose Example his People will fashion themselves, as being
the most noble Model, no Care in the World should be neglected: The Business is
to make a young Prince Happy, and that all who live under him may be so; it
being reasonable that those should a little share in the Happiness who are in
Duty obliged to Sacrifice themselves for prosecuting of it; and therefore this
first Point of their Education is of much greater Importance to them, than to
private Persons: For when Princes are no longer under the Conduct of Governors,
all that they do, or say, is approved, or at least it is so in Appearance; For
no Person comes into their Presence but with a design to please them, because
although he loves them, yet one easily inclines to love their Favor more; and it
were a great Imprudence for any Man to draw the Hatred of his Prince upon
himself, and to advise him as he would one of his particular Friends, unless at
first the Prince had signified his Pleasure to have it so: However, those
Persons that are near about Princes that be young, (if they are not too much
swayed by Interest) may very securely tell them in an agreeable manner, all
which may contribute to their Glory and Happiness: It Is certain, a very easy
Thing to give them good Advice as to their Glory, but it is not so to their
Happiness, which depends more upon the Temper; and whosoever will ascertain a
Prince what will make him happy, must know him perfectly well, for most
commonly we our selves know not what would be best for our own Happiness: But
when all is done, it seems to me, that with a very little Help, it were no
difficult Thing for a young Prince to be happy.

Certainly, that young Prince is in a fair way to it, who sees himself one of
the first amongst the Masters of the World, and that Fortune has nothing
greater to give. And therefore Princes should consider what Pleasure it is to
do good, that there is nothing more Noble, and that this Delight was made only
for Princes. For the more Favors they bestow, the more they are in Condition
to grant, provided their Gifts be with Choice and Esteem, which supports their
Grandeur, and renders them more Powerful: It is not Riches that are principally
desired from Kings, but Employments and Trusts, and that which makes Men desire
high Commands, is not for Convenience of Life, for their Lives are by them made
more troublesome; but it is Hopes of making it appear, that they have Merit in
them and are useful to the Public; and when just Persons that have Worth and
Fidelity are put into Employments, they make themselves soon known, and their
Princes are well served: We have lately seen in England, a sad Example of
taking false Measures herein; the ill Choice of our late King's Ministers was
his Ruin: Besides, what greater Slavery can there be, than that Princes are
chained to their Posts, and cannot make themselves less, all their Words and
Actions are descanted upon, and made public Discourse. A Prince cannot with
Dignity quit his Guards. Fortune has him in Custody, a Train besets him
wherever he goes, and there is no making an Escape, but still he that is the
Master of many is the Servant of more.

The great and honorable Fame of a King in this World depends more upon his
wise Administration than upon his private Morals; the Goodness of his
Government depends chiefly upon those that advise him, and execute under him;
it being an infallible Maxim, That he is the worst (at least the most unhappy)
King, who has the worst Counselors and Ministers under him.

Princes should endeavor to couple Warlike and peaceable Virtues together, to
know at all times how to Rule their own State, and protect their Subjects; to
honor the Good, and chastise the Wicked; to change the Pleasures of the Body
into those of the Mind, to seek their Content in the Acquisition of those
Things which may raise them above other Persons: But this Perfection is not
easily met with at Court, where every Thing stands in Opposition to good
Designs; Princes are born to govern, and therefore they must govern well,
without amusing themselves with Knowledge more curious than useful, which would
better become a Professor of Philosophy than a Prince.

There is no doubt but Sciences do adorn the Titles of Princes, as Diadems do
their Heads, and Jewels their Crowns, but the most necessary Philosophy for a
Prince, is to know how to do Justice to his People, and to defend them from
their Enemies, and to understand what Persons are able to serve him well;
nevertheless many Princes enter upon the Government before they have passed an
Apprentiship for it, and take least Care of what concerns them most.

Foreign Languages are most necessary for a Prince, and serve for a great
Ornament to him; the Princes Electors of Germany would admit no Man heretofore
to the Imperial Dignity, unless he was able to speak Latin, Italian, Sclavonian
and Dutch; and the Emperor Frederick the Second could besides speak elegant
French, Spanish and Turkish, which was very rare in his time: He was also
skilful in the ancient vulgar Greek; and indeed the Intercourse of Princes, who
live upon the Continent, permits them not to neglect these Languages without
running a great Inconveniency. The English Genius for clear speaking and
writing is always to the Point; they look upon rambling Discouses with
Contempt, and as Men of Reason, they stand more upon Strength of Argument, than
all the Pomp of Rhetoric, not so much concerned to move the Hearer's
Affections, as to warm his Reason. Perhaps no Nation is more Satirical and
quicker in Repartees, which argues Wit to express themselves significantly; we
have a most happy Language, compounded chiefly of Saxon, Latin and French, of
which Saxon is the Stock, the other two being ingrafted into it. The English is
so significant that it does almost equalize the Greek, and does even exceed the
Latin, in a particular Grace of compounding Words, which is as great a Beauty
as can be in Language. In Point of Sweetness, the French and the Italian run
smoother, but they want Sinews, especially the last. The Spanish is Majestical
but boisterous; the High- Dutch Manly, but very harsh; whereas the English is
both sweet and manly. If we look upon the famous Men of our Nation, which have
been Learned, or Soldiers, we shall find many very famous, as Venerable Bede,
Sir Thomas Moor, Lord Bacon, Smith, Spelman, Camden, Seldom, Daniel, Drayton,
Ben. Johnson, Shakespeare, Beaumont, Fletcher, Sir Philip Sidney, Cowley,
Oldham, Dryden, and many others. But is impossible to learn Languages without
traveling, which embellishes the Minds of those that use it prudently: A young
Prince that travels will understand Nations, imitate what they have of good,
and avoid the rest; he should heedfully regard the Laws and Fundamental Maxims
of State, the Inclinations of Sovereigns, their Revenues, the Order of their
Courts, their Alliances, their Power, and their Favorites; that Prince who
has seen Europe with Judgment knows every thing that can carry him to
glorious Actions, and certainly a young Prince that travils, profits more in
two Years, than if he had stayed in his Study ten Years; Travel teaches them to
understand the Plenty of Countries, the Force of Rivers, and which are the most
eminent Places of Traffic and Commerce, the Convenience of Bridges, the
distance of Places, the Strength and Situation of Cities and Castles, the
Number of the People, the Inclination of the Subjects, the Humor of Princes,
the Sympathy and Antipathy of Nations, and many other things which may instruct
a General of an Army to fortify Places, to entrench, to Camp an Army
advantagiously, to draw up a Body of Men in Battle, to lead an Army to fight,
and to show themselves eminent Examples to their Followers. Travel also gives a
Prince Lessons of Temperance, Modesty and Patience; and the Languages which are
useful to all Men are most necessary to Princes, and to those who would have
any Command of Armies. Spanish is the noblest of all Bastard Languages, it not
being a Mother Tongue, but compounded of Latin, Gothic, Arabic and Spanish:
The Romans, Goths and Moors, having reigned some Ages in that Country, did
introduce a Mixture of all those Languages. A Prince should also learn the
Mathematics, which will teach him to besiege, and fortify Places. These are
the most needful Studies for a Prince, and not to spend his time upon Logical
Notions, but to choose such Studies as are proportionable to his Condition: It
is sufficient that a Prince be ready in sacred and profane History; that he
take a Delight in some Books, and sometimes consult the dead, who will say that
which none of the living dare say to him; he should read such Books as may
teach him to know the Condition of his Friends and Enemies; he should learn
Principles of Generosity and Honor distinctly; to know those that love the
Public Good and Interest, and to favor them with such Offices as they
deserve, and to punish them that do otherwise: And though it be honorable for
Kings to aggrandize their best Deserving Subjects, yet a Prince ought not to
diffuse his Graces too prodigally, least the Servant should become the Master;
which in all Courts, and at all times has proved very prejudicial. The Planets
would have little Regard to the Sun, if they had no need of his Light, nor a
Servant of his Master, if he could do him no good; Princes ought therefore to
be circumspect in Distribution of their Favors, if they would not lose that
Honor and Respect which their Subjects give them. A King gives an Account of
his Actions to none but God; he ought nevertheless to act equitably, and not to
plunge brave Men into Despair, than which nothing is more dangerous, who having
lost their Estates by their most faithful and long Services, thinking they have
nothing more to lose, are capable to make the greatest report of their Wrongs;
it is true, Kings may take the Benefits bestowed, when they that received them
become unworthy of them; but before a King comes to that Extremity, he should
endeavor to reduce them to their Duty, and having tried all fair Ways, the
Prince must be careful not faintly to execute his Resolution, nor rashly to
enter upon a great Action, which in Prudence he must afterward abandon. A
Prince should think seriously of a Thing before he enters upon it, but having
begun, he should carry it through, for there is nothing more repugnant to
Authority of Kings than to act by halfs, nor any thing that encourages Subjects
so much to Rebellion as to see their Masters are afraid of them. A Prince ought
to spend some Time in reading, especially History, which will render him able
and knowing, and it is a good Guide, and what concerns Life which it does
antidate, and makes the Reader contemporary with the Times past, and by running
up beyond his Nativity, the Prince will be something the wiser for it, and will
have a Stock of Sense, without much Trouble of his own; and it is of great Use
to persuade by Example that which we have a Mind to. History is a kind of
Experience, and we may reap much by it; besides there are some Histories
written by so good Hands, which though we know, yet it is a Pleasure to read
them, as Thucidides, Polibius, Caesar's Commentaries, with the Duke of Rohan
and Sir Clement Edmond's Observations upon them, and Hugo Grotius de Jure Pacis
and Belli, and Selden's Mare clausum; but to read over much, and to be
constantly poring upon Books, brings neither Pleasure nor Profit. Reading too
much over-charges Nature; it is Thought and Digestion that makes Reading
profitable, which being well managed gives a great Insight into all Things. He
that depends upon his own Experience, has but a few Materials to work upon,
and to take Measures wholly from Books without looking into Men and Business,
is like traveling in a Map, where only Countries and Cities are well
distinguished; but Villages and private Houses are seldom or never marked.

Young Princes, after some Hours in their Study, should bestow some others upon
Sports, because the Mind being taken up too long with Contemplation will
disrelish Study, if it be not refreshed with some Recreations, in which Hunting
is one of the most agreeable to Princes; and because Youth runs easily down the
Hill toward Pleasures, therefore Princes should sometimes play at Tennis; though
most commonly young Princes would rather endure the Pains of Hunting a whole
Day than studying but two Hours, which they think a Labor, which is really
nothing but pure Delight, and Studying would be a sensual Pleasure, if the Mind
were capable of any in those younger Years. For those that have once tasted it
can never take themselves off again in such Manner that they become despicable
and good for nothing else. As for Exercises, Hunting has always been the
Recreation of Princes, nor never disesteemed but by those that know not the
Benefit of it. It withdraws the great Men about the Prince from Idleness, which
is the Mother of all Vices, or from Gaming, which is unsuitable to their
Condition: It makes Princes strong, active and bold. Almost all Princes love
Hunting, and apply themselves to it, because it is a Representation of War; a
good Huntsman is, or may easily be a good Soldier. To surprise the Wolf or the
Fox, a Man must use a certain Subtilty, which teaches us to lay Ambushes for
the Enemy. To take a wild Boar, one must know how to present the Boar Spear to
Advantage, just as one would do a Pike or a Halbert when two Bodies of Soldiers
come to push of Pike. To shoot a Deer or Hare running, a Patridge or a Quale
flying, one must be as good a Marks-man as the best Fusileer in the Army;
besides, Hunting enures a Prince to endure Hunger, Thirst, Heat, Cold, Rain,
Snow, and all the Incommodities of the Air, without which it is impossible to
be a good Soldier.

I confess, Princes should endeavor to couple Moral and Martial Virtues
together: I know Liberality is counted the proper Virtue of a Prince, it being
much better for him to be Profuse than Covetuous, Prodigality having a
resemblance of something more noble than Avarice, and really it is less odious:
Nay, those that gain by it make it pass for a Virtue; but perhaps it is more
prejudicial to Posterity, and more dangerous than the other Extreme: For though a
King should give away his whole Kingdom, he would not satisfy all that ask:
No, nor all that think they deserve much of him: It is then more convenient to
give with Reason, and never to draw so near the Bottom, but that the Prince may
always have wherewith to gratify Persons of Merit; and above all, the Prince
should take special Care, that his Liberalities be exercised without oppressing
his People, to avoid Murmuring, which is the ready way to produce Rebellion.
But there is little need at this Time of making Laws against giving too much,
Princes are not too free in this Age; and there are not many that want an
Overseer in this kind, especially in our English Court. It is certain, that
Kings, by the Eminency of their Places, are highly obliged to Integrity,
because the least Blemish in them grows up to a monstrous Deformity. They are
the Primum Mobile upon which all other Orbs depend; and Assiadorus says it were
more credible that Nature should Err, than for a Prince to frame a Commonwealth
different from the Constitution of his own Life; he being a Glass issuing forth
Incentives to Imitation; and where that is wanting, the Government cannot long
subsist. Was not Rome Warlike under Romulus, Religious under Numa, Continent
under Fabricius, Dissolute under Lucullus and Antony, Idolatrous under Julian,
Immerged in Arianism under Valens? To show that People are always molded into
the Temper of their Prince, and where that is not, the Government is short. And
we find in Holy Writ, Judgment threatened to Princes, who have been a Snare
instead of a Sanctuary to their Subjects: And St. Augustine calls them the worst
of Homicides, in destroying the Souls of their Subjects; and therefore that
King who understands his Duty to God, cannot be ignorant, how many Obligations
of Virtue are annexed to a Crown, since the Lives of his Subjects are shaded
under his Protection; and since a King mediates between God and his People, it
is as necessary that he should adhere first to God, as he would have his People
be faithful to him; so that he must in the first Place consecrate himself, next
his Kingdom, to the Service of his Creator; and whoever does not this, he
overturns both Divine and Humane Laws: Kings are not to be esteemed Happy for
their Conquests, but by using their Power in the Advancement of God's Honor
and Service. The Royal Dignity is not sufficiently great of it self to render
him Happy that injoys it, by the sole considering what he is; for if a King be
left alone without any Company, to think of himself at Leisure, he will find
himself to be a Man full of Miseries, and that feels them as well as other
common Persons; and therefore carefully to avoid this, there never fail to be
near the Persons of Kings a great many that continually watch to make
Divertisements for Princes, and supply their leisure Time, with Pleasures and
Pastimes, that none of their Time may be vacant; which is to say, that Kings
are encompassed round with Persons that are very careful Kings should not be
alone to think of themselves, knowing very well that a King, as he is, he would
be very Miserable if he should be left alone; and indeed, the chief thing that
supports Men in great Employments is, that they are perpetually hindered from
Thinking of themselves, for it is the Noise and Bustle that divert us, and is
most grateful; Men have a secret Instinct that intices them to seek
Divertisements, which proceeds from the continual Sense of their Misery, and
they feel another secret Instinct that remains from the Greatness of their
first Nature, which makes them know that their Happiness consists only in Rest;
and these two contrary Instincts flatter them, that the Satisfaction they
expect will come, by opening the Door that will admit them to Rest, which is
usually sought by struggling with some Opposition in vain: And therefore Cyneas
the Philosopher said well to Pyrrhus, who promised he would enjoy his Pleasures
with his Friends, when he had conquered a good Part of the World: But Cyneas
told him, he would do better to advance his own Happiness by enjoying that Rest
presently, than to seek it by so many Troubles; but Pyrrhus could not be Happy,
either before or after Conquering a great Part of the World; and the sensual
Life his Ministers advised him to was less able to content him, than the
Agitation of so great Wars, and so many Voyages as he designed.

It Is certain, Man hunts after Felicity in all his Actions; for all Men desire
to be Happy, and what ever different Means they use, all tends to this End; it
is the same Desire in both, that inclines one to go the War, and the other not
to go; the Will does never move one Step, but with regard to this Object of
Felicity: It is the true and real Motive of all Men's Actions; nay, even of
those that Hang themselves: When People believe their Prince is Liberal,
Valiant, and Prudent, they will more readily obey his Will and receive his
Commands with Respect; but to gain the Reputation of being a Prudent Prince, he
should be very careful that his Ministers and Servants be Friends to the
Public Good, that they be Affable, Modest and Generous: The Prince must show a
constant Resolution to maintain his People in their ancient Splendor: That
Adversity cast him not down, nor Prosperity make him Insolent; and to give a
fairer Luster to his Liberality, he should take Care that what he bestows do
not arise out of the Oppression of any, and being such without drawing his
Sword, or giving much to his Subjects, his Friends and Enemies too will esteem
him Valiant, Liberal, and Prudent, and all of them fearing to offend him, will
pay him the Duties of Subjects, Friends and Neighbors; and he need not doubt
but God will dissipate his Enemies, and all the mutinous malicious Designs of
his malicious Subjects and ambitious Neighbors.

We must know that Kings are considered in a double Capacity, that of Nature
and that of Policy; the Politic Body never dies, and is never defective of
Authority or Direction; the Acts of the Body Politic are not abated by the
Natural Body's Access. The Body Politic is not disabled to govern by the
Nonage of the Natural, by the 26 lib. Assis. Placit. 24. Justice Thorp's
Judgment was, That the Gift of the King is not defeated by his Nonage: And in
the Assis. Title Droit, Placit. 24. in the Sixth Year of King Edward the Third,
a Writ of Right was brought by the King of a Manor, as Heir to King Richard the
Second, the Exceptions of Nonage against the King was not admitted; for though
the Natural Body dies, the Politic never dies. So in the 4th of Queen
Elizabeth, the Leases of the Duchy of Lancaster, made by Edward the Sixth,
were resolved by all the Judges to be good, though made in the King's Minority;
and the Change of Religion made by Edward the Sixth in his Minority was good,
though he had not Age to discern what he did, being then in the Hands of his
Uncle the Protector; and if Catholics should pretend to make void the Change
of Religion made in that King's Time, because of his Minority, they would be
laughed at by all the World, and their Pretense would be ridiculous.

Of MAN.
THE Transactions of this World are the most unpleasant Speculations that ever
entertained my Mind; the whole Offspring of Nature moves as at first, but
only Man, who was designed Master of the whole, runs a Course contrary to all
Order, and the whole Progeny of Adam is obnoxious to his Original Guilt. We
have innate Affections and Propensities to do Evil, since our first Mother's
Converse with the Serpent, and the sad Effects of Adam's Fate are derived to
all; but yet no Evil is in us, but the Cure is in our own Power; no poisonous
Herb sprouts out, but in the same Field its Antidote is placed. It is therefore
a Wonder that Men who know they have rational Souls, should only follow the
Dictates of Sense, and for one Hour of Pleasure here, suffer an Eternity of
Torments hereafter; for by embracing our Heady Appetites, we have changed the
whole Mass of our Nature, and have set our selves a diametrical Opposition to
all that is called good; so that all our Actions are impertinent, and we level
our Designs at a false End, and we wander in those Paths which will lead us to
the Gates of Destruction.

The Enjoyment of what the World affords is that we only seek after. The Devil
began with these in his first Temptation of Eve in Paradise; and it seems he
had not, four thousand Years after, found out three better Engines for his Turn
than these; for he used the very same in the Wilderness to our Savior, the
promised Seed of the Woman, that he had prevailed with on Eve her self in
Paradise, so long before. Make these Stones bread; there is the Lust of the
Flesh. He shows him all the Kingdoms of the World, there is the Lust of the
Eyes: Cast thy self down from the Pinnacle, the Angels are thy Guard to bear
thee up in their Hands; there is the Pride of Life. It Is true, the Devil can do
no more but tempt us, his Power (however great) is limited, though we cannot
easily set out the Bounds of it; he has his Chains of Restraint, as well as
Torment: It seems an Invasion of God's Prerogative, and a giving the Devil more
than his Due, to allow him a Power of immediate and impressive Injection into
our Minds, without the Help of our own innate Corruptions; for it is by these we
hold the Candle to him, and the Wedge too of the Temptation whilst he drives
it; the Mud is still in the Bottom, he does but stir it up by shaking it, or
drawing it forth by some outward Objects. There is no easier Way to out-reach a
Man, than to out-end him. If once the Devil can get a Man to shoot with him in
his own Bow, and make his Engines a Man's End, the Match is lost (as we use to
say) in the very making.

Now if any Man will but seriously try, he shall find it more possible to
withold his Affection from the Things of this World, than enjoy the
Satisfaction of his Taste in it. Socrates had more true Joy in safely looking
on all the Olympic Games, and thanking the Gods, that they had made him not to
need the many things they had made for others Pursuits, than Alcibiades in his
hazardous obtaining them, which made Socrates cry out, Quos diderunt dii quibus
non indigeo. It Is worth our Observation to consider the Toil that such Men
take, who are in love with the Pleasures of this World, to eternize, if
possible, their earthly Happiness by a Succession of Variety, and to take off
the Weariness of one Pleasure by another, between the Oil and the Wine, as
Seneca speaks. Homines inter vinum and oleum occupati; but all in vain; for
after those few evaporated Minutes of Pleasure, the Body quietly fails the
Mind, and the Mind the Desire, and the Desire the Satisfaction, and all the
Man. There is indeed nothing more in all these Pleasures, besides bare
Imagination and Expectation, which though they may draw out the Affections, do
never satisfy them, nay, do the more dissatisfie and disappoint them, and
Pleasure is but an Earnest laid down for Grief, if not for Ruin.

This Adventure has no other Return, and if this be a Man's End, it is an End
that quickly ends both it self and him: Many have come to their End by it,
never any enjoyed their End in it. Alexander was a greater Conqueror in
overcoming his own Desire of seeing Darius his Wife and Daughters, than in
subduing them, Victor Magis Darii uxorem, non videndo quam Darium vincendo.

In the next Place, we shall see some Men rake Riches together, as Children do
Snow, rolling it up with no little Pains and Hazards of their Health, into
Heaps, and then fashioning them into Horses, Giants and Castles, and the next
Shower washes them away, and leaves nothing in the Place but Dirt. It was well
said of Themistocles, that great General, to a common Soldier, Thou who art not
Themistocles, take this Trash to thee, meaning the Jewels and the rich Persian
Spoils after a Victory. Wealth certainly is one of the greatest Bankrupts in
the World, and does not satisfy the Debt it promises; for a Man may as soon
fill a Quart Pot with Virtue, as a rational Mind with Wealth; there must be a
Proportion between the Ingredient and the Capacity. We call that Well, or
Brain, empty, that has not Water or Wit; though the first be full of Air, the
other of Vapor, they are still empty of what should fill them, and so will the
Heart of Man be, though never so full of Wealth, and much of it does but let us
see, how much more of it we want. The World is not so unequally dealt, as we
talk, the Rich want a Stomach oftener than the Poor do Meat: If the Poor Man's
Hunger and Labor be more, his Meat and Sleep are sweeter, and what Happinesses
are these, that are as well not received as enjoyed, as well wanted as had; the
Will would certainly never be satisfied, if it had all it desired, but one is
presently satisfied if he renounces it; in complying with the Will we shall
never be at quiet, not complying with it, we shall always be at rest. Solomon
and Job have best known the Happiness and Misery of Man, and have the best
described it, one of them the happiest, and the other the most wretched of Men;
the one knew the Vanity of all Pleasure, the other the Reality of all Evils, by
Experience.

Pleasure, instead of satisfying, does satiate, but Riches does neither. For my
own Part, my Humor does not much depend upon these Things. I have always fair
and soul Weather within my self, good or ill Success in my Affairs does not
much move me, I sometimes set my self against ill Fortune, and the Glory of
overcoming it makes me master it with Pleasure; whereas at other Times I am
very indifferent, and as it were dissatisfied, even with Prosperity, looking
upon Worldly Glory but as a Fancy: If we fish for it, we shall find it nothing,
an Apparition, like the Night Mare in a Dream, you imagine it a Substance, you
grasp at it, you awake and it is nothing. Pleasure yet and Wealth will abide a
Sense or two; but this of Glory can neither be felt, seen or understood;
besides the Slipperiness of it should make us undervalue it. (Let us remember
the Consul Bibulus in his triumphant Chariot by the Fall of a Tile-Stone from a
House made a Sacrifice, before he could reach the Capitol, to offer up the
Bulls and Garlands he had prepared; or in that prodigious Favorite Sejanus,
whom the same Day saw attended by the Senate, and torn in Pieces by the People;
nay we need not go so far back,) we need but think of the De Wits in Holland,
who governed absolutely that Common Wealth, and were so torn in Pieces by the
People in the Morning, that there scarce remained ere Night so much as a
Mammeck of Flesh. It has raised some, but it has ruined more; and those whom
it has most raised, it has much ruined. Paucos beavit sed and plures
perdidit, and quos heavit perdidit. Certainly if there be any thing glorious in
this World, it is a Mind that contemns that Glory. Diogenes had more of it by
his Contempt than Alexander by his Command of it, when he commanded himself to
be made a God.

Of GREATNESS of MIND.
WHEN Leonidas was to carry his 300 Men into the Streights of the Thermopyle,
to put a Stop to Xerxes's huge Army: Come, Fellow Soldiers, says he, eat your
Dinner here, as if you were to sup in another World; and they answered his
Resolution. How plain was that Speech of Cedilius to his Men upon a desperate
Action, Soldiers, says he, it is necessary for us to go, but not for us to
return. This brief and pertinent Harangue had in it a glorious Mixture both of
Bravery and Prudence.

The Action of Caesar upon taking Pompey's Cabinet at the Battle of Pharsalia,
was Noble. It Is probable that the Letters in it might have discovered who were
his Friends, and who his Enemies, and yet he burnt it, without so much as
opening it; esteeming it the noblest Way of pardoning, to keep himself ignorant
both of the Offender and of the Offense.

It was also a brave Presence of Mind in Alexander, who upon Advice in a
Letter, that his Physician Philip intended to poison him, took the Letter of
Advice in one Hand, and the Cup in the other, delivering Philip the Letter to
read, whilst he drank up the Poison. Resolution is the inexpugnable Defense of
humane Weakness, and is usually attended with wonderful Providence.

Horatius Cocles offered his single Body to the whole Army of his Enemies,
'till the Bridge was broken down behind him, and then leapt into the River with
his Sword in his Hand, and came off safe to his Party.

When Epicurus was ready to expire with an extreme Torment of the Stone, This,
says he, is the last and blessed Day of my Life. It is never said of the 300
Fabii, that they were overcome, but that they were slain; nor of Regulus, that
he was vanquished by the Carthaginians, but that he was taken; and yet there is
a great Difference in the same Action, done by a brave Person, and by a Stupid;
as the Death of Cato was esteemed honorable, but that of Brutus shameful.

How wise and happy was Saladine, the great Conqueror, of Asia, who triumphed
over himself, and in his victorious Return, caused a Shirt to be carried before
him on the Point of a Spear, with this Proclamation, that after all his Glories
he should carry nothing to the Grave but that poor Shirt. So Adrianus a Roman
Emperor, to qualify the excessive Joys of his high Fortune, celebrated his own
Funeral, and caused his Coffin to be carried before him when he went a public
Calvacade through Rome, which was a sacred Triumph, and a Heroic Insult over
himself and Death.

When Regulus was unhappily taken Prisoner at the Siege of a Battle with the
Carthaginians, they sent him back to the Senate of Rome to propose a Peace, and
the Exchange of Prisoners; but he was of a contrary Sentiment, and dissuaded
the Senate from harkening to his Proposal, choosing rather bravely to return to
his Captivity, there to be crucified, than to be instrumental to the least
Dishonor or Disadvantage to his Country.

Of CHILDREN.
THE Making or Marring is in the first Age of Children; for then their Minds,
by their Parent's Skill, no less than their Bodies, by the Midwife's Hand, may
with Ease be molded into such a Fashion as will be durable in After-Ages. The
Seeds of Virtue should be so early Ingrafted into them, that they should not
know, whether Nature or Precepts were the Teachers of them. Many Parents do
endeavor unseasonably to sow Wisdom in them, which does but corrupt their
Natures, not yet ripe for such Instructions; they should rather let them enjoy
that Freedom which Nature in Pity has bestowed on them, and not force them to
endure the Punishment of human Cares before they have deserved them; let
harmless Wantonness be freely allowed them, and let them rather fear, than feel
the Correction of their Parents. To Colts and young Cattle we freely allow an
uncontrolled Freedom, least their first Strength (which is then growing) should
be hindered; and yet we are so blind in what we behold in other Creatures, we
either neglect, or will not understand in our own Children, who after they have
fulfilled the Folly of their first Years, Age does by little and little change
their Desires, and the Roots of Virtue will spring up in them; and therefore
such as will call the raw Minds of Children to too hasty a Ripeness of Studies,
are very Ignorant of the Strength which Nature bestowed on that Age: Some
Children indeed have early Wits; as Papyrius's Childhood that was judged worthy
of the Roman Senate. The Humors of Children are very various; some seem to be
made of a better Mould than others. There are often seen Presages of future
Abilities in Children; as in Cyrus, who first founded the Persian Monarchy, who
was bred up and believed to be a Shepherd's Child, till after a more strict
Inquiry, he was found to be the Grandchild of Astyages; and Cato, in his
Infancy, was more than a Child; but this is very uncertain, and they are often
deceived, who by the Behavior of Children will judge too hastily of their
future Disposition; for it must be some great sign and firmly constant above
the Levity of that Age, which must be brought as an effectual Argument to judge
of the Inclination of their future and flexible Years. Though some Children are
more governable, and easier gained by gentle Usage, yet their Manners are
generally according to their Education; the neglect of Discipline, and the
force of Example, makes the Difference, and causes Children to succeed or
miscarry; but those who are naturally most inclined to Ill are in most Danger;
and since Education is the chief Reason of their first Principles, great Care
must be taken to set the Bias right at first, and that Virtue may be early
instilled into their Minds, which will make their Lives happy for the future,
and then Custom will make it easy to them: And indeed, Children should be
treated with great Wariness; they should hear and see nothing that should be
dangerous in the Imitation, and the Indiscretion of Parents is very often of
ill Consequence in this Particular; which puts me in mind of what Montaign says
to this Purpose; who being present whilst the Governante was hearing his
Daughter read, and there being an obscene Word, she forbad her the naming it;
whereupon the Father was very angry with the Governante, and said, She had done
his Daughter much hurt in taking Notice of that Word, which she should have let
pass without any Observation.

Childhood is certainly the principal Time for Improvement, whilst the Mind is
at liberty, the Memory strong, Pleasures unknown to them; and they are like
white Paper, where you may Write what you please; and we should never design
Children to any Profession before their Capacities are known, and their Genius
and Inclinations examined; for otherwise their Nature may be crossed, and to
strive against the Stream is altogether in vain; and if Care were taken that
the Inclinations of young People were suited to their Professions, we should
see them improve much faster than they do; for Men must not endeavor to fly
without Wings, and to undertake Business that is too hard for them: The
Passions of young Men often carry them with full Speed, when they want the
Bridle and not the Spur; and like a Ship without a Pilot, they often over-set
themselves, being launched without Ballast, and wanting a Compass to Steer by,
they are soon under Water: And indeed, Youth without good Breeding is in a
dangerous Condition, and soon lost, being subject to great Rashness; and
therefore those that are Young should be very careful of their Carriage, since
we see oftentimes those that are very promising in their Youth, flag at the
last, and fall short of Expectation.

Young Men, at their first Entrance into Man's Estate, the Heat of Blood breeds
in them a wonderful Change, carries away their Mind with a Tide of
inconsiderate Confidence and vain Security, they know not how to be Provident
for Aftertimes, neither can they consider how obnoxious they are to the Ruins
of Fortune.

The Office of Childhood is to Learn, and retain by a strong Memory, the Deeds
and Speeches of their Ancestors; of Youth, to invent and speak Things
altogether new; of middle Age, to moderate it self by Observation from both the
former, for then our Bodies and Minds are exceedingly changed from what they
were heretofore; and as we grow in Years, our Pleasures and Inclinations are
not the same, even our Manners, and all our Desires, are much different, and
molded as it were anew. No Age of Man is more cunning than the middle Age, in
dissembling Friendship, and governing their Affections. It can then wonder at
it self, that it could so improvidently go astray, and endeavors to repair the
Ruins of his younger Years, and renews with much Vigor the Errors of the same.
Memory is ever greatest in Children, being then able to retain what they learn,
and still safely store it up in the Closets of their Memory; but as Age
increases it will decay, and therefore their Minds ought to be filled with
profitable History whilst they are young; for Memory is like the Dew, which in
hot Countries falls upon the Leaves of Holly, unless it be gathered by break of
Day, it vanishes at Sun Rising. Things of little Labor and no Judgment, will
easily be attained by Children, who are neither strong for Labor, nor ripe for
Judgment.

Public Ministers, when they have a Mind to prolong their Families in Honor,
should always breed at least one of their Children in their Office under them.
This the French do constantly practice, which is disused in England, to the
great Prejudice of the Crown, where those great Places are most commonly sold,
and commonly ignorant Men put into those great Employments, if they have but
Money enough; believing great Places make great Men, which it always does, as to
their Estates, but very seldom as to their interior Qualifications, which made
King James the First say, That he had a Secretary that could not write, and an
Archbishop who could not preach.

The Chinese have that wholesome Piece of Policy, that the Son is always of
the Father's Trade, and it is all the Learning he aims at, which makes them
admirable Artisans; for besides the Dextrousness and Propensity of the Child,
being lineally descended from so many of the same Trade, the Father's more
careful to instruct him, and to discover to him all the Mystery of it; and this
general Custom, or Law, keeps their Heads from running at random after Book
Learning and other Vocations. The extravagant Custom of England herein is not
to be commended, where all Men aspire to Book Learning; when there is not a
simpler Animal, and a more superfluous Member of a State, than mere Scholar
telluris inutile pondus. The Goths forbore to destroy the Libraries of the
Greeks and Italians, because Books should still keep them soft and simple to
warlike Affairs. It is reported, that Grosthead, Bishop of Lincoln, had a
Brother a Husbandman, who seeing his Brother come to that great Station, came
to him in Expectation of some great Preferment, or something very considerable;
but the Bishop told him, that if he wanted Money to mend his Plow or Cart, or to
buy a new one; of if he wanted Tackling for his Horses, or any other Things
belonging to his Husbandry, he should not want what was fitting, but he wished
him to aim no higher, for Husbandman he found him, and a Husbandman he would
leave him; and to show the Force of Education, and that the learned Men are
not always the wisest, there goes a famous Story of Thomas Aquinas, and Saint
Bonaventure, being both invited to Dinner by the French King, on purpose to
observe their Humors, being brought into the Room where the Table was covered
and made ready, the first fell to eating of Bread as fast as he could, and at
last breaking out of a brown Study, he cried out Concafum est contra
Manichaeos: The other fell gazing upon the Queen, and the King asking him how
he liked her, Oh Sir, says he, if an earthly Queen be so beautiful, what shall
we think of the Queen of Heaven. This latter was esteemed the better Courtier.
But from hence we may infer, That the learned Men are not always the
civillest and best moral Men. And there is too great a Number of them, who lead
a soft sedentary Life, feeding only their own Fancies upon the Public, and
therefore it were to be wished, that the English had not so general an itching
after Book Learning

I well remember to have known a Person of Honor and great Quality in England
to have had three Sons by the same Lady, but of the most different Genius's and
Contrariety of Humors, that have been ever seen; the eldest the most
fantastical, proudest and foolishest in all his Actions; the Second the most
learned, sober, and yet bigoted in Devotion; the Third the most dissolute and
drunken that could be seen, but yet very witty in Conversation; insomuch that
there could not be found a more pregnant Instance to prove that humane Souls
come not extraduce, and by seminal Production from their Parents.

Of LAW.
IT is the Effect of Law, Quod Homo Homini Deus non Lupus, That we do Protect
and not Devour each other; and therefore Aristotle well observes, Quod optimum
animal Homo lege fruens, sed pessimum animal Homo lege devians, Man is the best
Creature with the Law, but the worst without it: The End and Aim for which Men
enter into Society, is not barely to Live, which they may do dispersed, but to
live Happily, answerable to the Dignity of Mankind, which End they cannot
accomplish without Submission to the Laws, and living according to the
Prescriptions thereof, Laws being the Instruments and Sinews of all outward
Blessings: It is an Englishman's Happiness, That as he is Born to Inherit his
Lands, so to Inherit the Laws, which are our Birthright, and the best
Inheritance we have, which cannot be taken from us.

Religion and Justice are the two Supporters of every Commonwealth, they are
the Pillars of all Government, without them the whole State, Civil and
Ecclesiastical, will like a melted Vessel run into Confusion and Disorder. The
Law of a Nation is the Soul of a Nation; it is the Rudder, by which the Vessel
of the Commonwealth is steered, it is the Yoke wherewith All are kept in
Obedience; and that Commonwealth, where Men, and not Laws govern, will be
quickly like the Field of the Sluggard, all grown over with Thorns and Nettles;
and therefore there had need be Weeders, that is, good Magistrates, to keep the
Field of a Commonwealth, from being overspread with Thorns and Nettles, that
is, disorderly lewd Persons, and they had need be good Laws that must keep in
such unruly Beasts, the Disturbers of the Peace. To what Purpose do Laws enjoin
Punishments, if they are not put in Execution. For Laws must not be like
Cobwebs, to catch only small Flies and to be broken by great Ones; it were
better not to make any, for this makes every particular Man's Offense the Sin
of the Public, quis non vetat peccare cum potest, jubet, to omit the
Punishment of an Offense under our Charge is to commit it. The due Observation
of the Laws of God, and the careful Execution of the Laws of Men, make a Nation
flourish. They are indeed the very Spirit and Sinews of every State, for all
Humane Laws have their Dependence upon the Laws of God, who is the Great
Lawgiver, and the nearer our Copies draw to that Original, the better they
are, and the more like to continue: In pessima republica leges plurimae. And
therefore the Curse of the Prophet has been expounded by the Multitude of
penal Laws, which are worse than Showers of Hail and Tempest upon the Cattle,
for they fall upon Men; and where Religion and Laws are not preserved, we cannot
properly call them Commonwealths, but magna latrocinia, great Confederacies of
Thieves; if Religion be not upheld, if the Laws be not observed, if Vice goes
unpunished, and Virtue unrewarded, if a due Respect be not given to
Magistrates, who are the living Stamps of the supreme Authority, all our
Happiness and Contentment in this Life and the next will be taken away, and the
whole Frame of Government will fall to the Ground and dissolve. The Rulers of
the Earth belong unto God, and from hence we should learn our Duty of Honor,
Reverence and Loyalty. They were the Sons of Belial that despised Saul. Without
Governors or Government, one Man will be Bread for another; and we should be
as the Fishes in the Sea, the Great would devour the Small. It is no particular
Conceit, but a great Truth, that all Duties are by so much the better
performed, by how much the Men are more religious from whose Abilities the same
proceed. But if Magistrates, who are employed about the Public Administration
of Justice, follow it only as a Trade for Gains sake, the Formalities of it
will only then serve to smother Right, and what was necessarily ordained for
the common Good, will through the Abuse of it be the Cause of common Misery. The
Laws without Execution, is putting Arrows into a Quiver from whence they are
not drawn out, this is to make the Magistrate an immovable Statue, a George on
Horseback, seeming always ready, but never strikes. The Law without Execution
is a Chimera, which only serves to fright.

Justice and Fortune are painted blind, to show us what the one should do, and
what the other should not do; for the one gives without Respect, and the other
is in no Respect to take; for none should execute the Office of Justice, but
such whose Eyes are blind from respecting Persons, and whose Hands are closed
from accepting Rewards. The Thebans painted their Judges and Magistrates
without Hands, since when their Hands are over long, it is to be feared their
Feet will become Gouty, their Tongue tied, their Ears deafened, and their Eyes
dimmed. It is a Shame and Reproach to us to see Pagans that have showed greater
Integrity, and more Uncorruption and Affection to the Public Good, than we do.
Civillians say, the Magistrate is the living Law, and that his good Example
should be a lively and perpetual Promulgation of that Law; for Example prevails
much more than Precept, and reduces more under its Yoke, though naked, than the
Law with all its Enforcements; and the Reason is obvious, for the Arms of Law
only strike the Body, but the Shafts of Example strike into the Soul, and we
see Men daily trust more to their Eyes than to their Ears, more to what they
see than to what they hear, Facilius est errare Naturam quam Principem
dissimilem sui formare rempublicam. We shall never see Princes frame an Age
unlike themselves. Under Romulus Rome was warlike; under Numa religious; under
the Fabritii continent; under the Cato's regular; under the Lucullus's and
Antonies intemperate and dissolute; under Julian Idolatrous; under Valens
Arrian; and the Example of King Jeroboam caused all the People to commit
Idolatry; whereas under the Reign of King David, Ezekias, and Josias Religion
and Piety were seen to flourish. For People generally are like Clay without
Form in themselves, but easily wrought by the Potter's Hand. They behold most
Affairs with the Eyes of their Magistrates, and suffer themselves easily to be
directed by their Examples, and to dislike whatever they reject.

An ancient Father has said, He that is not a good Husband, cannot be a good
Magistrate, for he that rules not his Family well, cannot govern others, which
is a rational Deduction; but he that is not an honest Man cannot be a good
Magistrate; for he that will make Shipwreck of his own Reputation, will never
take Care of the Commonwealth. The Justice every Man owes to himself, does
oblige him first to regulate his own Affections and Passions, and then he will
be more capable to render Justice to others, for both natural and divine Laws,
do propose our selves for a Rule and Measure of what we owe to our Neighbors.
Magistrates are to give good Examples to others, owing it themselves for
ordering their own Lives, and they owe to it the Public for Imitation. The
just and good Man is a Rule and Measure of all others, since being what all Men
ought to be, he shows what all Men ought to do. Integrity is so necessary in a
Magistrate, that without it all other Qualities are but Instruments of
particular Profit, and Public Loss. All the Grecian Commonwealths fell to
Ruin for want of this. Gold breeds the Scurvy in some Men's Mouths, and Ambition
breeds Imposthumes in some Men's Hearts. He must not look upon private Interest
but the Public, and submit his particular Affairs to the Interest of the
whole: Virtutis pretium est non posse pretio cepi, her Reward is that she
cannot be allured by Reward.

The Love of the Public is the inseparable Quality of a Good
Common-Wealths-Man, without which he is no more a Man but an Idol, as David
said of the Idols of the Gentiles, That have Eyes and see not, Ears and hear
not.

On OLD AGE.
I Hope it will not be thought unreasonable for an old Man, who can scarce
remember his Climacterical Year, who spent his blooming Youth in the Service of
the Crown, under King Charles the First, who in the Battle of Edgehill, fought
the 23d of October, 1642, received a dangerous Wound in his Head, still visible
as a Mark of Loyalty to his Sovereign, and was soon after that Battle made a
Captain of Horse, and from thence by degrees advanced to be a General Officer
of Horse, and served in that Quality during those Wars, and was engaged in
several Battles with various Successes, which ended with the Murder of one of
the best of Kings, accompanied with such barbarous Circumstances as cannot be
paralleled in any History, and fitter to be buried in Oblivion than remembered.
I have thereupon thought it not improper to show that the Strength of my Mind
is still in being, which with God's Blessing I hope to keep in Repair so long
as my Body lasts, and have therefore presumed in this following Discourse, to
show some Advantages of Old Age, of which I am at present a living Testimony,
even in this Year 1706.

The Life of Man is usually divided into Childhood, Youth, Man's Estate, and
Old Age, all which Degrees we bring into that narrow Compass, whilst our Life
consumes insensibly. Infancy is only a State of Hope, and most commonly
supported by the indulgent Tenderness of Parents and Nurses. Youth, if well
Educated, will soon blossom, and after yield Fruit. Man's Estate, like a Flame,
well kindled and supplied will burn long, but Old Age does usually soon pass
away; and if we do not watch, we lose our Opportunities; if we do not make
haste we are left behind, our best Hours fly from us, the worst are to come;
the purest Part of our Life runs first, and leaves only the Dregs at the
Bottom, unless we take great Care, and then our Strength and Desires will fall
off together, and our Years will sit easy upon us, when we are thus satisfied
and composed; it smooths our Passage to the other World, and makes us slide
into the Grave with a more gentle and insensible Motion. Indeed if we could
observe the State of our Infancy, when we came first into the World, with the
Progress of our Growth, and the Beginning of our Reason, it would certainly be
a pleasant Retrospection, but divine Providence has hid this from our Sight.
At our Birth neither our Limbs nor Understanding were born at their full
Growth, but we increase by Degrees, and being Infants in our Bodies, we are not
Men in our Souls: The first ten Years we may call an Animal Life, the Powers of
Reason are then feeble in us, and we do but sleep that Time away, but
afterward the Advances of Age are very gradual; but yet this Gradation is so
slow, that we cannot take much Notice of it, nor see it with our Eyes, and so
we think all goes well, since we are not thrown so suddenly out of our Youth
into our Manhood, and from that into Old Age, which would be much more sensible
to us, and concerns us more: But we walk gently up Hill from our Youth to our
middle State, and as gently down the Hill from our Manhood into Old Age,
without perceiving the Change we have made 'till we come at the Bottom: However
we must needs be troubled, when we consider the greatest Part of Life is no
better than a slow Consumption, and that at last we must fall into a State of
Weakness, and be unacceptable both to others and to our selves: But we seldom
think of this, because we seem to be the same Men in the Morning, as we were
the Night before. Now he that would have his Health hold out to the last, and
grow old with Advantage, must be regular in his Youth, and not live too fast:
We must husband our Constitution, and not throw it away 'till we have done
living, for our Vices destroy our Lives as well as our Fortunes; Intemperance
antidates our Infirmities, and makes us die much sooner than we should; and
though we have the World before us, we do not play the good Husband early enough;
for it is too late to spare at the Bottom, when all is drawn out to the Lees.
It Is true, we old Men cannot but be something concerned, to think that we grow
less and less every Day, doing the same things over again; and that we live
only to nurse up our Decays, which is troublesome to us, especially since there
is nothing in this World to make us in love with it, or fond of it; none yet
were ever fully pleased with it; for though it seems a Juno in the Pursuit, it is
but a Cloud in our Embraces; and therefore those who are sorry to see their
Voyage fixed, are over-fond of their native Country, and hang about Life a
little too meanly. Indeed when our Senses droop, and all the Faculties of our
Souls and Bodies decay apace, it is then high time to bid adieu to the active
Life, and not only to abandon the Vanities of this fading World, but the very
Remembrance and Thoughts of them: Our Minds begin then to be nauseated with the
Ideas of our past Folly, which we falsely called Pleasure; and that Retrospect
is unpleasant, when we reflect upon a Life to be repented of. It is but Reason
when we approach near the Grave, when all our Senses put us daily in Mind of
our Mortality, that we should begin to recollect our selves, and think
whereabouts we are, that we may not be surpised, and die less than our selves.
It should be our Care before we grow old to live well, and then we may be sure
to die well. It is the Duty of Life to prepare our selves for Death; there is
not one Hour we live, that does not mind us of our Mortality. Time runs on, the
Period is certain, though it lies in the Dark, our Term is set, and none of us
know how near it is, and therefore we should not wonder to have that befall us
to Day, which might have happened to us any Minute since we were born. This
Consideration should make us live as if every Minute were our last. But we fear
Death, only because we know not where we shall go, and we never begin to reform
'till our old Age, after having spent our former Years in all Sorts of Vanity
(which is better late than never) but it is a miserable Case, not to know the
Value of a Treasure, 'till we are going to lose it. To begin our Frugality,
when we are ready to turn Bankrupts: We should therefore begin early to do that
which will always please, and young Men should carefully avoid throwing away
their Time, as if they came into the World for no other End but to eat and
sleep, or else to spend their Days in Wantonness and Folly, and to make Vice
their Business. Thus we see in general, that Age grows worse upon the Progress,
and has no Relief to expect but the Grave; yet in some, Health, Vigor and
Sense, hold out to the last. Many of the ancient Philosophers and Romans were
Examples of this Truth. Tully, who wrote excellently well de Senectute was a
lively Example hereof, being past Sixty when he wrote his Philippicks, in which
his Rhetoric is more correct and moving than in his younger Orations. The
Poetic Fire, which is usually soonest extinct in Men, I have found by
Experience in my self, has lasted much beyond that Period, of which I could
give modern Proof, but I will leave that to my Son; only this I can with Truth
affirm, that the Poems I have made since my Age of Seventy, have more of Force
and Spirit, than those I had written some Years before; but this is a
particular Grace of God, it being very unusual in the Generality, and very hard
for Men to seem young when they are old, and much more strange to be so; for
though at ones Death, Fuimus may make a good Motto, yet in Life it is stark naught.

None can imagine how green and vigorous some Men's Minds are in Old Age, having
a perpetual Conflict with their Bodies, who were ill-match'd, unless to show
that an active Spirit may be lodged in a decayed Body. It is certainly a
particular Happiness to preserve the Force of the Mind in the Decay of the
Body, to live to that Age, that neither cares for any thing, nor stands in need
of any thing; that though it can much longer, yet it will not still do the same
Things over again, which it ought not to do, Age having put an End to his
Desires; certainly there can be no gentler End, than thus to melt away in a
kind of Dissolution.

Where Fire meets with Opposition and Matter to work upon, it is furious and
rages, but when it finds no Fuel, as in Old Age, it goes out quickly for want
of Nourishment; nor is the Body the settled Habitation of the Soul, but a
temporary Lodging, which we must leave whenever the Master of the House
pleases. It Is true, every Man has naturally a Love for his own Body, as poor
People love even their own beggarly Cottages: They are old Acquaintances, and
loath to part; yet old Men, though they may somewhat indulge their Bodies, yet
they make not themselves Slaves to them, nor care any more what becomes of
their Carcasses, when dead, than a Man does for the shaving of his Beard under
the Hand of a Barber. However Age it self is not without its Pleasures, if we
knew rightly how to use them (the best Morsel being still reserved for the
last) or almost it is equivalent to the enjoying of Pleasures, not to stand in
need of them. Time indeed goes faster with old Men than young, because they
reckon most upon it. There is hardly any Man so old but he may hope for one Day
more yet, and the longest Life is but a Multiplication of Days, nay Hours and
Moments, for the End of our Lives is set, and the first Breath we draw, is but
the first Step to our last, the Course of all Things in this World being only a
long Connection of Providential Appointments; and though there be great Variety
in our Lives, yet all tend to the same Issue. Death old Men find most easy,
because it is complied with without struggling; for by dying of old Age, a Man
does no more than go to Bed when he is weary, it being childish to go out of
the World as we came into it, groaning and crying. For these and many other
Reasons, I cannot agree with them that seem to impute much Inconvenience to
long Life, and that length of Days does much rather impair than improve us; for
if we follow the Course of Nature and of Reason, old Age is a mighty Blessing,
were it only in regard that it gives Time leave to vent and boil away the
Unquietness and Turbulency that follow our Passions in our younger Years, and
weans us gently from carnal Affections, and at last to drop with Ease and
Willingness, like ripe Fruit from the Tree; for when before the Season Fruit is
pulled off with violent Hands, or shaken down by rude and boisterous Winds, it
has an indigested raw taste of the Wood, and has an unpleasant Eagerness in
its Juice, that makes it unfit for Use till length of time has mellowed it; so
Souls that go out of their Bodies with Affection to those Objects they leave
behind (which usually is as long as they can relish them) do retain still, as
some think, even to their Separation, a Bias and Languishing toward them.
Besides, we must consider that old Age is not always a Burden and Encumbrance,
there are several peculiar Privileges annexed to this part of Life which will
relieve us under the Decays of the Body; for the Imperfections of old Age are
not so unavoidable as gray Hairs. The quiet Composure of an old Man's Mind,
keeps him from wearing out so fast, it props up his Strength, and makes him
live cheerfully to the last Moment; for easy Thoughts are excellent Opiates,
which will not only mitigate old Men's Distemper, but make them almost to
despise their Misery. Thus most Men take Care to live long, but few take Care
to live well, which is in every Man's Power to do, but in no Man's Power to do
the former.

We consume our Lives in providing the very Instruments of Life, so that we do
not properly live but we are about to live, and we only propound to begin to
live at our old Age, to which very few People arrive.

There are other very remarkable Advantages of old Age; for those who have had
the longest Time to improve themselves must needs be the wisest Men; such have
seen greater Variety of Events, have had more Opportunities of observing
Humors and Interests: Their Judgments are more exact, they know more things
and those better than young Men, bringing their Thoughts to a second Test, for
trying what they took upon Trust in their Youth. Old Men are usually free from
violent Passions; matters of Moment are better considered by them; whereas
younger Persons are apt to judge amiss, their Prospect being too short; and
certainly Age is the time in which the Mind is most discerning, and furnished
with the best Materials for Wisdom: Those who have been longest in public
Employments, whose Performances have been more than ordinary, who have done
most Service for their King and Country, deserve certainly a more particular
Respect, and should be considered with more Regards, and should have the
fairest Acknowledgments, and treated with the best Civility, like parting
Friends that are ready to take leave of the World; but, alas! this seldom
happens, for old Services are usually forgotten, especially in an Age where
young Men see Visions, and old Men Dream, their former Actions and repeated
good Services being no more taken notice of, than if they had never been, though
even Decency and Goodnature should at least make them be respected for them.

Thus the State of Mortals in this Life is very changeable; if we are invited
to cast Anchor awhile in some calm, serene Season, if we are permitted to
Careen and Recruit our Weather-beaten Spirits, enjoying some short interval of
Rest and Ease, the Indulgence soon expires, and we are forced to hoist Sail
with double Diligence, least we suffer a Wreck, for we fly at Random in a Sea
of perpetual Hazards and Difficulties; and yet the shortness of Life is the
common Complaint of most People, who make it short either by doing ill, doing
nothing, or doing Things besides their Business; so that this large extent of
Life will not perhaps amount to the Minority of Man; so that it may be a long
Being, perhaps a short Life; for it is not the Number of Years that makes Death
easy to us, but the Temper of the Mind; he that would live a little longer
this Day, would be as loath to Die a thousand Years hence: Go we must at last,
no matter how soon: It Is the Work of the Almighty to make us live long, but
it is own Business to make a short Life sufficient. Life is to be measured by
our Actions, not by Time. A Man may die old at Thirty, and young at Eighty, the
one lives after Death, the other perished before he died. And therefore that
Noble General Similis, who lived to a great Age, and retired from Business to
his Devotion Seven Years before his Death, would have only this Epitaph in
Substance engraved upon his Tombstone: Here lies Similis of a very great Age,
and yet lived only Seven Years.

Old Age is the Effect of Providence: How long I shall live is only in God's
Power, but it is in my Power how well. How great a shame is it then to be laying
new Foundations of Life at our last Gasp? for an old Man, with one Foot in the
Grave, to go to School again? While we are young we may learn, because our
Minds are then tractable, and our Bodies fit for Labor; but when old Age comes
on, we are commonly seized with Sloth and afflicted with Diseases, and at last
we leave the World as Ignorant as we came into it; only we die worse than we
were born, which is our own Fault. I wish with all my Soul that I had thought
better and sooner of my End; but I must now make the more haste, and being in
good Health, I must Spur on, like those that set out late upon a Journey: It is
better to learn late, than not at all, although it be only to instruct me how I
may leave the Stage of this World, with a perfect Resignation, with a true
Sense of the Sins of my fore-passed Life, with a true Fear of God, and a sure
Trust in his Mercy; and thus I shall sink with Ease into my Grave, and though I
die old, I shall rise young in the other World, for that State is an eternal
Spring, ever flourishing, and shall gently pass from one Extreme to another.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for and Sold by Jonas Brown, at the Black Swan without
Temple Bar.
ELeven Sermons, preached upon several Occasions, by the late Reverend Mr. John
Piggott, Minister of the Gospel. Being all that were printed in his Life;
together with Mr. Pilkington's Recantation of the Errors of the Romish Church,
as 'twas published by Mr. Piggot. To which is added, Mr. Piggot's Funeral
Sermon, preached by Mr. Joseph Stennet, containing some Account of his Life and
Character. A Discourse concerning the Contemplation of Death, being a Dialogue
between Psycophilos a Philosopher, and Philokosmos a Courtier; fit to be Bound
with Dr. Sherlock of Death. The Danger and Folly of Evil Courses; Being a
Practical Discourse, showing the base and vile Nature of Sin, and the dreadful
Consequences of it, as well in this World, as that which is to come. With such
effectual Remedies, as, if rightly applied, will prevent it; and bring Men to a
true Love of God, and Religion. Partly extracted from the Writings of
Archbishop Tillotson, Archbishop Sharp, Bishop Tailor, Bishop Stillingfleet,
Bishop Patrick, Dr. Scott, Dr. Horneck, Dr. Lucas, Dr. Sherlock, Dr. Stanhope,
Mr. Kettlewell, Judge Hale, etc. The Third Edition, with large Additions. By
Francis Hewerdine, A. M. Price 1 s. 6 d. or 15 s. a Dozen. A Philosophical
Enquiry into some of the most considerable Phenomena's of Nature. In Two Parts.
Wherein, 1. The Divine Nature, with the Order, Cause, and ultimate End of the
Creation, and particularly the Human Nature, are considered, 2. The Nature of
the World, with the Progress of her ordinary Course, in Producing, Multiplying,
and Changing her various Species, are briefly stated. Likewise, a Touch on her
Defects; with Regard to Maladies in Animal Bodies, and how, and of what, the
same are formed; with a Hint to avoid Dangers in the Rosacrucian Navigation.
The whole conformable to the Doctrine of Fermentation. The Art of Prudence; or,
a Companion for a Man of Sense. Written Originally in Spanish by that
celebrated Author Balthazar Gracian; now made English from the best Original,
and Illustrated with the Sieur Amelot de la Houssaie's Notes. By Mr. Savage.
The Third Edition, Corrected. Tully's Morals or Offices in English; the third
Edition. Revised and Corrected by Mr. Tho. Cockman. Letters of Abelard and
Heloise. To which is prefixed, a particular Account of their Lives Amors and
Misfortunes, Extracted chiefly from Monsieur Bail. Translated from the French.
Cosmography in Four Books, containing the Chorography and History of the whole
World, and all the Principal Kingdoms, Provinces, Seas, and the Isles thereof,
by Peter Heylin D. D. Improved with an Historical Continuation to the present
Times, by E. Bohun, Esquire with a large and more accurate Index than was in any of
the former Editions, of all the Kingdoms, Provinces, Countries, Inhabitants,
Peoples, Cities, Mountains, Rivers, Seas, Islands, Forts, Bays, Capes,
Forests, etc. of any Remark in the whole World: Revised and cleared from a
Multitude of Mistakes, which had crept into former Impressions, and five new
engraved Maps according to the best and most exact Projection. A Guide for
Book-keepers, according to the Italian manner now in Use. Directing Accomptants
where the Usual Occurrences in Trade are to be Entered, and in the Style proper
for such Entrances. By Charles Snell, Accomptant, Master of the Free
Writing-School in Foster-Lane. Price 1 s. Herodotus in English, 2 Vol.
Aristophanes's Plays, translated from the Greek by Mr. Theobald. The Beaux
Duel: Or, a Soldier for the Ladies, a Comedy, by Mrs. Cent Livre. Curious
Amusements: Fitted for the Entertainment of the Ingenious of both Sexes; writ
in Imitation of the Count de Roche Foucault; and rendered into English, from
the fifteenth Edition Printed at Paris, by a Gentleman of Pembroke-Hall in
Cambridge. To which is added, some Translations from Greek, Latin and Italian
Poets; with other Verses and Songs on several Occasions, not before printed. By
T. Rhymer, Historiographer Royal.
Also Variety of Law Books: Where may be had a great Variety of Plays; and
Ready Money for any Library.


