THE PEERAGE OF SCOTLAND: Containing an Historical and Genealogical ACCOUNT OF
THE NOBILITY of that Kingdom.

Collected from the Public Records of the NATION, the Charters and other
Writings of the NOBILITY, and from the most approved Histories.

By GEORGE CRAWFURD, Esquire

EDINBURGH: Printed for the AUTHOR: Sold by George Stewart, at the Book and
Angel in the Parliament-Close. 1716.

THE PREFACE.
THE Nature of this Work seeming to render something of a Preface necessary, I
shall, for that Reason, entirely dedicate it to the Service of the Reader, in
as few Words as possibly I can.

Having formerly written a short Essay upon the Royal Family of STEWART, to
which was prefixed an Historical Account and Description of the Shire of
Renfrew: I had no sooner published that little Book; than several Persons of
eminent Distinction for their Learning and Knowledge in the Antiquities of the
Nation, for whose Judgment I had the most profound Regard, set upon me to write
A Peerage of SCOTLAND, a Book very much wanted; which at length, by their
Importunity and promised Assistance, I was prevailed with to undertake.

When I first set about this Work, as I did entirely devote and dedicate my
Time to the Study of Antiquities, particularly those of our own Country, so I
made it my Business to collect all those Historical and Genealogical Tracts
that had been done on the Nobility, that I could come to the Knowledge of. The
Oldest of that Kind I have met with, was a few loose Sheets on the Genealogies
of our Nobility, said to be done by James Lord Ochiltree, in the Hands of my
very worthy Friend, and one of our best Antiquaries, Mr. Baillie of Castlecary;
but the Accounts even of the few Families that Lord treats of, are very lame;
and I observe where he goes much higher than his own Time, they are purely
traditional, and therefore I could not depend on them.

I perused also the large Genealogical Collections concerning the Nobility, by
Sir James Balfour, who was Lord Lion King at Arms, in the Reign of King Charles
I. but they are written so very loosely, and I have seen them contradicted so
frequently by Writs and Charters, that I give them but little Credit. I suppose
Sir James never intended these Papers should have gone further than his own
Closet, for he was a Learned and Curious Gentleman, as appears from his Annals,
in which he is much more exact, especially as to what occurred in his own Time.

I procured likewise a Copy of the Historical Essay on the Principal Families
of the Kingdom, Alphabetically digested, by the learned Lord Advocate, Sir
George Mackenzie of Rosehaugh; but I apprehend these Papers have been only some
first Draught of a greater Work Sir George intended, which he lived not to
finish: Of this there are many Copies in several Hands, the most exact by very
far of any of them I have seen, was that which I had the Use of from Thomas
Crawfurd of Cartsburn, my Brother, who by his own Reading and Knowledge in the
Antiquities of the Nation, has rectified a great many of Sir George's Mistakes,
at least of his Amanuensis, and has with great Accuracy, embellished his own
Copy with a vast deal of fine Historical Remarks, that it well deserves the
Character of a curious Manuscript.

I had moreover a Sight of the Genealogies of the Nobility, collected by Mr.
Dunlop, the late Principal of the College of Glasgow, who was Historiographer
for Scotland, a Gentleman of great Integrity and Learning, and an excellent
Antiquary. I understand he intended to have written A Peerage of SCOTLAND, and
for that End made very full Collections on that Subject: But I observe that
most of Mr. Dunlop's Accounts are composed of those Genealogical Descents that
the Nobility have in their own Families, and are handed about by their Friends;
and that ingenious Gentleman did with great Accuracy and Judgment, add
Historical Memoirs to the Genealogies, which give them a great Ornament; and he
is very exact as to his Authorities. The M.S. was communicated to me by my very
worthy Friend, Mr. Dunlop, the present Professor of Greek in the University of
Glasgow, the Principal's Son.

But after I had made all those Collections I have mentioned, and a great deal
more of that Kind, I cannot stay to particularize, I found I had not any
tolerable Foundation for the carrying on the Work I had undertaken, for the
Honor of the Country, (the Design it was principally for) or my own
Reputation; and therefore, by the Advice and Direction of my ingenious Friends,
who had engaged me in the Design, I did with as much Humility and Modesty as I
was Master of, address every Peer by myself or some Friend, for the Assistance
of their own Charters and Writings, to enable me to do their Families Justice
in this Undertaking.

Such Helps as I sought were very generously afforded me by the greater Part of
the Nobility, who allowed me the Perusal of their Charter-Chests and original
Writings, from which I composed the Accounts of their Families as they stand in
my Book. Severals indeed I did not see; some were unwilling to show their
Family Writs for diverse Reasons, some were Minors, others were Abroad, and out
of the Country; and even to such I have done all the Justice was possibly in my
Power. But if the Accounts of such Families, whose Charters I have not had
Access to, be shorter and less connected than others, that was what cannot be
supposed I could help: I took Care timeously to advertise every Body concerned,
and if they did not incline to show me their Writs, the Blame cannot be laid on
me.

But that I might be the better able to carry on the Work I had undertaken with
Advantage, and to form Accounts of those noble Families whose Writs I had not
seen, and to supply, if a Hiatus did happen, (as it frequently did) in such
Families whose Writings I had perused I searched all the Public Offices and
Libraries about Edinburgh By the Public Offices I mean the Registers of the
Great Seal, which I perused from the Charters of King Robert I. down to our own
Times, in the Laigh Parliament House, and in the Chancery; I looked over also
the Records of the Justiciary, and all the Chartularies in the Lawyers Library.
, and noted every Thing as exactly as I could; and the Keepers of these Offices
were so obliging as to allow me Access at all Hours, ordinary and
extraordinary, whenever I called, and to whom therefore I do, with all due
Gratitude, return my most humble and hearty Acknowledgments.

But after all my Labor, I am so far from being so vain as to imagine this
Essay is not capable of any further Improvement, that on the contrary I am
sensible, I have, through Inadvertency, and the Errors of the Press, especially
in Dates and Proper Names of the present Age, fallen into many Mistakes; but I
beg the ingenious Reader will pardon these Omissions, which are inevitable in
such Books, and where he discovers an Error, he will correct it with his Pen.

Perhaps some may think, that I have been fuller upon some Families, (even some
that are extinct) than on others who are much more ancient than those I enlarge
more upon. The Reason is plain, the Representatives, Relations, or Descendents
of those noble Families showed me their Writs, and encouraged my Design. If
others had done so, I doubt not but I should have been able to have done them
as full, and vouched them as well. For I can say, and do here declare on the
Word of a Gentleman, That I had no Regard in the doing of Justice in my
Province as an Author, to the Encouragement I received from any Man, otherwise
than to reckon myself very much obliged to such; and I own I did not spare
either Time or Pains to discover any Particular, I thought could give an
Ornament to the Antiquity, or a Luster to the Honor of their Families.

But where I have been assisted from the Public Records or Authentic History,
I have been as full on those Families who never encouraged the Design, as I
have been upon those who gave me the greatest Assistance every Way; and for the
Truth of this, I can and do appeal to severals of the Nobility themselves, who
will find very long deduced, and well vouched Descents of their Families, in
this Peerage, who never encouraged my Undertaking in any Degree. But as I said
before, That I had had no Respect to; for my chief and only Regard was, and
shall be Truth, and the Honor of our Country, as far as I am capable to
discover the one, or defend the other.

As to the Work it self, I shall say nothing: But after so great Labor, and
Expense of Time, the Essay (being new and never before attempted) how defective
soever it may be, I cannot but hope, will meet with a favorable Reception from
the Ingenious, and more particularly have the Approbation and Countenance of
Persons of Distinction, who frequently read such Books, and know how useful and
acceptable Undertakings of this Kind have ever been accounted in all the Polite
Nations of Europe.

THE Peerage of SCOTLAND.
HAMILTON Earl of Abercorn.
THE First of this Collateral Branch of the Family of Hamilton, was Lord Claud
Hamilton, third Son of James Duke of Chatlerault, Governor of Scotland by the
Lady Margaret Douglass, Daughter of James, fourth Earl of Mortoun.

Which Lord Claud, was promoted to be Commendator of the Abbacy of Paisly, upon
the Resignation of John Archbishop of St. Andrews, Anno 1553, which was
ratified and approven by Pope Julius III.

Upon the breaking out of the Civil War, he adhered to the Interest of Queen
Mary, by whom he was constituted one of the principal Commanders of her Army at
the Field of Langside, Anno 1568, where he performed the Part of a brave and
valiant General, and resolutely persisted in her Majesty's Service, for which
his Estate was Forfeited, and continued in other Hands, till his Majesty King
James VI. in 1585, was pleased to restore the long injured Family of Hamilton:
And in Testimony of the great Sense he had of that Gentleman's Sufferings for
his Loyalty to Queen Mary, did create him Lord Paisly, Anno 1591: He Married
Margaret Daughter of George Lord Seaton, by whom he had Issue,

James, first Earl of Abercorn.

Sir Claud Hamilton the second Son, was first of the Branch of Eliestoun.

The third, Sir George.

The fourth, Sir Frederick, a Colonel in the Irish Wars in the Reign of King
Charles I.

Beside these Sons, he had likewise a Daughter Margaret, Married to William
first Marquess of Douglass, and had Issue.

But before I proceed, it is proper to take Notice, That James Master of Paisly
being a Man of great Parts, was by King James VI. made one of the Gentlemen of
the Bedchamber; and by reason of his special Merit, was advanced to the
Dignity of a Lord of Parliament, by the Style and Title of Lord Abercorn, Anno
1604, being the same Year appointed one of the Commissioners on the Part of
Scotland, to Treat of an Union with England; His Majesty being pleased further
to Dignify him with the Title of Earl of Abercorn, by Letters Patent, bearing
Date the 10 of July 1606. Creations of the Nobility M.S. penes me.


He Married Marion Daughter of Thomas Lord Boyd, by whom he had five Sons and
two Daughters.

1. James his Successor in his Estate and Dignity.

2 d. Claud, whom he provided in his Irish Fortune, which he had by the Bounty
of King James, after his Accession to the Crown of England, Anno 1603, whom his
Majesty by Letters Patent, bearing Date the 8 of May 1618, created a Baron of
Ireland by the Designation of Lord Straband Sir James Ware on Irish Antiquities.
.

3 d. Sir William died sans Issue.

4 th. Sir George, of whom is descended the present Earl of Abercorn.

5 th. Sir Alexander, Father of Count Hamilton in Germany, dignified by the
late Emperor with the Honor of Prince of Nowburgh.

His Daughters were, Anne, married to Hugh Lord Semple, and Margaret to Sir
William Cauningham of Capringtoun. He dying on the 3 d. of March 1618, (his
Father surviving him three Years, Died in the Year 1621) his Estate and Dignity
devolved upon James his Son and Heir.

Which James, Earl of Abercorn, married Katharin the Daughter and sole Heir of
Gervise Lord Cliftoun, of the Kingdom of England, Widow of Esme, Duke of
Lennex, by whom he had James his Son and Heir, who in the Year 1651, disposed
of his Estate in Scotland, and retired into England: his Male Issue failing,
the Dignity came to Claud Lord Straband, his Heir Male, who dying without
Issue, left his Estate and Title to Charles his next Brother and Heir, who
dying without Male Issue, the Title of Lord Straband failed, but the Honor of
Abercorn, by reason of an Entail upon the Heirs Male, descended and came to
James Hamilton Esquire his Cousin, Son and Heir of James Hamilton Esquire one of the
Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, in the Reign of King Charles II. (by Elisabeth
his Wife, Daughter of John Lord Culpeper) who was Son of Sir George Hamilton,
one of the younger Sons of James first Earl of Abercorn.

Which James, the present Earl, was by King William created Viscount of
Straband, of the Kingdom of Ireland, and is one of the Lords of the Privy
Council in that Kingdom.

In 1706, to preserve his Scots Peerage, he came over, and sat in that Session
of Parliament which concluded the Union; He has married Elisabeth Daughter of
Sir Robert Reading, by whom he has Issue James Lord Paisly.

ARMS.
Two Coats quarterly, first and fourth Gules, three Cinque foiles Ermine,
second and third Argent, a Ship with her Sails trus'd up, Sable, supported by
two Antelops, for Crest a Saw cutting through a Tree, Motto, Through.

SANDIELANDS Lord Abercromby.
THE first who enjoyed this Dignity, was Sir James Sandielands of St. Monans,
descended of the Family of Torphichan, who was Created by King Charles I. in
Consideration of his good Services Lord Abercromby, by Letters Patent, bearing
Date the 12 of December 1647, Register of Patents in the Chanccry Office.
.

He married Anne Carnegy Daughter of David first Earl of Southesk, by whom he
had James his Son and Heir, who dyed without Succession, in the Year 1681,
whereby the Dignity became Extinct.

ARMS.
Two Coats quarterly, first Argent, a Bend Azure, second Argent, a Heart
proper, crowned with an Imperial Crown, Or, on a chief Azure, Three Moletts of
the First, the Third as Second, Fourth as First.

GORDON, Earl of Aberdeen.
DESCENDED of an Ancient Family of that Name, who have been for many Ages
possessed of a large Estate in Aberdeen-shire, and sprung of a Branch of the
Illustrious House of Gordon, 300 Years ago, of which Family John Gordon of
Haddo, was created a Baronet the 13 of August 1642.

Upon the breaking out of the Civil War, he eminently distinguished himself by
his Loyalty to King Charles I. ceasing not to hazard either Life or Fortune in
assisting the Royal Cause; He defended his Castle of Haddo with great
Resolution and Courage, against the Parliaments Forces, Anno 1644; but the
Garrison being treacherously Betrayed by the Soldiers, he was seized, sent
Prisoner to Edinburgh, Condemned and Executed the 14 of July 1644 Bishop
Guthry's Memoirs.
.

This Loyal Gentleman married Mary, Daughter of William Forbes of Tolquhon, by
whom he had two Sons, Sir John, who dying without Issue, left his Estate and
Title of Baronet to Sir George, his Brother and Heir.

Which Sir George, being a Person of excellent Parts and Learning, but more
especially in the Laws, was promoted to be one of the Senators of the College
of Justice, Anno 1680, and thereafter on the first of November 1681, was
constituted President of the Session, in Room of Sir James Dalrymple of Stair,
and the next ensuing Year he was promoted to be Lord High Chancellor of
Scotland, upon the decease of John Duke of Rothes. Having faithfully Demeaned
himself in all those great Employments, he was by his Majesty (King Charles
II.) in Consideration of the untainted Loyalty of his Ancestors in all
preceding Times, the great Loyalty and Sufferings of his Father, and his own
constant Zeal and Affection to the Interest of the Monarchy, by Letters Patent,
bearing Date the 30 of November 1682, advanced to the Dignity and Titles of
Earl of Aberdeen, Viscount of Formartin, Lord Haddo, Methlick, Tarves, and
Kellie.

He married Anne, Daughter and sole Heir of George Lockhart of Torbreaks, by
Anne his Wife, Daughter of Sir James Lockhart of Lee, one of the Senators of
the College of Justice, and by her he had Issue William Lord Haddo, his Son and
Heir; likewise four Daughters.

Anne married to Alexander Earl of Eglintoun, and had Issue.

Martha, to John Udney of That Ilk, and had Issue.

Mary, to Alexander Master of Saltoun, Son and Heir of William Lord Saltoun,
and has Issue.

Margaret unmarried.

William Lord Haddo in his Father's time married Mary, Daughter of David Earl
of Leven, by whom he has one Daughter.

ARMS.
Azure, Three Boars Heads Couped Or, within a Border, charged with Thistles,
Roses, and Flower-de-Lys, supported by two Doctors in their Doctoral Habits,
Motto, Fortuna Sequatur.

Lord Abernethy.
THE First of this Noble Family I have found upon Record, was Orme the Son of
Hugh, who flourished in the Reign of King William: He obtained from that
Monarch a Grant of the Lands of Abernethy, whence, according to the Custom of
that Time, he assumed a Surname; he left Issue a Son Hugh, who got from King
Alexander II. the Lands of Dunlopyn, to be holden of him and his Heirs in free
Forrestry, by a Charter dated the 15 of May, the Eight Year of his Reign. He
left a Son

Laurence, Lord Abernethy, who obtained from King Alexander II. a Grant of
certain Lands in Roxburgh Shire, by a Charter, dated at Edinburgh the 24 of
June, the Ninteenth Year of his Reign Penes Ducem de Douglass.
.

Alexander, Lord Abernethy, his Successor, in the Reign of King Robert Bruce,
dying without Male Succession, his Inheritance came to be shared betwixt his
Three Daughters, and Co Heirs, thus Married

Margaret, to John Stewart Earl of Angus.

Helen, to David Lindsay of Crawford.

Mary, to Andrew Lesly of Rothes.

ARMS.
Or, a Lion Rampant Gules, surmounted of a Riband Sable.

GORDON, Earl of Aboyn.
AMONG many others, who by reason of their special Merits, were advanced to
Titles of Honor, upon the Restoration of King Charles II. was Lord Charles
Gordon, Son of George, second Marquess of Huntly, by the Lady Anne Campbel
Daughter of Archbald Earl of Argyle.

Which Charles, highly manifesting his Loyalty to King Charles I. in the time
of the Civil War, and firmly adhering to King Charles II. during the
Usurpation, was, in Consideration of those his acceptable Services, raised to
the Degree and Dignity of Earl of Aboyn, by Letters Patent, the 10 of September
1661, and departing this Life Anno 1680, left Issue by Elisabeth his Wife,
Daughter of John Earl of Strathmore, Charles his Successor.

2 d. George.

3 d. John in Arms abroad.

And a Daughter Elisabeth, married to John Lord Castlehaven, Son and Heir of
George Earl of Cromerty.

Which Charles Earl of Aboyn, married Elisabeth Daughter of Patrick Earl of
Strathmore, his Cousin German, and dying Anno 1705, left Issue Charles now Earl
of Aboyn, his Son and Heir, a Minor.

ARMS.
Azure, a Chiveron betwixt three Boars Heads, erazed, Or. within a double
Tressore flowr'd with Flowr de-Lys within, and contra Crescents without,
supported by two Chevaliers completely Armed, holding each a Halbard in his
Hand, for Crest a Demi Lion, Gules, armed and langued, Azure, Motto, Stant
caetera tigno. Register of the Lions Office.


OGILVIE, Earl of Airly.
THE Ogilvies, according to our Historians, derive their Descent from Gilbert
Son of Gilebred, and Brother of Gilchrist Earl of Angus, who flourished in the
Days of King William, he obtained from that Monarch the Barony of Ogilvy, from
whence he assumed a Surname according to the Custom of that Time. Of the Family
of Ogilvy, that of Auchterhouse seems to be the principal Branch, whose
Ancestor Sir Wolter Ogilvy, in the Fifteenth of King Robert II. had a Grant for
his good Services done to that Prince, Annuum redditum vigesimi noni Librorum
debiti nobis de Thanagio de Kinclyes in Vic. de Forfar. He likewise had the
Barony of Auchterouse by the Marriage of the Heir-Female of Sir William Ramsay,
and was thereafter slain at the Battle of Hairlaw, the 29th of July 1411,
leaving Issue by his Wife aforesaid, Sir Alexander Ogilvy, Sheriff of Angus,
and Sir Walter Ogilvy of Lintrethan, who laid the Foundation of this noble
Family.

Which Sir Walter being a Man of Parts and Understanding, was upon the
Restoration of King James I. chosen of the King's Council, and constituted
Lord High Treasurer of Scotland Charta in Pub. Archivis.
: In which Office he continued for the Space of Seven Years, till the 1431, he
was made Master of the Household Ibid.
, and he held the Place till the Death of the King, Anno 1437, and giving Way
to Fate in 1441, he left Issue by Isobel his Wife, Sir John his Son and Heir,
who flourished in the Quality of a Knight under King James II Ibid.
. He married Marion, Daughter of Sir William Seaton of That-Ilk, by whom he had
Sir James his Son and Heir, and Three Daughters, Christian married to John
Forbes of Pitsligo Ibid.
Elizabeth to.... Kieth of Inverugy, and Marion to Henry Stewart of Rosyth.

Which Sir James being a Person of good Parts, was by King James IV. sent
Ambassador to Denmark, Anno 1492, in which Negotiation he behaved with so much
Prudence and Dexterity, that upon his Return he was raised to be a Peer of the
Realm, by the Title of Lord Ogilvy. He married Elizabeth, a Lady of the Family
of the Kennedies, and had John his Successor, and again Elizabeth, Daughter to
Archbald Earl of Angus. By her he had Walter Ogilvy, the first of the Branch of
the Ogilvies of Balfour, of the County of Forfar.

Which John married Jean Daughter of William Lord Graham, and had Issue, James
his Successor, Anthony, Abbot of Glenluce, and Two Daughters, Elizabeth married
to William Wood of Bonnieton, and Janet to.... Lichton of Ulysses-haven, in
Vic. de Forfar.

Which James married Elizabeth Daughter to the Earl of Crawfurd Ibid.
, by whom he had James his Successor, also several Daughters. Margaret married
to David Lion of Cossins, Isobel to David Strachan of Carmylie; and Beatrix
to..... Garden of Leyes.

James next Lord Ogilvy, married Margaret Daughter of Henry Lord Sinclair, and
had Issue, James his Successor, Thomas of whom the Ogilvies of Innerkeilor,
Alexander Ogilvy of Kinmundy, Archbald Ogilvy of Laton; also Four Daughters,
Marion married to Patrick Lord Gray, Margaret to David Graham of Fintry, and
had Issue, Anne to Sir Thomas Erskine of Brechin, Helen to John Lord Innermeath.

Which James married Catharine, Daughter of Sir John Campbel of Calder; and
departing this Life in the Month of May 1554, left Issue James his Son and
Heir, and two Daughters, Agnes married to John Erskine of Dun, and Helen to
John Ogilvy of Innerwharity, and had Issue.

Which James did firmly adhere to Queen Mary during her Troubles; for which he
suffered a long and tedious Imprisonment till King James VI. took the
Government on himself, that he was released; and in 1596, sent upon a solemn
Embassy to Denmark, to assist at the Coronation of King Cristern IV. He married
Jean, Daughter of William Lord Forbes: By her he had James who succeeded him,
Sir John Ogilvy of Craig, David Ogilvy of Pitmouies, George Ogilvy of Fornalt,
and Sir Francis Ogilvy of Grange; likewise a Daughter Margaret married to
George Earl Marshall; and departing this Life Anno 1606, was succeeded by

James his Son, who married Jean, Daughter of William Earl of Gowrte, and had
by her

James his Son and Heir, who having given several eminent Instances of his
Loyalty and Fidelity to King Charles I. at the Beginning of the Troubles, was,
in Consideration thereof, as well as the Loyalty and Merit of his Ancestors in
all preceding Times, raised to the Honor of Earl of Airly, by Letters Patent,
bearing Date at York, April 2d, 1639, and to the Heirs Male of his Body for
ever. When the Civil War broke out, this noble Earl did heartily and personally
engage himself in the King's Service, and in all Actions and Interprises of the
greatest Hazard and Danger; whereby he became in the first Form of those who
were most obnoxious to the Parliament. By Isobel his Wife, Daughter of Thomas
first Earl of Haddingtoun; he had James his Successor, Sir Thomas, a young Man
of great Courage and Valor, who from the Beginning of the War in the Time of
King Charles I. served his Majesty very bravely in the Head of a Regiment,
which he himself had raised, with which he fought several Battles, where he had
always Success and Victory, till the Fight at Inverlochy where he lost his
Life; and was very generally lamented, Sir David Ogilvy of Clova; likewise a
Daughter Helen, married to Sir John Carnagy of Bonymoon.

Which James was like very faithful to the Crown in the Time of the Civil War,
during the Reign of King Charles I. for as soon as the Marquis of Montrose took
the Field, and declared for the King, the Lord Ogilvy frankly engaged his
Person in the Service, and always behaved with signal Courage. At the
unfortunate Adventure of Philiphaugh he was taken Prisoner, and tried and
condemned by the Parliament to be executed, but was so happy as to make his
Escape the very Night before his Execution, in his Sister's Dress, and again
engaged in the same Service, and with the same Affection: And after very great
Sufferings sustained with great Firmness and Constancy, he lived to see the
King restored. He married Helen, Daughter of George Lord Banff: By her he had
David his Son and Heir, Marion married to James Lord Coupar; and again to John
Lord Lindores, Margaret to Alexander Lord Halkertoun, Mary to Sir John Wood of
Bonnieton, and had Issue, Helen to Sir John Gordon of Park, and had Issue.

Which David married Grisel, Daughter of Patrick Earl of Strathmore; by whom he
had James Lord Ogilvy, John Ogilvy Esquire and a Daughter Lady Helen.

ARMS.
Argent, a Lion passant guardant, Gules, crowned Or, supported by Two Bulls
proper. Crest, a Lady from the middle upward, holding a Portcullis in her Arms.
Motto, A Fin.

STEUART, Duke of Albany.
THE First who enjoyed this Title, was Robert Stewart, third Son of King Robert
II. by Elisabeth Mure, who in Right of Margaret his Wife, Grandchild and Heir
of Allan Earl of Menteth, came to that Honor, and had the Earldom of Fife, by
the Resignation of the Countess of Fife; both which Titles he used, till he was
raised to a higher Honor.

The Earl of Fife and Menteth was a Person of great Parts and Spirit, which he
manifested in all his Actions, both in Peace and War. His Father the King had
so great an Esteem of his Abilities, that in his old Age, he made him Governor
of Scotland; and he continued in the Administration till the Death of the King.

Upon the Accession of his Brother Robert III. to the Crown, the King being
aged and valitudinary, thought fit to continue the Earl of Fife his Brother in
the Regency, and further dignified him with the Title of Duke of Albany, Anno
1399, and he discharged that great Trust very well throughout the Whole of his
Brother's Reign; and the Prince King James I. being a Prisoner in England at
the Time of his Father's Death, the Duke came of Right to be Governor of the
Kingdom, and he enjoyed the Office till his Death, September 3d, Anno 1420.

He married first Margaret, Daughter and Heir of the Earl of Menteth aforesaid,
by whom he had Murdack his Successor, and several Daughters, Isobel married to
Alexander Earl of Ross, and again to Sir Walter Halliburton of Dirleton,
Marjory to Sir Duncan Campbell of Lochow, and Elizabeth to Sir Malcolm Fleming
of Biggar; next, Mauriella, Daughter of Sir William Keith Marshall of
Scotland; by her he had John Earl of Buchan, and Sir Robert Stewart Knight.

The Duke of Albany was succeeded by Murdack his Son, both in his Estate and in
the Government of Scotland, but he came very far short of his Father, for being
a weak Man, and of small Parts, was scarce able to govern his own Family, much
less the Kingdom: But that which should atone for all his Oversights, and
preserve his Memory from all unkind Reflections, was the glorious Part he
acted, in conducing so much toward the Restoration of King James I. in which
he was the great Instrument. Not long thereafter, the King growing jealous of
the Duke's Power, which no doubt was very great, and discovering some
treasonable Intrigue in which he was concerned, he was first put under Arrest,
and sent Prisoner to the Castle of Carlaverock; and being shortly after brought
to his Trial, he was found guilty of High Treason by his Peers, for which he
lost his Head on the 19th May 1425.

This great but unfortunate Duke, married Isobel, Daughter and Heir of Duncan
Earl of Lennox, by whom he had Sir Walter, and Alexander, who being found
accessory to their Father's Treason, both suffered Death for the same, and Sir
James who fled to Ireland, where he spent the after Part of his unfortunate
Life, and left a Son behind him, Sir Andrew Stewart of Stratheven, who came
over to Scotland in the Time of King James II. who afterward rose to great
Wealth and Honor, and laid the Foundation of the Family of Evandale and
Ochiltree.

The next illustrious Brench of the Royal Family who enjoyed this Title, was
Alexander of Scotland, second Son to King James II. who was created Duke of
Albany, Anno 1452, which he afterward forfaulted for his unnatural Rebellion
against his Brother King James III. and all his Measures being broke, he
retired to France, where he lived till his Death. He left Issue by Katharine,
Daughter of William Earl of Orkney, from whom he was divorced, a Son Alexander,
who was declared illegitimate, and thereupon he entered into Orders, and was
made Bishop of Murray. Also by Anne his second Wife, Daughter to the Count de
Bulloign, the Duke left a Son.

John Duke of Albany, to whom the Administration of the Affairs of the Kingdom
was committed in the Minority of King James V. and he discharged that great
Trust with invincible Constancy and Courage, till the King came to Age, that he
retired into France, where he had a fair Fortune in Right of his Wife. In the
Service of that Crown he exercised the highest military Commands under Francis
I. with great Honor and Reputation, even till his Death, Anno 1536. The Title
by Reason he had no lawful Issue, did extinguish with him.

The next who had this Honor by Creation, was that comely and graceful Prince,
Henry Lord Darnly, whom Queen Mary, a few Days before she took him to be her
Husband, did with great Solemnity invest in the Title of Duke of Albany; which
ceased again upon his Marriage, that he was proclaimed King of Scotland, and
had his Name put upon the Coin with the Queen's; Henricus and Maria Rex and
Regina Scotorum.

Prince Charles, the second Son of King James VI. was in the Third Year of his
Age, Anno 1601, created Duke of Albany, and he bore the Title till by the Death
of that incomparable Prince, Prince Henry his elder Brother, he became Prince
and Steward of Scotland, Anno 1612; after which this Title lay dormant, till
his Majesty King Charles II. on the Restoration, did create his Royal Brother
James Duke of York, Duke of Albany, by Letters Patent 31st of December 1660
Charta in Pub. Arch.
: And this Title his Royal Highness always used till by the Demise of the King
his Brother, he came to the Crown by the Name of King James VII.

KER, Earl of Ancrum.
SIR Robert Ker, having long served his Majesty King James VI. and King Charles
I. in the Quality of a Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and being a Person of very
fine Parts, was raised to the Honor of Earl of Ancrum, the 24th of June 1633.
He married first Elisabeth, Daughter of..... Murray of Blackbarrony, by whom he
had William Earl of Lothian; next, Anne, Daughter of William Earl of Darby, to
the Heirs of which Marriage the Honor was limited; by her he had Charles his
Son, Earl of Ancrum, who died without Issue, and thereby the Title became
extinct.

Earls of Angus.
GILBERT is the first Earl of Angus we read of in the Time of King Malcolm III.
and Gilchrist Comes de Angus his Son, was famous for his warlike Exploits under
King William. He married the King's Sister, by whom he had Duncan, Comes de
Angus, who ratified to the Monks of Arbroath, the Grant of his Father to their
Convent, of the Churches of Strathechen and Keriemoir.

Malcolm Comes de Angus was his Son and Successor Chartulary of Arbroath,
wherein he, Comes Malcol. ratifies his Father and Grandfather's Donations to
that Convent.
, who dying without Issue, the Earldom devolved to Matilda, Comitissa de Angus,
his Father's Sister Ibid, wherein she confirms Earl Gilchrist's Mortifications.
, who married Sir Gilbert de Umfraville, an English Gentleman, to whom the Lady
brought the Title of Earl of Angus. By him she had a Son, Gilbert Earl of
Angus, who was forfaulted for adhering to the Interest of the Baliols.

STEWART, Earl of Angus.
SIR John Stewart Knight. of Bonkle, Son of Sir John Stewart, who was killed at
Falkirk, and Nephew to the Lord High Steward of Scotland, was at the Coronation
of King David II. created Earl of Angus Sir James Dalrymple's Historical
Collections.
, and was afterward slain at Hallydownhill, leaving Issue by Margaret his Wife,
Daughter and Coheir of Sir Alexander Abernethy, Knight. Thomas his Son and Heir,
who by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Sir William Sinclair of Rosline Charta
penes Ducem de Douglas
, had Thomas his Successor; Margaret Countess of Angus, and Elizabeth Wife of
Sir Alexander Hamilton of Innerweek, Knight. ibidem.
, and had Issue.

Which Thomas married Margaret, Daughter and Heir of Donald Earl of Mar; but
dying without Issue, Anno 1377, his Estate and Title came to Margaret his
Sister, who was married first to Thomas Earl of M^^r, but being left a Widow by
him without any Issue, she married again William the first Earl of Douglas, to
whom she was second Wife, and by him had a Son Sir Gearge Douglas ibidem.
, first Earl of Angus.

MURRAY, Earl of Annandale.
THE ancient Family of Cockpool in Dumfries-Shire, took Beginning in the Reign
of King Robert I. Thomas Earl of Murray then gave Willielmo de Moravia, Nepoti
suo, pro homagio and servitio suo, omnes terras, and omnia Tenementa, cum
pertinen. totius Medietatis tenementorum de Cumlongan, and Rivell, in vallis
Annandiae Charta penes me.
. This Branch of the Murrays were well known by the Title of Cockpool. Cuthbert
Murray of Cockpool, was a Person of great Note in the Time of King James I. as
Charles his Son was under James II. Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
; by whom he was named one of the Commissioners on a Treaty of Peace with the
English, Anno 1457 ibidem.
, Cuthbert his Son flourished under King James IV. Of him frequent Mention is
made in the Annals of that Reign Charta in Pub. Archivis.
. Sir John Murray of Cockpool Knight. his Son ibidem.
, was the Father of Cuthbert, of the Place foresaid, and he of Sir Charles
Murray of Cockpool, who was one of the most zealous Barons for the Reformation
of Religion. He married Margaret, Daughter of Hugh Lord Somervel ibidem.
, by whom he had Sir James, Sir David, and Sir Richard Murray of Cockpool,
Bart. who all died without Issue Male, and Sir John Murray of Dundrenan, who
was the first Earl of Annandale.

He was early brought into the Court, under the Favor of the Earl of Mortoun,
where his accomplished Parts and Breeding made him quickly taken Notice of,
insomuch as he was in short Time made one of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber
to King James VI. Master of the Horse, and knighted: Upon the King's Accession
to the English Crown, Sir John Murray waited on his Master into that Realm,
under no other Character than a Gentleman of the Privy-Chamber, and had so
great Credit in the Court, that he quickly got the Reputation of a Favorite.
The King bestowed immense Bounties on him, whereby he came to have one of the
best Estates in Scotland; and therefore, that he might have Titles of Honor
equal to his Estate, his Majesty was pleased first to raise him to be Viscount
of Annan Charra in Pub. Archivis.
, and then Earl of Annandale, by Letters Patent, 13th of March 1624 ibidem.
, wherein his long and faithful Services to his Majesty, are very amply
acknowledged. He continued in a good Degree of Favor with King Charles I.
which he had enjoyed so many Years under the Father, even till his Death, Anno
1640. By Elisabeth his Wife, Daughter of Sir John Schaw, Knight. he had James his
Son and Heir, who in the Time of the Civil War, withdrew to England; where he
lived privately till his Death, 28th of December 1658 Memoirs of the Murrays of
Cockpool, and Earls of Annandale.
, leaving no Issue by Elisabeth his Wife, Daughter of James Earl of Southesk;
so that the Honor became extinct. This Earl entailed his Estate and Honors to
Sir Robert Crichton, his near Kinsman, Nephew to the Earl of Dumfries, who
assumed the Surname of Murray and the Title of Cockpool; and he dying without
Issue Male, left Two Daughters by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of John Lord
Madertie, who were Coheirs, Margaret the Elder, married to George Stirling of
Herbert-shire, and had Issue; and Anne the Younger, to Lord James Murray of
Doually, and had Issue.

JOHNSTON, Marquis of Annandale.
THE first conspicuous Person of this noble Family I have found upon Record,
was Sir John Johnston, who was a Knight of great Valor and Fame in the Reign
of King Robert II. Abercromby's Martial Achievements of the Scots Nation.
. Sir Adam Johnston of that Ilk, was very remarkable for his Loyalty to his
Prince, and Love to his Country in the Time of James II. and was particularly
instrumental in suppressing the Rebellion of the Earl of Douglas Mr. David
Hume's History of the House of Douglas.
; for which eminent Service to the Crown, he got a Gift of the Lands of Pitenen
in Lanerk-Shire Which were then given off by the Lord of Johnston to Herbert
Johnston his Cousin, who was the Ancestor of the Johnstons of Westerhall, of
whom Sir William Johnston, Knight. is the Lineal Heir.
. John Johnston of that Ilk, his Son, was one of the Conservators of the Peace
with England, Anno 1457 Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
, and afterward signalized his Valor and Courage at the Battle of Kirkonnel,
in the unnatural Invasion of the Duke of Albany, against his own Brother King
James III. Anno 1483. By Mary his Wife, Daughter of Maxwell of...... he had
James his Heir, and John, of whom the Branch of Wamfray Charta in Pub. Archivis.
, of which Lands he became possessed by the Marriage of Catharine, Daughter and
Heir of John Boil of Rysholm.

Which James behaved gallantly in several Encounters on the Borders with the
English, in the Reign of King James IV. By..... Daughter of..... his Wife, he
had John his Successor, 2d Robert, 3d Adam of Corry, 4th William.

John Johnston of that Ilk, his Son, behaved gallantly at the Battle of Pinky,
and was afterward one of the Commissioners about the debatable Lands in the
Border, Anno 1552 Rymer.
. He married first Elizabeth, Daughter of...... Jerden of Apple-girth, by whom
he had John his Successor, Robert of Stabletoun; and a Daughter Dorothea,
married to John Mattland of Achincastle Memoirs of the House of Annandale.
, and again Nicolas Douglass, of the House of Drumlanrig, by whom he had a Son
William, of whom the Branch of the Johnstons of Corhead.

Which John was a Man of great Spirit and Courage, which he manifested in
suppressing of Inroads on the Borders, which much abounded in his Time. He
married Margaret, Daughter of Sir John Hamilton of Samuelstoun, by whom he had
John his Son and Heir, and a Daughter Morgaret, married to Sir Robert Douglas
of Cashogle.

Which John being a Gentleman of great Sagacity and Conduct, was much in the
Favor of King James VI. by whom he was made Warden of the East Marches, and
Justiciary, Anno 1579 Carta penes M. de Annandale.
; and he discharged the Office with singular Courage and Fidelity till his
Death, June 5th, 1581 Jonstoni Heroes.
. By Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Sir William Scot Younger of Buccleugh
Charta in Pub. Archivis.
, he had Sir James his Successor, and several Daughters, Janet married to Sir
John Carmichael, Captain of Grawfurd, and had Issue; and Grisel to Sir Robert
Maxwell of Orchardtoun, and had Issue.

Sir James Johnston of that Ilk, his Son, was likewise a great Favorite of
King James VI. he was named Warden of the West Marches, Anno 1596, after his
Father, and continued in the Office, till the King's Entrance to England, that
all National Animosities were removed by the happy Union of the Two Nations. He
was killed in a Family Quarrel by the Lord Maxwell, the 6th of April 1608 B.
Spotswood's History.
, much regreted, says the Reverend Bishop Spotiswood, being a Gentleman full of
Wisdom, and very well inclined. He married Sarah, Daughter of John Lord
Harries, by whom he had Sir James his Son and Heir, who was by the special
Favor of King Charles I. raised to the Honor of Lord Johnston, 20th June 1633
Charta penes Marchionem de Annandale.
, and that for the greater Splendour of his Majesty's Coronation; and thereafter
by other Letters Patent, bearing Date 18th March 1643, was created Earl of
Hartfiel Charta in Publicis Archivis.
. In the Time of the Civil War, this noble Earl gave many signal Testimonies of
his Loyalty, for which he suffered both Imprisonment and the Sequestration of
his Estate. He died Anno 1656, leaving Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of
William Earl of Queensberry, James his Son and Heir; likewise three Daughters,
Mary married to Sir George Graham of Nedderby, Ancestor to the Viscount of
Preston, Janet to Sir William Murray of Stanhope, and had Issue, Margaret to
Sir Robert Dalziel of Glenae, Ancestor to the Earl of Carnwath.

James Earl of Hartfiel, upon the Restoration of King Charles II. with the
Approbation of the Crown, exchanged his Title of Hartfiel to Annandale, Anno
1661, being then one of the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable
Privy Council; and dying 16th July 1674 Ibidem
, left Issue by Henrietta his Wife, Daughter of William, first Marquis of
Douglas, by Mary his second Wife. Daughter of George Marquis of Huntley,
William his Successor: Also Three Daughters,

1st Mary married to William Earl of Crawfurd, and had Issue.

2d, Margaret, to Sir James Montgomery of Skelmurly, Bart. and had Issue.

3d, Henrietta, to Sir John Carmichael of Bonnytoun, Baronet, and had Issue.

Which William was after the Revolution, chosen one of the Lords of the Privy
Council to King William and after that one of the Commissioners of the
Treasury; likeas he was by the special Favor of the said Prince, June 24th,
1701 Ibidem.
, raised to the Honor of Marquis of Annandale.

Upon the Accession of her Majesty Queen Anne to the Crown, the Marquis was
made President of the Council, on the Removal of the Earl of Melvil; and
thereafter named conjunct Secretary of State, Anno 1704. From which Office he
was soon removed, the Earl of Mar being put in his Room. In the Parliament
1706, his Lordship opposed the Union, and delivered several Speeches and
Protestations, containing the Reasons of his Dissent, which were all entered in
the Records of Parliament, where they will remain as lasting Monuments to the
Honor of his Name.

His Lordship married Sophia, Daughter and sole Heir of Mr. John Fairholm of
Craigiehall, by whom he has Issue two Sons and a Daughter,

James, Lord Johnston,

Lord William.

Lady Henrietta, married to Charles Earl of Hopetoun, and has Issue.

ARMS.
Quarterly, first and fourth, Argent a Saltyre Sable, on a Chief Gules, three
Cushions Or. Second and Third Or, an Anchor Gules, (for the Name of Fairholm)
supported on the Dexter with a Lion rampant, Gules, armed and langued, Azure,
crowned with an Imperial Crown, Or; and on the Sinister, with a Horse, Argent,
furnished Gules. Crest, a winged Spur, with this Motto, Nunquam non paratus.

CAMPBELL, Duke of Argyle.
THIS noble ancient Family is derived from a Series of illustrious Ancestors,
who possessed Lochow in Argyle-Shire, according to the traditional Accounts by
the Bards and Sanachies, as early as the Time of King Fergus II. who restored
our Monarchy, Anno Christi 404.

The first Appellation they used was O Dwbin, which, according to an early
Custom they assumed from Diarmed O Dwbin, one of their Ancestors, a brave and
warlike Man, who flourished under King.... from whom they are in the Irish
Language called to this Time, Seol Diarmed, that is, the Posterity and
Offspring of Diarmed.

From this Diarmed O Dwbin, the Bards have recorded a long Series of the Barons
of Lochow I have seen a very ancient Manuscript History of the Family of
Argyle, that derives them from a very long Train of Ancestors, much farther
back than can be vouched by Writings or Records, and seems to be founded upon
the traditional Accounts of the Sanachies and Bards, whose Office consisted
chiefly in recording the Actions and Achievements of the great Men of the
respective Families to whom they were attached.
, whose Actions they tell us, were very renowned both for Valor and Courage.

Paul O Dwbin Lord of Lochow his Successor, called Paul in Spuran, so
denominate from his being the King's Treasurer, having no Male Issue, his
Estate went to his Daughter Eva, who married Gilespick O Dwbin, a Relation of
her own, who got the Name first changed from O Dwbin to Cambel, to preserve and
perpetuate the Memory of a very noble and heroic Piece of Service performed by
him in the Service of the Crown of France, in the Reign of King Malcolm
Canmore. By his Lady he left a Son Duncan, who was Lord of Lochow; He was the
Father of Colin, and He again of Archbald, called Gilespick, and he of Duncan,
Baron of Lochow.

This last mentioned Duncan was the Father of another Gilespick Cambel, Knight.
Lord of Lochow, whose Son and Heir Sir Colin More, called Dominus Colinus
Cambel, Miles, Filius quondam Domini Gileaspick Cambell, did acquire from Sir
William Lindsay, Knight. the Lands of Symontoun in Air-Shire; the Reddendo of which
he made over to the Monks of Newbottle, Die Martis in crastino beati Clementis
Martyris and Pontificis, Anno 1293 Register of Newbottle, also of the Abbay of
Cambuskenneth, transum'd under the Subscription of the Clerk of Register, in
the Reign of King James V. Anno 1535, now in the Lawyer's Library at Edinburgh.
. I find he was also one of the great Men who were summoned to Berwick upon the
Part of Robert de Bruce, in the Competition with John de Baliol for the Crown,
on the Demise of Queen Margaret Mr. Rymer's Foedera Angliae, lately published.
; which is all I have found memorable of him in our pulick Records.

The particular History of the Family of Argyle does represent this Sir Colin
More to have been a very renowned and warlike Chieftain, they tell us, That he
was slain, in a Conflict with a great Neighbor of his own, the Lord of Lorn;
that after he had defeat his Adversary, pursuing the Victory too eagerly, he
was slain at a Place called the String in Cowall, and there interred, where a
great Obelisk was erected over his Grave Historical and Genealogical Descent of
the illustrious Family of Argyle, M.S. penes me.
.

His Death occasioned great Bloodshed in those Parts, and kindled such a Flame
betwixt the Two Families of Lochow and Lorn, as was not extinguished for many
Years thereafter, even so long as the Argadii, Lords of Lorn, existed.

From this Colin it is that the Head of the Family of Argyle are called by the
Irish, MackCallan More even to this Time. By his Wife, a Lady of the Family of
the Sinclairs History of the illustrious Family of the Campbells, in my Hands.
, he had Two Sons, Sir Neil his Successor, and Sir Donald Campbell of Redhouse,
of whom the Family of London Ibidem. Likewise original Writs I have perused, in
the Custody of the Earl of London.
, and the other Cadets of this illustrious Branch of the Campbels derive
themselves.

Sir Neil his Son was honored with Knighthood, by King Alexander III. in the
End of his Reign Chartulary of the Monastery of Paisly, in the Hands of the
Earl of Dundonald, M.S.
. but from the Silence of our Authors, I can particularize none of his
Archievements, till the Year 1292, that upon the Demise of Queen Margaret, he
was one of the Magnates Scotiae summoned to Berwick, upon the Part of Robert de
Bruce, when he and all the other Competitors for the Crown had referred the
Decision of their respective Claims to Edward I. of Engalnd Mr. Prin's large
Collections, wherein Sir Nicol or Neil Campbell is there mentioned as one of
the great Men who were the Bruce's Friends.
; and when that Prince did declare in Favor of John de Baliol, Sir Neil
Campbel did so far acquiesce in the Decision, as to continue faithful to King
John, till that unhappy Prince did unking himself by an inglorious Surrender of
the Independency of the Crown to a Foreign Potentate the King of England, whom
he acknowledged Superior and direct Lord of Scotland Ibidem.
.

But no sooner did King Robert Bruce assert his Title to the Crown, and form a
rational Project of recovering his own Right, and of redeeming his Country from
the Subjection it was under to a Foreign Power, than Sir Neil Campbel was among
the earliest Patriots, who first resorted to him, owned his Title, and gave
quickly so many Proofs of his Zeal and Merit, for the Liberty and Honor of his
Country, and of his Loyalty to that heroic Prince; insomuch that he was
thought most worthy, and pitched upon to command a Party of Loyalists that were
sent to Argyle-Shire, to curb and overawe the Lord of Lorn Arch Deacon Barber's
Life and Achievements of King Robert Bruce.
, who was a declared Enemy to his Country, and of Consequence to the Brucian
Title; and he performed that Service committed to him with Honor and Success,
insomuch that in a short Time he recovered the Countries of Argyle and Lorn,
and brought them to submit to King Robert, notwithstanding the joint Efforts of
the Lord Lorn, and his numerous Accomplices on the contrary Dr. Abercromby's
Achievements of the Scots Nation.
; which shows him to have been a very resolute and hardy Patriot: After which
Sir Neil stuck close to King Robert, and was among the few Scots Patriots, who
accompanied him to Scoon, and assisted at the Solemnity of his Coronation, anno
1306. After which he gave many signal Instances of his Stedfastness and Loyalty
to that Monarch, even in his worst Circumstances: For when he was very far from
being firmly established on the Throne, Sir Niel Campbel entered into an
Association with Sir Gilbert Hay, and Sir Alexander Seton, wherein, in a most
solemn Manner, they bound themselves to desend, till the last Period of their
Lives the Liberties of their Country, and Right of Robert Bruce, their King,
against all Mortals, French, English, and Scots, to which they appended their
Seals at the Abbay of Cambuskenneth, 9 Sept. 1308.

Anno 1314, he was one of the Commissioners upon the part of Scotland,
authorized to Treat with the English for a Peace, which at that Time, took not
its desired Effect: And the next ensuing Year, he was one of the Barons at the
Parliament, held at Air, where they made an Entail of the Crown to King Robert
and his Heirs Mr. Anderson's Independency.
. About which Time, in Consideration of his good Services, and signal Loyalty,
he obtained a Grant of several Lands, then in the Crown, by the Forfaulture of
those who adhered to the Interest of the Baliol; and to oblige him the more,
the King bestowed upon him the Lady Mary Bruce, his Sister in Marriage. He
departed this Life, in the latter End of the Year 1315, leaving Issue two Sons,
Colin his Successor, and

John Campbel, who was by King David Bruce, dignified with the Title of Earl of
Athole, but dying sans Issue, the Honor went no further in the Family.

Which Sir Colin Campbel of Lochow, began early to distinguish himself for
Military Achievements. He was in the Expedition made into Ireland, anno 1316,
in behalf of Edward Bruce, then King of that Realm, where he behaved with
exceeding Gallantry, and performed many signal Services: In Consideration
whereof, he obtained a Grant of diverse Lands in Argyle Shire, by a Charter yet
extant, Charta Colini Campbel fi^ii Nigelli 10 Feb. 1316.
, having faithfully demeaned himself during the whole Course of King Robert's
Reign. He continued no less steadfast to King David his Son; for whose Service,
even when his Affairs were looked upon to be lost, he raised 400 Men, and took
the Castle of Dunoon, then in the Hands of the English; for which notable
Service, when that Prince came to be established upon the Throne, he made him
hereditary Governor, which his Descendants still enjoy Charta penes Joannem
Ducem de Argyle.
.

He married a Daughter of the Family of Lennox Colvil's History of the Family
of Argyle M.S. penes me.
, by whom he had Three Sons and a Daughter, viz. Archbald his Successor.

John Campbel was Author of the Branch of Barbreck, of whom descended Campbel
of Succoch

3 d. Sir Dougal Campbel, who lost his Estate for adhering to Edward Baloil.

Alicea, his Daughter, was married to Allan Lauder of Hatton Charta in publicis
Archivis.
.

He had a natural Son, Niel, of whom the Campbel's of Melfort derive their
Descent.

He departing this Life about the Year 1340, was succeeded by Archbald his Son,
who constantly adhered to King David, during his Captivity in England, after
the Battle of Durham, and that Prince, upon his Return, to reward his Loyalty,
bestowed upon him several Lands then in the Crown, by the Forfaulture of Sir
Dougal Campbel, his own Brother, anno 1357 Penes Ducem de Argyle.
.

He married Mary, Daughter of Sir John Laumont Colvil's History of the Family
of Argyle.
, by whom he had Colin his Successor, who obtained from King David II. a
Charter ratifying the Alienation made by Christian, Daughter and Heir of Sir
Dougal Campbel, of the Lands of Craignish, to be holden of him and his Heirs in
as ample manner as Duncan Mackdwyne, his Ancestor, held the Barony of Lochow,
which bears Date 25 March 1370 Charta penes Ducem de Argyle.
. He was employed by King Robert II. in restraining the Incursions of the
Highlanders, who then infested the Western Parts of this Realm, whom he reduced
to the King's Obedience: In Consideration whereof, he obtained from the said
King sundry Lands yet in the Family.

He married Mary Campbel, a Lady of his own Family, by whom he had two Sons,
Duncan his Successor.

Colin the second, was Founder of the Family of Arkinlass Charta per Duncanum
Campbel, Dominum de Lochow de Terras de Achingounen dilecto nepote suo Joanni
Campbel, filio and haeredi Fratris sui Colini Campbel de Arkinlass 6 May 1428
Penes Thomam Yuil de Darlieth.
, of whom Sir James Campbel, Baronet, is lineal Heir. Of Arkinlass the Families
of Arutenet, Dunoon, Carrick, Skipnish, Blythswood, Shawfield, Rachane,
Auchvwillen, and Dergachie are Branches.

Besides which two Sons, he had a Daughter, Christian, married to Malcolm
Mackfarlane of Arochar Charta Christian Campbel, filiae Colini Campbel de
Lochow Sponsae Malcolmi Mackfarlane, penes me.
.

He had likewise two natural Sons, Dougal, Progenitor of the Family of
Dunstafuage, of whom Colin Campbel of Ederlin, and Robert Campbel of Balvie are
descended.

The second, Duncan, was first of that Branch of Duntroon.

To Sir Colin Campbel succeeded Sir Duncan his Son: This Duncan being a Person
of great Parts, arrived to very high Advancements, as well in Honor as Estate:
He married first the Lady Marjory Steuart, Daughter of Robert Duke of Albany,
Governor of Scotland, and improved the Opportunity of his near Alliance with
Murdoch Duke of Albany, Governor, while King James 1. was detained Prisoner in
England, so far, that he prevailed with him, to ransom and restore the King to
his Fathers Throne. This prudent Prince, discerning so much his Abilities, he
constituted him one of his Privy Council, and his Justiciar, and Lieutenant
within the Shire of Argyle Writes of the Family of Argyle.
, was continued in the same Office to King James II. by whom he was advanced to
the Dignity of a Lord of Parliament, by the Title of Lord Campbel, anno 1445
Creations of the Nobility, penes Hamilton de Wishaw.
. This much as to his civil Actions. I come to his Works of Piety, which were
great and many. He gave in pure Alms to the Monks of the Abbey of Sandale, in
Kintyre, the Lands of Blairnatiber, for the Safety of his Soul Confirmation of
the said Charter to the Monastery of Sandale, in the Register.
, and founded the Collegiate Church of Kilmun, by his Charter, 4 August 1442
Monasticon Scoticanum penes me M.S.
; which Grant he expresses to be made, In honorem Dei, heatae virginis Mariae
and Sancti Mundi, pro salute Animae olim recolendae Memoriae Jacobi Regis and
Joannae Reginae suae; nec non pro salute Animae Jacobi moderni Regis Scotorum
meaque propria salute and animae quondam Marjoriae Conjugis meae and modernae
Consortis meae, and quondam Caelestini filii mei primogeniti omnium
Autecessorum and Successorum meorum.

This noble Lord left Issue by Marjory his first Wife, aforesaid, Daughter of
Robert Duke of Albany; three Sons. 1 st. Caelestine, dyed sans Issue.

2 d. Archbald, from whom the Male Line of this noble Family sprung: He married
in his Father's Time Elisabeth. Daughter of Sir John Somervel of Carnwath,
Ancestor to the Lord Somervel, by whom he had a Son Colin, who succeeded his
Grandfather.

3 d. Sir Colin, who was first of that Branch of the Family of Glenurchie, now
dignified with the Title of Earl of Broadalbin.

By his second Wife Margaret, Daughter of Sir John Steuart of Blackhall,
natural Son of King Robert III. he had three Sons;

Duncan, first of the Branch of Achinbreak, of whom Sir James Campbel, Baronet,
is lineal Heir Male. This Family has produced the Campbel's of Glencardel,
Glensadale, Kilduskland, Kilmorie, wester Keams, Kilberry, and Dana.

Niel, the second Son, was Ancestor of Campbel of Ellengreg, whereof the Heir
is Sir Niel Campbel. Of this Family, is Colin Campbel of Ormandale, now Major
General in the Muscovite Service.

Of the 3 d. Son Issued the old Campbel's of Ottar, extinct.

Lord Duncan departing this Life, 1453, was buried in the Church of Kilmun,
where there is a noble Monument erected over him, with the Statue of Himself,
as big as the Life, about the Verge of the Tomb, is this Inscription, Hic Jacet
Dominus Duncanus, Dominus le Campbel, Miles de Lochow.

To Duncan Lord Campbel succeeded immediately Colin his Grandson and Heir, who
was created Earl of Argyle, by K. James II. anno 1457 Creations of the Nobility
; being a Man of eminent Parts, was in the Reign of James III. employed in the
highest Offices in the State, as Privy Seal, Master of the Household, and Lord
high Chancellor; all which he discharged with great Ability and Integrity: He
was in no less Favor with King James IV. after his Accession to the Throne
(tho without having any particular Hand in the Contrivances and barbarous
Actions, which were exercised in Order thereto) who constituted him again
Chancellor, anno 1488 Catalogue of Statesmen, penes me.
. He enjoyed that Office till his Death, anno 1492.

He married Isabel, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of John Steuart, Lord
Lorn, by whom he had two Sons, Archbald his Successor, and Thomas, a younger
Son, of whom descended the Family of Lundie in Angus Miscellaney Collections
penes Mr. James Anderson.
, likewise five Daughters.

1. Margaret, married to George Lord Seton, and had Issue.

2 d. Isabel, to William Master of Drummond, Son and Heir of John Lord
Drummond, and had Issue.

3 d. Helen, to Hugh, first Earl of Eglintoun, and had Issue.

4 th. Elisabeth, to John, second Lord Oliphant, and had Issue.

5 th. Mary, to Aeneas Mackdonald, natural Son and Heir of Tailzie to John Earl
of Ross.

Archbald Earl of Argyle, his Son, succeeded him, being a noble Man of great
Parts and Wisdom: He was by King James IV. promoted to be Chancellor of
Scotland, anno 1494 List of Statesmen penes Mr. Milne.
, Lord Camberlain, Anno 1495 Ibidem.
, and Master of the Household, 1498 Charta in Rotulis Jacobi IV.
. At the Battle of Flowden, he Commanded the Vanguard of the Army; and
behaving himself with great Valor, was there killed, with his Royal Master
King James IV. and the Flower of his Nobility, 9 of September 1513, leaving
Issue by Elisabeth his Wife, Daughter of John, first Earl of Lennox, four Sons,
Colin his Successor.

Archbald Campbel of Skipnish, was the second, which failed in an Heir Female,
in the Reign of Queen Mary.

Sir John Campbel, third Son, came to the Possession of a fair Estate, by the
Marriage of Morella, Daughter and sole Heir of John Calder of that-Ilk, whose
Successor is Sir Hugh Campbel of Caldar: Of this Branch of the Family of
Argyle, are the Campbel's of Archattan, Airds, and Sir Archbald Campbel of
Clunies descended.

Donald, fourth and youngest Son, was Abbot of Couper, of whom the Campbel's of
Kythack in Angus derive their Descent.

Besides these Sons, he had likewise four Daughters. Margaret, married to John
Lord Erskin, and had Issue. Isabel, to Gilbert, second Earl of Cassils, and had
Issue. Mary, to John Steuart Earl of Athole, and had Issue. And Jean, to Sir
John Laumont of Inneryne, and had Issue.

Colin, Earl of Argyle, his Son, was named one of the four Counselors to King
James V. anno 1525; in 1528 he was constituted Lieutenant of the Borders, and
Warden of the Marches; which Office he discharged so much to his Majesty's
Satisfaction, that he obtained first a Grant of the Lordship of Abernethy, then
in the Crown, by Angus's Forfaulture, and after an ample Confirmation of the
hereditary Sheriffship of Argyle Shire, Justiciary of Scotland, and heretable
Master of the Household Penes Ducem de Argyle.
.

He married Janet, Daughter of Alexander Earl of Huntly, by whom he had two
Sons, and one Daughter, viz. Archbald who succeeded him.

John Campbel, second Son, from whom is descended the Branch of Lochnel, which
produced the Campbel's of Balerno and Stonfield.

Alexander Campbel, third Son, Dean of Murray, had no Succession.

Margaret, married first to James Steuart Earl of Murray, natural Son of King
James IV. and then to John Earl of Sutherland.

He departing this Life, anno 1542, was succeeded by Archbald his Son and Heir;
which Archbald was one of the Peers, who upon the Death of King James V. entered
into an Association to oppose the then intended Match betwixt Queen Mary and
King Edward VI. of England, and consequential Union of the Crowns, as tending,
To the high Dishonor, perpetual Skaith, Damage and Ruin of the Liberty, and
Nobleness of this Realm, as it runs in the Original yet extant, bearing Date
the 4th. July, 1543 Penes Hamilton de Wishaw.
.

Upon the breaking out of the War with England, he remarkably distinguished
himself by his Valor and Conduct, both at the Battle of Pinkie, anno 1547, and
at the Siege of Haddingtoun, 1548, in Defense of his Queen and Country, related
at large by our Historians Dr. Abercromby's History of the Campaigns 1548, and
1549.
. This noble Lord was the first of his Quality who embraced the Protestant
Religion, in the Beginning of the Reformation, of which he was a hearty
Promoter, and continued steadfast in the Profession thereof; when adying he
recommended to his Son, to propogate the preaching of the Gospel, according to
the reformed Principles, and the suppressing Romish Superstition and Idolatry.
He dyed anno 1558 History of the Reformation, commonly called Knox's.
, leaving Issue by Lady Helen Hamilton his first Wife, Daughter of James Earl
of Arran; Archbald his Son and Heir, and by his second Wife Mary Graham,
Daughter of William Earl of Monteith,

Sir Colin Campbel of Buchuan, and two Daughters,

1. Margaret, married to James Steuart Lord Down, Ancestor to the present Earl
of Murray, and had Issue.

2 d. Janet, to Hector Macklane of Dowart, and had Issue Charta Janetae Campbel
filiae Arch. Comitis de Argyle Sponsae Hectoris Macklane de Dowart, anno 1556,
in publicis Archivis.
.

Archbald Earl of Argyle, his Son being a Person of singular accomplishments,
was by the Estates of Scotland, sent Ambassador to the Queen, then in France,
anno 1559, to Supplicate her Majesty in Favor of the Reformation: But that
taking no Effect, he, together with the Earls of Glencairn, Morton, and others,
entered into an Association, wherein they bound themselves to assist one another
in advancing the Cause of Religion, which at last they got happily established
by Act of Parliament, anno 1560 Bishop Spotiswood and Mr. Calderwood's Church
Histories.
.

Upon the breaking out of the Civil War, in the Reign of Queen Mary, he
espoused her Interest, and was General of her Forces, at the Battle of
Langside, against the Earl of Murray, then Regent. After which he submitted to
the Authority of her Son, King James, and came to be so considerable in that
Party, that upon the Death of Matthew Earl of Lennox, Regent, anno 1571, he
stood a Candidate for that Post; but the Earl of Mar being preferred to the
Regency, he was constituted Lord High Chancellor. He enjoyed that Office with
universal Reputation for the Space of Three Years, even to his Death, which
happened in September 1575 Mr. Crawford's Memoirs.
, to whose Memory the famous Mr. Johnston Johnstoni Heroes.
, composed this Epigram. Gens Albina vetus, gemini incunabula Regni
Quae posuit, (fuerant nam duo Regna prius:)
Illa viris armisque potens, totque aucta tropaeis,
Quae dominos rerum tot dedit una Deos;
Hec and avos, atavosque dedit, loca prisca tenemus,
Tecta, Lares, mores, and decora alta ducum.
Sufficeretque vetus nobis ea gloria: verum
Major ad ignoti nos vehit astra poli.
Adscriptique Dei jam sancta in faedera cives,
Magnanimi audemus pro pietate mori.
Gens quae jura prius dederat, nunc accipit. Ergo
Bis felix: quae dat, quae nova jura capit.


This worthy Lord married two Wives, 1 st. Lady Jean Steuart, natural Daughter
of King James V. 2 dly. Jane, Daughter of Alexander Earl of Glencairn, but by
none of 'em left any Issue; whereupon his Estate and Honor came to Sir Colin
Campbel of Buchuan, his Brother and Heir.

Which Colin was constituted one of the Lords of the Privy Council to King
James VI. anno 1577, and Lord High Chancellor of Scotland, upon the Decease of
John Earl of Athole, 1579, which, together with several other great Employments
in the State, he enjoyed till his Death, in the Year 1584 Spotiswood
.

He was married first to Janet Steuart, Daughter of Henry Lord Methven, but by
her he had not any Issue; and by Agnes his second Wife, Daughter of William
Earl Marishal, and Widow of James Earl of Murray, He had two Sons, Archbald who
succeeded him, and Sir Colin Campbel of Lundy, Baronet.

Which Archbald Earl of Argyle was constituted General of the Forces raised
against the Earls of Huntly and Errol, at the Battle of Glenlivet, anno 1594
Ibidem.
, and suppressed the Insurrection of the Mackgregors 1603 Balfour's Annals.
, and another more formidable by the Mackdonalds, in the Western Isles, 1614
Ibidem.
: In Respect whereof, and his other great Merits, he obtained a Grant of the
Country of Kintyre, anno 1617, which was ratified by a special Act of
Parliament Charta penes Ducem de Argyle.
.

In 1618, he went to Spain, and signalized himself in that Service against the
States of Holland, and assisted at taking several Places of Strength, but by
his Majesty's Permission returning to England, he dyed at London, anno 1638
Bishop Guthry's Memoirs.
. He married first Anne, Daughter of William Earl of Morton, by whom he had
Archbald his Successor, and four Daughters.

1. Anne, married to George, second Marquess of Huntly, and had Issue.

2 d. Annabel, to Robert, second Earl of Lothian, and had Issue.

3 d. Jean, to John, first Viscount of of Kenmure, and had Issue.

4 th. Mary, to Sir Robert Montgomery of Skelmurly, and had Issue.

2 dly. He married Anne, Daughter of Sir William Cornwallis of Brom, Ancestor
to the Lord Cornwalis in England, by Mary his Wife, third Daughter, and one of
the Coheirs of John Lord Latimer Sandfords Genealogical History of the Kings of
England p. 344.
, by whom he had a Son James, created first Lord Kintyre, by King James VI.
anno 1622, and by King Charles I. dignified with the Title of Earl of Irvine,
by Letters Patent, bearing Date 28 March 1642 Creations of the Nobility, from
the Register of the Chancery.
, and a Daughter Mary married to James Lord Rollo, and had Issue.

Archbald Earl of Argyle, his Son, was a Man of great Learning, singular
Judgment, and other Endowments, which recommended him so much to the Favor of
King Charles I. that he constituted him one of the Lords of his Privy Council.

In 1628, he resigned in his Majesty's hands the Justiciary of all Scotland
(which had been in his Family for diverse Ages) reserving to himself and his
Heirs, the Justiciary of Argyle and the Western Isles, and where ever else he
had Lands in Scotland, which was ratified by Act of Parliament, in 1633, where
his Majesty was present in Person. Not long after which, in respect of his own
Merit, as well as the remarkable Fidelity and Loyalty of his Family in former
Times to the Crown, his Majesty was graciously pleased to create him Marquess
of Argyle, by Letters Patent, bearing Date 15th. November 1641.

When the Troubles began in that Reign he joined with the Parliament of
Scotland, and showed himself a Zealous asserter of the Presbyterian Church
Government, which was then established.

After the horrid Murder of the King, he contributed much to the dutiful
Reception of his Majesty King Charles II. into Scotland, anno 1650, and at the
Solemnity of his Coronation 1 st. January 1651, he assisted soeminently as to
put the Crown upon his Head: But upon the Restoration of his Majesty, anno
1660, he was attainted of High Treason, for corresponding and complying with
Oliver Cromwell (the too too common Fault of the Times) and found guilty by the
Parliament, was beheaded at Edinburgh, the 27 of May, anno 1661. Imediately
before his Execution, he solemnly declared, That from his Birth, to that
Moment, he was free of any Accession to the Death of King Charles Trial of the
Marquess of Argyle.
, and like a good Christian, prayed God to bless his present Majesty, in his
Person and Government.

This great Peer was married to Margaret, Daughter of William Earl of Mortoun,
by whom he had two Sons, Archbald Earl of Argyle. And

Lord Niel Campbel of Ardmaddie, sometime Governor of Dunbartoun Castle,
married first Vere, Daughter of William Earl of Lothian, by whom he had Mr.
Archbald Campbel his Son and Heir, a Gentleman of eminent Learning, and other
Accomplishments: Also by his second Wife Susanna, Daughter of Sir Alexander
Menzies of Weim, he had two Sons, Mr. Neil Campbel Advocate, and Mr. Alexander
Campbel. The Marquess had likewise three Daughters.

1 st. Anne, a Lady of excellent Endowments, never married.

2 d. Jean, married to Robert first Marquess of Lothian, and had Issue.

3 d. Mary, to George Earl of Caithness, sans Issue, after his Death, to John
Earl of Broadalbin, and had Issue.

The Title of Marquess of Argyle failing by the Forfaulture of this Archbald,
his Majesty was graciously pleased to restore Archbald Lord Lorn his Son, to
the Estate, Title, and Precedence formerly enjoyed by his Ancestors, Earls of
Argyle Charta in Rotulis Caroli II.
.

Which Archbald, Earl of Argyle, was constituted Captain of his Majesty's Foot
Guards, anno 1650, with this Speciality, That tho all Commissions were then
given by the Parliament, yet he would not serve without a Commission from the
King Penes Ducem de Argyle.
. After the Deseat of the Royal Army at Worcester, anno 1651, he took Arms for
his Majesty's Service, which incensed Oliver Cromwell so much against him, that
tho he granted a Pardon and general Indemnity to the People of Scotland, by his
Proclamation the 12 of April 1654, yet was he, with several other Loyalists,
particularly excepted; notwithstanding of which, with singular Constancy, he
preserved his Duty and Fidelity to his Majesty inviolated, in the worst Times,
would never capitulate, till he had General Midelton's Order from the King so
to do, bearing Date 31 of December 1655 State Tracts.
: Then he made his Composition, without any other Engagment than laying down
his Arms, whereupon he retired to his own House, that he might live quietly,
and retained still his Affection and Fidelity to the King; of which his Majesty
was so perfectly sensible, that he was pleased to make his eminent Loyalty and
Zeal toward the Restoration, the onerous Cause of restoring him to his Father's
Fortune, anno 1663. Not long after he was named a Privy Counselour, and one of
the Commissioners of the Tresaury, which for many Years he discharged with
great Fidelity, and through all Changes appeared an earnest Espouser of the
Protestant Interest: For seeing to what Pass things were like to come, he
proposed in a Committee of Council, that to the Test might be added some Acts
against Popery, which was so ill taken, that all methods imaginable were
devised to ruin him, which at last was effected, under a Pretense of his
putting his own Sense and Explanation upon the Test, when he took Ibidem.
it in these Words,

I have considered the Test, and am desirous to give Obedience, as far as I
can; I am confident, the Parliament never intended to impose contradictory
Oaths; and therefore I think no Man can explain it, but for himself, and
reconcile it, as it is genuine, and agrees in its own Sense; and I take it so
far as it is consistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion: And I do
declare, I mean not to bind up my self, in my Station, but in a lawful Way, to
endeavor any thing I think for the Advantage of the Church or State, not
repugnant to the Protestant Religion, and my Loyalty: And this I understand, as
part of my Oath.

For which, by the insinuating Persuasions of some who bore him no good Will,
the King was so far incensed against him, that he not only commanded him
Prisoner to the Castle of Edinburgh, but gave Order for his Trial. Being found
Guilty of high Treason, he made his Escape out of the Castle, very dexterously,
in the Dress of a Lady's Page Ibidem.
, got over to Holland, whence with a few Men he invaded this Kingdom, 1685, in
the Beginning of the Reign of King James VII. a little before the Duke of
Monmouth landed in England, History of the Reign of King James III.
but never having got together above 2000 Men, was soon after totally routed
near Kilpatrick, and taken Prisoner: He was Beheaded at the Cross of Edinburgh
the 30 of June 1685, upon his former Sentence. It Is said, he composed this
EPITAPH a few Hours before his Death. Thou Passenger, that shall have so much
Time,
As view my Grave, and ask what was my Crime:
No Stain of Error, no black Vices brand,
Did me compel to leave my native Land.
Love to my Country, Truth condemned to die,
Did force my Hands forgotten Arms to try,
More from Friends Fraud my Fall proceeded has,
Than Foes, the Thrice they did attempt my Death.
On my Design, the Providence did frown,
Yet GOD at last, will surely raise his own:
Another Hand, with more successful Speed.
Shall raise the Remnant, bruise the Serpent's Head.


This Archbald, Earl of Argyle, married Mary Steuart, Daughter of James 3 d.
Earl of Murray, by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Alexander Earl of Home, by
whom he had four Sons, viz.

Archbald late Duke of Argyle.

John Campbel of Mamore, 2 d. Son, Member of Parliament for Dunbarton Shire,
married -- -- Daughter of John Lord Elphingstoun, and has Issue.

Colonel Charles Campbel 3 d. Son.

Colonel James Campbel 4 th. Son, married Margaret, Daughter of David Lesly,
Lord Newark, and has Issue.

Also two Daughters.

Anne, married first to Richard Earl of Lauderdale, and now to Charles Earl of
Murray.

Jean, to William Marquess of Lothian, and has Issue.

Archbald Lord Lorn his Son, was one of the few Scots Peers that came over from
Holland with the Prince of Orange, the late King William, into Britain, anno
1688. He was owned by the Convention of Estates as Earl of Argyle, before the
Forfaulture of his Father was rescinded, which, by The Claim of Right, was
declared to be A Reproach to the Nation. He was particularly Active to have the
Crown established on the Prince and Princess of Orange, as the English had
done; which being by a great Majority carried in the House, his Lordship was
sent from the Nobility, with other two from the Barons and Buroughs, to offer
the Crown in the Name of the said Convention to their Majesty's, and tendered
them the Coronation Oath, for which, and many other good Services, upon their
Advancement to the Throne of this Realm, he was admitted one of the Privy
Council 1 st. of May 1689, and anno 1690, made one of the Lords of the
Tresaury, and after that Colonel of the Scots Guards of Horse, and one of the
extraordinary Lords of the Session, upon the Decease of William Duke of
Hamilton, in the Year 1694: And further, in Consideration of his good Services,
he was by his said Majesty created into the Dignity and Titles of Duke of
Argyle, Marquess of Kintyre and Lorn, Earl of Campbel and Coual, Viscount of
Lochow and Glenyla, Lord Innerara, Mull, Morvern, and Tyrie, by Letters Patent,
bearing Date at Kensingtoun the 23 of June, 1701. Likeas, he carried over a
Regiment to Flanders for King William's Service, consisting almost, both
Officers and Soldiers, of his own Name and Family, who bravely distinguished
themselves through the whole Course of the War.

He married Elisabeth, Daughter of Sir Lionel Talmash of Helingham, by
Elisabeth Duchess of Lauderdale, his Wife, Daughter and Heir of William Murray
Earl of Dysart, and Sister to Lionel now Earl of Dysart, by whom he had Issue,
two Sons and a Daughter.

John, the present Duke of Argyle.

Archbald Campbel Earl of Ilay.

Anne, married to James Steuart, 2 d. Earl of Bute.

He departing this Life the 28 of September 1703, was succeeded by

John, the present Duke of Argyle, his Son and Heir, who from his Youth,
according to the Rule of his great Ancestors, betook himself to a Military
Life, was Colonel of a Regiment of Foot, at the End of the last War, when not
full Seveenteen Years of Age, and even then gave signal Proofs of his Valor.

In the Beginning of this War, he was constituted Brigadeer and Colonel of a
Regiment of Foot, Major General, and then Lieutenant General in which
Characters he has in a very eminent Mannerdistinguish'd himself through the whole
Course of this present War; was at the Battle of Ramllies, and at the Siege of
Menin, of which he took Possession; commanded and took the Fort of Plasandale,
and assisted at the Siege of Ostend; was remarkably Active in the Pight at
Audenard, and afterward took Possession of Lille, (the Siege of which Town he
had assisted in) as also of Ghent and Bruges, and particularly signalized
himself in the Campaign 1709, at the Siege of Tournay, and the Battle of
Blareignes; In short, there has scarce been a Battle or Siege this War in
Flanders, at which he did not assist in Person.

Upon his Father's Decease, he was constituted one of the Lords of Her
Majesty's Privy Council, and Captain of the Scots Guards of Horse, and one of
the extraordinary Lords of Session, and Knight of the most noble Order of the
Thistle, anno 1704.

In the Year 1705, Her Majesty was pleased to add to his other Employments,
that of Lord High Commissioner to Represent Her Royal Person in the Parliament,
when not above 23 Years of Age: And upon his Return to Court, in Consideration
of his many signal Services, he was created a Peer of England, by the Title of
Baron of Chatham, and Earl of Greenwich.

In 1710, He was appointed Generalissimo of Her Majesty's Forces in Spain,
elected Knight of the Garter, and dispatched with the Character of
Ambassador-Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiary to Charles III. of Spain.

His Grace has married Mary, Daughter of Thomas Brown Esquire and Niece to Sir
Charles Duncomb, late Lord Mayor of London.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st. and 4th. Girony of Eight, Sable and Or, 2d. and 3d. Argent, a
Galley with her Oars in Action, supported by two Lions Rampant, Gules, Crest a
Boars Head eraz'd, Or, Motto, Ne Obliviscaris.

Earls of Athole.
AThole had early Earls in the Reign of King Malcolm IV. Malcolm is then Earl
of Athole: He out of his Devotion to God, gave in pure Alms to the Monks of
Scoon the Church of Logen-mabed, with four Chapels thereunto belonging
Register of Scoon, in the Custody of the Viscount of Stormont.
, for the Safety of his Soul, and to the Abbay of Dumfermling, the Tithes of
the Church of Mollin, Pro salute animae suae and animae Sponsae suae and Regum
Predecessorum suorum ibidem requiescentium, which was ratified by King William
Register of Dumfermling.
. He left Issue,

Henry his Son and Heir, from whom the Title of Earl of Athole came to Alanus
Ostiarius Domini Regis: For I have found him designed Earl of Athole, in a
Confirmation he made to the Abbacy of Arbroth, of the Wood of Torfeach in
Aberdeen-Shire, formerly given by Thomas de Lundin Ostiarius Regis his Father,
to that Convent, which King Alexander II. ratified by his Charter, the 12th. of
October, the 19th. Year of his Reign Register of Arbroth.
.

From this Family the Title of Earl of Athole was transferred to Thomas of
Galloway, by Marriage of Isabel, the Heir Female. Patrick Earl of Athole their
Son, was burnt in his own Lodging at Haddingtoun, anno 1241 Chron, de Melross.
, whereupon his Estate and Title descended to his Mother's Sister, then the
Wife of David Hastings, an English Gentleman Chron. de Melross.
, by whom he had one Daughter, married to John de Strathbolgie Sir James
Balfour's Collections, M.S.
. David Earl of Athole, their Successor, was Constable of Scotland, in the
Beginning of the Reign of King Robert I. He Is so designed in a Charter granted
by that Monarch, erecting the Lands of Tarves into a Regality, in favor of the
Monks of Arbroth, 26th. of February 1311 Register of Arbroth.
. And another David Earl of Athole, his Successor, who was constituted
Governor of Scotland, by Edward Baliol; for whose Service he raised an Army,
but was totally routed, and himself killed, at the Battle of Kilblain, by the
Scots, under the Conduct of Patrick Earl of March, and Sir Andrew Murray, anno
1335. His Estate by Forsalture falling to the Crown, it so continued till King
David II. was pleased to bestow both the Estate and Title of Earl of Athole,
upon John Campbel, Son of Sir Neil Campbel of Lochow, by the Lady Mary Bruce
his Wife, Daughter of Robert Earl of Carrick, and Sister to King Robert Bruce;
but he dying without Succession, the Title became extinct by his Death, but did
not long so continue, for King Robert II. was pleased to revive it again in the
Person of Walter Steuart his second Son, by Eupham Ross his Queen in the 5th.
Year of his Reign, anno 1375 Sir James Balfour's Genealogical Collections. M.S.
. He founded the Collegiate Church of Methven, anno 1433, which he amply
endowed with Lands and Tithes within his own Territories, for the Salvation of
his Soul, according to the Devotion of these Days; and considerably enriched
himself by the Marriage of Margaret, eldest of the Daughters and Coheirs of
Sir David Barclay of Brechin, by whom he had David his eldest Son, who died in
England, one of the Hostages for the Ransom of King James I. and Alan Steuart,
Earl of Caithness, who was killed, fighting bravely in the Service of his
Country at the Battle of Innerlochy, anno 1428 History of the Family of Steuart.
.

This Walter Earl of Athole, was the principal Actor in the horrid Murder of
King James I. his Nephew, which proceeded (says our Historians) from a Response
he had from some of his Highlanders, that before his Death he should be Crowned
in a solemn Assembly. For this horrid and unnatural Crime, the Sentence of
Death was executed upon him, in a most exemplary Manner, famous over all
Europe; and his Estate was annexed to the Crown.

STEUART, Earl of Athole.
THE First of this Illustrious Branch of the Family of Steuart, who attained
this Dignity, was, John Steuart Son and Heir of Sir James Steuart, for
Distinction called The black Knight of Lorn, by Jean his Wife, Dowager of King
James I. and Daughter of John Earl of Somerset; which James was created Earl of
Athole by his Uterine Brother, King James II. Printed History of the Family of
Athole.


In the Reign of King James III. he was constituted his Majesty's Lieutenant,
against the Lord of the Isles, then in Rebellion; and by his Valor and
Conduct, he reduced him to the King's Obedience Drummonds History.
: For which signal Service, he had thereupon a special Grant of several Lands,
and this Motto added to his Arms, Forth Fortune and fill the Fetters, in 1457,
he was one of the Conservators of the Peace with England, and in 14^^ was
joined in Commission with several others, to treat of a Peace with the English,
which they then concluded. He married first Beatrix, Daughter of Archibald
fifth Earl of Douglas, by whom he had a Daughter Elisabeth, married to Patrick
Lord Gray.

2 dly. Eleanor Sinclair, Daughter of William Earl of Orkney, by whom he had
John his Successor, 2 d. Andrew, Bishop of Caithness, and Daughters.

Jean, married to Alexander Earl of Huntly, and had Issue.

Catharine, to John Lord Forbes, and had Issue.

Isobel, to John Earl of Lennox, and had Issue.

Elisabeth, to Alexander Robertson of Strowan, and had Issue.

He departing this Life 19 September 1512; was succeeded by John his Son and
Heir, who was killed at Floudoun 9 September 1513, leaving Issue by Mary his
Wife, Daughter of Colin Earl of Argyle: John his Son and Heir, and Daughters,
Janet married first to Alexander, Master of Sutherland, and had Issue. Then to
Hugh Kennedy of Girvanmains. And 3 dly. To Henry Steuart Lord Methven, and had
Issue. Helen to John Lord Lindsay, and had Issue. Elisabeth, to John Mackenzie
of Kintail, Ancestor to the Earl of Seaforth.

John, 3 d. Earl of Athole married Grisal Daughter and Coheir of Sir John
Ratray of That-Ilk, by whom he had

John, 4 th. Earl of Athole; his Son who was on the King's side, in the
Minority of James VI. He was constituted Chancellor 19 April 1578, in the Room
of John Lord Glamis deceased, and continued in that Office till his Death,
which happened 24 April 1579. He was married to Margaret Daughter of Malcolm
Lord Fleeming, Widow both of Robert Master of Montrose, and of Thomas Master of
Erskine, by whom he had Issue, John, his Successor, and Daughters.

Elisabeth, married to Hugh Lord Lovat, and had Issue. 2 dly. To Robert Steuart
Earl of March. And 3 dly. She became the Wife of James Steuart, then called
Earl of Arran.

Grisal, to David Earl of Crawfurd, and had Issue.

Ann, to Francis Earl of Errol, sans Issue.

Jean, to Duncan Campbel of Glenurchie, and had Issue.

John, fifth Earl of Athole, was one of the Privy Council to King James VI.
anno 1590. He married Mary Ruthven, Daughter of William Earl of Gourie, by whom
he had Three Daughters.

Dorothea, married to William Earl of Tillibairn, whose Son John in her Right,
came afterward to possess this Honor.

Mary, to James Steuart Lord Innermeath, sans Isue.

Jean, to Henry Steuart Lord St. Colme, and had Issue.

He departed this Life 18 November 1594 Balfour's Annals.
, whereby the Honor became Extinct, but did not so continue two Years, when
King James was pleased to revive it again in the Person of James Lord
Innermeath, by Letters Patent, bearing date 13 April 1596 Balfour.
, but he dying without Issue 1605 Ibidem.
, the Title of Athole came to Dorothea, Countess of Tillibairn.

MURRAY Duke of Athole.
THIS Noble Family is of great Antiquity, in vice comitatu de Perth, and
descends from Sir William Murray, Son of Sir Malcolm Murray Knight. He obtained
the Barony of Tillibairn, by marrying of Adda, Daughter of Malyse, Senescal of
Strathern, as is clear from an Original Charter I have seen, bearing Date the
Thursday preceding the Feast of St. Simon and St. Jude, Anno Dom. 1282 Charta
penes Ducem de Athole.
. This Sir William was one of the Scots Barons on the Part of John Baliol, who
were called to Berwick when King Edward was to determine the Controversy about
the Crown of this Realm then in Dispute; betwixt Robert de Bruce, and the said
John de Baliol, anno 1292 Rymer's Faedera Angliae.
. By the said Adda his Wife he left Issue Sir Andrew his Son and Heir, who gave
in pure Alms to the Monks of the Abbey of Inchaffry, an Annual Sum payable out
of the Barony of Tillibairn, which had formerly been in Dispute between him and
the said Convent, and that for the Health of his Soul, bearing Date on St.
Bean's Day, ( i. e. 16 December) 1331 Chartulary of Inchaffry, penes M.
Mauritium Morray Fratrem Dni Abercairny,
. This is that Sir Andrew who took part with Edward Baliol, for which disloyal
Action his Estate was forfeited, and he beheaded at Perth in 1332, leaving
Issue.

William his Son, who obtained a Grant of the Barony of Tillibairn, upon the
Resignation of Adda de Moravia, his Grandmother, in which Sir William de
Montefix Justitiario Scotiae ex boreali par^e aquae de Forth, is a Witness.
This William had Issue.

Sir Walter Murray of Tillibairn his Son and Heir, who dying circa Annum 1390,
left Issue by Margaret le Baird his Wife.

Sir David Murray his Son and Heir, who was knighted by King James I. He
founded the Collegiate Church of Tillibairn in Strathern, dedicated in Honor
of our Blessed Savior, and dyed about 1446 leaving Issue, William his
Successor, and a Daughter Marion married to Malcolm Drummond of Cargill, the
Ancestor of the Family of Perth.

Which William, received the Honor of Knighthood from King James III. to whom
he faithfully adhered, in Consideration whereof he was constituted Stewart of
Strathern, anno 1482, which was ratified by Act of Parliament, in 1491 Penes
ducem de Athole.
. He married Mary Daughter to the Earl Marishal, by whom he had

Sir John, who dyed without Issue.

William, his Successor.

The 3 d. Sir Andrew Murray of Arngosk, ancestor to the present Viscount of
Stormont.

4. David Murray of Strathgeth.

And Christian, a Daughter married to George Lord Seton, and had Issue.

He departed this Life in a good advanced Age, about the Year 1509, was
succeeded by William his Son and Heir, who married Katharin Daughter of Sir
Duncan Campbel of Glenurchie, by whom he had Issue.

William, his Successor.

2 d. Alexander.

3 d. James.

And Daughters, 1. Anabella married to John Earl of Mar, and had Issue. 2.
Eupham first to Robert Steuart of Rosyth, then to Robert Pitcairn Commendator
of Dunfermling, Secretary of State in the Minority of King James VI. 3.
Katharin, to Robert Morray of Abercairny, 4. Jean to James Henderson of
Fordell, and had Issue; he departing this Life anno 1562, was succeeded by

William his Son and Heir, who was of the Privy Council to Queen Mary, and
Comptroller of Her Majesty's Household, upon the breaking out of the Civil War
in that Reign. He was one of the Barons who entered into that memorable
Association to Defend the young Prince King James, and to prosecute Bothwell
for the Murder of of the King; yet (says Sir James Melvil) He always retained a
dutiful respect to Her Majesty, and only entered into the Association for Safety
of the young Prince, and Punishment of the Kings Murder. In 1572. he was joined
in Commission with Sir Alexander Erskin to be Governor to the young King, and
joint Keeper of the Castle of Stirling, and dyed 1583, leaving Issue by Agnes
his Wife, Daughter of William Earl of Montrose, John his Successor, Alexander,
who was Colonel of a Regiment in the Netherlands.

Margaret, married to Sir Robert Bruce of Clackmanan, and had Issue.

Which Sir John Murray of Tillibairn was one of the Privy Council to King James
VI. he being a well deserving Person, and enjoying a very ample Fortune, was by
the Favor of the said King, advanced to the Dignity of Lord Murray of
Tillibairn, 25 April 1604, and July 10 1606, to the Dignity of Earl of
Tillibairn. He married Katharin Daughter of David Lord Drummond, by whom he had
Issue.

1. William his Successor, 2. Sir Patrick Murray Knight of the Bath, and one of
the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Bedchamber, and afterward Earl of Tillibairn. 3
d. Mungow Viscount of Stormont, who dyed without Issue. Likewise several
Daughters.

Anne, married to Patrick Earl of Kinghorn, and had Issue.

Lilias, married to Sir John Grant of That-ilk, and had Issue.

Margaret, to James Hadden of Gleneagles, and had Issue.

Katharine to David Ross of Balnagoun.

William Earl of Tillibairn his Son, being accidentally in the Town of Perth, 5
August, 1600 fortuned to be the happy Rescuer of his Majesty King James VI.
from a Tumult of the Citizens, after the Death of John Earl of Gourie; for
which signal Service, he obtained a special Grant of the Sheriffship of
Perth-shire, which still continues in his Family.

He married Dorothea Steuart eldest Daughter of John the fifth and last Earl of
Athole, by whom he had John his Son and Heir, who succeeded to the Title,
Dignity, and Precedence of Athole, (he then resigning the Honor of
Tillibairn), which John Earl of Athole, faithfully adhered to King Charles I.
In the Beginning of his unhappy Troubles he raised his Men for his Majesty's
Service, against the the Marquess of Argyle, anno 1641, and dyed 1642, leaving
Issue by Jean his Wife, Daughter of Sir Duncan Campbel of Glenurchie, John his
Successor, Mungow who died unmarried, and Anne married to James Earl of
Tillibardin, but had no Issue.

Which John Earl of Athole, in Defense of King Charles II. loyally took up
Arms, and had several Encounters with the English Usurpers in the North of
Scotland in 1653, when not above 18 Years of Age, for which he suffered in the
common Calamity with other Loyalists; in Consideration whereof, upon his
Majesty's Restoration, he was constituted Justice General in 1661, Lord Privy
Seal, 1672; Captain of his Majesty's Guards, and one of the extraordinary Lords
of the Session. And further, in Regard of his eminent Services, was created
Marquess of Athole, by Letters Patent, bearing date 17 Feb. 1676.

Upon K. James's Accession to the Throne; anno 1685, His Majesty, confiding
much in his Loyalty, commissioned him to go against the Earl of Argyle, then in
Arms in the West, where he contributed much to the suppressing of that
Rebellion; for which signal Service he was constituted Lieutenant of
Argyle-Shire, and in anno 1687, was elected Knight of the most noble Order of
the Thistle.

This noble Lord married Aemilia Stanly, Daughter of that valiant and loyal
Nobleman James Earl of Darby, by whom he had Issue,

John, the present Duke.

Charles, Earl of Dunmore.

Lord James Murray of Dowally, who married Anne Daughter of Sir Robert Murray
of Cockpool, and has Issue,

William Lord Nairn, fourth Son.

Lord Edward Murray 5th. Son, married Katharin Daughter of Skeen of Halyards,
and has Issue, and a Daughter Aemilia married to Hugh Lord Lovat, and had
Issue. He departed this Life 6 May 1703, was interred in the Vestry of the
Cathedral Church of Dunkeld under a sumptuous Monument of black and white
Marble.

John, the present Duke of Athole has been employed in some of the most eminent
Offices in the State, both in this and the former Reign, which he still
discharged with the utmost Fidelity. In 1695 he was made Secretary of State,
and by Letters Patent, bearing date 27 July 1697, created Earl of Tillibairn,
in Consideration of his good Services, as well as his near Relation in Blood to
King William, and the same Year was Lord High Commissioner to the Parliament.

Upon Her Majesty's Accession to the Throne, he was named a Privy Counselor,
and 8 December 1702. constituted Lord Privy Seal, and the 30 April 1703,
created Duke of Athole, and in 1704, elected Knight of the most noble Order of
St. Andrew.

In the Parliament 1706, which concluded the Union of the Crowns, he was one of
the Peers who made a very strong and vigorous Opposition to it, and on the 4
November, when the first Article of the Treaty, was Enacted and Ratified, his
Grace entered this Protestation, which from the Records of Parliament I
transcribed.

I John Duke of Athole, Protest for my self and all others who shall adhere to
this my Protestation, that an Incorporating Union of the Crown of Scotland with
the Crown of England, and that both Nations should be represented by one and
the some Parliament, as contained in the Articles of the Treaty of Union is
contrary to the Honor, Interest, fundamental Laws and Constitutions of this
Kingdom, the Birthright of the Peers, the Privileges of the Barons and
Burgesses, and Act 10. Parl. 8. Ja. 6. it is ordained, that none of the Leiges
presume to take upon them to impugn the Dignity and Authority of the Three
Estates of Parliament, or to seek or procure the Diminution of the Power and
Authority of the said Three Estates under the pain of Treason, and is contrary
to the Claim of Right, Property and Liberty of the Subject. And the 3 d. Act of
Her Majesty's Parliament, 1703, it is thereby declared high Treason in any of
the Subjects of this Kingdom to quarrel or impugn, or endeavor by writing, or
malicious and advised speaking, or any other open Act or Deed to innovate the
Claim of Right in any Article thereof.

Likeas on the 7 January, 1707, when the 22d. Article of the Treaty of Union in
relation to the Number of Representatives for Scotland in the Parliament of
Great Britain, came to be debated, the Duke gave in this Protest, which in
Justice to his Grace I could not forbear to insert.

Forasmuchas the Peers of this Realm who are Hereditary Members of Her
Majesty's great Council and Parliament do hereby become Elective, and so Her
Majesty is deprived of Her born Counselors, and the Peers of their
Birthright: And whereas at present they are 160 in Number, they are by this
Article reduced to 16, which 16 are to be joined with the House of Lords in
England, whose Number at present consists of above 180, whereby its plain, that
the Scots Peers share in the Legislative and Judicative Powers in the British
Parliament is very unequal, to that of the English, tho the one be
Representative of as Free and Independent a Nation as the other, and is
therefore a plain Forfaulture of the Peerage of this Kingdom, contrary to the
Honor of the Monarchy, disgraceful to the Kingdom, and prejudicial to the
Barons and Burrows of this Realm.

This noble Lord married first the Lady Katharine Hamilton, Daughter of William
and Anne Duke and Duchess of Hamilton, a Lady of incomparable prudence, and a
singular example of Virtue and Piety, by whom he had Issue,

John Marquess of Tillibairn, a Youth of great Hopes and Expectation, who was
killed at the Battle of Mons, 31 of August 1709, to the great Grief of his
noble Relations,

William Marquess of Tillibairn.

Lord James

Lord Charles

Lord George

Lord Basil

Lady Susanna All unmarried.

2 dly. He married Mary Daughter of William Lord Ross, by whom he has Issue a
Son John, an Infant.

ARMS
Quarterly 1st. and 4th Azure, three Molets Argent within a double Tressure
floured and Counter floured Or, 2d. and 3d. quarterly, 1st. and 4th. pale of
six Sable and Or, 2d: and 3d Or, a Fess Cheque Azure and Argent, supported on
the Dexter with a Lion Rampant Gules colored Azure, charged with three Molets
Argent, and on the Sinister with a Savage proper, wreathed about the Loins with
Laurel, Crest a Demi Savage, holding in his Dexter Hand a Key Or, and in his
Sinister a Dagger proper, with this Motto, Forth Fortune and fill the Fetters.

ARBUTHNET, Viscount of Arbuthnet.
THIS Family has been of great Antiquity in the Shire of Kincardin, and long
possessed of the Barony of Arbuthnet there. The Name has been originally
written Aberbothenoth, Duncan de Aberbothenoth is Witness in a Grant by King
Alexander II. to the Abbacy of Aberbroth, anno 1242 Register of Aberbroth M.S.
.

In the Time of Alexander III. Hugh de Aberbothenoth, gave in pure alms to the
Monks of Aberbroth the Patronage of the Church of Garvoch pro salute animae
suae, Anno Dom. 1282 Ibidem.
, and Philip de Aberbothenoth Dominus ejusdem, was a Benefactor to the Church
of Aberdeen, in anno 1367 Confirmation Regis Dav. in Rotulis.
, in the Time of King David II. He married Margaret Daughter of Sir James
Douglass of Dalkeith Charta penes Comitem de Morton.
, from whom by lineal Succession, was Sir Robert Arbuthnet of that Ilk, who
manifesting his Loyalty to K. Charles I. was by that Monarch created Viscount
of Arbuthnet 16 November, 1641. He married first Marion Daughter to David first
Earl of Southesk, by whom he had Robert his Son and Heir, and by Margaret his
second Wife, Daughter of Simon Lord Lovat he likewise had Issue, and dying anno
1659 Frazers History of Lovat, M.S.
, was succeeded by Robert his Son and Heir, who married Mary Daughter of
William Earl Marishal, by whom he had Robert, who succeeded him in his Estate
and Honor; also by Katharine his second Wife, Daughter of John Gordon of
Pitlurg, he had Issue John Arbuthnet of Fordon, Alexander, who changed his
Surname to Maitland, by his Marriage with the Heretrix of Pitrichie, he is now
one of the Barons of Her Majesty's Exchequer in Scotland, 3 d Thomas; also
several Daughters.

This Lord dying anno 1684, was succeeded by Robert his Son, who departed this
Life in 1692, leaving Issue by Anne his Wife, Daughter of George Earl of
Sutherland, Robert his Son and Heir, who died unmarried anno 1710, and John the
present Viscount of Arbuthnet who married Jean Daughter of William Morison of
Prestongrange.

ARMS.
Azure a Crescent betwixt three Stars Argent supported by two Dragons, Crest a
Peacock's Head proper, Motto Laus Deo.

CUMMIN, Lord of Badenoch.
THIS noble and spreading Family of Norman Extraction Mr. Andrew Winton's
Genealogy of the Cummins in his M.S. Chron. of Scotland.
, is of very great Antiquity in this Realm. The first I have found mentioned,
is, Comes Robertus Cummin, who was killed at the Battle of Anwick, anno 1609
Chron. de M^lross.
. The next is William Cummin, who was Lord high Chancellor of Scotland, in the
Reign of King David I. anno 1142, he left Issue Sir William, who was
Chamberlain to King William Winton.
, and married Hexilda Grand child of Donald King of Scotland Ibidem.
, by whom he had William, Father of Sir Richard Cummin, who gave in pure Alms
to the Monks of Kelso the Church of Lyncudric, with half a Carrucate of Land
thereunto belonging, pro salute Henrici Comitis Domini sui qui obiit 1152
Register of Kelso.
: He left Issue three Sons,

Sir John of Badenoch.

Sir Walter Earl of Monteith.

Sir William first Earl of Buchan.

Which Sir John for Distinction called The Reid Cummin, had Issue Sir John and
three Daughters, the first married to Sir Godfrey de Murray, the 2 d to
Alexander of Argyle, Lord of Lorn, the 3 d to Sir William Murray of Bothwell.

Sir John Cummin of Badenoch, usually designed The Black Cummin, was chosen one
of the six Governors of Scotland, anno 1286, upon the Death of K. Alexander
III. In 1290 he was one of the Competitors for the Crown on the decease of
Queen Margaret, as Son and Heir of John Son and Heir of Richard, Son and Heir
of William, Son and Heir of Hexilde, Daughter and Heir of Bethock Daughter and
Heir of Donald, some time King of Scotland Cummins claim to the Crown in the
Faedera Angliae, published by Mr. Rymer.
: He left Issue by Marjory Daughter of John, and Sister to John Baliol once
King of this Realm, John his Son and Heir Winton.
. This is that John Cummin, who in 1305 entered into a solemn Treaty with
Robert Bruce Earl of Carrick, for freeing their Country from English Servitude,
which he persidiously discovered to King Edward of England, for which King
Robert Bruce killed him in the Church of Drumfrise, 10 February 1306; by whose
Death the chief branch of this noble Family expired.

LINDSAY, Earl of Balcarass.
THIS Family descends from Mr. John Lindsay of Balcarass, 2 d Son of David
Lindsay of Edzle, (Earl of Crawfurd,) by Janet his Wife, Daughter of Sir John
Campbel of Calder.

Which Mr. John being a Man of great Parts and Learning, more especially in the
Laws, he was constituted one of the Senators of the College of Justice in 1584
List of the Senators of the College of Justice, from the Institution, in the
Lawyer's Library M.S.
, and after some time, one of the Commissioners of the Thesaury Bishop
Spotswood's History.
, and Secretary of State, anno 1596, in room of the Lord Thirlstane deceased;
all which Offices he enjoyed with an universal Reputation till his Death. In
1598 Ibidem.
, he married Margaret, Daughter of...... Guthry of Lunnen Charta in Rotulis
Jacobi VI.
, by whom he had Sir David his Son and Heir, and Daughters;

Janet married to Sir John Lindsay of Benholm.

Margaret to Sir Alexander Strachan of Thornfoun, and had Issue.

Mary to John Brown of Fordel, and had Issue.

Which Sir David was created Lord Lindsay of Balcarass, by K. Charles I. the 7
June 1633, immediately preceding his Majesty's Coronation. He married Sophia
Daughter of Alexander Earl of Dunfermling, by whom he had Alexander his
Successor, and two Daughters, Sophia married to Sir Robert Moray, Justice Clerk
in the Reign of King Charles II. of the Family of Abercairny, but had no Issue.
Isabel married to Thomas Boyd of Pinkhill, in vice comitatu de Air, sans Issue.

Which Alexander, Lord Balcarass, being a Person of great Prudence, examplary
Loyalty, and singular Affection to King Charles II. was by his Majesty's Favor
raised to the Dignity of Earl of Balcarass, in 1651. Upon the depression of the
Royal cause in Scotland, anno 1654, he followed the King into Foreign Parts,
during the Usurpation, and dyed in Holland in the beginning of the Year 1660,
upon him the famous Poet Mr. Cowley wrote this Epitaph, Balcaras who but the
other Day,
Did all our Love and our Respect command,
At whose great Parts, we all amazed did stand,
Is from a Storm, alas! cast suddenly on Land, etc.


He left Issue by Anne his Wife, Daughter of Colin Earl of Seaforth, two Sons,
Charles who succeeded him in the Earldom, but dyed unmarried anno 1662, and
Colin the present Earl: also three Daughters, 1 st. Anne, who embraced the
Romish Persuasion and dyed a Nun in France, Sophia married to Colonel Charles
Campbel, Son to the late Earl of Argyle, and Henrietta to Sir Duncan Campbel of
Auchinbraick, and had Issue.

Colin the present Earl was one of the Lords of the Privy Council to King
Charles II. and King James VII. and one of the Commissioners of the Thesaury,
he married first Margaret Daughter of Lewis de Nassaw Lord Beverwart in
Holland. 2 dly. Jean Daughter of David Earl of Northesk, by whom he had one
Daughter Anne, married to Alexander Earl of Kelly, and had Issue. To his 3 d.
Wife, he marred Jean Daughter of William Earl of Roxburgh, by whom he had
Colin Lord Cumberland, who dyed unmarried in 1708, and a Daughter Countess of
VVigtoun. 4 thly. He married Margaret Daughter of James Earl of London, by whom
he had Issue,

Alexander Lord Cumberland.

James in Her Majesty's Sea Service.

Lady Elisabeth.

Lady Eleanor, all unmarried.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st. and 4th. Gules, a Fess Cheque Argent and Azure, 2d and 3d. Or,
a Lion Rampant Gules surmounted of a Riban Sable within a border, Azure,
charged with Stars Or, supporters two Lions Sejant, Crest a Tent, Motto, Astra
Castra, etc.

BALLENDEN, Lord Ballenden.
THIS Family began its Rise in the Reign of King James V. at which time Thomas
Ballenden of Auchinoule was Justice Clerk, and Director of the Chancery, anno
1541 List of Statesmen penes me.
, he dying anno 1546, left Issue; Sir John his Son and Heir, who was Justice
Clerk in the Reign of Queen Mary and King James VI. for upwards of twenty
Years: He married Barbara Daughter of....... Kennedy of...... and left Issue
Sir Lewis his Son and Heir and Mr. Adam, Doctor of Divinity, first Bishop of
Dunblain, and thereafter of Aberdeen.

Which Sir Lewis was made one of the Senators of the College of Justice, anno
1584, he married Margaret Daughter of William Lord Livingston, and left Issue
Sir James his Son and Heir, who married Margaret Daughter of William Ker of
Cesfurd, Sister to Robert first Earl of Roxburgh, by whom he had Sir William
his Successor, and a Daughter Margaret married to Henry Lord Cardross.

Which Sir William having given many signal testimonies of his Loyalty to King
Charles II. during the Usurpation, in Consideration thereof upon his Majesty's
Restoration, he was dignified with the Honor of Lord Ballenden, by Letters
Patent bearing date 10 June 1661, and the same Year he was constituted
Thesaurer Depute, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, but
dying unmarried, he made over his Estate, and got his Title of Lord conveyed to
John Ker 4 th. Son of William Earl of Roxburgh, who thereupon changed his Name
to Ballenden; he married.... Mure Daughter to the Earl of Drogheda in the
Kingdom of Ireland, Widow of William Earl of Dalhousy, by whom he had the
present Lord, who succeeded his Father in the Honor upon his Death, anno 1706.

ARMS.
Gules a Stags Head couped and attired with ten Tynes betwixt three cross
Croslets, all within a double Tressure Counterflour'd Or.

ELPHINSTON, Lord Balmerino,
THE First of this collateral Branch, raised to the Dignity of Peerage, was Sir
James Elphinston 3 d Son of Robert Lord Elphinston, by Elisabeth Daughter of
Sir John Drummond of Innerpeffery, and of Janet his Wife, natural Daughter to
King James IV.

Which Sir James having studied the Laws, in short time became so highly
esteemed for his Abilities, that he was constituted one of the Senators of the
College of Justice, in the Year 1586 List of the Lords of Session, since the
Institution, M.S. in the Lawyers Library
, in 1595 one of the Lords of the Thesaury, then called The Octavians
Spotswood's History.
, and Secretary of State anno 1598 in room of John Lindsay of Balcaras
deceased: also President of the Session, upon the promotion of Alexander Earl
of Dunfermling to be Chancellor, in 1605. In all which Employments he deported
himself with such Learning, Judgment and Sufficiency, that King James, soon
after his accession to the Crown of England, created him Lord Balmerino, by
Letters Patent, bearing date 25 April 1604, being then appointed one of the
Commissioners on the part of Scotland to treat of a nearer Union with England,
he took to Wife, first Sarah Daughter of Sir John Monteith of Carse, by whom he
had John his Son and Heir, and 2 dly. Marjory Daughter of Hugh Maxwell of
Tyling, by whom he had James Lord Couper, also two Daughters, Anne married to
Andrew Lord Frazer, and had Issue, and Mary to John Homilton of Blair, and had
Issue, he departing this Life in anno 1612 Thomson's M.S.
, was succeeded by John his Son and Heir, a Person likewise of great Parts and
Learning, as appears by the Part he acted in the Reign of King Charles I.
whereof Bishop Guthry in his Memoirs gives a full Account: He married Anne
Daughter of Sir Thomas Ker of Ferniehirst, Sister to Andrew Lord Jedburgh, and
to Robert Earl of Somerset and dying anno 1649, by the said Anne his Wife left
Issue,

John his Son and Heir, who dyed the 10 th. of June 1704, leaving Issue by
Margaret his Wife Daughter to John Earl of Loudon, John his Son and Heir.

Which John, the present Lord Balmerino, was one of the Peers, who in 1706,
opposed the Union with England in the Terms of the Treaty then before the
House, tho the Matter was then concluded. In 1710 he was made General of the
Mint in place of the Earl of Lauderdale deceased: and Sheriff of Edinburgh
Shire, then in Her Majesty's Hands, by the Death of William Earl of Dalhousie:
and elected one of 16 Peers of Scotland to the Parliament of Great Britain,
also in 1711 he was named one of the Commissioners for executing the Office of
Chamberlain, which he at present enjoys.

This worthy Lord married first Christian Daughter of Hugh Earl of Eglington,
by whom he had Hugh, who was killed at the Seige of Lisle, anno 1708, James now
Master of Balmerino, also two Daughters;

Margaret married to Sir John Preston of Prestounhall, and had Issue.

Jean to Francis Stuart Esquire Brother to the Earl of Murray, and has Issue.

Secondly. Anne Daughter of Dr. Arthur Ross Archbishop of St. Andrews, by whom
he has

Arthur.

Alexander.

Anne, all unmarried.

ARMS.
Argent a Chiveron Sable, charged with three Buckles of the sield betwixt three
Boars Heads erazed Gules Regist. of the Lion Office, Edin.
, supporters two Griffons proper, Crest a Serpent stinging a Dove, Motto,
Prudentia fraudis nescia.

OGILVY, Lord Banff.
THE Progenitor of this Family was Sir Walter Ogilvy of Dunlugass, Son of Sir
Walter Ogilvy of Boyn by Margaret his Wife, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of
of Sir James Edmonston of Thatilke Charta. in pubicis Archivis.
.

This Sir Walter acquired a fair Estate by the Marriage of Alison, one of the
Daughters and Coheirs of Patrick Hume of Fastcastle, tempore Jacobi ^^arti, he
left Issue.

George Ogilvy of Dunlugass his Son and Heir, who married Beatrix Daughter of
George Lord Seaton, by whom he had Walter his Successor, and a Daughter married
to Sir Alexander Frazer of Philorth, he departed this Life anno 1612, in the
uncommon Age of 105, upon him Dr. Johnston Johnston's Poems.
wrote this Epitaph. Vixit Olympides ter septem Banfius aetas,
Ter fuit illustri posteritate minor:
Virtutes numera pancos liquise nepotes,
Cum periis pancos evoluisse dies.


Sir Walter Ogilvy of Dunlugass his Son, married Helen Daughter of Sir John
Urquhart of Cromarty, by whom he had George his Son and Heir, who was created
Baronet by King Charles I. 30 July 1627: He signalized his Loyalty and Valor
at the Bridge of Dee in his Majesty's behalf against the Covenanters, under the
Conduct of James Earl of Montrose, an. 1639, and continuing firm in his Loyalty
in the time of the Civil Wars, was in respect thereof raised to the Dignity of
Lord Banff, by Letters Patent, bearing date 31 of August 1642. He married first
Helen Daughter of Sir Alexander Irvin of Drum, by whom he had a Daughter Helen,
married to James Earl of Airly, and had Issue. 2 dly. Mary Daughter of Sir
Alexander Sutherland of Duffus, by whom he had Issue George his Son and Heir,
who succeeded him upon his Death, in 1663, he took to Wife Agnes Daughter of
Alexander Lord Halkertoun, by whom he had George the present Lord, and Sir
Alexander Ogilvy of Forglen, created Baronet 29 June 1701, and one of the
Senators of the College of Justice in 1706.

Which George married....... Daughter of William Earl Marishal, by whom he has
George Master of Banff, who married Helen Daughter of Sir John Lauder of
Fountainhall, one of the Senators of the College of Justice.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st. and 4th. Argent a Lion passant, guardant, Gules, crowned with
an imperial Crown, Or, 2d and 3d. Argent three Papingoes Vert.

HAMILTON, Lord Bargeny.
DERIVES his Descent from Sir John Hamilton natural Son of John Marquess of
Hamilton. This Sir John acquired a fair Estate in Carrick, which he transmitted
to his Posterity, and left Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Mr.
Alexander Campbel Bishop of Brechin, (a Son of the Family of Arkinlass,) Sir
John his Successor, also several Daughters,

Katharine married to Sir James Drummond of Machany, ancestor to the present
Viscount of Strathallan.

Helen to Sir James Somervel of Camnethan, and had Issue.

.... to Sir William Weir of Stonbyres, but had no Issue.

Mary to Alexander Cleland of that-Ilk, and had Issue.

Sir John Hamilton of Bargeny, the 2 d. of this Family, was by the bounty and
favor of King Charles I. created into the Dignity of Lord Bargeny, anno 1639
Sir James Dalrymple's Edition of Camden.
, in 1648. He cordially put himself in Arms with others his Majesty's loyal
Subjects, in order to rescue him, then a Prisoner in the Isle of Wight. After
the Murder of his Sovereign, he firmly adhered to King Charles II. for which he
was forfeited by Oliver Cromwell, and suffered diverse other Hardships.

He married Jean Daughter of William Marquess of Douglass, by whom he had
William his Successor, and four Daughters.

1 st. Margaret married to Sir John Kennedy of Colzean, and had Issue, and
thereafter to Sir David Ogilvy of Clova, and had Issue.

2 d. Anne to Sir Patrick Houston of that-Ilk, and had Issue.

3 d. Katharine to Mr. William Cuningham of Enterkin, and had Issue.

4 th. Marjory to William Baillie of Lamingtoun, sans Issue. He dying anno....
was succeeded by William his Son and Heir, who married Mary Daughter of William
Earl of Glencairn, by whom he had John Master of Bargeny, who dyed in the
Lifetime of his Father leaving Issue by..... his Wife, Daughter of Sir Robert
Sinclair of Lochermackhouse, one Daughter Joanna married to Sir Robert
Dalrymple of North-Berwick Junior, and has Issue, William his Successor, and
Nicolas married to Sir Alexander Hope of Carse, and had Issue.

Which William late Lord Bargeny dying anno 1711, left Issue by..... his first
Wife, Daughter of Sir James Primrose of Carringtoun, one Daughter Grisal
unmarried, and by Margaret his second Wife Daughter of Robert Dundass of
Arniston, one of the Senators of the College of Justice, James now Lord
Bargeny, a Child very young.

ARMS.
The quartered Coat of the Family of Hamilton with a suitable Difference.

DOUGLAS Viscount of Belhaven.
THE First who derived any Honor from this Place, was Sir Robert Douglas of
Spot, Son of Malcolm Douglas of Mains, in vice-comitatu de Dunbarton lineally
descended of Nicol Douglas a Son of the Family of Dalkeith in King Robert II's
time Mr. David Simson's Genealogical History of the Family of Morton M.S.
.

This Sir Robert was at first a Page of Honor to Prince Henry, and then Master
of his Horse. Upon the Death of that excellent Prince, he was made one of the
Gentlemen of the Bedchamber to the King, and continued in the same Office to
King Charles I. by whom he was also constituted Master of the Household, and one
of the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council; And finally, in Recompense of all
his acceptable Services he was by Letters Patent bearing date 24 June 1633,
created Viscount of Belhaven Patent creating Sir Robert Douglas Viscount of
Belhaven penes me.
, the Honor being limited to the Heirs Male of his Body. He married Nicolas
Daughter to Robert Moray of Abercairny, but dying without Issue 14 January
1639, he was interred in the Vestry of the Abbey Church of Holy rood-house,
where there is erected a Monument over him with his Statue in Alabaster as big
as the Life, with this Epitaph, wherein most of his remarkable Actions are
taken notice of.

QVod Reliquum apud nos est hic conditur Roberti Vicecomitis de Belhaven,
Baronis de Spot, etc. Regi Carolo a secretioribus consiliis, and inter
familiares intimi; quippe qui and prius Henrico Valliae gratissimus, ejusque
stabulis praefectus erat: Illo vero fatis cedente, fratri Carolo, nunc rerum
potito, in quaesturam Domus adscitus est, singulari favoris gradu acceptus, re
and honoribus auctus. In juventute Nicolaae Moraviae Abercarniae Comarchae
natae ad octodecim non amplius menses, ^nicae uxoris in puerperio simul cum
faetu extinctae, lectissimo, consortio fruebatur. Ingravescente senectute ab
aulico strepitu se subtrabens in patriam reversus est. Archibaldum and Robertum
Duglassios Equites auratos, primaevi fratris filios, terris and bonis, praeter
quae Testamento legavit aequa lance divisis haered^s seripsit; qui memoriae
ejus gratitudinis suae pignus hoc monumentum poni curarunt.

Ingenium, quod literis cultura non implevit, sagacitate Natura supplevit.
Indolis bonitate and Candore, nulli cessit. Facile succendi, at, dum loquimur,
facilius defervescere, ei, in moribus, quod aeque ab omnibus vix acciperetur,
unicum erat. Fide, in Regem; Pietate, in Patriam; Officiis, in Amicos;
Charitate, in Egenos, nulli socundus: Cui, in Prosperis, modus and Comitas; In
Adversis, Constantia and Magnanimitas, ad supremum usque diem, invaluere. Obiit
Edinburgi pride. Idus Januarii, anno, ab Incarnatione Messiae, supra MDCxxix;
aetatis vero, ultra Clymactericum magnum, tertio.

HAMILTON, Lord Belhaven.
AMONGST those who professed the Sense of their Duty and Fidelity to his
Majesty King Charles I. in the time of his Distress, was Sir James Hamilton of
Broomhill, in whose Defense he Ioyally took up Arms and marched into England
with the Scots Army, under the Conduct of James Duke of Hamilton, in 1648,
being some time before created Lord Belhaven: He married Margaret natural
Daughter to James Marquess of Hamilton, by whom he had three Daughters,

Margaret married to Sir Samuel Baillie of Lamingtoun, and had Issue.

Anne to Sir Robert Hamilton of Silvertounhill, and had Issue.

Elisabeth to Alexander Viscount of Kingstoun, he departing this Life in 1679,
the Honor devolved upon John Hamilton Son to Sir Robert Hamilton of Presmanan,
proceeding on his Resignation some Years before.

Which John Lord Belhaven, I find did particularly signalize himself both in
the Parliament 1681 and 1685, discovering then a firm Resolution to support the
Protestant Religion. In 1689 he assisted at the meeting of the Scots Nobility
at London, and concurred with them in addressing the Prince of Orange to call a
Convention of the Estates in Scotland for the settling the Government there.

His Lordship was present at the Convention, where he contributed much to the
settling the Crown upon King William and Queen Mary, who upon their Accession
thereto, constituted him one of their Privy Council, and one of the
Commissioners for executing the Office of Register.

Upon Her Majesty's accession to the Throne, he was named a Privy Counselor,
and after that, one of the Commissioners of the Thesaury, which he executed
with no little Approbation.

In the Parliament 1706, when the Union came to be debated, he joined with
those who opposed it, and on this Subject made several learned and elaborate
Speeches containing his Reasons, for which Posterity will celebrate his Name
with Honor as a Patriot of his Country.

He married Margaret Daughter of Sir Robert Hamilton of Silvertounhill, by Anne
Daughter of John Lord Belhaven, by whom he had only two Sons,

John the present Lord.

Mr. James Hamilton Advocate, married Anne Daughter of John Walkingshaw of that
Ilk. He departed this Life at London 21 June 1708, was succeeded by,

John his Son and Heir, who married Mary Daughter of Andrew Bruce of Edinburgh
Merchant, (of the Family of Earls-hall,) by whom he has John Master of
Belhaven, and several other Children.

ARMS.
Gules a Sword pale-ways proper between three Cinque Foils Argent, supported by
two Horses Argent, Crest an Unicorns Head, Motto Ride Through.

STUART Lord Blantyre.
THIS noble Family took beginning in the Reign of James III. in the Person of
Sir Thomas Stuart of Minto, Son of Sir William Stuart of Garlies Charta
Alexandri Stuart de Garlies dilecto fratri suo Thom Stuart de Minto filio
Willielmi Steuart de Dalsuinton militis, 2 Nov. 1476 confirmatum in Rotulis
Jacobi III.
, who greatly enriched himself by the Marriage of Isobel Daughter and Coheir of
Sir Walter Stewart of Arthurly, Carta in pub. Archivis
by whom he had Sir John his Heir; William, who being bred to the Church, the
first step he made into it was to the Rectory of Lochmaben; after that he was
preferred to the Provestry of Lincluden and then to the Bishopric of Aberdeen:
ibid.
Likewise a Daughter Agnes, married to John Stewart of Cardonald. ibid.
Which Sir John married Janet Daughter of - - - - - Lord Fleming, by whom he
had Robert his Successur, who by Janet his Wife Daughter of - - - Murray of - -
- had Sir John, who carried down the Line of the Family; Robert Prior of
Whitern, and Elisabeth married to John Maxwel of Calderwood.

Which Sir John married first a Lady of the Family of the Hepburns, by whom he
had Sir Matthew his Successor in the Barony of Miuto, whose Male-Line became
extinct in Sir John Stewart of Minto, who died in the Expedition to Darien,
Anno 1697, next Margaret Daughter of Captain James Stewart of Cardonald. By her
he had,

Walter Commendator of Blantyre, who being from his Youth bred in the Court of
King James VI. was Anno 1580 made one of the Gentlemen of the Bed Chamber, and
preferred to be Lord Privy Seal in 1582, ibid.
in which Office he continued till the 1596, he was promoted to be Lord
High-Thesaurer of Scotland: But he held the Place only two Years, for upon a
Disgust occasioned by some Affair of the Church, in which the Thesaurer had not
gone the way of the Court, his Majesty was pleased to take the White Staff from
him, which was put into the Hands of the Earl of Cassils. He bore the
Diminution very well; for he was a wise Man and quickly recovered so much Grace
and Favor that he was made a Peer by the Title of Lord Blantyre, July 10 th
1606. He Married Nicolas Daughter of Sir James Somervel of Camnethan, by whom
he had Sir James Stewart Knight of the Bath his Eldest Son, who was killed in a
Duel by Sir George Wharton Anno 1609, William his Successor, Walter Stewart Esquire
Carta penes D. Blantyre He was the Father of Francess Duchess of Lenox and
Richmond, who left her Estate to the Lord Blantyre, and of Sophia Lady Bulkly
wife of Henry Bulkly Esquire Master of the Household to King Charles II.
and a Daughter Margaret married to George Lord Saltoun, and dying Anno 1616,
Carta in Pub. Arch.
was succeeded by

William his Son, who died in the beginning of the Troubles in the Reign of
King Charles I. November 29 th 1638, ibidem.
leaving Issue by Helen his Wife, Daughter of Sir William Scot of Ardross,
Walter his Successor, Alexander, who succeeded his Brother in the Honor:
Likewise a Daughter - - - married to Sir John Swinton of that Ilk.

Which Walter married Margaret Daughter of Sir William Mure of Rowallan, but
dying without Issue in the Month of October of the Year 1641 was succeeded by,

Alexander his Brother, who by Margaret his Wife Daughter of John Shaw of
Greenock had Alexander his Successor, and a Daughter Helen married to James
Murehead of Brediesolm and had Issue.

Which Alexander married first Margaret Daughter of Sir John Henderson of
Fordel, but by her he had no Issue; next Anne Daughter of Sir Robert Hamilton
of Pressmenen one of the Senators of the College of Justice, and departing
this Life 20 th July 1704, left Issue by the Lady aforesaid, Walter his
Successor, Robert the present Lord Blantyre, John Stewart Esquire Advocate, Hugh
Stewart Esquire Likewise four Daughters.

Marion married to James Stirling of Keir and had Issue.

Francess to Sir James Hamilton of Rosehall Baronet.

Helen to John Master of Gray, at that Time Son and Heir apparent of John Lord
Gray.

Anne.

Which Walter being a young Nobleman of very fine Parts, and a great Lover of
his Country, was in the 1710 chosen one of the Sixteen Scots-Peers to serve in
the ensuing British-Parliament. He died at London the 23 d of June 1713
unmarried, his Estate and Honor devolving to

Captain Robert Stewart his Brother, who married Lady Helen Lion Daughter of
John Earl of Strathmore, by whom he has Alexander Master of Blantyre.

BORTHWICK, Lord Borthwick.
AS this noble Family was undoubtedly very ancient, and said to be of a
Hungarion Extraction, so it was no less illustrious for it is Allyances, as the
whole course of this Work does testify, but in regard I had no Access to see
any of their Writes, I cannot make a Deduction of them. I shall only remark,
that the last Lord, whose very Name I could never so much as learn, died
without Issue, since the Restoration of King Charles II. and with him the
Honor of the Family failed.

MURRAY, Lord of Bothwel.
ALL our Scots Historians make mention of the Moravii as a bold and Warlike
Tribe, who about the middle of the first Century were very assistant to King
Corbred I. in his Wars against the Romans, whose Captain Roderick and a great
many of his followers were slain in that famous Expedition of Queen Baudicea
related also by Cornelius Tacitus. But that I may proceed to my Design in
giving a Historical and Genealogical deduction of the ancient and noble Family
of the Murrays properly so called, I shall begin with their Ancestor one
Friskinus, who was a great Man in the Northern parts in the Reign of King David
I. Anno 1124: For it is certain he was not only possessed of the Country of
Moravia now called Moray, but likewise that of Sutherland, which he divided
betwixt two of his Sons, and from whence they took their respective Sirnames,
Writes of the Episcopal See of Murray in the Registers of that Church in the
Lawyers Library M.S.
and his Descendents even to this Time carry the same Coat of Arms, viz. Three
Molets differing only in the Tincture.

William de Moravia Filius Friskini, seems to be a very great Man about the
Court of King William, as appears from the frequency of his Witnessing the
Deeds of that pious Prince to the Cathedral Church of Moray, and to the Bishops
of that See, ibidem confirm. by King William Ric. Epis. Moraviae Ecclesiae de
Forress.
to which this great Man was likewise himself a Benefactor. He left Issue,

William de Moravia who is entitled Willielmus de Moravia filius Willielmi
filii Friskini in a Donation which he made in pure and perpetual Alms Ecclesiae
sancti Trinitatis de Spiny and Collegio Canonicorum ibidem Deo servientium
Ecclesiam de Artindoll cum pertinen. coram Hugone fratre suo and Archibaldo de
Douglas. Cartulary of the Cathedral Church of Elgine in Bib. Jurid.
He left Issue, several Sons, of whom diverse ancient Families of the Murray's
branched, ibidem
beside

Walter de Moravia Miles, who is designed filius Domini Willielmi deMoravia,
ibidem in an Indenture between him and the Bishop of Moray relative to the
Church of Artindole ad Annum 1226, and was likewise a Donator to St. Nicolas's
Hospital near the Bridge of Spey by his Gift of the Lands of Achinway, ad
sustentationem pauperum ibidem recipiendorum, of which the Bishops of Moray
were Patrons.
He gave to the Church of Elgin and the Chapter of the Episcopal See of Moray
Ecclesiam de Inerallel cum pertinen. pro salute animae suae, and is the same
Walterus, as I take it, who is one of the great Men, Magnates Scotiae,
mentioned as a Guarantee in a Treaty of Peace betwixt our King Alexander II.
and Henry III. of England, Anno 1244. Rymer's foedera Angliae ad Annum 1244
He left a Son

Willielmus de Moravia Filius Walteri de Moravia, who is so designed in the Act
declaratory of the Succession of the Scots Crown to King Alexander III. and his
Heirs Anno 1284. ibidem. ad Annum 1284.
And is the same noble Person designed Panetarius Scotiae and Dominus de
Bothwel, and Drumsargard Rymer's foedera Angliae ad Annum 1290 and 1292.
under which Title there are many Donations made by the Heirs of this noble
House to the Chapter of the Episcopal See of Moray after they came to have
Possessions in the South, and spread there into many noble Branches.

This Willielmus de Moravia Dominus de Bothwel and Drumshargard Panetarius
Scotiae was one of the great Barons summoned to Bervick as an Auditor of the
Claims of the Bruce and the Baliol, anent the Succession to the Crown ibidem.
His Title of Drumshargard distinguishes him from another Sir William de Moravia
de Tilybardin mentioned in the same Write of Summons
when that great Affair was in Agitation, and which afterward was by King
Edward I. of England, determined in favor of John de Baliol, how justly I
shall not say.

The same illustrious Person, according to the Devotion of those Times gave for
the Safety of his Soul, Ecclesiae and Capitulo Glasguen: jus Patronatus
Rectoriae Ecclesiae de Woolstoun coram Roberto Epo Glasguen. and D. Andrea de
Moravia fratre suo. Excerpta ex Cartul. Eccesiae Glasguen Donatio. Will. de
Moravia Panetarii Scotiae de jure Patronat. Ecclesiae. de Woolstoun data apud
Scoon die Mercurii proxima post festum Sancti Valentini Martyris Anno 1292
Likewise he gave Dicto Capitulo Glasguen. jus Patronatus Ecclesiae de Smalum
ibidem dat. ut supra
under the Seal of his Arms, Exhiben. dictum Willielm. de Moravia design.
Dominum de Bothwel equestrem, and in scato tres slellulas, multum attrito, much
defaced, says my Authority, but still to be seen by the learned and curious in
the great Chartulary of the Episcopal See of Glasgow in the Scots College at
Paris, ibidem Carta Will. de Moravia D. de Bothwel Panetarii Scotiae de centum
Marcis solvendis de Expensis super Ecclesia de Smalum 1293. These and other
Excerpts were exactly noted from the said Chartulary of Glasgow and transmitted
to me by a Gentleman a great Lover of Antiquities
where they were deposited by Bishop Beaton at the Reformation in Scotland. By
- - - his Wife Daughter of Sir John Cuming Lord of Badenoch Winton's History in
Bib. Jurid, M.S.
he had Sir Andrew his Successor, and Sir John de Moravia, Dominus de
Drumshargard, who was the Ancestor of the Murrays of Abercarny Manuscript
History of the Moravii Panetari Scotiae Domini de Bothwel penes D. Abercarny,
which Piece of History, is the best vouched and instructed of any of that kind,
I have ever perused, and it carries a great Air of Antiquity with it, and is
very nobly oramented with accurate Historical Remarks, and well deserves the
Character of a curious Book. the Author beside other Instructions for the
Original descent of the Murrays of Drumshargard and Abercarnie from the Moravii
of Bothwel, does very judiciously observe, that both the Baronies of Bothwell
and Drumshargard, now called Camslang, were in the Person of Sir William de
Moravia Panetarius Scotiae, designed Dominus de Bothwel, and Drumshargard, and
indeed can, I observe, be well made out from comparing the English Foedera,
Prynne and the Chartulary of Glasgow together, and that immediately upon his
Death they came to be two distinct Lordships, Andrew being Lord of Bothwel, Sir
William's Eldest Son whom we know was so by his hereditary Office of Panetarius
Scotiae, and Sir John, whom my Author calls his Younger Son, was Lord, Dominus
de Drumshargard, and which he makes well appear, and concludes, it is plain he
was Sir William's second Son, for his patrimonial Estate of Drumshargard, lay
contiguous with, and was a part of his Lordship of Bothwel, and given him off
by his Father, for in Matters of so remote Antiquity, we conclude for certain
what is instructed so rationally by such Manuscripts as are neither
contradicted by Writes nor any Authentic History, but confirmed by constant
uninterrupted and universal Tradition
in Perthshire.

Andrew de Moravia Panetarius Scotiae and Dominus de Bothwel was just such a
Patriot as his Father, whom he did not long survive; for he lost his Life in
the Attempt at Stirling to redeem his Country from the Subjection and Slavery
it was under to the English on the memorable 13 th September 1297 Buchanan and
Abercromby.
leaving Sir Andrew his Son and Heir, who tracing the Steps of his noble and
loyal Father in a firm and resolute Adherence to the Interest of his Country,
of which he had given such pregnant Instances, and of his eminent Courage and
Conduct in diverse Encounters with the opposite Party, that he was thought
worthy to be joined with Sir William Wallace, in the Command of the Army which
Anno 1298 entered England, and performed such Actions of wonderful Courage,
that they became very terrible to the Enemy; and thereafter when Robert the
Bruce took upon him the Title of King of Scotland, and declared his Purpose of
doing all was in his Power toward the Redemption of his Country, and the
retriving of the Independency of the Nation, no body appeared more hearty in
his Interest than Sir Andrew Murray, or stood more firm to that Glorious
Monarch in all the Vicissitudes of Fortune that befell him: And it was no doubt
in Reward of his great Merit, that the King bestowed upon him his Sister, the
Lady Christian Bruce, in Marriage, Carta Rob. I. Domino Andreae de Moravia
Panetario Scotiae and Cristianae Sponsae suae sorori nostrae carissimae de
Terris de Garie and here dibus eorum dat. apud Clackmannan 20th July 1327 in
Haddingtons Colections in Bib. juridica Edin.
and gave him diverse Lands of great Value and Extent.

As he continued most faithful to King Robert, he was no less so to his Son
King David the II. to whose Interest inviolably adhering, he was one of those
Patriots who joined the Governor and came to his Assistance before the Battle
of Duplin, where he signalized his Courage, insomuch as he was upon the Death
of the Earl of Mar, the Governor, unanimously elected Regent in his Room, and
he held that great Office (except a little time he was a Prisoner in England)
with the universal Approbation of the whole Nation, and the Applause of all
Men, even till his Death Anno 1338, Buchanan says, that having reduced Lothian
to the Obedience of his lawful Sovereign King David, to give himself a little
Relaxation, he made a progress into the North to visit his own Lands and
Possessions, Transmontana praedia intervisit, which no doubt was his own old
Northern Estate in Elginshire, and out of which his Sons made Mortifications to
the Cathedral Church of Elgine, where their Father was interred.
whose Character drawn by the Great Buchannan, I cannot pass over. Speaking of
his Death, he says summum apud omnes bonos desiderium sui reliquit, was much
regrated by all good Men, and that tantas enim res biennio ac semestri quibus
in Magistratu fuit, gessit, ut suffecturae cujuslibet magni Ducis aetati
viderentur. He was solemnly interred with his Ancestors in the Cathedral Church
of Elgin under a Canopy of free Stone in Armor as big as the Life, with his
Coat of Arms over him. Dr. Johnstoun celebrates his praises in a very handsome
Poem, which I shall take the Liberty to insert here by way of Epitaph. Obvius
armato quoties sese obtulit hosti,
Cum quateret duro Sors fera cuncta pede!
Constans robur erat circum praecordia. Vincit
Dum capitur, nulla vincere vis potuit.
Victor caedit, agit, quatit, bostes, oppida, and arces.
Nemo unquam parvo tempore plura dedit.
Regum aequat merita: in Reges, pro Rege tuetur
Magnanimus patriae libera jura suae.
Vos ^ degeneres patriam sic prodere vestram!
Nempe ut MORAVII restituatur open.


And though Mr. Winton the old Prior of Lochlevin be thought no good Poet now a
Days, yet because he has endeavored to preserve the Memory of so well
deserving a Person, and to transmit his Character to Posterity in the best
fashion he could, I shall likewise amuse the Reader with his Words in
Commendation of the Governor, Schir Andrew Muref guide and wight,
That was a flout and bald Knight,
That name better was in his Day,
Frae g^id King Robert was away.


By the Lady Christian Bruce his Wife he left Issue John de Moravia Panetarius
Scotiae his Son and Heir, who gave in pure and perpetual Alms, an Annuity of
eight Merks Sterling out of his Lands of A^kly and Croy in Moray for the
Maintenance of a Priest, who was perpetually to perform Divine Offices at the
Altar of the Holy-Cross, in the Cathedral Church of Elgin, Pro anima sua and
anima bonae memory D. Andreae de Moravia patris sui Chartul. of Moray ad Annum
1351, in the Deed he is designed Joannes de Moravia Panetarius Scotiae
: But he dying without Issue

Thomas his Brother was Heir to him. This noble Person was in the 1351 sent to
England as an Hostage for King David II. Rymers foedera Angliae, he is designed
Frater and Here Is Joannis de Murrif
and was afterward one of the Commissioners appointed to treat about the King's
final Redemption Anno 1357 ibidem
which was then happily brought about; likeas he gave, ratified and confirmed
to the Church of Elgin his Brother's donation, adding by a new Deed of his own
ten pounds to be distributed among the Chanons on the Day of his Father Sir
Andrew's Anniversary Chartul. of Moray: In the Deed he is designed, Thomas de
Moravia Panetarius Scotiae
. But he dying without Male Issue, left a Daughter Jean his sole Heir, married
to Sir Archibald Douglass Lord of Galloway, thereafter Earl of Douglass, Charta
in Magno Chartulario Glasguen. Joannae Comitissae de Douglas Dominae de
Bothwel, whereby she gives in pura and simplici viduitate sua pro salute animae
suae, nec non animae recolendae memoriae quondam Archibaldi Comitis de Douglas
D. Galvidiae et de Bothwel Ecclesiae Glaguen. tres petras cerae annuatim
percipiendas de firmis Baroniae nostrae de Bothwel datum apud Castrum nostrum
de Bothwel, 8th Junii 1401
which brought the Lordship of Bothwell to that illustrious Family.

The Male Line of this Ancient Family was continued in Sir John de Moravia de
Drumshargard, a younger Son of Sir William de Moravia de Bothwell and
Drumshargard Panetarius Scotiae before mentioned, History of the Moravii
Panetarii Scotiae penes D. Abercarny. M.S.
who fixed his Residence at Abercarny in Perthshire, in the Time of King Robert
I, of which Lands he became possessed, as also of Ogilvie, Glensherrop, etc. by
the Marriage of Mary Daughter of Malise, Earl of Strathern, as from the Earl's
Charter to him and Mariae Filiae nostrae sponsae dicti Domini Johannis de
Moravia de Drumshargard Charta penes D. Abercarny.


Upon the Death of this Earl of Strathern, it being then customary to renew the
Infeftment upon the Change of the Superior, as well as of the Vassal, Sir John
Murray obtained a new Charter from Malise Earl of Strathern his Brother in Law,
whereby he narrates, quod nobilis vi^ Malisius bonae memoriae Comes de
Strathern infeodavit Dominum Joannem de Moravia de Drumshargard, Militem, de
diversis terris infrascript. viz. Ogilvie, Abercarny, Glensherop and medietat.
de Kincousy, nec non annuo reditu de Mochuverd, cum Hybergis infra Comitatum
deStrathern, ac etiam de terris de Egy and Arthsmethen prout in Cartadicti
Domini quondam Patris mei eidem Domino Joanni and heredibus suis confect.
before contineur ibidem.


This noble person gave to the Monks of Arbroth, all his Right and Title to the
Lands of Kingoldrum, which had formerly been in Dispute with the Convent, and
that for the health of his Soul Cartul. of Arbroth in Bib. Juridica Edin.
whereby Sir Maurice ratifies to the Convent of Arbroth, his Father Sir John's
Grant of the Lands of Kingoldrum ad Annum 1339
; which is all that I have found further memorable of him. By Mary his Wife
aforsaid, he had Sir Maurice his Successor, Sir Allexander Murray; and Walter,
who got off the Lands of Drumshargard, from which he is afterward designed
VValterus de Moravia de Drumshargard. Carta in Pub. Archivis Rob. II.


Which Sir Maurice being a person of great Honor and Merit, was by the Favor
of King David II. made Earl of Strathern Carta David Regis Will. Comiti de
Sutherland, in which Maurice Comes de Strathern, is a Witness the 17th of that
King's Reign, and produced by the Earl of Sutherland in his Claim of Precedence.
but being slain in the Service of his Country at the Battle of Durham Anno
1346, without Issue of his Body, the Title of Earl became extinct, his paternal
estate descending to,

Sir Alexander de Moravia de Drumshargard his Brother, who was served Heir to
his Father Sir John on the 30 th of July 134 -- Charta penes D. Abercarny.
He married Janet Daughter of Hugh Earl of Ross, Widow of the Baron of Monimusk
and Sister to Euphame Queen of Scotland. The Marriage Articles are very solemn
by way of Indenture, Ibid. And to this noble Contract, the Queens Seal is
appended, and prett entire, and serves to correct the mistake of George
Buchanan, who says she died in 1373, whereas this Indenture is plainly in 1375.
wherein the Queen and David Count Palatine of Strathern her Son do contract
for the Lady: But the Write it self being very curious and singular, I shall
for the Satisfaction of the learned, insert it in the original Words.

PResens Indentura per modum alphabeti facta, testatur quod vicesimo quarto die
mensis Novembris anno Domini millesimo trecentesimo septuagesimo quinto apud
Perth, inter excellentissimam Dominam Dominam Euphemiam Dei gratia Reginam
Seotie illustrem, and nobilem virum ac potentem dominum David Comitem Palatinum
de Strathern and Comitem Cattanie ex part una, and Alexandrum de Moravia de
Drumsergorth ex altera, in hunc modum extitit concordatum, videlicz quod dictus
Alexander ducet in uxorem Dominam Jonetam de Munymusk sororem dicte Domine
Regine; and predicta Domina Regina ac Comes fideliter promiserunt facere cum
toto consilio suo and auxilio dictum Alexandrum habere consilium Jurisperitorum
and Advocatorum sumptibus suis propriis and expensis, pro recuperatione sue
hereditatis secundum visum fuerit quod jus habet ad prosecutionem. Insuper
concordatum est inter eosdem, quod dicta Domina Regina inveniet sufficientem
sustentationem predicte sororis sue ad tempus unius anni vel duorum annorum.
Preterea concordatum est inter eosdem quod Walterus de Moravia frater dicti
Alexandri, si velit, pro voluntatis sue libito seniorem filiam predicte domine
Jonete habebit in uxorem. In cujus rei testimonium perimplende and fideliter
observande parti hujus indenture penes dictum Alexandrum remanenti sigilla
predictorum Domine Regine and Comitis sunt appensa, parti vero hujus indenture
penes predictum Dominam Reginam remanenti sigillum predicti Alex. est appensum.
Acta die anno and loco supradictis.

The Article whereby the Queen and the Earl of Strathern her Son do oblige
themselves to assist and patronize Sir Alexander Murray cum confilio suo and
auxilio habere consilium Jurisperitorum and Advocatorum pro recuperatione suae
hereditatis, I think, as a person of knowledge in Antiquities has judiciously
observed before me, respects Sir Alexander's Title to the Lordship of Bothwel
as Heir Male, out of which he was kept by the power of the Earl of Douglas, and
adduces many Arguments to prove that point History of the Panetarii Scotiae
penes D. Abercarny, the Author of this History represents, that Archibald Earl
of Dowglass, who married the Heiress of Bothwel, was a very bold Man; That it
was he who oppressed Thomas Fleming out of the Earldom of Wigtoun, because it
lay contiguous to the Earl's Lordship of Galloway; That it was the same Earl of
Douglas, who influenced King Robert the III. to break the Marriage Articles he
had entered into with the Earl of March, whereby the Prince the King's Son was
to have married the Earl of March's Daughter, and in place of that Lady to
substitute Elisabeth Douglas his own Daughter: And who, says he, is so much a
stranger to our History, as not to know that from the Time of this Earl, till
the extinction of the Stem of that Illustrious Family, the Earls of Douglas did
not over-aw the Crown, and were too great Subjects for our Kings?
which I must pass over, in regard they do not suit with the Brevity I intend
in carrying on this Work, and only remark, that Sir Alexander Murray was
overpowered in his Claim, and that he died in the 1410, leaving Issue, by the
aforesaid noble Lady his Wife, a Son

Sir Andrew Murray of Ogilvy and Abercarny, who by Agnes his Wife Daughter of
Cunningham of Glengarnock in Vic. de Air, had Sir Humphry his Successor, who by
Catherine his Wife, Daughter of Patrick Lord Graham, had Andrew his Son and
Heir, who took to Wife Margaret Daughter of Alexander Robertson of Strowan. By
her he had a Son George, who in the Lifetime of his Father was killed in the
Service of his Country at the fatal Battle of Floudoun with King James IV.
leaving Issue by Margaret his Wife, a Lady of the Family of the Lindseys, a Son
John, who succeeded his Grandfather, to whom he was served and retoured Heir in
the 1518. He married Nicolas Daughter of William Earl of Montrose, by whom he
had William his Son and Heir, and Robert, who was his Brother's Successor. This
John was slain in the Defense of the Honor and Independency of his Country by
the English at the Battle of Pinkycleugh, the 10 th of September 1547 and was
succeeded by,

William his Son, who married Margaret Daughter of Lawrence Lord Oliphant, but
dying without Issue 1559, his Estate fell to,

Robert his Brother, who in the time of the civil War, in the Reign of Queen
Mary, adhered to that unfortunate Princess, and was much esteemed by her, as
appears by several Documents in the Hands of his Heirs. He married Catherine,
Daughter of Sir William Murray of Tillybairdin. By her he had Sir William, Sir
David of Gorthy, who was Governor to Henry Prince of Wales, Mungo Murray Esquire
Father to Sir Robert Murray, who was Justice Clerk in the Reign of King Charles
II, a learned and polite Gentleman, and of Sir William Murray of Dreghorn, Mr.
John Murray Minister of Dumfermling, also two Daughters, Nicolas married to
Robert Viscount of Beil heaven, and Anne to Sir William Moncrief of that Ilk,
and dying anno 1595, was succeeded by

Sir William his Son, Charta penes Dominum Abercarny. This and all the Writs
beforementioned, in the Hands of the Lord of Abercarny, and those from the
Time of Sir Alexander Murray of Drumshargard, which are likewise in Abercarny's
Hands, I my self have seen and perused, and from them have framed this Account.
who being from his Youth, bred up at the Court of King James VI. was first
made a Knight, then one of the Gentlemen of the Bed Chamber, and Master of
Horse to Queen Anne. He married Christian Daughter of Andrew Mercer of Aldie,
by whom he had Sir Robert his Son and Heir, and a Daughter Mary, married to
William Murray of Auchtertyre.

Which Sir Robert in the Lifetime of his Father, married Helen Daughter of
Alexander Bruce of Cultmalundie, by whom he had a Son Sir William, and a
Daughter Anne, married to Alexander Murray of Strowan, and dying 1640, was
succeeded by

Sir Wiliam his Grandson, who survived his Grandfather but a Year, for he dyed
in the 1641, and left Issue by Anne his Wife, Daughter of Sir George Hay of
Keilour, Ancestor to the present Earl of Errol, Sir Robert his Successor,
William, and Captain George Murray. Also two Daughters.

Isabel, married to Sir Archbald Stewart of Burro,

Helen, to Mungo Graham of Gorthie.

Sir Robert his Son was a Gentleman of Parts, and who in a good Degree
inherited the Virtue, Loyalty and Merit of his Ancestors. He dyed the 11 of
April 1704, leaving Issue by Anne his Wife, Daughter of that valiant and loyal
Gentleman Patrick Graham of Inshbrakie, William his Successor. Robert Murray
Esquire Colonel John Mu^ray, Maurice Murray Esquire Likewise two Daughters.

Anne, married to David Grahame o^ Fintrie,

Emilia to James Graham of Garvock.

JOHN RAMSAY, Earl of Bothwell.
SIR John Ramsay of Balmain, the great Favorite of King James the III. was by
the said Prince created Earl of Bothwell: Charta in pub. Archiv.
But he did not live long to enjoy the Honor, for he was slain with the King
his Master at the Field of Stirling, on the 11th of June 1488.

HEPBURN Earl of Bothwell.
THIS Noble Family is descended of Sir Adam Hepburn, an English Knight, who
transplanted himself into Scotland, in the Reign of King David the II. and had
the Lands of Hailes by the Grant of George Earl of March.

Patrick Lord Hailes, was by King James the IV. raised to the Honor of Earl of
Bothwell Anno 1488. By Margaret his Wife, Daughter to the Lord Dalketh, he had
Adam his Son and Heir, who was slain at Floudoun Field, leaving Issue by Agnes
his wife, Daughter to the Earl of Buchan, Patrick his Son, who was Father of
the unhappy James Earl of Bothwell, who was created by Queen Mary Duke of
Orkney, but was in the same Reign forfeited for Treason, whereupon he fled
beyond Sea to Denmark, where he died Anno 1577.

Francis Stewart, Earl of Bothwel.
THE Title of Earl of Bothwel, by the special Favor of King James VI. came
next to Francis Stewart Esquire Son and Heir of John Prior of Coldingham, Lord
Privy Seal in the Reign of Queen Mary, a natural Son of King James V. He was
also constituted Lord high Admiral of Scotland; but in the same Reign, for his
treasonable Design of seizing the King's Person in his own Palace of
Holy-rood-house, he was forfeited Anno 1593. The Admirality was bestowed on the
Duke of Lennox, and most of his Estate in Lidsdale given to the Lord Buclugh.
How the rest went, I do not pretend to account for: All that I am to observe,
is, that he transported himself into France, and thence into Italy, where he
passed the remainder of his Days. Sanderson's History of King James VI.
.

BRECHIN Lord of Brechin.
DAvid of Scotland Earl of Huntingtoun and Garioch, Brother to King William the
Lion, gave the Lordship of Brechin, a Part of his own Appanage, to Henry his
natural Son, from whence he took a Surname; for in a Donation of John de Scotia
Comes de Huntingtoun and Chester to the Cannons of St. Andrews, this Henry is
designed de Brechin, filius Comitis David, Register of the Priory of St.
Andrews.
and in a Mortification by the said Earl, of a Toft of Land in his Burgh of
Dundee, to the Abbay of Aberbrothock, Henrico de Brechin fratre suo is a
Witness Chartulary, of Aberbrothock.
; and likewise in many Royal Charters to Scoon and Aberbrothock. He left Issue
by Julian his Wife,

William de Brechin his Son, who designed himself Willielmus de Brechin, filius
Henrici de Brechin, filii Comitis David, in his Foundation of the Mayson Dieu
Hospital of Brechin, for the Salvation of the Souls of William and Alexander
Kings of Scotland, John Earl of Chester and Huntingtoun his Brother, Henry his
Father, and Julian his Mother, and for the Welfare of his own Soul, to which
Albinus Bishop of Brechin, Robert de Monte alto, and several other Persons of
Note are Witnesses, Confirmation by King James the III. in 1477, wherein the
original Charter is transumed.
. This William made a very great Figure in all the public Transactions both in
the Reign of King Alexander II. and III. In the 1255, he was one of the great
Men, Magnatum, as the Record calls them, with whose Counsel, and aliorum
plurium Baronum nostrorum, the King gave a Commission to the Earls of Monteith,
Buchan and Mar, to treat with the English, de negotiis regni nostri, anent the
Good and Utility of both Realms Rymer.
. Likeas I find he was an Arbitrator in the Dispute betwixt Sir Peter de Maulea
Dominus de Panmure, and Domina Christina de Valoniis his Wife, with the Abbot
of Aberbrothock, about the Marches of the Baronies of Aberbrothock and Panmure;
which Alexander Cumin Earl of Buchan, Justiciary of Scotland, had perambulate
by the King 's special Command, and was at length to the Satisfaction of the
Parties amicably composed Anno 1254. Chartulary of Arbroth fol. 27. and Charta
pones Comitem de Panmure.
. He also was one of the Privy Council to King Alexander III. and one of the
Proceres Scotiae who oblige themselves recepturos Margaretam Norvegiae, Rymer's
Foedera, ad annum 1283.
the King's Grandchild, ut heredem Scotiae in failzure of his Issue Male. He
married - - - Daughter of John C^^^in Earl of Buchan, by whom he had,

David Lord of Brethin his Son and Heir, who, after the Abdication of Baliol,
was at the Battle of Methven, and several others, fought in the ensuing War
Rymer's Foedera, etc.
, being in the English Interest, and no Friend to the Brucian Title, though he
had the Honor to be in a very near Degree allied with that illustrious Family:
For by his Wife, King Robert the Bruce's Sister, he had a Son David, and a
Daughter Margaret, married to Sir David Barclay Knight, Charta David Barclay
Militis Margaretae filiae Domini David de Brechin de terris de Cairny Barclay
etc. pro matrimonio inter ^os contrahendo anno 1315 in pub. Arch.
.

Which David Lord of Brechin was one of the Barons who wrote that bold and
loyal Letter to the Pope Anno 1320: Soon after which, he was so unhappy as to
be drawn into a Conspiracy to deliver the Town of Berwick to the English; but
that Combination being happily discovered, he was made Prisoner, and being
tried before the Parliament, was found guilty of high Treason, for as much as
he had concealed and not revealed the Design, Ab conjurationis popularibus
appellatus nunquam assenserat: tantum eicrimini dabatur, quod in conscientiam
rei tam f^^dae ascitus eam tacitam habuit Buchanan.
, and suffered Death for the same, Anno 1321. His Case was much pitied and
lamented; for besides that he was the King's Nephew, he was a Person very
eminent in the Arts both of Peace and War, Omnium aetatis suij^venum and belli
and, pacis artibus long primus habebatur, says my Author. And Ibidem.
continues he, Dederat etiam suae virtutis in Syria bello sacro praeclarum
specimen. His Estate was not forfeited as the rest of the Conspirators were,
but went to Margaret his Sister, who was his Heir.

BARCLAY. Lord of Brechin.
SIR David Barclay, Lord of Brechin in Right of his Wife the Heir of David de
Brechin, was a Person of very signal Fidelity to the Brucian Interest, and is
famous in the Wars of King Robert Bruce, to whom he did many remarkable
Services. Abercromby's Mart Atch.
This Sir David and Margaret his Wife gave in pure Alms to the Monks of
Balmerino a Fishing upon the Water of Tay, for the good of their Souls;
Register of Balmerino
and left Issue Sir David, and a Daughter Jean, married to Sir David Fleming of
Biggar, by whom he had only one Daughter, Marion, married to William Maule of
Panmure, Ancestor to the Earl of Panmure. Charta penes Comitem de Panmure data
3 September. 1381


This last mentioned Sir David Barclay Lord of Brechin was eminent for his
Activity and Valor in behalf of King David Bruce, to whom he performed many
Actions of Honor and Courage; but at last falling into a fatal quarrel with
the Douglasses, he was murdered by the Contrivance of William Douglas of
Lidsdale, Anno 1348. Buchanan
leaving Margaret his only Child, married to Walter Earl of Athole, Charta in
Pub. Archivis.
Son to King Robert II.

Walter Earl of Athole, by the aforesaid Margaret his Wife, had Issue David
Stewart Knight, who died in England, one of the Hostages for the Ransom of King
James the I. and Alan Earl of Caithness, who was killed at the Battle of
Inverlochy in 1428, leaving no Issue. The Earl of Athole, though his Lady and
Children died before himself, kept Possession of this Lordship till he was
execute for the Murder King James I. in Anno 1437. But when he was under
Sentence of Death, he declared that he possessed the Lordship of Brchin only by
the courtesy of Scotland since his Wife's Death, and that he had no other
Title to that part of his Estate. Whereupon Sir Thomas Maule of Panmure laid
Claim to this Lordship, as nearest Heir to Margaret Barclay Countess of Athole,
to whose Heirs it was provided, failing Heirs of her own Body Charta data 19
Octobris 1378 in publicis Archivis
, and accordingly he took an Instrument in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, upon the
Earl's Declaration immediately before his Execution, wherein his Right and
Proximity of Blood to the Lords of Brechin is set down penes Com. de Pan.
. And Thomas Bisset of Balwylo, judicially declares, That Dame Jean Barclay,
Wife to Sir David Fleming, was Grandmother to Sir Thomas Maule, who was killed
at Harlaw Declaration anno 1437, penes Comitem de Panmure.
. Notwithstanding of all which, the Council of King James the II. in his
Minority, having in sundry Cases procured Decisions to be made in Favors of
the Crown, when the Competition run betwixt the Sovereign and the Subject, the
Family of Panmure were baulked of their Right, and the Lordship of Brechin, in
regard the Earl of Athole died possessed of it, was with the rest of his Estate
annexed to the Crown. Acts of parliament.


But this Lordship being afterward dissolved, it was purchased by Patrick Earl
of Panmure, and has ever since been used as a Title of that noble Family, who
are undoubted Heirs in Blood of the ancient Lords of Brechin, both of the
Brechin and Barclay Line.

CAMPBEL Earl of Bradalbin.
THO none of this Family arrived to the Dignity of Peerage till the present
Earl, yet were they Baron^ of great Account long before, and were dignified
with the Title of Baronet at the Institution of that Honor, Anno 1625. Their
first Ancestor Sir Colin Campbel, was a second Son of the Family of Lochow,
near three hundred Years ago, who by his Marriage with Margaret, one of the
three Daughters and Coheirs of John Stewart Lord Lorn, obtained a third Part
of that Inheritance. From which Sir Colin they have continued remarkable in a
direct Line, down to the present Time, spreading themselves into several
eminent and flourishing Branches by the Way, as are the Campbels of Lawers
(sprung from a Son of a second Marriage of the first Sir Colin, by a Daughter
of the Family of Keir) Glenlyon, Achriny, Lochbuskie, Mochaster, Monzie,
Glenfaloch, Carquhin, Kilpont, Aberuchil, Glendarual, etc.

The Family of Glenurchie has been remarkable in our Scots History on several
Occasions; nor need I be at much Pains to show the several Matches they have
made with some of the most noble Families of this Kingdom, since the whole
Course of this Book sufficiently makes mention thereof, only I shall take
notice, that John, now Earl of Bradalbin, is Son of Sir John Campbel of
Glenurchie Baronet, by Mary his Wife, Daughter of William Earl of Airth and
Monteith. He was created Earl of Caithness by King Charles II. 28 January 1677,
in Consideration of the Loyalty of his Ancestors, as well as his own personal
Merit; but this Title being adjudged to another, Anno 1681. he was then created
Earl of Bradalbin, with Precedence, according to the former Patent. In 1692 he
was named a Privy Counselor, and one of the Commissioners of the Treasury,
which for some Time he enjoyed.

His first Wife was Mary Rich, Daughter of Henry Earl of Holland, of the
Kingdom of England, by whom he had Duncan Lord Ormly, who is not to succeed
him, and John Lord Glenurchie. Also by Mary his second Wife, Daughter of
Archbald Marquis of Argyle, he had a Son Colin, who died unmarried.

John Lord Glenurchie, married first Frances Daughter and Coheir of Henry
Cavendish Duke of New Castle, but by her he had no Issue; And secondly
Henrietta Daughter of Sir Edward Villiers Sister to Edward late Earl of Jersey,
by whom he has John Master of Glenurchie.

ARMS.
Three Coats quarterly, 1st and 4th. Gyrone of eight Pieces Sable and Or, 2d
Or, a Fess cheque Argent and Azure, 3d. Argent, a Galey with her Oars in
Action, Sable, supported by two Stags Proper. Crest a Stag's Head eraz'd,
Motto, Follow me.

CUMIN Earl of Buchan.
THE first of this noble Family was Sir William Cumin, Son of Sir Richard Cumin
Knight Winton's Manuscript History in the Lawyer's Library.
, who married Margaret Daughter of Fergus Earl of Buchan Charter of
Confirmation by Margaret Countess of Buchan, of a Donation which Fergus Earl of
Buchan, her Father, gave to Arbroth Abbay.
, in Right of whom he came to enjoy that Honor. He was by King Alexander II.
constituted Justiciary of Scotland, Anno 1230. which he enjoyed for many Years.
Being a Person of singular Devotion, he founded the Abbay of Deer in Buchan,
for Cistertian Monks, and endued it with many Lands in those Parts Chron. de
Melros.
, and dying Anno 1233 Ibidem.
, left Issue by the said Margaret his Wife,

Alexander his Son and Heir, who was constituted Justiciary of Scotland in the
Reign of King Alexander III. He was commissioned Ambassador to England, Anno
1284 Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
, and in 1286 was chosen one of the six Regents of this Realm, upon the Decease
of the said King Alexander Buchanan.
. His Works of Piety were these; An Hospital of his Foundation at Turref in
Buchan, for twelve poor old Men; Another at the New-Burgh of Buchan, and a
Confirmation in most ample manner to the Monks of Arbroth of a Grant which
Fergus Earl of Buchan, his Grandfather, had formerly made for the Salvation of
his Soul Chartulary of Murray and Register of Arbroth, MS.
. All which show not only the Greatness of his Estate, but also of his Piety.
He dying Anno 1289 Simson's History.
, left Issue by Isabel his Wife, Daughther and one of the Coheirs of Roger de
Quincy Earl of Winchester (by Helen his Wife, Daughter of Alan Lord of Galloway
Constable of Scotland) John Earl of Buchan Constable of Scotland his Son and
Heir, who was sent Ambassador to France to treat of a Peace, which was then
happily concluded, Anno 1303 Rymer.
. Upon King Robert's Accession to the Throne, Anno 1306, he adhered to the
English Interest, for which Action his Estate was seized on, and dying in
England in 1329 the 1 st. Year of David II. left Issue by Isabel his Wife,
Daughter of Duncan Earl of Fife, two Daughters, Alicia Wife of Sir Henry de
Beaumont, and Margaret of Sir John Ross Knight Mr. Andrew Winton's Chron. M.S.
in the Lawyers Library, in old Scots Rhyme.
.

STEWART, Earl of Buchan.
THE next that enjoyed any Title from hence was Alexander Stewart Lord
Badenoch, 4th Son to King Robert II. who was dignifyed with this Title, Anno
1374. He married Eupham Countess of Ross Charta in Rotulis Roberti II.
, and dying 20th February 1394, was interred in the Middle of the Choir, of the
Cathedral Church of Dunkeld, with his Statue over him in a fair Stone, which
continued entire, till a Party of Angus's Regiment having garrisoned the Church
of Dunkeld at the Revolution, the Soldiers very much defaced it; but upon the
Pedestal, there is this Inscription. Hic jacet Dominus Alexander Senescallus
Comes de Buchan and Dominus de Badenoch bonae Memoriae, qui obiit 20 Die mensts
Februarii, Anno Dom. 1394.

From this Time the Honor of Buchan lay dormant till the Year 1419, when it
was meritoriously bestowed by Robert Duke of Albany, Governor of Scotland, upon
John Steuart Lord High Chamberlain of Scotland, his Son. This Earl commanded
the 7000 Scots Auxiliares that were sent to the Assistance of Charles VI.
against the English Buchanan. Hist.
, whose great and memorable Actions and Services to the Crown of France, are
sufficiently recorded in our Scots and French Histories, and leave me very
little to say here. He was killed at the Battle of Vernoil, anno 1424
Drummond's History.
, leaving Issue by Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter to Archibald Earl of Douglass,
one sole Daughter and Heir, Jean married to George Lord Seaton, Ancestor to the
present Earl of Wintoun History of the House of Seaton, M.S.
, which gave Occasion to the noble Family to carry quarterly in the
Achievement the Coat of Buchan, viz, Azure, three Garbs, Or.

ERSKINE, Earl of Buchan
THE Honor and Earldom of Buchan coming to the Crown, (by the Death of John
the last Earl without Male-issue), remained in the Royal Person of the King, as
nearest Heir-male to the said Earl, till the Year 1469, when the same was by
King James III. with the whole Lands which formerly composed that Earldom,
bestowed upon James Stewart, second Son of Sir James Stewart (surnamed, The
Black Knight of Lorn) by Queen Jean, Widow of James 1. of Scotland, and
Daughter of John Duke of Somerset, who was Son of John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster, 4th Son of Edward III. King of England, from whom the same has
through several Descents hereafter deduced, devolved on Earls of the Surname of
Erskine, a Branch of the Illustrious House of Mar, by whom it has been enjoyed
for the Space of One hundred and thir^een Years, since the 1601.

Which James Earl of Buchan was a most faithful Counselor to King James III.
by whom he was constituted Warden of the Middle Marches toward England Charta
Jacobi III. dilecto avunculo suo Jacobo Comiti de Buchan, Guardiano mediarum
Marchiarum regni nostri, terrarum de Traquair, quae fuere Willielmi Murray and
nostrae ratione forisfacturae, 3. Feb^. 1478. Alia. Charta in Rotulis dicti
Regis Jacobo Comiti de Buchan Comerario Scotiae ad Annum 1479.
and Lord High Chamberlain of Scotland. He married first Margaret, Daughter and
sole Heir of Sir Patrick Ogilvy of Auchterhouse, high Sheriff of the County of
Forfar, by whom he had Alexander his Son and Heir; also by Margaret, Daughter
of....... Murray of Philiphaugh, Mr. Martin of Clermont's Collections in the
Hands of his Son.
he had James Stewart Ancestor to the present Earl of Traquair; also two
Daughters Charta in Publicis Archivis.
, Agnes married to Adam Earl of Bothwel, afterward to Robert Lord Maxwel, and
Elizabeth to John Hume of Colding knows, Ancestor to the present Earl of Hume
Ibidem.
.

Which Alexander Earl of Buchan married Jean, Daughter of William Lord Ruthven,
by whom he had Issue, John Earl of Buchan his only Son and Heir, who was one of
the Lords of the Privy Council to King James V. who, by Margaret his Wife,
Daughter of Sir John Scrimgeor of Duddop Knight, had Issue John, who died
before him, and one Daughter, who was married to Thomas Dempster of Muirask in
Bamff-shire, and had Issue.

Which John, Eldest Son of the said Earl, was with the Flower of the Nobles of
Scotland, killed at the Battle of Musteburgh on the 10th of September 1547, in
the Lifetime of his Father; having been twice married: First, To Mary Daughter
of James Earl of Murray, by whom he had no Issue; and, 2 dly, To Beatrix;
Daughter of Sir Walter Ogilvy of Boyn, by whom he had one Daughter Christiana,
who, anno 1551, succeeded her Grandfather in the Earldom of Buchan, and married
Robert Do^glas (Brother of William Earl of Mortoun) in Right of her afterward
Earl of Buchan, by whom she had Issue James, who succeeded her; and two
Daughters,

Janet married to Alexander Irvine of Drum, and had Issue.

Elizabeth married to Andrew Frazer of Muchil, in the County of Aberdeen,
Ancestor of Charles, now Lord Fraser.

To which Robert and Christiana (Earl and Countess of Buchan) succeeded

James Earl of Buchan, their only Son and Heir, who, by Margaret his Wife,
Daughter of Walter Lord Deskford, Ancestor of James now Earl of Findlater, had
Issue one Daughter, Mary, who, anno 1601, succeeded the said James her Father
in the Earldom of Buchan.

Which Mary Countess of Buchan married James Erskine eldest Son of the second
Marriage of John Earl of Mar, Lord High Treasurer of Scotland, and Knight of
the most noble Order of the Garter, by the Lady Mary Stewart, second Daughter
of Esme Duke of Lennox: Upon which Marriage, the Right of Succession to the
Earldom of Buchan (which before had been to the Heirs whatsoever) was by a
Charter under the Great Seal, proceeding upon a Resignation, limited to the
said Mary Countess of Buchan, and the said James her Husband, and the Heirs
Male of the said Marriage; which failing, to the said James's nearest lawful
Heirs Male whatsoever.

Which James Earl of Buchan being a Person of great Merit and Accomplishments,
and much in the Favor of King Charles I. (to whom he was a Gentleman of his
Bedchamber) lived most of his Time in England, where he had Issue by his said
Wife, James his eldest Son and Heir, and John who died unmarried; as also two
Daughters.

Mary married to Alexander Lord Pitstigo, and had Issue; and Margaret married
to Sir James Graham, Son to the Earl of Monteith.

After the Death of whom, he married, 2 dly Elizabeth, Daughter of Sir Philip
Knevit of Bucknam Castle, in the County of Norfolk, Bart. by whom he had Issue,
Dorthy married in England to (...) Walker in the County of Middlesex, Esquire and
several other Children, who died young.

To whom succeeded James Earl of Buchan, his eldest Son and Heir, who by his
Wife Mary, Daughter of William Earl of Dalhousie, had Issue one Son William,
who succeeded him, and five Daughters, Marjory the eldest, married first to
(...) Fraser of Inderalachie Esquire and 2 dly to Charles Lord Fraser. Anne the 2 d
to James Canaries D.D. Henriette the 3 d. to Thomas Forbes of Tolquhon Esquire and
Jean the 4 th. to George Gray of Hackerton Esquire

Which William Earl of Buchan having joined himself at the Revolution in 1688
to those who took up Arms in Scotland against the late King William, brought
himself thereby into much Trouble: For being soon after taken by that King's
Troops, he was committed Prisoner to the Castle of Stirling, where, tho by the
Intercession of his Friends his Prison was at last much enlarged, he continued
to his Death, which happened anno 1695, without leaving any Issue, having never
been married.

To whom succeeded David Lord Cardross, his nearest Heir Male, being great
Grandson and Heir to Henry the first Lord Cardross, who was Brother to James
Earl of Buchan, Grandfather to the said William last deceased.

Which David Earl of Buchan in anno 1697 married Frances, eldest Daughter, and
since sole Heir of Henry Fairfax of Hurst, in the County of Berks Esquire only Son
and Heir of Henry Fairfax Esquire second Son of Thomas Viscount Fairfax: By the
which Frances Countess of Buchan the said Earl has had nine Sons,

Henry David, Lord Auchterhouse, born in September 1699, who died very young.

David Lord Auchterhouse, born in April 1703, who died an Infant.

Henry David, now Lord Cardross and Auchterhouse, born 17 th April 1710.

Fairfax, born Feb. 8 th 1712.

George Lewis on Jan. 30 1714, and

George Augustus on December 27 th, 1715, who died very young, and three more,
who died soon after they were born.

Also seven Daughters.

Lady Katharin Anna, and

Lady Frances; yet in their Minority.

Lady Alethea, and

Lady Willelmina Carolina, who both died Infants; and three others who died
soon after they were born.

Which David now Earl of Buchan, was one of the Council of Trade appointed by
Parliament in anno 1705, when by an Act past in England, the Importation of
Scots Linen Cloth and Cattle into that Kingdom was prohibited, and Matters
seemed to run high betwixt the two Kingdoms, in which Commission his Lordship
behaved himself so as to gain universal Esteem, as he has upon all other
Occasions, when employed in the public Service, wherein he has always
eminently distinguished himself by his unshaken Zeal and constant appearance
for the Honor and Interest of his Country, as well during the Reign of the
late King William, in which he was a Privy Counselor from the Year 1697, till
the Death of that Prince, as during that of her late Majesty Queen Anne, by
whom he was also constituted of the Privy Council; as also one of the
Commissioners of the Exchequer, and Governor of Blackness Castle; in all which
he continued till after the Conclusion of the Treaty of Union, anno 1707, which
he opposed in Parliament to the very last, being of Opinion, as his Lordship
then declared, that several of the Articles agreed upon, were inconsistent with
the Honor of his Country, especially of the Peerage, against which he
therefore entered his Protest, and was soon after removed from all public
Trust. But on the Accession of his Majesty King George to the Crown, for the
Security of whose Succession his Lordship had on all Occasions exerted himself
with the outmost Zeal, he had again several Marks of Favor bestowed on him,
having been appointed one of the Lords Commissioners of Police, and Lord
Lieutenant of the Shires of Stirling and Clackmannan, as he was also to the
general Satisfaction elected one of the sixteen Peers for Scotland to the first
Parliament of Great Britain called after his Majesty's Arrival in this Kingdom.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st. Azure, three Garbs, Or, 2d grand quarter 1st and 4th Azure, a
Bend betwixt six Cross Croslets, Or, 2d and 3d, Argent, a Pale, Sable, 3d,
great Quarter 1st and 4th Or, a Fess Cheque, Azure and Argent, 2d and 3d Azure,
3 Garbs Or, 4th Argent, three Bars Gamels, Gules. Over all a Lion Rampant Sable
in Surtout an Escoutcheon, Gules, an Eagle displayed, Or, looking toward the
Sun in his Splendour, p^aced in the Dexter chief Point, supported by two
Ostriges proper Crest, a dexter Hard grasping a Batton, Motto, Judge Nocht.

SCOTT Duke of Buckclugh.
THE first of the Surname of Scott, I have found upon Record, was Ricardus
Scottus, who in the Reign of King David I. is Witness to a Charter of
Confirmation by Robert Bishop of St. Andrews, to the Abbacy of Holyrood house;
Dalrymple's Hist. Collect.
but whether Scottus was his Surname, or only so called from his Country, is
not so clear. Likeas we find in the Reign of King Alexander II. another
Ricardus Scottus, who obtained a fair Estate in Roxburgh-Shire, by Marriage of
Alicia, one of the Heirs Female of Henry de Molla, out of which he gave in pure
and perpetual Alms to the Monks of Kelso, eight Acres of Land, with Pasturage
for diverse Oxen, in his Tenement of Molle, for the Health of his Soul. Chartul.
of Kelso MS.


In the Reign of Alexander III. Sir Richard Scott obtained the Barony of
Murthockstoun, now called Murdistoun in Clidsdale, by the Marriage of an Heir
Female of the same Surname, and is designed Ricard le Scott de Murthockstoun,
in the Bond of Submission called the Ragman Roll, wherein as a Baron of
Lanerkshire, he swears Allegiance to King Edward the I. of England Anno 1296;
Prynne's History.
whose Successor Robert Scott designed of... Murdistoun and Ranelburn,
flourished under King Robert II. who with Consent and Approbation of Walter his
Son and Heir apparent, gave to the Monks of Melross the Lands of Hinkery in
Selkirkshire, pro salute animae suae. Chartul. of Melross, data 28 Maij 1415.
This Walter was a gallant brave Man, and performed many Actions of signal
Honor and Courage in the Service of the Crown, for which he was nobly
rewarded. For King Robert, who never failed to reward merit, did with Consent
of John Earl of Carrick his eldest Son, change the holding of the Barony of
Kirkurd from Ward to Blanch in his Favors, by his Royal Charter of the Date
December 7. Anno 1390. He is designed Walter Scott Son and Heir of Robert
Scott, Anno Regni Rob. II 19 penes ducem de Buclugh.
The same Sir Walter, then a Knight, in the 1426, obtained a Charter from the
Earl of Douglas, of the Lands of Lempetlaw, for his Services done to the Earl,
by his Charter second July 1426; Charta penes ^undem. In the Charter he is
designed Son and Heir of Robert Scott of Murdistoun.
and afterward exchanged his Lands of Murdistoun with Thomas Inglis of Manner
for Manners Lands of Branxholm, Anno 1446 Ibid.
He was a Person of that Character, that during the Reign of King James II. he
was frequently employed in Negotiations of Peace betwixt the two Nations, as
appears from Mr. Rymer's Foedera lately published, and did exert his Valor in
a very eminent Degree, in suppressing the Rebellion of the Earls of Douglas,
Murray and Ormond, for which he had a Grant from the Crown of the Lands of
Abinigton, Fairholm and Glendonary, wherein his Loyalty and signal Services are
very fully narrated and set forth in the King's Charter, Charta in pub.
Archivis.
under the Great-Seal. By... Daughter of... his Wife, he had David his Son and
Heir, and Alexander.

Which David made a very great Figure, in the public Transactions, in the Time
of King James III. and IV. and was oftener than once appointed one of the
Conservators of the Peace betwixt the two Nations. By... Daughter of... he had
Sir Walter his eldest Son, and Robert; likewise a Daughter Janet, married to
Sir James Douglas of Drumlanrig, Charta penes Ducem de Queensberry.
and departing this Life Anno 1492, was succeeded by

Sir Walter his Grandson and Heir, who was served and retoured Heir to his
Grandfather, 6. November 1492: Charta penes Ducem de Bucklugh.
He was famous for his many excellent Qualities under King James V. whose great
Favorite he was. In the 1526 he attempted to relieve at Melross his Sovereign
out of the Hands of the Earl of Angus; and tho the Attempt proved
unsuccessfull, yet the King still retained a very lasting Sense of Sir Walter's
Duty and Loyalty on that Occasion. After the Death of King James he signalized
his Valor and Courage at the Battle of Pinky, soon after which he was
constituted Warden of the West-Marches toward England, and he discharged the
Office with great Honor and Integrity, till his Death in the Month of October
of the Year 1553. Charta in pub. Archivis.
He married first Elizabeth Daughter of... Carmichael, Ibid.
of... and had Sir David his eldest Son, who died without Issue, and Sir
William Scott Knight his Father's Heir apparent, who likewise died before
himself. His second Wife was Janet Daughter of John Bethune of Cricht, Ibid.
by whom he had Grisel married to William Lord Borthwick, and again to Walter
Cairncross Esquire Son to John Cairncross of Colmesly. Ibid.
And Jean to John Cranstoun of that Ilk.

Sir William Scott of Kirkurd, Son and Heir apparent to Sir Walter Scott of
Buckclugh, in the Lifetime of his Father, married Grisel Daughter of John
Bethune of Cricht, Histor. Remarks on the Bethunes of Cricht. MS.
by whom he had Sir Walter his Grandfather's Successor, and three Daughters,
Jean married to Sir Thomas Ker of Fernyherst, Margaret to Sir John Johnstoun of
that Ilk, and Elizabeth to John Carmichael of Meadowflat, Captain of Crawfurd.

Which Walter was a Man of excellent Parts and Reputation, and tho a firm
Adherer to Queen Mary, yet he has a very good Character even by the Historians
of the other Party, particulary Sir James Melvil, who says, He was a Man of
rare Qualities, wise, brave, stout and modest. He married Margaret, Daughter of
David Earl of Angus, by whom he had Sir Walter his Son and Heir, and two
Daughters.

Margaret, married to Robert Scott of Thirlestane, and had Issue.

Mary, to William Elliot of Liriestoun, and had Issue.

Which Walter being a Person of very fine Parts, and in great Favor with King
James VI. had the Honor of Knighthood conferred on him, at the Coronation of
Queen Anne, in Anno 1590, Rymer.
and after that was constituted Warden of the West-Marches toward England, and
he discharged the Trust with singular Courage and Fidelity, Spotiswood's Hist.
ad Annum 1596.
till the King's Accession to the Crown of England, Anno 1603.

Sir Walter being a Person of a warlike Genius, and from his Youth much
affecting a military Life, carried over a Regiment to the Netherlands, where he
served under that famous General the Prince of Orange, in which valiant
Adventures he gained so much Honor, that to countenance his signal Merit, King
James VI. was pleased to raise him to the Degree and Dignity of a Baron of this
Realm, by the Title of Lord Scott of Buckclugh, on the 16. March 1606, and
departing this Life 5. December 1611, Scotstarvet's Histor. Collections MS.
lest-Issue by Mary his Wife, (Daughter of William Ker of Cesford, Sister to
Robert I. Earl of Roxburgh) Walter his Successor; likewise two Daughters,

Margaret married to James Lord Ross, and again to Alexander Earl of Eglintoun.

Elizabeth to John Master of Cranstoun, Charta in pub. Archivis.
at that Time Son and Heir apparrent to William Lord Cranstoun, sans Issue.

Which Walter was by the special Favor of King James VI. raised to the Honor
of Earl of Buckclugh, by Letters patent 16. March 1619. Charta in Rotulis
Jacobi VI. ad Annum 1619.
This noble Earl being likewise a Noblemen of a warlike Temper, had likewise
the Command of a Regiment under the States of Holland against the Spaniard,
where he served with singular Honor and Reputation, and coming over to England
in the Beginning of the Winter, 1633, died at London on the 21. of September
thereafter.

Leaving Issue by Mary his Wife, Daughter of Francis Earl of Errol, Francis his
Son and Heir and two Daughters.

Lady Mary married to John Earl of Mar.

Lady Jean to John first Marquess of Tweddale.

Francis Earl of Buckclugh was a young Nobleman of very fine Parts, and of
singular merit, and very loyally affected to King Charles II. for which
Cromwell, after the Earl's Death, imposed a Fine of 15000 Lib. Sterling. on his
Heir. Oliver Cromwell's Act of Indemnity to Scotland, Anno 1654.
He was suddenly snatched away by Death in the Flower of his Age, Anno 1652,
leaving Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of John Earl of Rothes, two
Daughters, Mary Countess of Buckclugh, who married Walter Scot of Hychester,
who was thereupon created Earl of Tarras; but the Lady dying without Issue,
Anno 1662, her Estate and Honor came to her Sister the Lady Anne Scott, who
soon thereafter was married to James Duke of Monmouth, natural Son to King
Charles II. who changed his Name to Scot, and was, together with the Countess
his Wife, created Duke and she Duchess of Buckclugh, by Letters patent, 20.
April 1673. Charta penes D. de Bucklugh.
And the Duke of Lennox dying in the End of 1672, his Grace was constituted
Lord High Chamberlain of Scotland.

In the Year 1679. upon the Insurrection in Scotland, which commenced with the
Murder of the Archbishop of St. Andrews, he was sent with a sufficient Force,
as Generalissimo to suppress it, where giving them Battle at Bothwel-Bridge, he
entirely defeated them, and so suppressed that Rebellion.

But the following Year, having shown himself very zealous in prosecuting a
full Discovery of the Popish Plot, and joining with those who were the greatest
Sticklers at that Time against Popery, by which means he had very much gained
the Affection of the People, some of his chiefest (supposed) Friends began to
invite him to cast an Eye upon the Crown, and the more to flatter his Hopes
therewith, a Report was about this time very industriously spread through the
Kingdom, That the King had been lawfully married to Mrs. Walters the Duke's
Mother, which so affected his Majesty, that he thought himself obliged, both in
Conscience and Honor to declare the contrary to his Privy Council, and
thereupon caused the following Declaration to be entered in the Council Books.

Whitehall, March 3, 1679.
To avoid any Dispute, which may happen in time to come, concerning the
Succession to the Crown, he declares in the Presence of Almighty God, that he
never gave, nor made any Contract of Marriage, nor was ever married to any
Woman whatsoever, but to his present Wife, Queen Catharine, now living.

Signed CHARLES R.


Not long after this, the King was prevailed with, not only to divest him of
all the Offices and Places he held under the Crown, but that he should likewise
depart the Kingdom, whereupon he retired to Utrecht, and there continued some
Time, and then returned to England, but was again banished the Court in 1683,
and retiring into Holland, continued at the Hague till the Death of the King
his Father. But before K. James VII. was well settled on the Throne, anno 1685,
he invaded England; but being soon after totally routed at Sigemore, and taken
Prisoner, he was beheaded on Towerhill the 15th July 1685.

By the Duke of Monmouth the Duchess of Buckclugh had two Sons,

James Earl of Dalkeith, who was elected one of the Knights of the most noble
Order of the Thistle, anno 1704, and dyed 14th March 1705, leaving Issue by
Henrietta his Wife, Daughter of Laurence Earl of Rochester, three Sons and two
Daughters, viz.

Francis now Earl of Dalkeith.

Lord James Scot.

Lord Henry Scot.

Lady Anne Scot.

Lady Charlotte Scot.

Lord Henry Scot, 2 d Son of Anne Duchess of Buckclugh, was by Letters Patent,
bearing date the 29th of March 1706, in the 5th Year of the Reign of her
Majesty Queen Anne, created Earl of De Lorain, Viscount Hermitage and Lord Scot
of Goldilines, all in the County of Roxburgh.

Her Grace married a second Husband Charles Lord Cornwallis, and by him had
Issue, Lord George Scot, and Lady Anne Scot, who both deceased young, and Lady
Isabella Scot, yet unmarried.

ARMS.
Or, on a Bend Azure, a Star of six Points betwixt two Crescents of the Field,
supported by two Women in Rich antique Apparel, the Crest is a Stag passant,
proper, Motto, Amo.

BALFOUR, Lord Burleigh.
THIS Family which originally took its Surname from the Castle and Barony of
Balfour in Fife-shire, has been of great Antiquity in the foresaid County,
there being some of that Name flourishing there, in the time of Alexander II
Ingelramus de Balfour vice comes de Fife, is Witness in a Charter the 15th of
Alexander II, Anno Dom. 1229.
. Also it appears, that Michael de Balfour vice comes de Fife, was a Member of
Parliament in the Year, 1315 Sir Robert Sibbald's History of Fife, Page 141.
. This Family continued in great Luster till the fifth of King Robert II. and
then came to an Heir Female, married to Sir John Beaton Knight, Progenitor to
the Lord of Balfour.

Of the Family of Balfour, that of Monquhany, appears to have been a very
ancient Branch, for Michael de Balfour, obtained the Barony of Monquhany in
vice-comitatu de Fife, in Exchange with Duncan Earl of Fife, for his Lands of
Pittencrief Ibidem.
which was ratified by a Charter of King David II. anno 135^ Ibidem.
, as Balfour of Burleigh was another Family in good Esteem, and possessed the
Barony of Burleigh since the Days of King James II Charta Jacobi II. de Baronia
de Burleigh Johanni Balfour de Balgarvie.
. These two Families of Monquhany and Burleigh, came to be united in the Person
of Sir Michael Balfour of Burleigh, Son and Heir to Sir James Balfour of
Monquhany, Clerk Register in the Reign of Queen Mary, by Margaret his Wife,
Daughter and Heir of Michael Balfour of Burleigh. This Sir Michael was by the
Favor of King James VI. raised to the Peerage of this Realm by the Title of
Lord Balfour of Burleigh, 7th August 1606 Sibald's History of Fife.
, being then his Majesty's Ambassador to the Dukes of Tuscany and Lorain, he
married...... Daughter of Lundy of that Ilk, by whom he left one Daughter,
Margaret Baroness of Burleigh, his sole Heir, the Honor being to him and the
Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten, she married Robert Arnot of Ferny, who
changed his Name to Balfour, and in her Right became Lord Burleigh. He was
elected President to the Parliament, anno 1641, and by his said Wife he had
Issue.

John his Successor, and three Daughters.

Jean, married to David Earl of Weems, and had Issue.

Margaret, to Sir John Crawfurd of Kilbirny, Ancestor to the present Viscount
of Garnock.

Isabel, to Thomas Lord Ruthven, and had Issue.

John Lord Burleigh, was married to Daughter of Sir William Balfour of Pitcullo
Lieutenant of the Tower of London, in the Reign of King Charles I. by whom he
had three Sons, Robert who succeeded him in his Estate and Honor. John Balfour
of Ferny, and Henry Balfour of Dunboig, also several Daughters,

Margaret, married to Andrew Lord Rollo, and had Issue.

........ to Sir Robert Douglass of Kirkness, and had Issue.

........ to Sir John Malcolm of Lochore, and has Issue.

.... to.... Douglass of Strenthry. Isabel, unmarried.

Anne to Captain Robert Sinclair.

Robert the present Lord Burleigh, upon King William's Accession to the Crown,
anno 1689, was constituted one of the Commissioners for executing the Office of
Register. He married Margaret Daughter of George Earl of Melvil, by whom he has,

Robert Master of Burleigh,

Margaret,

Mary, all unmarried.

ARMS.
Argent on a Cheveron Sable, an Ottars Head erraz'd of the first, supported on
the Dexter with an Ottar, and on the Sinister by a Swan proper, for the Crest,
a Maid holding in one Hand an Ottars Head, and in the other a Swans, with this
Motto, Omne solum forti Patria.

STEUART, Earl of Bute.
THE descent of this noble Family is from Sir John Steuart, a Son of King
Robert II. Sir James Dalrymple's Edition of Camden, Page 73.
who had by his Fathers Grant a fair Possession in the Isle of Bute (the
ancient Patrimony of the Royal Steuarts, long before they attained to the
Crown) with the hereditary Sheriffship of that County, which King Robert III.
his Brother confirmed by this Charter. Robertus dei gratia Rex Scotorum sciatis
nos dedisse and hac presenti charta nostra confirmasse dilecto fratri nostro
Johanni Senescallo de Bute officium vice comitatus de Bute and Arran datum 11
Nov. 1400 Charta penes comitem de Bute.
. Likeas he obtained a Charter from Robert Duke of Albany, when Governor of
Scotland, of the Lands of Fynock, which runs thus in the Original,

Robertus Dux Albaniae Gubernator Scotiae sciatis nos dedisse dilecto
fratrinostro Johanni Steuart vice comiti de Bute totam dimidietatem terrarum de
Fynock in Barronia de Renfrew, etc. apud Villam de Irvin primo die Januarii
1418 Penes dictum comitem.
.

This Sir John Steuart married Jean Daughter of Sir John Semple of Eliotstoun
Charta Roberti Ducis Albaniae dilecto fratri suo Johanni Steuart vice comiti de
Bute and Jonetae sponsae suae faliae Johannis Semple de Eliotstoun 1418 penes
comitem de Bute.
, Ancestor to the present Lord Semple, by whom he had three Sons,

Robert his Successor.

Andrew Steuart of Roslyn in vice comitatu de Bute.

William first of the Branch of Fynock Charta confirmationis Jacobi II. dilecto
consanguineo suo Willielmo Steuart de Terras de Fynock, anno 1444, penes
comitem de Bute and etiam in publicis Archivis.
in vice comitatu de Renfrew.

Which Robert Steuart of Bute was of the Privy Council to King James II. anno
1440 Indenture betwixt the King and the Lord Erskin, penes comitem de Mar.
. The third of this Family was James Steuart of Bute, who obtained from King
James III. in Consideration of his good Services before that time performed,
the hereditary Constabulwick of the Castle of Rothsay, (which had been
anciently a royal Seat, and where King Robert III. yielded his last Breath) by
a Commission still extant among the Earl of Bute's Writes, and bears date, 1 st
August 1498.

To this last mentioned James succeeded Ninian his Son and Heir, who married
Elisabeth Daughter of John Blair of that Ilk Charta in publicis Archivis.
, and departing this Life anno 1509, was succeeded by James his Son, who was
Infeft both in his Estate, and in the hereditary Constabulary of Rothsay
Castle, 20th. May 1509 Charta penes Jacobum comitem de Bute.
. He married first a Daughter of the Family of Argyle and secondly Marion
Daughter of John Fairly of that Ilk, in vice comitatu de Air, Widow of Thomas
Boyd of Linn Charta penes Thomam Boyd de Pitcon.
, by whom he had John who succeeded him, and Robert Steuart of Kelspock Charta
Roberti Steuart de Terris de Kelsock filii Jacobi Steuart vice comitis de Bute
1560 in publicis Archivis.
.

Which John was in special Favor with King James VI. to whom he was one of the
Gentlemen of his Bedchamber, and in 1580 was constituted Captain of the Castle
of Brodick, and Chamberlain of Arran The original Commission is extant amongst
the Earl of Butes Writes, dated 11 August 1580.
, which he enjoyed till the Family of Hamilton was restored, anno 1585. His
first Wife was Mary Daughter of John Campbel of Skipnish, and his second
Fynuald, Daughter of Sir James Mackdonald of Duneyveg and Glinns, Ancestor to
the Earl of Antrim of the Kingdom of Ireland, and departing this Life about the
Year 1602, was succeeded by John his Son and Heir, who was knighted by King
James VI. He added to the ancient patrimonial Fortune of his Ancestors, the
Lands of Foord in vice comitatu de Haddingtoun, by the Marriage of Elisabeth.
eldest of the two Daughters, and Coheirs of Robert Hepburn of Foord, by whom
he left Issue, James his Successor, and Colonel Thomas Steuart who died in
France.

Which James had the Honor of Baronet conferred on him by King Charles I. When
the civil War broke out in that Reign, he faithfully adhered to the King's
Interest, for which, beside the Sequestration of most of his Estate, he
suffered much personally during the Usurpation, notwithstanding whereof he
continued constant and unshaken in his Loyalty, and living to see the
Restoration, he died at London soon after, tho the exact time I cannot assign,
and was buried in the Abbay at Westminster. His Wife was Isabel Daughter of Sir
Dougal Campbel of Achinbreak, by Isabel his Wife, Daughter of Thomas Lord Boyd,
by whom he had Sir Dougal his Successor, and

Sir Robert Steuart of Tillycutry, one of the Senators of the College of
Justice, and one of the Lords of her Majesty's Justiciary, who was created
Baronet by Patent 29th. April 1707. He married Cicil Daughter of Sir Robert
Hamilton of Presmanan, and had Sir Robert Steuart Baronet.

Also three Daughters, 1 st Elisabeth married to Ninian Banatyne of Keams, in
vice comitatu de Bute, and had Issue. 2 d. Anne to Alexander Mackdo^ald of
Sana, in vice comitatu de Argyle, and afterward to Walter Campbel of Skipnish,
of the same County, and had Issue. 3 d. Jean to Angus Campbel of Skipnish,
Junior and had Issue.

Sir Dougal his Son married Elisabeth Daughter of Sir Thomas Ruthven of
Dunglass, by Mary his Wife, Daughter of Alexander 1 st Earl of Leven, by whom
he had two Sons, Sir James who succeeded him. Mr. Dougal Steuart of Blairhall,
who having applied himself to the study of the Law, became soon so famed in
that Profession, that Her Majesty was pleased to name him one of the Senators
of the College of Justice, and one of the Lords of the Justiciary, 12 May 1709,
and having served Commissioner in diverse Parliaments, both before and since
the commencement of the Union, he still discharged that trust with Honor and
Integrity, particularly in relation to the Union of the Kingdoms, where he
acted so conscientious and honorable a Part, that Ages to come will equally
esteem him for the Regard he then showed for the Honor of his Country, as for
his Abilities upon the Bench, which he has in the Opinion of all, to a very
eminent degree. He married Mary Daughter of -- Bruce of Blairhall, and has
Issue.

Also several Daughters, Barbara married to Alexander Campbel of Barbreak, in
vice comitatu de Argyle, and has Issue, and Margaret to Dougal Laumont,
apparent Heir of Archibald Laumont of that Ilk, and has Issue. He departed this
Life in May 1672, and was succeeded by

Sir James his Son and Heir, who upon Her Majesty's Accession to the Throne was
named a Privy Counselor, and appointed one of the Commissioners upon the Part
of Scotland to Treat of a nearer Union with England, anno 1702, which then took
not effect, and by Letters Patent bearing date 14th April 1703, raised to the
Honor of Earl of Bute, Viscount of Kingarth, Lord Mont Steuart, Cumra and
Inchmarnock. In 1706, he was one of the Peers who dissented from the Union, and
when he discovered the Parliament was by a Majority disposed to go into it, he
left the House and retired to his Seat in the Country. He married 1 st. Agnes
eldest Daughter of Sir George Mackenzie of Rosehaugh, Lord Advocate, in the
Reign of King James VII. by whom he had

James the present Earl, and a Daughter Margaret married to John Crawfurd Lord
Kilbirny, and Viscount of Garnock, and had Issue. And by Christian his second
Wife Daughter of William Dundass of Kincavill he had a Son John. This Earl died
at the Bath in England, 4th June 1710, and was interred in the Church of
Rothsay among his Ancestors, upon him I find this Epitaph, Per multos proavos
Regali stemmate cretus,
Qui fuerant fidi Regibus usque suis,
Pulchra fuit cui men's habitans in corpore pulchro,
Cuique Genus Geniusque Ingeniique vigor,
Ornarunt Animum virtusque scientia juris,
Et Regum and Patriae and Relligionis amor
Ille and Apostolico Clero tot fluctibus acto
Vivens and moriens grande levamen erat.


Which James now Earl of Bute had a considerable Accession to his Estate by the
decease of George Mackenzie of Rosehaugh, his Uncle, to whose Fortune he
succeeded in 1707, and which he is obliged by the Destination to give to his
second Son, who is to bear the Surname, and wear the Arms of Mackenzie of
Rosehaugh. His Lord ship married the Lady Anne Campbel Daughter of Archibald
Duke of Argyle, and has a Daughter Lady Mary.

ARMS.
Or, a Fess checkque, Azure and Argent, within a double Tressure Counterflour'd
Gules, supported on the dexter with a Horse, Argent, and on the sinister with a
Stag proper, Crest, a Demi Lion rampant, Gules, issuing out of an Earls
Coronet, with this Motto, Nobilis Ira.

Nota, A Principal Branch of this Family was Steuart of Kilcattan, in vice
comitatu de Bute, whose Descendants now enjoy a fair Estate in the Kingdom of
Ireland, of whom is Steuart of Ascog, which remains to this Day seated in the
Isle of Bute, John Steuart now of Ascog, being the fifth Descendant from John
his Predecessor, a younger Son of William Steuart of Kilcattan, in the Minority
of King James VI.

Earl of Caithness
IN the Time of King William one Harold was Earl of this Country; but for
Rebellion his Estate was forfeited, anno 1187 Sir James Dalrymple's Preface to
his Collections concerning the Scots History.
, and continued in the Crown till the Year 1222 History of the Earls of
Sutherland M.S.
, when King Alexander II. bestowed it upon Magnus the Son of Gilibred Earl of
Angus, for the payment of a yearly Duty of ten Pound Sterling to the King and
his Successors Dalrymple.
. The Honor continued in this Race till it expired in a Daughter married to
the Earl of Ro^s, in the Reign of King David II. History of Sutherland.


The next who had this Title, was David Steuart Son to King Robert II. by
Eupham Ross. He was created Count Palatine of Strathern, and Earl of Caithness,
upon his Father's Accession to the Sovereignty, anno gratiae 1370, but he dying
without Male Succession, it devolved on Walter Earl of Athole, his immediate
younger Brother, who dispon^d it to Allan Steuart his Son, who was killed at
the Battle of Innerlochy Charter granted by King James I. to Allan Steuart of
the Earldom of Caithness, upon the Resignation of Walter Earl of Athole.
, leaving no Issue; so that by his Father's Forfaulture it came to the Crown.

CRICHTON Earl of Caithness.
CAithness was again erected into an Earldom, in the Person of Person of George
Crichton of Cairns, Charta Jacobi II. Georgio Crichton comiti de Caithness de
Terris de Blackness 1452.
Lord high Admiral of Scotland, anno 1452, but he dying in the Year 1455
Drummond's History.
, left only a Daughter Janet married to John Master of Maxwel, whereby the
Honor extinguished.

SINCLAIR Earl of Caithness.
WIlliam Sinclair Earl of Orkney Lord high Chancellor of Scotland, in the
Reign of King James II. obtained from that Monarch a Grant of the Earldom of
Caithness in Compensation of a Claim he had to the Lordship of Nithsdale,
bearing date 29th April 1456 Hume's History of the Family of Douglass, Page 109.
. He convoyed this Earldom with the Honor to William Sinclair, one of his Sons
Mackenzies Miscellany Collections, M.S.
, who married Mary Daughter of Sir William Keith of Inver^gy. He was slain at
the Field of Floudon, 1513, leaving Issue by the said Mary his Wife.

John his Son and Heir, and Alexander Sinclair founder of the Family of
Dunbeth, which John took to Wife Mary Daughter of William Sutherland of Duffus
Ibidem.
, by whom he had George who succeeded him. This Earl was killed in an
Insurrection of the Inhabitants of Orkney, 29th May 1529 Holinshed's History of
Scotland, and Mackenzie.
.

George the 3d Earl of Caithness, was constituted Justiciary within the bounds
of Caithness by Queen Mary anno 1566, and in 1568 was one of the Peers who sat
upon the Trial of James Earl of Bothwell. He married Elisabeth. Daughter of
William 2 d Earl of Montrose, by whom he had,

John his eldest Son, who died in the Year 1577 Gordonstoun's History of the
Family of Sutherland M.S.
, leaving three Sons and a Daughter by Jean his Wife, Daughter of Patrick Earl
of Bothwell, George who succeeded in the Earldom: James Sinclair of Murthill
Ancestor to the present Earl of Caithness Ibidem and Sir George Mackenzie's
Miscellany Collections compared.
, and John Sinclair of whom descended Sinclair of Greenland Ibidem.
. Mary, first Wife to Sir John Hume of Coldingknows, and afterward of Andrew
Earl of Errol.

George Sinclair second Son, was Progenitor of the Sinclairs of May Ibidem.
in the Shire of Caithness, his Wife was Margaret Daughter of William Lord
Forbes.

He had likewise several Daughters, 1 st. Beatrix, married to Alexander Earl of
Sutherland Ibidem.
, but had no Issue. 2 d. Elisabeth to Alexander Sutherland of Duffus, sans
Issue, and afterward to Hutcheon Mackcay of Far Ibidem.
, Ancestor to the present Lord Rae. Margaret to William Sutherland of Duffus
Ibidem.
. Barbara to Alexander Innes of that Ilk Ibidem.
.

This Earl died in a good old Age, in 1583 Ibidem.
, and was immediately succeeded by

George his Grandson, who was married with Jean Daughter of George Earl of
Huntly, by whom he had William Lord Berrindale, who married Mary Daughter of
Henry Lord Sinclair Mackenzie.
, and died in the Lifetime of his Father, leaving behind him a Son, John Lord
Berrindale, who died in 1639 Balfour's Annals.
, leaving a Son George by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Colin Earl of
Seaforth, who succeeded to the Earldom upon the decease of his Great
Grandfather, in 1643 History of the Family of Sutherland.
.

Which George Earl of Caithness married Mary Daughter of Archibald Marquess of
Argyle, but died without Succession, anno 1676. George Sinclair his Cousin, by
reason of his slender Estate, declined to take upon him the Honor, wherefore
the Title of Earl of Caithness was conferred upon Sir John Campbel of
Glenurchy, who had acquired most of the Fortune, anno 1677. But in the Year
1681, the said George Sinclair, Cousin German and Heir Male to the late
deceased Earl, laying Claim to the Title, it was allowed him by the Parliament;
but he dying unmarried, anno School, by reason of the Entail upon the Heirs Male,
John Sinclair of Murthill succeeded in the Honor. He married Jean Carmichael,
by whom he had

Alexander the present Earl of Caithness.

John.

Francis.

Janet, All unmarried.

ARMS.
Three Coats quarterly, 1st Azure, a Ship at Anchor, her Oars erected in
Saltyre, within a double Tressure counterflour'd Or, 2d and 3d Or, a Lion
Rampant, Gules, 4th Azure, a Ship under Sail Or, overal dividing the Coats, a
Cross ingraled Sable, supported by two Griffons, Crest a Cock proper, with this
Motto, Commit thy Work to God.

LIVINGSTON Earl of Calender.
SIR James Livingston, First Earl of Calendar, was the 2 d Son of Alexander
Earl of Linlithgow, by Eleanor his Wife, Daughter of Andrew Earl of Erroll.
Which Sir James being from his Youth bread up in the Wars of Bohemia, Holland,
Sweden, and Germany, acquired a great Reputation in Martial Affairs: Upon his
Return he was constituted one of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber to King
Charles I. and by Patent 19th June 1633 Patent creating Sir James Livingston
Lord Almont.
, created Lord Livingston of Almont, and Earl of Calendar, anno 1641.

In the beginning of the Civil War, he accepted of a Command in the Parliaments
Service; but withdrawing himself from them, he freely resorted to the Service
of his injured Sovereign, and was constituted Lieutenant General of the Scots
Army, who in the 1648 attempted to rescue the King from his fatal Imprisonment
in the Isle of Wight: But the enterprise miscarrying, he retired to Holland,
where he stayed till the Murder of his Majesty. He married Margaret Daughter of
John Lord Yester, Widow of Alexander Earl of Dunfermling, and dying very aged,
in 1672, both his Estate and Title descended to

Alexander Livingston his Nephew, who marrying Mary Daughter of William Duke of
Hamilton, died 1685, leaving no Issue save a natural Son. Sir Alexander
Livingston of Glenterren, Baronet, his Fortune and Honor devolved upon

Alexander Livingston, his Nephew, Son of George Earl of Linlithgow, who
deceased in the Year 1694, leaving Issue by Anne his Wife, Daughter of James
Marquess of Montrose, James his Son and Heir, who upon the Death of his Uncle,
Alexander Earl of L^nlithgow, anno 1695, succeeded him in that Earldom, and two
Daughters,

Lady Henrietta. unmarried.

Lady Mary. unmarried.

FAIRFAX, Lord Cameron.
THE Family of Fairfax, which is unquestionably one of the most Ancient and
best allied in England, had first its Seat at Toucester, in the County of
Northumberland, where we find it at the Conquest of that Kingdom, anno 1060,
from whence it removed a^fterwards to the County of York, where, anno 1204, the
6th of King John, we find Richard Fairfax possessed of several Lands,
particularly of the Manor of Askham, to which Richard, succeeded William
Fairfax, who, by Alicia his Wife, Daughter and Heir of Nicholas de Bugthorp,
had Issue one Son William, who purchased the Manor of Walton in the same
County, by which, he and his Successors were afterward designed, and yet in
the Possession of of his Family.

From whom, the 8th in a straight Male Line, was Thomas Fairfax o^ Walton, to
whom anno 1415, the 2 d of Henry V, succeeded another Richard, who, by Eustace
his Wife, Daughter and Heir of John Caltrop de Caltrop Esquire had Issue six Sons,
Viz.

1 st. William of Walton who succeeded him.

2 d. Bryan, Doctor of the Laws.

3 d. Sir Guy Fairfax, Knight, Justice of the King's Banch.

4 th. Richard.

5 th. Sir Nicholas, Knight of Rhodes.

6 th. Miles Fairfax.

And three Daughters, of whom Ellen the youngest, was Lady Prioress of
Nunmuncton.

Of which William of Walton, eldest Son of the said Richard, who died the 31st
Henry VI. anno 1453, descended, after five Generations, Sir Thomas Fairfax, who
the 3 d of Charles I. was created Viscount Fairfax of Emelay, in the Kingdom of
Ireland, and by Katharine his Wife, Daughter of Sir Henry Constable, and Sister
of the Viscount Dunbar, had Issue six Sons and five Daughters, of whom Thomas,
the eldest Son succeeded him, and Henry the second was Father of Henry Fairfax
of Hurst Esquire whose Daughter and sole Heir Frances is married to David now Earl
of Buchan.

Of which Thomas, Nicholas now Lord Viscount of Fairfax, is lineal Descendant
and Representative, and the One and Twentieth, who has succeeded in this Family
in a straight Male-Line, since the said sixth of King John, being the space of
507 Years.

But leaving to others, a more particular Account of that noble House, as not
belonging to this present Work, We shall proceed to a younger Son, viz. Sir Guy
Fairfax abovementioned, 3 d Son of Richard Fairfax of Walton, of whom the Lord
Cameron is descended.

Which Sir Guy, got from the said Richard his Father, the Lands and Manor of
Steeton, in the County of York; And being a Person eminent for his Parts and
Learning, was made Attorney General, the 3 d Edward IV. anno 1464, and Judge of
the King's Bench the 17th of the same Reign. He built Steeton Castle,
afterward the Seat of his Family, and had a Chapel there, consecrated by
Archbishop Rotheram; He also founded a Chantery at Sheriff-Hutton, anno 7 mo.
Henry VII. and died in the 11th Year of the same Reign, anno 1495, leaving
Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Sir William Ryther of Ryther, Knight,
four Sons, viz. Sir William who succeeded him, Thomas, Guy, and Nicholas, and
two Daughters, Ellen married to Sir Miles Wilesthorp, Knight, and Maudeline to
Sir John Waterson of Medley, Master of the Horse to King Henry VI.

Which Sir William, eldest Son and Heir of Sir Guy, was a great Lawyer, and
Judge of the common Pleas, from the 1st. to the 6th of Henry VIII. and by
Elisabeth his Wife, eldest Daughter of George Mannours, Lord Roose, and Sister
to Thomas Earl of Rutland, whose Grandmother was Sister to Edward the 4th King
of England, had Issue, one Son William, who succeeded him, and four Daughters,

Ellen, married to Sir William Pickering, Knight, by whom he had Sir William
Pickering, so great a Favorite of King Edward VI. and Queen Elisabeth.

Elisabeth, married to Sir Robert Vightred.

Anne, to Sir Robert Normanville, Knight.

And Dorothy to -- Constable of Kexby Esquire

Which Sir William Fairfax of Steeton, Knight, Son and Heir of Sir William the
Judge, married Isabella, Daughter and Heir of John Thwaits, of Thwaits and
Denton, in the County of York, Esquire in whose Right he got the said Manor of
Denton, and had by her five Sons, viz.

Sir Thomas who succeeded him, Francis, Edward, Gabriel, and Henry.

Also six Daughters, 1 st Anne married to Sir Henry Everingham, Mary to --
Rockley Esquire Bridget to Sir Cotton Gargrave, Ursula and Susanna.

To which Sir William Fairfax there are two Letters from King Henry VIII. one
of the 35th and another the 38th of his Reign, indorsed, To our Trusty and well
beloved Sir William Fairfax, Knight, which Letters are yet extant, and to be
seen at Denton Castle, in the said County of York, whereof he was high Sheriff,
the 26th and 31st of the said Henry VIII. and a third time nominated, but died
ult. October. the 5th of Philip and Mary, Anno Dom. 1557.

He gave to his 5th Son Gabriel the Manor of Steeton, and several other Lands,
being (according to the Superstition of these Times) highly offended with Sir
Thomas his eldest Son, for being with the Duke of Bourbon, at the sacking of
Rome, in the beginning of the Reformation, but that Loss was sufficiently made
up to him, by his succeeding, in Right of his Mother, to the said Estate of
Denton, which became, from that time, the principal Seat of the Family, and of
Gabriel the younger Brother, who got Steeton, is descended another Family,
known by the Distinction of Steeton, also in the County of York, where it has
its Residence to this time.

Which Sir Thomas Fairfax of Denton, was high Sheriff of the County of York,
the 14th of Elisabeth, knighted the 19th of her Reign, and died, alter
performing many Services to his Country, the 42d of the same, Anno Dom. 1599,
leaving Issue by Dorothy his Wife, Daughter of George Gayle of Acham-Grange,
Tresaurer of the Mint at York, five Sons, viz.

Thomas that succeeded him.

Henry and Ferdinando, who both died young.

Sir Charles Fairfax Colonel of a Regiment at Ostend, the time of that famous
Siege, where he was slain, after gaining immortal Honor by his brave Actions,
as Camden and others have recorded.

And Edward Fairfax of Newhall, an excellent Poet, as appears by several of his
Translations yet extant; also two Daughters,

Ursula, married to Sir Henry Bellasis of Newbourgh, in the County of York,
Baronet, Mother by him of Thomas first Viscount Fa^conberg, Ancestor of Thomas,
now Viscount of that Name.

And Christian, married to John Ask Esquire

To Sir Thomas Fairfax of Denton, last mentioned, succeeded Sir Thomas, his
eldest Son, who, Anno 1582, married Ellen, Daughter of Robert Ask Esquire by whom
he had six Sons, viz.

1 st. Ferdinando, who succeeded him.

2 d. Henry.

3 d. Charles, of whom the Family of Menston is descended.

4 th. William, and 5 th. John, both killed in the defense of the City of
Frankendale in the Palatinat.

6 th. Peregrine killed in defense of Rochel in France; also two Daughters,
Dorothy the eldest married to Sir William Constable, Baronet, and Anne the 2 d
to Sir George Wentworth of Wolley, Knight.

Which Sir Thomas, being of a Martial Spirit, accompanied into France the Earl
of Essex, General of the English Army, sent by Queen Elisabeth to the
Assistance of Henry IV. of France, against the Spaniards and Catholic League,
where an. 1591, in the lifetime of his Father, he was knighted by the said
General, in the Camp before Roan in Normandy, from whence returning, not long
after, with the said Army, after having performed many brave Actions for the
Honor of his Country, he was, by the Queen, received with many marks of
Distinction and Favor, and employed by her in several important Affairs,
particularly in carrying a Commission into Scotland to King James VI. whom, he
lived not only to see seated on the Throne of England, upon the Death of that
Queen, but also till the Reign of his Son, King Charles I. in the 3 d Year of
whom by Patent bearing date, 4 th May, 1627. He was created Lord Fairfax of
Cameron, and died not before the 17th of he same Reign, anno Dom 1642, Aetat:
80, being full of Years, and no less of Honor, for his many Virtues, and great
Skill in the Arts both of Peace and War, of which all allow him to have been a
great Master.

To which Thomas Lord Cameron, succeeded Ferdinando his eldest Son, who by the
Lady Mary, Daughter of Edmund Earl of Mulgrave, Lord President of the North,
Ancestor of John now Duke of Buckingham, had Issue,

Thomas Lord Cameron.

Charles, Colonel of Horse, slain at the Battle of Marston-Moor near York, Anno
1644.

And John, who died an Infant.

Also six Daughters. Ursula; who died unmarried;

Ellen, married to Sir William Selby of Twistle, in the County of
Northumberland, Baronet.

Frances to Sir Thomas Weddrington, Knight.

Elisabeth, to Sir William Craven, Knt.

Mary, to Henry Arthington of Arthington, Esquire and

Dorothy, to Richard Hutton of Poppleton, Esquire all of whom had Issue.

He married 2 dly Rhoda, Daughter and Heir of Thomas Chapman, Esquire and had by
her one Daughter, Ursula, born at Denton, a few Days before the Death of her
Father, who died March 31 st, 1648, and was succeeded by,

Thomas Lord Cameron, his eldest Son and Heir, who married Anne, Daughter and
Coheir of Horatio Lord Vere, Master of the Ordinance, and General of all the
English Forces in the Palatinat, Holland and the Netherlands, by whom he had
Issue two Daughters,

Mary the eldest, married to George Duke of Buckingham, Knight of the most
noble Order of the Garter, and Master of the Horse to King Charles II. and
Elisabeth died young.

Which Thomas Lord Cameron, so famed in English History, by the Name of General
Fairfax, was born at Denton Castle, 17 th January 1611, and going into the Low
Country Wars in 1627, gave then (tho but sixteen Years old) such Proofs of a
great Spirit and Martial Genius, as occasioned his being particularly noticed
by the Lord Vere, abovementioned, one of the greatest Captains of that Age,
whose Daughter he afterward married.

In 1640 he was knighted (his Father being then on Life) and the civil Wars
beginning not long after, he came soon, to make no small Figure in them, by the
many Proofs he gave, of his great Courage and Conduct, in the Service of the
Parliament, whose Cause he early espoused, and in 1645, being then but 34 Years
of age, was chosen supreme General of their Armies, which he commanded, with
great Success and Glory, till 1650, in which time, he performed such Actions,
as wanted nothing but a better Cause, to have made his Fame immortal: But War
being then decreed against Scotland, by the Parliament, and an Army appointed
to march thither, he declared his Resolution not to command it, or invade that
Kingdom, and, thereupon, laid down his Commission, which, soon after, was
bestowed on Oliver Cromwell, then Lieutenant General under him:

What the Reasons were, that induced this great Man, to lay down so high and
important a Command, was at that time, variously, reported, some (as Clarendon
relates) imputing it, to his Affection and Kindness to Scotland, of which he
had always been a great favourer, and whereof he was born a Peer; but others,
to his not being satisfied, with the Parliaments, having pusht things, so far,
against the King, and to his, secretly, favoring the Interest of his Son K.
Charles II. then admitted to the Government in that Kingdom, and crowned there;
which Opinion was confirmed, by the Part he afterward acted at the
Restoration; In order to which, he entered, very early, into Measures with
General Monk, to whom he gave considerable Assistance, in the Prosecution of
that glorious Design, upon the happy issue whereof, he had the Honor, to be
one of the Commissioners which composed the solemn Deputation, sent by the
Parliament to the King, upon that great Occasion, and arriving at the Hague,
was received by his Majesty, with singular Favor and Goodness, and great Marks
of Honor and Esteem, which he ever after continued to wards him;
notwithstanding whereof, being weary of the great hurry and Confusion, in which
he had spent much of his Time; he retired, soon after the Restoration, to his
House in the Country, where, he passed, in peace and quiet, the remainder of
his Life, highly beloved and honored by all good Men, for his many great and
heroic Qualities, and shining Virtues, for which, he is justly celebrated, by
the greatest Pens of that Age, all sides and Parties agreeing, in giving due
Praise, to his consummate Merits. He died of a short Sickness, November. 11th.
1671, the 60th Year of his Age, and lies buried at Bilbrough, near Tork, where
a stately Monument was erected to his Memory, being succeeded in his Honor and
Estate by,

Henry Fairfax, his Cousin German, eldest Son and Heir of Henry, 2 d Son of
Thomas the first Lord Cameron.

Which Henry, married Frances, Daughter and Heir of Sir Robert Barwick of
Tolston, Knight, by whom he had Issue Thomas, who succeeded him. Henry, Bryan,
and Barwick,

Also four Daughters,

Dorothy, married first to Robert Stapleton of Wighill Esquire afterward to Bennet
Sherrard of Whissenden, in the County of Rutland, Esquire

Anne, to Ralph Ker of Kocken, Esquire in the County of Durham, and Ursula and Mary
who died young.

Which Thomas Lord Cameron, married Katharin, only Daughter and Heir of Thomas
Lord Colepepper, and dying 6 th January 1710, left Issue

Thomas, now Lord Cameron, about 18 Years of Age: Henry and Robert.

Also three Daughters,

Margaret.

Katharine.

And Mary, All unmarried.

ARMS.
Or, three Bars Gamells Gules, over all a Lion Rampant Sable, supported on the
Dexter with a Lion Rampant of the 2d, and on the Sinister with a Horse ready
prepared; Crest, a Lion passant guardant Sable, Motto, Lucem, fer, fax.

ERSKINE Lord Cardross.
THE Honor and Title of Lord Cardross, had its beginning in anno 1604, when
James VI. of Scotland, and first of Great Britain, by his Charter under the
Great Seal, bearing date on March 27th in the said Year, erected the said
Lordship, in favors of John Earl of Mar, Lord Treasaurer of Scotland, and
Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, his Heirs and Assigns; In
pursuance whereof, the said Earl, in anno 1615, assigned and disponed the same,
and whole Rights thereto belonging, to Henry Erskine, his 2 d. Son, by the Lady
Mary Steuart, his 2 d. Wife, Daughter of Esme, Duke of Lennox, a Lady near in
Blood to his said Majesty; who, as a further Mark of his Royal Favor, was also
pleased to bestow on the said Henry, the Abbey of Dryburgh in Teviotdale,
formerly a Seat of Monks of the Order of Promontre; the said Abbey, with the
Lands and Tithes thereto belonging, being, by a special Act of Parliament, for
that purpose, dissolved from the Crown.

Which Henry Lord Cardross, married Margaret, only Daughter of Sir James
Ballanden of Broughtoun, and Sister of William first Lord Ballanden, by whom he
had David his only Son and Heir, and one Daughter, Mary, who was married to Sir
John Buchannan of that Ilk in the County of Stirling, and had Issue; and dying
Anno 1636, was succeeded by,

David Lord Cardross, his only Son, who, an. 1645, married Anne, Daughter of
Sir Thomas Hope of Craighall, Lord Advocate, Great Grandfather to the present
Earl of Hopeton, by whom he had Issue, Henry, who succeeded him, and a
Daughter, Margaret, married to William Cuningham of Boquhan, in the County of
Stirling, Mother, by him, of Henry Cunningham of Boquhan, Junior,
Representative of the Burgh of Stirling, and District thereof in this present
Parliament, anno 1712.

Which David married 2 dly, ( anno 1655,) Mary, 2 d Daughter of George Bruce of
Carnock, and Sister of Edward and Alexander, both Earls of Kincardin, by whom
he had Issue four Sons, and three Daughters.

Alexander the eldest Son, died young.

William the 2 d, late Deputy Governor of Blackness Castle, a Person of great
Integrity and Honor, married Magdalen, Daughter of Sir James Lumsden of
Innergelly, in the Shire of Fife, and had Issue by her, William, his eldest Son
and Heir, unmarried, and James, yet in his Minority.

John, the 3 d. who, upon all occasions, has appeared, with great Zeal, in the
Cause of Religion and Liberty, and has thereby acquired an universal Esteem,
retired into Holland, some Years before the Revolution, in 1688. When he
accompanied the Prince of Orange, in his Expedition into England, a little
before which, he had a Company of Foot bestowed upon him in Holland; and soon
after, upon that Prince's Accession to the Throne, was made Lieutenant
Governor of Stirling Castle, and afterward Governor of Dumbarton, and a
Lieutenant Colonel of Foot.

In 1695, he was chosen a Director of the Company of Scotland trading to Africa
and the Indies, and by them sent, with others, in 1696, into Holland, and other
Foreign Parts, to manage the Affairs of that Company; In pursuance whereof,
such Progress was made at Hamburgh, and Encouragement given from other Parts,
as had, in all appearance, been attended with the desired Success, had it not
been for some Things, very unexpected, and surprising, and too well known to
need mentioning.

He married 1 st. Jean, Daughter and Heir of William Muir of Caldwell, in the
Shire of Renfrew; but she dying soon after, without Issue, he married 2 dly,
Anne, eldest Daughter, and Coheir of William Dundass of Kincavill, in the
County of Linlithgow, Advocate, by whom he has John his eldest Son and Heir,
and several other Sons; also one Daughter, Mary, yet unmarried.

Charles the 4 th Son, being a Captain of Foot in the Low Countries, in the
Service of the late King William, was killed there, at the Battle of Stenkirk,
the 24 th of July 1692:

Veronica, his eldest Daughter, married to Walter Lockhart of Kirtoun, in the
County of Lanerk, and has Issue,

Magdalen the 2 d. to Alexander Monypenny of Pitmilly, in the Shire of Fife,
and has Issue.

And Mary the 3 d died young.

To which David Lord Cardross succeeded, Anno 1671. Henry his eldest Son and
Heir, who, eodem anno, married Katharine, 2 d Daughter, and at length sole
Heir, of Sir James Steuart of Strabrock, in the Country of West-Lothian, by
which Katharine, he had Issue.

David who succeeded him, now Earl of Buchan.

Charles Erskine Advocate.

William, deputy Governor of Blackness Castle, who married Margagaret Daughter
of Lieutenant Colonel John Erskine, deputy Governor of Stirling Castle, and
has Issue by her, one Son John, in his Infancy, and a Daughter Jean, yet very
young:

Thomas, yet in his Minority; and five more, who all died young.

Also three Daughters,

Katharine the eldest, married to Sir William Denham of Westshields, in the
County of Lanerk, Baronet, but has no Issue by him.

Mary the 2 d, yet unmarried.

And Anne, the 3 d. married to Archibald Edmondston of Duntreth, in vice
comitatu de Stirling.

Which Henry Lord Cardross, being a Person of universally acknowledged Merit,
and, upon all occasions, a strenuous asserter of the Rights and Liberties of
his Country, met with many Hardships in the late Reigns, with which having
strugled long, with great firmness and constancy, he at last withdrew into
Holland, where he was kindly received by the Prince of Orange, afterward King
of Great Britain, whom he accompanied in his Expedition into England, in 1688,
And upon that Prince's Accession to the Throne (of which he was a zealous
Promoter) had several Marks of his Favor bestowed on him, being soon after
made a Privy Counselor, General of the Mint, and Colonel of a Regiment of
Dragoons, As he was, at the same time, appointed by Parliament, one of the
Commissioners for treating of an Union with England. Upon all which occasions,
he behaved himself, so as to maintain the Character, he had all along had, of a
Person of untainted Integrity and Honor; and dying at Edinburgh the 21 st of
May, 1693, and 44th Year of his Age, was succeeded by,

David Lord Cardross, his eldest Son and Heir, who, upon the Death of William
Earl of Buchan, anno 1695, without Issue, became also Earl of Buchan, of whom,
and of his Marriage, and Issue, see an Account in Title Buchan.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th Gules, an Eagle displayed Or, looking toward the Sun in
his Splendour, placed in the dexter chief Point, 2d quarterly, 1st and 4th
Azure, a Bend betwixt six cross Croslets Or, 2d and 3d Argent, a Pale Sable, 3d
quarterly, 1st and 4th Or, a Fess Cheque, Azure and Argent, 2d and 3d Azure,
three Garbs Or, supported, on the dexter by a Griffon proper, and on the
Sinister, by a Horse ready prepared, Argent, Crest, upon the Point of a Sword,
Paleways, a Boars Head crazed, Or, Motto, Fortitudine.

CARLYLE, Lord Carlyle.
OF this Family, which is of great Antiquity in the Stewartry of Annandale, was
Sir William Cairlyle, Knight, in the Days of Robert I. who was matched with
Margaret Bruce, Sister to that King, as is evident from a Grant by that
Monarch, Willielmo Cairlyle milite and Margaretae sponsae suae sorori nostrae
Carissimae Charta in Rotulis Roberti I. in Haddingtoun's Collections.
de Terris de Crumanstoun.

Sir William Cairlyle, his Son, obtained from King Robert the Lands of Culen,
una cum Tennendariis totius Baroniae de Torthorald Ibidem.
.

The Family continued in the state of Barons till James III. called Sir John
Cairlyle of Torthorald, into the number of his Nobility, by the Title of Lord
Cairlyle of Torthorald, anno 1473 Charta Errectionis vilae de Torthorald in
Burgum Baroniae Johanni Domino Carlyle, 3d December. 1473.
. He had by the Grant of the said King, the Lands and Barony of Duncow, then in
the Crown by the Forfaulture of Robert Lord Boyd, in recompense of his great
Charge in an Embassy to France, anno 1477 Charta in Registro.
. His Wife was Margaret Douglass, and dying anno 1500 Simpson's Collections.
, as appears from the Probate of his Testament, his Estate and Title of Lord
descended and came to.

William his Grandson and Heir (his own immediate Son dying in his Lifetime)
who married Janet, Daughter of -- Maxwell of -- Charta Johanni Domino Carlyle,
Willielmo Carlyle, nepote suo and haerede apparenti and Jonetae Maxwell sponsae
suae de Terris de Midleby, anno 1487.
; by whom he had James Lord Cairlyle, who married Janet Scrimgeour, Daughter of
-- Scrimgeour Constable of Dundee, he died Issueless, anno 1629 Charta in
Rotulis Jacobi VI. Michaeli Domino Carlyle ^ratte and haeredi Jacobi Domino
Carlyle de Terris de Torthorald, anno 1529.
.

Michael his Brother became his Heir. This Lord was on the King's side, in the
Minority of James VI. and was one of the Peers who bound themselves to maintain
his Authority, in 1569, which many of them signed, and this Lord with his Hand
at the Pen, he dying about the Year 1580, His Estate, went to Elisabeth,
Daughter of William Master of Cairlyle his Grandchild, and sole Heir, who
married Sir James Douglass of Parkhead.

DOUGLASS, Lord Cairlyle.
THIS Family owes its Original to George Douglass, natural Son to Sir George
Douglass of Pitten drich, (killed at Pinkie,) who obtained the Lands of
Parkhead, in Lanerk-shire, by the Marriage of Elisabeth, Daughter and Heir of
James Douglass of Parkhead Hume and Simpson'^ Essay upon the Family of Douglass.
. He left three Sons,

1 st. Sir James Douglass of Torthorald, his Son and Heir.

2 d. Sir George Douglass of Mording town, one of the Gentlemen of the Bed
chamber to King James VI. Ibidem.
who by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Archibald Dundass of Finzies, had Issue
Sir George Douglass, who was Ambassador to Poland and Sweden, from King Charles
I. anno 1633, and 1635, and died in that Character; likewise a Daughter Martha,
married to Sir James Lockhart of Lee, one of the Senators of the College of
Justice, and Justice Clerk, in the Reign of K. Charles II. Mother by him of Sir
William Lockhart of Lee, who was Ambassador from King Charles II. to the Crown
of France. Sir George Lockhart of Carnwath, President of the College o^
Justice, and Sir John Lockhart of Castlehill, also one of the Lords of Council
and Session.

3 d. John Douglass Doctor in Divinity. Also three Daughters,

-- married to Sir James Dundass of Arnestoun.

Martha, married to Mr. Robert Bruce of Kinnaird, one of the Ministers of the
City of Edinburgh, Mary to John Carruthers, of Holmains.

This Sir James Douglass, was killed by William Steuart 31 st July, 1608
Balfour's Annals.
, leaving

Sir James his Son and Heir to succeed him, who marrying Elisabeth, Grandchild
and Heir of Michael Lord Carlyle, was in her Right, created into the Dignity of
Lord Carlyle of Torthorald: He had a Son James, who suceeded him.

Which James Lord Carlyle, and Torthorald married Elisabeth Daughter of Sir
John Gordon of Lochenvar; but having no Issue, he resigned his Honor to
William first Earl of Queensberry, anno 1638 Mr. David Simpson's Collections on
the Family of Douglass.
, who had acquired his Estate, and thereby the Title became extinct in this
Family.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th Gules, a Cross florie Or, 2d and 3d Or, a plain Cross
Gules, in a Shield of pretense, the paternal Coat of Douglass, viz. Argent, a
Heart Gules, crowned with an imperial Crown Or, on a chief Azure, three Stars
of the first, supported by two Peacocks proper, Crest, a Dragons Head Register
of the Lion Office at Edinburgh.
, Motto, Humilitate.

DALZIEL, Earl of Carnwath.
THIS ancient Family originally of Dalziel, in vice comitatu de Lanerk, is of
great Antiquity in that County, having matched with many worthy Families there,
before they removed to the Shire of Nithsdale, where now there principal Seat
is. Mr. Nisbet, a famous Herald, Mr. Nisbets Marks of Cadency.
, gives this Story of the Origin of this Surname, when he is accounting for
there old Bearing, which was anciently, A Man hanging on the Gallows, and was
given (says he) as a Reward to one of the Progenitors of the Earl of Carnwath,
to perpetuate the Memory of a brave and hazardous Exploit performed in taking
down from the Gallows the Body of a Favorite of King Kenneth II. hung up by the
Picts. For, as the Story goes, the King being exceedingly grieved that the Body
of his Minion and Friend should be so disgracefully treated, he profer'd a
considerable Reward to any of his Subjects who would adventure to rescue his
Corpse, from the Disgrace his Enemies, had put upon him; But (adds he) When none
would undertake this hazardous Interprise, at last a certain Gentleman came to
the King, and said, Dalziel, which signifies I Dare, and actually did perform
that noble Exploit to his immortal Honor: And in Memory of it, got the
foresaid remarkable Bearing, and afterward his Posterity took the Word Dalziel
for their Surname, and the Interpretation of it, I Dare, as the Motto of their
Family.

But the first of this Name I have found upon Record, was Sir Robert de
Dalziel, Knight, who faithfully adhering to King David Bruce, during his
Captivity in England, obtained in Consideration thereof, a Grant from the said
Monarch of the Barony of Selkrig, of the date 15th May 1365 Charta in Rotulis
Regis David ad Annum 1365.
, his Successor.

Sir John Dalziel, Knight, tempore Roberti III. was in 1392, joined in
Commission with diverse others to treat about the Prorogation of a Peace with
the English Rymer's Foedera Angliae, lately published.
, and the next ensuing Year, he obtained by the Gift of the said King to
himself in Liferent, and to Walter Dalziel his Son in Fee, the whole Revenue
belonging to St. Leonard's Hospital, within the Burgh of Lanerk, upon Condition
that he and his Heirs shall provide a qualified Person to celebrate three
Masses once every seven Years, for the Salvation of Robert III. King of
Scotland, Anapbella his Queen, and all their Children for ever Charta Roberti
III. dilecto and fideli suo Johanni de Dalziel, milite datim 1393, in publicis
Archivis.
.

Hence after several Generations, descended Robert Dalziel of that Ilk, who was
killed in the Burgh of Drumfries, 30th July 1508 Holinshed's History of
Scotland.
, a in Skirmish betwixt the Lords Maxwel and Crichton, leaving Robert his Son
and Heir, Father of another Robert, who approved himself a loyal Subject to
Queen Mary, when the civil War broke out in that Reign: I find he was one of
the Barons, who upon her Majesty's escape from her Imprisonment in Lochliven,
bound themselves upon Conscience and Honor, to adhere to her, against her
rebelious Subjects, as may be seen from the original yet extant, bearing date,
8th May 1568 Mr. David Crawfurd of Drumsoy's Collections, relating to Queen
Mary, in Manuscript, in the Lawyers Library.
, and accompanied her to the Battle of Langside Mr. Thomson's Collections, M.S.
, where the Queen's Party was totally defeat.

He married Janet, Daughter of Gavin Hamilton of Raploch, Commendator of
Kilwinning Charta in Publicis Archivis ad Annum 1558.
, by whom he had Robert his Son and Heir, and a Daughter, Christian, married to
John Hamilton of Orbestoun, and had Issue. He dying circa annum 1588, was
succeeded by,

Robert his Son and Heir, who received first the Honor of Knighthood from King
James VI. and being a Baron of an opulent Fortune, was in Consideration of his
own proper Merit, as well as the constant Loyalty of his Ancestors in all times
past was by the special Favor of King Charles I. raised to the Honor of Lord
Dalziel 18th of September 1628 Charta in Rotulis Caroli I ad Anum 1628
, and thereafter Created Earl of Carnwath, anno 1639. He married Margaret,
Daughter of Sir Robert Crichton of Cluny Charta in Rotulis Jacobi VI.
, by whom he had Robert his Successor, Sir John Dalziel of Glenae Ancestor to
the present Earl of Carnwath, and a Daughter Lady Mary married to Sir James
Muirhead of Lachop.

Which Robert was a Nobleman of great Honor and Reputation, and whose Loyalty
and Affection to King Charles I. was very Remarkable, for as i^ on as the Civil
War broke out he was among the first who raised both Horse and Foot upon his
own Charge, and served in the Command of them with great Courage and Fidelity,
till the very end of the War, for which he suffered very much, both by
Sequ^stration and otherways: But all these hardships did not in the least
discourage him in venturing Life and Fortune again in the Service of King
Charles II. for as soon as an Army was raised to March into England with the
King, the Earl accompanied his Majesty into that Kingdom, and was with him in
the Fight at Worcester, where his Lordship had the Misfortune to fall into the
Enemies Hands, who kept him Prisoner diverse Years which he sustained with
great Patience and Magnanimity. He married Christian Daughter of Sir William
Douglas of Drumlanrig, Charta penes Ducem de Qucensbery.
by whom he had

Gavin his Son and Heir, who married Margaret, Daughter of David Lord Carnegy,
Carta penes Comitem de Suthesque.
and departing this Life in the Month of June 1674, Charta penes Comitem de
Carnwath.
left Issue two Sons and a Daughter, viz. James and John both Earls of
Carnwath, and a Daughter Jean, married to Claud Muirhead of Lachop.

Which James married Mary Daughter of George Earl of Winton Ibidem.
, by whom he had only one Daughter, Elizabeth married to Lord John Hay, Son to
John Marquis of Tweddale, and dying anno 1683 Records of the Abby-Church of
Holy-rood-House.
, was succeeded by,

John his Brother who died a Batchelour on the 7th of June 1702 Charta in
Publicis Archivis. Retour in the Chancery, whereby Sir Robert Dalziel of
Glenae, is served Heir to John Earl of Carnwath, as Son and Heir of Sir John
Dalziel of Glenae, Son and Heir of Sir Robert Dalziel of Glenae, who was Son to
Sir John Dalziel, and he a younger Son to Robert 1st E^rl of Carnwath.
, his Estate and Honor devolving on Sir Robert Dalziel of Glenae Baronet his
Heir Male. This Earl married Grace Daughter of Alexander Earl of Eglinton, by
whom he had a Daughter Lady Margaret Dalziel.

ARMS.
Sable, a naked Man with his Arms expanded proper, Supported by two Chevaliers,
proper, Crest, a Dagger erected Saltyre-ways, Azure. Motto, I Dare.

CARRICK, Earl of Carrick.
DUncan of Galloway, Son of Gilbert Lord of Galloway, in the 20th of King
William, anno 1185, had by the Bounty of that Prince, the Country of Carrick,
erected to him in an Earldom Scotichron. M.S.
, out of which he founded the Abbacy of Crosragwell, for Cluniack Monks, and
amply endued it with Lands and Tithes within his own Territories, and likewise
gave to the Monks of Paisty and Melross several Donations out of his Estate,
for the welfare of his Soul. Chart. of Melross and Pasty.
He left a Son,

Niel Earl of Carrick, who imitated the Piety of his Father in his Liberality
to the Church, of which his Gifts to the Monasteries of Crosragwell and Sandal
are very remarkable Instances. He gave way to Fate on the 23d of June 1250
Martyrologio Ecclesiae Metropolitanae Glasguensis in Chartulario dicti
Ecclesiae penes Alex. Bailie de Castlecarry.
leaving one Daughter, Margaret his sole Heir, who married first Adam de
Kilconcath, who thereupon was Earl of Carrick, but he dying in the Holy Land
anno 1272 Chron. de Melross.
without any Issue, She married again Robert de Bruce Lord of Annandale, to
whom she brought the Title of Earl of Carrick.

BRUCE, Earl of Carrick.
SIR William Dugdale in his Baronage of England, makes mention, that among the
many valiant and noble Normans who accompanied William Duke of Normandy in his
Expedition into England, was one Robert de Bruce, who had by the Grant of that
Victorious Prince the Lordship of Skeltoun in York Shire, and other Lands in
that County of great Value and Extent. A Descendent from him, another Robert de
Bruce obtained from King David 1st. of Scotland, the Lordship of Annandale,
with all the Lands from the bounds of Dunegall to the Limits of Ranulph de
Meschines, Lord of Cumberland Dugdale's Baronage of England.
. He lef^,

Robert Lord of Annandale his Son and Heir, who gave to the Episcopal See of
Glasgow, cum consensu Roberti de Bruce fi^ii sui, the Churches of Moffat
Kilpatrick, Drumsdale, Hoddam, and Castlemilk, pro salute animae suae
Chartulary of Glasgow.
. He married Isabel, natural Daughter to King Wil^iam of Scotland, Chron. de
Melross.
by whom he had Robert his Son and Heir, who married a Lady of very Royal
Birth. viz. Isabel second Daughter of David Earl o^ Huntington, in Right of
whom his Posterity came to enjoy the Crown of this Realm. By her he had

Robert Lord of Annandale, who in the 1290 upon the demise of Queen Margaret,
laid Claim to the Crown of Scotland, both in regard he was the nearest Male in
Propinquity of Blood, to the deceast King Alexander, as well as in respect of a
Parliamentary Settlement had been made in his Favors by the foresaid King
Rymers Foedera Angliae.
. But the Right of Succession being adjudged against him, by Edward the I. of
England, to whom all the different Competitors had referred the Decision of
their respective Claims, he absolutely refused even in the presence of King
Edward, to acquiesce in it: Nor did he ever do Homage to, or acknowledge John
Baliol as King, and to avoid making any such acknowledgement after the
definitive Sentence was pronounced, he gave up all his Lands in Scotland, to
Robert Earl of Carrick his Eldest Son, and dying anno 1295, Dugdale's Baronage
of England.
left Issue by Isabel his Wife, Daughter of Richard de Clare Earl of Clare and
Hartford, Robert his Son and Heir Dugdale's Baronage of England.
, and Christian married to Patrick Earl of Dunbar and March.

Which Robert was in his Youth signed with the Cross Ibidem.
, and was one of those many Scotsmen that went with St. Lewis King of France in
his last Expedition against the Infidels, and afterward accompanied Edward the
I. then Prince of England, to the Holy Land, where he gained singular Honor
and Reputation. Upon his return he obtained the Sole Daughter and Heir of the
Earl of Carrick in Marriage, in whose Right he was Styled Earl of Carrick, and
by that Title he was one of the Peers who in 1284, bound themselves in the most
solemn manner, that in case King Alexander should die without Heirs of his own
Body, to own and acknowledge Margaret of Norway his Grandchild, as their
Sovereign and Queen of Scotland. Rymers Foedera Angliae.
Upon the Decease of that Princess, when the Succession to the Crown was
determined against his Father, he disowned John Baliol as King, and was an
irreconcilable Enemy to him. After the Death of his Father, he asserted his
own Title to the Crown, and resolved to prosecute his Right, but was prevented
by Death before a favorable opportunity offered anno 1303 Dugdale.
, leaving Issue by Margaret Countess of Carrick his Wife, Robert and Edward
both Earls of Carrick, Neil, Thomas and Alexander, who all three lost their
Lives in the War against the English; likewise six Daughters:

Isabel married to Sir Thomas Randolph Charta in Rotulis Roberti I. eiam Charta
in Registro Episcopatus Moraviae in Bibliotheca Juridica
, Lord High Chamberlain of Scotland.

Mary, to Sir Niel Campbel Knight, Lord of Lochow, and after his Death to Sir
Alexander Fraser Ibidem
, Lord (...) Chamberlain of Scotland.

Christian, first to Gratney Ea^^ Mar, next to Sir Cristopher Se^on^ Winton,
and after that to Sir And^ Murray Lord of Bothwel.

Matilda, to Hugh Earl of Ross.

Margaret, to Sir William Carlyle of Torthorald.

Elizabeth, to Sir William Dishi^gton of Ardross Charta in publicis Archivis.
Knight.

( g) Charta Roberti I. Dilecto nepoti suo Willielmo Cairlyle militi Terrarum
deCullen una cum Tenendriis totius Baroniae de Torthorald, in Bibliotheca
Juridica.
( g) Charta Roberti I. Dilecto nepoti suo Joanni Dishingtoun militi Terrarum
de Langhermestoun.
( i) Foedera Angliae ad Annum 1353.
To Robert Earl of Carrick succeeded Robert his Son, who upon the Death of his
Father revived his pretentions to the Crown, and being joined by such of the
Nobility, and others who were willing to redeem their Country from the
Subjection and Slavery it was under; bravely fought his way through innumerable
Difficulties to the Crown, into which he was solemnly inaugurated on the 27 of
March 1306, by the Name of Robert the first, and that with the universal
applause of the whole Kingdom, who thought themselves bound in gratitude, to
run the fate of that brave Prince, who had so gloriously redeemed them from
Tyranny, Slavery and the Yoke of a Foreign Power. Were it here proper to enter
on a particular detail of his Actions, I could even add a great deal more for
the Honor of his Memory, than what the latest Writers of his Life have said
upon that Subject. But in regard of the Brevity of this Work, it shall suffice
to say, no Age has produced a more extraordinary Man than King Robert the
Bruce, examine all the Heroes of Plutarch, and all those great Men that have
lived since that Historian, and it will be difficult to find any upon Record,
who possessed more eminently all those Virtues and Qualities that enter into
the Composition of a great Man. All I shall further add, shall he to take
notice of his Children, not only such as have been mentioned by our Historians,
but others who have been very unaccou^tably omitted by them.

King Robert had by Isabel his first Wife, Daughter of Donald Earl of Mar, a
Daughter Majory married to Walter Lord High Steward of Scotland, Mother by him
to King Robert II. the first of our King's of the Royal Line of the Ste^arts
Historical and Gene^logica^ History of the Royal Family of Stewart published in
1710.
. Also by Mary his 2 d Wife, Daughter of Ailmer (...) Bur^ Earl of U^ster, he
had David II, who succeeded him in the Sovere^gnty of Scot^and, who after a
Reign of Forty Years, died without any Issue of his Body, and with him the
Royal Brucian Family did expire Its evid^^t all our Historians have been
mistaken as to the time of Kind David Bruce's Death Mr. Buchanan and others
place it on the 7th of May, in the 39 Year of his Reign, but they are certainly
mistaken, both as to the Year of his Reign, and the day of his Death, for I
have seen many Charters, granted by him in the 40th Year of his Reign, which
prove him then alive, and from a very good Voucher, we are informed he died
festo Cathedrae Sancti Petri, i. e. the 22d of February 1371
; likewise three Daughters,

Margaret married to William Earl of Sutherland Carta in Rotulis Davidis II.
Willielmo Comiti de Sutherland and carissi^ae so^ori suae Margaretae sponsae
dicti Comiti, de Comitatu d^ Sutherland, and heredibus eorum.
, and had Issue.

Matilda to Thomas de Tssack, by whom she had a Daughter Jean married to John
de Ergadia Lord of Lorn Fordon ad annum 1353, Obit Matilda de Br^^ soror R^gis,
q^ae ex T^^ma de Ys^ck habuit fi^^am nuptam Joanni de Lorn Domino ^ju^dem:
E^iam Carta in Rotuiis Regis David dilecto and fideli suo J^anni de Lorn and
Jon^tae sponsae ^uae consanguineae nostrae terrarum de Glenhorm in Comitatu
Atholiae, da^a (...) d^e M^^i anno regni sui tricesimo no^o.
.

Elizabeth married to Sir Walter Oliphant, Ancestor to the Lord Oliphant, who,
tho she has not been taken notice of by any other Writer; yet its beyond all
dispute, she was King Roberts Daughter, from the Authority of a Charter in the
Custody of Oliphant of Gask, which I have seen, bearing Date on the 11th of
January 1364, This Charter is in the Custody ^^ James O^^phant of Gask, which
proves this Daughter of King Robert Bruce beyond dis^^^e, the she has not been
taken notice of by any of our former Historians, but (...) no more
unaccountabl^ ^h^^ five or six Daughters of King Robert the II. they have (...)
to make m^ntion of, all which are clearly instructed from our public Records.
whereby King David erects the Lands of Gask into a Barony, Dilecto and fideli
suo Waltero Olyfant. and El^zabethae Sponsae suae dilectae sorori nostrae cum
^peciali Liberate dicto Waltero, and Elizabeth piscandi in aqua de ^^rne
tribus diebus septimanae tempore anni probi^ito.

Upon the Accession of King Robert I. to the Crown, he gave the Earldom of
Carrick to his brave and faithful Brother, Sir Edward Bruce, thereafter King of
Ireland, who being slain at the Battle of Dundalk, anno 1318, le^t a natural
Son Robert Bruce Lord of Lydsdale, on whom his Uncle King Robert bestowed the
Earldom of Carrick, who being slain at the Battle of Duplin anno 1332 was
succeeded in his Estate and Title by Alexander his Brother, who lost his Life
soon thereafter, at the Battle of Halydonbill in 1333, leaving a Daughter Helen
Countes^ ^f Carrick his Heir, who married first Sir William Cunningham Knight,
and thereafter Sir Duncan Wallace of Sundrum, but by neither of them had she
any Issue, so upon her Death, the Earldom of Carrick returned to the Crown,
where it remained, till King David II. gave it to John Stewart Lord Kyle his
Nephew, eldest Son and Heir of Robert, then Earl of Strathern (afterward K.
Robert II.) who was created Earl of Carrick the 39th of David II. Sir James
Balfour's Ann^ls, M.S.
which Title he bore till he came to the Crown in the 1390, by the Name of
Robert III. He an nexed this Honor to the Principality, anno 1404; wherefore
the Names of the Successors in this Earldom, are such, as were Princes of
Scotland, which are not necessary to be inserted here.

STEUART, Earl of Carrick.
THIS honourary Title was bestowed by King Charles I. upon John Steuart Lord
Kincliven, Son of Robert Earl of Or^ney, natural Son of King James V. about the
Year 1633; but he died not long after the Acquirement thereof, without any
surviving Male Issue.

KENNEDY, Earl of Cassils.
THAT the Kennedys are originally from Ireland is without Doubt, but as to the
precise Time, when, they transplanted themselves thither, it is not certain: The
Surname is from one Kenneth, the proper Name of some eminent Person of their
Family, which they assumed, when Sirnames became fixed and hereditary; The
first of whom, I have found upon Record, was Sir John Kennedy, Knight, who is
mentioned in a solemn Treaty with the English, relative to the Redemption of
King David Bruce, anno 1357 Rymers Foedera Angliae.
He added to his ancient patrimo^^al Inheritance the Barony of Cassils, by
Acquisition, from Marjory, Daughter of Sir John de Montgomery Knight, which was
ratified by King David II. Charta in Rotulis Regis David.
with the special Approbation o^ Walter Bishop of Glasgow: He founded a Church
at Maybole, in Carrick, and endoued it for the Maintenance, and Support, of a
Clerk, and three Chaplains, perpetually to perform divine Service, in Honor of
God and the Blessed Virgin Mary, and for the healthful Estate of himself, and
Mary his Wife, and their Children, while in this Life, and for the Salvation of
their Souls, after their Departure hence; and for all the faithful deceased, to
which he appends his Seal, at Dunnure, the pen^lt of November 1371, M. Mabilion
de^^re Diplomatica.
by the said Mary his Wife. He left Issue two Sons.

Gilbert, his Successor.

Sir Hugh Kennedy of Ardstincher Crawford's Notes on Buchanan's History.
, who acquired great Reputation and Honor in the French Wars.

Which Gilbert was one of the Hostages sent to England, for the Redemption of
King David Bruce, anno 1357 Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
, and standing highly in Favor with Robert III. he received the Honor of
Knighthood from the said King, and several Grants of Lands within the Earldom
of Carrick, in Consideration of the special Favor he bore him.

His first Wife was Mary, Daughter of Sir James Sandylands of Calder Crawfurd.
, by whom he had Gilbert, who died in the French Service, without Issue, and
Thomas, first of the Branch of Bargany Dalrymple.
of whom Sir Thomas Kennedy of Kirkhill is the lineal Male Representative. Also
by Marion Crawfurd's Notes on Bu^hanan.
, his second Wife, Daughter of Sir Robert Maxwel of Calderwood: He had a Son,
Sir James, on whom his Father settled his Estate, by Reason of his Marriage
with the Lady Mary Steuart, Daughter of King Robert III. Countess Do^ager of
Angus, which occasioned Gilbert, the eldest Son of the first Marriage, and Sir
James to fall into a ^atal Quarrel, in which the latter lost his Li^e; but by
the said Lady Mary his Wife he had Issue two Sons.

Gilbert, afterward Lord Kennedy. And,

James, who being educated according to his noble Birth, devoted himself to the
Service of God, and entering into Orders, he passed through some inferior
Stations in the Church, and came to be promoted to the Episcopal See of
Dunkeld, anno 1438 Miln's Lives of the Bishops of Dunkeld, M.S.
, and translated thence to the Bishopric of St. Andrews, in the Year of our
Lord 1440 Balfour upon the Bishops of St. Andrews.
, in place of Bishop Wardlaw deceased, and not long after he was constituted;
Lord high Chancellor of Scotland, and one of the Lords of the Privy Council to
King James II. In all which Stations, he acquitted himself with such Advantage
and Reputation, that he became an Ornament to his Profession. In the Year 1456,
he founded a College in the City of St. Andrews, dedicated in Honor of our
Blessed Lord and Savior, and competently endowed it, which still continues a
Monument of his Piety. This worthy Man, for his Learning and other Virtues,
deserves to have his Memory perpetually honored and esteemed; not only by
those of his own Communion, but also of all who regard Learning and Probity. He
has large Encomiums by all our Historians, particularly George Buchanan, who
says, That In eo viro, praeter virtutes a^te commemoratas erant summa domi
frugalitas and continentia, foris splendour and Magnificentia, omnes superiores,
qui eum ^sque ad hanc diem secati sunt, Episcopos superavit. He dyed in a good
advanced Age, on the 10th May 1466, and lies buried in the Collegiat Church of
St. Andrews, where you may see a fair Monument, much decayed, more by Reason,
of the Brittleness of the Stone, of which it is composed, than its Antiquity,
having neither Inscription, nor painting, but a plain Coat of Arms.

To Sir Gilbert Kennedy, of Dunnure succeeded Gilbert, his Grandson, who
obtained from King James I. his Uncle, a Grant of the hereditary Constabulwick
of the Castle of Lochdon, by a Commission, of the date 14th May, 1430, and
standing highly, in Favor with King James II. he was by him constituted
heretable Baillie of ^he Earldom of Carrick, and he and his Heirs Male, in all
time coming, by His Majesty's special Appointment, made Caput totius prosapiae
suae, and about the same time came to be called Lord Kennedy Charta in Rotulis
Jacobi II. ad Annum 1450. in Haddingtoun's Collections.
. In 1460, upon King James III. his Accession to the Crown, he was appointed
one of the six Governors during the said Kings Minority, which he managed with
great Discretion and Applause; and marrying Agnes, Daughter of Herbert Lord
Maxwel, had Issue by her. John who succeeded him, and two Daughters, Katharine,
married to Alexander Lord Montgomery Charta in publicis Archivis.
. Marion, to John Wallace of Craigie Ibidem.
. John, the 2 d. Lord of the Family, was one of the Privy Council to King James
III. In the Year 1484 Rymers Foedera.
. He was appointed one of the Commissioners upon the part of Scotland to treat
with the English touching a Peace. His first Wife was Jean, Daughter of
Alexander Lord Montgomery, by whom he had David his Son and Heir. He second
Wife was, Elisabeth Gordon, Daughter to the Earl of Huntly, Widow of William
Earl of Errol Charta in publicis Archivis.
, by whom he had a Son Alexander; of whom came the Kennedys of Girvanmains and
Barqu^anny Ibidem ad annum 1495
, and Jean, married to Archibald Earl of Angus Ibidem.
. He dyed about 1508, was succeeded by,

David his Son; who being of the Privy Council to King James IV. was by the
special Favor of the said King, honored with the Title of Earl of Cassils,
anno 1509 Productions at the Decrcet of Ranking, in 1606.
. He took to Wife, Agnes, Daughter to William Lord Borthwick; by whom he had
Gilbert his Successor, and after her Death Margaret Boyd, Daughter of Thomas
Earl of Arran, and was killed at the Battle of Floudon, where fell the Flower
of the Scots Nobility, together with their Sovereign King James IV. in 1513.

To David Earl of Cassils, succeeded Gilbert his Son, who was of the Privy
Council to King James V he was sent Ambassador to England, anno 1524, and in
1526, together with the Earls of Lennox and Glencairn, he attempted to rescue
the King out of the Custody of the Earl of Angus; for which he suffered much by
the opposite Party, and at last by their Contrivance, was barbarously Murdered
at Prestick, 22 December 1527 Mr. Thomas Crawfurd's Notes on Buchanan.
, leaving Issue by Isobel his Wife, Daughter of Archibald Earl of Argyle,
Gilbert, who succeeded him in the Honor. 2 d. Quintin, Abbot of Corsragwell,
who dyed 1564, and was canonized as a Saint.

Which Gilbert, was with King James V. at the Battle of Soloway, anno 1542,
where he was taken Prisoner, but was soon afterward released by King Henry
VIII. with several Marks of his Favor, and dispatched home to use his Interest
for the bringing about a Match betwixt Queen Mary, and Edward Prince of
England, and so to unite the Crowns, which then met with great Opposition. In
the 1554, he was promoted to be Lord high Treasaurer of Scotland, upon the
Resignation of John Archbishop of St. Andrews; and in 1558, he was one of the
Peers who were sent over to France to assist at the Marriage of Queen Mary with
Francis I. and their Died at Diep the 28th of October 1558, he was married to
Elisabeth, Daughter and Heir of John Kennedy of Colzean, by whom he had, 1 st.
Gilbert. 2 d. ^^^ Thomas Kennedy of Colzean, Ancestor of Sir John Kennedy
Baronet. 3 d. Jean, married to Robert Steuart Earl of Orkney. And 4 th.
Katharine, to Sir Patrick Waus of Barnburow, and both had Issue.

Gilbert Earl of Cassils, Son of the former Earl, was named a Privy Counselor
to Queen Mary, in 1562. He adhered to her Interest, upon the breaking out of
the Civil War, in that Reign, and assisted her in Person at the Battle of
Lang^ide, which was sought the 13th May 1568; but afterward he submitted to the
Authority of the young King her Son. He married Margaret, Daughter of John Lord
Glammis, by whom he had two Sons, John, and Gilbert, then designed Master of
Cassils, and departing this Life in 1576 Ibidem
, had the Honor of this EPITAPH from the Great Buchanan. Hic situs est heroes
humili Gilbertus in urna,
Kennedus antiquae nobilitatis honos, Musarum matrisque decus patrisque minister
Et columen patriae consiliumque suae:
Occidit insidiis falla^i exceptus ab host
Bis tria post vitae lustra peracta suae
Parce hospes lachrymis and inane comprime luctu^
Non misere quisquam, qui been vixit, obit.


John, the next Earl of Cassils, was constituted Lord high Thesaurer of
Scotland, anno 1599, upon the Removal of Walter, Prior of Blantyre, and
marrying Jean, Daughter of James Lord Fleeming, died without Succession, in the
1615, and left his Peerage and Estate to John Son of Gilbert Master of Cassils,
his Nephew, who was a Person of great Parts and exemplary Virtues. After the
Murder of the King in 1649, he was with the Earl of Lothian, the Lord Burligh,
Sir John Brody and Sir George Windram, sent Commissioners from the Estates of
Scotland, to King Charles II. then at Breda, where they concluded a Treaty, in
Pursuance whereof, His Majesty set Sail for Scotland, and arriving there, he
was crowned at Scoon, 1 st January 1651. After the total Suppression of the
roval Cause in Britain, by the Defeat of the Scots Army at the Battle of
Worcester 3 d September 1651. This Earl was so exemplary in his Loyalty and
Fidelity to the King, that even when Cromwell called himself Protecter, he could
never bring, says an Author of no small Credit Dr. Burne^, Bishop of Saru^.
, this Lord, to advance one step toward him, in outward Civilities; and
surviving all our intestine Commotions, he lived to see the King restored, but
had never any Benefit by the Court, being in Matters of Religion, and in
relation to the Church, purely Presbyterian.

He married two Wives; the first was Jean, Daughter of Thomas Earl of
Haddingtoun, by whom he had two Daughters, Margaret, married to Dr. Gilbert
Bar^et, the present Bishop of Sarum, in England; and Katharine to William Lord
Cochran, Son and Heir of William first Earl of Dundonald. His 2 d Wife was
Margaret Daughter of William Earl of Errol, Widow of Henry Lord Ker, by whom he
had John his Successor, and a Daughter, Lady Mary, and departing this Life in
1672,

John, his Son, succeeded him in his Estate and Honor: He was named one of the
Lords of the Privy Council, 1 st May 1689, and afterward constituted one of
the Commissioners of the Thesaury: He married first Susann^, Daughter of James
Duke of Hamilton, by whom he had a Son and a Daughter, viz.

1 st. John, Lord Kennedy, who dying in the Spring of the Year 1700, left Issue
by Elisabeth Daughter of -- Hutchison Esquire only a Son John, the present Earl of
Cassils.

2 d. Anne, married to John Hamilton Earl of Ruglan.

This Earl married to his second Wife, Elisabeth, Daughter of -- Foix Esquire by
whom he had a Son James, and a Daughter Elisabeth, and departing this Life 2 d
July 1702, was immediately succeeded by John, now Earl of Cassils, his
Grandson.

ARMS.
Argent, a Chiveron Gules, betwixt three cross Croslets, Sable, within a double
Tressour of the 2d. Supporters, two Swans proper, Crest a Dolphine Najant,
Azure, Moto, Avie la fine.

CATHCART, Lord Cathcart.
THAT which will sufficiently attest the Antiquity of this noble Family, is,
That Rainaldus de Kethcart is Witness in a Grant, by Allan the Son of Walter
Dapiefer Regis of the Patronage of the Church of Kethcart, to the Monastry of
Pasly, and to the Monks serving God there, 500 Years since Chartulary of Paisly.
. Alan de Cathcart appends his Seal to the Resignation made by the Judge of
Lennox to the Abbot and Convent of Paisly of the Lands of Culbethe, Anno 1234
Ibidem.
. Likeas William de Cathcart is one of the Barons mentioned in the Bond of
Submission made to King Edward I. of England, now called the Ragman Roll Prin's
History.
. He seems to be the Father of the brave Sir Alan Cathcart, who so faithfully
adhered to the Interest of his Country in the time of King Robert the I. and
fought stoutly for that renowned Monarch in the Battle of Lowdonhill, against a
strong Party of the English, whom they routed. Which Mr. Barber our Historian
has thus recorded; A Knight that then was in his Rout,
Worthy and wight, stalward and stout,
Courteous and fair, and of good Fame,
Sir Alan Cathcart was his Name.


This noble Person married the Sister, and at length one of the Coheirs of Sir
Duncan Wallace of Sundrum, and had Sir Alan his Son and Heir, who, upon the
Demise of his Uncle, came to inherit the Baronies of Sundrum and Achencrew in
Air Shire, which still do remain, and may they long continue in the Family. He
left a Son Sir Alan to inherit his Fortune, a Baron of great Reputation in the
time of Robert III. This last Sir Alan was succeeded by Sir Alan his Grandson,
who in 1447 redeemed several Lands from John Kennedy Lord of the Coffe, which
had been wadset by Sir Alan Cathcart his Grandfather Charta penes D. de
Cathcart.
, within the Earldom of Carrick. This Alan was knighted by King James II. and
in the same Reign was ranked among the greater Barons that are now Lords of
Parliament, though the precise time I cannot assign. He was in special Favor
with King James III. who appointed him Warden of the West Marches toward
England, Anno 1481 Spotswood's Practicks.
, and in consideration of his special Services before that time performed, made
him a Grant of the Barony, together with the Constabulary of the Castle of
Dundonald, Anno 1482, then a part of the Royal Patrimony: But his Master's
Favor did not stop to him here, for he by his Royal Deed made over to him the
Lands of Trabath in King's Kyle, then in the Crown by the Forfeiture of the
Lord Boyd, and made him Master of the Artillery in the Year 1485 Ibidem.
. He married Janet Daughter of.... Maxwel of.... and had Issue, Alan who died
in his own Lifetime. 2 d, David Cathcart of Pennyfedoch Charta penes D. de
Cathcart.
. 3 d, Hugh first of the Cathcarts of Trevour Ibidem.
. 4 th. John styled of Galryne Ibidem.
; and Helen married to David Stewart of Craigyhall in Vic. de Lithgow Ibidem.
. This Lord gave way to Fate in a good advanced Age Anno 1500, and was interred
in the Convent of the Black Friars of Air Ibidem.
, leaving John his Grandson, Son of Alan his eldest Son, to succeed him in his
Estate and Honor: But his Lordship did not follow the Steps of his Ancestors
in the path of Virtue, for, from Motives I know not, he spent much of the
Estate that his Progenitors had acquired with so much Honor, that the Family
since his time have not appeared with that Luster they did in former Ages. He
married to his first Wife Margaret Daughter of John Kennedy of Blairquhan; by
her he had Alan Master of Cathcart, who was killed at the Battle of Flowdon 9
th September 1513, having in his Father's time married, first Helen Daughter of
Robert Lord Lyle Ibidem.
, by whom he had no Issue, and after her Death Margaret Daughter of Patrick
Maxwel of Newark Ibidem.
, by whom he left a Son Alan who succeeded his Grandfather. His 2 d Wife was
Margaret Daughter of Sir William Douglas of Drumla^rig Charta penes D. de
Cathcart.
; by her he had a numerous Issue, viz. 1 st, Robert, who married Margaret
Daughter and Heir of Alan Cathcart of Carltoun Ibidem.
, who was an old Branch of the Family, and of whom the present Family of
Carltoun is descended in a lineal Course of Succession. 2 d, John, who was with
his two elder Brothers, Alan the Master, and Robert of Carltoun, killed at
Flowdon Ibidem.
. 3 d, David of Duchray Ibidem.
, of whom the present Branch of Carbiestoun his Ancestor in the Reign of Queen
Mary, marrying Margaret one of the two Daughters and Coheirs of William
Cathcart of Carbiestoun, an old Family of the Name, which was existing in the
Time of James II. Ibidem.
. 4 th Hugh, of him sprung Cathcart of Corff, now extinct. Besides these Sons,
he had also four Daughters. Janet married to John Crawfurd of Drongan Ibidem.
, then an eminent Family in Air Shire. Elizabeth to John W^llace of Craigy
Ibidem.
, i^ Vic. de Air. Jean to John Shaw of Haily Ibidem.
, in the foresaid County. Margaret to John Hunter of Hunter stoun Charta penes
Pat. Hunter de Eodem.
in Vi^. de Air, and had Issue. He died in December 1535 Charta penes D.
Cathcart,
, his Estate and Honor devolving upon Alan his Grandson, who lost his Life in
the Service of his Country at the Battle of Pinky against the English, upon
that fatal Day the 10th of September 1547 Ibidem.
, as appears from the Probate of his Testament, dated the same Day he lost his
Life, whereby he resigns his Soul to Almighty God, and bequeaths his Body to be
buried among his Ancestors in the Convent of the Gray-Friars of Air, appointing
his Executors to order Mass and Dirige to be said for the hele of his Soul. By
Helen his Wife Daughter of William Lord Semple Ibidem.
, he had Alan his Successor, who was a hearty Promoter of our happy Reformation
from Popery, particularly in the Western Parts, where his Reputation and
Interest was very great, and was among the first of the Peers, who armed in
Defense of King James VI. when he was in his Cradle against the Earl of
Bothwel, who had married the Queen his Mother, and signalized himself at the
Action of Langside, anno 1568, where Queen Mary's Party was totally routed, and
always continued on the King's Side, till he came to be peaceably fixed on the
Throne, to reward which he was in 1579 constituted Master of the King's
Household Ibidem.
, and had several very beneficial Grants from the Crown, in the Time of the
Earl of Mortoun's Regency, which were again reassumed, when his Majesty came to
act by his own Counsels. This noble Lord married Margaret Daughter of John
Wallace of Craigy, by Margaret Countess of Casils Ibidem.
. By her he had a Son, Alan Master of Cathcart, who died before his Father anno
1603, leaving Issue by Isabel his Wife Daughter of Thomas Kennedy of Barganny,
a Son Alan who succeeded his Grandfather upon his Death in December 1618. Which
Alan married Margaret Daughter of Francis Earl of Bothwel Ibid.
and again Jean Daughter of Alexander Colquhoun of Luss, and departing this
Transitory Life anno 1628, left a Son, an Infant at his Death, Alan late Lord
Cathcart, a Nobleman of much Goodness and Probity, who died in the 81. Year of
his Age, upon the 13 th of June 1709, leaving Issue by Marion his Wife,
Daughter of David Boswal of Achinleck, Alan the present Lord, James Cathcart
Esquire and David who was killed in the public Service about the time of the Time
of the Revolution.

Which Alan married Elizabeth Daughter of James Viscount of Stair, by whom he
had three Sons and a Daughter, viz.

Alan Master of Cathcart, who perished at Sea going for Holland, whose Death
was much lamented upon the Account of his Affability, excellent Parts, and
other rare Qualities.

Charles, who from his very Youth betaking himself to a Military Life, went
over to Flanders, where he had a Company in Mackartny's Regiment bestowed on
him anno 1704, being then but entered in his eighteenth Year, and soon
thereafter was made Captain of the Granadiers. The next Year he had a Troop in
the Royal Regiment of Scots Dragoons, under the Command of Lord John Hay, in
which Station he continued till the 1707, he was made Major of Brigade in the
Queen's Corpse of Dragoons serving in Flanders, of which his near Kinsman the
present Earl of Stair was then Brigadier, in which Character, after he had
served two Years, in March 1709, he obtained a Commission to be Major of the
said Royal Regiment; and thereafter in 1711, got a Brevet of Lieutenant Colonel
in the Army, in all which Stations, with what Applause he acquitted himself, is
too well known to such as know him, to need any further Mention here.

Major James Cathcart.

Margaret married to Sir Adam Whiteford of Blairquhan Baronet.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th, Azure, three Cross Croslets, issuing out of as many
Crescents, Argent. 2d and 3d, Gules a Lion Rampant Argent. Supporters two
Parrots proper. Crest, a Dexter Hand grasping a Crescent. Motto, I hope to
speed.

ELPHINSTOUN, Lord Cowpar.
UPON the Distribution made by King James VI. of the Lands which came to the
Crown upon the Dissolution of the Religious Houses, his said Majesty of his
Royal Bounty erected the Abbey of Cowpar in Ang^s in a Civil Lordship, in
Favors of James Elphinstoun Son of James Lord Balmerino Anno 1606, but he
dying childless in the Year 1669, the Honor devolved to the Lord Balmerino.

CRICHTON, Lord Crichton, Viscount of Frendraught.
OF this ancient Family, which took its Surname from the Lands of Chrichtoun in
the Sheriffdom of Edinburgh Dalrymple's Historical Collections.
, was John Crichton of That-Ilk, the Father of Sir William Crichton, who was
Chancellor of Scotland in the younger Years of King James II. and a great
Statesman in the Account of that Time. He made his Exit in the 1455 Lives of
the Scots Statesmen MS. penes me, which may sometime see the Light.
, and left Sir James Lord of Crichton to succeed him in the Barony, and two
Daughters, Elizabeth Wife of Alexander Earl of Huntley, and Agnes of Alexander
Lord Glammis. Which James took to Wife Janet, one of the Daughters and Coheirs
of James Dunbar Earl of Murray, and had Issue by her, William Lord Crichton,
who was forfeited for Rebellion against James III. but afterward obtaining his
Pardon, he was restored to the Barony of Frendraught in the North, of which
James Crichton his Son had a Charter in the 5 th of King James IV. Anno 1492
Charta in publ. Archivis.
. His Successor

Another Sir James Crichton of Frendraught was by King Charles I. raised to the
Honor of Viscount of Frendraught 20 th August 1642 Ibid.
. He married first Margaret Daughter of Alexander 1 st Earl of Leven, by whom
he had a Daughter married to Sir James Macgill of Rankeilor. 2 dly, Marion
Daughter of Sir Alexander Irvine of Dr^m. By her he had James Viscount of
Frendraught, whose Son William died without Issue; so that Lewis his Uncle fell
to the Honor, who following the Fortune of King James VII. into France and
Ireland, died without Issue 26 th February School.

COLVIL, Lord Colvil of Culross.
IN the Reign of King William, Philip de Colvil is frequently made Mention of
in the Donations which that Prince gave to the Abbey of Melross, soon after his
Accession to the Throne. The Successor of this Philip, Sir John Colvil, was
Proprietor of the Baronies of Oxname and Ochiltree in the Time of Alexander
III. Chart. of Melross.
, whose Son Sir William having no Issue Male of his Body, E^stachia his only
Daughter was Heir to some of his Lands. She became the Wife of Sir Reginald le
Cheyn Ibid.
, and the Estate abovementioned came to Sir Robert Colvil, who continued in the
Male Line, till it ended a second Time in the Person of Sir William Colvil of
Ochiltree, who dying the 14 th of King James IV. left two Daughters his
Coheirs, Elizabeth the elder, married to Robert Colvil of Ravenscraig, and
Margaret to Patrick Colquhoun Esquire

The Barony of Ochiltree was again acquired from the Heirs Female anno 1509, by
a Male Relation of the Family Robert Colvil of Hiltoun Charta in publ. Archivis.
, who in the Reign of James IV. was Master of the King's Household and Director
of the Chancery Ibidem.
, both which Offices he possessed, till he lost his Life with his Master at
Flowdon, leaving Issue by Elizabeth Arnot his Wife Ibidem.
, Sir James Colvil of Ochiltree his Son and Heir, who was Director of the
Chancery in King James V's. Time, and one of the Senators of the College of
Justice, at the Institution of that Judicature. In the 1530 he exchanged the
Estate of Ochiltree with Sir James Hamilton for his Lands of Easter-Weems in
Fife, from which he and his Successors were styled, till they came to be Peers.
He married Alison Bruce Ibidem.
, and had Sir James his Successor Ibidem.
, Alexander Commendator of C^lross Ibidem.
, of whom the Colvils of Kincarain are derived, who do now represent this
Family: Likewise a Daughter Margaret married to James Lindsay of Dowhill. Which
Sir James, by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of.... Douglas of Lochleven, had

Sir James who, from his Youth affecting a Military Course of Life, went over
to the Wars of France, where he he served under Henry IV. with so much Honor
and Reputation, that upon his Return home he was by King James VI. worthily
raised to the Degree and Dignity of a Lord, by the Title of Lord Colvil of
Culross, Anno 1604, and that he might the better support the Honor, the King
thought fit to augment his Fortune, and made him a Grant of the dissolved Abbey
of Culross, which heretofore had been a Seat of Cistertian Monks. He married
Isabel, Daughter of Patrick Lord Ruthven, by whom he had James Master of
Colvil, a young Nobleman of very bright Parts, who died in the Flower of his
Age, much regreted by all that knew him. 2 d, Robert Master of Colvil, and a
Daughter Jean married to Sir James Campbel of Lawers, Mother by him to John
Earl of Lowdon, Lord High Chancellor of Scotland, in the Reign of King Charles
I. My Lord Colvil dying about the Year 1620, his Estate and Dignity devolved on
Robert his Grandson in whom the Honor came to an End.

COLVIL, Lord Colvil of Ochiltree.
THIS noble Family is sprung from Robert Colvil Son of Sir James Colvil of
Easter-Weems CartaJacobi Colvil de Easter-Weems Roberto Colvil filio suo
naturali Terrarum deCleish in Rotulis Jacobi quinti ad Annum 1535
, who in the Twenty second of King James 5 th had a Grant to himself and
Frances Colquhoun his Wife and to their Heirs from his Father of the Lands of
Cleish in Kinross Shire, whence he and his Descendents were designed till the
Time they were raised to the Honor of the Peerage. This Robert was a zealous
and hearty Promoter of the Reformation, and a strenuous Asserter of the
Liberties of his Country, in the Defense whereof he lost his Life at the Seige
of Leith, May 7 th 1560 Mr. Knox's History of the Reformation, who gives him
the Character of a wise Man and of great Courage and Zeal for the work of God
, leaving Issue by the aforesaid Frances his Wife Daughter and Heir of Patrick
Co^quhoun Esquire of Drumskeith, and of Elizabeth his Wife, one of the Daughters
and Coheirs of Sir William Colvil of Ochiltree Carta in pub. Archivis
, Robert his Son and Heir, and a Daughter Eupham married to James Moniepenny of
Pitmily, and had Issue.

Which Robert married Margaret Daughter of James Lindsay of Dove-hill, by whom
he had Robert his Son and Heir, who dying in the Month of January of the Year
1634 Carta in pub. Archivis
left issue by Beatrix his Wife Daughter of Sir. John Hadden of Glenegles,
Robert, his Son and Heir, David Colvil Esquire likewise a Daughter Margaret married
to David Weems of Finzies and had Issue.

Which Robert was made a Knight by King Charles I. and thereafter by his
Majesty King Charles II. raised to the Peerage by the Style and Title of Lord
Colvil of Ochiltree by Letters patent 4 th of January 1651, He married Janet
Daughter of Sir John Weems of that ilk ibidem
, but dying without Issue 25 of August 13 1662 Carta in Cancellaria. S. D. N. R.
his Estate and honor devolved on.

Robert Colvil Esquire his Nephew by his Brother, who departing this Life in the
1671, left Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of David Weems of Finzies,
Robert the Present Lord Colvil; also two Daughters, Margaret Married to Sir
John Aiton of that Ilk, in Vic. de. Fyfe and - - - - to the Reverend Mr. Logan
Minister at Torrie, and had Issue.

ARMS.
A Cross molin sable, supported on the Dexter side with a Reinoceros and on the
sinster with a Hercules proper. Crest, a Stag's Head Cupe Argent. Motto, Oublie
ne puis.

RICHARDSON, Lord Cramond.
HIS Majesty King Charles the I. was pleased to raise and advance Dame
Elizabeth Beaumont, then the Wife of Sir Thomas Richardson, Lord Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas in England, to the honor of Baroness of Cramond, and to
her and Sir Thomas's Heirs male by Letters patent 28 February 1628, Charta in
Rotulis Caroli I. ad Annum 1628.
which was the only Female Creation I have at any Time observed in this Realm.

CRANSTON, Lord Cranston.
THE Family of Cranston is of very great Antiquity in Edinburgh Shire, where in
former Times their chief Residence was. Effric deCranston. One of their
Ancestors is Witness in a Donation which King William made to the Monastery of
Newbotle and to the Monks of that Convent for the Health of his Soul, Appendix
to Sir James Dalrymple's Collections concerning the Scots History, from the
Ch^rtulary of Newbotle in the Hands of the Lord Marquess of Lothian
Anno 1170, whose Successor and lineal Deseendant Sir John Cranston of that Ilk
in the Reign of King James VI. married Margaret Daughter of.... Ramsay of
Dalhousie, but dying without Male Issue, his Estate by his own Destination and
Appointment came to Sarah his Daughter and Heir, whom he married with a
Gentleman of his own Name, Sir William Cranston Carta in Public is Archivis ad
Annum 1580
Son of Sir John Cranston of Moriston, a Branch of his own Family, who being a
Person of great Merit and Fortune, was by the special favor of King James VI.
whom he had the Honor to serve long as Captain of his Majesty's Guard, raised
to the Honor of Lord Cranston, by Letters patent, 19 th of November 1609,
Carta penes Dominum Cranstoun,
and dying in the Month of June 1627, Account of the Funeral Solemnity of
William the first Lord Cranstoun. M.S. penes me ad Annum 1627.
was succeeded by John his Son, who married first Helen Daughter of James Lord
Lindsay, and again Elizabeth Daughter of Walter Lord B^cle^gh, Carta in public
is Archivis
but dying without Issue, was succeeded by

William Cranston Esquire his Nephew, Son of James Cranston Esquire his Brother, by
Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of Francis Stewart Earl of Bothwell. This Noble
Lord did eminently signalize himself in his Loyalty to King Charles the II.
with whom he marched to the Battle of Worcester, where he had the Misfortune to
be taken Prisoner and sent to the Tower, where he long remained, and had his
Estate not only sequestrated, but was particularly excepted out of Cromwell's
Indemnity in the 1654, Cromwell's Indemnity to the Kingdom of Scotland in the
1654.
he married Mary Daughter of Alexander I. Earl of Leven by whom he had James
his Son and Heir, who married Anne Daughter of Sir Alexander Don of Newton
Baronet, by her he had William the present Lord, and James Cranston Esquire

Which William married Jean Daughter of William Marquess of Lothian, by whom he
has James Master of Cranstoun.

ARMS.
Gules, three Crans Argent, supported on the Right side by a Lady richly
apparelled, and on the Left by a Stag, proper; Crest a Cran dormant. Motto,
Thou shall want or I want.

CRAWFORD, Lord of Crawford.
BEFORE the Reign of King Malcolm III. we had no Sirnames in Scotland so far as
can be gathered from the most ancient Records, but the ordinary distinctions
then were either personal, or from such Offices as they held, or from the Name
of their Father as Malcolm Canmore, Joannes Filius Willielmi, Thor. Longus
Writs of the Priory of Coldingham in the Custody of the Dean and Chapter of
Durhame.
Willielmus dictus Niger, Walterus Dapifer, Alan Durward. But after that great
Men began to assume Designations from their own Lands, which by custom, became
Hereditary Sirnames to their descendents, as Dunbar, Murray, Douglas, Gordon,
Ersken, Crawfurd, and innumerable such like Instances could be given.

Dominus Galfridus de Crafurd is the first I have found using this Surname in
the Time of King Malcolm IV and King William, Chartulary of the Abbacy of
Arbroth in the Lawyers Library, M.S.
who is frequently witnessing the pious Deeds of this last Prince to the
Religious of Arbroath, and seems to have had some Relation to the Court under
that good King.

Dominus Joannes de Crawfurd, Miles and Dominus Reginaldus de Crawfurd
Vicecomes de Air Chartulary of Kelso in the Lawyers Library, M.S.
in the Reign of King Alexander II. seem to be Brothers, and very probably the
Sons of the former, Sir Galfride. We know that Sir John was Baron of the Barony
of Crawford, in Lanerk Shire and from the Chronicle of Melross, we are
informed, that he died in the 1248, Chronicle of Melross ad Annum 1248
His Estate, at least that part of it the Barony of Crawfurd, went to his
Daughters. Mr. Thomas Crawfurd's History of the Crawfurds. M.S.
The Elder married to Archibald de Douglass Dominus loci ejusdem, and the
Younger to David de Lindesay Militi Domino de Crawford.

LINDSAY, Earl of Crawfurd.
BY our public Records, as well as the Archives of this most noble and
illustrious Family, it appears, That, William de Lindesay their Ancestor was a
Person of very great Note in the Reign of King David I. Appendix to Sir James
Dalrymple's Collections concerning the Scots History.
and seems to have had some near Relation to that Prince's Court.

David de Lindsay, his Successor made a very great Figure under King William,
This is that David de Lindesay, Miles, who got the Barony of Crawfurd by the
Marriage of the Daughter of John de Crawfurd, Mr. Thomas Crawfurd's History of
the Crawfurds M.S. penes me
and was succeeded by David de Lindesay his Son, who was a very warlike Man,
and in the 35 th of King Alexander II. executed the Office of Justitiarius
Laudoniae. Carta in publicis Archivis
He had Issue David his Successor, and John de Lindesay who was Chamberlain of
Scotland in the Time of King Alexander III. Anno 1270, Chartulary of
Dunfermling in Biblioth: Jurid.
which David was likewise a very brave and magnanimous Person. He left Issue,
David de Lindesay Miles, the first I have found designed Dominus de Crawfurd
Notes from the Chartulary of the Episcopal See of Glasgow M.S. penes me, ad
Annum 1329.
in the Time of King Robert the I. and William de Lindesay Rector of Air and
Lord high Chamberlain of Scotland in the 1317. Under King Robert I.

which David Dominus de Crawfurd added to his own Paternal Estate many fair
Lands by the Marriage of one of the three Daughters and Cohei^s of Alexander de
Abernethy Knight, by whom he had David his Successor in the Ba^ony of Crawfurd
Sir Alexander Lindesay of Genesk, of which Lands he became possessed by the
Marriage of Katharine Daughter and Heir of Sir John Stirling Knight, The Earl
of Haddington's Collections in the Law^ers Library M.S.
and Sir William Lindesay of Byres Ancestor to the present Earl of Crawford.
Carta in Publicis Archivis
Which David de Lindsay Dominus de Crawfurd was in the 1357, one of the
Commissioners on the Treaty for the Redemption of King David II. He was
succeeded by

Sir James his Son, who by Giles his Wife, Daughter of Walter Lord High Stewart
of Scotland, had Sir James Lindsay Dominus de Crawfurd, who is a frequent
Witness in the Charters of King Robert II. his Uncle, in which he is always
designed nepoti nostro, likewise two Daughters,

Elizabeth Married to Sir John Maxwell of Nether Pollock Carta in Rotulis
Roberti II. Joanni Maxwel Militi and Elisabethae sponsae suae nepoti nostro
carissimae.
Knight, and had Issue.

Margery to Sir Henry Dowglass of Loch evin Carta Roberti Secundi Dilecto suo
Henrico Dowglass Militi and Marjoriae sponsae suae neptae nostrae in Rotulis
dicti Regis,
Knight Ancestor to the present Earl of Morton.

But he dying without Issue male, the Barony of Crawford, and his other Estate
came to his Cousin.

Sir David Lindsay of Glenesk, who was by King Robert III. in the 1399 created
Earl of Crawfurd Carta in pub. Arch.
he married Jean Daughter to King Robert II. Carta in publicis Archivis etiam
Ford^ni Historia rerum Stoticarum, and Rymer's faedera Angliae
by whom he had Alexander his Successor, Carta in Rotulis Roberti II
David and Bernard.

Which Alexander was one of the Hostages for the ransom of King James I. in
1423, Rymer's faedera Angliae ad Annum 1423
he died in 1445 leaving Issue.

Alexander his Successor who made a very great Figure under James II. he left
Issue David his Successor, Sir Alexander Lindsay of Achte^monsie and Elisabeth
married to Sir Thomas Maule of Panmure, ancestor to the present Earl of that
Name.

Which David was Master of the Household and Lord Chamberlain in the Reign of
King James III. With whom he was in great favor and was created a Duke by the
Title of Duke of Montrose during his Life, Anno 1488, The Earl of Haddington's
Collections from the public Records M.S. in the Lawyers Library
He Married E^izabeth Daughter of James Lord Hamilton Carta in publicis Archivis
by her he had Alexander Master of Crawfurd, who dyed before his Father, and
John his Successor who was slain at the Battle of Flowden, leaving no Issue,
so that his Estate and honor Came to.

Sir Alexander Lindsay of Auchtermonsy his Uncle who by Marion his Wife;
Daughter of - - - Dunbar of Monsie had David the succeeding Earl, who married
Katherine Daughter of Sir William Stirling of Kei^, next E^izabeth Daughter of
-- Lundy of that Ilk, and had Carta in Rotulis Jacobi IV.
Alexander Master of Crawfurd and two Daughters Marga^et married to James Lord
Ogilvie Carta in Rotulis Jacobi VI.
and E^izabeth to John E^skine of Dun, Memoirs of the Erskines of Dun, MS.
penes me.
This Earl being justly provoked by the folly and insolence of his own Son did
disinherit him, and settled his Estate and the Title of Earl with the
approbation of the Crown upon Sir David Lindsay of Edz^e who accordingly
succeeded him therein upon his Death, Anno 1562 Mackenzie.
. He married first Janet, Daughter to the Lord Gray, but having no Issue, he
generously resigned the Estate and Honor in favors of Sir David Lindsay, the
wicked Master of Crawfurd's Son, reserving to himself, during his Life, both
the Title, and such a Provision as supported him according to his Quality. He
dying Anno 1570 Ibidem.
Sir David Lindsay succeeded in the Honor. He married Margaret, Daughter of
Cardinal David Beaton, Bishop of St. Andrews, by whom he had,

1 st. David,

2 d. Sir Henry Lindsay, afterward Earl of Crawfurd.

3 d. Sir Alexander Lindsay, one of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber to King
James VI. who honored him with the Title of Lord Spinzie, Anno 1590; also a
Daughter Helen, married to Sir David Lindsay of Edzil, and had Issue.

Which David, married Grisel Daughter of John Steuart Earl of Athole, by whom
he had David his Son and Heir, who dying without Issue, his Estate and Honor
went to

Sir Henry Lindsay his Uncle, who married Beatrix, Daughter and Heir of George
Charters of Kinfauns, by whom he had George, who deceast without any Issue. He
married again Margaret, Daughter of Sir James Shaw of Sauchie, in Vicecomitatu
de Clackmanan, by whom he had Lodovick, who succeeded to the Honor.

This Earl, when the Civil War broke out, Anno 1639, cordially put himself in
Arms in behalf of King Charles I. and commanded a Regiment of Horse at the
Battle of Lansdoun, Anno 1643, where he performed the Duty of a Colonel most
punctually; and though he almost out lived his Fortune by his great suffering for
the Royal Cause, yet he did not that of Love to his injured Sovereign,
continuing fixed in his Duty till the very end of his Life. He married
Margaret, Daughter of William Earl of Monteith, but by her he had no Issue,
whereupon he made an Entail of his Honor to John Earl of Lindsay, which was
ratified by Act of Parliament, Anno 1661, upon the King's Restoration.

LINDSAY, Earl of Crawfurd and Lindsay.
A Younger Branch of this noble Family, was Lindsay of Byres, in Vicecomitatu
de Haddingtoun, sprung from Sir William Lindsay, Son of Sir David Lindsay of
Crawfurd Gencalogy of the Earl of Crawfurd.
, in the Days of King David Bruce: He raised his Fortune by the Marriage of
Christian, Daughter and sole Heir of Sir William More of Abercorn Charta in
Rotulis Roberti II.
, in Vicecomitatu de Linlithgow; whereupon he assumed into his Achievement
three Mollets, the Co^t of the said Family, and exchanged his Lands of
Dunnoter, in Vicecomitatu de Kincardin, with Sir William Keith Marshal of
Scotland, for his Lands of Struthers in Fyfe, which hencefurth became the chief
and ancient Seat of this noble Family. This Sir William was succeeded by

John his Son and Heir, who in 1457, the 20th of James II. was constituted
chief Justiciar benorth the River of Forth, being likewise of the Privy Council
to the said King History of Fyfe by Dr. Sibbald.
. He married...... Steuart, Daughter to the Lord Lorn, and had Issue David, who
succeeded him in his Honor; John, who succeeded his Brother Patrick, afterward
Lord Lindsay; Sir George Lindsay Knight, Sir Walter Precptor of Torphichen, and
Lord St. John in the Reign of King James V. Also two Daughters,

1. Margaret, married to Henry Wardlaw of Torrie.

2. Christian, first to John, Son and Heir of George Lord Seaton, and again to
Robert Lord Kilmaurs. He departed this Life, Anno 1480.

David his Son succeeded him. He assisted King James III. at the Battle of
Bannockburn against his Subjects, and dyed without Issue, Anno 1492, leaving

John his Brother and Heir to succeed him, who likewise dying sans Issue, in
1498,

Patrick his Brother became his Heir. This Lord was constituted Sheriff of Fife
by King V. in 1519, which Office he enjoyed till the 1531, when it was
heritably conferred upon George Earl of Rothes. He married Margaret, Daughter
of..... Pitcairn of that Ilk, by whom he had,

1. John, who married Elisabeth, Daughter of Sir Andrew Lundy of Balgony, and
had a Son John, who succeeded his Grandfather.

2 d. Patrick, first of the House of Kirkforther.

3 d. William, of whom came the Lindsay's of Wormistoun; also a Daugter
Catharine, married to Sir Alexander Seaton of Parbroath.

To Patrick Lord Lindsay succeeded John his Grandson, who married Helen,
Daughter of John Earl of Athole, by whom he had Patrick his Son and Heir, and
five Daughters, viz.

1. Isabel, married to Norman Lesly, Son and Heir apparent of George Earl of
Rothes. 2 d. Margaret to David Beaton of Melgum. 3 d. Janet, to Henry Son and
Heir of Henry Lord Sinclair. 4 th. Helen, to Thomas Fotheringh^m of Pourie. 5
th. Elisabeth, to David Kinnier of that Ilk.

Which Patrick Lord Lindsay, was active for the Reformation of Religion, and
was on the King's side. in the Minority of James VI. he married Euphame,
Daughter of Robert Douglass of Lochlevin: By her he had a Son and a Daughter,
James his successor, and Margaret married to James Son and Heir to the Earl of
Rothes. He made Exit out of this World 11th. December 1589 Johnston.
, and was succeeded by

James his Son, who took to Wife Euphame, Daughter of Andrew Earl of Rothes, by
whom he had Robert and John successively Lords; also two Daughters,

Helen, married to John, Son and Heir to William Lord Cranstoun.

Catherine, to John Lundy of that Ilk.

He departed this Life 5th November 1601; his Estate and Honor devolving on

Robert his Son, who married Anne, Daughter of Laurence Lord Oliphant, who had
only a Daughter married to Alexander Falconer of Halkertoun, he dying 7th Nov
1609, John his Brother, became his Heir; who dying on the 9th of July 1616,
left Issue by Christian his Wife, Daughter of Thomas first Earl of Haddington,
John his Son and Heir, and Helen married to Sir William Scot of Ardross.

Which John, was by the special Favor of King Charles I. and for the greater
Splendor of his Coronation, Anno 1633, raised to the Honor of Earl of
Lindsay, being then the first Lord in the Rolls of Parliament. In 1641, he was
constituted Lord high Thesaurer of Scotland upon the Removal of John Earl of
Traquair; which Employment he enjoyed till the 1649, he was laid aside by the
Estates of Parliament for his vigorous Appearance in raising the Army which
designed the King's Relief out of the Isle of Wight. After the Murder of the
King, he adhered to the lawful Heir of the Crown, King Charles II. from whom he
received a Commission to raise Forces for his Service, in order to his
Restoration, Anno 1651, when unluckily he was with several other Lords
surprised by the English at Eliot in Angus, and sent Prisoner to the Tower of
London, where he suffered a long and tedious Imprisonment, till he was released
by the Restoration of the King, Anno 1660: In Consideration whereof, his
Majesty was pleased to restore him to the Thesaurer's Office, which in 1664 he
resigned to the Earl of Rothes, his Son-in-Law; and departing this Life, Anno
1676, he left Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of James Marquis of
Hamilton, two Sons, William his Successor; Patrick, who married Margaret
Daughter and Heir of Sir John Crawfurd of Kilbirny, also four Daughters,

1. Anne, married to John Duke of Rothes.

2. Christian, to Thomas Earl of Haddingtoun.

3. Helen, to Sir Robert Sinclair of Stinstoun, Baronet.

4. Elisabeth, to David Earl of Northesk, and all had Issue.

Which William, was constituted President of the Privy Council, Anno 1689, and
one of the Lords of the Thesaury. He married first, Mary Daughter of James Earl
of Annandale, by whom he had John the present Earl, Colonel James Lindsay who
was killed at the Battle of Almanza, Anno 1708, and Henrietta, married to
William Baillie of Lamingtoun, and has Issue. 2 dly. Henrietta, Daughter of
Charles Earl of Dumfermling, Widow of William Earl of Wigton, by whom he had a
Son Thomas, and six Daughters;

Lady Anne.

Lady Christian.

Lady Margaret.

Lady Helen.

Lady Susanna.

Lady Catharine. all unmarried.

He departing this Life, March 6th Anno School, was succeeded by John his Son and
Heir, who betaking himself to a Military Life, has had several considerable
Commands in the Army, and was made Brigadeer before the end of the late War. He
married Aemelia, Daughter of Alexander Lord Down, by whom he had John Lord
Lindsay, and William.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Gules, a Fess Cheque, Azure and Argent, 2d and 3d Or, a
Lion Rampant Gules surmounted of a Ribban Sable, Supporters two Lions Gules;
Crest, an Ostrich with a Key in its Mouth, with this Motto, Endure Forth.

MACKENZIE Earl of Cromarty.
THIS Family has its Descent from Sir Roderick Mackenzie, second Son of Sir
Colin Mackenzie of Kintail, by Barbara his Wife, Daughter of James Grant of
that Ilk, which Sir Roderick being a Person of singular Courage and Conduct was
very Instrumental in civilizing the Northern Parts, especially in Ross shire,
in Recompense of which acceptable Service King James VI. conferred on him the
Honor of Knighthood, and gave him several Lands then in the Crown by
Forfeiture. He married Margaret, Daughter and Heir of Torquill Macleod of the
Jews, whereupon he added to his Arms Or, a Mountain in a flame Azure and
Gules, and departing this Life, Anno 1625, left Issue by the said Margaret his
Wife

1. Sir John his Successor.

2 d. Sir Kenneth of Scatwell.

3 d. Colin.

4 th. Alexander of Baloon.

5 th. Margaret, married to Sir James Mackdonald of Slate, Baronet, and had
Issue.

Which John so succeeding, was made Baronet by King Charles I. Anno 1628, three
Years after the Institution of that Honor. He married Margaret Daughter and
Coheir of Sir George Erskine of Innertail, one of the Senators of the College
of Justice, Brother to Thomas first Earl of Kelly, by whom he had Sir George
and Mr. Roderick Mackenzie of Prestonhall, who was promoted to be one of the
Senators of the College of Justice, Anno 1702, and dyed 4th January 1712,
leaving Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Dr. Alexander Burnet
Archbishop of St. Andrews, a Son Alexander Mackenzie (alias Frazer) of
Frazerdale Esquire who changed his Name by reason of his Marriage with Aemelia
Baroness of Lovat.

Besides these Sons he had likewise five Daughters,

Margaret, married to Roderick Mackleod of that Ilk, but had no Issue.

Anne to Hugh Lord Lovat.

Isabel, to Kenneth Earl of Seaforth.

Barbara, to Alexander Mackenzie of Garloch.

Catherine, to Sir Colin Campbel of Aberuchill.

He departed this Life the 10th September 1654, and was succeeded by

Sir George his Son and Heir: This noble Lord in the 1654 obtained a Commission
from King Charles II. during his Exile, to raise what Forces he could for his
Majesty's Service, in order to his Restoration, and therewith joined
Lieutenant General John Middleton, who sustained a War with the English for a
whole Year, till (...) were defeated by Colonel (...); then his Lordship
capitu^^^ed with the Enemy upon very honorable Terms. This signal Appearance
for his distressed Sovereign, probably seemed one Cause that upon his Majesty's
Restoration, when he constituted a new Set of Judges in the 1661, he named him
one of the Senators of the College of Justice, and one of the Lords of his
Privy Council. Anno 1678, he was constituted Justice General upon the decease
of Sir Archibald Primrose, and three Years thereafter he was made Lord Clerk
Register, in which Station he continued till the Death of King Charles II, Anno
1685.

King James VII. had no less Value for his Abilities, for in the first Year of
his Reign, he renewed his Patent for being Register, and on the 15th of April
the same Year, created him Viscount of Tarbat, Lord Macleod and Castlehaven,
and continued him in that Employment till the Dissolution of the Government in
1689.

In the 3 d of William and Mary, An. 1692, he was again restored to the
Registers Office: Then it was he put forth a Vindication of King Robert III.
from the Imputation of Bastardy, an Error all our Historians of former Times,
either maliciously or ignorantly had fallen into; and from the national
Archives clearly evinced, that Elisabeth More was the first and lawful Wife of
King Robert II, when Earl of Strathern; that she was long dead before he came
to the Crown; that Robert III. her Son, was not only owned as the eldest lawful
Son of his Father in all public Deeds, after he became King, but also in the
time of King David Bruce his Grand-Uncle.

In 1702 the first of Queen Anne he was constituted Secretary of State, and the
first of January the next Year raised to the Honor of Earl of Cromarty, his
Age making the Fatigue of the Secretarie's Place uneasy to him, he dimitted,
and in Lieu thereof, her Majesty was pleased to give him an Employment of a
much easier Nature, making him Justice General, which he resigned to the Earl
of Ilay, Anno 1710. He married first Anne Daughter of Sir James Sinclair of
May, by whom he had Issue,

1 st. John Lord Mackleod.

2 d. Sir Kenneth Mackenzie of Cromarty, Baronet.

3 d. Sir James of Roystoun created Baronet, 8 February 1704, and promoted to
be one of the Senators of the College of Justice, in 1710.

Also four Daughters, Margaret, married to David Bruce of Clackmannan,
Elisabeth to Sir George Brown of Colstoun, Jean to Sir Thomas Steuart of
Balcasky, and Lady Anne.

He married next Margaret Countess Dowager of Weems, but by her he had no
Issue, and became a Widower by her Death, in 1705.

ARMS.
Four Coats quarterly, 1st Or, a Mountain in a flame Azure and Gules, 2d Azure
a Dears Head coboss'd Or, 3d Argent on a Pale Sable, an imperial Crown Or,
within a double Tressure, counter-flour'd Gules, 4 Gules 3 Legs armed proper,
conjoined in Fess at the upper part of the Thigh, flex'd in a Triangle,
garnished and spurred Or, and supported by two Savages proper, Crest, the Sun in
his Splendour, Motto, Luceo non uro.

RAMSAY. Earl of Dalhousie.
AMong those who were Witnesses to the Grant of the Church of Livingstoun, by
Thurstanus filius Livingi to the Monastery of Holy-Rood-house, in the time of
King David I. 600 Years since, Simundus de Ramesie, is there taken notice of
for one, from which Simund did Sir William de Ramesie of Dalhousie Knight
descend, who firmly adhered to King Robert Bruce, and upon his Accession to the
Throne, did Homage for his Lands in Edinburgh Shire. Likeas, he was one of the
many Scots Barons who wrote and sealed that memorable Letter to the Pope,
declaring the Independency of the Kingdom of Scotland, Anno 1320, which is all
I have found on Record concerning him. To this Sir William, succeeded Sir
Alexander Ramsay of Dalhousie, who signally raised the Grandeur of his Family,
by his great and loyal Services to King David Bruce, against Edward Baliol, who
then called himself King of this Realm; in Consideration whereof, he was by the
said King David constituted Warden of the Middle Marches, and Constable of the
Castle of Roxburgh, Anno 1342, which he had by his Valor taken from the
English. This brave Man, who well deserves, and I know will have a Place among
the Scots Heroes, was slain by William Douglass of Liddesdale, 7 July 1348, and
to him succeeded

Sir William Ramsay his Son, who tracing the Steps of his loyal Father, took up
Arms for the Service of his King and Country, was in the Wars of England, and
acted a very noble Part, in Recompense whereof, no doubt, it was, that he
obtained a Grant to him, and Agnes his Wife, of the Lands of Nether Libertoun,
Anno 1370, by a Charter still extant under the Great Seal. This Sir William was
succeeded by

Sir Alexander his Son, who came nothing behind his Ancestors for Loyalty,
Courage and Conduct, which he manifested in a very eminent Degree, in the
Battle of Nisbet against the English, and afterward at Homildon in
Northumberland, in which Action he lost his Life in the Service of his Country,
5 May 1401.

Sir Alexander Ramsay of Dalhousie his Son, was one of the Barons of this
Realm, who obtained Letters of safe Conduct from the King of England, to come
into that Kingdom, to accompany King James I. home to Scotland, Anno 1423, he
being one of the Barons on whom he conferred the Honor of Knighthood, for the
greater Splendour of his Coronation, Anno 1424. By...... Daughter of....... his
Wife, he left Issue,

Sir Alexander, who flourished under King James II. and III. Being like his
Ancestors, a Man of a Martial Spirit, he accompanied the Earl of Angus the
King's Lieutenant, in that Expedition against the English, whereupon ensued the
Battle of Piperdein, where the Scots obtained the Victory over the English.

To this Sir Alexander succeeded Alexander his Grandson and Heir, Son of
George his eldest Son, who dyed before him. This Sir Alexander was (according
to common Fame) a M^n of prodigious Stature, and of Strength answerable to his
Hight.

By...... Douglass his Wife, he had Issue, Nicol his Son and Heir, who
succeeded him upon his Death, which happened the 9th September 1513, at the
Battle of Flowdon.

Which Nicol Ramsay of Dalhousie, married Isabel Daughter of...... Lord
Livingston, by whom he had,

George his Successor, who loyally adhered to Queen Mary, when the War broke
out in that Reign, and was one of the Barons who entered into that memorable
Association in her behalf, bearing date the 7th of May 1568. He married
Elisabeth, Daughter of....... Hepburn of...... by whom he had,

John, who succeeded him, but he dying without Male Succession, his Estate
descended to

Sir George Ramsay his Nephew, who obtaining first the Honor of Knighthood
from King James VI, afterward by the special Favor of the the said Prince,
was raised to the Honor of Lord Ramsay, by Letters Patent, bearing date 25 of
August 1618 Register of the Chancery Office.
. He married Margaret, Daughter and sole Heir of Sir George Douglass of
Ellenhill, brother of William Earl of Morton, by whom he had William his
Successor, and Margaret married to William Livingston of Kilsyth. He departed
this Life Anno 1630, and was succeeded by

William Lord Ramsay his Son, who was by King Charles I. raised to the Honor
of Earl of Dalhousie, 19th June 1633, at the said King's Coronation. He
married Catherine, Daughter of David, first Earl of Southesk, by whom he had,

George, his Successor.

Captain John Ramsay, Father to the present Earl; also two Daughters.

1. Mary, married to James Earl of Buchan.

2. Margaret, to John Scrimgeor Earl of Dundee, but had no Issue. 2 dly. To Sir
Henry Bruce of Clackmanan.

He dying the 11th of February 1674. his Estate and Honor devolved upon

George his Son and Heir, who married Anne, Daughter of John Earl of Wigton,
Widow of Robert Lord Boyd, by whom he had,

1. William, his Successor.

2. George, who in his Youth carried Arms in Holland, and in the Low Countries,
in Balfour's Regiment: He rose gradually to be Ensign, Lieutenant, Captain and
Major in the same Regiment, after that he was preferred to be Lieutenant
Colonel, and not long after, to be Colonel of a Regiment.

In the 1690, he was made Brigadeer after the Action of Valcour, and Colonel of
the Scots Regiment of Guards. In the Year 1693, after the Battle of Landen, he
was made Major General, and in 1702, the first of Queen Anne, Lieutenant
General of the Army, and Commander in Chief of the Forces in Scotland, which he
enjoyed till his Death, which happened in November 1705.

Besides which two Sons, he had likewise two Daughters, Jean, married first to
George Lord Ross, next to Robert Viscount of Oxenford, and Anne to James Earl
of Hume. This Earl dyed in 1675, and was succeeded by

William his Son, who married...... More, Daughter to the Earl of Drocheda of
the Kingdom of Ireland, by whom he had two Sons and a Daughter, viz.

1. George, who was killed in Holland by one Mr. Hamilton, Anno 1696.

2. William, who dyed Colonel in the Scots Regiment of Guards in Spain, Anno
1711, both unmarried.

Elisabeth, married to William Lord Halley of the Kingdom of Ireland, and has
Issue.

William, Earl of Dalhousie, dying without Issue, the Honor devolved on
Colonel William Ramsay, his Father's Cousin German, who married Jean, Daughter
of George Lord Ross, by whom he had,

George Lord Ramsay.

Charles.

Malcolm.

Anne.

Jean.

ARMS.
Argent, an Eagle displayed, Sable, Supporters, two Griffons displayed of the
2d; Crest, an Unicorns Head coupe, Motto, Ora and Labora.

SCOT Earl of Delorain.
LORD Henry Scot, Son of James Duke of Monmouth, by Anne Duchess of Buclugh,
was in the fifth Year of the Reign of her Majesty Queen Anne, by Letters
Patent, bearing date the 29th of March 1706, created into the Dignity and
Titles of Earl of Delorain, Viscount of Hermitage, and Lord Scot of Goldylinds,
all in the County of Roxburgh.

He married Anne Daughter of William Duncomb of Batlesdin, in the County of
Bedford, Esquire and has Issue.

ARMS.
The same with the Family of Buclugh, with a proper Difference.

DENNISTON, Lord of Denniston.
THIS Family is one of the most ancient in the Shire of Renfrew, and was of
great Repute there, long before the Time of King Robert II, insomuch, that we
find Ronnaldus de Denniston, is a Witness to the Inquisition, which David
Prince of Cumberland made of the ancient Possessions of the Church of Glasgow,
Anno 1116, when John Achaian was promoted to that See. Hence descended Sir John
Denniston, Knight, who flourished under King David Bruce, he married......
Daughter of Malcolm Fleeming Earl of Wigton Chatta penes Comitem de Glencairn.
, by whom he had Sir Robert his Son and Heir, who obtained a Grant from King
Robert II. of the Barony of Glencairn, Anno 1370, and dying without Male Issue,
in the beginning of King Robert III, his Estate went to his Daughters, and Co
heirs,

Margaret, married to Sir William Cuningham of Kilma^rs, Ancestor to the Earl
of Glencairn, who thereby acquired the Baronies of Glencairn, Finlaystoun and
Kilmaronock.

Elisabeth, married to Sir Robert Maxwel of Calderwood, who thereupon added to
his paternal Coat, the Arms of the Family of Denniston, viz. Argent, a Bend
Azure, which is still born by Sir William Maxwel Baronet, his lineal Heir Male.
A Branch of this Family, Denniston of Cowgra^n, does still remain in Dunbarton
shire.

KEITH, Lord Dingwall.
A Collateral Branch of Keith Earl of Marishal, was Andrew Keith Esquire In the
Time of King James VI. who coming to Court, he soon grew so popular, that he
was first Knighted, and then by his Majesty's special Favor attained to the
Dignity of a Baron of this Realm, by the Title of Lord Keith of Dingwall,
before the Year 1584 Act of Parliament in favors of Andrew Lord Dingwall, Anno
1584.
. Being a Person of excellent Parts, he was with George Earl of Marishal sent
Ambassador to Denmark, to Treat about a Marriage betwixt King James and Anne a
Daughter of that Crown, which was happily concluded in 1589, but he dyed soon
after, without either Wife or Issue that I find.

PRESTON, Lord Dingwall.
THIS Surname was first assumed from the Lordship of Preston, in Vicecomitatu
Edinburgi, where they have been seated as early as the Reign of Alexander III.
The first of whom I have found upon Record, is Sir William Preston Knight, who
was one of the Barons of Scotland, who were summoned to Berwick in the 1291
Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
, when the Controversy run high betwixt Robert Bruce and John Baliol, for the
Crown of this Realm.

The principal Family of the Name seems to have been Craigmiller: Sir Henry
Preston Knight in the 2 d of Robert III, is joined in Commission with Sir John
Swinton, Sir Henry Douglass, and Sir John Dalziel Ibidem.
to treat with the English, touching a Peace betwixt the two Crowns. Of this
Family.

Sir Richard Preston was a younger Son in the Reign of James VI, whose high
Advancements to Honor, added no small Luster to this worthy Family. He was
educated at the Court, and being of an agreeable and winning Deportment, he
soon grew into his Majesty's special Favor, attaining first the Honor of
Knighthood, and e're long, was made one of the Grooms of the Bedchamber. Upon
King James's attaining the English Crown, he accompanied him into that Realm,
where he received further Honor, being made one of the Knights of the Bath, at
his Majesty's Coronation the 30 of July 1603 Lift of the Knights of the Bath,
in 1603.
. Also in 1607, he was further dignified with the Title of Lord Dingwall, the
Constabulary of which Castle, the King then bestowed on him. His faithful
Services, together with the King's Countenance, procured him the Marriage of
Elisabeth Daughter and Heir of the Earl of Desmond in the Kingdom of Ireland,
into which Dignity he was created, by Letters Patent, bearing date 24 July
1619, and departing this Life Anno 1622, the Irish Honor expired, but the
Title of Lord Dingwall being to the Heirs of his Body whatsoever lawfully
begotten, devolved upon the Lady Elisabeth his only Daughter and sole Heir,
married to James Duke of Ormond, by whom she had Issue, Thomas Earl of Ossory,
Richard Earl of Aran in Ireland; also two Daughters,

1. Elisabeth, married to Philip Earl of Chesterfield, by whom he had only one
Daughter Elisabeth, married to John late Earl of Strathmore.

2. Mary, to William Duke of Devonshire in England. But to return to Thomas
Earl of Ossory (the eldest Son) he being ^ummoned to the English Parliament by
the Title of Lord Butler of Moor-Park, was made Knight of the Garter, and
Rear-Admiral of his Majesty's Fleet; and being a Person of singular Worth, gave
many eminent Proofs of his Prudence and Valor both by Sea and Land, but was
suddenly snatched away by Death in the flower of his Age, Anno 1680. He married
the Lady Aemelia de Nassau, Daughter to Lewis de Nassau, Lord Beverwart, Son to
Maurice Prince of Orange, by whom he had,

James now Duke of Ormond, Charles Lord Butler of Westoun, also three Daughters,

1. Elisabeih, married to William Earl of Darby.

2. Aemelia, unmarried.

3. Henrietta, to Henry Earl of Grantham.

His Father surviving him eight Years, then gave way to Fate, his Estate and
Honor devolving upon the present Duke his Grandson, a lively Example of the
Valor and Gallantry of his two great Ancestors. In 1689, his Grace was
constituted one of the Bedchamber to the King, Captain of the second Troop of
Guards, and Knight of the Garter. On the Accession of her present Majesty to
the Throne, he was appointed Generalissimo of the Forces sent against Spain; in
his Return from whence he had a large share in the Service of destroying the
French Fleet in the Harbor of Vigo, and was afterward sent Lord Lieutenant
into Ireland; also he was named Generalissimo of her Majesty's Forces in
Flanders, upon the Removal of John Duke of Marleborough.

In 1710, he laid Claim to the Honor of Lord Dingwall, as being the Heir
gradually and lineally descending from Richard Lord Dingwall: Being found to
have Right, his Claim was allowed, and accordingly he Voted by his Proxy in the
Election of the Sixteen Scots Peers, (who by the Treaty of Union are to sit in
the House of Peers of Great Britain) 10th November the same Year.

He married first Anne, Daughter of Laurence Earl of Rochester, who deceased
without any surviving Issue; and to his second Wife Mary, Daughter of Henry
Duke of Beaufort, by whom he had Thomas Earl of Ossory, who dyed in 1694,
Elisabeth and Mary, both living unmarried.

ARMS.
Argent, three Unicorns Heads eras'd, Sable.

DOUGLASS, Duke of Douglass,
THIS Family is a very great and ancient one in Lanark shire, of which there is
a particular History wrote by a very learned Pen, who equalizes them to any of
the ancient Roman Families, and gives them the preference to all other in
Europe, those of crowned Heads excepted. They have been particularly famous for
great Generals, there having been more of this Name, than any other that is to
be met with in History; neither was it their native Country alone that was
indebted to their Valor, but they signalized themselves in most places of
Europe, and particularly in France, where they have had great Commands and
Titles, as Duke of Turrin, Count de Longoville, etc. In short, this Family
exceeded all the rest in the Kingdom, for the Number of Nobility and Gentry of
their own Name, according to those old Lines, So many so good as of the
Douglasses have been,
Of one Surname was never in Scotland seen.


The Origin of this illustrious House is derived from one Sholto, who in the
Reign of Solvathius King of Scotland, Anno Christi 770, having been the
principal Man that routed Donald Bane and his Forces, who invaded the Country,
and being a Dou glass, or a black pale Man, as these Words signify (says my
Author) both in old British and Irish, the King royaly rewarded his Services,
and made him a Grant of large Possessions in the County of Lanerk, which either
he or his Successors called Douglass, and from thence took the Surname of the
Family. This Sholto was the Father of Hugh, of whom there is nothing memorable.
He was succeeded in his Inheritance by his eldest Son Hugh II. whose younger
Brother William, being sent by Achaius King of Scotland, pursuant to his League
with Charlemaign, with 4000 choice Men into Italy against the Lombard's, he
performed many glorious Actions, and became the Root of the Family of Scoti at
Placentia.

But to leave the Family of the Scoti in Italy, William is supposed to be the
Son of Hugh Lord of Douglass, and the Father of John, who was the Father of
William, the next Lord of the Family, who is Witness among others to the
Charter of King William, whereby he confirmed the Lands of Dalgarnac given by
Adger the Son of Dovenald, to the Church of the Holy Cross at Edinburgh, in the
former part of that Reign: He left Issue two Sons, Archibald, who succeeded in
the Lordship, and Bricius, first Prior of Lisma^agoe, afterward Bishop of
Murray Chartulary of the Episcopal See of Murray, and the Chronicle of Melross.
.

Archibald first of the Name, married one of the Coheirs of the Barony of
Crawfurd of the same Sirame, Simson's Essay on the Family of Douglass.
and was succeeded by William III, the Father of Sir Hugh de Douglass, who
lived in the Time of Alexander III, and did signalize himself at the Battle of
the Largs, where the Scots obtained a glorious Victory over the Norvegians,
Anno 1263. He married Marjory, Daughter of Alexander, and Sister to Hugh Lord
of Abernethy Charta penes Ducem de Douglass.
; but having no Children by her, at least that survived him, his Brother
William, for Distinction called the Hardy, succeeded him. In the time of the
War with England, upon all Occasions he distinguished himself in the Service of
his Country. In the 1295, he was chosen Governor of Berwick, then in the Hands
of the Scots, which he defended with great Resolution and Courage; but
afterward falling into the Enemies hand, he dyed there Prisoner, Anno 1303 Mr.
Hume:
, leaving Issue by...... his Wife, Daughter of Keith of that Ilk, James Lord of
Douglass, and Hugh; also by Margaret Daughter to Ferrairs Earl of Darby, of the
Kingdom of England Mr. Simson.
, Archibald Lord of Galloway, of whom the Family descended, and John,
Progenitor to the Earl of Morton.

Which James Lord Douglass, commonly called The good Sir James, laid the
Fundation of the Grandeur of the House of Douglass: He was famous all the World
over for his Valor and glorious Actions in the Service of his Country, for
which his Memory will still be honored: He entered early into the Service of
King Robert Bruce, and in 1313 Abercrombie's Martial Atchievments.
he assaulted and took the Castle of Roxburgh from the English, and the next
Year he commanded the left Wing of the Scots Army, at the famous Battle of
Bannockburn, where he behaved so well, as to merit the Honor of Knighthood in
the Field Barber's Life of King Robert I.
, after which, he was constituted Warden of the Marches toward England
Abercromby.
, and entering Cumberland, wasted that County. In Consideration of his good
Services before that time performed, he had a Grant of the Castle, Village, and
Forest of Jedworth Charta penes ducem de Douglass, data 6 May 1319, alia data
apud Berwick 8 Nov. 1329.
, then erected into a free Forrestry, Cum indictamentis latrociniorum and
ministrationem earundem in omnibus terris suis infra regnum nostrum; and si
aliquis de hominibus suis per justitiarios nostros fuerint judicati, volumus
quod dictus Jacobus, haeredes sui, and eorum ministri habeant liberam earundem
ministrationem cum omnibus libertatibus, commoditatibus ad predicta
indictamenta pertinen. in feudo and haereditate perpetuo, salvo tantum communi
auxilio pro defensione regni nostri contingenti, And the Seasin is declared to
be the giving him the King's Ring with the Emerauld Stone.

An Author reckons this illustrious Person to have been in fifty seven Battles
and Re-encounters against the English, thirteen times victorious against the
Saracens, and other Infidels, thrice as often as he had been Years in Action,
which were about twenty four, from King Robert Bruce's Coronation, 1306, to the
time of his Death, in 1330, which happened fighting against the Saracens, the
Enemies of our Faith. Now tho what is above recorded of this noble Lord were
alone sufficient to preserve his Memory, yet cannot I omit adding this Epitaph
which Mr. Hume gives him. Quicquid sors potuit mortali in pectore far,
Vel facere, hoc didici perficere, atque pati.
Prima ubi luctando vici, sors affuit ausis
Omnibus: and quid non pro patria ausus eram?
Hosti terror ego: nullus me terruit hostis:
Consiliis junxi rob^^ a dura meis.
Praelia quot numerat, titulos, actosque triumph^^
Brucius, hinc totidem pene trophaea mihi.
Qua jam signa feram? major quaerendus and orbi^,
Atque hostis; famam non cap^^ iste meam.
Arma Saraceno objeci prope littora Calpes
Herculeae, hic tellus me male fausta tegit.
Herculea Graecis memoretur gloria lud^,
Fallor an Herculea stant potiora mea.


Sir James was succeeded by his Brother Hugh, but an unactive Man, of whom
there is little on Record, having no Issue of his own Body. In 1343, he
resigned the Lordship of Douglass, in favors of Sir William his Nephew (Son of
Archibald Lord of Galloway, who was slain at the Battle of Halydonhill, so
fatal to the Scots, Anno 1333) whereupon he obtained from King David Bruce a
Charter De omnibus terris reditus and possessiones per totum regnum Scotiae, de
quibus quondam Jacobus Dominus de Douglass avunculus suus and Archibaldus pater
suus obierunt vestiti, cum regalitate and libera warena, integre and
honorifice, una cum ducatu hominum Vicecomitatum de Roxburgh and Selkrig. In
the 1346, he was Warden of the East Marches toward England, and accompanying
King David to the Battle of Durham, he was taken Prisoner with his Sovereign
Hume.
, but was soon afterward released. In 1357, he was one of the Commissioners on
the part of Scotland, authorized to treat with the English about the Redemption
of the King Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
, and among other Nobles bound to Edward III, for a hundred thousand Pound
Sterling Ransom, in which Deed he is designed Willielmus Dominus de Douglass
miles. Much about the same time he was dignified with the Honor of Earl of
Douglass; for I find him entitled Willielmus comes de Douglass, when he is
joined in Commission with diverse Lords to treat with English Commissioners
about King David's Enlargement Rymer.
. This Earl was deeply engaged on the French side, in the memorable Battle of
P^ictiers (where John King of France was taken Prisoner by the Black Prince)
and very narrowly escaped, being then Ambassador from King Robert II. to the
French Court, where the ancient Alliance betwixt the two Crowns was renewed and
confirmed. As for his Works of Piety, I have only discovered, that he gave in
pure Alms to the Abbey of Melross, and the Monks serving, and perpetually to
serve God there, the Patronage of the Church of Cavers, with its Tithes, for
celebrating Divine Service there, according to the Tenor of a special
Ordination by him made, viz. for certain Priests, who were to perform that
Service for the good Estate of his Sovereign Lord King David, and of himself,
during his Life, and for the health of his Soul, and his Ancestors and
Successors after his Departure hence; and which Donation the said King ratified
in the 30th of his Reign.

He married first Margaret, Daughter of Donald, Sister, and at length sole Heir
of Thomas Earl of Mar Here I take the liberty to differ from Mr. Hume, who
says, this Earl's first Marriage, was with the Earl of March's Daughter, and
that he had by her James Earl of Douglass, killed at Otterburn, which is a
Mistake, for I have seen a Mortification by Margaret Countess of Douglass and
Mar, to the Church of St. Mary of Garrioch, for the Soul of William Earl of
Douglass, her Husband, and James Earl of Douglass her Son and Heir: Also
there is a Confirmation by the same Earl James to the Monks of Melross of the
Church of Cavers, wherein he is designed Comes de Douglass and Mar: Moreover,
it is to be considered, that upon the Decease of Earl James, Isabel his Sister,
of the whole Blood, succeeded him in the Honor of Mar, when the Earldom of
Douglass devolved upon Archibald their Brother of the half Blood.
, by whom he had James his Son and Heir, and Isabel, a Daughter, after the
Death of her Brother Countess of Mar, who became first the Wife of Sir Malcolm
Drummond of Cargill, who in Right of her was entitled Lord Mar Charta penes
Ducem de Douglass.
, and thereafter of Sir Alexander Steuart Knight, in whose favor she resigned
the said Earldom, Anno 1404, Causa (says she) Matrimonii contracti inter
dominum Alexandrum Senescal and nos dictam Isabellam Charta in Rotulis Roberti
III.
, which Honor he enjoyed till his Death.

This Earl William's second Marriage (having Divorced his former Wife) was with
Margaret, Daughter of Patrick Earl of March This is with greater Probability,
than that he was Brother by the same Mother to James Earl of Douglass, killed
at Otterburn; for when he succeeded to the Honor and Estate of Douglass, he
made no Claim to Mar, which descended to Isabel, Earl James's Sister, as is
above narrated.
, by whom he had Archibald Lord Galloway, afterward Earl of Douglass: And his
third and last was Margaret, Daughter and Heir of Thomas Steuart Earl of Angus,
by whom he had George Douglass first Earl of Angus of that Name: He departed
this Life in 1384, and was interred in the Abbey Church of Melross, according to
Mr. Winton, whose Words are these, To Douglasdale as I heard say,
An Sickness took him by the way,
And there he dyed in short space,
:::::::::::
To Melrose then they took his Body,
And there it bury it right honorably.


This Earl was succeeded by James his Son, between whom and Sir Henry Percy
there were glorious Feats of Arms performed in Honor of their Country. He was
killed at the Battle of Otterburn, 31 of July 1388, fought betwixt him and Sir
Henry Hotspur, Son to the Earl of Northumberland, an Encounter, says one,
managed with that unparallelled Courage on both sides, that it was hardly to be
matched in History, and was the Occasion of an old Rhyme, of which this is a
part, It fell about the Lammas Tide,
When Yeoman win the Hay,
The doughtie Douglass began to ride
In England to take a Prey.


Mr. John Johnston, our famous Poet, has endeavored on his Part, to perpetuate
his Memory by the following Elegy, Quaeritis o quid agam? en animam jam ago:
fata meorum
Hac sequor. Innumero huc vulnere facta via est.
Nesciat hoc hostis: sequitor quam quisque secat spem,
Atque aliquis nestri funeris ulter ades.
Finiit, and subito redivivo funere surgens
Mars novus intonuit, victor and ultor obit.


This Heroic Earl was married with the Lady Isabel Steuart, Daughter to King
Robert II History of the Royal Family of Steuart, Anno 1710.
, but dying without lawful Issue, he was succeeded in the Earldom by

Archibald Lord Galloway, his Brother, commonly called Archibald the Grim. In
1381 he was sent Ambassador to France, which Negotiation he managed with
Success and Honor. This Earl added to his ancient patrimonial Inheritance the
Lordship of Bothwel, in Vicecomitatu Lanerici, by Marriage of Elisabeth, only
Daughter and sole Heir of Thomas Murray, Lord of Bothwell, and thereupon had an
Augmentation to his ancient Arms, viz. Azure, three Molle^s within a double
Tressure, Or. He founded the Collegiate Church of Bothwell, establishing
Maintenance for a Provost and eight Prebends, out of the Lands of Osbairnstoun
and Nether-Urd, who were continually to perform the Offices of the Church for
the Soul of him and his Successors, of the Date 10th October. 1398 Spotiswood's
Practiques.
, and departing this Life in the Month of February 1400 Simson.
, he was interred at Bothwell Church, without any Epitaph on his Monument,
leaving Issue by the said Elisabeth his Wife, Archibald his Successor, and a
Daughter Marjory, married to David Prince of Scotland, elder Brother to King
James I.

Which Archibald was a Nobleman of great Valor, and much addicted to Arms. In
1401, he had a Command in the South against the English, ravaged the Country as
far as Newcastle, carried of the Stores, and then returned Home without any
manner of Loss.

This Earl was in such Esteem for his Conduct, Valor, and other bright
Qualities, that he was made Captain General of all the Forces then designed to
be transported into France, in behalf of the French against the English, where
he did such signal Service to that Crown, that King Charles VII. invested him
in the Duchy of Turrin, and to his Heirs Male for ever, and made him Marishal
of France ( d) Hume.
: He had the chief Command in the Battle of Vernoil, where he lost his Li^e,
7th of August 1425, and was interred in St. Gratians Church in Tours.

This Earl had Issue by his Wife Margaret, Daughter of King Robert III.

Archibald, who succeeded him,

James, Lord Abercorn.

Margaret, married to William Earl of Orkney.

Elisabeth, to John Steuart Earl of Buchan, Constable of France, and
Chamberlain of Scotland.

Helen, to Alexander Lauder of Hatton.

Mary, to Sir Simon Glenddining of that Ilk Simson.
.

Archibald, next Earl of Douglass, his Son, was a Person of great
Accomplishments either for Peace or War: I find him in 1424, appointed to go
upon a solemn Embassy into England to treat upon the Redemption of King James
I. Henry Bishop of Aberdeen, and Sir William Hay of Err^ll, were appointed to
accompany him, and to be his Colleagues: The first mention of his Martial
Actions is in 1420, the first of the Government of Murdack Duke of Albany, when
he, with his Brother-in-law, John Earl of Buchan, were sent into France with
7000 Auxiliaries, wherewith they performed many signal Services against the
English: He gave way to Fate on the 26 June 1438, and was buried in the Church
of Douglass, with this Epitaph on his Monument, Hic jacet Dominus Archibaldus
Douglass Dux Turroniae, Co^es de Douglass and Longoville, Dominus Gallovidiae.
and Annandiae, locum tenens Regis Scotiae, obiit 26 June, Anno Dom. Millefi^o
quadringentesimo Trigesimo ^ctavo.

This Earl had no Issue by his first Wife Matilda Simson.
, Daughter of David Earl of Crawfurd: But Eupham Graham Ibidem.
, Daughter of Patrick Earl of Strathern, his second Wife, bore him two Sons,
viz. William, who succeeded him. 2 d. David, and Margaret a Daughter, first
Countess of Douglass, and thereafter the Wife of John Steuart, Earl of Athole,
Uterine Brother to King James II.

To Archibald Earl of Douglass succeeded William his Son, a Youth of great
Expectation, of an high Spirit and a sweet Disposition, but the Vanity of his
followers, and his own want of Experience, led him into several Misdemeanors,
and being on his Journey to a designed Parliament, he was met, and sumptuously
entertained by William Lord Crichton, then Chancellor, who minded him of the
Greatness and Merit of the Family, and his own Duty to the Crown; the Earl in
Return acknowledged his Fault lay in his Youth and Ignorance, blaim'd his evil
Counselors, chided his Dependents, promised Obedience for the future, and gave
all the Marks of a sincere and generous Resolution: But after all this, he was
invited to the Castle of Edinburgh, and being set at the King's Table, was
suddenly removed, and instantly murdered, in the 16th Year of his Age, together
with his younger Brother David, and Sir Malcolm Fleeming of Cumbernald, his
Friend, Anno. 1441.

To William last mentioned, succeeded James Lord Abercorn, his Uncle, for
Distinction called The gross Earl, of whom I find nothing remarkable, save that
he was Warden of the Marches toward England, in the Reign of King James II. He
married Beatrix Sinclair, Daughter to the Earl of Orkney, who bore him six
Sons, viz. William, who succeeded him. James Douglass, Knight, who took to Wife
Mary, one of the two Daughters and Coheirs of James Dunbar Earl of Murray, in
Right of whom he came to possess that Honor. Sir Hugh Douglass 4th Son, was
Earl of Ormond. John Lord Balveny, and Henry the youngest; also four Daughters,

1. Margaret, married to James Earl of Morton, and had Issue.

2. Beatrix to the Lord Aubignie.

3. Janet, to Robert Lord Fleeming, Ancestor to the present Earl of Wigton.

4. Elisabeth, to Wallace of Craigie in Vicecomitatu de Air Simson.
.

This Earl died the 24th of March 1443, and was interred at Douglass-Church:
Upon his Tomb ye may read this Epitaph, Hic jacet magnus and potens Princeps
Jacobus Comes de Douglass, Dominus Annandiae and Gallovidiae, Liddaliae, and
Jedburgh-forestiae, and Dominus de Balvenia magnus Wardanus Regni Scotiae
versus Angliam, etc. qui obiit vicesimo quarto die mensis Martii, Anno Domini
millesimo quadringentesimo quadragesimo tertio.

William, Son and Heir of the former Earl, being unwilling that so great an
Inheritance as the Earldom of Douglass was, should be divided, married
Margaret, Daughter of William, and Sister and Heir to William Earl of Douglass
his Cousin, A Marriage (says one) made him as much hated by his Friends, as
feared by his Enemies. This Earl prosecuted Revenge on Chancellor Crichton, as
the Author of his Cousins Death with more Violence than Success, his
Affectation of a mighty Pomp and Splendour, procured him Envy: His Contempt of
the Courtiers begot Hatred, and incurred him their Displeasure. They improved
his Faillings, magnified his Designs, and plotted his Ruin; His Power and
haughty Conduct rendered him suspected to his Sovereign K. James II, whose Hand
and Dagger put a period to his Life in Stirling Castle, the 13th of February
1452.

James succeeded to William his Brother in the Earldom, he took up Arms against
his Prince; and coming to a Battle, he was entirely routed by the Earl of
Angus, the King's Lieutenant, Anno 1455. Retireing then to the Court of
England, he was intertain'd by King Edward, who made him one of the Knights of
the most noble Order of the Garter; but invading the Kingdom again with with
the Duke of Albany, assisted from England, Anno 1483, he was taken Prisoner,
and confined in the Abbey of Lindores, where he took upon him religious Orders,
and continued in Devotion till his Life's End, which happned to fall out on
15th of April 1488: He was interred before the high Altar, under a Marble Stone,
to which was affixed a Tablet of Brass Sir James Balfout's Peerage of Scotland
M.S. penes me.
containing this Inscription, Hic Requiescunt Ossa Jacobi quondam Comitis de
Douglass, inclyti hujus Monasterii Monachi, qui po^^ (...) vitae discrimina
obiit in summa pace (...) di^ Aprilis, Anno Domini millesimo (...)simo
octogesimo octavo.

This Earl is thus Uncharacterized by a good Historian Mr. Simson.
, who says, He was a Nobleman of a Majestic Presence, Valiant, Learned, and
Wise, but of a resolute and precise Temper, yet somewhat over distr^stful of
his own Power, and other Performances, and if he had been either a more
resolute Adventurer, or a more complying and submissive Subject, he might have
made Peace on his own Terms. I shall conclude with Mr. Hume's Epitaph on him,
as Follows, Quid rides rasumque caput, cellaeque recessum?
Quod que cucullatis Fratribus anumeror?
Si fortuna volvente vices fiet modo Princeps,
Plebeius: Monachus saepe Monarcha fuit.
Englished, Why do you laugh to see my shaven Crown?
My Cell, my Cloister, and my Hooded-Gown?
This is the Power of that Sovereign Queen,
By whom Monks, Monarchs, Monarchs Monks have been.
The principal Branch of the Illustrious Family of Douglass, thus expiring, I
shall at present confine my Memoirs to the House of Angus, the next great
Family of the Name, who, tho inferior to that of the old Earls of Douglass yet
exceeded most others for Royalties, Greatness, number of Vassals, and Military
Glory. They had many Privileges inherent in their Family, as, that ^^e Earls of
Angus should have the first Place and Vote in Parliament or Council, that he
should carry the Crown in Riding of Parliaments, to be the King's hereditary
Lieutenant, and to have the leading of the Van of the Army in the Day of
Battle; all which were confirmed by King James VI. to William Earl of Angus
Anno 1591.

George Douglass, first Earl of Angus, was only Son of William first Earl of
Douglass, by Margaret his 3 d Wife, Daughter and Heir of Thomas Steuart Earl of
Angus: He was invested in this H^^our upon his Mother's Resignation by a
Charter, of which this is a part,

Robertus Dei gratia Rex Scotorum, etc. sciatis nos dedisse and hac Charta
confirmasse Georgio Douglas totam and integrum Comitatum Angusie, cum Dominio
de Ahernethy jacent. in Vicecomitatu de Perth and Berwick, and heredibus
masculis corporis dicti Georgi^; quibus deficientibus Alexandro Hamilton militi
and Elisabethae Steuart sponsae suae sorori dicte Comit^sse Angusie, etc. Test.
Waltero Episcopo sancte Andreae, Joanne Episcopo Dunkelden. Cancellario, Joanne
Comite de Carrick Senescallo Scotiae primogenito nostro, Roberto Comite de Fife
and Montieth Custode Scotiae, filio nostro. Apud Edinburg decimo die Aprilis,
Anno Regni nostri decimo nono, Anno Dom. 1389.

This George, in the 1397, married the Lady Mary Steuart, Daughter to King
Robert III The original Contract extant in the Writes of the Family of Douglass.
, by whom he had William his Successor, Sir George Douglass Knight, and a
Daughter Elisabeth, married to Sir William Hay of Lockhart Charta penes
Marchionem de Twedal ad Annum 1409.
, Ancestor to the present Marquess of Tweddal. All that I have found in History
of this Earl, is, that he accompanied the Earl of Douglass to the Battle of
Homildon, where he was taken Prisoner, and there falling Sick, he dyed Anno
1402, his Lady re-marrying with Sir James Kennedy Knight, after that she became
the Wife of Sir William Graham of Kincardin, whom surviving, also she was a
fourth time married to Sir William Edmiston of Duntreath Charta Jacobi II.
Willielmo Edmiston de Colodin militi and Mariae Comitissae Angusiae sponsae
suae amitae nostrae de terris de Duntreath, Anno 1452, penes Dominum Duntreath.
.

William, second Earl of Angus, in the 1423, was sent to England one of the
Hostages for the Ransom of King James I. his Uncle Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
, at the Solemnity of whose Coronation he had the Honor of Knighthood
conferred on him, an Honor much more valued in ancient Times than we have
since sound it to be: And in the Year 1424, he was one of the Peers that sat
upon the Trial of Murdock Duke of Albany History of the Royal Family put fu^^h
in 1710.
, and the 29th of the said Reign he was appointed Warden of the middle Marches
toward England, and the next Year after, had a special Grant of all the
Manors, Castles, and Lands descended to him from his Ancestors, in as ample
manner as they held the same.

In 1436, the English making several Incursions upon the Borders, under the
command of the valiant Percy, he was sent against them, where he destroyed
several Towns upon the Marches, and routed them at Piperdeen. He departing this
Life the following Year 1437 Simson.
, left Issue by Elisabeth his Wife, Daughter of Sir William Hay of Locherret
Dispensation by William Bishop of Glasgow for William Douglass Earl of Angus to
marry Margaret Daughter of Sir William Hay of Locherret, in the 1425, in the
Writes of the Family of Yester.
, my Lord Tweddal's Ancestor, James who succeeded in the Honor.

Which James, in the second of James II. was one of the Conservators of the
Peace with England Mr. Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
, a Truce being then concluded betwixt the two Realms. He married the Lady Jean
Steuart, Daughter to King James I, but dying without Issue, he was succeeded
both in his Honor and Estate by

Sir George Douglass his Uncle Mr. Hume.
, a Man of great Parts, and much esteemed for Wisdom, Loyalty, and Valor. The
first notice of him, is in the 1449, that he was one of the Commissioners on
the part of Scotland, who met with several English Lords at Berwick, and there
concluded a League of stricter Amity, as they termed it, betwixt both Nations;
and soon after he was constituted Warden of the East and Middle Marches Ibidem.
. In 1457, the 20th of James II, he was sent against the Earl of Douglass, then
in Rebellion, which he successfully quelled; in Consideration of which special
Service so performed by him, he had a Grant of the Lordship and Barony of
Douglass. Finally he Indents with Henry VI. of England, then dispossessed of
the Crown by Edward Duke of York, that for the Earl's Assistance toward his
Restoration, he obliges himself in verbo Principis, that he shall erect to his
Lordship and his Heirs, as much Land betwixt Humber and Trent as shall amount
to two thousand Merks Sterling a Year; and at the same time by a bold
Interprise, he relived Monsieur Brisack and the French Troops under his
Command, then besieged in the Castle of Alnwick, in the sight of the English
Army, and brought them safe into Scotland, but after all his great and loyal
Services, he gave way to Fate, well advanced in Age, 14th November 1462, and
was buried with his Ancestors at Abernethy. His Wife was Elisabeth, Daughter of
Sir Andrew Sibbald of Balgony in Vicecomitatu de Fife, by whom he had Archibald
the next Earl, George Douglass of Bonjedward Simson's Notes on the Family of
Douglass.
, and three Daughters,

Jean, married to William Lord Graham Charta Willielmi Domini Graham, and
Jeanae Douglass sponsae suae Georgio Graham ^orum filio de terris de Calendar.
.

Elisabeth, to Sir Robert Graham of Fintrie, and had Issue.

Margaret, to Sir Duncan Campbel of Glenurchie, Ancestor to the Earl of
Breadalbin.

Archibald his Son and Heir succeeding, commonly designed The great Earl, he
made a considerable Figure in the Reigns of James III, and IV. In 1488, he was
one of the associating Lords who at Lawder-Bridge, in presence of the King
seized on Thomas Homil and Robert Cochran the mean Favorites of that Prince,
and caused Execute them as the Authors of the Mismanagement of the public
Affairs, tho I don't find he was in the Prince's Army at Bannockburn, where the
unfortunate King lost his Life. In the 24th of James IV, Anno 1492, he was made
Warden of the Marches, also one of the King's Privy Council, and the next Year
constituted Lord high Chancellor of Scotland, then void by the Decease of Colin
Earl of Argyle, from which he was removed in 1498, George Earl of Huntly being
put in his stead.

H^s first Wife was Elisabeth, Daughter of Robert Lord Boyd, Lord high
Chamberlain of Scotland, by whom he had three Sons,

1. George, Master of Angus.

2. Sir William Douglass of Braidwood, who was killed at Flowdon, of whom and
his Descendants more will be said afterward.

3. Gavin Douglass third Son, devoting himself to the Service of the Church,
was put into Orders about 1493: His first Preferment was to the Rectory of
Heriot, and then to the Provostry of St. Giles, Edinburgh, in which Station he
continued till the 1515, he was promoted to the Episcopal See of Dunkeld, then
void by the Death of Bishop Brown, where he exercised his Episcopal Function
till Death took him away, Anno 1522 Vitae Episcoporum Dunkelden. M.S. penes me.
.

His second Wife was Catherine, Daughter of Sir William Stirling of Keir, in
Vicecomitatu de Perth Remarks upon the Family of Angus, by Mr. David Simson.
, who bore him a Son Archibald Douglass of Kilspindy Ibidem.
, and three Daughters. 1 st. Marjory, married to C^thbert Earl of Glencairn. 2
d. Elisabeth to Robert Lord Lyle, Justice General of Scotland, in the Reign of
King James IV. 3 d. Janet, to Robert Lord Herris, Ancestor to the Earl of
Nithsdale.

But its requisite here to observe, That George Master of Angus, married
Margaret, Daughter of John, first Lord Drummond: His Children by her were three
Sons,

1. Archibald, who succeeded his Grandfather.

2. Sir George Douglass, who by Elisabeth his Wife, Daughter and sole Heir of
David Douglass of Pittendrich Charta in Rotulis Jacobi quinti ad Annum 1535.
had Issue David, afterward Earl of Angus, James Earl of Morton, Regent of
Scotland, in the Minority of King James VI. Elisabeth, married to Sir John
Carmichael of that Ilk, and Mary to Sir George Anchinleck of Balmanno
Manuscript History of the House of Angus, in the Custody of Sir Robert Douglass
of Glenbervy, Baronet.
, in Vicecomitatu de Perth.

3. William, Prior of Coldingham, afterward promoted to be Abbot of
Holy-rood-house, Anno 1522, upon the Promotion of George Crichton to the
Episcopal See of Dunkeld.

Also six Daughters, Elisabeth married to John Lord Yester, Progenitor to the
Marquess of Tweddale. Janet to John Lord Glammis, Ancestor to the Earl of
Strathmore. Janet, to Sir James Douglass of Drumlanrig, Ancestor to the Duke of
Queensberry. Alison, married first to Robert Blackader of that Ilk, in
Vicecomitatu de Berwick, and secondly to Sir David Hume of Wedderburn, in dicto
Vicecomitatu. Margaret, to Robert Crawfurd of Achinnaims, in Vicecomitatu de
Renfrew. This George behaving himself very gallantly at Flowdonfield, there
lost his Life, with two hundred Gentlemen of his Name and Family, 9th September
1513; which Disaster so affected his aged Father, that he retired from the
World to prepare himself for Death, which he was sensible was approaching, and
it happened in the Beginning of the next Year 1514.

To Archibald the great Earl of Angus succeeded Archibald his Grandson, a
Person of great Accomplishments, either for Peace or War. This noble Person in
his Youth traveled into France and other Foreign Parts, where he received
great Honors from the Princes themselves of these respective Countries,
particularly from Henry II. of France, who made him a Knight of the most noble
Order of St. Michael. About the Time of his Return, Anno 1515, Scotland was
then afflicted with the Death of King James IV. who left his Son very Young,
and the Regency to the Queen Mother, who for her better Support married this
Earl.

Upon the Resignation of the Government by the Duke of Albany, he together with
the Earls of Aran, Lennox, and Argyle, by a special Act were made Counselors
to the young King James V. Anno 1521, and the Year after constituted Lord high
Chancellor of Scotland; he held the Office till the Year 1528, at which time,
upon a Disgust taken against him by the King, he was removed and out-lawed,
whereupon he retired into England, where he was nobly entertained by Henry
VIII. and taken into the Number of his Privy Council, where he sojourned
fifteen Years, till the Death of King James V. Anno 1542. Then returning ^ome,
he was Parliamentarily restored to his Estate and Titles of Honor, and at the
fatal Battle of Pinkiefield he commanded the Vanguard of the Army against the
English, where he behaved very worthily, and living peaceably the remainder of
his Days, he departed this Life at his Castle of Tantallon, in the 1557, aged
64, and was interred at Abernethy.

This gallant Earl married thrice, his first Wife being Margaret Hepburn
Daughter of Patrick Earl of Bothwell, by her he had no Children. Next, he had
the Honor to marry Margaret of England, Widow of James IV. of Scotland, eldest
Daughter of Henry VII. and Sister to Henry VIII. Kings of England, who bore him
one Daughter, the Lady Margaret Douglass, married to Matthew third Earl of
Lennox, Mother by him of Henry Duke of Albany, Lord Darnly, etc. Father of
James VI. first Monarch of Great Britain. His third Wife was Margaret Daughter
of John Lord Maxwell, by whom he had a Son James, who dyed in his Childhood. To
Archibald Earl of Angus succeeded,

Sir David Douglass of Pittendrich, his Nephew, who did not live long to enjoy
the Honor: He departing this Life in 1558, leaving Issue by Margaret his Wife,
Daughter of Sir John Hamilton of Clidesdale, Brother to James Duke of
Chatlerault, Widow of Sir John Johnston of that Ilk, a Son Archibald, who
succeeded into the Honor; also two Daughters,

Margaret, married to Sir Walter Scot of Buclugh, and after his Death to
Francis Steuart Earl of Bothwell.

Elisabeth, to John Lord Maxwell, afterward Earl of Morton.

Which Archibald, for his virtuous Endowments, was Surnamed The good Earl. He
married first Margaret E^skine Daughter of John Earl of Mar. Next, Margaret
Daughter to the Earl of Rothes, but by neither of these had he any Issue. 3 dly
Jean, Daughter of John Lord Glammis, who bore him a Daughter Elisabeth, who
dyed a Maid.

The first time I find this Earl in public Business, is in 1573, he was
constituted Sheriff of Berwick, and one of the Wardens on the Borders, which he
exerced with an universal Reputation for five or six Years, Justice never being
better administered.

Upon the fall of his Uncle the Earl of Morton, the King grew jealous of him,
whereupon he retired to England, where he was bountifully entertained by Queen
Elisabeth, and there he had Opportunity to contract a Friendship with the
famous Sir Philip Sidney, very much to their mutual Satisfaction: But after
some Years, upon better Information, his Majesty not only restored him to his
former Favor and Familiarity, but appointed him Lieutenant on the Borders,
which he defended with great Reputation for several Years; but at last being
seized with a Sickness, which was thought to be Sorcery, he languished under
his Distemper till about the end of July 1588, at which time he gave way to
Fate, with the Character of being a good Man in all respects, well versed in
Learning, and tho endowed with many excellent Qualities, his Piety was allowed
to be the reigning Virtue in him. He was interred at the Collegiate Church of
Abernethy; upon him I find this Epitaph, Morte jacet saeva Angusius, spes illa
bonorum,
Terror malorum maximus:
Cui, laud and luctu meritis, pia turba parentat;
Patrem, Parentem ingeminans.
Par studium impietas simulat: quem carpere livor
Vivum solebat, mortuum
Aut veris sequitur lacrymis, aut gaudia fictis
Celat pudenda; and laudibus
Saltem non fictis os pene invita resolvit,
Seque arguit mendacii.
O laus! O very vis! O victoria! honosque
Cunctis triumphis clarior!
Englished, Angus by cruel Death lies here,
The good Man's hope, the wickeds Fear,
The Praise and Sorrow of the most
Religious, who, as having ^^st
A Father, mourn, most Men are known
To find a Woe if they have none.
Envy, accustomed to wrong
His guiltless Life, imploys her Tongue
Now a loud Trumpet of his Fame,
And weeps, if not for Grief, for Shame,
Enforced to give her self the Lie,
O Power of Truth! O Victory!
By which more Honor is obtained,
Than is in greatest Triumphs gained.


The Male Line of George Master of Angus terminating in this Earl, the Honor
and Estate, by reason of the entail upon the Heirs Male, devolved on Sir
William Douglass of Glenbervy.

Glenbervy is a Barony in the Shire of Kincardin, which was the Possession of
the Melvil's: As far back as the Time of Alexander II. Philip de Melvil Knight,
executed the Office of Sheriff of Aberdeen, in the beginning of that Reign
Chartulary of Arbroth.
. In his Line the Barony continued till the the 8th of James III, Anno 1468
Charta in Rotulis Jacobi III. ad Annum 1468.
, and then determined in Elisabeth, Daughter, and at length sole Heir of
Alexander Melvil of Glenbervy, married to Sir John Achinleck of that Ilk, an
ancient Family in Air-Shire Charta in Rotulis dicti Regis.
, by whom he had James his Son and Heir, who marrying Giles Daughter of Sir
John Ross of Halkhead, Knight Charta penes Ducem de Douglass.
, left a Daughter Elisabeth his sole Heir, whose Ward and Marriage falling to
the King, James IV. he assigned it to Sir William Douglass of Braidwood,
Knight, Son to Archibald Earl of Angus Ibidem.
, Anno 1492: Whereupon there happned a Contest betwixt the said Elisabeth and
James Achinleck of that Ilk, her Cousin German, about the Right of Succession:
The Matter at length, after long Dispute, was referred by both Parties to
certain Noblemen, who determined the Barony of Glenbervy to the said Elisabeth,
and Sir William Douglass her Husband, whereupon he took the Coat of Achinleck,
viz. A Cross imbattled, Sable, into his Atchievment. He was killed at the fatal
Battle of Flowdon, Anno 1513, leaving Issue by the said Elisabeth his Wife,
Archibald his Son and Heir, on whom King James V. conferred the Honor of
Knighthood. His first Wife was Agnes, Daughter of William Earl Marishall, by
whom he had William his Son and Heir: Also by his second Marriage with Mary,
Daughter of Sir Alexander Irvine of Drum, he had two Sons,

1. James, a Clergyman, Parson of the Paroch Church of Glenbervy, Grandfather
by Robert Douglass of Kilmonth, his eldest Son, of the right reverend Dr.
Robert Douglass Bishop of Dumblain, he was born Anno 1626, and had his Grammar
Education in the Country, from whence being sent to the University of Aberdeen,
he proceeded to the Degree of Master of Arts, continuing to pursue, his
Theological Sudies with great Assiduity, he commenced Preacher about the Year
1650, but what was his first ministerial Charge before he was Parson of Renfrew
in the West, does not occurr to me. From thence, after some Years stay, he was
removed to the Provostry of Bothwell, and not long after that, to the Deanery of
Glasgow, and Parsonage of Hamilton, where he continued to exercise his
Ministerial Function, till Dr. Robert Lawry, who had presided over the
Episcopal See of Brechin, from the Year 1671, to the 1682, departing this Life,
Mr. Douglass was consecrated in his Room, and on the 29th of June 1684
translated to the Sea of Dumblain, where he continued in the exercise of his
Episcopal Function till the 1689, he was deprived of his Bishopric; since
which time, he has made Conscience to live peaceably under King William's
Government, and that of her present Majesty, and is now arrived to the uncommon
age of 87, exercising himself daily in Works of Devotion and Piety, patiently
waiting till the great Change come of translating him from this World, to the
State of endless Felicity in the other.

2. John Douglass, second Son.

To Sir Archibald Douglass of Glenbervy, succeeded Sir William his Son and
Heir, to whom the Honor of Earl of Angus devolved Anno 1588.

This Earl, while a private Gentleman, accompanied Queen Mary in her Northern
Expedition, Anno 1562, and was active in the Fight at Corrichie, where
Alexander Earl of Huntly was slain. Upon the turn of the Reformation, in the
memorable Year 1560, when both the Doctrine of the Church, and Authority of the
Bishop, of Rome was parliamentarly abolished; he did eminently signalize
himself by his firm Adherence to, and zealous Profession of the Protestant
Religion, of which he was a very great Promoter, and of Consequence was a
mighty Supporter of King James VI's. Authority during the Administration of the
Regents Murray, Lennox, Mar, and Morton; which in that Prince's Minority, very
much to his Detriment, he maintained, assisting both with his Money and
Counsel; but having no Opportunity of signalizing himsely by Arms, we hear no
more of moment concerning him, till the time of his Death, which happened 14
April 1591, leaving a numerous Family by Giles his Wife, Daughter of Sir Robert
Graham of Morphie, in Vicecomitatu de Kincardin;

1. William his Successor in the Honor.

2. Sir Robert, who got his Father's paternal Estate of Glenbervy, and was
created Baronet, by King Charles I. the 30th of May 1625, being the sixth in
Number of Precedence in that Honor. His Wife was Elisabeth, Daughter of Sir
George Auchinleck of Balmanno, by whom he had Sir William his Successor, and
Dr. George Douglass Rector of Stepney, Grandfather to Sir Robert Douglass now
of Glenbervy, Baronet.

3 d Son Gavin Douglass of Bridgeford.

4 th. John Douglass of Barras.

Margar^^ eldest Daughter, married to John Forbes of Monimusk, in Vicecomitatu
de Aberdeen. Elisabeth the second, to Sir Alexander Gordon of Cluny. Jean the
third, to James Wishart of Pittarow, in Vicecomitatu de Kincardin. Sarah ^ourth
and youngest, to Sir Alexander Strachan of Thorntoun Baronet, and after his
Death to Sir George Auchinleck of Balmanno.

William his eldest Son, succeeded in the Honor, was a Nobleman well versed in
the Antiquities and History of his Country, especially in that Part relating to
Genealogies; and from the Scots History, and the Documents of his Family, he
wrote a Chronicle of the Douglasses, a much more elaborate Work than that put
out in the Year 1644, Dedicated to the Marquis of Douglass. This Earl, in the
latter part of his Life, made Defection to the Romish Faith, which put him so
much under the King's Displeasure, that with leave he retired into France,
where he spun out his Time in the Devotions of that Church till his Death, in
the Year 1616. His wife was Elisabeth, Daughter of Lawrence Lord Oliphant, by
Margaret his Wife, Daughter of George Earl o^ Errol, by whom he had three Sons,
and two Daughters, William Lord Angus his Successor, Sir James Douglass
afterward Lord Mordingtoun, S^r Francis Douglass of Sandilands, Knight.

Mary, second Wife of Alexander Earl of Linlithgow, Margaret, to Sir Alexander
Campbel of Calder, in Vicecamitatu Moraviae, and had Issue.

To this Earl succeeded William his Son, who as he was Master of a most
plentiful Fortune, so he kept up the old Scots Hospitality and Grandeur at his
Castle (...) Douglass, where he usually resided, having perhaps a more numerous
Family and Attendance than any Nobleman in the Kingdom. King Charles I,
constituted him chief Commander or Lieutenant on the Borders Mr. Simson.
, and created him Marquis of Douglass on the 17th of June 1633, the Day
immediately preceding his Majesty's Coronation. Upon the commencing of the
Civil War, in that Reign, I do not find this noble Lord engaged much on either
side, but kept himself out of the Broils of these times, as much as any of his
Quality in the Kingdom, till the 1645, perceiving the hard Usage of the King,
and the Miseries that threatened his native Country, he took up Arms in Defense
of both, and joining his Forces with these under the Command of the Great
Marquis of Montrose, his Majesty's Captain General in Scotland, He accompanied
him to the Battle of Philiphaugh, where he behaved himself with great Valor
and admirable Courage. Upon the loss of the D^^, he had the Misfortune to be
taken Prisoner; and notwithstanding all the Disadvantages and Dangers he lay
under from the usurping Powers of these Times, continued steady in his Loyalty
to his Prince King Charles II, tho in Exile, to the frequent hazard of his
Life, and Detriment of his Fortune, Oliver Cromwell imposing a considerable
Fine upon him in the 1654.

H^s first Marriage was with Margaret Daughter of Claude Hamilton Lord Paisly,
Sister to James first Earl of Abercorn, by whom he had two Sons and four
Daughters.

1. Archibald, Lord Angus, who upon the breaking out of the Civil War, in the
Reign of King Charles I, was on the Parliament's side for some time, but
afterward disliking the Service; and finding Things carried on to Extremities,
he left them, and appeared very forward to testify his Loyalty to King Charles
II, at whose Coronation, which was solemnized the first of January 1651, his
Lordship was constituted Lord high Chamberlain for the Day. He married first
Anne, Daughter of Esmae Steuart Duke of Lennox, by whom he had James who
succeeded his Grandfather. 2 dly Jean, Daughter of David Earl of Weems, by whom
he had Archibald Earl of Forfar, and Margaret fourth Wife of Alexander Viscount
of Kingstoun. This Lord dyed in the prime of his Age, Anno 1655, his Wife
surviving him, re-married with George Earl of Sutherland.

2 d. James the 2 d Son, whose Genius leading him to the Wars, he went over to
France, where he signalized himself in the Service of Lewis XIV, on every
Occasion that offered, and more particularly at the Siege of Doway, where he
was killed, his Death preventing his being honored with a Marshal's Batton.
Besides these Sons, he had also three Daughters.

Jean, married to William Lord Alexander, Son and Heir of William first Earl of
Stirling.

Margaret, to Sir John Hamilton, who was created Lord Bargany by King Charles I.

Grisel the third, to Sir William Carmichael.

His Lordships second Wife was Mary Daughter of George Marquis of Huntly, by
Henrietta his Wife, Daughter of Esmae Duke of Lennox, by whom he had William,
created Earl of Selkirk, Anno 1646, and afterward Duke o^ Hamilton 1661. The
second, George Earl of Dunbarton; Colonel James Douglass, third Son, dyed
unmarried; likewise four Daughters,

1. Henrietta, married to James Earl of Annandale.

2. Catherine, to Sir William Ruthven of Douglass, in Vicecomitatu de Berwick.

3. Isabel, to William the first Duke of Queensberry.

4 Jean, to James 4th Earl of Perth, Lord high Chancellor of Scotland, in the
Reign of King Charles II. and King James VII.

5. Lucy, to Robert Earl of Nithsdale, and all had Issue.

My Lord Marquis surviving all our intestine Commotions, which were not a few,
the detail of which, I need not at this time enter into, he at last gave way to
Fate in a good advanced Age, in the Spring of the Year, 1660 Mr. Simson's Essay
on the Family of Douglass, penes me.
.

James succeeded his Grandfather in the Honor, he was sworn one of the Privy
Council to King Charles II. about 1670, and so continued to two succeeding
Kings, for the space of 30 Years, even to his Death. He married first Barbara,
Daughter of John Earl of Mar, by whom he had a Son, James Lord Angus, a very
brave Youth, who engaging early in the Wars, signalized his Courage upon every
Occasion that offered it self especially at the Battle o^ Stenkirk, where he
was unfortunately slain, 3 d. of August 1692, in his 21 Year, generally
lamented, being a Nobleman of great Hopes and Expectation, and would have been
an Honor and Ornament to his Country, had not an untimely Death too soon
deprived his illustrous Family of the great Advantages it might have reaped by
his Enjoyment of a longer Life. His Lordship married to his second Wife, Mary,
Daughter of Robert Marquis of Lothian, by whom he had Archibald his Son and
Heir, and a Daughter Lady Jean. He departed this mortal Life in a most
Christian manner, and with an entire Resignation to the Will of the Creator, on
the 25th of February 1700, at the Age of fifty four, and was interred at
Douglass without any Funeral Solemnity.

Archibald the present Duke, a young Nobleman of great Hopes, succeeded his
Father at six Years old, and Her Majesty Queen Anne was pleased in the nineth
Year of his Age, to augment his Lordships Honors, by creating him Duke of
Douglass, on the 18th of April 1703: The Reasons for bestowing the Honor upon
him, is thus set forth in the Preamble to his Patent.

Quod nos in Regio nostro animo revolventes fidelissimum and dilectissimum
nostrum ^onsanguineum Archibaldum Marchionem de Douglass. ex familia nobili and
illustri ortum esse and a progenitoribus qui maximae fi^uciae munia illis
concredita immaculata virtute and singulari fide obierunt quique ob res ab
illis clarissime gestis. Regium diadema tuendo and sustentando summis honoris
and dignitatis titulis per nostros Regios predecessores exornati fuerunt: Nos
quoque hujus maxim memores and cupidae per ulteriorem honoris additionem
d^ctum Archiba^d^m Marchienem de Douglass ejusque heredibus masculis ipsius
corporis, sibi animum addere, ut nobiles suos predecessores imitetur; Noveritis
i^itur nos f^^^sse, constituisse, creasse and inaugu^asse Archibaldum
Marchionem de Douglass Ducem a^ Douglass, Marchionem de Angus and Abernethy,
Vicecomitem de J^dburgh Forest Dominum Douglass de Lonckle, Prestoun, and
Robertoun.

ARMS.
Four Coats quarterly. 1st Azure, a Lion Rampant crowned with an imperial Crown
Or: 2d Or, a Lion rampant Gules, surmounted of a Ribban, Sable: 3d Or, a Fesse
Cheque, Azure and Argent, surmounted of a Bend, Sable, charged with five
Buckles, Or: 4th Argent, three Pyles, Gules; over all in a Shield of Pretense,
Argent, a Heart, Gules, ensign'd with an imperial Crown, Or, on a Chief, Azure,
three Mollets of the first, supported on the Dexter, with a Savage, wreathed
about the Loins with Laurel, and on the Sinister by a Stag Proper: Crest, a
Salamander vomiting Fire: Motto, Jamais Arriere, all within a Compartment of
Stakes impaled.

MAXWEL, Earl of Dirleton.
THE first and last Earl of this Place, was Sir James Maxwel of Innerweek,
Knight, Son o^ John Maxwel of Kirkhouse (a Branch of the Family of Maxwel) by
Jean his Wife, Daughter o^ Sir Charles Murray of Cockpool. Which Sir James was
first introduced to Court by the means of his Uncle John Earl of Annandale, the
great Favorite of James VI. where he soon obtained so much of his Majesty's
Favor, as to be made a Knight, and one of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber.
King Charles not only continued him in his Service, but further to reward his
long and constant Fidelity in that Im^loyment, created him into the Dignity and
Titles of Earl of Dirle^on, and Lord Elbotle, in the Year 1646. He married
Elisabeth de Bousoyn, a Foreigner, by whom he had two Daughters,

Elisabeth, married to William second Duke of Hamilton.

Jean, to Charles Lord Cranburn, eldest Son of William Earl of Salisbury in
England, and had Issue.

ARMS.
Argent, Saltyre, Sable.

SUTHERLAND, Lord Duffus.
THE Murray's were the first Proprietors of the Barony of Duffus, in the County
of Murray, and that as early as the time of King William the Lion, Hugh de
Moravia, being Brother to William de Moravia, who first assumed the Surname of
Murray: He Is Witness in several Grants made to the Episcopal See of Murray, by
his Brother, therein designed filius Willielmi filii Friskini Chartulary of
Murray in the Lawyers Liberary, M.S.
.

This Hugh left Issue Walter de Moravia, who cedes his Right of the Wood of
Spiny to Archibald Bishop of Murray Ibidem.
, in pure and perpetual Alms, Anno Dom. 1226. He was succeeded by Frsikinus de
Moravia his Son, who designs himself Dominus de Duffus, in a solemn Contract
bebetwixt him and the Bishop of Murray, relative to several Lands that had been
in Dispute between Sir Walter his Father, and the former Bishop of that See,
dated on St. Cuthberts Day 1248. By Jean his Wife, he left Issue two Daughters
his Coheirs Ibidem.
, Mary married to Sir Reginald le Chien, Knight, and Christian to William de
Federeth, who divided the Inheritance.

The Lands of Duffus falling to the Share of the eldest Sister, Sir Reginald de
Chein, and Mary his Wife foresaid, they gave a Donation to the Cathedral of
Elgin, 1 st May 1269, for the good of their Souls. After some Descents this
Barony was transferred by the Marriage of Mary Daughter and Heir of Rynald
Chine, Knight, to Nicol a younger Son of Kenneth Earl of Sutherland, who was
slain at the Battle of Halydonhill, Anno 1333 Sir Robert Gordon's History of
the Family of Sutherland.
, he obtained by his Brother's Grant on the 30th of September 1360, the forty
pound Land of Therboll, to be holden of the said Earl, which King David II,
confirmed by his Charter under the Great Seal, in the 1364 Information for the
Earl of Sutherland against the Earls of Argyle, Crawfurd, Errol and Marshal.
, and by reason of this Marriage, the Sutherlands of Duffus added to their
paternal Coat, the three Cross Croslets, the Arms of Chine, which is still in
their Atchivement. This Nicol was succeeded by Henry Sutherland of Duffus, his
Son and Heir Ibidem.
, as he was by Alexander, who obtained a Charter of the Lands of Therboll from
John then Earl of Sutherland, his Superior, dated the 12th of July 1444. He
added much to the Wealth of his Family by the Marriage of the Heir Female of
Chisholme of that Ilk, Sir George Mackinzies Baronage of Scotland MS. penes me.
and thereupon assumed into the Center of his Coat of Arms a Boars Head coupe.
Alexander Sutherland of Duffus, Successor to the former, dying without Male
Issue, in the Reign of James IV. Charta in Rotulis Jacobi IV. ad Annum 1507.
Christian his only Daughter and Heir, was married to William Oliphant of
Berrindale: the Barohy of Duffus after a long Dispute, came to William
Sutherland of Querrelwood Ibidem.
as Heir Male. He departing this Life in 1529, left Issue by Janet his Wife,
Daughter of Alexander Innes of that Ilk Chartulary of Murray.
, William his Successor, and Alexander a Clergyman, who was Dean of Caithness
Ibidem.
.

As to the Descendents of this William, seeing they did not stand in the rank
of Peers, though a considerable Family, I shall not trace them, but come down to
the Reign of King Charles II. in whose Time Sir Alexander Sutherland of Duffus,
was one of the Barons, who by Reason of his special Merit was advanced to the
Honor of Lord Duffus, 8th December 1650, some Days preceding his Majesty's
Coronation.

He married to his first Wife, Jean Daughter of Colin Lord Kintail, Widow of
William Lord Berrindale. 2 dly.......... Daughter of Sir Robert Innes of that
Ilk. And next, Margaret Daughter of James Earl of Murray, by whom he had James
his Successor, and Henrietta a Daughter married to George Earl of Linlithgow.

James late Lord Duffus, married Margaret Daughter to Kenneth Earl of Seaforth,
by whom he had Kenneth the present Lord, who succeeded his Father in the 1705.
His Lordship having acquired great Knowledge in Maritime Affairs, was
meritoriously advanced to the Command of The Advice, one of her Majesty's Ships
of War, in which Character, in several Expeditions he has behaved with
admirable Courage and Bravery. He married Charlota Christina, Daughter of Eri^^
de Siobladhe Governor and Admiral of Gottenburgh in Sweden, by whom he has a
Son Erick, Master of Duffus.

The present Lord has two Brothers, James Sutherland Esquire who changed his Name
for that of Dunbar, by reason of his marrying Mary, Daughter, and Heir of Sir
William Dunbar of Hemprigs; he was created Baronet 10th of December 1706, and
William Sutherland of Roscommon. Ibidem.


OSBURN, Viscount of Dumblain.
AMONG many others, whose great Deserts and special Services inclined his
Majesty King Charles II. to confer sundry Titles of Honor upon them, was Sir
Thomas Osburn, Son and Heir of Sir Edward Osburn Baronet, vice President of the
Council to King Charles I. for the Northern Parts of England, and Lieutenant
General of the Forces that were raised for the Service of that Prince, upon the
first breaking out of the Rebellion in England, Anno 1642.

This Sir Thomas faithfully adhering to the royal Interest during the
Usurpation, and Cooperating with many others his Majesty's loyal Subjects, in
order to his Restoration, and afterward constantly applying himself to his
Service, with all Fidelity and Diligence, was sworn of his Privy Council, 3 d
of May 1672, and made Thesaurer of the Navy, as a further Testimony of his
Majesty's Esteem, He was by Letters patent bearing date the 19th July 1673,
created Viscount of Dumblain in this Realm; and in 1674, honored with the
Title of Viscount of Latimer and Earl of Danby in England, and soon after
instal'd Knight of the Garter; afterward concurring in the Revolution, Ann
1688, he was upon the Prince of Orange Accession to the Crown of England,
constituted President of the Council, and on the 9th of August 1689, created
Marquis of Carmarthan, and afterward Duke of Leeds, 4th May 1694; he married
Briget, Daughter of Montague Earl of Lindsay, by whom he had

1. Edward, Lord Latimer, who dyed without Issue.

2 d. Peregrine, who became Viscount Dumblain, upon his Father's surrender of
the Honor; also four Daughters,

Anne, married to Robert Cock of Hoskham, in the County of Norfolk, Esquire and
since to Horatio Valpole Esquire

Bridget, to Charles Earl of Plymouth, to whom she had no Issue, since whose
Decease she has married with Philip Bliss, Doctor of Divinity.

Catherine, to James Herbert Esquire

Martha, to Charles Earl of Bath.

Sophia, first to Donatus Lord Obrien, and again to William late Lord Lempster.

His Grace dyed full of Days and Honor, the 29th of July 1712, aged 81 Years,
and was succeeded by

Peregrine, Lord Viscount of Dumblain, and now Duke of Leeds, his Son and Heir.
This noble Lord, having experienced himself in Maritime Affairs, and commanding
as an Admiral in several Expeditions at Sea, has on many Occasions
distinguished his gallant Behavior, ^ especially at the Business of Cameret,
where his Conduct and Bravery were very remarkable. He married Bridget Daughter
and Heir of Sir Thomas Hide of Worthmyms, in the County of Hartfort, by whom he
had William Marquis of Carmarthan, who dyed at Utrecht, returning from his
Travels, 16th of August 1711, aged 21.

Peregrine, now Marquis of Carmarthan, who is married with Elisabeth Daughter
of Robert Earl of Oxford, Lord high Thesaurer of Great Britain; also two
Daughters,

Lady Bridget,

Lady Mary.

ARMS.
Quarterly Ermine and Azure, a Cross Or.

SETON, Earl of Dumfermling.
THAT the Study and Practice of the Law, has raised many to great Wealth and
Honor, is evident enough from sundry Examples of that kind; amongst which Sir
Alexander Seton, the first of this Family is not the least; he was a Younger
Son of George Lord Seton, by Isobel his Wife, Daughter of Sir William Hamilton
of Sorn, Knight, Lord high Thesaurer of Scotland, in the Reign of James V. he
was educated in Italy, where he studied the Laws, in which Profession he became
so great a Proficient, that King James VI. upon his return home, constituted
him one of the extraordinary Lords of the Session, 12th of March 1585, that he
might thereby come to the knowledge of the Forms here used: After which, in
February 1587, he was admitted one of the ordinary Senators of the College of
Justice, and on the 3 d of August 1591, his Majesty advanced him to the Dignity
of a Lord of this Realm, by the Title of Lord Urquhart; and that he might the
better support the Honor he had conferred on him, that Prince took the first
Opportunity to augment his Fortune, and in the 21 st. of his Reign, upon the
Dissolution of the Monastries, made a Grant to him and the Heirs of his Body,
lawfully begotten, of the whole Lands and Tithes of the rich Priory of
Pluscarden in Murray; his Lordship ascending still higher in Esteem, in Respect
of his eminent Knowledge, was preferred to be President of the Session, in the
Room of William Baillie of Provan, deceased 12th of May 1593; as also in 1595,
to be one of the Commissioners of the Thesaury. Rising by these Gradations, in
the 36 of the said King, Anno 1604, he was advanced to that eminent Post of
Lord high Chancellor of Scotland, and upon the 3 d of March the Year after
dignified with the Honor of Earl of Dumfermling, he was likewise appointed one
of the Commissioners to treat of a nearer Union betwix Scotland and England,
which was not completed at that time; after which continuing in the
Chancellours Office with much Honor, for the full Term of 18 Years, He
departed this Life 16th of June 1622, and was interred at the Paroch Church of
Dalgaty in Fife, with great Funeral Solemnity.

His first Wife was Lilias, Daughter of Patrick Lord Drummond, by whom he had
four Daughters,

1. Anne, married to Thomas second Earl of Kelly.

2. Isabel, to John first Earl of Lauderdale.

3. Margaret, to Colin Earl of Seaforth.

4. Sophia, to David first Lord Balcares.

His second Marriage was with Grisel, Daughter of James, Son and Heir of Andrew
Earl of Rothes, by whom he had only a Daughter Jean, married to John first Earl
of Twedale.

He married to his third Wife, Margaret Daughter to John Lord Yester, by whom
he had Charles his Son and Heir, and a Daughter Grisel, who dyed unmarried.

Alexander, Earl of Dumfermling, was succeeded in his Honors and Estate by his
Son Charles, who upon the breaking out of the Civil War, in 1638, was at first
on the Covenanters side: However, such was his Prudence and Moderation, that he
endeavored to advance all Motions toward a Peace, and was the first Lord in
the King's Commission to treat with the English, in order to compose the
unhappy Differences between his Majesty and his Subjects in Scotland, which was
by his Endeavors happily concluded in the Year 1641. And that he might be
further able to serve the King with the Church, he was appointed Commissioner
to the General Assembly, Anno 1641, wherein he proposed very temperate
Counsels, and earnestly recommended to the Clergy, that in return of all his
Majesty's Favors toward their Church, they would make Conscience by their
Doctrine and Example to keep the People in their Duty to God and the King,
during the succeeding Times of Anarchy and Usurpation. This noble Lord
affecting to lead a retired Life, I find no Account of him in any of the
public Transactions that ensued, but upon the Dawn of the Restoration of King
Charles II. he appeared very forward to express his Loyalty, and to
re-establish the old Scots Constitution, to which he firmly adhered, not long
after, he was constituted one of the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, and
in 1671 made Lord Privy Seal, in the Room of William Earl of Marshal deceased;
which Office he enjoyed till his Death, Anno 1674. By Mary his Wife, Daughter
of William Earl of Morton, he had three Sons and a Daughter,

1. Alexander, who succeeded in the Honor, but dyed unmarried.

2. Charles, killed aboard the Fleet in the great Sea Fight against the Dutch,
Anno 1672.

3. James, who succeeded his Broin the Honor.

4. Henrietta, married first to William Earl of Wigton, and after to William
Earl of Crawfurd, and had Issue.

Which James Earl of Dumfermling, in his Youth, having a Genius to War, he
betook himself to Arms in the Service of the States of Holland, and was in
several memorable Expeditions under the Prince of Orange; but quiting those
Military Employments, upon his Accession to the Honor, he lived at home in
great Splendour, till the Revolution, in 1688. He was one of the Scots Peers who
faithfully adhered to the Interest of King James: And the Viscount of Dundee no
sooner took the Field, and declared for the King, than his Lordship brought and
joined him with a Troop of Horse, upon the Head of which he was personally
engaged in the Battle of Killicrankie, where he behaved very bravely, for which
he was Forfeited by Authority of the Parliament, 1690. Upon the Capitulation of
the Highlanders, when there was no probability of supporting King James's
Interest any longer in Scotland, he retired to the Court of St. Germans in
France, where the said King, to alleviate his Misfortunes, was pleased to
honor his Lordship with the most noble Order of the Thistlo, as a
distinguishing Mark of his royal Favor (and as he said) An Earnest of what he
intended to do for him and his Family, when it would please God to restore him
to the peaceable Possession of his own; here he sojourned till his Death, in
the Year 1694, leaving no Issue that survived him by Jean his Wife, Daughter of
Lewis Marquis of Huntly; so that the Honor by Reason of the entail to Heirs
Male, would descend to George Seton of Barns, descended of Sir John Seton
Knight, immediate elder Brother to Alexander first Earl of Dumfermling, were it
not for the Forfaulture.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st. and 4th. Or: Three Crescents Gules, within a double Tressure
flowr'd and Counterflowr'd, Or: 2d. and 3d. Argent, on a Fess, Gules: Three
cinque Foils of the first, supported by two Horses, Argent: Crest, a Crescent,
Gules: Motto, Semper.

HUME, Earl of Dunbar,
IN ancient Deeds and Charters, Cospatricius is styled Comes de Dunbar, tempore
David I. but his Successors came to be designed Earls of March, under which
Title they will be more properly spoken of. The first then who enjoyed this
Honor since, was Sir George Hume Knight, Son of Alexander Hume of Manderstoun,
in Vicecomitatu de Berwick, a Cadet to the Branch of Wedderburn ( in praedicto
Vicecomitatu) who being a Person of great Learning, singular Judgment, and
other great Indowments, was first admitted Gentleman of the Bedchamber
Johnstoni Historia rerum Britannicarum.
, 18 vo. Jacobi VI. Anno 1585, Knighted Anno 1590, and constituted Master of
the Wardrobe Ibidem and Melvil's Memoirs.
. Also in 1601, he was made Lord high Thesaurer of Scotland, Alexander Lord
Elphinston resigning the Office. Upon his Majesty's Accession to the Crown of
England, Anno 1603, he accompanied him into that Realm, being then of the Privy
Council, and was by his Majesty's special Favor, by Letters patent, bearing
date 7th of July 1604, created a Baron of England, by the Title of Lord Hume of
Berwick Dugdale's Baronage of England, Tom 2.
, and on the 3 d of March 1605, dignified with the Title of Earl of Dunbar
Creation of the Scots Nobility.
, and instituted Knight of the Garter, Anno 1609. Dugdale.
His Lordship having discharged all the great and weighty Employments he
engaged in with admirable Prudence and Dexterity, at length gave way to Fate on
the 29th January 1611, and was interred at the Collegiate Church of Dunbar.
Over his Grave was a stately Monument erected of black and white Marble, with
his Portraiture lying thereon, below this Inscription, Here lies the Body of
the Right Honorable George Hume Earl of Dunbar, Baron Hume of Berwick, Lord
high Thesaurer of Scotland, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, and
one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, who departed this Life the
29th of January, MDCXI.

This Earl left Issue by Catherine his Wife, Daughter of Sir Alexander Gordon
of Gight, Knight, in Vicecomitatu de Aberdeen, by Mary his Wife, Daughter to
Cardinal David Beaton Bishop of St. Andrews Mr. Martin of Claremont's
Genealogical Collections, in the Hands of Claremont his Son.
, two Daughters his Coheirs; Anne, the eldest, married to Sir James Hume of
Coldingknows, in Vicecomitatu de Berwick, Mother by him to James 3 d Earl of
Hume; Elisabeth, the second, to Theophilus Earl of Suffolk of the Kingdom of
England, and had Issue.

ARMS.
Three Coats quarterly: 1st. and 4th Vert, A Lion rampant, Argent: 2d Argent,
Three Papingoes Vert: 3d. Argent, Three Escutcheons, Vert: and in surtout
Gules, A Lion rampant, Argent, within a Border, charged with eight Crosses of
the second.

CONSTABLE, Viscount of Dunbar.
THE next who enjoyed any honourary Title from this Place, was Sir Henry
Constable of Halsham, Knight, of a good Family, in the County of York in
England. He was by the Favor of King James VI, raised to the Honor of
Viscount of Dunbar in Scotland, by Letters Patent, bearing date the 14th of
November 1620. He married Mary, Daughter of Sir John Tuffton, Baronet Peerage
of England Vol. I.
. John his Son and Successor in the Honor, married Mary Daughter to Robert
Earl of Cardigan. To this John succeeded Robert Lord Viscount of Dunbar, who
took to Wife Mary Daughter of John Lord Bellaisses, and Robert the next
Viscount, married Dorothea, Daughter of Robert Earl of Cardigan, Widow of
Charles Earl of Westmoreland, Mother by him, I presume; to Edward the present
Lord Viscount of Dunbar, whose paternal Coat of

ARMS.
Is, Or, three Bars, Azure, supported on the Dexter with a Bull, Sable, and on
the Sinister with a Lion rampant, Gules: Crest, a Dragons Head: Motto, Sans
maivaise Desire.

DOUGLASS, Earl of Dunbarton.
FROM this royal Burongh, hone derived any Title of Honor till King Charles
II. raised Lord George Douglass, younger Son of William first Marquis of
Douglass, to the Dignity of Earl of Dunbarton, the 9th of March 1675.

This noble Person served Lewis XIV. of France in the Quality of one of his
Pages of Honor; afterward taking himself to the Profession of Arms, he rose
gradually to be Colonel Brigadeer, and at last Major General: He was present in
most of the Sieges and Actions betwixt the French and the Confederates, wherein
he acquired immortal Honor by his unparalleled Valor, in 1678. Upon the
Conclusion of the Peace with the States of Holland, by the Treaty of Nimiguen,
He was called over to Britain, and resided most at Court during the remainder
of King Charles's Reign.

Upon the Accession of King James VII. to the Crown, in the 1685, he was
constituted General of the Forces in Scotland; and in that Station he commanded
against the Earl of Argyle upon his Invasion of this Realm, whom he so closely
pursued, that his Men were soon dispersed, and himself taken Prisoner, whose
Fate I need not re-count here. Also in the 1687, he was elected one of the
twelve Knights, Companions of the most noble Order of St. Andrew of Scotland,
which his Majesty was then pleased to revive, after it had lain dormant for 145
Years.

Upon the landing of the Prince of Orange in England, his Lordship stuck closs
to King James, and together with the Earls of Aran, Salisbury, and Leitchfield,
attended his Majesty to Rochester, from whence he set Sail for France, whether
my Lord Dunbarton soon followed, and dyed at the Court of St. Germans, Anno
1692, leaving Issue by....... his Wife, Sister to the Duchess of
Northumberland, George the present Earl of Dunbarton, now in the British
Service.

ARMS.
The four quartered Coats of the Family of Douglass, with the paternal Arms,
over all in a Shield of Pretense; for Destinction within a Border quartered,
1st Azure: Three Flower-de-Lys Or, 2d Gules, three Lions passant guardant Or,
3d as 2d. 4th as 1st.

SCRIMGEOUR, Earl of Dundee.
ACcording to the Authority of our Historians, this noble and ancient Family
derive their Origin from one Sir Alexander Caron, a brave and valiant Knight,
who in the first of Alexander I. Anno Dom. 1107, signalized his Valor against
the Northern Rebels, who had attempted no less than the Murder of the King, for
which (continue they) he had his Name changed to Scrimgeour, that is a Sharp
Fight;

Wherefore he had a special Grant from the King to himself, and the Heirs Male
of his Body, to be hereditary Standard-bearers to the Kings of Scotland, and
for his Coat of Arms, Gules, a Lion rampant, Argent, holding in his dexter Paw
a crooked Sword Proper, and the word Dissipate for his Motto. Mr. Johnston the
Poet, has left us the following Verses to the Honor of his Memory, Quid
trepidas? da signa mihi, superabimus amnem;
Terreat an pavidos nos fugitiva cohors?
Dixit, and areptis signis ruit acer in hostem,
Nil rapidi metuens agmina torva vadi:
Hine decus augusto surgit sub Principe, ab armis
Scrimgerae genti fama decusque manent.
Arma alius jactet, nos scimus fortibus armis
Vtier, hand dici, malumus esse viri.


This Name has been remarkable in our Scots History on several other Occasions,
particularly Sir Alexander Scrimgeor, was among the first who took the Field
for King Robert Bruce, and faithfully adhered to him; in Consideration whereof,
when that valiant Prince came to be established on the Throne, he gave him
sundry Lands about the Burgh of Innerkeithing, then in the Crown, by the
Attainder of Sir Philip de Moubray, Knight. Also Sir John Scrimgeor was killed
at the fatal Battle of Halydonhill 1333; and another Sir James Scrimgeor
Constable of Dundee, his Successor, was slain in the Governors Army against
Donald Lord of the Isles, at the Battle of Harlaw, Anno 1411. I need not be at
much Pains to show the several Matches they have made with some of the most
noble Families of this Kingdom, since the whole Course of this Book makes
mention thereof, only I shall take notice, that in process of Time, after
having flourished long in the State of Barons, they came to the Honor of
Peerage the in Person of Sir James Scrimgeor Constable of Dundee, who was
raised to the Honor of Viscount of Duddop, by King Charles I. in the Year
1641. Upon the breaking out of the Civil War, he accepted of a Command in those
Forces that were sent from Scotland to the Aid of the English Parliament,
against the King, and lost his Life in the Battle of Marstoun Moor, 2 d July,
Anno 1644, A Person (says one) who for the Nobleness of his Extraction, and
many personal Endowments, deserved a better fate, at least to have dyed in a
better Cause. He left a Son John, by Mary his Wife, Daughter of Robert first
Earl of Roxburgh, who succeeded him in the Honor.

This Lord put himself in Arms in behalf of King Charles II. and marched with
him to the Battle of Worcester, 3 d September 1651, after which he suffered
much for his Loyalty, but living to see the Restoration, he received some part
of amends, being created Earl of Dundee, Anno 1661, and made one of the Privy
Council. His Wife was Mary Daughter of William first Earl of Dalhousie, but
dying without Issue, in 1668, by reason of an Entail of his Estate, which
(purely through Inadvertency) terminated in the Heirs Male, the King succeeded
thereto as ultimus haeres, and the Honor became extinct, and lay dormant till
the Year 1688, that the Title of Viscount of Dundee was bestowed on General
Graham.

GRAHAM, Viscount of Dundee.
THE Family of Fintry anciently seated in Stirling shire, of which the Viscount
of Dundee was sprung, descended from Sir Robert Graham eldest Son of Sir
William Graham of Kincardin, by the Lady Mary Steuart his second Wife, Daughter
of Robert third King of Scotland. This Sir Robert Graham of Fintry's second Son
John Graham of Balargus, was Founder of the Family of Claverhouse: He obtained
from Archibald Earl of Angus a Grant to himself and Marjory his Wife, Daughter
of Sir James Scrimgeor of Duddop, Constable of Dundee, of the Lands of Balargus
in Forfar-shire, Anno 1482 Charta in publicis Archivis.
, where he fixed his Residence, tempore Jacobi Tertii, from whom descended in a
direct Line, William Graham of Claverhouse, who marring Anne, Daughter of
Robert Lundy of Balgony, in Vicecomitatu de Fife, had Issue by her William his
Successor, and Walter first of the Branch of Duntroon. The next William by his
Virtue and good Conduct, much bettered the Condition of his Family, acquiring a
great Estate, he obtained the Honor of Knighthood. His Wife was Marion,
Daughter of Thomas Fotheringham of Poury, in Vicecomitatu de Forfar, by whom he
had William his Son and Heir, who taking to Wife Jean Carnegy, Daughter of John
Earl of Ethy, Sister to David 1 st. Earl of Northesk, he had,

John, Viscount of Dundee.

Mr. David Graham.

Margaret, married to Robert Graham of Morphie.

Anne, to Robert Young of Auldbar.

Which John, after he had gone through the Course of his Studies at the
University of St. Andrews, he went into Foreign Parts to accomplish himself by
Travels, betaking himself to a Military Life, he served at first Volunteer in
the French Service, where he learned the Rudiments of War, after some time he
engaged in the Service of the States of Holland, 1672. His first step to
Advancement was a Cornet's Commission in the Prince of Orange's Guard of Horse;
in which Character he did eminently signalize himself in the Battle of Senef,
fought betwixt the Confederates, under the Command of William Prince of Orange,
and the French under the Prince of Conde, in August 1674; after this he was
immediately preferred to be Captain of a Troop of Horse; in which Station he
served with the highest Reputation for his Valor. Leaving the Dutch Service
upon some disgust given him, he came over to Britain; by a particular Character
from the Prince of Orange to his Royal Highness the Duke of York, he was
recommended to King Charles II. who was pleased, as a Testimony of the Esteem
he had for Mr. Graham, to nominate him one of the Captains of the three
independent Troops which were raised to force the Dissenters in the Western
Shires to comply with the Constitution of the Church, as established by Law,
Anno 1678, the Earls of Hume and Airly, having the Command of the other two.

When the Troops came to be regularly modeled, 1684, he was constituted
Captain of the Royal Regiment of Horse, the late Duke of Queensberry, then Earl
of Drumlanrig, being his Lieutenant Colonel.

King James ascending the Throne on the Decease of his Brother King Charles II.
6th February 1685, he was sworn a Privy Councilour, and made a Brigadeer in the
beginning of 1686, which was his higest Preferment, till the 1688. Upon the
Prince of Orange's landing in England, he marched with his Regiment thither for
King James Service: Then his Majesty was pleased to advance him to the Degree
of Major General, and on the 12th of November, the 4th Year of his Reign,
raised him to the Honor of Viscount of Dundee (the Constabulary of which
Burough, together with the Barony of Duddop, being some time before bestowed on
him.) This Dignity, his Patent mentions, was granted him, Propter egregia
servitia and praeclara admodum officia and nobismetipsis and carissimo nostro
Fratri Carolo secundo sempiternae memoriae in singulis muneribus and publicae
fiduciae provinciis tum civilibus tum militaribus multis retro annis fidei suae
demandatis fideliter praestita and peracta, fidemque ejus intemeratam; quodque
omni occasion sibi data coronae nostrae juribus firmus semper adhaeserat;
Hisce igitur multisque aliis magni mementi rationibus praeviis, durabilem
quandam nostri regii favoris tesseram in ipsum and famimiliam suam confer;
Noveritis igitur Nos creasse fecisse and inaugurasse Majorem Generalem Joannem
Graham de Claverhouse, Vicecomitem de Dundee, Dominum Graham de Claverhouse,
and haeredes Masculos ex ejus corpore legitime procreatos seu procreandos;
quibus dificientibus in alios ejus haeredes masculos, etc.

In the beginning of the Year 1689, his Lordship came down to Scotland, and sat
some Days in the Convention of Estates, which the Prince of Orange had called,
till he discerned the House disposed by a great Majority to declare the Throne
vacnat, and Forfault King James; as also a Design the Mobb had to Assassinate
him, of which he informed the Meeting, but his Complaint not being regarded;
and Justice denied him, he absented from the Convention; and after having had a
private Conference with the Duke of Gordon, at the Postern-Gate of the Castle
of Edinburgh, which held out for King James, he retired to Linlithgow with a
small Party of Horse, and so by the Way of Stirling-Bridge, rode home to his
House in the Country, whereupon the Convention voted him an intercommuned
Person, and sent a Messenger to require him to appear before them at Edinburgh;
but his Lordship excusing himself upon pretense of Danger, there was a Party
sent to apprehend him. This necessarly obliged him to go into the Highlands for
Refuge, where he raised the Clans by King James's Authority, and having got a
Reinforcement of 300 Irish, Headed by Colonel Cannon, with a Body of about 1600
Horse and Foot, he engaged Major Geneneral Mackay, who was advancing toward him
with 4000 Foot, and some Troops of Horse and Dragoons at Kilicrankie in Athole,
27 th of July 1689. In the first Charge, his Lordship received a Shot of a
Musket-Ball in his right Side, of which he instantly expired; and
notwithstanding this Discouragement, his Men Fought like Lions, and routed
Mackay; yet the Death of my Lord Dundee did more than overballance the others
Loss of 2000 Men killed on his side. After the Battle, his Body was found and
deposited in the Vault of of the Family of Athole, within the Church of Blair,
where I leave him to his Rest, and shall only add this Epitaph done on him by
the learned Dr. Archibald Pitcairn, Vltime Scotorum, potuit quo sospite solo
Libertas patriae salva fuisse tuae:
Te moriente novos accepit Scotia Cives,
Accepitque novos te moriente Deos.
Illa tibi superesse negat, Tu non potes illi,
Ergo Caledoniae nomen inane vale:
Tuque vale gentis priscae fortissime ductor,
Optime Scotorum atque ultime, GRAME, vale.
Englished by Mr. Dryden, O last and best of Scots! who did maintain
Thy Country's Freedom from a foreign Reign;
New People fill the Land, now they are gone;
New Gods the Temples, and new Kings the Throne.
Scotland and thou, did each in other live,
Thou coud'st not Her, nor could (...) theesurvive
Farewell thou living that did support the State,
And coud'st not fall, but by thy Countries fate.


He married Jean Daughter of William Lord Cochran, Son and Heir of William
first Earl of Dundonald, by whom he had a Son James, who dyed an Infant, in the
Month of December 1689, the Honor devolving on

Mr. David Graham his Uncle, who heartily espousing King James's Inteterest at
the Revolution, he was present with his Brother in the Battle of Kiliecrankie,
for which he was Outlawed, Anno 1690, retiring to the Court of St. Germans, in
1692, the said King, as a special Mark of his Favor, and to testify the great
Esteem he had for his Lordship, was pleased to make him a Knight of the most
noble Order of St. Andrew, and tho he continued a very zealous Protestant, yet
he was King James particular Favorite till his Death, which happened in the
1700, unmarried; so that had not his Estate and Honor been forfeited, William
Graham of Duntroon would have succeeded him in both the one and the other.

ARMS.
Or, three Pyls wave within a double Tressure counterflour'd, Sable, on a chief
of the second: three Escalops of the first.

COCHRAN, Earl of Dundonald.
THIS Family, which originally took its Surname from the Barony of Cochran in
Renfrew-shire, is of very great Antiquity, and tho none of the Family arrived
not to the Dignity of Peerage till the Reign of K. Charles I. yet its
undeniable that they were Barons of special Account for many Ages before, and
endowed with large Possessions in these Parts, and elsewhere.

The first of whom I have found upon Record, is Waldenus de Coveran, i. e.
Cochran, who in the 1262, is Witness to the Grant which Dungal the the Son of
Suayn made to [Walter Steuart Earl of Monteith, of sundry Lands in the County
of Argyle Chartularly of Paisly penes Joannem Comitem de Dundonald.
, which came in Aftertimes to be transmited to Forrester of Carden. Another
William de Coveran is mentioned by Pryn, as a Person of a Account in this
County, who makes his Submission to King Edward I. Anno Dom. 1296 Pryn's
History.
in the Ragman Roll; also John de Coveran is Witness in the regular Election of
James Abbot of Paisly 17th of David II, Anno 1346 Chartulary of Paisly.
. The next remarkable Person of the Family, is Gosiline de Cochran, who
flourished under King David Bruce, he is Witness to several Grants made by
Robert second, when Earl of Strathern, to the Religious of Paisly, an Abbacy he
assumed into his particular Patronage, wherein his Ancestors Donations being
made to the Glory of God, are particularly narrated. He left Issue, William de
Cochran of that Ilk, his Son, who obtained from King Robert II. a Charter of
the Lands of Cochran to be held in as ample a manner as any of his Progenitors
held the same of the Lord high Stewart of Scotland, dated on the 22 of
September 1389; as he stood in special Favor with this King, so was he in no
less with Robert 3 d his Son, to whom it seems he had been serviceable, for
when he came to the Crown, he had so greatful a Sense thereof, that in the
second Year of his Reign, Anno 1392, he made him a Grant of forty Shilling
Sterling in Annuity arising out of the Profits of the Burgh of Rutherglen
Charta in Rotulis Roberti III.
. He was succeeded by Robert his Son, who resigned his Estate in favors of
Allan his Son, Anno 1456. This Allan, in 1452 is Witness to the Mortification
which Robert Lord Lyle made to the Abbot and conventwal Brethern of the
Monastry of Paisly, of the Fishing on the River of Clyde, at the place called
Crokatshot, for the help of there Prayers to advance his spiritual Estate, in
in which Deed he is designed Allanus Cochran Armiger, his Father being then
alive, and to whom he succeeded before the 1480. He married........ Daughter
of...... by whom he had Robert a Son, who was Father of John Cochran of that
Ilk, who immediately succeeded his Grandfather, upon his Death.

Which John, for some Considerations, I know not, obtained a License from his
Sovereign Lord King James IV. under the Great Seal, impouring him to dispose of
either his Lands of Easter Cochran in Renfrew-shire, or his Lands of Pitfour in
Perth-shire, Accordingly he alienated a part of his Lands of Cochran to James
Archbishop of Glasgow, Anno 1519, to which Deed he appends his Seal, the
Impression bearing Three Boars Heads eraz'd, and circumscribed, Sigillum
Johannis de Cochran. His Wife was Elisabeth Daughter of John Semple of Fullwood
Charta penes Comitem de Dundonald.
, who bore him a Son John, who was served and retoured Heir to his Father on
the 12th of May 1539, he dying in the 1557, left Issue by Mary his Wife,
Daughter of Lindsay of Dunrod, in Vicecomitatu de Renfrew, a Son.

William, who succeeded him. In 1593, he erected from the Foundation, at
Cochran the ancient Seat of his Family, a very high Tower of Freestone, and
adorned it with large Plantations, he marrying Margaret Daughter of Robert
Montgomery of Skelmurly, in Viceomita^u de Air, by Mary his Wife Daughter of
Robert Lord Semple, had a Daughter Elisabeth, his sole Heir.

He wisely considering the proper way of supporting his Family, was to settle
his Daughter in his own own time, and declining to Marry her into a richer
Family than his own; he made a prudent and discreet Match for her with
Alexaader Blair, a younger Son of an ancient and genteel Family in Air-shire He
was the third Son of John Blair of that Ilk, by Grisel his Wife, Daughter of
Robert Lord Semple.
, whose Ancestors had been seated in the County foresaid for many Ages before,
so that beside a noble Alliaance, and a competent Patrimony, he yielded to
change his Name to Cochran, which was almost the only Condition the old
Gentleman required. This Alexander so taking upon him the Surname of Cochran,
was a vertous and frugal Man, and studied as much the good of the Family, as if
he himself had been born the Heir thereof. In 1622, he acquired the Lands of
Cowdoun, with an Intention to unite them to the ancient patrimonial Inheritance
of Cochran; but he afterward sold them to Sir William his second Son, as a
Fund to provide his younger Children; for beside Sir John his eldest Son, he
had six other Sons and two Daughters.

Sir William Cochran of Cowdoun.

Alexander, a Colonel in the King's Service, in the Wars of Ireland, which
commenced in the 1641, with the Murder of upwards of fifty thousand Scots and
English by the Native Irish.

Hugh, Author of the Branch of Fergusly, he was a Colonel first under the
renoun'd Gustavous Adolphus King of Sweden, and afterward to King Charle I. in
the time of the Civil War in Ireland.

Bryse, a Colonel in the time of the Civil War, who lost his Life in the King's
Service, Anno 1650.

Captain Ochter Cochran.

Gavin Cochran of Craigmure, was the seventh and youngest Son.

Elisabeth, married to John Lennox of Woodhead in Stirling-shire.

Grisel, to Thomas Dunlop of Housle.

Which Sir John, in the Time of the unhappy Civil War in Britain, firmly
adhered to the Interest of King Charles I. and had a Colonel's Commission in
the Army. In the Year 1644, he was sent Ambassador to several Princes to
solicit their Assistance in his Majesty's behalf Montrose's Life by Dr.
Wishart.
, which he performed with such Diligence and Conduct, that in the Treaty of
Peace which was set on Foot betwixt the King and the Parliament of England and
the Estates of Scotland, Anno 1646, he was together with the Marquis of Huntly
and Montrose, the Earls of Nithsdale, Crawfurd, Tra quair, etc. proposed to be
excepted from the King's Pardon, which his Majesty generously refused Guthrie's
Memoirs.
. Upon the Murder of the King, he attended King Charles II. into Foreign Parts,
and in the 1650, was sent into Polland to crave Aid of the Scots Merchants
there; but before his Return the King and the Scots Army were defeated at
Worcester, he continuing with the King, during his Exile, dyed about the time
of the Restoration without Issue; so that his next Brother Sir William became
his Heir.

Which Sir William was very carefully educated in Grammar learning in his
Youth, whence he was removed to the University, where having applied himself
indefatigably to his Studies, and highly improved his natural Endowments with
Academical Learning, he removed from thence after he had taken the Degree of
Master of Arts, and studied our Laws; in which Profession he attained to an
uncommon Perfection. Soon after his entering on the Stage of Business, he
became much sam'd for his prudent Management and Conduct, by which he acquired
a fair Estate, both in the Shires of Renfrew and Air, for the last of which he
had the Honor to serve as a Member in the Parliament, 1647, wherein his
Abilities were soon discovered by the great and leading Men of the House, and
he showed himself through the Course of the Sitting of that Parliament, a good
and even Patriot, wholly Intent upon the Honor and Safety of the King, whose
Interest he did visibly advance, and the Welfare and Tranquillity of the
Nation, then in no small Ferment. He appeared very forward to raise the Army
for the Relief of his Majesty, then under Restraint, in Consideration whereof,
he was by Letters Patent, ^bearing date at Scarsborough, 27th December 1647,
created Lord Cochran of Cowdon. Increasing still more and more in Wealth and
Honor, not long after he acquired the Lordship of Paisly, where he fixed h^s
Seat, and lived with great Splendour and Hospitality for many Years. After the
barbarous Murder of the King, his Lordship contributed his best and hearty
Endeavors toward bringing home King Charles II. to inherit the rightful
Possession of the Throne of these Realms, which no doubt was the Cause, when
Oliver Cromwell came to be called Protector, he fined my Lord Cochran among
other Loyalists, in 5000 Pound Sterling, by a special Ordinance of the
Commonwealth of England, the 12th of April 1654 Original Print pene^ me.
.

The King being happily restored in the 1660, he was soon after sworn a Privy
Counselor, and by his Majesty's special Choice constituted one of the
Commissioners of the The saury and Exchequer, which great and weighty
Employment he discharged with admirable Prudence and Integrity, to the general
Satisfaction of the whole Nation, of which his Majesty was so fully satisfied,
that he was pleased to advance him to the Title of Earl of Dundonald, the 12th
of May 1669, and that in Consideration of the special Services he had rendered
the Crown in those high and eminent Stations, continuing in great Esteem with
King Charles, during the whole Course of his Reign.

He married Euphame Daughter of Sir William Scot of Ardross, in Vicecomitatu de
Fife, by whom he had two Sons and a Daughter.

1. William Lord Cochran, who dyed in the flower of his Age, Anno 1680, leaving
Issue by the Lady Catherine his Wife, Daughter of John Earl of Cassils, John
who succeeded his Grandfather in the Honor, William Cochran of Kilmaronock, a
Member of Parliament for the Burgh of Wigtoun, and the other Towns in that
District, and one of the Commissioners for keeping her Majesty's Signet, Sir
Alexander Erskin Lord Lion, and John Pringle of Haining, being joined in
Commission with him. He married Grisel, Daughter of James, second Marquis of
Montrose, and has Issue; Thomas Cochran of Polkely, third Son, dyed without
Children; Alexander Cochran of Bonshaw, the youngest; also three Daughters, 1
st. Margaret, married to Alexander Earl of Eglintoun. 2 d. Helen, to John Earl
of Sutherland. 3 d. Jean, to John Viscount of Dundee, and afterward to William
Viscount of Kilsyth.

2 d Son, Sir John Cochran of Ochiltree, in Air-shire.

Likewise a Daughter Grisel, married to George Lord Ross.

This Earl gave way to Nature in the spring of the Year 1686, and was by his
own Direction interred in the Paroch Church of Dundonald, without any Funeral
Monument, but upon his Escutcheon I find the Arms of these noble and ancient
Families. Paternal Side. Cochran of that Ilk. Lord Semple. Cunningham of
Glengarnock. Lord Cairlyle of Torthorald.
Maternal Side. Cochran of that Ilk. Montgomery of Skelmurly. Lindsay of
Dunrod. Lord Semple.



To William Earl of Dundonald succeeded John his Grandson and Heir, a Nobleman
of great Goodness and excellent Parts; he dyed in the prime of his Years, Anno
1691, regrated by all those who knew him, leaving Issue by the Lady Susanna his
Wife, Daughter of William Duke of Hamilton, two Sons, William who succeeded in
the Honor, but dyed unmarried the 19th of November 1705. And

John the present Earl, who married Anne Daughter of Charles Earl of Dunmore, a
Lady who wanted no Virtue to make her an acceptable Wife; she dyed in the 1711,
universally lamented, whose Conduct in all Conditions of Life rendered her Loss
a lasting Grief to her Relations; he had by her a Son and three Daughters.

William Lord Cochran

Lady Anne,

Lady Catherine,

Lady Susanne, all Young.

ARMS.
Argent, a Chiveron, Gules, betwixt three Boars Heads Azure, supported by two
Ratch Hounds of the first, Crest, a Horse, Argent, Motto, Virtute and Labor.

GALLOWAY, Lord Dunkeld.
THE Ancestor of this Family was Mr. Patrick Galloway, first Minister of the
Gospel in the Burgh of Pearth Calderwood's History of the Church of Scotland.
, whence he was translated to the City of Edinburgh, where he exercised his
Function till the 1624, he departed this Life, leaving Issue by Mary his Wife,
Daughter of Mr. James Lawson, one of the Ministers of the City of Edinburgh, a
Son

Sir James Galloway of Carnby, who was Master of Requests both to King James
VI. and King Charles I. Dalrymple's Camden.
and conjunct Secretary of State with William Earl of Stirling, Anno 1640, when
the Troubles broke out in that Reign, he approved himself a most faithful
Servant to his Majesty in the Times of his greatest Exigency, in Testimony
whereof he was by Letters Patent, bearing Date the 15th May 1645, created Lord
Dunkeld Registration of the Patent in the Chancery Office, Edinburgh.
. He married..... Daughter of Sir Robert Norter, Knight, by whom he had

Thomas Lord Dunkeld, his Son and Heir, who marrying Margaret Daughter of Sir
Thomas Thomson of Duddingstoun, by Jean Daughter of Sir James Scrimgeor of
Duddop, had Issue

1. James, late Lord Dunkeld.

2. Andrew Galloway Esquire

3. John Galloway Esquire

Catherine, married to Thomas Forbes of Watertoun, in Aberdeen shire.

Margaret, to James Ratry of Craighall, in Vicecomitatu de Pearth.

Mary, to the Reverend Mr. John Falconer, a Divine.

Which James Lord Dunkeld, being Abroad in the Army, at the Revolution freely
resorted to the Service of King James VII, and had a Command in the Battle of
Killiecrankie, for which he was Forfeited, and retiring to the Court of St.
Germans, he dyed not long ago.

ARMS.
Argent, a Lion rampant Azure, the Supporters two Eagles Sable, Crest, a Mound
bespread with the Rays of the Sun, embraced betwixt two Corn-Ears, Saltyre
ways, Or, Motto, Higher.

MURRAY, Earl of Dunmore.
KING James VII. was pleased to raise Lord Charles Murray, second Son of John
Marquis of Athole, by the Lady Aemilia Stanly, Daughter of James Earl of Darby,
to the Honor of Earl of Dunmore, by Letters Patent the 16th of August 1686.
His first Preferment was, to be Lieutenant Colonel to a Regiment of Horse
commanded by General Thomas Dalziel, Anno 1679, and Master of Horse to her
Royal Highness the Princess Anne, now Queen of Great Britain: He was afterward
made Colonel of the same Regiment, upon the Death of the General his Superior
Officer, Anno 1685, and Master of Horse to Queen Mary, Wife of King James VII.
both which Offices he held till the Revolution deprived him: All King William's
time he lived retir'dly, but upon the Queen's Accession to the Crown, he was
constituted one of her Majesty's Privy Council, the 4th of February 1703, and
Captain of the Castle of Blackness, Anno 1707, upon the removal of David Earl
of Buchan, and departing this Life in 1710. He left Issue by Catherine his
Wife, Daughter of Robert Watts of the County of Hertfort, Esquire

1. James Lord Fincastle, dyed without Issue. 2 d. John now Earl of Dunmore,
Lieutenant Colonel in the English Foot Guards, Commanded by his Grace James
Duke of Ormond. 3 d. Rorert, a Colonel in the Scots Foot-Guards. 4 th. Charles.
5 th. William. 6 th. Thomas, a Page of Honor to her Majesty Queen Anne; also
three Daughters,

Henrietta, married to Patrick Lord Kinnaird, sans Issue.

Anne, to John Earl of Dundonald.

Catherine, to John Master of Nairn, Son and Heir of William Lord Nairn.

ARMS.
The Coat of the Duke of Athole, viz. The Arms of the old Steuarts Earls of
Athole, quartered with the paternal Coat of Murray Earl of Tilliebardin; and in
an Escutcheon over all, a proper Difference taken from his Relation to the
noble Family of Stanly Earls of Darby, Lord of the Isle of Man.

CRICHTON, Earl of Drumfrees.
THIS Family was a Branch of Crichton in Lothian; in the Time of King Robert
Bruce, William Crichton Knight, then obtaining the half of the Barony of
Sanquhar in Drumfrees-shire, by the Marriage of Isobel de Ross, one of the
Daughters and Coheirs of Ross of Sanquhar Charta Roberti I. Ficardo dicto
Edgar de Manerio capitale cum medietate totius Baroniae de Sanquhar ad ipsum
capitale manerium pertinente sicut dicta Baronia inter Willielmum de Crichton
and ipsum Ricardum nuper fuert Divisa. Dalrymple's Collections.
, whence they came to carry the Coat of Ross, viz. Azure, three Water-Budgets,
Or. Hence descended,

Robert Crichton of Sanquhar, tempore Jacobi II. who stood in special Favor
with that Prince, from whom he obtained first the Honor of Knighthood; and in
the 1452, being also one of the Lords of Privy Council, he greatly enriched
himself, by the Marriage of Catherine, the Heir of Sir Nicol Erskine of
Kinoule, in Vicecomitatu de Perth, and had Issue,

1 st. Robert, his Successor.

The 2 d. Edward Crichton, who had by his Father's Grant, the Lands of
Kilpatrick, which was confirmed by the King's Charter, Anno 1483 Charta in
Rotulis Jacobi II. ad Annum 1485
, and at the same time, he had diverse Lands then in the Crown, by the
Forsaulture of those who assisted the Duke of Albany, and other Rebels. This
Branch terminated in a Daughter, in the Reign of James V. married to James
Gordon of Lochinvar.

The 3 d. was Alexander, from whom the Crichtons of Crawfurdstoun in Nithsdale
descended Charta Roberti Crichton de Sanquha^ militis Alexandro Crichton filio
suo de Terras de Crawfurdstoun, Anno 1466.
, and their Cadets.

4 th. Lawrance Crichton, of Balnamuchty;

Also several Daughters, Elisabeth; married to Sir William Douglass of
Drumlanrig, Margaret to David Cairlyle of Torthorald: But to return to the
aforesaid Robert Crichton of Sanquhar. This Robert signalized himself, both for
his Loyalty and Valor in the Wars, against Alexander Duke of Albany, and James
Earl of Douglass, in behalf of King James III, at the Battle of Kirkonel Anno
1483, in Recompense whereof he had several of the Rebels Lands bestowed upon
him; in the Grant his Services to the Crown are particularly narrated with
Honor Charta in Rotulis Jacobi III. ad Annum 1466.
; having thus augmented his Fortune, he came in the same Reign to be called
Lord Crichton of Sanquhar.

He married Marion, Daughter of John first Earl of Lennox, and had Issue Robert
his Successor.

Marion, married to Malcolme Crawfurd of Kilbirny, Ancestor to the Viscount of
Garnock.

Which Robert married Elisabeth, Daughter of..... Murray of..... and had
William his Successor, who was Killed by the Lord Semple Buchanan's History.
, Anno 1550, leaving Issue by Elisabeth his Wife, Daughter of Malcolm Lord
Fleeming, 1 st. Robert his Successor in the Honor, but dyed without Issue, 2
d. Edward who after his Brothers Death was Lord Sanquhar.

3 d. John Crichton of Rayhill, who married Mary Daughter of Sir John
Carmichael of Crawfurd, and had William afterward Earl of Drumfrees, which
Edward so succeeding his Brother, married Margaret Daughter of Sir James
Douglass of Drumlanrig, by whom he had Robert his only Son and Heir, who
residing at the Court, after King James's Accession to the Crown, acquired
great skill in most of the Exercises then in Vogue, particularly in Fencing,
whereby he came to value himself much upon his Skill therein, and intending to
disparage one John Turner a Fencing-Master in his own School, and he
apprehensive of his Design, pressed so rudely upon this Lord, that he put out
one of his Eyes; his Lordship being afterward in the Court of France, and the
King understanding that he lost his Eye by a common Fencing Master, said to the
Lord Sanquhar, Vit to il encore? Is the Man still alive that did it? This
Question put him upon meditating a Revenge, and some Years after, coming to
England, he hired one Robert Cairlye to Murder Turner, which he did with ^
Pistol at his own House in Whitefriars, London; whereupon his Lordship
absconded; and hearing a thousand Pound was offered for his Head, he resigned
himself to the King's Mercy, and acknowledged the Murder, but no Intercession
could prevail, his Life satisfied the Law, for he was executed before the Gates
of Westminster, the 29th of June 1612. He married Mary, Daughter of Sir George
Farmour of Easton, in the County of Northampton, Ancestor to the Lord Lempster
in England, but by her he had no Issue, and therefore so far as he could, made
over his Estate to William Crichton his natural Son, and the Honor came to

William Crichton of Rayhill, his Cousin German, and Heir Male, who by the
King's Determination, had also most of the Estate; he was by the said King
James in 1622 raised to the Honor of Viscount of Air, and King Charles I. some
Days preceding his Coronation in Scotland, created him Earl of Drumfrees. by
Letters patent, bearing date the 10th of June 1633, and to the Heirs of his
Body for ever, and departing this Life in 1641; he left Issue by Eupham his
Wife, Daughter of James Seton of Touch, in Vicecomitatu de Stirling, 1 st.
William, who succeed- him. 2 d. Sir James Crichton of St. Leonards. 3 d. John,
a Colonel in the German Wars; also two Daughters,

1. Mary, married to Edward Swift, Viscount of Carlingford, in the Kingdom of
Ireland, and had Issue.

2. Catherine, to Sir John Charters of Aimesfield, in Vicecomitatu de Drumfrees.

Which William was one of Lords of the Privy Council to King Charles II. He
married Penelope, Daughter of Sir Robert Swift, Knight, of the County of York
by Ursilla his Wife, Daughter of...... Barnham Esquire by whom he had Charles Lord
Crichton, who died before himself and two Daughters Elisabeth, Wife of
Alexander Earl of Eglingtoun, and Lady Mary who dyed unmarried.

Charles Lord Crichton, married Sarah Daughter of James first Viscount of
Stair, by whom he had William who succeeded his Grandfather, and four Daughters,

1. Penelope, now Countess of Drumfrees.

2. Margaret.

3. Mary.

4. Elisabeth.

This Earl resigned the Honor, Anno 1690; and got a Patent to his Heirs Male
or Female, with the Precedence, according to the former Creation Charta in
publicis Archivis, ad Annum 1690.
, and dying in the 1691, he was succeeded by William his Grandson, who dying a
Minor, Anno 1694, the Honor devolved upon Penelope his Sister, who is married
with Willim Dalrymple Esquire Son to John first Earl of Stair, and has Issue,
William Lord Crichton, and several other Children.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th, Argent, a Lion rampant, Azure, 2d and 3d Azure, three
Water Budgets, Or, supported by two Lions, Azure, crowned with an Earls Coronet
Proper, Crest, a Dragons Head, Vert, spouting Fire, Motto, God send Grace.

TALMASH, Earl of Dysart.
WIlliam Murray, created Earl of Dysart, by the Favor of King Charles I. Anno
1646 Sir James Dalrymple's Edition of Camden Anno 1694.
, was the Son of Mr. William Murray Parson of Dysert, a younger Brother of the
Family of Wood-end in Perth-shire, branched from Patrick Murray Son of Sir
David Murray of Tillibardin, in King James III's Time.

Which William was Educated at Court by Mr. Thomas Murray his Uncle, who was
Preceptor, and then Secretary to King Charles I. when Prince of Wales, the
Prince and Mr. Murray being about an Age, they contracted a more than ordinary
Intimacy in their younger Years; when his Majesty came to the Crown, Anno 1626,
he made him one of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, which was a fair and
probable way to Preserment; had it not been for the Changes that ensued during
the Civil War; he was employed by the King in diverse secret Negotiations of
the highest Importance: Likeas, he was with the Earl of Carnwath sent over with
Instructions to the Scots Commissioners at Breda, then treating with King
Charles II. in order to his Restoration Life of King Charles II.
, Anno 1650, which he performed with great Diligence and Conduct.

He married Elisabeth Bruce, of the Family of Clackmanan, by whom he had two
Daughters, Elisabeth Countess of Dysart, and Margaret, married to William Lord
Maynard, in England. This Elisabeth by the special Favor of his Majesty King
Charles II. whose great Favorite the Countess was, procured certain Letters
Patent, whereby the Dignity and Title of Countess of Dysart was conferred on
her, and after her Death, the Honor of Earl to descend to her Heirs. Her first
Husband, was Sir Lionel Talmash of Hellingham in the County of Suffolk, by whom
she had two Sons and two Daughters,

Lionel Talmash, the present Earl of Dysert.

Lieutenant General Thomas Talmash, who received his Death-Wounds in the Fight
of Cameret, Anno 1694 Sandford's History.
; also two Daughters, Elisabeth, married to Archibald, first Duke of Argyle.

Catherine, to James Lord Down, Son and Heir of Alexander Earl of Murray, 2 do.
To John Earl of Sutherland, to whom she had no Issue.

She married after the Death of Sir Lionel Talmash, John Duke of Lauderdale, to
whom she was likewise second Wife, whom surviving also, she dyed in the
Year...., being then well advanced in Age, whereupon the Title of Earl, by
virtue of the Grant abovementioned, devolved to Sir Lionel Talmash her Son,
the present Earl.

ARMS.
Argent, a Frette, Sable.

MONTGOMERY, Earl of Eglintoun,
EGlintoun is the Name of a Lordship and Castle in Air-shire, from whence its
Owner took a Denomination, tempore regis Malcomi, Bryce de Eglintoun, Son and
Heir of Eglun, Lord of Eglintoun, who acquired certain Lands from the Community
of the Village of Irvine, quas Radulphus fili^s and haeres quondam Hugonis de
Eglintoun, dedit Communitati and Burgensibus dicte villae datum in vigilia
sancti Mattheii, Anno gratiae millesimo ducentesimo quinto Charta penes Burgum
de Irvine.
, from whom in a continued Series descended

Sir Hugh Eglintoun of that Ilk, who was Justiciary of Lothian, Anno 1361
Drummond's History published Anno. 1710.
. He married Giles, Daughter of Walter Lord high Stewart of Scotland, Sister to
King Robert II, upon whose Advancement to the Throne, he obtained diverse
Grants of Lands, and several Employments, but leaving no Male Issue, his Estate
went to his Daughter and Heir, married to Sir John de Montgomery of Eglesham,
Knight, whose Ancestor

Roger de Montgomery, Son to Hugh de Montgomery, a noble Knight of French
Extraction, near allied to William Duke of Normandy; he was one of those Nobles
who accompanied this victorious Duke into England, and commanded the Body of
his Army in the memorable Battle of Hastings in Sussex, Anno 1066, where King
Harold was slain, and the Victory and Crown of England accrewed to the
Conqueror, for which signal Service King William bestowed on him very large
Gifts, and both gave him the Territory and Honor of Earl of Arundel, with the
Earldom of Salsburry Dugdale's Baronage of England.
, being also a Person of singular Devotion, he founded, and most amply endowed
the Abbey of St. Peter's at Salisburry, where he at length took upon him the
Habit of a Monk, and dyed 1094, leaving Issue by Mable his Wife, Daughter of
William de Talvaise, a great Baron in Bolesm, five Sons, 1 st. Hugh, dyed
without Issue, Robert, Roger, Philip, and Arnulph.

Which Robert was knighted by the Conqueror the 6th of his Reign, and always
enjoyed his Favor, but upon his Death he adhered to Robert Curthose, against
Henry I. and assisted him in the Battle, where he was routed, and taken
Prisoner. This exasperated K. Henry so much, that he banished this Earl, and
discountenanced his Friends, then it is, and with much Probability supposed,
that Philip de Montgomery, come for Scotland, and fixed his Residence in the
County of Tiviotdale upon the Border, where he became a powerful Man. In the
Time of Malcolm IV. frequent mention is made of Robert de Mundegumery, i. e.
Montgomery, who is one of the many Witnesses to Walter high Stewart of
Scotland's Foundation-Charter of the Monastery of Paisly, Anno Christi 1160
Chartulary of Paisly.
. The next in Order of Succession taken notice of, if not his Son, is Allan de
Mundegumbri, Knight, who held diverse Lands in the Tenement of Innerwick, of
the Lord high Stewart of Scotland Ibidem.
, he is a Witness to the Charter of Robert Avenel of his Wood of Polwarth to
Arnold Abbot of Kelso, Anno 1221, Chartulary of Kelso.
with whom he himself settles about the Tiths of his Lands of Innerwick, which
had been in Dispute between him and the Convent; he left Issue, Sir John de
Montgomery, Knight, his Son, who shared the Inheritance with William de
Haukerstoun, which he obtained by Helen his Wife, Daughter and Cohier of Robert
de Kent in Innerwick Ibidem.
, but more of this Sir John I have not discovered, saving that jointly with the
foresaid William, he was a Benefactor to the Monks of Kelso for the Health of
his Soul Ibidem.
: From this to the Time of Robert II. by many advantageous and honorable
Marriages, and their great and signal Services done to the Crown, both in the
Wars and otherways, this Family became possessed of diverse fair Lordships.

But omitting some Traditions, I descend to Sir John Montgomery of Eglesham,
Knight; who married the Daughter and Heir of Sir Hugh Eglintoun of that Ilk,
which Sir John was in that Expedition made against the English at the Battle of
Otterburn, Anno 1388, where James Earl of Douglass was slain; here he behaved
very valiantly, and took Henry Percy, Son to the Earl of Northumberland
Prisoner, and for his Ransom obliged him to build the Castle of Punoon, the
chief Message of the Lordship of Eglesham, he had Issue two Sons,

1. Sir Hugh, a brave and gallant Youth, who lost his Life in the Service of
his Country, at the Field of Otterburn, where his Death is particularly
remarked in this old Heroic Poem, He had a Bow bent in his Hand,
Made of a trusty Tree,
An Arrow of a Cloath-yeard long
Into the Head drew he.
Against Sir Hugh Montgomery,
So right his Shaft he set,
The gray Goose Wing that was therein,
In his Heart-blood was weet.


Sir John the second Son succeeded into the Estate, he was sent into England
one of the Hostages for the Ransom of King James I. Anno 1423 Mr. Rymer's
Foedera Angliae.
and at the solemn Inauguration of the said Prince; he was one of the Barons on
whom the Honor of Knighthood was conferred in 1424, and one of the Peers, who
sat upon the Trial of Murdo Duke of Albany, where we find that unhappy Duke
condemned to lose his Head, tho the Records are wholly silent as to his Crime.
This Lord married Agnes Daughter to the Lord Maxwel, by whom he had

Alexander his Son and Heir, who indeed first raised the Grandeur of the
Family, being a Man of great Parts. King James I. choose him a Privy
Councilour, and in 1430, constituted him jointly in Commission with Sir
Alexander Cuningham to be Governor of Kintyre and Knapdale, and the next
ensuing Year he was with Alexander Lord Gordon and Mr. John Methven Secretary
of State, sent to England to treat of the continuing a Peace betwixt the two
Realms, which was at length concluded by them, having survived the many
Difficulties and Factions of King James I's. Reign. I find he was of the Privy
Council to his Son King James II, Anno 1440, from whom he obtained several
beneficial Grants from the Crown, in Consideration of his good and laudable
Services, not only performed to himself, but to his Father of blessed Memory.
This Lord was twice sent Commissioner into England Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
the first time in the 1444, and the other in 1457. In both the Commissions
he is designed Alexander Dominus Montgomery. Simply he took to Wife, Margaret
Daughter of Thomas Boyd of Kilmaronock Genealogy of Eglintoun.
by whom he had Issue,

Alexander, who dyed in his Lifetime, but left two Sons behind him, by
Elisabeth his Wife Daughter of..... Hepburn of Hales Ibidem.
, viz. Alexander who after his Grand-father's Death, was Lord Montgomery, and
Robert first of the Montgomerys of Broadstone Charta penes Dominum Grenock.
, of whom Hugh Earl of Mount-Alexander of the Kingdom of Ireland in the Linal
Heir.

George Montgomery of Skelmurly, was this Lords second Son () whose Successor
is Sir Robert Montgomery Baronet.

Mr. Thomas Montgomery, the third Son, was Parson of Egelsham.

He had likeways several Daughters, 1. Margaret married to John first Earl of
Lennox. 2 d. Janet to Sir Robert Cunningham of Kilmaures, Ancestor to the Earl
of Glencairn. 3 d....... to Alexander Hume of that Ilk. 4 th. Jean, to John
Lord Kennedy. 5 th. Agnes, to William Cuningham of Glen garnock; as to the
precise Time of this Lords Death, I have not found, but he was succeeded in his
Estate and Honor by

Alexander his Grandson, whom he married in his own time to Catherine Charta in
publicis Archivis.
Daughter of Gilbert Lord Kennedy, by whom he had Hugh his Successor. 2 d.
James Montgomery of Smeithston. 3 d. John.

Which Hugh, upon the Accession of King James IV. to the Crown, was named of
his Council, and in 1489 he obtained a Grant of the Constabulary of his
Majesty's Castle of Rothsay Ibidem.
, this King ever treating him with particular Marks of his Favor, and at last
was pleased to creat him into the Dignity of Earl of Eglintoun, Anno 1503
Ibidem.
, he married Helen, Daughter of Colin first Earl of Argyle, by whom he had
three Sons and several Daughters.

1. John called Master of Eglintoun,

2. Son Sir Neil Montgomery of Lainshaw, who had a Grant from his Father of the
Lands of Lainshaw, Galowbery, Crevoch, Kilbryde, Milstonflet, Bradfurow, the
Temple Land of Stewartoun, Holowchaple, Langanfee, Charlewrak, Longford;
Crochdow, and Lochdernell in Air-shire Charta penes Jacobum Montgomery de
Lainshaw.
, the Lands of Airdoch and Nether-Craig in Renfrew shire. Moreover by Marriage
of Margaret, Daughter and sole Heir of Quintine Mure of Skeldon, he
considerably increased his Fortune, his Estate in all amounting to 100 Merk
Land of old Extent, and thereupon he added to his Coat of Arms Argent, three
Molets Azure.

He was killed in a Feud by the Lord Boyd in June 1547, having had two Sons by
the said Margaret, his Wife; John who married Margaret Daughter of Robert Lord
Boyd, but dyed without Succession, and Sir Neil who succeeded him, of whom and
his Descendents more shall be said under the Title of Lyle, he marrying Jean,
Daughter and sole Heir of John last Lord Lyle.

3 d. Son was Mr. William Montgomery of Greenfield, who acquired the Lands of
Stane in Air-shire, by Marriage of Elisabeth Daughter and sole Heir of Robert
Frances of Stane Charta in Rotulis Jacobi IV. ad Annum 1508.
. This Branch divided it self afterward by Means of Hugh, a younger Son, who
became the Root of the Montgomery's of Achinhood, and his Cadets.

Margaret, 1 st. Daughter, married to William Lord Semple. 2 d. Marjory, to
William Lord Somervel. The 3 d. Maud to Colin Campbel of Arkinglass Account of
the Family of Eglintoun.
but had no Issue. 4 th. Isobel to John Mure of Caldwell, in Vicecomitatu
deRenfrew, and had Issue. 5 th Elisabeth, to John Blair of that Ilk. 6 th.
Agnes, to John Ker of Kersland, in Vicecomitatu de Air, and had Issue.

Here its requisite to observe, that John, Son and Heir apparent to this Earl,
when the Feuds run high betwixt the contending Parties of the Nobility in the
Minority of King James V, he was killed in a Scuffle betwixt the Earls of Aran
and Angus on the Street of Edinburgh, 30 of April 1520 Hume's History of the
Family of Douglass.
, leaving behind him a Son and a Daughter by Elisabeth his Wife, Daughter of
Sir Archibald Edmonston of Duntreath Charta penes commitem de Eglintoun.
, Hugh who succeeded his Grandfather, and Christian, Wife of Sir William
Douglass of Drumlanrig, Ancestor to the Duke of Queensberry.

Which Hugh was of the Privy Council to King James V. as he had been before to
John Duke of Albany, Governor of Scotland, in the said King's Minority, and
was one of the Lords to whom his Grace committed the Tuition of that Prince,
upon his going to France to concert Measures with that Court for carrying on a
War with England, Anno 1520 Holinshed's History of Scotland.
: Yea, the said King had such an Esteem of this Lord, that when he went to
France in order to espouse Magdalen, Daughter of Francis I. Anno 1536, he
appointed him one of the Governors of Scotland, the Earl of Huntly being
joined in Commission with him. His Wife was Marion, Daughter of George Lord
Seton, by whom he had only a Son,

Hugh his Successor in the Honor, who, as soon as he came to Man's Estate,
married the Lady Jean Hamilton, Daughter of James Duke of Chattlerault
Governor of Scotland, which Marriage was disolved in the 1562, they standing
in the fourth Degree of Consanguinity, the Pope's Dispensation not being
obtained Original Divorce still extant.
, and then by, the Permission of the Bishop of Rome, he is allowed to Marry
Agnes Daughter of Sir John Drummond of Innerpeffrey, Widow of Sir Hugh Campbel
of Lowdon: By her he had four Children.

1. Hugh Earl of Eglintoun.

2. Robert Montgomery of Giffen, who married Margaret Daughter of Sir Matthew
Campbel of Lowdon, by whom he had one Daughter, Elisabeth, his sole Heir,
married to Hugh Earl of Eglintoun.

Margaret, eldest Daughter, was married to Robert 1 st. Earl of Winton, Mother
by him of George 2 d Earl of Winton, and of Alexander Earl of Eglintoun.

Agnes the second, married to Robert Lord Semple, and had Issue.

This Earl stuck close to Queen Mary in the Time of her greatest Distress: He
put himself in Arms in her behalf, and was personally engaged in the Battle of
Lang-side Crawfurd's Memoirs.
, were he, together with the Lord Seton, and many Barons of Account, were taken
Prisoners, after which he thought sit to tender his Submission to King James
VI. and lived peaceably till his Death, which happened in the Month of June
1585 Charta in publicis Archivis.
, his Estate devolving on

Hugh his Son, who was barbarously murdered on the score of a private Quarrel,
by John Cuningham of Colnbeith, and his Adherents, the 12th Day of April 1586
Dr. Johnston's Scots Heroes.
, whereby his Country was deprived of an Honor and Ornament, his Prince of a
faithful and able Subject, and his Family of a singular Advantage, Mr. John
Johnston wrote the following Epitaph in Praise of him. Illa opifex sollers
rerum, magni amula Olympi
Natura, immensis ambitiosa opibus;
Illa sibi de te certans quae singula, rara,
Vix aliis, dedit haec cunta benigna tibi.
Sic artus, sic ora, animos, sic pectora finxit,
Caeteraque humanis anteferenda notis:
Vix aliqu^m ut credas mortali semine cretum,
Ast quales tulerunt secula prisca deos.
Invidiosa nimis visa haec mortalibus. Ergo
Tollere mox properat infidiosa manus.
Pertunam ingentem gravior saepe exitus urget:
Praecipitique vides fulmine magna quati.


He left a Son by Giles his Wife, Daughter to Robert Lord Boyd, Hugh who
succeeded him in his Estate and Honor. This Earl in the 1603 Charta in
publicis Archivis, 5 January 1603,
, obtained a Grant to himself, his Heirs and Assigneys, upon the Resignation of
Mr. William Melvil, erecting the dissolved Abbay of Kilwining formerly a Seat
of Benedictine Monks, with all the Lands and Tithes, either in Property or
Superiority which had belonged at any time thereto into a temporal Lordship,
with the Patronage of the Churches of Kilwining, Irvine, Dunbartoun,
Kilmarnock, Loudoun, Ardrossan, Kilbirny, Dalry, Dunlop, Beith, Stewar town,
Stevenson, Dreghorn, Pearston, Kilbryde, and Kilmachornal.

He married Elisabeth, Daughter of Robert Montgomery of Giffen, but dying
without Issue in the 1612 Spotiswood's History.
, his Estate by virtue of an Entail made by him, came to Sir Alexander Seton
his Cousin German, who changed his Name to Montgomery, but he could not enjoy
the Title of Earl, without the King's special Allowance, which soon after, his
Majesty was pleased to bestow upon him, for the great Merit of his Ancestors,
with the Dignity and precedence formerly enjoyed by Hugh Earl of Eglingtoun,
last deceased.

This Earl was among the Number of those Peers, who engaged themselves against
the King, Anno 1638, upon the first commencing of our bloody Civil War; he had
the Command of a Regiment in the Army that was sent to Ireland, Anno 1642,
toward the suppressing the Rebellion, of the Native Irish Guthry's Memoirs.
: He was likeways personally engaged in the Battle of Longmarstonmuir, Anno
1643, in the Service of the Parliament of England, against the King, where he
behaved with abundance of Courage, yet his Lordship still retained a Respect
and Affection to his Majesty's Person, and no Man more abominated the Murder of
the Lords Anointed than he.

He heartily concurred with, and was extremely satisfied with the Restoration
of King Charles II. by whom he was constituted Captain of his Guard of Horse My
Lord Kingston's History of the Family of Winton.
, Anno 1650; and the next Year while he was raising Forces in the Western Parts
for the King's Service, he was surprised at Dunbarton by a Party of English
Horse, and sent Prisoner to the Town of Hull, and afterward removed to Berwick
upon Tweed, suffering likeways the Sequestration of his Estate till the
Restoration reponed him, Anno 1660, his first Wife was Anne, Daughter of
Alexander first Earl of Linlithgow, by whom he had

1. Hugh his Successor in the Honor.

2. Sir Henry Montgomery of Giffen, dyed without Children.

3 d. Sir Alexander, a Colonel in Ireland, in which Kingdom he dyed.

4. Colonel James Montgomery of Coelsfield.

5. Robert, who in his Youth making choice of a Military Life, went over to the
Wars in Ireland, Ann^ 1642, he was first made a Captain in his Father's
Regiment, after which he listed himself in the Service of the Parliament of
England, where in Time he arrived to the Degree of a Major General, and
acquired the Reputation of a Man of Courage, and a good Officer, he firmly
adhered to King Charles II. and in his Majesty's Service he gave many signal
Proofs of his Loyalty and Valor on several occasions, especially at that
memorable Encounter at Dunbar, 3 d. of September 1650, in which Action he
performed the part of a brave and valiant Commander; likeways he commanded in
the Quality of Major General of the Horse in the Royal Army at Worcester. 3 d
of September 1651, where he received diverse Wounds, and had the Misfortune to
be taken Prisoner, whence making his Escape out of the Castle of Edinburgh ^n
Disguise, Anno 1659 History of Seton by the Lord Kingstoun.
, he got beyond Sea to the King, and returned with his Master, Anno 1660, being
one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Bed Chamber. He married Margaret Daughter
of James Viscount of Kilsyth, by whom he had James Montgomery Esquire his Son and
Heir.

His Lordships had likeways two Daughters, 1 st. Margaret, married to John 1
st. Earl of Twedale after his Death to William Earl of Glencairn, the 2 d. Anne
dyed unmarried. He married to his second Wife Margaret Daughter of Walter Lord
Buclugh Widow of James Lord Ross, but by her he had no Succession, and arriving
to the 73 d Year of his Age, he departed this Life the 7th of January 1661, his
Estate and Honor devolving on

Hugh his Son. This noble Earl was a Man of perfect Loyalty in the time of our
Civil Troubles, as appears in all the Accounts of those Times, particularly by
the Memoiers of the Bishop of Dunkeld, his Cotemporary. In the 1643, he raised
a Troop of Horse, with which he marched in Person, and fought valiantly at
Langmarstonmuir, and several other Battles and Skirmishes, and continuing to
adhere faithfully to the Royal Cause, he was therefore excepted out of
Cromwell's Indemnity, in the 1654 History of Seton by the Lord Kingstoun.
, by Anne his first Wife, Daughter of James Marquis of Hamilton, he had one
Daughter Anne, married to James Earl of Finlator; also by Mary his second Wife
Daughter of John Earl of Rothes, he had

Alexander his Successor.

Francis Montgomery of Giffen, who was one of the Lords of the Privy Council,
and one of the Commissioners of the Thesaury in the Reign of K. William and Q.
Anne. He was appointed one of the Commissioners upon the Part of Scotland to
treat upon a nearer Union with England in 1706, which was at that time
completed, he had no Issue by Margaret his first Wife, Daughter and sole Heir
of Alexander Earl of Leven, but by Elisabeth Daughter of Sir Robert Sinclair of
Lochermackhouse, in Vicecomitatu de Haddingtoun; He had John Montgomery Esquire a
Member of Parliament for the County of Air. Alexander, one of the Colonels in
Her Majesty's Foot Guards, who dyed a very hopeful Youth of his Death woun^s at
the Battle of Almanara, in the 1711; also Elisabeth a Daughter, married to
Patrick Ogilvy of Lonmay. This Earl had moreover five Daughters,

1. Mary, married to George Earl of Winton, sans Issue.

2. Margaret, to James 2 d Earl of Loudon.

3. Christian, to John 4 th Lord Balmerinoch.

4. Eleanor, to Sir David Dunbar of Baldoon, Baronet, in Vicecomitatu de
Wigtoun, and had Issue.

5. Anne, to Sir Andrew Ramsay of Abbotshall, Baronet. He departing this Life,
Anno 1669, was succeeded by

Alexander his Son and Heir, who was named one of the Lords of the Privy
Council, 1 st of May 1689, and dying in the end of the Year 1701, he left Issue
by Elisabeth his Wife, Daughter of William Earl of Drumfrees, Alexander the
present Earl, Major Hugh and Major John Montgomery, Original Act of Indemnity
pones me.
and Mary married to Sir James Agnew of Lochnaw, and had Issue.

Which Alexander, was one of the Lords of the Privy Council to King William,
and one of the Commissioners of the Thesaury. In 1700, he had a Patent to sit
and Vote in the Parliament of Scotland, as Lord High Thesaurer, all Officers of
State tho neither Peers, nor elected as Commissioners, having by the
Constitution a Place in Parliament, and the Crown a Right, when any one of the
Officers were vacant, to appoint one to Represent in Parliament the said
Office. Upon the Dissolution of the Parliament in 1710, he was on the 10th of
November the same Year elected one of the sixteen Peers of Scotland to the
Parliament of Great Britain; also in 1711, his Lordship was appointed one of
the Commissioners of the Chamberlian-Court, which was then erected. He married
first Margaret Daughter of William Lord Cochran, Son and Heir of William Earl
of Dundonald, by whom he had two Sons, Hugh and Alexander, who both dyed in the
Year 1696; also four Daughters,

1. Catherine, married to James Earl of Galloway.

2. Eupham, to George Lockhart of Carnwath, and has Issue.

3. Grace, to Robert Earl of Carnwath.

4. Jean, to Sir Aexander Maxwel of Monrieth, Baronet.

His second Wife was Anne Daughter of George Earl of Aberdeen, by whom he had a
Daughter, Lady Mary.

His third Marriage was with Susanna, Daughter of Sir Archibald Kennedy of
Colzean, Baronet, by whom he has two Daughters,

Lady Elisabeth.

Lady Helen.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Azure, three Flower de lyces, Or: 2d and 3d, Gules,
three Annulets, Or, stoned, Azure, all within a Border, Or, flour'd and counter
flowr'd, Gules, supported by two Dragons Vert vomiting Fire, and for Crest, a
Maid holding in her Dexter Hand a Man's Head, and in the Sinister an Anchor,
Motto, Guard bien.

BRUCE, Earl of Elgin.
THAT the ancient and noble Family of Clackmanan, is branched from the Earls of
Carrick, all our Antiquaries do agree, tho they do not deduce the Line of that
Descent in each Point alike, to the intent that it may clearly appear that it
is, I thought fit to take notice, that King David II. made a Grant to Robert
Bruce, dilecto consanguineo suo, of the Castle and Barony of Clackmanan, the
39th Year of his Reign Sir George Mackenzies Collections from the public
Archieves of the Kingdom.
, which is sufficient to show he was of the said King's Kindred.

Sir Edward Bruce of Shires-Mill, a younger Son of Sir Edward Bruce of
Clackmanan, by Margaret Daughter of Sir Patrick Blackader of Tilliallan in the
Time of King James V. acquiring several Lands from John Abbot of Culross, in
1541 Charta in Rotulis Jacobi V.
, he raised to himself a fair Fortune. By..... his Wife, Daughter to the Lord
Semple Genealogy of the Family of Elgin.
, he had Robert Bruce of Blairhall, Edward Bruce of Kinloss, and George Bruce
of Carnock Ancestor to the Earls of Kincairn. Of these his Children, Edward the
second being the Person of whom I Am chiefly to speak here, I shall deduce what
I found related of him from unquestionable Authority.

This Edward being bred a Lawyer, was first made one of the Commissarrs of
Edinburgh, and after that pre^erred to be one of the Senators of the College of
Justice by King James VI. 2 d December 1597, by the Title of Commendator of
Kinloss: And being a Person of great Parts, was by the said King, with the Earl
of Mar sent Ambassador to Queen Elisabeth, Anno 1601, to Congratulate her upon
her good Success in repressing that Audacious Attempt of the Earl of Essex; and
upon the Death of that Queen, being eminently instrumental to the pe^ceful
Entrance of King James to the Crown of England, by the Intelligence, which he
held privately in her Lifetime with Sir Robert Cicel, one of her principal
Secretaries of State, and accompanying the King into England, Anno 1603, in
Recompense of his faithful Services, he had the Office of Master of the Rolls
conferred on him during Life; and as a further Testimony of his Majesty's
Favor, he had a Grant of the dissolved Abbay of Kinloss in Murray erected to
him and his Heirs in a Temporal Lordship, by Letters Patent bearing date 8th of
July 1604 Charta ad Annum 1604.
, being of the Privy Council to his Majesty in both Kingdoms, he departed this
Life in the 62 Year of his Age, on the 14th of January 1610, and was interred
in the Chapel of the Rolls in Chancery Lane, London, where there is a fair
Monument erected to his Memory, with this Inscription upon it. FUIMUS Sacrae
Memoriae Domini Edwardi Bruce, Baronis Bruce, Kinlossensis, sacrorum scriniorum
Magistri dicatum qui obiit 14 Jan. Anno sal. 1610. Aetat. 62. Jacobi Regis 8
vo. Brucius Edwardus situs hic and Scotus and Anglus,
Scotus ut ortu Anglis sic oriundus avis,
Regno in utroque decus tulit auctus honoribus amplis
Regi a consiliis Regni utriusque fuit,
Conjuge prole, nuru, genero, spe, reque beatus
Vivere nos docuit, nune docet ecce mori.


He left Issue by Magdalen his Wife Daughter of Alexander Clark of Balbirny, in
Vicecomitatu de Fife, two Sons and a Daughter,

1. Edward Lord Kinloss.

2. Thomas Bruce Esquire

3. Christian, married to William Earl of Devon-shire of the Kingdom of
England, and had Issue; Also

Janet, a natural Daughter, married to Thomas Dalziel of Binns, Mother by him
of Lieutenant General Thomas Dalziel.

Which Edward Lord Kinloss was made Knight of the Bath at the Creation of Henry
Prince of Wales, and afterward one of the Gentlemen of the Bed Chamber to K.
James VI. in 1613 he had the Misfortune to fall into a fatal quarrel with Sir
Edward Sackville, afterward Earl of Dorset, upon which says a noble Historian
The Earl of Clarenden's History.
, They both transported themselves into Flanders, attended only by two
Surgeons, placed at a Distance, and under an Obligation not to stir but upon
the fall of one of them, they fought under the Walls of Antwerp, where this
Lord was killed, whereupon Thomas his Brother became his Heir.

Which Thomas attended King Charles I. into Scotland, and at the Solemnity of
his Coronation, was by Letters Patent bearing date the 19th of June 1633,
created Earl of Elgin, afterward in the 17 of Charles I. advanced to the
Dignity of a Baron of England, by the Title of Lord Bruce of Whorletoun, in the
County of York, he married Anne Daughter of Sir Robert Chichester, Knight. 2
dly. Diana, Daughter, and one of the Coheirs of William Lord Burleigh, Son and
Heir of Thomas Earl of Exeter, and departing this Life, Anno 1663, he left
Issue by Anne his first Wife,

Robert his Son and Heir, who being Lord Lieutenant of the County of Bedford;
and having given great Testimony of his Loyalty to King Charles II. under his
misfortunate Troubles; as also been instrumental in the Restoration, he was in
the 19th of Charles II. created Lord Bruce of Skeltoun, Viscount Bruce of
Ampthil, and Earl of Ailesbury. He married Diana Daughter to Henry Earl of
Stamford, by whom he had Issue,

Thomas Lord Kinloss.

James Bruce Esquire

Diana eldest Daughter, married first to Sir Seymour Shirely, Baro net, and
after to John Duke of Rutland.

Anne, to Sir William ^ich of Sunning.

Christian, to John Rolls Esquire eldest Son of Sir John Rolls of Stephenson, and
afterward to Sir Robert Guyer of Stoke.

Mary, to Sir John Walter of Saresdon, in the County of Oxford, Baronet.

Anne-Charlotte, to Nicolas Bagnal Esquire

Henrietta, to Thomas Ogle Esquire only Son of Sir Thomas Ogle Governor of Chelsea
College.

Which Thomas eldest Son succeed ed him in the Earldom, and married Elisabeth
Daughter of Henry Beauc^^mp, Son of William Marquis of Hartford, Sister, and at
length Heir to William Duke of Somerset, by whom he had Issue,

1. Charles, now Lord Bruce of Kinloss, who has married Anne Daughter and
Coheir to William Marquis of Halifax, and had Issue a Son Robert, born 1707.

This Earl's eldest Daughter Elisabeth, was married to George Earl of Cardigan,
and Lady Mary dyed young.

His Lordship has since married the Countess of Sanaw in Brabant, by whom he
had a Daughter Charlot-Maria.

ARMS.
Or, a Saltyre and Chief, Gules, on a Canton Argent, a Lion rampant, Azure,
Supporters two Savages Proper, wreathed about the Head and Loins with Laurel,
Motto, Fuimus.

MURRAY, Lord Elibank.
IS a Cadet of the Family of Blackbarony: His Ancestor was Sir Gideon Murray
Son of Sir Andrew Murray of Blackbarony, by Grisel his Wife, Daughter of Sir
John Beaton of Crich Mr. Martin.
, Relict of Sir Walter Scot of Buclugh. From a short Abstract of his L^^e, I
find that Mr. Murray in his Youth, resolving to follow the Ministry, while he
was a Student in D^vinity, he happened unluckily to kill a Man by Accident
Scots-tarvets MS.
, which made him relinquish that Profession, and become Chamberlain to the
Lord of Buclugh; which Trust he managed with great Prudence, and considerably
improved that opulent Fortune. He was first brought to Acquaintance with the
Court, by means of his Nephew Robert Earl of Somerset, once the great Favorite
of King James VI. who procured him first the Honor of Knighthood Balfour.
, Anno 1605: and upon his Lordships Promotion to the Thesaurers Office, on the
Decease of George Earl of Dunbar, in the 1611 Sir Gideon Murray was constituted
Thesaurer Depute, which Office he managed so much to the Advantage of the
Crown, that beside the Charge of the Government, he both repaired and enlarged
the Palaces of Holy-rood-house, Falkland, Linlithgow, Dumfermling, and the
Castles of Edinburgh, and Dumbartoun, and had the Treasury so full at the
King's coming to Scotland 1617, that he defrayed the whole Charge of the Court,
his Majesty appearing with as much Splendour at Holy-rood-house as at Whitehall.
He departed this Life Anno 1621 Historical Collections
, leaving Issue by Margaret Pentland his Wife Charta in Rotulis 1603.
,

Sir Patrick his Successor;

Walter Murray of Livingstoun; and a Daughter...... married to Sir William Scot
of Harden.

Which Patrick was by King Charles I. Anno 1628 List of Baronets.
first made a Baroner, and afterward, in respect of his approved Loyalty to the
said King, was advanced to the Dignity of Lord Elibank, March 18th 1643 Charta
in pub. Arch.
. He married Elisabeth Daughter of Sir James Dundas of Arnistoun, by whom he
had a Son, 1 st, Patrick his Successor; 2 d,...... Murray of Spot, and several
Daughters; Elisabeth, married to Sir Archibald Stiling of Carden.

Patrick Lord Elibank his Son, married Elisabeth Steuart, Daughter of John 1
st, Earl of Traquair, by whom he had Alexander his Son and Heir, who married
Anne Daughter of Dr. Alexander Burnet Archbishop of St. Andrews, by whom he had
Alexander his Successor in the Honor, and two Daughters,

Anne, married to John Lord Mackleod, Son and Heir of George Earl of Cromarty.

........ to Sir John Mackenzie of Coul, in Vic. de Ross.

Alexander the present Lord, has married.... Daughter of George Stirling
Surgeon in Edinburgh, by whom he has Issue the Master of Elibank his Son and
Heir apparent.

ARMS.
Azure, A Martlet betwixt Three Stars, within a double Tressure, Argent.
Supporters, Two Horses bridleed, Argent. Crest, A Lion Rampant Saliant on a
Pole Ax, Sable Motto, Virtute fideque.

ELPHINSTON, Lord Elphinston.
THIS ancient noble Family originally took the Surname of Elphinston from their
own Lands of that Name in Edinburghshire, the first of whom I have found was
John de Elphinston, who is Witness in that Grant which Roger de Quincy Earl of
Winchester made to the Monks of Dryburgh, de uno Tofto Terrae in Glaswoode
circa Annum 1252 Original Gift to the Abbay of Dryburgh.
.

Another Alexander Elphinston de Elphinston in the Time of King David II, had
the Lands of Kinchinbar, in Baronia de Stenhouse, in Vicecomit. de Stirling
Charta in Rotulis Regis David.
, from Godofredus de Ross, Dominus ejusdem in feudo and haereditate: He was
succeeded by Alexander Elphinston Dominus ejusdem, his Son, who in the 33d of
King David II. exchanged the foresaid Lands with Alexander Son of Sir Adam More
Knight, for the Lands of Arthbeg in Stirlingshire, since called Elphinston. Sir
William Elphinston his Son, was slain fighting gallantly against the English at
the Battle of Piperdain, Anno 1436, to whose Valor chiefly our Historians
ascribe the Victory; leaving only a Daughter, Agnes his sole Heir, married to
Gilbert Son of Sir Adam Johnston of that Ilk Mr. Thomas Crawfurd's Notes on
Buchanan.
, who thereby came to the Possession of the Lands of Elphinston in Lothian: The
rest of the Estate of the Family in Stirling-shire, by a solemn Arbitration, in
the 1471, came to Henry Elphinstoun, Brother to the aforesaid Alexander whch he
then called Elphinston.

Sir Alexander Elphinstoun of that Ilk, Son and Heir of Sir John Elphinstoun
Knight, was by the Bounty and Favor of K. James IV. created Lord Elphinstoun,
by whose special Countenance he obtained in Marriage Elisabeth Barlow an
English Lady, one of the Maids of Honor to Queen Margaret. He was slain at the
Battle of Flowdon, with the said King his Master, 9th September 1513, leaving
Issue, Alexander, who succeeded him in the Honor, Isobel, married to David
Lindsay of Dunrod, 2 dly, To Robert Maxwell of Calderwood, in Vic. de Lanerk
Charta ad Annum 1527.
, Eupham, to John Bruce of Cultmalindie Genesis of Elphinstoun.
, Elizabeth to Sir David Somervel of Plain.

Which Alexander married Catherine Daughter of John Lord Erskine, by whom he
had Issue, 1 st, Robert the next Lord, 2 d John Parson of In^er^ochty, 3 d,
James Elphinstoun of Innerdovat Charta penes Gavinum Hamilton de Innerdovat.
, 4 th, Sir Michael Elphinstoun, Master of the Household to King James VI. 5 th.
William, who was the Author of that Branch of the Elphinstouns of Calderhall in
Stirling-Shire; also several Daughters,

Isobel, married to James Hamilton of Haggs, and had Issue.

Marjory, to Sir Robert Drummond of Carnock, and had Issue.

Margaret, to Alexander Livingston of Dunipace.

This Lord was killed at the Battle of Pinkie, 10th of September 1547 Genesis of
Elphinstoun.
, and was succeeded in his Estate and Honor by Robert his Son and Heir, who
married Elisabeth Daughter of Sir John Drummond of Innerpeffery, by whom he
had, 1. Alexander his Successor, 2. George Ibidem.
; Rector of the Scots College at Rome, 3. Sir James Elphlnstoun, 1st Lord
Balmerinoch; likewise several Daughters.

1st, Agnes, married to Walter Lord Deskford.

2 d. Jean to Walter Barclay of Towie, in Vic. de Aberdeen.

3. Elizabeth Ibidem.
, to Sir Robert Innes of that Ilk, and had Issue.

4. Margaret to John Cunningham Ibidem.
of Drumwhasle, in Vic. de Stirling, and had Issue.

He departed this Life, Anno 1602, and was succeeded by

Alexander his Son, who was one of the Lords of the Privy Council to King James
VI. by whom he was preferred to be Lord high Theasurer of Scotland, Anno 1599,
which Office he resigned to the Earl of Dunbar in 1601. By Jean his Wife,
Daughter of William Lord Livingstoun, he had

1. Alexander his Successor in the Honor. 2. James Elphinston of Barns,
Ancestor to the present Lord Elphinston. 3. John Elphinston of Wortle in
Aberdeen-Shire. 4. Michael Elphonstin of Quarrel. in Vic de Stirling; also five
Daughters.

Anne, married to John Earl of Sutherland, and had Issue.

Jean, to Arthur Lord Forbes, and had Issue.

Elizabeth, to Sir John Bruce of Airth, and had Issue.

Christian, to Sir Thomas Urquhart of Cromarty.

Helen, to Sir William Cockburn of Langtoun, and had Issue. And again to Mr.
Henry Rollo of Woodside, Grandfather and Grandmother to the present Sir Henry
Rollo of Woodside Knight.

Which Alexander married Elizabeth, Daughter of Patrick Lord Drummond, Sister
to James first Earl of Perth Charta penes Dominum de Perth.
, by whom he had one Daughter Lillias; and departing this Life Anno 1649 Charta
in publicis Archivis.
, the Title of Lord descended to

Alexander Elphinstoun of Barns his Nephew, who, that the Honor might be
properly supported, married Lillias Daughter and Heir of Alexander Lord
Elphinstoun his Uncle: He dying Anno 1654 Ibidem.
, left Issue, 1. Alexander. 2 d. John, and a Daughter Anne, married to Walter
Lord Torphichen.

Which Alexander married Anne Daughter of Dr. Alexander Burnet then Archbishop
of Glasgow, and afterward of St. Andrews, but he dying without Issue, Anno
1669 Ibidem.
, his Estate and Title came to

John his Brother, who married Isobel, Daughter of Charles Earl of Lauderdale,
by whom he had,

1. Charles.

2. John, who dyed in the blossom of his promising Youth, unmarried.

3. Captain William Elphinstoun.

Elisabeth, eldest Daughter, married to John Campbel of Mamore, Son to
Archibald Earl of Argyle, and has Issue.

Margaret, to George Count Lesly of Balquhain, and has Issue.

Mary.

Charles Master of Elphinstoun, married Elisabeth Daughter of Sir William
Primrose of Caringtoun, by whom he has Issue,

ARMS.
Argent, a Cheveron Sable, betwixt three Boars Heads eras'd Gules, supported by
two Savages Proper, Crest, a Lady above the middle, holding in her Dexter-hand
a Castle, and in the Sinister a Laurel, Motto, Cause Causit.

HAY, Earl of Errol.
BOTH our ancient and modern Historians say, that this noble Family had its
Rise Anno 980, tempore Kennethi Tertii, when the Danes invaded this Nation, and
gave Battle to the Scots; whom they had routed near Perth, but for the Courage
and Conduct of a certain Labourer, who perceiving his Countrymen flying before
the conquering Enemy, he and his two Sons stopped them with their Plow Gear in
a certain Defile, and upbrading them for their Cowardice, obliged them to
rally: whom the Danes supposing to be fresh Succors, he became thereby the
means of transferring the Victory to the Scots side: And King Kenneth advanced
him into the first Rank of those about him, and rewarded him with as much Land
as a Falcon flying from a Fist, should measure out before he settled: To which
Exploit, the Arms, Crest, and Supporters of the Family of Errol, are allusive.
The praise of this illustrious Person and his Sons are celebrated by the polite
Poet Dr. John Johnston, as follows, Quo ruitis cives? Heia! hosti obvertite
vultus ^
Non pudet infami vertere terga fuga?
Hostis ego vobis; aut ferrum vertite in hostem.
Dixit, and armatus dux praeit ipse jugo.
Quaqua ibat vastam condensa per agmina Danum
Dat stragem. hinc omnis consequiturque fugae.
Servavit cives. Victorem reppulit hostem.
Vnus cum natis agminis instar erat.
Hic Decios agnosce tuos magnae aemula Romae,
Aut prior hac; aut te his Scotia major adhue.


In the Reign of King Malcolm IV. William de Haia is Possessor of the Lands of
Errol in Forfar-shire, and is among many other noble Persons Witness in that
King's Charter to the Abbay of Scoon, he gave to the Monastry of Couper in pure
Charity, the Lands of Lyderpoyls, which King William by his Royal Charter
ratified and confirmed, Comite Duncano Justiciario, Comite Gilberto de
Strathern, Willielmofilio Thori, being Witnesses therein, sufficiently prove it
a very ancient Deed Original Writes of the Abbay of Couper.
. He left behind him three Sons, David, Robert, and Malcolm.

Which David was a Benefactor to the Monks of Couper in Angus, by his Gift and
Donation of three Acres of arable Land, with the Fishing of one Net upon the
River of Tay, Pro anima piae memoriae Regis Willielmi, and anima Willielmi de
Haia patris mei and salute mea and Elene sponsae meae and Antecessorum and
Heredum meorum, cum consensu Gilberti Heredis mei.

Sir Gilbert Hay of Errol his Son, was one of the first Barons of Scotland, who
assisted King Robert I. in retrieving the Independency of his Native Country,
then almost subjected to the English by John Baliol; and assisted at the
Solemnity of his Coronation, Anno 1306. In Consideration of his good and
faithful Services he had diverse Grants of Lands then in the Crown; and that
Monarch being further desirous to put a lasting Mark of Esteem upon him and his
Family, he was graciously pleased to make him and his Heirs for ever Lord High
Constables or Scotland, by his Charter 12th Nov. 1315 Charta penes Comitem
Errol.
. He died Anno 1330 Genealogy of Errol.
, and was interred in the Abbay of Couper, to which he and his Ancestors had
been Benefactors. He was succeeded by

Sir William his Son, who adhered firmly to the Interest of King David Bruce,
in whose Service he lost his Life at the Battle of Duplin, Anno 1333 Ibidem.
, together with the whole Gentlemen of his Name; so that had not his Lady been
with Child, and supported it by the Birth of a Postumous Son, it had been quite
extinguished. Mr. Johnston the Poet writes thus of him, Me simul, and mecum
spemque and genus omne meorum
Vulnere non uno sustulit una dies.
At vos crudeles Parcae miserescite. nobis
Degener haud tant is spes nova surgat avis.
Audivere Deae Dabitur quod poscitis, ajunt,
Aut dabis, aut conjux te tibi dante dabit.
Stat rediviva igitur, potuitque excisa renasci,
Et tibi gens a te posthuma surget avo.
Si fas morte etiam victuram condere gentem,
Qualia, quanta olim vita datura fuit!


Sir William was succeeded by Sir David his Son, born after his Father's Death,
and on that account came not into Action for a long time: He lest a Son

Sir Thomas, who is one of the Barons who recognosced John Earl of Carrick's
Right to the Crown, upon his Father's Accession to the imperial Dignity of this
Realm Earl of Cromarty's Vindication of King Robert III.
. He married Elisabeth Daughter to King Robert II. Charta Roberti II. dilecto
filio suo Thomae Hay Constabulario Scotae and Elisabethae sponsae suae filiae
nostrae, ad Annum 1376.
and departing this Life Anno 1406 Genesis of Errol.
. he left Issue William his Successor, and a Daughter Elisabeth, married to Sir
George Lesly Knight Charta penes Comitem de Rothes.
.

Which William was one of the Commissioners deputed by the Estates of Scotland
to treat with the English, touching the Redemption of King James I. Anno 1424,
which was then happily effected Drummond's History of King James I.
, at the Solemnity of whose Coronation he received the Honor of Knighthood. He
married Alice, Daughter of Sir William Hay of Tester, Progenitor to the Marquis
of Tweddale Charter by William Earl of Errol to Sir David Hay of Yester, his
Uncle, in the Year 1454, among the Writes of the Family of Tweddale.
, by whom he had William his Successor in his Estate and Honor, and Gilbert
Hay Charter by Nicol Earl of Errol to Gilbert his Uncle, of the Lands of Urrie
in 1477.
of Urrie.

This Sir William being a Person of singular Merit, was by the favor of King
James II. created Earl of Errol Anno 1452, and departing this mortal Life in
the 1455 Hawthornden's History of King James. II.
, he left Issue by Beatrix his Wife, Daughter of James Lord Dalkeith Genealogy
of Errol.
.

Nicol his Son and Heir, who was one of the Privy Council to King James III.
and one of the Commissioners upon the Part of Scotland nominated to treat with
the English, touching the keeping a good Understanding betwixt the two Realms
Mr. Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
, Anno Dom. 1472: He married Elisabeth, Daughter to the Earl of Huntly,
Genealogy of the Family of Errol MS.
by whom he had,

William Earl of Errol his Son and Heir, who married Janet Daughter to John
Earl of Athole, by whom he had two Sons, William, and Sir Thomas Hay of Logie,
Knight Charta Jacobi IV. Thomae Hay filio Willielmi Comitis de Errol and
Margaretae de Logy dominae de Logy-Amond sponsae suae. Anno 1493. in Registro.
.

Which William married Elisabeth Lesly, Daughter to the Earl of Rothes Charta
Willielmo Comiti Errol and Elisabethae Lesly sponsae suae ad Annum 1501.
, by whom he had,

William Earl of Errol Genealogy of the Family of Errol.
, who was constituted Sheriff of Aberdeen, Anno 1510 Charta in Rotulis Jacobi
IV.
. He took to Wi^e, first Christian, Daughter of John Lord Glamis Geneaology of
Errol.
, and again Elisabeth Daughter to the Lord Ruthven Charta in Rotulis Jacobi V.
Elisabethae Ruthven Comitissae de Errol sponsae Niniani Domini R^ss.
. This Lord accompanying King James IV. to the Battle of Flowdon, was there
slain with his Sovereign Lord, and the Flower of the Nobil^ty on the fatal 9th
of September 1513, leaving

William his Son and Heir to succeed him, who was of the Privy Council to King
James V. and his special Favorite. He married Helen, Daughter of John Earl of
Lennox, by whom he had one Daughter Jean, married to Andrew Earl of Errol her
Cousin; his Estate and Honor devolving on

George Hay of Logie, his Heir Male Manuscript History of the Family of Errol.
. He married Margaret, Daughter of Sir Alexander Robertson of Strowan Ibidem.
, by whom he had Andrew his Successor; also two younger Sons, John Hay of
Muchill, George Hay of Ardlithan, and two Daughters,

1. Elisabeth, married to William Earl Marishal, and had Issue.

2. Margaret, to Laurence Lord Oliphant, and had Issue. He departed this Life
Anno 1563 Ibidem.
. and was succeeded in his Estate and Honor by

Andrew his Son, who was constituted one of the Lords of Queen Marys Privy
Council in 1567, when the Civil War broke out in that Reign. I do not find him
much engaged in either Party during all the Confusions of King James's
Minority. He married Jean Daughter of William Earl of Errol Ibidem.
, by whom he had Francis, who succeeded him, and a Daughter Eleanor, married to
Alexander first Earl of Linlithgow, and had Issue.

His second wife was Mary, Daughter of George Earl of Caithness, Widow of Hume
of Coldingknows, by whom he had George Hay of Kilour, Ancestor to the present
Earl of Errol. He dying Anno 1585 Ibidem.
.

Francis his Son succeeded him, who was one of the Commissioners appointed to
treat about a nearer Union of Scotland and England, Anno 1604 Spotiswood.
. He married first Mary, Sister to James Earl of Murray, next Anne, Daughter of
John Earl of Athole, and last of all Elisabeth Daughter of William Earl of
Morton, by whom he had William his Son and Heir, and Francis who died
unmarried; also four Daughters,

1. Anne, married to George Earl of Winton.

2. Jean, to John Earl of Mar.

3. Elisabeth, to Hugh Lord Semple.

4. Mary, to Walter Earl of Buclugh.

5. Sophia, to John Viscount Melgum.

This Earl arriving to a great Age, at last his long Life was brought to a
period on the 14th of July 1631. Upon him Dr. Arthur Johnston wrote this
Epitaph. Occidit Hayorum Princeps Errolius, orbis
Nunc defiderium, qui fuit ante decus.
Adscripsit procerum numero domus edita Regum
Stemmate, sanguineis nobilitata jugis.
Manibus Heroum sociavit Martia virtus,
Partaque fulminea mill trophea manu.
Donavit coelo pietas spectata. Quid ultra
Vel maruere homines, vel tribuere Dei?


William Earl of Errol his Son, was much in the Favor of King Charles I. and
assisted at the said King's Coronation, 18 June 1633. He married Anne Daughter
of Patrick Earl of Kinghorn, by whom he had Gilbert his Successor, and a
Daughter Margaret married to Henry Lord Ker, Son and Heir of Robert Earl of
Roxburgh, 2 dly to John Earl of Cassils, and departing this Life, 17th of
December 1636 Balfour's Annals.
his Estate and Honor descended to

Gilbert his Son and Heir, then very young, and upon that account was not
engaged in the Civil War; for I find no mention of him till the Restoration of
King Charles II. when he was constituted one of the Lords of his Majesty's
Privy Council, Anno 1661. He married Catherine Daughter of James second Earl of
Southesque, but dying without Issue, Anno 1674, both his Estate and Honor, by
virtue of an Entail to the Heirs Male, came to John Hay of Kilour, Son and Heir
of Sir Andrew Hay (by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Patrick Kinnaird of
I^chture) Son and Heir of Sir George Hay of Kilour (by Mary his Wife, Daughter
of...... Cheyne of Eslemont) Son and Heir of Andrew Earl of Errol, as has been
observed.

Which John so succeeding in the Earldom, married Anne Daughter to James Earl
of Perth, by whom he had Charles his Successor, James and Thomas, who both dyed
unmarried; also two Daughters,

Lady Mary.

Lady Margaret, married to James Earl of Linlithgow.

He dying Anno 1705, was succeeded by Charles his Son,

Which Charles now Earl of Errol, was one of the Peers who in the Parliament
1706, dissented in every Article of the Union with England, in the Terms of the
Treaty then before the House, before the Conclusion of which, his Lordship
entered a Protestation, which chiefly respected his own Heritable Constabulary,
in these Terms,

I Charles Earl of Errol, Lord high Constable of Scotland, do hereby Protest,
that the Office of high Constable of Scotland, with all the Rights and
Privileges of the same, belonging to me Heritably, and depending upon the
Monarchy, Sovereignty, and ancient Constitution of this Kingdom, may not be
weakened nor prejudged by the Conclusion of the Treaty of Union betwixt Scotland
and England, nor any Article, Clause or Condition thereof, but that the said
Heritable Office, with all the Rights and Privileges thereof, may continue and
remain to me and my Successors entire and unhurt by any Votes or Acts of
Parliament, or other Proceedings whatsomever relative to the said Union: And I
crave this my Protestation may be admitted and Recorded in the Registers and
Rolls of Parliament.

ARMS.
Argent, three Eschutcheons, Gules, supported by two Savages carrying upon
their Shoulder, two Oxen, Yoaks, Crest, a Falcon Proper, with this Motto, Serva
Jugum.

CHURCH-HILL, Lord Eymouth.
THE first who enjoyed this honourary Title, was John Churchhill Esquire Son of Sir
Winston Churchhill of Wottonbasset, in the County of Wilts, by...... his Wife,
Daughter of Sir William Drake of the County of Devon, Baronet.

His first step to Advancement in martial Affairs, was the Honor of a Colors
in the Royal Foot-Guards, which was procured him by his Royal Highness the Duke
of York, while a Youth, rather to humor his forward Inclination that way, than
any Advantage to be made by it. He soon after went to France with the Duke of
Monmouth, who gave him a Company of his own Regiment, and served at the Siege
of Maestricht, then under the Direction of the present French King. Upon his
Return to England, by a particular Character of his Bravery and Conduct from
the Duke of Monmouth, he was made Lieutenant Colonel to Sir Thomas Littleton
Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and Master of the Robes to the Duke of York: Not
long after which, he was created Lord Church-hill of Eymouth in Scotland, by
Letters Patent bearing date 21 December 1682 Diploma in Cancellaria supremae
Dominae nostrae Reginae.
.

King James ascending the Throne, he was immediately made Gentleman of the
Bedchamber, and Captain of a Troop of his Lifeguard. Also in the first Year
of his Reign, 14th of May 1685. he created him a Baron of England, by the Title
of Lord Churchhill of Sandridge; But notwithstanding these Honors, upon the
Revolution he went over to the Prince of Orange then at Sherburn.

King William was no sooner on the Throne, but he was made Gentleman of the
King's Bedchamber; also 9th of April 1689, he was raised to the Honor of Earl
of Marlborough. The same Year he commanded the English Forces in Flanders, and
was present with Prince Waldeck at the Shock at Walcourt: And Anno 1690, was
sent General of the Forces to reduce Cork and Kinsale; which Service he
performed with great Dispatch and Conduct.

The next Year, he made the Campaign under King William in Flanders, was
constituted Governor to the Duke of Gloucester, sworn of his Majesty's
Privy Council, and made one of the Lords Justices; which he served three times
successively, in the King's Absence, who, at length, Anno 1701, appointed him
General of the Foot, and Commander in Chief of the English Forces in Holland,
also Ambassador-Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiary for the Negotiation at the
Hague.

In the first of Queen Anne, he was constituted Captain General of Her
Majesty's Land Forces, both at Home and Abroad, elected Knight of the Garter,
and dispatched with the Character of Her Majesty's Ambassador-Extraordinary,
and Plenipotentiary to the States of Holland.

Anno 1702, he commanded the Army in Flanders, took Venlo, Ruremond,
Stevenswaert, Liege, etc. and on his Return to England, was made Marquis of
Blandford, and Duke of Marlborough.

In the Year 1704, he marched to the Danube, routed the French and Bavarian
Forces at Schellenbergh, and afterward gave them a total Defeat at Hochstet;
was made a Prince of the Sacred Roman Empire; and on his Return to England, had
the Honor and Manor of Woodstock, and Hundred of Wooton, voted to him and
his Heirs; and next Year settled by Act of Parliament.

In the Year 1705, he marched to the Moselle, returned to the Netherlands,
raised the Siege of Liege, and forced the French Lines: At the end of which
Campaign, he made a Tour to Vienna, where the Emperor made him a Grant of the
Lordship of Mildenheim, in Suabia, formerly possessed by Duke Maximilian, Uncle
to the present Duke of Bavaria; from which time, he was distinguished
throughout the Empire, by the Style and Title of Prince of Mildenheim: And was
afterward invested therein, and admitted, by his Plenipotentiary Mr. Stepney,
to sit and vote in the College of Princes.

In the Year 1706, he gave an entire Defeat to the French and Bavarian Forces
at Ramillies, and gained the whole Country of Brabant to the Allies.

In the Year 1708, he (with Prince Eugene of Savoy) defeated the French and
Spanish Army at Audenarde, covered the Siege of Lisle, succored Brussels, then
besieged by the Duke of Bavaria, and re-took Ghent and Bruges.

He married Sarah, Daughter, and at length, one of the Coheirs of Richard
Jennings of Sandridge, in the County of Hertford, Esquire by whom he had four
Daughters,

Henrietta eldest Daughter, married to Francis Earl of Godolphin.

Anne, second Daughter, married to Charles Spencer Earl of Sunderland; to whom
she is second Wife.

Elisabeth, third Daughter, married to Scroop Egerton Earl of Bridgewater.

Mary, fourth and youngest Daughter, married to John now Duke of Mountague.

ARMS.
Sable, a Lion Rampant Argent, in a Canton of the Second, the Cross of England.

KING, Lord Eythen.
SIR James King of Birness Charta in Rotulis Caroli I
in Aberdeen shire, was first trained up in the Wars of Germany, under Gustavus
Adolphus, King of Sweden, where he rose gradually, till at last he came to be
Lieutenant General; in which Character he served with the highest Reputation;
afterward upon the breaking out of the Civil War in England, he repaired to his
Majesty's Service, was constituted General of his Army against the English
Parliament, which he ordered with great Wisdom and Dexterity: In Consideration
whereof, the King was pleased to create him a Peer of Scotland, by the Title of
Lord Eythen Ibidem.
, the 28 March 1642.

OGILVY, Earl of Finlater.
IN the Reign of King Robert II. Sir John Sinclair Knight is possessor of the
Barony of Deskford in Banff-shire Charta aliquando in Rotulis Robert II.
. He was succeeded by Ingeram his Son and Heir Resignation by Alexander
Sinclair Son to Ingeram Sinclair of Deskford to Sir Walter Ogilvy of Ach^^en,
Knight, and Margaret Sinclair Lady Deskford his Neice, quam Deo (...) dictus
Dominus Walterus ducet in uxorem 1437. penes Comitem deFinlater.
, as he was by John his Son, who was slain at the Battle of Harlaw, Anno Dom.
1411, leaving Margaret his only Daughter and sole Heir to succeed him in the
Barony. In 1437 She was married to Sir Walter Ogilvy of Achyven, Knight, (a
Branch of the Family of Ogilvy,) whereupon he assumed into his Coat of Arms,
Argent, a Cross ingrail'd, Sable, which hisPosterity still wear. This Sir
Walter, in the 18th of James II. got leave of the King to fortify his Castle of
Finlater with an embattled Wall of Lime and Stone, and all other Necessaries
for a place of Strength License under the great Seal by King James II. Anno
1455, to Sir Walter Ogilvy of Deskford to build a Tower and Fortalice at the
Castle of Finlater, still preserved among the Writs of the Family of Finlater.
. By the said Margaret his Wife, he had two Sons,

Sir James Ogilvy of Deskford.

Sir Walter Ogilvy who obtained the Lands and Thanedom of Boyn in the North, by
the Marriage of Margaret, Daughter and one of the Coheirs of Sir James
Edmonston of that Ilk Charta in publicis Archivis tempore Jacobi III.
. Of this Branch the Ogilvies of Dunlugus and Strathern are sprung. He departed
this Life Anno 1456.

Sir James his Son succeeded him; he was made a Knight by King James III. and
married Mary Daughter of Mr. George Martine of Clermont's Genealogical
Collections.
Sir Robert Innes of that Ilk, in Vicecomitatu Moraviae: By her he had,

Sir James, succeeded in the Fortune.

Walter Ogilvy of Glashaugh.

Alexander killed at Flowdoun Ibidem.
.

George a Churchman: Also several Daughters,

Margaret, married to James Abercromby of Birkenbog.

Marion, to Patrick Gordon of Haddo, Ancestor to the present Earl of Aberdeen
Ibidem.
.

Catherine, to William Crawfurd of Federat, in Vicecomitatu de Aberdeen.

Elisabeth, to John Grant of Freuchie.

Mary to Alexander Urquhart Sheriff of Cromarty.

Which Sir James Ogilvy of Deskford married Agnes, Daughter of George Earl of
Huntly Ibidem.
, by whom he had,

1. Alexander his Successor,

2. James.

3. Patrick.

4. George.

5. Elisabeth, married to Sir James Dunbar of West-field Charta in publicis
Archivis.
Sheriff of Murray.

Alexander Ogilvy of Deskford his Son, got from King James V. a Charter
erecting his Lands of Deskford, Finlater, Cathmore, the Forest of Glensudech,
the third part of the Lands of Inernach, Achinstank, Buchhaw, with the Fishing
on the River of Dovern, the Lands of Sandlacht, Castle-field, the Constabulary
of Cullen and Achendorn in Banff-shire, the one half of the Lands of Balhall,
and the fourth Part of Manmure in Forfar-shire, into one entire Barony in all
time coming, to be called the Barony of Ogilvy, of the date 22d of May 1527
Ibidem.
. This Alexander Ogilvy of that Ilk, (for so he is after this designed) took to
Wife first Jean Abernethy, Daughter of Alexander Lord Saltoun, by whom he had
James Ogilvy of Cardal, his only Son. His second Wife was Elisabeth Gordon, a
Lady of the Family of Huntly Genealogy of Finlater.
, by whom he had a Daughter Margaret married to John Gordon Son of Alexander
Earl of Huntly. This Lord of Finlater, and Ogilvy, by the Influence and evil
Counsel of his Wife, was prevailed upon to disinherit his Son, and to settle
the most part of his Fortune on John Gordon his Son-in-law, upon Condi^^on he
should change his Name to Ogilvy, and he and his Heirs in all time coming, wear
his Coat of Arms: Accordingly the said John Gordon succeeded into the Estate of
Finlater, and kept Possession thereof till the 1562, it came to be forfaulted
for his being present in the Fight of Corr^chie, whereupon James Ogilvy of
Cardal, Son and Heir of the said Alexander Ogilvy of that Ilk, represents to
Queen Mary, how far he had been wronged by his Father's unjust Act, and
therefore Her Majesty was graciously pleased to restore him to the Estate of
Finlater by way of Justice, in the 1564 Charta in publicis Archivis.
. When the Civil War broke out in that Reign, he was not so ungrate as to
forget the good Offices the Queen had done him, but most loyally adhered to her
Interest, and was one of the Barons who entered into an Association to stand by
her against her rebellious Subjects (as they call them) who had deprived her of
her Authority, and would to the outmost of their Power, endeavor her
Restoration, bearing date, 8th of May 1568. He married...... Gordon, Daughter
of..... Gordon of Lochenvar Genealogy of the Family of Finlater.
, by whom he had a Son Alexander, who died before him, leaving Issue by Barbara
his Wife, Daughter of Sir Walter Ogilvy of Boyn Charta in Rotulis Jacobi VI.
, a Son,

Walter, who succeeded his Grandfather; he was first knighted by King James VI.
before the Institution of the Honor of Baronet: And being a Baron of an ample
Fortune, he was by the special Bounty of the said King, raised to the Peerage
of this Realm, by the Title of Lord Ogilvy of ^^^^ford, by Letters patent,
bearing date 4th of October 1616 Sir George Mackenzies MS. of the Baronage of
Scotland
.

He married first Jean, Daughter of Robert Lord Elphinston, by whom he had only
one Daughter Christian, who was married to Sir Alexander Forbes, afterward
created Lord Pitsligo.

His second Wife was Marion, Daughter of William Earl of Morton, by whom he had
James his Son and Heir, and two Daughters,

1. Jean, married to James Douglass Earl of Buchan, and afterward to Andrew
Lord Gray.

2. Margaret, married to Sir John Grant of that Ilk, in Vicecomitatu de Murray,
and had Issue.

Which James Lord Deskford, was by K. Charles I. advanced to the Honor of Earl
of Finlater, by Letters patent, bearing date the 20th of February 1638 The
Registrated Patent in the Chancery Office.
, and to the Heirs Male of his Body for ever.

He married Elisabeth, Daughter to the Earl of Rothes, by whom he had two
Daughters.

Mary Countess of Finlater.

Anne, Wife of William Earl of Glencairn.

This Earl having no Male Issue of his Body, he procured from King Charles I.
on the behalf of his Daughter, and her Descendants certain Letters Patent,
whereby the Dignity and Title of Earl of Finlater was conferred upon her and
Patrick Ogilvy of Inchmartin her Husband. This Patrick Earl of Finlater, in the
time of the Civil War, suffered much both in his Person and Fortune, for his
firm and loyal Adherence to King Charles II. Departing this frail Life, the
30th of March Anno Dom. 1658 Retour of James Earl of Finlater to Patrick Earl
of Finlater his Father in the Chancery Office.
. he left Issue by the aforesaid Elisabeth Countess of Finlater his Wife,

James his Son and Heir, who married Anne only Daughter of Hugh Earl of
Eglinton, by Anne his Wife, Daughter of James Marquis of Hamilton, by whom he
had,

1. James the present Earl.

2. Colonel Patrick Ogilvy of Lonmay, who married Elisabeth Daughter of Mr.
Francis Montgomery of Giffen, and has Issue.

3. Anne, married to George Allardice of that Ilk, and had Issue. This Earl
dying Anno 1711, his Estate and Honor devolved on

James the present Earl of Finlater and Seafield, his Son, whose personal
Endowments were the principal Cause of the great Honor and Preferments he has
attained to, both in this and the former Reign.

In his Youth having accomplished himself by Travels into foreign Countries, he
studied the Civil Law: After his Return to his native Country, he was admitted
Advocate 16th of January 1685, in which honorable Profession he made a very
considerable Figure, tho there is nothing memorable concerning him, till the
Meeting of the Convention in March 1689, (where he had the Honor to serve as a
Member for the Burgh of Cullen) wherein his Abilities began to be very soon
taken notice of, and he was employed in several Committees to examine and give
the Opinion to the Meeting concerning diverse Grievances. In the Debates about
King James's Forfaulture, he argued learnedly in favors of that unfortunate
Monarch. In the 4th of King William and Queen Mary, he was constituted
Solicitor; and after that, in 1696, appointed conjunct Secretary of State with
John then Earl of Tilliardin. He being then only a Knight, his Majesty was
pleased to confer upon him the Title of Viscount of Seafield, by Letters Patent
bearing Date 28th of June School; and thereafter by other Letters Patent of the
Date 24th June 1701, to create him Earl of Seafield.

Upon Queen Anne's coming to the Throne, Anno 1702, he was constituted conjunct
Secretary of State with the Duk of Queensberry; but the same Year, upon a
Change of the Ministry, he was removed from the Secretary's Employment, and
constituted Lord High Chancellor of Scotland; from which Office he was
removed, and in 1704 made a third time conjunct Secretary of State; but the
next Year 1705 he was restored to be Chancellor, and therein continued till
the commencing of the Union, the 1 st of May 1707. Then his Lordship was named
Lord chief Baron of the Exchequer, which he again was pleased to resign, Mr.
Smith being put in his Room. All which, and several other high Trusts his
Lordship still discharged with great Learning and Sufficiency. Also in 1712, he
was elected one of the sixteen Peers of Scotland to the Parliament of
Great Britain, by a Vacancy, through the Demise of William Earl Marshall.

He married Anne Daughter of Sir William Dunbar of Durn, Baronet, by whom he
has,

1. James Lord Deskford.

2. Mr. George Ogilvy.

3. Anne, married to Charles Earl of Lauderdale, and has Issue.

4. Janet.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Argent, a Lion passant guardant, Gules, crowned, Or; 2d
and 3d Argent, a Cross ingrail'd, Sable, supported by two Lions rampant, Crest,
a Lion rampant, all Gules, holding a Plumb Line betwixt his Feet, Motto, Tout
Jour.

FORBES, Lord Forbes.
THAT which will sufficiently attest the Antiquity of this numerous and far
spreading Family, is a Grant by King Alexander II. to Fergus the Son of John,
of the Lands and Tenement of Forbes in Aberdeen-shire Original Charter in the
Custody of the Lord Forbes.
, whence the Surname has been originally assumed. The first conspicuous Person
of this Line, was Alexander Forbes, who resolutely defended his Castle of
Urquhart in Murray, against Edward I. of England Dr. Abercromby's Martial
Achievements.
, Anno 1303, upon the storming of which, he and the whole Garrison were put to
the Sword: By this fatal Stroke his Family would have perished, had not his
Wife preserved it by the Birth of a postumous Son, Alexander, who obtained from
Robert Bruce certain Lands in Compensation for what his Father had lost in his,
and his Countries Quarrel. This Alexander treading in the Steps of his gallant
Father, loyally adhered to the better Title of David Bruce, against Edward
Baliol, who invaded this Kingdom, and called himself King of this Realm, and by
the Assistance of the English routed the loyal Scots Army at the Battle of
Duplin, Anno 1332, where many brave Scots-men fell, and among others this Sir
Alexander Forbes, leaving, says my Author Mr. Lumsden's Historical and
Genealogical History of the Family of Forbes.
, no Issue but a postumous Child, this Family having the parallel Fate with the
Family of the Fabii in Rome, of whom it is said, Vna dies Fabios ad bellum
miserat amnes,
Ad bellum missos perdidit una dies.


Sir John Forbes of that Ilk, the next of the Family, lived in the Time of King
Robert II. and seems to be the Son of the former Alexander, who acquired from
Thomas Earl of Mar, several Lands in Aberdeen shire, which the aforesaid King,
in the 3 d of his Reign, ratified by his Charter under the great Seal. Likeas,
he obtained from Alexander Bishop of Murray, pro fideli and utili servitio suo
and assistentia personali in nostris agendis totam terram nostram de Fyntr^ffie
19 of July 1378 Charrulary of Murray.
. In the 5th of King Robert III. he was constituted his Majesty's Justitiary
within the bounds of Aberdeen and Coroner of the said County. His Wife was
Elisabeth Kennedy, a Daughter of the Family of Dunure in the West, by whom he
had three Sons, viz.

Sir Alexander Forbes his Successor.

Sir William Forbes Knight, Ancestor to the Lord Pitsligo.

Sir John, who obtained the Thanedom of Formartin, by the Marriage of Marjory
Daughter and Heir of Sir Henry Preston of Formartin Knight, whereupon he added
to his paternal Coat of Arms the three Unicorns Heads, which is still born by
his Descendents He was the Founder of the Family of Tolquhon, of whom branched
the Forbesses of Foveran, Watertoun, Colloden, etc. and their several Cadets.

Which Alexander obtained the Honor of Knighthood before the 1424. He had a
Grant to himself and Elisabeth Douglass his Wife, and to their Heirs, from John
Earl of Buchan, of the Lands of Mikle Fintry, Blacktoun, and Balcross, by his
Charter 10th December 1423 Charta penes Dominum Samuelem Forbes de Foveran
Baronet.
. He departed this Life in, or near to the Year 1444, leaving Issue by the said
Elisabeth his Wife, James his Successor, and a Daughter Annabella, married to
Sir Patrick Gray of Fowlis, Ancestor to the Lord Gray Charta in Rotulis Jacobi
IL ad annum 1446.
.

This James was Knighted by King James III. and was the first of his Family who
in that Reign came to be called Lord Forbes He married Egidia Daughter of
William Earl Marshal Mr Lumsden.
, by whom he had William, and Patrick, first of the Branch of Corse, (which
produced the Earl of Granards Family in Ireland, and Forbes of Craigievar in
Aberdeen shire, Baronet) and a Daughter married to Malcolm Forbes of Tolquhon
Mr Lumsden.
.

Which William made a considerable Figure in the Reign of King James III. He
married Christian, Daughter of Alexander Earl of Huntly Charta Alexandri
Comitis de Huntly, Williemo Domino Forbes filio suo, in publicis Archivis.
, by whom he had four Sons, Alexander, Arthur, and John, all three successively
Lords, 4th. Duncan Author of the Branch of Cor^indae, of whom issued the
Forbesses of Monymusk, Kilmuck, Lesly, etc.

Which Alexander adhered to King James III. and upon his Death in 1488, he rose
in Arms in order to bring them to condign Punishment, who had imbrew'd their
Hands in the Blood of the King Drummond.
, but afterward submitting to King James IV. he departed this Life not long
after, leaving no Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter to Thomas Boyd Earl of
Aran, so that his Estate and Honor sell to Arthur his Brother, who likewise
dying without Issue, his Brother John became his Heir, His Lordship married,

Catherine, Daughter of John Earl of Athole, by whom he had a Daughter
Elisabeth, married to Grant of that Ilk Lumsden's History of the Family of
Forbes.
.

His second Wife was Christian Daughter of Sir John Lundy of that Ilk Ibidem.
, by whom he had two Sons,

John Master of Forbes, who died in Edinburgh, 17th July 1537 Mackenzie's
Criminals.
.

William, who succeeded in the Honor: And three Daughters,

1. Margaret, married to Andrew Fraser of Muchill, in Vicecomitatu de Aberdeen,
Ancestor to the Lord Fraser Charta in publicis Archivis ad Annum 1509.
.

2. Elisabeth, to Gilbert Keith of Troup. 2 dly. To Alexander Innes of that Ilk
Lumsden's Account of the Family of Forbes.
.

3. Marjory, to Gilbert Forbes of Brux Ibidem.
.

He married 3 dly. Elisabeth Barlow Widow of Alexander Lord Elphinston, by whom
he had a Son Arthur Forbes of Putuchie Ibidem.
, in Aberdeen shire, and a Daughter Janet, married first to John Earl of
Athole. 2 dly to Alexander Hay of Dalgety, and again to William Lesly of
Balquhain, and had Issue Ibidem.
. He departed this Life Anno Them. 1547, and was succeeded by

William his Son, who was constituted one of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber
to King James V. Miscellanea Scotica.
Anno 1539, and always enjoyed his Favor. He married Elisabeth Daughter and
Coheir (with her Sister Margaret, Countess Marshal) of Sir William Keith of
Inneruggie Charta in publicis Archivis.
, by whom he had,

1. John his Successor.

2. William Forbes of Foderhouse Lumsden.
, in Vicecomitatu de Aberdeen.

3. James Forbes of Lethinty.

4. Robert Prior of Monymusk, in Aberdeen-shire, formerly a Cell to the Priory
of St. Andrews.

5. Arthur Forbes of Logie.

6. Abraham Forbes of Blacktoun.

1 st. Daughter Jean, married to James Lord Ogilvy.

2. Elisabeth to the Lord Sinclair.

3. Christian, to George Johnston of Caskieben, and had Issue.

4. Isabel, to John Gordon of Pitlurg, and had Issue.

5...... to Barclay of Gairtly in Vicecomitatu de Aberdeen.

6. Margaret, to George Sinclair of May Charta in publicis Archivis.
, Son to George Earl of Caitness.

7. Barbara, to Alexander Allardice of that Ilk.

8. Anne, to Sir John Seton of Barus, Son of George Lord Seton, and had Issue.
He dying Anno 1593, was succeeded by,

John Lord Forbes his Son, who married first Margaret, Daughter of Alexander
Earl of Huntly, by whom he had a Son John, who entered into a religious Order
abroad, and died without Succession. 2 dly. Janet, Daughter of James Seton of
Touch, by whom he had,

Arthur his Successor in his Estate and Honor, who married Jean Daughter of
Alexander Lord Elphinston, by whom he had a Son William, and a Daughter
Barbara, married to George Earl of Seaforth, and had Issue.

Which Alexander affecting a Military Life, went over to Germany, and entered
into the Service of the renowned Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, against the
Imperialists, where he attained to the Degree of a Lieutenant General, and
acquired the Reputation of an excellent Officer. Upon the breaking out of the
Civil War in Britain, he returned to his Native Country, and had a considerable
Command in the Army that was sent from Scotland to Ireland, Anno 1643, to
suppress the Irish Rebellion. Afterward retiring from the violence of these
Times, he returned to Germany, where he spent the Remainder of his Days.

His first Wife was Anne, Daughter of Sir John Forbes of Pitsligo, by whom he
had William his Successor. His second Marriage was with Mary Daughter
of........ Forbes of Riress by whom he had Colonel James Forbes, Mary, married
to..... Rose of Kilravock, and.... to.... Forbes of Balflug.

Which William married Jean Daughter of John Campbel of Calder, by whom he had
William his Son and Heir, Arthur Forbes of Breda, Archibald Forbes of Putachie,
and two Daughters.

1. Mary, married to James Lord Duffu^, sans Issue. 2 dly. To Sir Robert Gordon
of Gordonstoun, and had Issue.

2....... to John Leith of White haugh, in Vicecomitatu de Aberdeen, and had
Issue.

He departing this Life Anno 1691, was succeeded by William his Son. This Lord
was one of the first of the S^^ts Nobility who declared for King William, for
which, upon his Accession to the Crown, he was named a Privy Counselor, 1 st
of May 1689, and constituted Captain of a Troop of Horse, then a Lieutenant
Colonel of Dragoons and not long after made Colonel of a Regiment of Dragoons
and since the Accession of her Majesty to the Throne, he was Lieutenant Colonel
to the Horse-Guards commanded by his Grace John Duke of Argyle. His Lordship
married Anne Daughter of James Brody of that Ilk, in Vicecomitatu de Elgin, by
whom he has,

William Master of Forbes.

James Forbes Esquire who married Mary Daughter to Alexander Lord Pitsligo, Also a
Daughter Mary.

ARMS.
Azure, three Bears Heads. Coupe, Argent, muzl'd, Gules, supported by two Boars
Proper, Crest, a Stag's Head eraz'd, Argent, Motto, Grace me guide.

FORRESTER, Lord Forrester.
THIS Surname has been assumed from an Office, as Stewart, Durward, Constable,
and others were, which their bearing, viz. three hunting Horns, seems to
confirm. The principal Family appears to be this of Forrester, whose Ancestor
Sir Adam Forrester, Citizen of Edinburgh in the 6th of Robert II. acquired the
Barony of Corstorphin, from Sir William More of Abercorn Charta in Rotulis
Roberti II.
, whence his Successors took their Designation. Upon the Accession of King
Robert III. to the Throne, Anno 1390, he was constituted Lord Privy Seal Mr.
Rymer's Faedera Angliae.
. In the 2d of the said King, he was commissioned to treat with certain English
Commissioners for maintaining the Peace betwixt the two Realms Ibidem.
. Likeas in 1405, he was a second time one of the Commissioners authorized to
treat with the English, about composing of certain Differences betwixt the two
Kingdoms Ibidem.
. By Margaret his Wife he had Issue,

Sir John his Son and Heir, who being a Man of good Parts, was Anno 1421 named
Lord Privy Seal to Murdach Duke of Albany Governor of Scotland Charta in
Rotulis Murdaci Ducis Albaniae.
, and in 1423 he was with William Bishop of Glasgow, George Earl of March,
John Montgomery of Ardrossan, Patrick Dunbar of Beill, and William Borthwick
of that Ilk, sent Commissioners to England to Treat with that State, about the
Redemption of King James I. Rymer's Federa Angliae.
. Upon that King's Return home, Anno 1424, he was constituted Master of the
Household Charta in Rotolis Jacobi I ad annum 1424.
, and Lord high Chamberlain of Scotland Ibidem anno Praedicto.
. After which, in 1428 he was named a Commissioner with diverse others, to treat
with the English about a Peace. Thus much for his Civil Actions. His Works of
Piety were these, The founding a Chaplaniry at the Altar of St. Ninian, within
the Church of St. Giles of Eidnburgh, Pro salubri statu serenissimi Principis
Jacobi I. and Joannae sponsae s^ae; and pro salute animae quondam Adae
Forrester de Corstorphin, Militis, Patris mei and Margaretae matris meae to
which he mortified sex libras tredecem solidos and quatuor denarios de
tenemento suo in dicto Burgo Ibidem.
. Likeas, he doted a sufficient Subsistence for three Chaplainries in the
Chapel of St. John the Baptist, contiguous to the Paroch Church of Corstorphin,
founded by Sir Adam Forrester his Father Ibidem.
which in the 1429, he erected into a Collegiate Church, and procured the
Annexation of several Lands and Tithes thereunto. He married Jean, Sister to
Henry Sinclair Earl of Orkney Charta Confirmattionis Jacobi I. de
impignoratione quas Henricus Comes Orkadiae fecit delecto fratre suo Joan^^
Forrester de Corstorphin militi in 1424.
; and departing this Life about the 1440, was interred in the Church of
Corstorphin, under an Arch, with the Portraiture of himself and his Wife, as
big as the Life in free Stone, without any monumental Inscription but a Coat of
Arms, he had Issue,

1. Sir John his Successor.

2. Henry Forrester of Oxgang.

3. Jean, married to Sir Robert Maxwel of Carlaverock Charta in Rotolis dicti
Regis.
, Ancestor to the Earl of Nithsdale.

4. Elisabeth, to Sir Alexander Lauder Knight Ibidem.
.

Which Sir John obtained a Grant from King James I. of the Lands of Blackburn
in Linlithgow shire, upon the Resignation of Sir Robert Cuningham of Kilmaures,
Anno 1424, wherein he is designed filio and heredi apparenti Joannis Forrester
de Corstorphin Militis Camerarii Scotiae. He was succeeded by

Archibald Forrester of Corstorphin, who by Margaret his Wife, Daughter
of....... Hepburn of...... had Ibidem.
Alexander his Son and Heir, in whose Favors he resigned his Estate Anno 1482,
reserving a Liferent to himself. He had to Wife Margaret, Daughter of Sir
Duncan Forrester of Gairden, Master of the Household, in the Reign of King James
IV. Ibidem.
, by whom he had Alexander Forrester of Corstorphin, his Son and Heir, who
married Janet Daughter to.... Lauder of Hatton Ibidem.
, by whom he had Sir James his Son, who succeeded him; but he dying without
Male Issue, Anno 1587 Charta in Cancellaria supremae Dominae Nostrae Reginae ad
annum 1587.
, his Estate fell to Henry his Brother, who marrying Helen Daughter of....
Preston of Craigmillar, in Vicecomitatu de Edinburgh Charta in Rotulis Jacobi
VI.
, by her he had,

George his Son and Heir, who was first created Baronet by King Charles I. 27
th November 1625, and thereafter Lord Forrester, 22 July 1633 Charta in
Registro.
. He married Christian, Daughter of Sir William Livingston of Kilsyth, by whom
he had several Daughters, viz. Helen married to William Lord Ross, Margaret to
John Shaw of Sornbeg,....... to Hamilton of Grange, Jean, to James Baillie of
Torwood-head, Son of Lieutenant General William Baillie, in whose Favors my
Lord Forrester resigned the Honor, and to the Heirs of their Body, which
failing to his other Heirs therein specified, which was ratified by King
Charles II. Anno 1651, but he having no Issue by her, the Honor by virtue of
the said Entail, came to William Baillie, alias Forrester of Torwoodhead, his
Brother, who married also Lilias the youngest Daughter of George Lord
Forrester, by whom he had William Lord Forrester, who departed this Life, Anno
1705, leaving Issue by...... his Wife, Daughter of Sir Andrew Birnie of Saline,
one of the Senators of the College of Justice, George the present Lord
Forrester.

ASHTOUN, Lord Ashtoun of Forfar.
KING Charles I. was pleased to raise Sir Walter Ashoun an English Gentleman
Knight of the Bath, and Baronet, to the Honor of Lord Forfar in this Realm, by
Letters Patent bearing date 8th November 1628 Diploma Domini Ashtoun de Forfar.
whose Successor Walter Lord Ashtoun enjoys the Honor.

DOUGLAS, Earl of Forfar.
WHEN King Charles II. was in Scotland, Anno 1651, his Majesty thought fit upon
the 3 d of April that Year, to grant a Patent to Archbald Lord Angus to be Earl
of Ormond, Lord Bothwel and Hartside, and to limit the Honor to his Heirs Male
by Lady Jean Weems his Spouse, and upon the Restoration, his said Majesty by a
new Patent, bearing Date the 2d of October 1661, created Archbald Douglass, the
Son of the said Marriage, Earl of Forfar, Lord Wandale and Hartside, Diploma
Archibaldi Douglass Co^^tis de Forfar in Rotulis Caroli II. ad Annum 1661.
.

Upon the Advancement of King William to the Throne, Anno 1689, he was named a
Privy Counselor and one of the Commissioners for executing the Office of Lord
Privy Seal, in which he continued several Years. In the first of Queen Anne, he
was again made one of her Majestys Privy Council, and one of the Commissioners
of the Thesaury, in which Station he continued till the Dissolution of that
Court, as one of the Consequences of the Union of the two Kingdoms, and
departing this Life the 12th of December 1712, left Issue by Rabina his Wife,
Daughter of Sir William Lockhart of Lee, Ambassador-extraordinary from King
Charles II. to the Court of France, Archbald the present Earl his only Son, a
Lieutenant Colonel of Dragoons in her Majesty's Army.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th, Argent, a Man's Heart crowned, Proper, on a chief,
Azure, three Stars of the 1st. 2d. and 3d. four Coats quarterly, 1st.
Mackdoual. 2d. Abernethy. 3d. Wishart. 4th. Stewart, as born by the Duke of
Douglass, supported by a Savage, on the Dexter with a Chain about his Neck
pendent to it a crowned Heart proper; on the Sinister, a Buck colored with
three Molets. Crest, a Phoenix in a Flame, Motto, Extinctus orior, and on the
Compartment, Jamais Arrier.

Patrick Ruthven, Earl of Forth,
THIS Gentleman was the Son of William Ruthven of Banden, in the County of
Perth, whose Descent was from the Ancient Barons Ruthven, Men famous many Ages
since in Scotland, by William a younger Son of William 1 st. Lord Ruthven
Charta in Rotulis Jacobi V. Willielmo Ruthven filio Willielmi Domini Ruthven
ge^ito inter ipsum and Dominam Christianam Forbes sponsam suam ad annum 1527
, and Christian his second Wife Daughter to Sir John Forbes of Pitsligo Litera
prosapiae Dominae Margretae Hay filiae Francisci Comitis Erolliae in Rotulis
Caroli I.


Which Patrick, the first and only Earl of Forth, in his Youth much affecting
Military Exercises, went over to Sweden, where he served in the German Wars
under that great Prince and famous Soldier Gustavus Adol phus, then King of
Sweden, in which valiant Adventures he deported himself with such Eminent
Courage, that he arrived to the Degree of a Lieutenant General, and gained so
much Honor, that upon his Return, King Charles I. was pleased to raise him to
the Dignity of a Lord of this Realm, by the Title of Lord Ruthven of Ettrick,
Anno 1639, and the same Year Guthry's Memoirs.
made him Governor of Edinburgh-Castle, which he kept for the King's Service,
and positively refused to deliver it to the Parliament without his Majesty's
special Order, for which Contumacy (as it was then termed) his Estate was
forfaulted Ibidem.
Anno 1640. Upon the commencing of the Civil War in England, in 1642, he freely
resorted to the Service of his injured Sovereign, who appointed him General of
his Army; and by Letters Patent, bearing Date the 27th of March 1642 Diploma
Patricii Comitis de Forth in Rotulis Caroli I.
, created him Earl of Forth. In the Battles of Edgehill, Brentford, and
Newbery, performing the part of a most Prudent, and experienced General, he was
further in Consideration of his eminent Services, in the 1645, created Earl of
Brentford in the Kingdom of England. He died very aged, Anno 1651 Sir William
Dugdale's Baronage of England.
, leaving one Daughter Jean his sole Heir, married to James Lord Forrester; so
that this Honor became extinct, and was since one of the subsequent Titles of
John Earl of Melfore.

Argent, three Bars, Gules.

FRASER, Lord Fraser.
ANdrew Fraser of Muchill, in Vicecomitatu de Aberdeen, Son and Heir of Andrew
Fraser of Muchill, by Elisabeth his Wife, Daughter of Robert Douglass Earl of
Buchan, was the first honored with this Title by King Charles I. 19th June
1633 Diploma Andreae Domini Fraser.
. His Wife was Anne Daughter of James Lord Balmerin^, and dying 10th November
1636 Balfour's Annals.
,

Andrew his Son succeeded into his Estate and Honor: He married Anne Daughter
of..... Hadden of Gleneagles Charta in Rotolis Caroli II.
, by whom he had,

Andrew is Successor, who departing this Life 24 May 1674 Retour of the Lord
Frasar to his Father in the Chancery.
, left Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Hugh Lord L^vat, a Son

Charles Lord Fraser, who married Mary Daughter of James Earl of Buchan, but
had no Issue.

ARMS.
Argent, three Frazes, Argent.

CARRY, Viscount of Falkland.
SIR Henry Carry Knight, Son and Heir of Sir Edward Carry of Aldenham, an
Englishman, Comptroller of the Household, and one of the Gentlemen of the
Bedchamber to King James VI. was by his Majesty's special Favor created a
Peer of Scotland, by the Title of Viscount Falkland, 10th November 1620 Deploma
Henrici Vicecomitatis de Falkland in Rotolis ad annum 1620.
. Afterward, he was constituted Lieutenant of Ireland; in which Government he
behaved himself with much Prudence, and dying Anno 1633 Dugdal's Baronage of
England.
, by Elisabeth his Wife, Daughter of Sir Laurence Taunfield Lord chief Baron of
the Exchequer, he had a Son Lucius and a Daughter, Ann married to James Earl of
Hume.

Which Lucius Lord Viscount Falkland, was a Person singularly well accomplished
with Learning, and other excellent Parts: He was chosen Member to the
Parliament, Anno 1641 Rushworth's Collections.
for the Burgh of Newport, in the County of Southampton, where he merited so
well of the King, that he was worthily advanced to be one of the Principal
Secretary's of State, upon the removal of Sir Henry Vane, which Office he
executed with great Applause. Shortly after which, out of his great Zeal to his
Majesty's Service, venturing himself in the Battle of Newberry, 20th September
1643, he there lost his Life in his 34 Year. His intimate Friend, no less a Man
than the Earl of Clarendon, in his History of the Rebellion, characterizes him
thus, That he was a Person of such prodigious Parts, of Learning and Knowledge,
of that inimitable Sweetness and Delight in Conversation, of so flowing and
obliging a Humanity and Goodness to Mankind, and of that primitive Simplicity
and Integrity of Life, that if there were no other brand upon this odious and
accursed Civil War, than that one single loss, it must be most infamous to all
Posterity.

He was married with Letice Daughter of Richard Morison of Tolay-Park, in the
County of Leicester Esquire Dugdale.
, by whom he had Henry his Son and Heir, a Person of the highest
Accomplishments, excellently versed in Learning and good Letters; and not only
a great incourager of Poetry, but a principal Ornament of it himself Account of
the English Dramatick Poets by Gerrard Shakespeare, published Anno 1691.
. He wrote a Play called, The Marriage Night, very well esteemed. His Lordship
was elected to serve in the House of Commons upon the Restoration, and was
constituted Lord Leiutenant of Oxfordshire, he was out off in the prime of his
Years, Anno 1664 Shakespeare's Account of the English Dramatick Poets,
, as much missed (says one) when Dead, as loved when Living.

Anthony Viscount of Falkland his Son History of England.
, was sworn of the Privy Council 17th of March 1691, serving then a Burgess in
Parliament; and 3d of March 1692, appointed one of the Lords Commissioners for
executing the Office of Lord high Admiral of England Ibidem.
, he made his Exit out of this to another World, in 1694, and was succeeded in
his Estate and Honor by

Edward the present Lord Viscount of Falkland.

ARMS.
Argent, on a bend Sable, three Cinque Foils of the first, the paternal Coat of
Carry, supported on the Dexter with a Lion rampant, Gules, colored Or, on the
Sinister by a Unicorn, Argent, Motto, In utroque fidelis.

MACKDUFF, Thane, afterward Earl of Fyfe.
A Thane in Ancient Times, is thought by the learned Spelman and Seldom, to
have been the King's principal Minister in a Province, no doubt invested with a
Power of Administration of Justice, to which certain honourary Privileges were
annexed. It Is thought it was not at the first Institution, properly a Title of
Dignity, but of Service. They were of two kinds, either such as served the King
in greater Places of Eminency, who were called Thani Majores, or Thani Regis,
as the Thanes of Fife, Caithness, Argyle, and Murray were, these that served
under them were termed Thani Minores: But when the Title of Comes and Dux
became Hereditary (so the Learned are of Opinion) the Title and Privileges of
Thani Majores did descend with the Lands from Fathers to their Children, tho
the lesser did not, yet they still retained the old Name of Thanes and
Thanedoms, as the Baronies of Boyn in Ba^ff shire and Calder in Murray, etc.
are called to this Time: And perhaps the Difference betwixt the two consisted
in this, That the greater Thanes derived their Power and Authority immediately
from the King, and held them of the Crown in capite, for Knights Service, which
by a certain Constitution made them Hereditary, and were of the same kind with
them that afterward came to be Parliamentary Barons. The lesser Thanes, had
only Commissions from them, and were held in the ordinary way for Services
done, and to be done. All our Histories do agree, that Mackduff, formerly
Thane, was created Earl of Fyfe, by King Malcolme Canmore, Anno 1057 Balfour
and other Scots Historians.
, and that in Consideration of his extraordinary Services to that Prince, in
assisting him to revenge his Father's Death upon Mackbeth, and to recover his
Crown, for which he gave him and his Heirs these great and noble Privileges,

I. That his Posterity should have the Honor to place the succeeding Kings in
the Chair of State, at their Coronations.

II. That they should lead the Van of the Royal Armies.

III. That, if any within the 9th. Degree in Relation to his Family, should be
guilty of the unpremeditated Slaughter or casual Homicide of a Gentleman, he
should pay twenty four Merks of Silver, and but twelve if a Plebeian, for
Expiation of the Crime; flying to a Sanctuary near Newburgh in Fyfe, on the
Confines of Strathern: Which was much the same Privilege granted to Mackduff's
Kindred, as the Cities of Refuge were to the Isralites, Joshua 20. At the Place
of Girth, there was an high Cross erected, containing an Inscription of old
Macaronick Verses, a Mixture of Latin, Saxon, Danish, and old French Words, to
this Purpose, Maldraradum dragos, Mairia, laghstita, Larges,
Spaland^ spados, five nig fig knighthite gnares
Lothea lendiscos laricingen lairia lisc^^
Et Colovurtes sic fit tibi bursia burtus
Exitus, and bladadrum five lim five lam five labrum
Propter Magridin and hoc oblatum
Accipe s^eleridem super limthide lamthida labrum.


This last Privilege was observed as long as the Family existed, and was
claimed and enjoyed by severals within the Degree of Consanguinity to the Earls
of Fife afterward. The learned Skeen, in his Verborum Significatione, remarks,
that Spence of W^rmistoun enjoyed this Benefit for the Slaughter of one
Kinninmonth: Sir George Mackenzie mentions another, whereby Sir Hugh Abernethy
was assoilzied for the Slaughter of John Melvil of Glenbervy: and I have seen
an Instrument in the Year of God 1397, wherein Sir Alexander Murray of
Abercarny did plead the Privileges of Clan Mackduff, for the Slaughter of one
John Spalding, as standing in the ninth degree of Kin to the Earl of Fyfe.

To Mackduff Earl of Fyfe, succeeded Duffgan Comes, his Son, who is one of the
Comites assenting to the Charter of Alexander I. to the Trinity-Church at Scoon
Sir James Dalrymple's Collections.
, He left a Son Constantine Sir Robert Sibald's History of Fife.
Earl of Fyfe, who is one of the many Witnesses to King David's Charter to the
Monastery of Dunfermling, Anno Dom. 1126. The next Earl to Constantine, was
Gillemichel, who is Witness in the Foundation Charter of the Abbey of
Holyrood-house, and dying 1139 Ibidem.
, he was succeeded by Earl Duncan his Son, who is a frequent Witness in
Charters by King David to religious Persons and Places; and dying 1154 Cron. de
Melross.
, Duncan his Son was his Successor: He was Justiciary of Scotland in the time
of King William, and a constant Witness in Donations by him to the Church, to
which he also himself was a liberal Benefactor: For besides, his erecting the
Nunnery of North-berwick; He gave many Donations to Churchmen, which was then
believed to be the most compendious way to save the Soul. He gave way to Fate
in 1203 Sir Robert Sibbald's History.
leaving Malcolm his Son to inherit his Estate and Honor, who in the 1217
founded, and richly endowed the Abbacy of Culross in Perth-shire, in Honor of
St. Servan the Confessor Cron. de Melross.
; and departing this Life Anno Christi 1230 Ibidem.
, his Estate devolved to Malcolm his Nephew Ibidem.
, who was Father of Colban Earl of Fyfe who died in 1270 Balfour's Annals.
leaving Duncan his Son to succeed him. This Earl of Fyfe was elected on of the
six Guardians of Scotland, upon the decease of Alexander III. in the 1286, and
died before the Accession of John Baliol to the Crown. Duncan Earl of Fyfe his
Successor, was slain in the Service of his Country at the Battle of Falkirk,
Anno 1298 Sir Robert Sibbald's History of Fife.
; and to him succeeded Duncan his Son, who was killed at the Battle of Durham,
Anno 1346; the Honor and Privileges of the Family devolving to Isabel his
Daughter, who brought the Honor first to Sir William Ramsay Knight, her
Husband, and afterward to Sir Thomas Bisset, but she having no Issue of her
Body, resigned the Honor to Robert Earl of Montieth, her Brother-in-law,
afterward Duke of Albany. And so this noble Family was extinguished.

ARMS.
Or, a Lion Rampant, Gules.

Lord of Galloway.
THE first entitled Lord from this Country, was Fergus de Galweya, who
flourished under King Malcolm III. He founded the Monastery of Saul-seat, and
the Priory of Whitern Monasticon Scoticanum.
for Monks of the Order of Premontre, and was a Benefactor to the Abbey of
Holy-rood-house, by his Gift of the Village of Dundrenan Cron. de Melross, and
Cronicon Sanctae Crucis de Edinburck.
, in pure and perpetual Alms: After which he took upon him the Habit of a Monk
in that Monastery, Anno 1160. He left two Sons, Uchtred Lord of Galloway, and
Gilbert, who fraudulently seized upon his elder Brother, made him his Prisoner,
ema sculated him, pulled out his Eyes, and then put him to Death: But upon the
Death of this Gilbert, Anno Christi 1185 Dalrymple's Edition of Camden 1694.
. Rolland Son of Uchtred his Brother, recovered the Lordship of Galloway, and
increased the Wealth and Honor of his Family by the Marriage of Elisabeth
Daughter, and at length sole Heir to Richard Morvil Chartularly of Melross.
Constable of Scotland, whereby that Dignity was transferred to his Race. By
Elisabeth his Wife He had two Sons and a Daughter, viz.

Alan Lord of Galloway.

Thomas de Galloway Earl of Athole.

Ada, Wife of Sir Walter Bisset Balfour.
.

Which Alan was a great Benefactor to the Church; for besides that he founded
the Abbacy of T^ngland Monasticon Scoticanum MS.
, He ratified to the Monks of Melross Chartulary of Melross.
, Annuum redditum quem habere solebant de Galweya temporibus Predecessoris mei,
pro animabus Rollandi patris mei, and Uchtredi avi mei. This Man married
Margaret eldest Daughter of David Earl of Huntington, Brother to King William
the Lion, by whom he had three Daughters his Coheirs.

1. Helen, married to Roger de Quincy Earl of Winchester in England, but had no
Succession.

2. Christian, to William de Fortibus Earl of Albemarle sans Issue.

3. Dornagilla to John Baliol Knight, who convoyed the Right to the Crown of
Scotland to her Son.

This Alan dying Anno Dom. 1233 Cron de Melross.
, was interred in the Abbey Church of Dundrenan Balsour's Annals.
before the high Altar, and had this Monkish Epitaph, M. semel and bis C si
jungas X ter and I ter,
Hoc anno subiit mortis Alanus iter.
Gloria Scotorum, rosa Cleri, flos laicorum,
Dandi larga manus, jacet hic venerandus Alanus.
Tot bona qui deder at vix fuit, est vel erit.
O tu qui legere vel qui cupis ista videre,
Disce bona facere, sic mortuus non moriere.
Qui legis haec metra, quae continet haec mea petra,
Ores ut petra Christus me ponat in aethra.


Alan thus dying without Male Issue, the Lordship of Galloway fell to the share
of Dornagilla his second Daughter, Wife of John de Baliol, Signeur de
Castubernard. He founded Baliol College in the University of Oxford Dr. Gibson
on Camden; 1694,
, and with Consent of Dernogilla his Wife, released to the Bishop of Glasgow
all Right he had to the Church of Edilstoun, which had been long in dispute
between his Ancestors and the Chapter of that See Chartulary of Glasgow MS.
, departing this Life Anno 1269 Dr. Cibson on Camden.
, was interred at New-Abbay in Galloway, founded by his Wife in Honor of the
Place of his Sepulture, of which Mr. Winton informs us thus, When Baliol that
was her Lord
Spousit, as ye hard record,
H^s Sau^ send till his Creatoure
Or he was laid in Sepulture
She gart opyne his Body tyte,
And gart take his Heart out quite,
With Spicery right well savorand,
And of kind well fleworand,
That ilk Heart, as men said,
She balm^^ and gart be laid
In a Coffore of Ebore
That she gart be maid thairfore,
Enamylit and perfectly dight
Locket and bunden with Silver bright,
She foundit intil Galoway
Of Cistertians order an Abbey,
Dulce Cor she gart them all
That is Sweet Heart that Abbey call,
But now the Men of Galloway
Call that Steid New-Abby.


He left Issue by the said Dornagilla his Wife, John his Son and Heir, and a
Daughter married to John Cummin Lord of Badenoch.

Which John, upon the decease of Margaret Queen of Scotland, Anno 1290,
competed with Robert Bruce for the Crown of this Realm.

However, both of them at length unanimously resolved to refer the Matter to
the Arbitration of Edward King of England, who determined in Favors of this
John Baliol, who accordingly was placed on the Throne 29th of November 1292 Dr.
Abercromb^'s Martial Achievements.
, by the Name of John I. the Lordship of Galloway and the Constabulary of
Scotland being thereby involved in the regal Dignity; and so continued ^^ll
Robert I. meritonously bestowed the Lordship of Galloway upon Sir Edward Bruce
his own Brother, afterward Earl of Carrick and King of Ireland, Anno 1313
Charta in Rotulis Roberti I.
, by whose Death it again returned to the Crown, and so continued till that
victorious Monarch erected it to Sir Archibald Douglass, Knight, who being an
active Person, served King David Bruce with great Fidelity against the Baliol,
whom he totally routed at Annand, Anno 1332, after which he was chosen
Governor of Scotland; and fighting gallantly in the Battle of Halydonhill, was
there slain in the Defense of his Country, 22 July 1333, leaving Issue
by....... his Wife Daughter of John Cumin Lord Badenoch, William Lord of
Galloway, afterward Earl of Douglass.

STEUART, Earl of Galloway.
THIS collateral Branch of the illustrious Family of Steuart, sprang from Sir
Walter Stewart Knight The Learded Mr. David Simson conjectures this Sir Walter
Steuart was Son of Sir John Steuart of Bute who was killed at Falkirk.
, who had by the bounty of King Robert Bruce, a Grant of the Barony of
Dalswinton, in reward of his good and faithful Services to that glorious
Monarch Ibidem.
, not long after his Accession to the Crown. Likeas he had a Charter from his
Nephew Ibidem.
John Randolph Earl of Murray, of the Lands and Barony of Garlies, then in
Drumfries-shire, but now in the Stewartry of Kircudbrught, without Date, a
Thing usual enough in these Days. The next of the Family was,

John Stewart of Dalswinton, who seems to have been a very considerable Person,
both on the account of his Birth, and the many Lands he held in diverse
Counties, since we find by the Transactions with the English in the Foedera
published by Mr. Rymer, that this John was given one of the Hostages for the
Ransom of King David Bruce in the 1357. After him (and apparently his Son) was,

Sir Walter Stewart Lord of Dalswinton, who lived in the Time of Robert II. and
III. He having no Male Issue of his Body, in the 1396 married his only Daughter
The original Contract is still extant in the Lawyer's Library at Edinburgh.
to John Stewart Esquire Son and Heir of Sir William Stewart Sheriff of Teviotdale
This Sir William was a Son of the Family of Darnly, afterward Earls and Dukes
of Lennox, as appears from the Patent creating Sir Alexander Steuart Lord
Garlies in the 1607, and several other Accounts.
. They with Consent and Assent of each other, in the 1418 Genealogy of the
Family of Garlies by Mr. David Simson in the Custody of Alexander Bailie Esquire
, give to Sir John Stewart Lord Grytoun, the Barony of Callie, in comitatu
Gallovidioe, which is all I have found memorable concerning him, save that he
left a Son,

Sir William Stewart of Dalswinton, who made a considerable Figure in the Reign
of King James II. by whom he was made a Knight, sometime before the 1453 Charta
in Rotulis Jacobi III.
. He had Issue three Sons, Alexander his Successor, Sir Thomas Stewart of Minto
Knight, Ancestor to the present Lord Blantyre Ibidem in Rotulis dicti Regis ad
annum 1476.
, Walter, of whom came Simson's MS. of the House of Garlies.
the Stewarts of Tongrie.

Which Alexander Stewart of Garlies obtained a Grant of the Barony of
Dalswinton, upon the Resignation of Sir William his Father, 13 January 1453
Charta in publicis Archivis.
, and in the 1465, he resigns sundry Lands in Teviotdale in favors of
Alexander Scot of Howpaslet. By Elisabeth Stewart his Wife, he had Issue John
his eldest Son, who dyed without Succession Charta Jacobi III. Joanni Steuart
filio and haeredi apparenti Alexandri Steuart de Garlies and Elisabethae Shaw
sponsae suae 20 October. 1477.
, and

Sir Alexander his Successor, who departing this Life Anno 1490 Simson's
Collections.
left Issue Alexander a Son, and Agnes a Daughter, who was married to John Lord
Maxwel Genealogy of the Family of Maxwel.
, and had Issue.

Which Alexander was Knighted in the Time of King James IV. being then a
powerful Baron. He was slain at the Battle of Flowdon 9th September 1513,
leaving Issue a Son Alexander to succeed him, by Christian his Wife, Daughter
of Sir Archbald Douglass of Cavers, Sheriff of Teviotdale History of the Family
of Garlies by Mr. David Simson MS. penes Alexandrum Bailie de Castlecary.
.

This Sir Alexander Steuart of Garlies was much favored by King James V. of
whose Privy Council he was. He married first Catherine Daughter of Sir James
Crichton of Cranston-riddel Charta in publicis Archivis.
. 2 dly Margaret Daughter of Patrick Dunbar of Clugston, by whom he had two
Sons, Alexander, and John Stewart Parson of Kirkmahoe Mr. Simson.
, Progenitor of John Stewart of Phisgill, in Vicecomitatu de Wigtoun. His third
Wife was Catherine Daughter to William Stewart of Barcly, by whom he had
William, first of the House of Clarie, and Robert, who in the Year 1561
purchased the Lands of Cardonald in Renfrew shire by the Marriage of Mary
Daughter and Co Heir of James Stewart of Cordonald Charta in Rotulis Mariae
Reginae.
, and Helen married to William Gordon of Murefade, in Vicecomitatu de Wigton.

Alexander Stewart younger of Garlies, was in the Interest of King James VI. in
the said King's Minority, and was slain at the surprise of the Town of Stirling
by the Earl of Huntly and the Lord of Buclugh, 3d September 1571 Crawfurd's
Memoirs.
, leaving Issue by Catherine his Wife, Daughter and Coheir of Andrew Lord
Herris of Terregles.

Alexander, who succeeded his Grandfather, and obtained the Honor of
Knighthood, at the Coronation of Queen Anne, Wife of James VI. Anno 1590 Dr.
Patrick Anderson's History of Scotland MS.
. He married Christian, Daughter of Sir William Douglas of Drumlanrig, Ancestor
to the Duke of Queensberry Mr. Simson's Genealogy of Gairlies.
. By her he had Alexander, the first Earl, and William Steuart of Mains,
Ancestor to Sir Jame Stewart of Burrow Baronet; likewise two Daughters. 1 st.
Helen, married to John Douglas of Stanhouse. 2 d. Jean, to James Kennedy of
Colzean. He departing this Life in October 1596 Charta in Cancellaria supremae
Dominae nostrae Reginae.
, his Estate descended to

Alexander his Son, who was first knighted by King James VI. then by his
Majesty's special Favor raised to the Dignity of Lord Garlies, by Letters
Patent 2 d of September 1607 Diploma Alexandri Domini Garlies in Ro^ulis Jacobi
VI.
, his Descent from the illustrous Family of Lennox, being one of the principal
Reasons for bestowing the Honor. Further, his said Majesty was pleased to
create him Earl of Galloway, 9th of September 1523 Ibidem.
. He married Grisel Daughter of Sir John Gordon of Lochenvar, in Vicecomitatu
de Wigtoun: By whom he had, 1 st. Alexander Lord Garlies, who married Margaret
Daughter of William Earl of Monteith, by whom he had a Son Alexander, who died
young. 2 d. Sir James Steuart Baronet; likewise Anne, married to Andrew Agnew
of Lochnaw. This Earl died very aged, Ann^ 1649 Retour of James Earl of
Galloway to Alexander Earl of Galloway his Father, in the Chancery.
, his Estate and Honor devolving on

Sir James his Son and Heir, who during the Usurpation, was very active in the
King's Cause, and on that accound suffered in the common Calamity with other
Loyalists, surviving the Usurpation eleven Years, he gave way to Fate in June
1671 Retour of Alexander Earl of Galloway to Earl James his Father, registrated
in the Chancery Office at Edinburgh;
' leaving Issue by Nicolas his Wife, Daughter of Sir Robert Grierson of Lag,
three Sons and a Daughter, viz. Alexander his Successor, Robert Steuart of
Reimstoun, William Steuart of Castle-Steuart, Grisel married to Alexander
Viscount of Kenmure.

Which Alexander married Mary Daughter of James Earl of Queensberry, by whom he
had Alexander his Successor, who died unmarried, Anno 1694. 2 d. James, now
Earl of Galloway. 3 d. Colonel John Steuart of Sorbie. 4 th. Andrew Steuart Esquire
who died in the Expedition to Darien in the 1699. 5 th. William Steuart Esquire 6
th. Robert Steuart Esquire also two Daughters, 1 st. Margaret, marrried to John
Clark of Penniecook Junior, one of the Barons of Exchequer, and had Issue. 2 d.
Heurietta, to William Earl of Glen^airn.

Which James so succeeding into the Estate and Honor of Galloway, upon the
Decease of his Brother, was constituted one of the Lords of her Majesty's
Privy Council. Soon after her Accession to the Throne, his Lordship was
appointed one of the Committee of Parliament, 18th of June 1702, for revising
the Accounts of Money laid on by the former Sessions of that Parliament. And in
the great Affair of the Union of the two Kingdoms. I find his Lordship
dissenting from the Court in several very momentous Articles of the Treaty, as
appears from the Minutes of the last Parliament. He married Catherine Daughter
of Alexander Earl of Eglintoun, by whom he has Issue Alexander Lord Gairlies,
etc.

ARMS.
A Fess Checquie, Azure and Argent, surmounted of a Bend Gules, within a double
Tresure Flowered and Counterflower'd of the last, supported on the Dexter with
a Savage, and on the Sinister by a Lion Rampant Gules. Crest, a Pelican feeding
her Young, Proper. Motto, Virescit vulnere virtus.

CRAWFURD, Viscount of Garnock.
THE Surname of the Family of Kilbirny was first Barclay, descended of Sir
Walter Barclay, who executed the Office of Lord high Chamberlain of Scotland,
the 9th of King William the Lion Charta Willielmi Regis Scotorum Waltero de
Barcklay Cameraro Scotiae terrarum de Inerkilor pro servitio dimidii Militis
Test. Comite Waldeno, Comite Gilberto. Ricardo de Morevil Constabulario.
Anno Dom. 1174 Dr. Abercromby's Martial Atchievemants of the Scots Nation,
Page 252.
. From this noble Person the several Ancient Families of that Surname in the
Counties of Aberdeen, Fyfe, and Air, derive themselves. The first Person of
Note of this Branch, was Sir Hugh Barclay of Kilbirny Knight, who flourished
under King David II. in the 18th of whose Reign, he gave to his Vassal John
Mackmoran, his Lands of Haymore, for Services done by him, and to be done
Charta Hugonis de Barclay Domini dimidiatae Baroniae de Crawfurd-John, Joanni
Macmoran and Margaretae sponsae suae terrarum de Haymore Test. Willielmo Comite
de Douglas, Willielmo Baillie, Roberto de Livingston, Joanne Heris militibus,
Rogero Hog apud Edinburgum 26 Februarii 1357, penes Macmoran deGlaspen
. This Sir Hugh was succeeded in his Inheritance by Hugh his Son, who obtained
the Honor of Knighthood from Robert III. For I have found him designed Hugo
Barclay de Kilbirny miles, Anno 1397 Charta penes Marchionem de Twedale.
. He left behind him, but by whom I have not discovered, two Sons, David the
eldest, and Archbald Charta Hugonis Barclay deKilbirny, militis Archibaldo de
Barclay filio suo, Dimidieatem Terrarum de Ladyland Test. Willielmo Cuningham
de Kilmaures Hugone Campbel deLoudoun, Joanne Semple de Eliotstoun, Hugone
Blair de eodem Militibus, Thoma Boyd de Kilmarnock, Ronaldo Fulartoun de Crosby
and Thoma Crawfurd de Achinames, confirmata ^a Jacobo I. 26 May 1431 in Rotulis
dicti Regis.
first of the Branch of Ladyland, in Vicecomitatu de Air, which determined in
Sir Hugh Barclay Knight, who died without Male Issue in 1596. Which David
obtained a Grant of the whole Lordship of Kilbirny, and half of Ladyland from
King James I. upon the Resignation of his Father Sir Hugh, 26 of May 1431
Charta in Rotulis dicti Regis.
. He was succeeded by John his Son, who dying without Male Succession the 10th
of King James III. 1470 Precept for infefting Marjory Barclay as Heir to John
Barclay of Kilbirny, her Father, in the Viscount of Garnock's Charter Chest.
, with him the Male Line of the Barclay's determined, after having flourished
in great Splendour for a considerable space, the Barony of Kilbirny devolving to
Marjory his Daughter and sole Heir, married to Malcolm Crawfurd Esquire.

Tho the Crawfurds have not possessed Kilbirny above 243 Years, yet were they a
very ancient Family before. A Branch of the House of Loudoun came first to
possess the Barony of Easter-Greenock in Renfrew-shire, about the Time of
Robert III. Malcolm Crawfurd Esquire then taking to Wife......... Daughter and
Coheir of Malcolm Galbraith of Greenock, an ancient Family in those Parts The
Surname of Galbraith, as is evident from the Chartulary of Dunbartoun, has been
taken from a proper Christian Name; for in the time of Alexander II. Mauritius
filius Galbrat, is Witness in a Charter by the Earl of Lennox to the Abbey of
Paisly, and Willielmus de Galbraith Dominus de Gartconnel, is a Person of good
account in the time of King David II, as is evident from sundry Charters, in my
Hands, and many others elsewhere.
, by whom he had Malcolm Crawfurd Esquire his Son and Heir, who came to be Kilbirny
in Right of Marjory Barclay his Wife aforesaid, whereupon he assumed the Coat
of Barclay and impail'd it with his own: Here it may be remarked, that all the
Estate the Family ever had, or yet possesses, was acquired to them by Marriage;
or Lands so obtained were exchanged for others lying more contiguous to the
rest of their Fortune, which gave occasion to a Friend to apply to them the
following Distich, Aulam alii jactent, at tu Kilbirnie nube,
Nam qua Fors aliis, dat Venus alma tibi.


This Malcolm Crawfurd of Kilbirny, by Marjory Barclay his Wife, had Issue

Malcolm Crawfurd of Kilbirny.

James Crawfurd first of the Line of Monock, in Vicecomitatu de Air.

Thomas.

John.

Isobel, married to Sir Adam Cuningham of Capringtoun Knight The Discharge of
the Portion is still extant in the Viscount of Garnock's Charter-Chest.
, in Vicecomitatu de Air, Mother by him of Sir John Cunningham, and of Margaret
Wife of Andrew Lord Ochiltree,

Malcom Crawfurd, Son and Heir of Marjory Barclay of Kilbirny, had a Charter of
the Barony of Kilbirny and others Charta Marjoriae Barclay Dnae Kilbirny
dilecto filio suo primogenito and haeredi apparenti terrarum de Kilbirny, etc.
24 of April 1499, in Rotulis Jacobi IV. Test. Thoma and Joanne Crawfurds filiis
suis.
, upon the Resignation of his Mother, 24th of April 1499, which Malcolm married
Marion Crichton Charta in Rotulis Jacobi IV ad annum 1499
Daughter to Robert Lord Sanquhar, Ancestor to the present Countess of
Dramfries, by whom he had two Sons, Robert his Successor, and John Crawfurd Esquire

Which Robert had a Charter of the whole Lordship of Kilbirny, following on his
Father's Resignation, he reserving a Competency to himself, 8th of May 1499
Ibidem.
, which was ratified by King James IV. by a Charter under the Great-Seal; his
Death happening not long after, viz. in the 1500 Gift of the Ward of Robert
Crawfurd of Kilbirny, Son and Heir of umquhile Malcolm Crawfurd of Kilbirny,
then in the King's Hands through Decease of the said Malcolm, dated 27 of April
1500 in the Registers of the Privy Seal.
. This Robert Crawfurd of Kilbirny in Anno 1505, had a Dispensation from James
Beaton Abbot of Dunfermling, the Pope's Delegate, for marrying Margaret Semple
Writs of the Family of Kilbirny, in the Custody of the Viscount of Garnock
, notwithstanding of their Consanguinity within the Degrees prohibited by the
Canon Law. He dying about 1513, left Issue by the said Margaret his Wife,
Daughter of Sir Thomas Semple of Eliotstoun,

Lawrence his Son and Heir, a Person of eminent Note in those Days, both for
the considerable Lands he held in diverse Counties, and the many Services to
his Country; in Consideration whereof, he had several beneficial Grants from
the Crown, in Reward of his good and laudable Services, but living in a Reign
of no great Action, there is not any thing to be seen further memorable of him,
but that he exchanged the Barony of Crawfurd-John, the ancient Inheritance of
his Ancestors, with Sir James Hamilton of Finart, for the Lands of Drumray, in
the County of Dunbarton, by a solemn Agreement, bearing date 29th of January
1528 Original Charter of Excambion of the abovementioned Lands, still extant
in the Viscount of Garnock's Charter-Chest.
, and founded a Chaplainry in the little Church of Drumray, of his own
Patronage, for certain Priests, to celebrate Divine Service for the Soul's
Health of his late Sovereign Lord King James V. the good State of himself, and
Helen Campbel his Wife, during their Lives here; likewise for the Welfare of
their Souls after their Departure out of this World, their Children,
Successors, and all the faithful deceased, to which he appends his Seal Charta
penes Patricium Vicecomitem de Garnock, data 1547.
. Living to the Age of about 41, he departed this Life the 4th of June 1547,
happily taken away from seeing the sad Calamity of his Country by abloody War
that soon followed after, leaving a numerous Family by Helen Campbel his Wife
Daughter of Sir Hugh Campbel of Loudoun, Ancestor to the present Earl of that
Name,

Hugh his Successor.

William Crawfurd died without Issue.

Robert Crawfurd Esquire

John Crawfurd of Greenock-Easter.

David Crawfurd of Campel.

Thomas, Progenitor of the Crawfurds of Jordan-hill, also of Cartsburn Thomas
Crawfurd first of the Branch of Cartsburn, was the second Son of Cornelius
Crawfurd of Jordan-hill, by Mary Daughter of Sir James Lockhart of Lee.
in Renfrew-shire, who taking himself to Arms, was early engaged in the Service
of his Country, more particularly when in the utmost Danger of being ruined by
the English, Anno 1547, and was present in the Battle of Pinkie-field, where he
had the misfortune to be taken Prisoner Mr. Thomas Crawfurd's Notes on Buchanan.
, and for some time remained in Durance, till by a Sum of Money his Ransom was
procured. Seeing his native Country imbroil'd in a War, he retired into France
An. 1550, and listed himself in the Service of Henry II. in the Quality of one
of the Gensd' Arms, then under the Command of James Earl of Aran Vita Thomae
Crawfurd de Jordan-hill, penes me.
, where his prudent Conduct and generous Behavior gained him a general Esteem.
Upon the Demise of Francis II. he returned with Queen Mary to his native
Country, Anno 1561, and so far as I can discover, he lived in a private
Capacity till the Nation was alarmed with the Murder of Henry Lord Darnly,
Queen Mary's Husband, to whom he had the Honor to be nearly related: Then it
was he entered into an Association with the Earls of Argyle, Morton, Athole,
Mar, Glencairn, Lindsay, Boyd, and others, for the Defense of the young Prince
King James VI. who was in Danger of being murdered by the Earl of Bothwel, as
his Father had been: This they solemnly declared, and that they had no other
View but the Honor and Safety of Her Majesty's Person, and the Preservation of
their Natural Prince, and to bring the Regicide to a fair Trial. How a Civil
War broke out, I need not mention in this place, the Anarchy and Confusion of
the succeeding Times, I rather pass over in Silence, than enter on the Detail
of so ungrateful a Subject: But true it is, that this Gentleman was on the
young King's side against Queen Mary, and commanded in several Expeditions
against the Loyalists, with abundance of Reputation for his Valor and Conduct,
being then Captain of the King's Forces all the time of these unhappy Troubles.
He signalized himself in the Siege of the Castle of Edinburgh, as appears at
large by Mr. Hume's Annals In his History of the Family of Douglas
, and in surprising Dunbarton Castle, then he would out for Queen Mary by John Lord
Fleeming, 2d of April 1572 George Buchanans History of Scotland of the Year
1572, where he gives Captain Crawfurd a very good Character.
, a Strength which was in these Days thought impregnable: In Consideration of
which Services, he obtained from the King the Lands of Blackstoun, Barns,
Bishops-Meadow, with an Annuity of 200 l. out of the Bishopric of St. Andrews,
to enjoy it during Life, Pro remuneratione dicto Thomae Crawfurd Capitaneo,
militi prudenti ac in rebus bellicis audaci and experto, ob Castrum
Dunbritonense omnium judicio inexpugnabile labor and industria ipsius Thomae
captum and expugnatum Charta penes Laurentium Crawfurd de Jordan-hill.
. He married first Marion, Daughter of Sir John Colquhoun of Luss Charta penes
Vicecomitem deGarnock, data 1562.
, by whom he had only Marion, married to Sir Robert Fairly of that Ilk, in
Vicecomitatu de Air; after her Death, Janet, eldest Daughter and Heir of Robert
Ker of Kersland, an ancient Family in Air-shire, by whom he had two Sons and a
Daughter, 1 st. Daniel, who succeeded to his Mother's Estate, and therefore
changed his Name to Ker The Family of Kersland continued from this Daniel
Crawfurd, alias Ker of Kersland, in the Male Line, till Major Daniel Ker of
Kersland was killed at the Battle of Stainkirk, Anno 1692.
. 2 d. Hugh Crawfurd of Jordan-hill, Heir of his Father's Fortune, and Susanna
married to Colin Campbel of Elengreg, in Vicecomitatu de Argyle. Having so
prudently settled his Estate, as that both the Families might be supported, he
made his Exit out of this to another World the 3d of January 1603, and lies
buried at the Church of Kilbirny, under a plain Tomb, where you may still
discover the Figure of a Man in full length in Armor, with a Coat of Arms,
wherein Crawfurd quartered with Barclay is to be seen, and this Inscription
upon the Pedestal, Here lies Captain Thomas Crawfurd of Jordan-hill, Sixth Son
to Laurence Crawfurd of Kilbirny, and Janet Ker, eldest Daughter of Robert Ker
of Kersland, his Spouse.

Catherine, eldest Daughter of Laurence Crawfurd of Kilbirny, was married to
David Fairly of that Ilk Charta penes Vicecomitem de Garnock. Of this Marriage
of David Fairly of that Ilk, and Catherine Crawfurd, there were three
Daughters, 1st. Margaret Heiress of Fairly. 2d. Marion to John Steuart of
A^cog, in Vicecomitatu de Bute, Son to William Steuart of Kilcattan. 3d.
Elisabeth to Robert Boyd of Portencross, in Vicecomitatu de Air.
.

Isabel the second, married to Gavin Blair of Hally, in Vicecomitatu de Air.

To Laurence succeeded Hugh Crawfurd his Son and Heir, of whom there is nothing
recorded in History till the breaking out of the Civil Troubles in Queen Mary's
time, Anno 1568. He was a forward Asserter of her Right, and faithfully adhered
to her Interest. He was the same Year one of the Barons who signed a Bond for
Defense of the Queen's Majesty, against all Persons whatsoever, and against all
deadly, (as they speak) and marched in Person with two of his Sons, and several
of his Vassals and Retainers to the Field of Lang-fide; which Action happened
13th of May 1568, for which he was obliged to accept of a Remission from the
Regent Remishon to Hugh Crawfurd of Kilbirny, 8th of September 1571, in
Archivis Jacobi VI.
. He first married Margaret Daughter of Sir John Colquhoun of Luss Charta penes
Vicecomitem de Garnock.
, in Vicecomitatu de Dunbartoun, by whom he had Malcolns his Son and Heir. Next
Elisabeth, Daughter of David Barclay of Ladyland Ibidem.
, who bore him a Son William Crawfurd of Knights-wood in Vicecomitatu de
Dunbartoun: And three Daughters.

1. Margaret, married to James Galbraith of Kilcroich, in Vicecomitatu de
Stirling Ibidem.
, and afterward to Sir Aulay Mackaulay of Ardincaple.

2. Marion, to John Boil of Kelburn, Ancestor to the present Earl of Glasgow,
and had Issue.

3. Elisabeth, to David Brody of Castletoun Ibidem.
, in Vicecomitatu de Clackmanan, and had Issue. There being nothing more
memorable concerning this Loyal Gentleman, I shall only notice, that he dying
in the Year 1576, was succeeded by,

Malcolm his Son and Heir, who took to Wife Margaret Daughter of John Cuningham
of Glengarnock, in Vicecomitatu de Air Ibidem.
, by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of John Lord Fleeming, by whom he had John and
Alexander; likewise a Daughter Anne, married to William Cuningham of Leglane,
Ancestor to Sir William Cuningham Baronet. He departing this Life, Anno 1592
Ibidem.
.

John his Son succeeded, who spent much of his Time in Foreign Parts, and died
young, viz. 16th of January 1622 Retour of John Crawfurd of Kilbirny to John
his Father.
. He left Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of John Blair of that Ilk, by
Grisel his Wife, Daughter of Robert Lord Semple, John his Successor, Malcolm
Crawfurd of Newtoun, James Crawfurd of Knights-wood; Also two Daughters.

1. Margaret, married to Hugh Kennedy of Ardmillan, in Vicecomitatu de Air, and
had Issue.

2. Jean, to John Lindsay of Blacksolme, in Vicecomitatu de Renfrew, 2 dly. To
John Buchanan of Drumiekill, and had Issue.

Which John lived in great Plenty and Respect, and agreeably spent his Time in
Re-building the House of Kilbirny, a large and magnificent Fabric from the
very Foundation, which he finished in the 1627. His Wife was Mary, Daughter of
James Earl of Glencairn: By her he had John his Successor, James who died
unmarried; also two Daughters, Anne married to Alexander Cuningham of
Corsehill, in Vicecomitatu de Air, and Margaret to Colonel William Crawfurd
elder Brother to Thomas Crawfurd of Carse, sans Issue. He died the 12th of
November 1629, his Estate descending to

John his Son, who obtained the Honor of Knighthood from King Charles I. Anno
1642, and had the Command of a Regiment in the time of the Civil War, but lived
retired during the Usurpation, which he had the Happiness to survive. He was
elected a Member of Parliament for the County of Air Record of the Parliament
1661.
, which began the 1 st of January 1661, John Earl of Midletoun being his
Majesty's High Commissioner; in which Year he also died at Edinburgh, from
whence his Body was convoyed to Kilbirny Church, and was buried among his
Ancestors. By Margaret his first Wife, Daughter of Robert Lord Burleigh, he had
no Children came to Maturity: But by Magdalen his second Wife, Daughter of
David Lord Carnegy, he had two Daughters, Anne married to Sir Archbald Steuart
of Blackhall Baronet, and Margaret, on whom, by a special Entail, he settled
his Estate, and to the Heirs Male or Female to be procreate betwixt her and Mr.
Patrick Lindsay Son of John Earl of Crawfurd, upon Condition every such Heir
should carry the Surname and Arms of Crawfurd: She died in the 29th Year of her
Age, the 4th. of October 1680, leaving Issue by the aforesaid Mr. Patrick
Lindsay her Husband, John Crawfurd of Kilbirny her Son and Heir, Patrick
Crawfurd Esquire Captain Archbald Crawfurd; Likewise three Daughters.

1. Margaret, married to David Earl of Glasgow.

2. Anne, to Master Harry Maul of Kelly, Brother to James Earl of Panmure.

3. Magdalen, to George Dundass of Duddingstoun, in Vicecomitatu de Linlithgow,
and has Issue.

Which John was born the 12th of May 1669. He had his Education in Grammar at
Irvine, and his Academical in the University of St. Andrews, where he spent the
usual Years. The Revolution coming about in 1689, upon his first Appearance in
the World, he engaged with the Party who were active in it. I find he was one
of those Persons to whom the Militia of Air-shire was entrusted Record of the
Convention of Estates.
, and which on a surmise of an Invasion from Ireland (if I be not mistaken) he
once commanded. After the Convention was turned into a Parliament, He was in
the 1693 chosen to serve for Air-shire, which he did without Interruption, till
the Dissolution thereof upon the Death of King William, 8th of March 1702. Her
Majesty Queen Anne, upon her Accession to the Crown, appointed him one of the
Commissioners on the Part of Scotland for treating of an Union between both
Nations, and the 4th of February 1703, named him one of the Lords of the
Privy Council. He was again chosen to serve for the County of Air, to her
Majesty's first Parliament, which met at Edinburgh the 6th of May 1703, where
he merited so well of the Queen, that she was pleased in the second Year of her
Reign to make him a Peer, by creating him Viscount of Mount-Crawfurd, which he
changed again to the Title of Garnock: And among other Reasons for conferring
the Honor, her Majesty declares, this was not the least, propter multa and
conspicua officia per Predecessores ejus Crawfurdios de Kilbirny, pro Coronae
nostrae and Monarchiae sustentatione peracta. Tho this Lord was one of the
Commissioners for the Treaty of Union, Anno 1702, yet I don't find his Name
among those appointed for that Affair in the 1706, to which however his
Lordship being in the Measures of the Court, contributed, when the Articles
came to be considered in Parliament. After which he continued in the Council
till its Dissolution. In the Month of March 1708 he was taken ill with an
Asthma and a Cough, the Malignity of which all the Art of his Physicians not
being able to remove, it put an End to his Days on the 24th of December
thereafter, and upon the 13th of January 1709, he was deposited in a Vault
within the Church of Kilbirny among his Ancestors, where I leave him, how soon
I have given this Epitaph upon him. Ante diem, querimur, tua cingi busta
cupresso,
Crawfurdae gentis lausque decusque tuae.
Invida ^^rs paucis passa est te vivere lustris,
Et generi and pr^^vis noluit esse parem:
Saepe laboranti patriae, qui saepe tulerunt
Regi, cum promeret civis iniquus, opem.
At, si vita tibi seros mansisset in annos,
Fulsisset magnis gloria major avis.


By the only Wife he ever had, and who survived him, viz. Margaret Daughter of
James Stewart 1 st. Earl of Bute, he had Patrick now Viscount of Garnock, John,
James, David, and Charles: Also three Daughters,

Margaret.

Anne.

Magdalen. All Young.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Gules, a Fess Ermine, 2d and 3d Azure, a Chiveron
betwixt three Cross Patees Or, supported by two Gray-Hounds, Crest, an Ermine
Argent, Motto, Sine labe nota.

A learned Gentleman of this Name Mr. Thomas Crawfurd Professor of Philosophy
in the University of Edinburgh,
paraphrased on this Coat of Arms in these fine Elegiacks. Sanguineum scutum
praecingit balteus albens,
Quem variant nigrae sed sine labe notae.
Sic labem ut vitet, mustela Armenica strictum
In ferrum and structos non timet ire rogos:
Martia vis animi, vacuum formidine pectus,
Cana fides, nulla labe notatus honos:
Haec Crafurdiacae gentilia symbola stirpit,
Artibus his veteres emicuere patres.


RUTHVEN, Earl of Gaurie.
FROM the Barony of Ruthven in Perth-shire, did Walter the Son of Alan,
Proprietar of the said Lands assume a Denomination, which before that Time
appears not to have been Hereditary. However, he was a Person of so much
Consideration, that he obtained the Lands of Cowgask in Marriage with Cecily,
Daughter of Gilbert Earl of Strathern Sir John Cuningham's Historical
Collections courteously furnished me by the favor of John Corss Writer in
Edinburgh.
. in the Reign of Alexander II.

He left a Son Walter de Rochven, who obtained a Confirmation from Malise Earl
of Strathern of the Lands abovementioned, which Gilbert his Father had
formerly given Walter filio Alani and Ceciliae filiae suae.

Walter de Rochven his Successor in the 13th of Alexander III. resigns his
Right of the Lands of Fowlis per decessum aviae suae Ceciliae filiae Domini
Willielmi Maule Militis Charta penes Comitem de Panmure.
. This noble Family continued for many Generations in the County of Perth,
where they were hereditary Sheriffs among the superior Rank of the Gentry, till
the Reign of King James III. that Sir William Ruthven of that Ilk came to be
ranked among the Parliamentary Barons. I find he married to his first Wife,
Isabel Livingston Charta in publicis Archivis.
, Relict of Walter Lindsay of Beaufort, by whom he had Sir William his eldest
Son Charta Willielmi Domini Ruthven Willielmo Ruthven filio su^ terarum de
Cowgask in Rotulis Jacobi IV. ad annum 1506.
, who was killed at Flowdon Sir George Mackenzie's Genealogical Collections.
; also a Daughter Jean, married to Alexander Earl of Buchan, and again to John
Erskine of Dun, in Vicecomitatu de Forfar Charta in publicis Archivis ad annum
1508.
, Mother by him to Sir John Erskin of Dun, Superintendent of Angus. He married
2 dly Christian Daughter of Sir John Forbes of Pitsligo Charta in publicis
Archivis ad Annum 1521. Etiam litera prosopiae Dominae Margaretae Hay.
, by whom he had William Ruthven of Banden, in vicecomitatu de Perth Ibidem ad
annum 1525.
, Grandfather of Patrick Earl of Forth, and a Daughter Elisabeth, married
first to William Earl of Errol, and again to Ninian Lord Ross Ibidem ad annum
1521.
, and had Issue.

To William Lord Ruthven succeeded William his Grandson Ibidem.
, who augmented his Fortune by the Marriage of Janet, one of the three
Daughters and Coheirs of Patrick Lord Dirletoun Ibidem.
, and thereon added to his own Coat of Arms Argent, a Bend Azure. He was made
Lord Privy Seal Ibidem.
Anno 1547, upon the removal of John Abbot of Paisly, which he held till the
1553. By the aforesaid Janet his Wife, he had Issue Patrick his Successor, and
Alexander of Freeland, and Daughters, 1 st. Lilias, married to David Lord
Drummond Ibid ad annum 1564
, 2 d. Catherine, to Colin Campbel of Glenurchie, 3 d. Cecilia, to Sir David
Weems of Weems, 4 th. Barbara, to Patrick Lord Gray, 5 th. Janet, to John
Crichton of Strathurd Ibidem ad annum 1543.
. 2 dly to Laurence Mercer of Addie Ibidem and Genealogia Ruthvanorum.
, in Vicecomitatu de Perth. 6 th. Margaret, to James Johnston of Elphinstoun,
in Vicecomitatu de Haddingtoun. 7 th. Christian, to Mr. William Lundy of that
Ilk Ibidem, etiam Charta in Rotulis Reginae Mariae ad annum 1562.
, in Vicecomitatu de Fife.

Patrick Lord Ruthven his Son, was very active in the Reformation of Religion,
which indeed was very commendable and Praiseworthy; but that which lies
heaviest on this Lord's Memory, is, the Hand he had in the Murder of David
Rizio, a Deed so odious, both in it self, and attended with such Circumstances,
that none will take upon them to justify. His Wife was Jean, natural Daughter
of Archbald Earl of Angus Hume's History of the Family of Douglas.
, by Margaret Daughter of James Steuart of Traquair, by whom he had two Sons,
William and Alexander; likewise two Daughters, Jean, married to Henry Lord
Methven, 2 dly to Andrew Earl of Rothes Charta in Rotulis Jacobi VI. ad annum
1573.
, Isabel to Sir James Colvil of Easter-Weems, in Vicecomitatu de Fife. This
Lord gave Way to Fate on the 13 Day of June 1566 Charta in Rotulis Jacobi VI.
ad annum 1566.
, and was succeeded by

William his Son, who was on the King's Side in the Minority of James VI. by
whom he was constituted Lord high Thesaurer of Scotland 24th of June 1571 Gift
of the Thesaurer's Office to William Lord Ruthven, under the Privy Seal
, and created Earl of Gourie 23 of August 1681 Bishop Spotswood's History.
; but three Years after he entered into a Conspiracy to seize the King's Person,
and remove some Councillors from the Court, for which he was attainted of
Treason, and lost his Head 28th April 1584 Sir James Melvil's Memoirs.
, leaving Issue by Dorothea his Wife, Daughter of Henry Lord Methven, and of
Janet Daughter of John Earl of Athole, 1 st. James. 2 d. John, 3 d. Alexander,
4 th. Patrick Ruthven Doctor of Medicine: Also seven Daughters,

1. Margaret married to John Earl of Montr^se.

2. Mary to John Stewart Earl of Athole.

3. Sophia to Lodovick Duke of Lennox, sans Issue.

4. Jean to James Lord Ogilvy.

5. Beatrix, to Sir James Hume of Colding knows in Vicecom. de Berwick.

6. Isabel, to Sir Robert Gordon of Lochenvar, 2 dly to Hugh first Lord Londo^n.

7. Dorothea, to John Weems of Pittencrief Charta in Rotulis Jac. VI.
, in Vicecomitatu de Fife.

James Son of William Earl of Goury was restored to his Estate and Honor, Anno
1586, but dying young in 1588 John his Brother became his Heir. This Earl, with
Alexander Ruthven his Brother, entered into a most hellish Conspiracy to have
murdered the King at his own House in the Town of Perth, on the 5th of August
1600, which was by the good Providence of God detected at the very instant of
Execution, both the Earl and his Brother being killed in the Enterprise.
Thereafter, upon the 19th of October their dead Bodies were carried to the
common Place of Execution in the City of Edinburgh, hanged on a Gibbet, and
their Heads cut off and affixed on the Jayl, there to remain till the Wind
should blow them off This Conspiracy of the Earl of Goury is set in a true
Light from the Records of Council and Parliament, by the Right Honorable and
Learned, George Earl of Cromarty, published in the 1713
. The Earldom of Goury was annexed to the Crown, and the Surname of Ruthven
discharged by Act of Parliament, and the 5th of August ordered in all time
coming to be religiously observed as a Day of Thanksgiving, in remembrance of
his Majesty's happy Deliverance.

ARMS.
Three Coats quarterly, 1st and 4th Argent, three Bars Gules. 2d Or, three Bars
Gules, 3d Or, on a Bend Azure, three Lozanges of the first, all within a Border
Or flowr'd and Counter-flowr'd Gules, supporred by two Goats proper, Crest, a
Goats Head cabos'd, issuing out a Crown Or, Moto, Facta Probant, and on the
Dexter a Chivaleer garnished with the Earl's Coat of Arms, pointing with a
Sword upward to an imperial Crown, with this Devise, Tibi soli This from an
Authentic Copy of his Arms, richly illuminated in the Year 1597, with his Name
and Titles, viz. Joannes Ruthven, Comes de Goury, Dominus de Ruthven, etc. in
my Hands.
.

Francis Abercromby, Lord Glasfurd.
THIS Francis was the Son and Heir of Alexander Abercromby of Fiterneir, in
Vicecomitatu de Aberdeen, by Jean Daughter of John Seto^ of Newark, branched
from the Family of Birkenbog, seated in the Shire of Banff, before the Time of
King Robert I. as appears from the Authorities ^^re cited This local Surname
was assumed from the Lands of Abercromby in Fife, according to Sir George
Mackenzie, tempore Malcomi III. and continued a Family in good Respect, till it
came to a Close in the Person of Thomas Abercromby of that I^k, in the Reign of
King Charles I. One of Birkenbog's Predecessors Umphray Abercromby got a
Charter from King Robert I. of the Lands of Ardun, and Hart-hill, and has since
allied with the Families of Errol, Finlater, etc.
: Which Francis having married Anne Baroness of Semple, was in Respect thereof,
and in Reward of his Father's Loyalty during the civil Commotions in the time
of King Charles I. honored with the Title of Lord Glasfurd, for his own Life,
by King James VII. 25th of July 1685.

The Brothers of this Lord are, John Abercromby Esquire and Patrick Abercromby
Doctor of Medicine, my worthy Friend, who has obliged his Country with a most
exact and curious History of Scotland, refined from the Dross and Errors of our
former Authors, and put our Affairs in such a Light, that no Nation I know of
can show any Performance of that kind done with greater Exactness and Ingenuity.

CUNINGHAM, Earl of Glencairn.
THE Surname of Cuningham, which properly signifies the King's Habitation, has
no doubt been taken from the Bailliary of Cuningham in the Shire of Air, the
Patrimony of the Morvils, formerly Constables of Scotland, to whom the
Cuninghams of Kilmaures were Vassals. The first of them I have found is
Robertus filius Varnebaldi de Cuningham, who is Proprietar of Kilmaures, in the
Reign of K. William the Lion. He gave in pure and perpetual Alms to the Monks
of the Abbey of Kelso the Patronage of the Church of Kilmaures, cum dimi^ia
carucata terrae ad dictam Ecclesiam pertinen. pro salute animae suae, which is
ratified by Richard Morvil before the Year 1189 According to the Cron. of
Melross, Richard Morvil then died.
. He married Richenda Daughter and Heir of Umphray Barclay Knight Charter of
Mortification by Richenda de Barclay, Daughter of Sir Umphra Barclay Knight to
the Abbey of Arbroth, with Consent of Robert the Son of Warnebald her Spouse.
, They had a Son Robert, who designs himself Robertus filius Roberti filii
Warnebaldi de Cuningham, in a Grant which he made to the Religious of Arbroth
of the Lands of Glenfarquharlin, in Vicecomitatu de Kincardin, pro salute
animae suae, Patris and Matris suae, ac pro animabus omnium antecessorum and
successorum: Hence descended Sir William Cuningham of Kilmaures Knight, who
purchased the Lands of Waterstoun in Renfrew shire, from William Waterstoun of
that Ilk, Anno 1384 Charta penes Alexandrum Porterfield de eodem.
. He left two Sons, William his Successor, and Thomas first of the House of
Capringtoun Sir John Cuningham, a very learned Lawyer, and an excellent
Antiquary, mentions a Charter by William Lord of Kilmaures, with Consent of
William his Son and Heir apparent, Thomae Cuningham filio suo ^uniori, ^^rra^um
de Bedla^ in tenemento de Dalray, 9th May 1385, and says that he was Ancestor
to Capringtoun.
, of whom came the Cuninghams of Leglan and Enterkin.

Which Sir William Cuningham of Kilmaures, in the Reign of King Robert III.
added to his old patrin onial Inheritance the Barony of Fynlastoun in
Renfrew-shire, Kilmaronock in the County of Dunbartoun, Redhall and Collingtoun
in Lothian, by the Marriage of Margaret, Daughter, and one of the two Coheirs
of Robert Denniston Lord of Dennistoun Original Contract of Division of the
Coheirs of Sir Robert Denniston Knight, betwixt Sir William Cuningham of
Kilmaures and Sir Robert Maxwel of Calderw^od. Anno 1404, penes Domi^um Pollock
Knight. He founded the Prebendaries of Kilmaures Sir John Cuningham's
Collections relating to the Family of Glencairn, pen^s Joannem Cross Scribam
Edinburgensem.
, or more properly the collegiate Church there, by his Charter the 13th of May
1403, consisting of a Provost and six or eight Prebends; and doted certain
Lands both within that Barony and elsewhere for their Support and Subsistence,
which was dissolved upon the Reformation. To the Abbot and Convent of
Kilwining, he gave the Lands of Grange for the Health of his Soul, and the
safety of the Souls of his Ancestors and Successors for ever Mr. Richard
Cuningham of Bedlan mentions this in his Notes on the Family of Glencairn.
. By the said Margaret his Wife he had Issue Robert his Successor, and William
first of the Branch of Cuningham-head in Air-shire Sir John Cuningham remarks a
Charter by Sir William Cuningham of Kilmaures to William Cuningham his Son, of
the Lands of Wood-hall
.

This Robert the next of the Line, was one of the Hostages for the Ransom of
King James I. who honored him with Knighthood, Anno 1424 Balfour's Annals
, and afterward put him in Commission with Alexander Lord Montgomery in the
Joint Government of Kintyre and Knapdale Haddingtoun's Collections ad annum 1434
. He married Janet Daughter of Alexander Lord Montgomery, by whom he had

Alexander Lord of Kilmaures his his Son and Heir, who was one of the Lords of
the Privy Council to King James III. He faithfully adhered to that Prince in
his good and bad Fortune: In Consideration of which he was by a very formal
Patent 28th May 1488, created Earl of Glencairn Penes Willielmium Comitem de
Glencairn.
, which Honor he did not long enjoy, for he lost his Life with his Master the
King at the Field of Bannockburn, 11th June 1488. He had Issue by Margaret his
Wife, Daughter of Patrick Hepburn Lord Hales Genealogy of the Family of
Glencairn by Mr. Cuningham of Bedlan.
, Robert his Successor, and William Cuningham of Craigends Charter by Alexander
Lord Kilmaures to William Cuningham his Son, of the Lands of Dennistoun, Anno
1480, which Sir John Cuningham has a Note of.
, in Vicecomitatu de Re^^^ew, of whom the Families of Robertland, Carncuren,
Bedlan, Achinharvy, and Achenyards are sprung.

Which Robert marrying Marjory Daughter of Archbald Earl of Angus, had Cuthbert
Earl of Glencairn his Son, who was of the Privy Council to King James IV. Anno
1509 Charta in Rotulis Jacobi IV.
. He married Marion Daughter of John Lord Lindsay Ibidem.
, by whom he had

William Earl of Glencairn his Son and Heir, who was of the Privy Council, to
King James V. He was taken Prisoner at the Battle of Solway by the English,
Anno 1542, for his Ransom I find he paid 1000 l. Sterling. Rymer's Feedera Angliae.
. The next ensuing Year he was joined in Commission with Sir George Douglas,
William Hamilton of Sanquhar, James Learmonth of Balcomy, and Mr. Henry
Balnavis of Hall-hill, Secretary of State to treat with the English about a
Marriage betwixt Queen Mary and King Edward VI. Rymer ad Annum 1543.
which was much opposed by all who were in the French Interest. He married
first Catherine Daughter of William Lord Borthwick Charta in Rotulis Jacobi V.
. 2 dly. Elisabeth Campbel; and dying Anno 1547, he left behind him, 1 st.
Alexander, 2 d. Andrew, Ancestor of Sir Alexander Cuningham of Corse-hill
Genealogy of Glencairn.
Baronet, 3 d. Hugh Progenitor of the Cuninghams of Waterstoun and Carlung
Ibidem.
, 4 th. Robert, Minister of the Mistry or Priory of Fell in vicecomitatu de Air
5. William, who was Bishop of Argyle, also a Daughter Elisabeth married to John
Cuningham of Capringtoun.

Which Alexander for Distinction, called The Good Earl, was one of the first of
the Peers of Scotland who concurred in the Reformation of the Church from
Popery, and was a strenuous asserter of King James's Title to the Crown, when
his Mother Queen Mary resigned the Government Anno 1567. Upon the Dissolution
of the Religious Houses, he obtained a Grant of the Abbey of Kilwinning, a Seat
formerly of Benedictine Monks, and of which one of his Sons came to be Titular
Commendator. He married first Jean Daughter of James Earl of Aran, and had
William the next Earl, Andrew the second Son, and James Prior of Lismahago;
also a Daughter Margaret, Wife of John Wallace of Craigie Charta in Rotulis
Mariae Reginae ad annum 1552.
, in Vicecomitatu de Air. 2 dly Jean Daughter of John Cuningham of Capringtoun,
by her he had a Son Alexander, and a Daughter Jean, married first to Archbald
Earl of Argyle, 2 dly. to Sir Humphray Colquhoun of Luss, Knight, in
Vicecomitatu de Dunbarton. This Earl dying in the Year of God 1574 Johnston's
Heroes.
, his Estate and Honor descended to

William his Son, who had to Wife Janet Daughter of James Gordon of Lochenvar,
who bore him a Son James, and four Daughters, 1 st. Jean married to George
Haldan of Gleneagles in Vic. de Perth. 2 d. Margaret to Hector Macklain of
Dowart, in Vic. de Argyle. 3 d. Jean to James Crawfurd of Achinnames; after his
Death to Alexander Cuningham of Craigends. 4 th. Susanna to John Napier of
Kilmahew, in Vic. de Dunbartoun.

Which James was one of the Lords of the Privy Council to King James VI. and in
some Degree a Favorite of that wise Prince, who named him one of the
Commissioners on the Part of Scotland to treat upon a nearer Union with England
the Year immediately after his Majesty's Accession to that Crown, viz. in 1604.
This noble Earl left Issue by Margaret his Wise Daughter of Colin Campbel of
Glenurquhie, William Earl of Glencairn, John Cuningham of Camskeith, Catherine
married to Sir James Cuningham of Glengarnock, in Vic. de Air, Anne to James
Marquis of Hamilton, Margaret to Sir James Hamilton of Evandale, 2 dly. to Sir
James Maxwel of Calderwood, Mary to John Crawfurd of Kilbirny, Susanna to
Alexander Lauder of Hatton.

Which William the succeeding Earl, was married to Janet Daughter of Mark, Earl
of Lothian, by whom he had Issue William his Son and Heir, and Colonel Robert
Cuningham; also four Daughters,

Elisabeth married to Sir Lodovick Stewart of Minto.

Jean to John Blair of that Ilk.

Margaret to David Beaton of Crich.

Marion to James Earl of Finlater.

He died in October 1631 Charta in Cancellaria.
, and was succeeded by William his Son. This noble Lord, during the Usurpation
of Oliver Cromwell, being highly sensible of the Calamities brought upon this
Nation by the Ruin of the Monarchy, in order to the Restoration of his
Sovereign, and the Redemption of his Country from the Slavery it was in,
cordially put himself in Arms, having before obtained a Commission from the
King as General of all the Forces he could raise for his Majesty's Service, in
which Character he behaved himself very worthily, and gave General Monk much
Trouble; but upon the arrival of General Middleton, he delivered up to him
(says a noble Historian) Earl of Clarenden.
, His thin unarmed Troops, and retired first to his own House, and then made
his Peace with Monk, that he might live quietly, and retain his Affection and
Fidelity to the King, which ^e made manifest afterward in a more favorable
Conjuncture, and at the same time he excused himself for giving over an
Enterprise he was not able to prosecute, but living to see the King restored,
he was constituted Lord high Chancellor of Scotland on the 19 January 1661, in
which Office he continued till the 10th of July 1664. when he made his Exit out
of this World. By Anne his first Wise Daughter of James Earl of Finlater. he
had Issue,

1. James Lord Kilmaures, who married Elisabeth Daughter of William Duke of
Hamilton, but dyed without Issue.

2 Alexander his Successor.

3. John who succeeded his Brother in the Honor.

Jean eldest Daughter, was married to William Earl of Kilmarnock, Margaret the
second to William Lord Bargany, Elisabeth the third to William Hamilton of
Orbistoun.

Alexander Earl of Glencairn his Son married Nicolas Daughter and Coheir of Sir
James Stewart of Stra brock and Kirkhill in Vicecomitatu de Linlithgow, by whom
he had one Daughter Margaret married to John Earl of Lawderale, and departing
this Life the 26 of May 1670 Retour John Earl of Glencairn to Alexander Earl of
Glencairn, his Brother, in the Chancery Office.
, his Estate and Honor devolved to

John his Brother, who was one of the Peers who in the first and only
Parliament of King James VII. Anno 1686 appeared against the repealing of the
Laws against Popery, and for securing the Protestant Religion Minutes of
Parliament.
. Upon King VVilliam's Accession to the Corwn, he was named a Privy Counselor
1 st. May 1689, and constituted Colonel of a Regiment of Foot, as his Lordship
was also Captain and Governor of the Castle of Dunbartoun in the Reign of
Queen Anne.

He married first Jean Daughter of John Earl of Mar, and after her Death
Margaret Daughter and Heir of John Napier of Kilmahew, Relict of Patrick Maxwel
of Newark, and departing this Life in the end of the Year 1703, he was
succeeded by

William his Son and Heir, who married Henrietta Daughter of Alexander Earl of
Galloway, and has Issue. William Lord Kilmaures, etc.

ARMS.
Argent, a shake Fork Sable, supported by two Rabbets Proper, Crest, an
Unicorns Head Coupe, Motto, Over Fork over.

BOIL, Earl of Glasgow.
THAT this Family has been of great Antiquity in Air-shire, and possessed of a
fair Inheritance in those parts, where they still remain, undeniably appears
from several old Deeds and evidences still preserved in the Family: For in the
Reign of Alexander III. Richard Boil Dominus de Caulburn, had an Acquittance
from Walter Cummin Dominus de Rougallan, de quadraginta solidis annui-redditus
terrarum de Malderland cum Multuris dictae Terrae in Tenemento suo de
Rougallan, in quibus dictus Ricardus and Antecessores ejus mihi and
Antecessoribus meis annuatim solvere tenebantur. Test. Dno Galfredo de Ross,
Willielmo de Keith, Willielmo Abbate de Kilwining, Willielmo Sympl, Adam^ filio
Ucttredi Original Charter in the Custody of my Lord Glasgow, which I have seen
Cut in a Coper-plate by the ingenious Mr. James Anderson.
. This Richard married Marjory Daughter of Sir Walter Cummin Knight of Rowallan
Sir George Mackenzie's Collections MS.
, and left Robert his Son to succeed him, whom I find one of the Barons in
Air-shir, who took an Oath of Fidelity to Edward I. King of England, to whom
all, or most of the Kingdom of Scotland rendered a Submission, Anno Dom. 1296
Pryn's Collections.
. A Descendent of the former Robert was Hugo de Boil, who gave to the Abbey of
Pasly, and to the Monks there in free Alms, dimidiam petram Cerae de firmis
terrarum suarum de Rysholm ex eo quod ipse and Janeta uxor sua suscepti sunt
tanquam frater and soror in Domo de Paslit and in toto ordine Cluniacensi. Data
septimo Februarii millessimo trecentesimo nonagesimo nono Register of the Abbey
of Pasly, belonging to the Earl of Dundonald.
. Since which time they have remarkably continued in a direct Line spreading
themselves into several Branches by the way, as were the Boyle's of Wamfray in
Dumfries-shire, and of Raysholm in Air-shire. Much likewise might be said as to
their Matches with Persons eminent for their Parentage; As also of the
Acquisitions made to their personal Inheritance by Marriage, and otherwise; but
omitting several things, I shall observe that after a long and continued Series
of worthy Ancestors descended John Boil of Kelburn, who lost his Life and
Fortune for his loyal Adherence to King James III. in the Battle of
Bannockburn, 11 June 1488, against the Rebellious Barons of that Age; but upon
the general Indemnity in the third of King James IV. John his Son obtained the
King's Precept to the Sheriff of the County for Restitution of the same. This
John obtained a Grant from King James V. of the Lands of South Bullochmartin in
the Isle of Cumra, to be held of the Crown, 8th of April 1536 Charta in Rotulis
Jacobi V. sub privato sigillo.
, and being then Aged, he had by the King's favor an Exemption indemnifying
him from attending the royal Army in time of War Charta in Rotulis Jacobi V. ad
annum 1531.
, and lived till the 1549. (his Wife Agnes, a Daughter of the Family of Ross
surviving him,) He had three Sons, David who died before himself, John the
second, of whom the Boyle's of Halks-hill, Belliecun and Portray derive
themselves. He had by a Grant of King James V. to himself and Christian Wallace
his Spouse, and their Heirs, the Lands of Beliecun, with the hereditary
Crowrary of the Isle of Cumra on the the 8th of April 1536 Charta in publicis
Archivis and Charta penes Jacobum Boil de Beliecun.
. The third Robert, who was Ancestor of Bullochmartin, another Branch of this
Family that existed long in these Parts, he had from his Father a Charter of
the Lands of Bullochmartin, 6th of October 1554 Chartain in Rotulis Reginae
M^riae.
. This John was succeeded by John his Grandson, in whose Favor he resigned
the Barony of Kelburn, and his other Lands, on the 28 of April 1549 Ibidem.
. Which John marrying Jean Daughter of John Fraser of Knock, an ancient Family
in Air-shire Attested Pedigree of the Family of Kelburn, penes Comitem de
Glasgow.
, by her he had John his Successor, and a Daughter Margaret married to John
Cuningham of Caddel.

John Boil of Kelburn his Son, was a most zealous Loyalist in the Service of
Queen Mary, during the Civil War, in the Minority of King James VI. He took to
Wife Marion Daughter of Hugh Crawfurd of Kilbirny, Ancestor to the Viscount of
Garnock, by whom he had John his Son and Heir, and Six Daughters.

Jean married to William Barclay of Pearstoun, in Vic. de Air.

Marion to Matthew Ross of Haining, and afterward to Dr. James Law Archbishop
of Glasgow.

Margaret to Robert Bruce of Achinbowie, in Vic. de Stirling.

Elisabeth to Robert Sempel of Milbank, in Vic. de Renfrew.

Agnes to Robert Boil of Bullochmartin, in Vic. de Bute.

Mary to William Hamilton Esquire of the County of Down, in Regno Hiberniae, and
all the Six had Posterity.

Which John so succeeding, being a Person much esteemed for his Abilities, was
joined in Commission with diverse of the first Quality to revise and rectify
the Practice of our Law, Anno 1630 Acts of Parliament.
, the 5th of Charles I. When the Civil War broke out in that Reign Anno 1639,
he did signally manifest his Loyalty to his said Majesty, whose Interest he
zealously asserted during that fierce and unnatural War, for which he suffered
no less than Ten Years Banishment, to the Ruin almost of his Estate, for his
being reckoned amongst the number of Loyalists. He was married to Agnes only
Daughter of Sir John Maxwel of Pollock, in Vicecomitatu de Renfrew, by Margaret
Daughter of William Cuningham of Capringtoun, by whom he had only one Daughter
Grisel his sole Heir, whom he wisely married, (after having rejected many
Offers) to Terms of great Advantage for his Family with David Boil of
Halks-hill, a near Relation of his own This David Boil of Halks-hill, was Son
and Heir of James Boil of Halkshill by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of David
Crawfurd of Bedlane, Son and Heir of David Boil of Halkshill, by Christian his
Wife Niece to the Lord Boyd, Son of John Boil by Christian his Wife, Daughter
of...... Wallace of Cairn-hill 2d Son to John Boil of Kelburn, as before
remarked.
, who being a prudent and virtuous Man in all his Affairs, he improved his
Estate, and took care to let it descend entire to Posterity, and died in 1672.
leaving Issue by the said Grisel his Wife, John his Son and Heir, James Boil
of Montgomeristoun This James obtained the Lands of Montgomeriestoun, by the
Marriage of Janet Daughter and Heir of Mr. Robert Barclay Provo^t of Irvine,
and by her was Father of James Boil one of the Commissioners of the Excise in
Scotland, Anno 1713.
, and Patrick: Also a Daughter Grisel married to William Wallace of Shewaltoun,
in Vic. de Air.

Which John being a Man of Parts and Business, made a great Addition to his
Estate, the bulk of which he settled on his eldest Son. He was chosen Member
for the Shire of Bute to the Parliament 1681, where his Royal Highness James
then Duke of York sat High Commissioner Records of Parliament 1681.
, and from thence forward without Interruption, continued a Member till his
Death, which happened on the 7th of October 1685 Ibidem, and Retour of David
Boil of Kelburn to his Father in the Chancery Office.
. He married twice, first Marion Daughter of Sir Walter Stewart of Allantoun,
in Vic. de Lanark, and next Jean Daughter of Sir William Mure of Rowallan: By
the first he had David Earl of Glasgow, William one of the Commissioners of the
Customs for Scotland, and Margaret married to Sir Alexander Cuningham of
Corsehill Baronet, in Vic. de Air.

Which David having been returned a Member of the Convention of Estates to the
Shire of Bute, in the Year 1689, which declared the Prince of Orange King of
Scotland, his said Majesty called him to his Council some time after, though he
was not created Lord Boil till the 31th of January 1699 Patent creating David
Boil of Kelburn Lord Boil.
.

Upon Her Majesty's Accession to the Crown, his Lordship was nominated one of
the Commissioners to treat of an Union with England; which Treaty at that time
not taking effect, he was soon after constituted Thesaurer Depute in the room
of Adam Cockburn of Ormestoun, and on 10th of April 1703, raised to the
Dignity, of Earl of Glasgow, with Limitation of the Honor for lack of Male
Issue of his own Body, to his Heirs Male whatsoever. Her Majesty being again
empowered by the Parliament 1705, to appoint Commissioners to treat of a nearer
Union Patent creating David Lord Boil Earl of Glasgow, both Registed in the
Chancery Court.
between the two Kingdoms, his Lordship by a Commission under the Great-Seal of
Scotland, was appointed one of that Number under whose Management that great
Work was accomplished. The same Year he had the Honor to represent Her
Majesty's Person as High Commissioner in the General-Assembly of the Church,
and in several subsequent Assemblies; also in the 1708, he was made Lord
Register of Scotland.

He married first Margaret Sister to John Crawfurd Viscount of Garnock, by whom
he had John Lord Boil. Patrick an Advocate, Charles.

2 dly. Jean Daughter and sole Heir of William Mure of Rowallan, and by her has
two Daughters Jean and Anne.

John Lord Boil is married with Helen Daughter of William Morison of
Prestoungrange, and had Issue David a Son, and two Daughters, Janet and
Margaret.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th. Argent, a double Eagle displayed Gules, 2d and 3d party
per Bend Crenele, Argent and Gules. Over all in a Shield of Pretense, the
paternal Coat of Boil, Or, three Hearts Horns Gules, supported on the Dexter by
a Savage Proper, and on the Sinister with a Lion party per Bend Crenele, Argent
and Gules; Crest, a double Eagle displayed party per Bend Crenele, Argent and
Gules, Motto, Dominus Providebit.

GORDON, Duke of Gordon.
IN the Time of King Malcolm IV. 600 Years since, the Gordons were then a
flourishing and numerous Family in Berwick shire, where they had large
Possessions, besides the Lordship of Gordon in that County, which they retained
till of late Years. Richer de Gordon their Ancestor, first mentioned on Record,
gave in pure Alms, Deo and Sanctae Mariae de Kelso and Monachis ibidem Deo
servientibus ecclesiam suam Sancti Michaelis deGordon pro salute animae suae
Register of the Abbey of Kelso in Bibliotheca Juridica Edinburg.
. This Richer left a Son,

Thomas de Gordon, who was a Benefactor to the Religious of Kelso, as his
Father had been; for besides what he gave himself, he ratified the Donation of
the Tithes of his Lands of Gordon, formerly given by his Father to the Abbot
and Convent of that Monastery for the good of his Soul Ibidem.
. This Thomas left behind him a Son,

Thomas, who, according to the Devotion of those Times, took upon him the Sign
of the Cross, and was not behind his Ancestors in Liberality to the Church,
which the Abbey of Kelso shared of in a right liberal manner, for to them he
confirmed, and amply ratified all the pious Grants quas Richer de Gordon avus
suus aut Thomas de Gordon Fater suus dictis Monachis dederunt in puram and
perpetuam Eleemosin^m Ibidem.
. He dying without Male Issue, Alicia de Gordon his Daughter succeeded in his
Inheritance, and was married with Adam de Gordon Knight, her Kinsman: They with
Consent and Assent of each other, ratified all the Mortifications, and which
she particularly confirms, made by Richer de Gordon, Proavus suus, Thomas de
Gordon avus suus, aut Thomas de Gordon Pater suus Ecclesiae Sanctae Mariae de
Kelso. Moreover, she appends her Seal to a Gift of certain Lands and Pasturage
within the Territory of Gordon, lying betwixt the Lands of Huntly and
Spotiswood, given to the Monks of Kelso by her Father, and expresses the
Confirmation to be made pro salute animae suae and animae Adae de Gordon
quondam spousae suae. To this Adam and Alicia his Wife succeeded Register of
the Abbey of Kelso in Bibliotheca Juridica Edinburg.
.

Sir Adam his Son, who in a Charter of Mortification to the Abbey of Kelso of a
Pasturage for Thirty Oxen in Mansione sua de Westrocher, designs himself Adam
de Gordon filius and haeres quondam Adae de Gordon Ibidem.
, releasing for ever all the Lands that had been in dispute between him and the
Abbot, in Domini^ de Gordon, to which he appends his Seal the Friday
immediately after the Feast of St. Peter 1308. This noble Person was none of
the last Barons of Scotland who stuck closs to King Robert Bruce, and zealously
asserted the Independency and Freedom of his Native Country; in Consideration
of which he had from that Prince, a Grant of the Lordship of Strathbogy in
Aberdeen-shire, which was then in the Crown by the Attainder of David de
Strathbogy Charta in publicis Archivis.
. By Annabell Chartulary of Kelso.
his Wife, he left Issue,

Alexander de Gordon Knight his Son and Heir, who did considerable Service
against the English in behalf of King David Bruce. He lost his Life in the
Battle of Durham 14 October. 1346, leaving Sir John his Son to succeed him in his
Inheritance. In the 28th of King David II. he obtained a Charter of
Confirmation of the Lands of Strathbogy, which had formerly been given to Sir
Adam Gordon his Grandfather, by King Robert I. History of the Family of Huntly
By..... Daughter of...... his Wife, he had Issue,

Sir John his Son and Heir, who obtained from King Robert II. a Charter
erecting all and haill the Lands of Strathbogie into one entire Barony,
narrating, that Do^^inus Robertus illustris Rex Scotiae avus dicti Regis dedit
quondam Adae de Gordon, Militi, proavo Domini dicti Joannis ratione
forisfacturae David de Strathbogie, dated at Perth 16 June 1376. This Sir John
was succeeded by

Sir Adam his Son, who following the Example of his loyal Ancestors in a
forward Zeal to serve his Country, was unhappily slain at the Battle of
Homildon, 5 May 1401 Ibidem.
, leaving Issue by Elisabeth Keith his Wife Genealogical History of Drummond by
the Viscount of Strathallan MS.
, Daughter to the Lord Keith, one sole Daughter his Heir, Elisabeth, married in
the 1408 Charta in Rotulis Roberti Ducis Alb^^iae.
to Sir William Seaton, Son of Sir William Seaton of that Ilk. By her he had
Issue, Alexander Lord Gordon, and William first of that Branch of Meldrum, in
Vic. de Aberdeen, he marrying the Heir Female of William Meldrum of Meldrum, of
whom the Seatons of Pitmedden Branch themselves.

Which Alexander Lord of Gordon, though then called Seaton Rymer's Foedera.
, was one of the Hostages for the Ransom of King James I. Anno 1423 Rymer.
; also in the Year 1437, he was joined in Commission with John Bishop of
Glasgow, Sir Walter Ogilvy, and Sir John Forrester Knights, to treat of a Peace
with England, which they happily concluded for Nine Years. This noble Lord
having performed many notable Services to King James II. in his Minority, was
by him in the Year 1449, created Earl of Huntly Hawthornden's History of the
five King James's, last Edition.
resuming the Surname of Gordon. This Earl defeated my Lord Crawfurd, then in
Rebellion at Brechin, on the 18th of May 1452; and therefore King James
rewarded him with the Sheriff-ship of Inverness, and diverse other Manors and
Lordships: Also he was one of the Conservators of the Peace with England, Anno
1457, and again in the 1459, living till the 1470, he then made his Exit out of
this World. He married three Wives, 1 st. Jean Daughter and Heir of Robert
Keith, Grandson of Sir William Keith Marshall of Scotland, by whom he had no
Issue. 2 dly. Giles, Daughter and Heir of John Hay of Tillybody, in
Vicecomitatu de Clackmanan Charta in publicis Archivis, etiam Charta penes
Dominum Gray ad annum 1437.
, by whom he had Sir Alexander Seaton Knight, first of the Family of Touch in
Stirling-shire I have many Writes in my Hands that sufficiently make out this
Assertion
. 3 dly. Margaret Daughter of William Lord Crichtoun Chancellor of Scotland,
to whose Posterity it seems the Honor was limited. By her he had George his
Successor, and Sir Alexander Gordon of Mid-mar Knight Charta in Rotulis.
; also three Daughters, Janet married to James Dunbar Earl of Murray, Elisabeth
to William Earl Marshal, Christian to William Lord Forbes Charta in Rotulis
Jacobi III.
.

George his Son, was one of the Privy Council to King James III. and in 1484,
when a Peace was concluded by the Commissioners of both Kingdoms betwixt
Scotland and England, this Earl was one of the Conservators thereof Rymer's
Foedera Angliae.
, what Part his Lordship acted in that turbulent Reign, our Historians are
altogether Silent: But upon King James IV. his Accession to the Crown, he was
sworn of his Privy Council, and constituted Lieutenant of the Northern Parts of
Scotland beyond the River of North-Esk, on the 13th of May 1491 Charta in
Registro.
. Likewise in the 10th of the same Reign, preferred to be Lord high Chancellor
in place of Archibald Earl of Angus; in which eminent Station he continued till
his Death, which happened on the 8th of June 1507 Manuscript History of the
Family of Gordon.
. He married first the Lady Jean Stewart Daughter of King James I. History of
the Royal Family published in 1710:
and after her Death Agnes Daughter of William Earl of Errol Charta penes
Joannem Duminum Gray.
, and left behind him four Sons, and as many Daughters.

Alexander his Successor in the Honor.

Sir Adam Gordon of Aboyne, who came to inherit the Title of Earl of
Sutherland, by Marriage of Elisabeth Daughter of John, Sister, and at length
sole Heir of John 13th Earl of Sutherland.

Sir William Gordon of Gight, who was slain in the fatal Year 1513, at the
Battle of Flowdon Balsour's Genealogical Collections MS.
.

Sir James Gordon of Letterfury Admiral of Scotland in the Reign of James IV.

Catherine eldest Daughter married to Perkin Werbeck the pretended Duke of York.

Janet to Alexander, Son and Heir of David Earl of Crawfurd, and again to
Patrick Lord Gray Charta penes Dominum Gray.
.

Agnes to Sir James Ogilvy of Finlater, and had Issue.

Mary to Sir William Sinclair of Westraw Balfour.
, in Vic. de Caithness.

Sophia to Sir Gilbert Hay Knight Ibidem.
.

Which Alexander was one of the Lords of the Council to K. James IV. he
accompanied that Prince to the Battle of Flowdon, and commanded the Van of the
Army with Valor and Conduct Drummond's History of King James IV.
Surviving that fatal Day, he was in the Minority of James V. made Lieutenant
of the North beyond the River of Forth: Also in 1517, appointed one of the
Governors to the young King, the Earls of Aran, Angus, and Argyle being joined
in the Commission with him. He married Jean Daughter of John Earl of Athole
Charta in publicis Archivis.
, by whom he had

1. John Master of Huntly, who married Jean, natural Daughter of King James IV.
by Margaret Daughter of John Lord Drummond, and had Issue, George who succeeded
his Grandfather, and Alexander, who being a Person of Learning, as the Times
went, was preferred to the Bishopric of the Isles, 26 November 1553 Charta in
publicis Archivis.
when but young. In which Station, when he had some time continued, he was
translated to the Episcopal See of Galloway Anno 1558.

2. William, who applying to the Service of the Church, was first made
Chancellor of Elgin, and then preferred to the Bishopric of Aberdeen, a Man
of great Power and Authority in those Days.

3. Sir Alexander Gordon of Strathavin Balfour's MS.
Progenitor to Cluny.

Also several Daughters, 1 st. Janet, married to Colin 3 d Earl of Argyle. 2 d.
Isobel to..... Lord Innermeath Ibidem.
. This Earl dying aged at Perth 16 July 1523 Ibidem.
, was interred in the Estate of the Carthusians there, his Priory and Honor
descending to

George his Grandson and Heir, who being a Nobleman of great and eminent
Parts, was constituted Lieutenant of Scotland, Anno 1536, when the King went to
France to Espouse Queen M^gdalen Drummond.
, being then one of the Privy Council; also in the 28 of the same Reign, he was
sent against the English, to prevent their Incursions upon the Borders, in
which he was successful, having repulsed them with Loss. Upon the Death of his
Master, he was one of the Peers who signed and sealed that Association to
oppose the intended Match betwixt Queen Mary and Edward VI. of England, Anno
1543, and three Years after, he was promoted to be Lord high Chancellor of
Scotland Charta in publicis Archivis.
, upon the decease of Cardinal Beaton: Likeas, he was personally present at the
Battle of Pinkie-Cleugh, in Defense of his Country against the English, where
he was taken Prisoner, and after one Years Confinement Dr. Anderson's MS
History of Scotland.
made his escape: Then it was in Consideration of his extraordinary Services to
the Crown, that he had a Grant of the Earldom of Murray and Lordship of
Abernethy Charta in Rotulis Mariae Reginae ad annum 1548.
, which he enjoyed for diverse Years. This Earl continued sometime in great
Favor with Queen Mary, both on the account of his Religion, which was Roman
Catholic, and his approved Loyalty, till from some Motives of State, he
attempting to surprise her Majesty's Royal Person in Progress to the North, was
slain in the heat of the Action at Corichie, 28th of October 1563.

This great Earl left Issue by Elisabeth Daughter of Robert Son and Heir
apparent of William Earl Marshal,

1. Alexander Lord Gordon, who married Margaret Daughter of James Duke of
Chattlerault, but dyed without Succession.

2. George, of whom and his Descendents more will be said hereafter.

3. John Gordon of Finlater, who was executed after the Battle of Corichie.

4. James who entered into a Religious Order abroad.

5. Sir Adam Gordon of Achingown, who appeared eminently for Queen Mary in the
time of the Civil War.

6. Sir Patrick Gordon of Gartly.

1 st. Jean Eldest Daughter, married to James Earl of Bothwel, and 2 dly to
Alexander Earl of Sutherland,

2 d. Elisabeth to John Earl of Athole,

3 d. Margaret to John Lord Forbes.

George, Son of George Earl of Huntly, was parliamentarly restored to the Title
of Honor and Estate lost by his Father's Forsaulture, by the special Favor of
Queen Mary, 27th June 1566 Charta in Rotulis Mariae Reginae.
, and constituted one of her Majesty's Privy Council. Upon the breaking out of
the Civil War in the 1567, he heartily Espoused the Queen's Interest, and
obtained a Commission not only to be Lord Chancellor upon the Earl of Morton's
Removal, but also to be a Lieutenant General of all the Forces raised, or to be
raised in the North, for her Interest; and his Lordship being a Person of great
Honor and Fortune, quickly engaged those Parts into a cheerful Association for
her Service, and raised a considerable Body of Horse and Foot, which gave the
other Party who adhered to the young King's Interest much Trouble. He died in
the Month of May, of the Year 1576, leaving Issue by the Lady Anne his Wife,
Daughter of James Duke of Chatlerault, George his Successor, and a Daughter
Jean, married to George Earl of Caithness.

Which George being a Nobleman of great Spirit and Courage, was much in the
Favor of King James VI. from whom he had a Grant of the dissolved Abbacy of
Dunfermling, then in the Crown by the Dissolution of the Church Lands: Soon
after which he was constituted Lieutenant of the North, and by Letters Patent
the 17th of April 1599, raised to the Honor of Marquis of Huntly; and dying
the 15th of October 1636, left Issue by the Lady Henrietta his Wife, Daughter
of Esmae Duke of Lennox, George his Successor, John Viscount of Aboyne,
likewise Four Daughters,

Lady Anne married to James Earl of Murray.

Lady Elizabeth to Alexander Earl of Linlithgow.

Lady Mary to William Marquis of Douglass,

Lady Jean to Cloud Hamilton, Lord Strabane, of the Kingdom of Ireland.

Which George was Captain of the Scots Gens d' Arms, to Lewis XIII. of France,
while he was only Lord Gordon, in the Lifetime of his Father, upon the breaking
out of the Troubles in the Reign of King Charles I. He was very firm to that
Prince's Interest, and had a Commission to be Lieutenant of the North, during
the Rage of the Civil War, at the End of which he was executed for his Loyalty
at Edinburgh, 30th of March 1649. By Anne his Wife, Daughter of Archbald Earl
of Argyle, he left Issue,

George Lord Gordon, who was killed in the King's Service at the Battle of
Aldford, Anno 1645.

Lewis Marquis of Huntly.

Charles Earl of Aboyne.

Lady Anne married to James Earl of Perth.

Lady Henrietta to George Lord Seaton, and again to John Earl of Traquair.

Lady Jean to Thomas Earl of Haddingtoun.

Which Lewis married Isobel, Daughter of Sir John Grant of That-Ilk, by whom he
had George his Successor; likewise Three Daughters,

Lady Anne married to the Count de Crolly.

Lady Mary to Adam Urquhart of Meldrum, and again to James Earl of Perth.

Lady Jean to Charles Earl of Dunfermling.

George Marquis of Huntly, was Parliamentarly restored to his Estate; which had
been forfaulted during the Time of the Civil War in the 1661, and was by King
Charles II. created Duke of Gordon, by Letters Patent, 1st November 1684. Upon
the Accession of King James VII. to the Crown, his Grace the Duke was made one
of the Lords of the Treasury, one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy -
Council, Governor of Edinburgh-Castle, and one of the Twelve Knights of the
most noble, and most ancient Order of the Thistle. At the Revolution the Duke
held out the Castle of Edinburgh for King James's Interest some Time, but
seeing no Hope of Relief from his Master, and that Prince's Condition growing
every Day worse and worse, he thought it the most advisable Course to surrender
the Castle and referred himself and the Garrison to King William's Discretion.

His Grace married the Lady Elizabeth Howard, Daughter of Henry Duke of
Norfolk, of the Kingdom of England, by whom he had Alexander Marquis of Huntly,
and a Daughter Lady Jean, married to James Lord Drummond.

Alexander Marquis of Huntly, in his Father's Lifetime married Henrietta,
Daughter of Charles Earl of Peterborough, of the Kingdom of England, and has
Issue.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st, Azure, Three Boars Heads coupe Or, 2d Or, Three Lions Heads
eraz'd Gules, 3d Or, Three Crescents within a double Tressure counter-flower'd,
Gules, 4th Azure, Three Frazes Argent, supported by Two Hounds Argent, collar'd
Gules, charged with Three Buckles, Or. Crest, a Hart's Head Coupe. Motto,
Bydand.

GRAY, Lord Gray.
AS many Families in Britain and France, and in most Parts of Europe, derive
their Sirnames from the Lands which their Ancestors possessed, when Sirnames
became first fashionable; so it is not to be doubted, but the Surname of Gray
has the same Derivation: Some are of Opinion, that it took its Rise from a City
in the Franche Compte, which is still so named; others, and among those Francis
de Bellowforest derives the Surname of Gray from the Castle of Gray in Picardy;
and adds, That one Rollo, Chamberlain to Robert Duke of Normandy, who possessed
the aforesaid Castle, was the first who assumed that Surname: However, it is
certain one Anchitil de Gray came over to England with William the Conqueror;
and that when the general Survey was made in the 20th of that King's Reign, he
held many Lands in Oxfordshire and elsewhere; From him many great and
illustrious Families in England are descended, as the Dukes of Kent and
Suffolk, the Earl of Stamford, the Barons Gray of Chilingham and Werk, with
their numerous Cadets, whose Names and Heroic Actions are frequently to be met
with in the English History.

That the Lord Gray in Scotland has his Descent from some of these, cannot be
doubted. Mr. Camden the great English Antiquary, and others of our own Country
also, are mistaken as to the Time of their Ancestors coming to Scotland, as
will appear afterward; but they assert, and with great Probability, That the
first of this most noble Family was a Son of the House of Chilingham (indeed
the Armorial Bearing of both Families are still the same); and it is observable,
that the Lands of Browfield, the first Inheritance of the Grays in Scotland, ly
in the County of Roxburgh or Teviotdale, at no great Distance from Chilingham
in Northumberland, which Lands were given off in the Reign of King Robert I. to
Sir Andrew Gray his Son, who, and his Posterity enjoyed the same for several
Generations, till Andrew Lord Gray, who was Justice-General in the Time of King
James III. exchanged them with the Earl of Angus for Brughtie-Castle, Bagilo,
and the Fishings thereof. Now, every Body knows, that some Northern Counties of
England, and Northumberland in particular, were some Times possessed by the Kings
of Scotland; and it is well known, that some of those who held Lands of the
Crown of Scotland, in the Northern Counties of England had also Possessions
within Scotland; the Bruces and Baliols, and many others did so: And when War
broke out betwixt the Two Nations, the Families so stated divided among
themselves, and adhered to either of the Kings in whose Dominions they had
largest Possessions. Thus it is probable, that Sir Andrew Gray, the first whom
we find on Record with us, adhered to King Robert the Bruce, whose Subject he
was, upon the Account of his Scots Estate. This Sir Andrew was undoubtedly a
brave Man, and a great Favorite of that glorious Monarch Robert I. from whom
he had a Grant the 12th of February, the 5th Year of his Reign, Anno 1315, of
the Barony of Long forgan, in the Shire of Perth, and of many other Lands in
Forfar-Shire, for his good and faithful Services, as the Charter bears Charta
penes Dominum Gray.
. He also acquired the Lands of Broxmouth in the County of Roxburgh, from Sir
Alexander Fraser Knight. and these Two Records which I my self have seen and
perused, though there were no other extant, do sufficiently confute a very gross
Mistake of Boethius, Buchanan, and Camden, who say, That the first of this
noble Family came only to Scotland with King James I. when he was relieved from
his Captivity out of England, Anno 1424, whereas the Chief of this Family,
another Sir Andrew Gray was by the Estates of Scotland sent to England, one of
the Hostages for that King's Ransom; but of this afterward. With whom this
gallant Sir Andrew was married it does not appear; but from the Archives of the
Family of Gray it is evident he left a Son Sir John Gray, who succeeded him in
his Estate, who in several Records is styled Lord of Broxmouth, as are several
of his Descendents after him.

This John Gray de Gray, Dominus de Broxmouth, had a Grant of the Lands of
Craigie, in the County of Forfar, from William de Troup, for a very valuable
Consideration mentioned therein, and that Grant was confirmed to him by King
David II. the 8th of September, the Twenty Seventh Year of his Reign, Anno
1356, with whom it would appear he was no less in Favor than his Father had
been with the great King Robert. I find this noble Person had very great
Superiorities beside his own proper Estate, as a Proof of which there is a
Charter granted to him by Hugode Giffard, whereby he acknowledges Sir John Gray
to be Superior Lord to Henry de Fotheringham, of the Lands of Lourenston and
Huhcuman, now called Littleton, of the Date at Langforgan, ultime Februarii
1355 Ibidem.
. I find also, that John Gray was Custos Rotulorum and Registri, in the Reign
of King David Bruce, and likewise of his Successor King Robert II. who had for
Pension during Life ducentos solidos Sterlingorum, out of the Profits of the
Court of the Chamberlain and Justiciary Charta in Archivis David II. ad Annu^
1463. etiam Charta in Rotulis Roberti II.
, a Sallary that has been observed by a learned and judicious Person, to amount
to as much as the Constable or Marischal enjoyed as the Fees of their Offices
in those Days. To whom Sir John Gray, the Lord of Broxmouth, was married, it
does not appear from any Record of the Family, but it is clear that he left Two
Sons, John the eldest, who was one of the Hostages for the Ransom of his Royal
Sovereign King David, Anno 1357 Rymer's l'oedera Angli^.
, with whom he had been made a Prisoner at the Battle of Durham in the Year
1346, and Sir Patrick who succeeded him in his great Estate, and in the Royal
Favor, for King Robert II. in a Charter to this Sir Patrick Gray, designed
Lord of Broxmouth, and to Margaret his Wife, of sundry Lands in the Barony of
Longforgan, the King gives him the distinguishing Appellation of Co^sanguineus
Noster Charta penes Dominum Gray.
; likeas, he had by the said King pro Retinentia sua, a yearly Pension of 26 L.
13 s. 4 d. Sterling, and that during Life Ibidem.
, which is all I have found memorable of him. By Margaret his Wife aforesaid,
but of what Name or Family the Record does not mention, he left Issue Four
Sons, Andrew, Alexander, Patrick and George; also Two Daughters,.... married
to.... Lindsay of Crawfurd, and Elizabeth to Andrew Moncur of That-Ilk.

Sir Andrew Gray, the next of this noble Family, added to the old Paternal
Estate of his Family, the Barony and Lordship of Fowlis in Perth-Shire, by his
Marriage with Janet, Daughter and sole Heir of Sir Roger Mortimer Knight. Lord of
Fowlis Ibidem.
. It was this Sir Angrew Gray who in his old Age had the Honor to be one of
the Hostages for the Redemption of King James I. when he was relieved out of
England, in the Year 1423 Rymer.
, by the aforesaid Lady his Wife, he left Issue Sir Andrew his Successor; and
several Daughters, 1st.... married to Sir Alexander Ogilvie of Auchterhouse, 2d
Elizabeth to Sir Thomas Maule of Panmure, and thereafter to Sir Andrew Murray
of Tillibardin, and had Issue Family Book of the House of Panmute, M.S.
. 3d.... to John Ross of Kinfauns, 4...... to..... Herring of Glasclune. 5....
to William Auchterlony of Kelly. 6...... to David Annand of Melgum.

Sir Andrew Gray of Fowlis, made a very bright Figure in the Time of King James
I. and II. and was in that Reign one of the great Barons who were fixed
Hereditary Lords. He was in the 1452, constituted Magister Hospitii Charta in
Rotulis Jacobi II.
, which Office he enjoyed for several Years thereafter, about which Time he got
a Royal License to build the strong and beautiful Castle of Huntly in the Carse
of Gowry, now called Castle-Lyon Charta penes Dominum Gray.
, which continued with his Family for many Ages thereafter. He married
Elizabeth, Daughter of Sir John of Weems, Lord of Rires Ibidem.
. By her he had Issue Sir Andrew his Successor, and Two Daughters, Elizabeth
married to Robert Lord Lyle, and.... to.... Crichton of Strathurd.

Andrew Lord Gray, Son to the last Andrew, married Elizabeth, Daughter of Sir
Walter Buchannan, Knight. by whom he had Patrick, and Andrew, Author of that Branch
of the Grays of Bal^gerno.

Sir Patrick Gray his eldest Son, in the Lifetime of his Father, was Gentleman
of the Bedchamber to, and a great Favorite to King James II. He married first
Margaret, Daughter of Sir Malcolm Fleeming, Lord of Biggar, by whom he had no
Issue, and thereafter Annabella, Daughter of Sir Alexander Forbes, Lord of
Forbes, by whom he had Andrew his Grandfather's Successor; and Three Daughters.
1st Elizabeth married to Sir David Rollo of Ballachie and Manmore, 2d... to
Andrew Monorgund of That-Ilk, 3d..... to.... Coless of Bonymoon: He died before
his Father in 1462.

To Andrew Lord Gray succeeded Andrew his Grandson. He was retoured Heir to his
Grandfather, October 31st, 1471. He was a Nobleman of very great Parts, and
much augmented the Wealth and Grandeur of his Family.

In the 1488, upon the Accession of King James IV. to the Crown, he was named
one of the Lords of the Privy Council, and constituted High Sheriff of
Forfar-Shire, upon the Surrender of David Duke of Montrose; also in 1489, his
Lordship was made Justice-General besouth the River of Forth, on the
Forfaulture of the Lord Lyle; and was at length appointed Justice General of
all Scotland; and he held the Office till his Death in the Month of February
1514. He married first, Janet, only Daughter of John Lord Keith, Son to William
Earl Marshal. By her he had Patrick his Successor, and Two Daughters, Elizabeth
married first to John Lord Glamis, next to George Earl of Hunt^ey; and last of
all to George Earl of Rothes, and Isabel to Alexander Straton of Lauristoun, in
Vic de Kincardine, and had Issue. His second Wife was Elizabeth, Daughter of
John Earl of Athole, Niece to King James II. By her he had Robert Gray of
Lutfie, who was slain at the Battle of Flowdoun, leaving no Issue. Gilbert Gray
of Buttergask, and Andrew Gray of Muretoun, who by Marriage of the Heir Female
of Schives in Aberdeen-Shire, was the Root of that Branch of the Grays and the
Paternal Ancestor of the present Lord Gray: He had also Four Daughters, 1.
Isabel married to Sir James Scrimzeor, Constable of Dundee, and thereafter to
James Crichton of Ruthven. 2 Janet, first to John Charters of Cuthlegourdy, and
again to Sir David Weems of that Ilk, and had Issue. 3. Jean to Alexander Blair
of Bethayck; next, to Hugh Lord Lovat; and last of all to David Earl of
Crawfurd. 4. Marjery to..... Kininmount of that Ilk Notand. Sir Andrew Gray
Lord Foulis, had by Dame Janet Mortimer, another Daughter (...) (...) (...) on
the other Page,...... married to Maclellan of Bomby, Ancestor to the Lord
Kircudbright.


Patrick the next Lord Gray was first betrothed to Christian, Daughter of David
Ogilvy of Inchmartin Paternal Ancestor to the present Earl of Findlater, and
afterward married to Janet, Daughter of Alexander Earl of Huntley, Widow of
Alexander Master of Crawfurd: By her he had several Daughters, 1 Margaret
married to Sir William Keith of Innerugie, by whom he had two Daughters his
Coheirs, Elizabeth married to William Earl Marshal, and Mary to William Lord
Forbes, 2. Marjory to Sir Patrick Ogilvy of Inch martin, 3. Isobel to Sir Adam
Crichton of Ruthven, and afterward to Sir John Ca^^^^^^ of Lundy, Ld high
Treasurer of Scotland, and 4.... to... Monorgund of that Ilk, and dying without
Male Issue at his Castle of Huntley, the.... Day of April 1541, was succeeded
in his Estate and Honor by,

Patrick Gray his Nephew, Son and Heir of Patrick Gray of Buttergask, and of
Giles his Wife, Daughter of Sir Laurence Mercer of Aldie. This noble Lord, in
the 1541, was one of the Peers who accompanied King James V. to the Battle of
Soloway; where his Lordship was taken Prisoner: but upon the paying a Ransom of
L. 500 Sterling, he was soon thereafter released. In the Minority of Queen Mary
he was among the first of his Quality who concurred and countenanced the
Reformation of Religion, which came to be happily established Anno 1560; and
departing this Life Anno 1581, left Issue by Marion his Wife, Daughter of James
Ld. Ogilvy of Airlie, Patrick his Successor, and another Son, Sir Patrick Gray
of Innergowrie, James who was Archer to Queen Mary's Guards, Robert. Gray of
Drumelie, also seven Daughters.

1. Margaret married to Patrick Master of Ruthven ^ans Issue. 2. Mary to
William Master of Ruthven. 3. Margaret to Mr. James Ogilvy of Balfour. 4. Agnes
to Sir Robert Logan of Restalrig next to Alexander Lord Home, and again to Sir
Thomas Lion of Aldbar, Lord High Treasurer of Scotland. 5. Lilias to David
Tyrie of Drumki^^o, and after his Death to John Master of Oliphant, and had
Issue. 6. Elizabeth to Laurence Bruce of Cultmali^die. 7. Anne to Patrick
Douglas of Kilspindie.

Which Patrick married first B^rbara, Daughter of Patrick Lord Ruthven, by whom
he had Patrick the brave Master of Gray, so famed in the History of King James
VI James Gray Esquire Gentleman of the Bedchamber, Gilbert Gray of Bandirran, who
left two Daughters his Heirs, Eupham married to Sir Patrick Kinnaird of
Inchture, Ancestor to the Lord Kinnaird, and..... to Hay of Kirkland, and
Robert Gray of Milhill; also Four Daughters, Mary married to David Seton of
Parbroath, C^mptroller of Scotland, Helen to Sir Hugh Maxwell of Tyling, Isabel
to David Strachan of Carmylie, and had Issue; and Elizabeth to William Gordon
of Aberzeldie; and dying in the Year 1611, was succeeded by

Patrick his Son and Heir, who was Gentleman of the Bed chamber, and Master of
the Wardrop to King James VI. in 1584. He was constituted one of his Majesty's
most honorable Privy Council, and sent Ambassador to Queen Elizabeth, to
interpose in Behalf of Queen Mary, then under Sentence of Death. He was also
Commendator of the Abbacy of Dunfermling, beside several other Beneficial Gifts
and Grants he had from the Crown. He married first Elizabeth, Daughter of John
Lord Glamis, Chancellor of Scotland, but by her he had no Issue; and next Mary,
Daughter of Robert Stewart Earl of Orkney, by whom he had Andrew his Successor,
and Seven Daughters, Jean married to John first Earl of Weems, Agnes to William
Earl of Menteith and Strathern, President of the Council in the Reign of King
Charles I. Mary to James Lord Lindores, Elizabeth to Sir John Lesly of Newtoun,
Brother to the Earl of Rothes, Agnes to Alexander first Lord Halkertoun, Helen
to Andrew Bruce oo Earlshall,..... to Robert Carnegy of Dunichen, and all had
Issue.

Andrew Lord Gray, Son and Heir to the last Lord Patrick, was Lieutenant to the
Gens d' Arms in France, under the Duke of York, Captain thereof; which
honorable and advantageous Post, he resigned at the Desire of King Charles II.
and of his Brother the said Duke when in Exile, in Favors of Monsieur
Schomberg, thereafter Marshal Schomberg, which Office for many Generations had
been enjoyed by Scotsmen, but since could never be recovered; he was also
engaged by King Charles I. to resign the heretable Jurisdiction of the
Sheriffdom of Angus, which had continued in the Family near 200 Years, for
which he got his Majesty's Bond for 50000 Merks, which was never recovered by
Reason of the ensuing Troubles of that Reign; he was also fined in the Sum of
1500 lib. Sterling. for his Loyalty, and forced to flee the Kingdom. This with his
other Sufferings and Losses of the Family, brought his Estate very low, which
for many Generations past, had been amongst the most opulent in the Kingdom. He
married Dame Anna Ogilvy, Countess of Buchan, Daughter to Walter Ogilvy, Lord
Deskford, and Sister to James the first Earl of Findlater. He died Anno 1663,
and had Issue by her Patrick Master of Gray, who was slain at the Siege of.....
in France, unmarried, and one Daughter Anna, to whom he provided his Estate.
His Second Wife was Dame Catharine Caddel, with whom he had only one Daughter,
Frances, married to Captain.... Mackenzie, Son to the Bishop of Murray.

The said Anna Mrs. of Gray, was married with the Advice and Consent of her
Father and Friends to William Gray, eldest Son and Heir to Sir William Gray of
Pittendrum, Knight, and Bart. This Sir William Gray was Son to Thomas Gray of
Brighouse, for so I find him called in a Record (...) Aberdeen, 10th June 1620:
Which Thomas Gray I find designed in another Record, Nephew to Andrew Gray of
(...), who was sl^in at the Battle of Flowdoun, whose Father Andrew Gray of
Mure^^^^ being a Son of the Family of Gray, was married to the Heiress of (...)
in Aberdeen-shire. This Sir William Gray, by Merchandising, and other worthy
Means, aquired the greatest Wealth not only to himself, but to the whole
Nation, by improving and enla^^ing its Trade with all Countries in Europe, in^^
much that the Evidences relating to the Trade in which he was concerned, and
the Estate which he acquired, would scarce be believed, if they were not still
extant in the Famil^, which I my self have perused: But his Merit was yet
greater than his Wealth, the one having been much lessened by the other, for he
was fined by the Parliament at St. Andrews, in the Sum of 1^^000 Merks, for
corresponding with the great Montrose, and imprisoned in the Castle of
Edinburgh, which refusing to pay, by Order of the Committee of (...), was
brought down to the Tolbooth or common Prison, where he was kept, till his
(...) Master Gray, and his other Friends, upon Application to the said
Committee, got it m^^^ied to (...) Merks, which was instantly paid, as the
Discharge yet extant testifies; besides the Sum of (...) Sterling. was extorted
from him by Way of Loan, but never repaid. These Hardships with the increasing
Troubles of the Country and Royal Family, put an End to his Life Anno 164^. He
married Dame Giles Smith, Sister to Sir John Smith of Grotel, Provost of
Edinburgh, and by her had Six Sons and Twelve Daughters, Robert the Second Son
was killed at the Battle of Inver^^^hing, David killed at Tangier with the Earl
of Teviot; Alexander died unmarried; Mr. Andrew died Minister at Glasgow, a
young Man of great Piety and Learning; Ten of his Daugters were honorably
married, the other Two died Maids.
, whereupon his Majesty King Charles I. was pleased to grant a Patent of Honor
upon the 8th January 1638, to the said William Gray and his Heirs Male to be
procreate betwixt him and the said Lady, which faillieing to the Heirs Male of
his own and his Father's Body whatsomever; and because Andrew Lord Gray his
Lady's Father was not yet dead, he is thereby allowed to take upon him the
Style and Title of, Master of Gray, and to enjoy the same Precedence as if he
had been a Son of his own Body. This Patent was ratified in Parliament 17th
November 1541, and is very ample, containing an Account of the Antiquity,
Alliances, Offices Civil and Military etc. of the House of Gray, and asserts
the said William Gray to be lineally and fairly descended of the said House.

This William Master of Gray, (as his Father-in law and Father) was a firm and
resolute Abettor of the Royal Cause, for which he suffered much both in his
Person and Fortune: He had the Command of a Regiment Anno 1650, which he kept
together for the most Part on his own Charge, till the total Subversion of the
Royal Family after the Battle of Worcester, and he had the Satisfaction to
survive the Restoration, but died soon after in September 1660, leaving Issue
by Anna Mrs. of Gray, Patrick Lord Gray, William who died unmarried, and Mr.
Charles Gray Advocate.

Patrick Lord Gray, eldest Son to William Master of Gray, married Barbara,
Daughter to Andrew Lord Balvaird, and Sister to David Viscount of Stormount, by
whom he had one Daughter Marjory, who only survived him, married to John Gray
of Crichie, her Father's Cousin-German, and Grandson by his Father to the above
mentioned Sir William Gray of Pittendrum, by Consequence next Heir-Male in the
last Patent of Honor to Patrick Lord Gray, and his Brother Mr. Charles, who
having both resigned in his Favors before the Union of the Two Kingdoms, a new
Patent of Honor was obtained to him and his Heirs whatsomever. Patrick Lord
Gray died 30th January 1711.

John the present Lord Gray, had by his abovementioned Lady Marjory Mrs. of
Gray, John Master of Gray, William, and Alexander; likewise Three Daughters,
Barbara, Catharine married to James Paterson of Kirktoun, Advocate, and
Elizabeth.

John Master of Gray, in the Lifetime of his Father, married Helen, Daughter of
Alexander Lord Blantyre, and has a Son John.

ARMS.
Gules, a Lion rampant within a Border ingraled Argent. Supporters, two Lions
rampant, guardant Gules. Crest, an Anchor, Motto, Anchor, fast Anchor.

RAMSAY, Viscount of Haddingtoun.
SIR John Ramsay of East-Barns, a Branch of the Family of Dalhousie, in
Consideration of his good Services in Rescuing King James from the traitorous
Attempt of the Earl of Gowry and his Brother at Perth, 5th of August 1600, was
created Viscount Haddingtoun; and accompanying his Majesty to England, he was
created a Peer of that Realm, by the Title of Earl of Holderness; but dying
without Issue, his Honors died with himself, Anno 1625.

HAMILTON, Earl of Haddingtoun,
IS descended from the Family of Innerwick. Thomas the first Earl of
Haddingtoun was the Son of Thomas Hamilton of Priestfield, by Elizabeth his
Wife, Daughter of James Heriot of Trabrown, who being bred to the Law, he soon
made an eminent Progress in that honorable Profession, in Reputation and
Practice; insomuch as he was when very young, advanced first to be one of the
Senators of the College of Justice, and then to be Lord Advocate Anno 1595,
which Office he discharged to his Majesty's Satisfaction for many Years
thereafter. In the 1612, Sir Thomas Hamilton was made Lord Register, and
shortly after Secretary in Place of Sir Alexander Hay, and without parting with
the Secretary's Place, he was in 1616, preferred to be President of the
Session, on the Demise of Sir John Preston, and raised to the Dignity of a Peer
by the Title of Lord Binny; and thereafter created Earl of Melross, 20th March
1619, which with his Majesty's Approbation, he exchanged to the Title of Earl
of Haddingtoun.

In the 1627, the Earl was removed from the Secretary's Place, and was
thereupon made Privy Seal, and he continued in the Office till his Death, May
29th, 1637.

He married first Margaret, Daughter of James Borthwick of Newbuyres, by whom
he had a Daughter Christian, married to Robert Lord Lindsay, and after his
Decease to Robert Lord Boyd; next Margaret Daughter of...... Fowlis of
Colingtoun, by whom he had Thomas his Successor, Sir James Hamilton of
Priestfield, Sir John Hamilton of Reidhall; likewise three Daughters, Isobel
married to James first Earl of Airly, Margaret to David Lord Car^agie, Son of
David Earl of Southesk, and after his Death to James Earl of Hartfiel, and Jean
to John Earl of Cassils: His last Wife was Julian, Daughter of Sir Thomas Ker
of Ferniehirst, Widow of Sir Patrick Hume of Polwarth, by whom he had a Son
Patrick, who was slain at the blowing up of the House of Dunglass.

Thomas the second Earl of Haddingtoun, in the Beginning of the Troubles was on
the Side of the Covenant, and when the Scots Army marched toward England, he
had the Command of the Garrison of Dunglass, which by the Treachery of his own
Page, an English Boy, was blown up, by firing the Magazine, whereby the Earl
and several Gentlemen of Quality, miserably perished on the 30th of August
1640. By Catharine his Wife, Daughter of John Earl of Mar, he had Thomas his
eldest Son, who married a Lady of Quality in France, o^ the Family of Chatilon,
but died without Issue, and John Earl of Haddingtoun; also by Jean, Daughter of
George Marquis of Hantl^, his second Wife, he had a Daughter Margaret, married
to John first Earl of Kintore.

John the next Earl of Haddingtoun married Christian, Daughter of John Earl of
Crawfurd, by whom he had Charles his Son and Heir, and Three Daughters,
Margaret married to John Hope of Hopetoun, Eleanor to Sir William Anstruther of
That-Ilk, one of the Senators of the College of Justice, Susanna to Adam
Cockburn of Ormistoun, Lord Justice-Clerk, and all had Issue. He dying the 1st
of September 1669, was succeeded by

Charles his Son, who married Margaret Countess of Rothes, eldest Daughter of
John Duke of Rothes. By her he had John the present Earl of Rothes, and Thomas
Earl of Haddingtoun, who married Helen, Daughter of John Hope of Hopetoun, and
has Issue, Charles Lord Binning, John, Margaret, Christian.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Gules on a Chiveron betwixt Three Cinque Foils, Argent,
a Buckle Azure betwixt Two Spots of Ermine, all within a Border, Or, charged
with eight Thistles Vert, 2d and 3d Argent, a Fess wave betwixt Three Roses,
Gules. Supporters, Two Spaniel Dogs. Crest, Two Dexter Hands holding betwixt
them a Branch of Laurel. Motto, Praesto and Persto.

HALIBURTON, Lord Haliburton.
SIR James Dalrymple, a very learned Person in the Antiquities of his Country,
upon good Grounds, is of Opinion, that the Surname of Haliburton was taken at
first from the Chapel of Haliburton, depending upon the Church of Green-Law in
Berwick-shire, as appears from a Grant thereof by David Filius Tructe about the
Time of Malcolm IV. as may be inferred from a Charter by Philip de Haliburton,
designing the forementioned David the original Granter his Grandfather, Anno
1261. In the Reign of Robert I. the Haliburtons came to be Lords of the Barony
of Dirltoun, by Right from the Vausses, an ancient Family, whose Arms they
carried, and so probably, by Marriage of an Heir Female. The Family came to be
considered as Lords in the Time of King James II. in the Person of Sir Walter
Haliburton of Dirltoun. He was succeeded in his Estate and Honor by John Lord
Haliburton, who flourished under King James III. Patrick Lord Haliburton was
his Son, who obtained a Grant to himself and Margaret his Wife Daughter of
Patrick Hepburn of Hales of the Barony of Dirltoun, on his Father's
Resignation. George Lord Haliburton was his Successor, and James Lord
Haliburton succeeded him. After this James, Patrick was Lord Haliburton, who
dying without Male Issue, in the Reign of King James V. the Honor failed, and
his Estate came to his three Daughters Coheirs thus married.

1. Janet to William Lord Ruthven.

2. Marion to George Lord Hume.

3. Margaret to George Ker of Faudenside in Vic. de Roxburgh.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st. and 4th. Or, on a Bend, Azure, 3 Lozanges of the 1st, 2d, and
3d Or, a Bend Gules.

FALCONER, Lord Halkertoun.
THIS ancient Family is derived from one Ranulphus filius Walteri de Lenorp,
who was Falconer to King William of Scotland, as appears by a Deed of the said
Prince to him of the Lands of Lachra and Balbegno, in Vic. de Kincardin,
wherein he is designed Falconario nostro Sir George Mackenzies Collections for
a Baronage of Scotland, MS. penes me. Nota, I have not had any Opportunity to
see the Writes of this ancient Family: but what I have gleaned up in the Course
of my perusing the Records of the Nation, and other Documents, is as follows. I
find that George Falconer of Halkertoun died in the 1511, and was succeeded by
David his Son, who married Marion Dunbar, Daughter of...... Dunbar of.......
and was succeeded by Alexander his Son, who improved his Estate, and purchased
the Lands of Midletoun to his Family, in the 1539: He had to Wife Elisabeth
Daughter of Sir Archibald Douglass of Glenbervy, immediate Ancestor to the
present Duke of Douglass, and had by her Alexander Falconer of Halkertoun his
successor, Archibald Progenitor of Sir James Falconer of Phesdo, Samuel of
Kincorth, in Vic. de Elgin, William of Dinduff, Progenitor of Mr. Colin
Falconer first Bishop of Argyle, and thereafter of Murray, in the Reign of King
Charles II. Sir Alexander Falconer the next Baron of Halkertoun married
Margaret Daughter to Patrick Lord Gray, by whom he had two Sons, Sir Alexander
and Patrick Falconer of Newtoun, Ancestor to Falconer of Montoun, in Vic. de
Edinburgh. This Sir Alexander was by the after-mentioned Agnes Carnegy, Father
to Sir Alexander Falconer the first Lord Halkertoun, and of two younger Sons,
Sir David Falconer of Glenfarquhar, and Sir John Falconer of Balmakellie, who
was Master of the Mint in the Time of King Charles II. This Sir David Falconer
of Glenfarquhar, had two Sons, Sir Alexander Falconer of Glenfarquhar, and Sir
David Falconer of Newton, who was promoted to be one of the Senators of the
College of Justice, Anno 1676, and President of the Session on the 5th of July
1682, whose Son and Heir is David Falconer of Newtoun Esquire in Vic. de Kincardin.
. In process of time his Descendants rose to be great Barons, and were well
known by the Designation of Halkertoun, their principal Residence in the County
foresaid. They have for many Years enjoyed the Honor of Knighthood, and have
been frequently elected to sit in Parliament as Knights of the Shire, and in
other public Stations have served their Country on occasions with great
Reputation.

Sir Alexander Falconer of Halkertoun, the first who attained the Honor of
Peerage, was Son and Heir of Sir Alexander Falconer by Agnes his Wife Daughter
of Mr. David Carnegie of Coluthie Ancestor to the Earl o^ Southesk, being a
Gentleman well versed in Learning, and competently skilled in the Laws, was by
the Favor of King Charles I. promoted to be one of the Lords of Council and
Session 19th of July 1639 List of the Lords of Session since the Institution of
the College of Justice, in the Lawyers Library MS.
, and deporting himself both in Parliament and otherways with Honor and
Honesty in the King's Service during the Civil War, his Majesty was graciously
pleased to put a lasting Mar^^ of his Esteem upon him and his Family, by
creating him Lord Halkertoun on the 20 of December 1647 Charta in Cancellaria
Sanctae Dominae Nostrae Reginae
, and living to see his Royal Master King Charles II. restored; his Lordship
was again nominated to be one of the Senators of the College of Justice, in
which Employment he continued till his dying Day, the 1st. of October 1671
Ibidem, where Alexander Lord Halkertoun is retoured to his Father.
, leaving Issue by Anne his Wife, Daughter to John Lord Lindsay Ancestor to the
Earl of Crawfurd Alexander his Successor, and a Daughter Agnes married to
George Lord Banff.

Which Alexander married Margaret Daughter of James Earl of Airly. and
departing this Life the 4th of March 1684 Retour of David Lord Halkertoun to
Alexander his Father in the Chancery Office, Edinburgh
, was succeeded in his Estate and Honor by David the present Lord his Son, who
is not married, and consequently has no lawful Issue. His nearest Relation on
the Male Line is Sir Alexander Falkoner of Glenfarquhar, his presumptive Heir.

ARMS.
Azure, a Falcon displayed Argent crowned Or, betwixt three Stars of the
second, and on her Breast a Man's Heart proper, Supporters Or, two Eagles
proper, Crest, an Angel incircl'd with Laurel, Motto, Vive ut Vivas.

BOTHWEL, Lord Haly-Rud-House.
WHEN King James V. did Institute the College of Justice, Anno 1532 Acts of
Parliament.
, he promoted Mr. Francis Bothwel, a Person well versed in the Civil and Canon
Law, to be one of the Lords of Council and Session. By Anne his Wife, Daughter
to the Lord Livingston he had two Sons, Richard Bothwel Provost of Edinburgh in
the Reign of Queen Mary, Ancestor of Bothwel of Glencorss in Vic. de Edinburgh,
and Mr. Adam Bothwell who having gone through the Course of his Studies at the
University and the Inferior Schools, applied himself particularly to Theology;
and after some inferior Station in the Church, which no doubt he passed
through, he was elected Bishop of Orkney by the Chapter, and obtained the Royal
Assent thereto, the 8th of October 1562 Charta in pub. Arch.
, Nota, I have seen a Memorial of the Lineage of this Family, which makes this
Mr. Francis the Son of Mr. Richard Bothwel, by Jean Somervel his Wife, a
Daughter of Somervel of Plain, in Vic. de Stirling.
Charta in Rotulis Mariae Reginae.
that See being then void by the Decease of Bishop Reid, and two Years after
nominated to be one of the Senators of the College of Justice List of the Lords
of Session with the time of their Admissions MS. in the Lawyers Library.
. He was one of the four Popish Bishops who embraced the Protestant Religion,
and zealously concured in reforming the Errors in Doctrine of the Romish Church
till then established in the Nation by Law, and continued long in the exercise
of his Bishopric, notwithstanding of the Prejudice the Church then had to that
Order Mr. Wallace History of Orkney.
. In the 1570, he made an exchange of the Revenue of the Episcopal See of
Orkney, then in his Person, and which he was empowered to dispose of as he had
a mind, with Robert Stewart Prior of Haly-Rud-House, and thereby came to be
Commendator of that Abbey, which he enjoyed till the the 23 of August of 1593.
He was called from this transitory to an Eternal Life, and was interred in the
Abbey-Church of Haly-Rud-House, near his Grave was affixed this Inscription and
Epitaph, Hic reconditus jacet Nobilissimus Vir, Dominus Adamus Bothuelius,
Episcopus Orcadum and Zetlandiae; Commendatarius Monasterii Sanct^ Crucis;
Senator and Consiliarius Regius: qui Obiit anno aetatis suae 67. 23. die Mensis
Augusti, anno Domini, 1593 Epitaphium, N^te Senatoris magni; magne ipse Senator;
Magne Senatoris, triplice laud, Parens;
Tempore cujus opem poscens Ecclesia sensit;
Amplexa est cujus Cura forensis opem;
Vixisti, ex animi voto: Jam, plenus Honorum,
Plenus opum, senii jam quoque plenus obit.
Sic nihil Vrna Tui, nisi membra senilia, celat;
Teque vetat Virtus Vir tua Magne mori.
I faelix Mortem requie superato suprema;
Sic, Patriae and Liberis, Fama perennis erit.


Mr. John Bothwel of Allhammar Charta in Rotulis Jacobi VI. ad annum 1607.
his Son succeeded him in the Commendatory of Haly-Rud-House, who being a very
polite and learned Person, was by the Bounty of King James VI. promoted to be
one of the Senators of the College of Justice, upon the Dimission of his
Father, 26th June 1593 List of the Lords of Session.
, he was one of those the said King chose to accompany him into England, Anno
1603, when he went to take Possession of that Crown, being then one of his
Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, and continuing much in his Masters
Favor and Esteem. He obtained a Charter and Patent bearing Date at Whitehall
20th of December 1607, erecting Totas and integras terras and Baroniam de
Dunrod, nec non Terras de Mikle and Little Kirklands jacent in Seneschallatu de
Kirkcudbright and Vicecomit. de Drumfries ac etiam omnes and singulas feudae
firmarum augmentationis annuus redditus ad conventum and conventuales fratres
Monasterii and Abbaciae de Haly-rud-house pro tempore solvi solit. and Consuet.
ac etiam totas and integras Terras and Baroniam de Alhammer alias Whitekirk in
unam liberam Baroniam and Regalitatem; nec non Damus and Concedimus Magistro
Joanni Bothwell suisque heredibus and assignatis Heredita^iae totum and
integrum Monasterium and Abbaciae locum de Haly-rud house una cum omnibus and
singulis decimis garbalibus aliisque decimis quibuscunque tam rectoriarum quam
vicariarum omnium and singularum Ecclesi^rum and Parochiarum de Whitekirk,
Libertoun, Tranent, Crawfurd-Lindsay, St. Cuthberts, and Haly-rud-house, per
prius ad dictum Monasterium and Abbaciam de Haly-rud-house, tanquam
spiritualitatem ejusdem spectan. quas omnes Terras, Baronia and Abbacias
erigimus unimus, and annexamus in unum integr^^ and liberum temporale dominium
omni tempore futur^, Dominium de Halyrud house ^^^cupa^d. praefato Magistro
Joanni Both^el, suisque heredibus Masculis de Corpore suo legitime procreatis
seu procreandis, quibus deficien. heredibus masculis qu^ndam Adami Episcopi
Orcaden. sui Patris, quibus deficientibus legitimis and propinquioribus
heredibus and assignatis dicti Magistri Joannis quibuscunque. This Lord married
Mary Daughter of Sir John Carmichael o^ that Ilk Charta penes Comitem de
Hyndford.
, and dying in November 1609 Charta in Cancell^ria Sanctae Dominae Nostrae
Reginae.
, he left a Son John to succee^ him in the Honor, who died unmarried Anno
1635, to whom Alexander Bothwel of Glencorss was served and retoured Heir
Generalis retornatus Alexandri Bothuel de Giencorss ad Joannem quondam Dominum
Haly-rude-house penes D. Glencorss.
on the 4th o^ February 1704.

ARMS.
Azure a Cheveron betwixt three Trefoils Or, supported on the right Side by a
Gray-Hound, and on the other with a Gose-Hawlk Proper, Crest, a Palm Tree, with
a naked Boy on it, Motto, Surgendum adversus urgentia,

HAMILTON, Duke of Hamiltoun.
AS this illustrious and most noble Family is the first of the Peerage of
Scotland, so it is one of the most considerable, whether we Respect the
Nobleness of its Extraction, the Multiplicity of its Branches, or the Grandeur
of its Alliances; and though they are not of so long a Continuance in this Realm,
as some others mentioned in this Work; yet it is sufficient to say, That this
noble House has been established by an undeniable and uninterrupted Succession
of full Four Hundred Years, and had the Honor to be graced with the Intail of
the Crown, and imperial Dignity of this Realm, One Hundred and Sixty Years ago,
which was ratified in a full Assembly of the three Estates of Parliament, to
which all of them set their Seals.

I must acknowledge I have not had the Honor to peruse the more ancient Writes
of the Family of Hamiltoun, wherefore I am obliged to rely upon the Account
given me from Mr. Hamilton of Wishaw, an Antiquary of no little Fame, who says,
"That Sir Gilbert Hamilton, the first of this illustrious Race who transplanted
himself from the Kingdom of England, was extracted from the ancient Earls of
Licester, of whose Grant his Progenitor had Lands in that County, called
Hamilton, from whence they assumed a Surname, and that the occasion of his
coming to Scotland is delivered by Historians, after this manner:" Sir Gilbert
(say they) at the Court of Edward II. chanced to talk with Honor and Respect
of the great Merit of King Robert the Bruce, whereupon one John del Spencer
gave him a Blow, which arrogant Treatment he resented so highly, that
encountering him the next Day, he killed him; and to avoid punishment, fled to
Scotland, where he was well received by King Robert: Who to make amends for
what he had forfaulted on his account at home, generously rewarded him with the
Barony of Cadzow, in the county of Lanerk, then an appendage of the Crown. He
was a very brave Man, and to him are ascribed a vast many great Exploits,
particularly, that he distinguished his Valor and Conduct in the decisive
Battle of Bannock-burn, (which happened on the the 25th of July 1314,) so
eminently, that he was knighted in the Field, and got a Gift of diverse Lands.
My former Author further informs me, that he was matched with a Lady of the
Family of the Randolphs, raised in that Reign to the Honor of Earl of Murray,
by whom he had two Sons, Sir Walter his Successor, and Sir John Hamilton of
Ross-aven Knight, of whom sprung the Family of Prestoun in Vicde Edinburgh, and
its Branches. To Sir Gilbert's Memory this Epitaph was composed by a famous
Author. Iure ego deserui patriam, veteresque penates,
Nempe fidem, jus, fas deserit illa prius.
Jam nova jura libens inii sub rege benigno,
Qui profugo patriam, qui potiora dedit.
Hinc res, at que decus, fortunaque laeta secuta est,
Hinc regum thalamis nobilitata domus.
Esto, solum verti, at patriam inveni, haec dedit auxit,
Quae modo perdideram: quae potui, illa dedi.


Sir Walter his Son was a Man of great Fame and Character, he had several
Military Commands in the Service of Robert I. which he performed with great
Diligence and Success, in Consideration whereof, he had by that Prince's Grant
a Charter of the Barony of Cadzow, to be held in as ample manner as Sir Gilbert
his Father held the same: Also in the 9th of the same Reign, to reward his
great Merit and acceptable Services, he had a Grant of the Barony of
Machan-shire in the County of Lanark, which formerly belonged to John Cumin
Knight. Further, in the 1324, the King bestowed on him the Lands of Kinneil,
Larber, Brimage, and Auldcathie in the Shire of Linlithgow, and the very same
Year the Lands of Kirkinder and Kirkowen in the County of Wigtoun, for good
Services done and to be done by him, as the Charter bears. Thus by his Princes
Bounty and Favor arriving to great Wealth and Honor, he strengthened his
Family by a very noble Alliance, taking to Wife Isobel Daughter of William Earl
of Ross Wishaw's Account of the Family of Hamilton.
, and Neice to the King by her Mother, by whom he had two Sons, who survived
him, Sir David, and Sir John Hamilton, from whom the Families of Innerweek
Ballincrieff, and the present Earl of Haddingtoun are descended.

To Sir Walter Hamilton succeeded Sir David his Son, who served King David II.
in his Wars against the English: He was with the King at the unfortunate Battle
of Durham, Anno 1348, where he was taken Prisoner with his Master Mr. Rymer's
Foedera Angli^^
, but paying a Ransom he was released. That he had great esteem from that King,
is plain enough, for in the 40th of his Reign, he had a special Grant of all
the Lands which belonged either to Sir Gilbert his Grandfather or Sir Walter
his Father in any part of the Realm; The Charter is dated 27 September 1369.
and at the same time the King was pleased to discharge for ever to him and his
Heirs, a Feu-duty that had been formerly payable to the Exchequer out of the
Barony of Cadzow, a Sign of the Prevalency of his Interest at that Prince's
Court, where Men of Merit were only employed. In the 4th of King Robert II.
Anno 1373, he had Summons to Parliament, and appends his Seal to the Act
recognizing his Majesty's Title to the Crown, and in settling the Succession
upon all the King's Children lawfully begotten, either by Elisabeth Mure his
first Wife, or Euphame Ross then his Queen Acts of Parliament still extan^ in
the Records, where he is mentioned in both.
. What is further remarkable of this Sir David, is, That according to the
Devotion of that Age, when Donatives to the Church could sanctify and merit
for any Person, he gave in pure and perpetual Alms to the Cathedral Church of
Glasgow an Annuity of Ten Merks Sterling out of the Barony of Kinneil, for the
Support of a qualified Person to celebrate Divine Service at the Altar of the
Blessed Virgin Mary, in the said Church, Pro salute animae Roberti quondam
Regis Scotiae, nec no^ pr^ prosperitate serenissimi Principis Domini David
Regis Scotiae, ac etiam pro salute animae suae, and animarum omnium
antec^ssorum and successorum suorum in perpetuum Chartulary of Glasgow in the
Hands of Alexander Baillie of Castlecarry.
. My former worthy Author Mr. William Hamilton of Wishaw.
informs me, that this Sir David dying in the 1373, left Issue by Margaret his
Wife Daughter of Walter Lesly Lord of Ross, by Euphame Daughter and Heir of
William Earl of Ross, David his Successor, and Walter Progenitor of the Branch
of Camskeith, in Vic. de Air From Writs in my Hands, I find that Hamilton of
Camskeith is now represented by Alexander Hamilton of Grange in Air-shire.
and its Cadets.

Which Sir David attained the Honor of Knighthood from King Robert II. in the
7th of whose Reign he had a Grant of the Lands of Bothwell-Mure, in the County
of Lanark Wishaw's Account of the Duke of Hamilton's Family MS.
, and by other Acquisitions, he raised a great Fortune. Marrying Janet Daughter
of Sir William Keith Marishal of Scotland Penes Eundem.
, by her he had five Sons and a Daughter.

Sir John who continued on the Line of the Family.

Sir William the second Son, was Ancestor of the Hamilton's of Bathgate in Vic.
de Linlithgow This from Wishaw's Account of the Family of Hamilton. Etiam
Charta penes Alexandrum Baillie de Castlecarry, ad annum 1407.
.

Sir Robert the third, from whom the Family of Bruntwood and Udstoun did
descend, out of which branched the Hamiltons of Barncluth, the Lord Belhaven,
Rosehall, Pencaitland, and Wishaw.

George the fourth Son, was Author of the Family of Boarland, in Vic. de Air.

David the fifth, who fixed his Residence in the County of Stirling, where he
acquired a fair Estate by the marrying one of the Coheirs of Galbreath, a
great Baron in those Parts, and became the Root of the Hamiltons of Bardowie,
who still continue there.

Elisabeth only Daughter, married to Sir Alexander Fraser, Thane of Cowie and
Doors Charter by Sir Alexander Fraser, Thane of Cowie and Doors, with Consent
of Elisabeth Hamilton his Spouse, to Alexander Fraser his Son, of the Lands of
Doors in the 1400; and is presently in my Hands by the favor of Sir Peter
Fraser of Doors.
.

But to return to Sir John Hamilton Lord of Cadzow, who appears to have been a
Person of special Account, but living in a Time of no great Action under Robert
III. a peaceable Prince, I could not procure any Memoirs of him proper to be
inserted here. His Wife was Janet Daughter of Sir James Douglass of Dalkeith,
Ancestor to the Earl of Morton. By her he had

Sir James his Successor.

David, who first founded the Family of Dalserf, in Vic. de Lanark, of whom the
Hamiltons of Blackburn, Allarshaw, Ladyland, Green, and others derive
themselves.

Thomas, of whom descended the House of Raploch, out of which issued the
Hamiltons of Torrence, Stanhouse, Woodhall, Aikenhead, Dechmont, Barns, and
several flourishing Branches in the Kingdom of Ireland, of which the Earl of
Glenbrysall was the Head.

Having done with the younger Brothers, I proceed with Sir James Hamilton of
Cadzow the eldest Son, who in the 1411, with David his Brother, obtained
Letters of safe Conduct from Henry IV. to come into England, as far as the
Castle of Calthorp, in the County of Lincoln, yet on what occasion is not said
Mr. Rymer's Foedera Angliae ad Annum 1411.
: And twelve Years after, when the Sum of Forty Thousand Pound Sterling was
agreed on as the Ransom of King James I. He was sent into England as one of the
Hostages for the payment thereof Mr. Rymer's Foedera Angliae ad Annum 1423.
, an Evidence he was then looked upon as one of the most considerable Barons of
Scotland. Soon after which, King James conferred on him the Honor o^
Knighthood, and called him to his Privy Council. In the Reign of King James II.
when our Constitution of Parliaments came to be modelled according to the Frame
they are now in, this noble Person was in the 8th of the same King, Anno 1445,
entered among the Lords of Parliament, all his Lands being then erected into a
Lordship in all time coming, to be called the Lordship of Hamilton Charta penes
D. de Hamilton.
. Also in the 1449, he was joined in Commission with John Bishop of Glasgow,
Andrew Abbot of Melross, Patrick Cockburn Provost of Edinburgh, Peter Young
Dean of Dunkeld, to treat with the English touching a Peace betwixt the two
Nations, which they concluded Rymer's Foedera.
. Upon the Rebellion of the Earl of Douglass, he was with the Earl of Angus
sent to command against the Rebels, by whom they were entirely routed: In
Consideration of which signal Service, he was rewarded with the Baronies of
Drumshargard and Carmonock, with the heritable Sheriffship of Lanark shire,
then in the Crown, by the Forfaulture of the said James Earl of Douglass Charta
penes D. de Hamilton.
. This noble Lord founded, and amply endowed the Collegiate Church of Hamilton
in the 1451, which was ratified and approven by the Popes Bull, which he went
to Rome in Person to procure, being accompanied with James Lord Livingstoun and
Gavin Hamilton Provost of the Collegiate Church of Bothwell, having got a safe
Conduct from Henry VI. to pass through England Rymer's Foedera.
. He was likewise a Benefactor to the University of Glasgow, then founded by
Bishop Turnbull, by his Charter of Mortification, bearing Date the 14th of
January 1459 Charta Mortificationis Jacobi Domini Hamilton Academiae Glasguen.
de quatuor acris terrae Montis Columbarum, ac etiam Tenementum in Magno vico ex
part orientali loci Fratrum praedicatorum. The Reddendo is, Quod omnes
Magistri and Successores eorum singulis diebus fine prandii aut coenae cum
universis studen. orabunt pro animabus Jacobi Domini Hamilton and Euphemiae
sponsae suae, heredum and successorum suorum in perpetuum. The Charter moreover
has this Clause, that he makes the Donation above-specified, Ob salutem
animarum omnium a quibus bona aliqua habui direct aut indirecte, and hactenus
restitutionem non feci.
, which he did not long survive, departing this mortal Life in the Year 1460
Wishaw's Notes on the Family of Hamilton.
, though I cannot meet with the Day and Month. His first Wife was Janet Daughter
to Sir Alexander Livingston of Calendar Ibidem.
, by her he had

1. James his Successor Lord Hamilton.

2. Andrew first of the Hamiltons of Silver-Town-Hill, in Vic. de Lanark.

3. Gavin, Provost of the Collegiate Church of Bothwell, Ancestor of the Family
of Orbistoun, of whom also Haggs, Kilbrachmont, Dalztel, Monkland,
Bothwel-haugh, Parkhead, and Bar Nota This Gavin Hamilton Provost of Bothwel,
I Am told, was an aged Man before he entered into Orders, and long before had
been married and had Children, of whom came Orbistoun and its Cadets.
.

4. John Hamilton of Whisleberry Dr. Baillies Notes on the Family of Hamiltoun.
, in Vic. de Lanark.

His second Wife was Euphame Daughter of Patrick Graham Earl of Strathern,
Countess Dowager of Douglass, by whom he had a Son and two Daughters,

Sir John Hamilton of Shawfield, in Vic. de Lanark.

Mary, married to William Earl Marishal.

Elisabeth to David Earl of Crawfurd afterward Duke of Montrose.

NOTA, Here it will, I apprehend, be neither improper nor ungrateful to my
Reader, to offer some Considerations to obviate that Ass^rtion of George
Buchanan, and other Historians who have copied and translated from him, who
insinuate, that the Lady Mary the King's Sister, was forced by her Brother to
marry James Lord Hamilton, when Thomas Boyd Earl of Arran her Husband was
alive: And this is generally believed by every Body who reads George Buchanan's
History, and enquire no more about it, but depend on our Affairs as wrote by
him, who indeed, to do him Justice, was a very learned and polite Person, and
has wrote the History of Scotland not much inferior in Style to the best Roman
Authors. I shall here offer what I have observed in relation to this Affair.
All Histories commend the Lady Mary's Affection to her Husband, and tell us,
That she could not be prevailed with to forsake or desert him when he fell into
Disgrace, but transported her self with him into foreign Parts to share with
him in his Misfortunes, and sojourned with him in Denmark and Flanders for some
time, till she understood from Scotland, that her Presence and Solicitation
with her Brother might prevail with him to suffer my Lord Arran to return home
to his Native Country, and accordingly she came to Scotland: But the King
continuing inexorable, and the Lady detained from going abroad, the poor
unfortunate Earl of Arran soon after died of Grief at Antwerp: She continuing a
Widow till the 1474. is then, I find, married to James Lord Hamilton. Moreover,
I Am told by Mr. Hamilton of Wishaw, that the Contract of Marriage is still
preserved among the Archives of the Family, but I have not seen it; but there
is a Charter in my hands dated the 12th of July 1474, to James Lord Hamilton
and the Lady Mary Stewart the King's Sister, of the Lands of Kinneil, etc.
Moreover, I think the Testimony of Mr John Ballenden Arch Dean of Murray, who
was Co temporary with the Lady whom we find alive in the 1515, and for ought I
know lived much longer, ought to be regarded. He at the Command of King James
V. translated Hector Boethius History of Scotland into English, printed in the
Year 1536, under this Title, The History and Cronicles of Scotland completed,
and newly corrected and amended by the reverend and noble Clerk Mr. Hector
Boeis Canon of Aberdeen, translated by Mr. John Ballenden Arch-Dean of Murray
and Canon of Ross. And there he says, Book 12 Cap 5. The first Daughter of King
James II. was married to the Lord Boyd, of whom was begotten a Son, whilk was
slain by the Lord Montgomery, and a Daughter married to the Earl of Cassils;
and after the Death of the Lord Boyd, this Daughter of King James II. was
married on the Lord Hamilton, and that way the House of Hamilton is Decorit in
the King's Blood. I say, I think the Authority of this learned and ingenuous
Author should determine any Man of Judgment more than a posterior Party-writer,
such as every one knows George Buchanan was, with all Deference to his
Character otherways: For every Body may perceive, who reads his Book, that he
takes all Opportunities to blacken and misrepresent this nob^e Family,
sometimes with very great Inconsistency with himself, as a judicious Historian;
and if this be not sufficient to disprove this part of Buchanan's History, take
also the Testimony of a very ingenious Foreign Historian Ralph Holinshed; who
wrote a History of Scotland, wherein he says, "That after the Death of the Lord
Boyd, the Daughter of King James II. was married to the Lord Hamilton." But how
far will not an Author depart from Truth, who is the devoted Servant of any
Party, as Buchanan was, who wrote the latter part of his History to serve a
particular turn, well enough known?
James Lord Hamilton was succeeded by James his Son, who was constituted one of
the Lords of the Privy Council, Anno 1440; in which Station he continued, till
from some Mistake he entered into that memorable League with the Earls of
Douglass, Ross, Crawfurd, Murray, and Ormond, wherein they solemnly swore never
to desert one another during their Lives; that Injuries done to any one of
them, should be considered as done to them all; that they should concur
against whatsoever Persons within or without the Realm, and spend their Lives,
Goods and Fortunes in Defense of each other. But when Sir James Hamilton
discerned their violent purposes against the King, he severed himself from
them, and returned to his Duty, whereupon ensued the ruin of the Earl of
Douglass, who persisted in his Rebellion. In the Reign of King James III. he
was no less considered and valued than he had been by the former King; for in
the 1471, when a Treaty of Peace was set on foot with the English, he was one
of those noble Persons who met the Lord Howard and other Commissioners on the
Part of the King of England, and treated of a League and Amity betwixt the two
Nations. Thereafter on the 6th of March 1472, he was with William Bishop of
Aberdeen, David Earl of Crawfurd, John Lord Darnly, and Archibald Whitelaw
Secretary of State, by a Commission under the Great Seal, appointed to treat
with the Ambassadors of England upon a lasting Peace betwixt the two Realms.
His excellent Qualities and heroic Virtues gained so much upon his Sovereign
King James III. that he was pleased to bestow upon him his Sister the Lady Mary
Countess of Arran in Marriage, the greatest Honor any Subject was capable of.
With this most virtuous Lady he lived in all conjugal Affection, till the 6th
of November 1479, he departed this Life Obituary of Glasgow in the Chartulary
of that Metropolitan See, in the Hands of Alexander Baillie of Castle-Carrie, a
Gentleman well known in the Antiquities of his Country, and who has been at
great Pains to make considerable Collections very useful for illustrating the
History of the Kingdom.
, leaving Issue James his Successor, and a Daughter Elisabeth married to
Matthew Earl of Lennox, Grandmother by him of Henry Lord Darnly Duke of Albany
Father of King James VI. first Monarch of Great Britain.

Which James being a Nobleman endowed with all the great Qualities suitable to
his high Birth, began early to distinguish himself in the public Service in
the Reign of King James IV. for when he was very young his Majesty called him
to his Privy Council, and in the 1503 sent him to England to conclude his
Marriage with Margaret eldest Daughter to Henry VII. Soon after which the said
King being sensible of his great Merit and eminent Services, was pleased to
give him the Earldom, and create him Earl of Arran on the 10th of August 1503,
where the remarkable Expressions used by his Majesty, as the just Motives of
bestowing the Honor, are sufficient to illustrate those of his Posterity, and
are thus set forth in the preamble of his Patent.

Sciatis nos, propter propinquitatem sanguinis inter nos and dilectum
consanguineum nostrum Jacobum Dominum Hamilton, and pro suo gratuito servitio
nobis impenso and impendendo, ac pro suis magnis laboribus and expensis factis
and sustentatis pro nostro and Regni nostri honor, tempore contractus
Matrimonii nostri in facie Ecclesiae solemnizati apud nostrum Monasterium
Sanctae Crucis prope Edinburg ac cum avisamento and consensu nostri Concilii,
ac trium nostri Regni statuum; pro tempore praedicto mature avisatos and ex
nostra expressa scientia ac proprio motu dedisse, conc^ssisse, and hac presenti
charta nostra confirmasse eidem Jacobo Domino Hamilton totum and integrum
Comitatum de Arran jacen. in Vicecomitatu ^e Bute etc. Charter of Erection of
the Earldom of Arran in favors of James Lord Hamilton, in the public Register
of Charters. This may likeways serve to correct the Mistake of those
Historians, who say, That when James Lord Hamilton married the Sister of King
James III, that he got with her the Earldom of Arran, which Marriage I have
made evident, was in the 1474, and yet this Grant of the Earldom of Arran was
not to him, nor his Son for Twenty Nine Years after the Marriage of his Father
and Mother. From this we may remark how George Buchanan, and other Historians
who copy from him, are to be relied on, who take Materials and Vouchers of
their Histories from other Authors who have wrote before them, and never looked
into the National Records, where proper Materials for a Historian are to be
found: For I cannot imagine that Mr. Buchanan ever gave himself the Trouble to
turn over one Roll in the public Archives of the Kingdom, otherwise he could
not but have discovered the Error of Robert III's Illegitmacy, and many other
Things relating both to the Royal Family, as well as to this Noble Family I now
write of; for since the Time of King Robert the Bruce the Records are pretty
full, so that if diligently perused, would have rectified many very gross
Errors all our old Historians have fallen into, whom Buchanan, as to the
History, has followed exactly; for he only turned their Books into that ornate
Latin Style we now read his History of Scotland in. For I cannot imagine
Buchanan saw the Records, otherwise he could not have been so Wicked, or so
Perverse an Historian as to have concealed Matters of Fact so evident there,
and of such importance to the Royal Family, except ye suppose, (as indeed many
do) that he was well pleased to find that any before him had wrote of the
illegitimacy of King Robert III, and thereby to make it a Precedent for the
Succession of another Bastard to the Crown, who was his Patron, in Prejudice of
the lawful Heirs; and James Duke of Chatlerault being then the presumptive Heir
of the Crown failling of Queen Mary and her young Son King James VI. I believe
Mr. Buchanan had a particular View to that in his malicious and false
Aspersions against that most Noble and Worthy Lord and his Family, both in his
History, and in another scurrilous Pasquil he wrote, entitled, An Admonition
to the true Lords, and which is the most false, and most scandalous writing
that ever flowed from the Pen of any Man of the least Worth, which shall be
answered elsewhere, to the Conviction of any who will allow themselves to
believe Truth, all clearly made out from original Writings, accidentally come
into my Hands.
,

His Lordship being now higher in Dignity, the Year following had the Command
of the Forces sent from Scotland to the Assistance of Christian II. of Denmark;
which Service he happily performed with Conduct, Diligence, and Fidelity.
Having gone thus successfully through this Affair, his royal Master again
entrusted him with the Command of the Four Thousand Men sent into France to the
Assistance of Lewis XII. where he acquired immortal Honor; and when that
Service was over, he returned Home richly rewarded by that Prince, besides a
Pension during Life. While he stayed in France the Death of King James IV.
happned in the unfortunate Battle of Flowdon; then he returned home to settle
the disturbed State of his Native Country, which ordinarily falls out in all
Minorities, and stood fair to have been elected Regent to the young King. Many,
says my Author, gave their Voices for him, as being nearest in Blood to the
King, and a Man affecting Peace more than others, and every way sufficient for
such a Charge; but he generously and justly yielded his Pretensions to his
Cousin-German John Duke of Albany, who was as near to the King in the Male, as
his Lordship was in the Female Line. Upon the Duke's Promotion to the Supreme
Government, his Lordship was named Captain of the Castle of Edinburgh
Drummond's History.
, Provost of that City, and not long after Warden of the Marches toward
England. Also in the 1517, this Earl was appointed one of the Six Guardians of
the Realm, who were to Rule by Turns, when John Duke of Albany went to France
to renew the ancient League which had been kept inviolable for many Centuries
past betwixt the two Realms: There being nothing more to be found in History
concerning this great Earl, we shall draw toward the Close of his Life, and
observe his Marriages and Issue.

His first Wife was Beatrix Daughter of John Lord Drummond Charta in Rotulis
Jacobi IV.
, by whom he had only one Daughter Margaret, married to Andrew Stewart Lord
Evandale and Ochiltree My Lord Strathallan's Historical Account of the Family
of Perth, penes Jo. Drummond M.D.
, and after her Death, Elisabeth Sister to Alexander Lord Hume, Lord High
Chamberlane of Scotland; but being divorced from her This is fully made evident
from the Process of Divorce at the instance of the said James Earl of Arran, as
it was led and deduced before Mr. Patrick Coventree, and other Judges delegate
for that Effect, in the 1513, and is still preserved in the Charter Chest of
the Family, whereby it appears she had been formerly married to Sir Thomas Hay,
who then was alive, and so could not be married to any other Man. This, by the
by, is sufficient to correct the Mistake of the Author of a History of the
Church of Scotland, called Knox's History, who makes James Duke of Chatlerault
born in unlawful Wedlock, in regard Elisabeth Hume his Father's first Wife was
alive; but that Author had not access to see or know of this Divorce, otherwise
I have more Charity for him than to think he would have transmitted a Falsehood
to Posterity.
, he was again enabled to marry, so he next took to Wife Janet Daughter of Sir
David Beaton of Crich in Vic. de Fife Comptroller in the Reign of King James
IV. Widow of Sir Robert Livingston of Easter-Weems, by whom he had,

James Earl of Arran.

Helen married to Archibald Earl of Argyle.

Jane to Alexander Earl of Glencairn.

This Earl giving way to Fate in the 1530, was succeeded by

James his Son, a Person of singular Prudence and Integrity, as will appear in
the whole Conduct of his Life. In the 1536, when he was but a very young Man,
he was one of the Lords who attended King James V. by his special Appointment
in his Voyage to France, when he espoused Magdalen Daughter to Francis I.
Drummonds History of King James V.
, afterward in 1539, when the foresaid King had a Prince born to him by Mary of
Lorrain his next Queen he had the Honor to stand Godfather to him Ibidem.
. His Lordship was very forward in offering the King his Service toward the
suppressing the Incursions of the English, under the Command of Sir Thomas
Wharton, and had the Command of that Body which was sent to Desend the
East-Border, where he soon heard the mortifying News of the Loss of the Army at
Solway, which was not long after attended with the Death of that Monarch, who
yielded his last Breath on the 14 of December 1542: Then my Lord Arran was, by
the unanimous Consent of Parliament chosen Protector to the young Queen Mary,
and Governor of Scotland, which was ratified by an Act of the three Estates,
in which, The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commissioners of Burghs,
declare James Earl of Arran Lord Hamilton, second Person of the Realm, and
nearest to succeed to the Crown of the same, failling of our Sovereign Lady,
and the Bairns lawfully to be begotten of her and none others; and by Reason
thereof Tutor lawful to the Queen's Grace and Governor of the Realm, and he to
use the said Office in all things until the perfect Age of our said Sovereign
Lady, and all the Leiges of this Realm, to Answer and Obey the said Earl as
Tutor lawful to her Grace, and Governor foresaid, in all things concerning the
said Office, conform to the Act made hereupon The Original of this Act is in
the Custody of the Family of Hamilton, bearing date 13th of March 1543, to
which all the Seals of the Noblemen, Prelates and Buroughs are appended, which
I have seen, and from which I took this Note.
.

As soon as the Earl was in Possession of the Government, he sent the Earl of
Glencairn, Sir George Douglass, William Hamilton of Sanquhar, James Learmont of
Balcomy, and Mr. Henry Balnaves of Hall-hill, Secretary of State unto England,
in order to treat both about a Peace, which was become necessary, by reason of
the King's Death, and other concurring Circumstances, and a Match betwixt the
Infant Queen and Edward Prince of England. Accordingly a Peace, or at least an
Abstinence, as it was then termed, and a Marriage betwixt the Queen and Prince
Edward were agreed to, and ratified by a great Majority in the Parliament,
which met at Edinburgh in August 1543.

I need not mention in this place, how this advantageous Union was spoiled by
the then Clergy and the French Faction, it being so fully treated on by Bishop
Lesly and Mr. Buchanan, only I shall add what neither of them have taken much
notice of, That the Earls of Huntly, Argyle, Montrose, Bothwel, Monteith, Lord
Fleeming, and a great many more of all Ranks, entered into a most solemn Bond;
and notwithstanding of the Act of Parliament, bound and obliged themselves to
oppose the intended Match with England, and consequential Union, with all their
Power, though with the hazard of their Fortunes and Lives, at the same time they
endeavored all they could to bring the Governor into a Compliance with the
breach of the Treaty, and the more effectually to win him over to them, they
proposed to secure the Crown to his Posterity, by bestowing the Infant Queen
upon the Lord Hamilton, his eldest Son. But so invincibly was he attached to
what he thought the Interest of his Country and his own Reputation and Honor
in the Observation of a Treaty he himself had caused to be ratified in
Parliament, that he kept it inviolated on his part, till King Henry VIII. not
only refused to ratify it on the other Part, but also caused his Officers to
seize upon a great many Scots Ships that had sailed to England laden with
French and Scots Commodities, upon the Faith of the Treaty of Peace before
concluded. This undeniable Breach of the Articles condescended on, the
Governor resented to that degree, that he called a Parliament in December
1543, and in it declared the Treaty to be void and null, in regard the English
had broke it first. Then he applied himself with the utmost Diligence to carry
on a War, and immediately raised what Forces he could, to oppose the English
Army that had invaded Scotland, under the Command of the Lord Evers, whom he
encountered at Ancrum in Teviotdale; and though they were 7000 to not above 800,
put them to the rout with considerable Loss on their Side, and scarce a Man on
his Lordship's. Not long after this, he was joined by Monsieur de Lerges Count
of Montgomery, with 3500 French Auxiliaries, and marched toward England in
search of the Earl of Hartford, who to retrieve the former Loss, had entered
Scotland, and had already laid waste a great part of the Merse and Teviotdale,
but retired upon the approach of the Scots Army. The Governor in his Turn
invaded England, beat the Enemy where ever he found them, ravaged the Country,
and returned with the Glory of having defeated one Army, and given the Chase to
another in one Campaign. Neither am I to forget, that at this time King Francis
I. sent him the Ensigns of the most noble Order of St. Michael. To proceed, in
the 1547, when the Duke of Somerset was made Protector of England, and Tutor to
Edward VI. upon the demise of Henry VIII. in Prosecution of the War, he invaded
Scotland upon the head of a mighty Army, seconded by a Fleet by Sea. His Grace
hastening to raise all the Force he could to oppose him, so advancing toward
Pinkie-cleugh, where the Enemy were encamped, the English obtained the Victory
on the 10th of September 1547, and left Eight Thousand Scots killed on the
Field. After which they ravaged the Country five Miles round, sacked Leith, and
made an Attempt upon Edinburgh, but by the Activity of the Governor they were
repulsed with Loss. After which his Lordship repaired to Stirling, where he had
appointed the Nobility to meet him. In this Assembly he appeared not at all
dejected or dispirited, but addressed himself in this Speech, that Monsieur de
Larrey has thought fit to insert in his French History of England, translated
by an ingenious Author, from whom I have presumed to borrow it.

"I Doubt not but that many of you, My Lords, and more of the Vulgar, (whose
forward preposterous Understandings seldom judge of Things but by the various
Events they are liable to) may be apt to disapprove a War that has been
attended with Consequences so fatal to most of us. I own that I advised you to
Undertake it; and as then, so I am still of Opinion, that it is one of these
Evils the Glory and Liberty of the Nation do not allow us to avoid: I know not
but you may have other Sentiments at this time, and have therefore called you
together, to congratulate your Magnanimity, if you remain unshaken, as I am, in
your Resolution to repulse the Encroachments made upon us; and, if you are
otherwise disposed, as I hope you are not, to upbraid your Fear, the Inglorious
Enemy of Reason and Courage. When I took the Command of our Armies upon me, you
unanimously preferred an Honorable War, to a Peace you thought equally Unsafe
and Disgraceful; and shall we be so Mean as to yield to the first Signal
Injustice of Fortune? No: I am persuaded, that, as Grating as our Misfortune at
Pinky must needs be to you all, you will nevertheless choose to pursue a Noble
Revenge, rather than sit down with the Affront, or submit to the threatened
Slavery. Come on it what will, I am fixed in my first Opinion; and I had rather
preserve the Monarchy at any rate, I mean, though at the Expense of such of the
Subjects Fortunes and Blood as have been, or may yet chance to be wasted, than
to spare the Estates and Lives of private Men, though ever so Great or Deserving,
with the Loss of our Common Country. Let us labor by all Means to save the
Ship, that saves all; and to effect this, let us not grudge to cut down the
Mast, nor to see our own Shares of the Loading thrown over Board: If the
Foundation of an Edifice stands firm, it is no great Matter what comes of the
Ceiling or Furniture. Our private Losses are so many Sacrifices that are due to
the Public, they weaken the State, I own it, but the Ruin of the State it self
must needs involve us all in Universal Irretrivable Miseries. Consider, My
Lords, with what an Enemy we have to do, and on what Terms we may purchase a
Peace. Our Enemy, is he not the same old Inveterate One, whose Avarice has, by
Unjust Wars, so often attempted to Devour our Existence? And is not this
present War alone sufficient to make us tremble at the very Thought of, falling
under the Power of Tyrants so unconscionably Implacable? We cannot descend to
the Terms they propose, without stooping under the Imperious Yoke of a People
that thirst for our Blood, and whose Insolence is whetted with Fury. Cast your
Eyes, on the other Hand, on your Ancient Unalterable Allies the French; they
never yet failed us in our greatest Exigencies, and will not in the present
Juncture of our Affairs: Neither do we want Friends in Italy: Nay, there are
few Potentates in Europe, that will unconcernedly look on and behold our
Destruction. Resolve, in fine, Whether we had best Defend our Liberties, or
give them up; Whether it is most expedient to die, if it must be so, Free and
Independent, or to live Eternal Slaves to our greatest Foes. It Is true, they
offer us fair Things; our Laws and Rights are, by the Treaty, to remain
untouched: But pray, who is Guarrantee for this? And if the English shall, in
an After-game, either Break or Encroach upon the Articles agreed to, Who will
Redress our Grievances? To what Tribunal shall we appeal? It Is a Jest to offer
to set up either for Liberty or Property, when in effect we shall have given
them away. We must begin, by surrendering our Mistress to a Husband, that is,
to a Master; which done, I don't see why he may not, as such, subject her Crown
to his own, or rather Unite and Confound them in one: And thus Scotland must
inevitably become a County or Province of England. It Is impossible to reflect
on the Ambitious Project without Horror and Detestation: And how can we choose,
but to have the meanest Sentiments of, and greatest Contempt imaginable for
such of our Countrymen as shall show themselves Villains enough to comply. The
uncertain Events and Length of the War, may perhaps intimidate some of us: But
is it the first time that Scotland has seen herself exposed to Dangers of this
kind? When reduced to the like Extremities, did ever our Ancestors hesitate to
prefer their Honor to Life? And are we so far Degenerated as to render our
selves, their Offspring, unworthy of the inesteemable Treasure they purchased
with so much Valor, and transmitted to us with so much Glory? Had the malign
Influence of our Birth involved us in Slavery, how far we had been obliged to
endeavor the Recovery of that Freedom we had never enjoyed, I shall not
determine; but since we were born Free, it is plain, that our Posterity can
never pardon our Cowardice, if we become willing to resign the Independency our
own Birth and Forefathers Courage have entitled us to. I^ but a part of our
Estates and Honors were invaded, we might plead some Pretense or Excuse for
dispensing with it: But the Body of the Nation is attacked; our Country,
nothing less than our Country, is at Stake; its Ancient Laws and Fundamental
Constitution are on the Point of being subverted. I cannot disown, but that
it is hard to tell what Success it shall please the Almighty to give to our
Arms; it is certain however, that as we must bear with Patience those Maladies
the Infirmity of Nature has made us liable to, so we are obliged to suffer with
Constancy such further Losses as the Enemy's good Fortune may procure us. It Is
not only in these our Days that the Scots Nation, equal to the Romans in this
Point, have stood firm in the midst of Dangers, or that they have conquered
their hard Fate by the Steddiness of their Courage: Let us for no reason
affront the Memory of those Heroes that gave us a Being, and far from following
the Example of those in the March and Teviotdale, let us rather detest the
Infamy of their Defection. The more Vigor we shall express by our Unanimity in
this Meeting, so much the more may we expect the Assistance of our Friends
beyond Seas: Nay, Fortune her self seems to take Pleasure in raising that
Virtue she has in vain attempted to depress. One thing at least we are sure of,
the Boldness of our Resolutions cannot fail of conveying the Praises we shall
deserve, down to the old Age of Time; whereas our Cowardice, if expressed on
this Occasion, would render us Infamous and Unhappy at once."

This Speech so lively, and so admirably well adapted to the Humor of the
Nation at that time, had its desired Effect: The Nobility applauded his Design,
they talked of nothing but of Means to prosecute the War; and whatever the
Event might be, they resolved to hazard all, rather than submit to the English.
So it was agreed to have recourse to the King of France, who they thought alone
able to retrieve their Losses, and to transact with him about marrying the
Queen when fit for a Husband, to Francis the first his Son the Daulphine. Then
the said King was pleased to create his Lordship Duke of Chattlerault in that
Kingdom, and to assign him for the better support of the Honor a Revenue of
30000 Livres a Year to him his Heirs and Assigneys for ever. After which his
Grace continued Governor of Scotland for six Years, till the 1555, he resigned
that great Post in full Parliament to the Queens Mother. He was again declared
to be the presumptive Heir of the Crown, failing Queen Mary and the Issue of
her Body, and this at a Time when he had divested himself of all Authority,
delivered up the Regalia, and consequently was not in a Condition to influence
the Members, nor bias the Judgment of the Nation; after which his Grace lived
much at Home in a State suitable to his Quality, employing himself in the
Service of his Country upon all Occasions with untainted Honor.

When Queen Mary returned Home from France, Anno 1561, her Majesty was pleased
prudently to make choice of a new Privy Council, all or most of whom were
Protestants, the better to conform her self to the present posture of Affairs;
and confiding much in the Duke of Chattlerault, he was chose one of that
Number, wherein he worthily served her Majesty in settling the Kingdom, then in
no small Ferment, always showing a great steddyness to the Interest of his
Country and the Protestant Religion. The Queen having found the benefit of his
faithful Services at Home, was pleased in 1566 Letter under the Privy Seal.
to send him over to France to take care of her Interest there, where he did
all the Service he could that was consistent with his Honor and the Protestant
Cause. Here he continued till the Queen was forced to make the Resignation of
the Government in favors of her Son the Prince: Then the Duke of Chattlerault
was called home to be the Head of the Loyalists History of Scotland ad annum
1569.
. So soon as he came to Scotland, his Grace used his utmost endeavors to have
had the Earl of Murray then Regent, degraded from his usurped Authority, the
Queen reponed to the Exercise of her royal Power, and the Peace of the Country
restored; and for that end by virtue of a Commission from her Majesty, he
gathered together what Forces he could raise in so short a time; but seeing no
manner of hopes of Assistance from England, and knowing that a Civil War was
just breaking out in France, he resolved to make no other use of his Arms than
to obtain to himself and his Friends honorable Conditions of Peace, and the
benefit of living quietly at Home, till indulgent Providence should afford him
an Opportunity of serving his Queen and his Country, for which End the Bishop
of St. Andrews his Brother, was sent to the Regent to procure a safe Meeting,
in order to bring their Differences to an Accommodation; and the Time and Place
being agreed to, after many Disputes on both Sides, the following Articles were
drawn up, and mutually signed, which I shall set down in the primitive Style.

"IT is desired for the part of my Lord Regent, that my Lord Duke and his
Adherents, shall recognosce the King and his Authority, and acknowledge
themselves to be his Subjects, and promise unto him Service, Obedience and
Fidelity, in all time coming, as their Sovereign."

"IT is required on the part of the Duke's Grace and his Adherents, that every
Nobleman be admitted to have his Place in Council, as their Predecessors have
been in all time of other Princes of this Realm? And my Lord Regent bearing the
King's Authority, shall be sworn solemnly, from that time forward, to behave
himself uprightly and indifferently to them, as the remanent Noblemen of this
Realm, in all their honest and just Causes, without Particularity, or
remembrance of any Offense, conceived amongst them during the time of their
Contraversies."

" Item, That all these who shall be content in time coming to behave
themselves as faithful Subjects to the King, and acknowledge their Obedience to
him, shall be restored to their Lands, Bounds, Heritages, and Possessions,
notwithstanding the Doom of forefaulture led against them. Providing always
that this Benefit shall not extend to them, that has been forfaulted for Art
and Pa^rt of the Slaughter of umquhile the King's Father."

" Item, That my Lord Regent, and remanent Noblemen joined with himself, shall
condescend to sick Heads and Articles, as may redound ^o the Queen's Honor,
Advancement and Commodit^, and may best serve her Turn, providing that the same
be not prejudicial to the King nor his Sovereignty, whereupon depends the
Security of all Noblemen and others, professing themselves to be his Subjects."

"And because my Lord Regent, and others on his part, are as well content to
yield to their reasonable Desir^s foresaid; as to crave the Performance of his
Desire toward the King's Obedience at their hands, and w^lleth that all come
together at a time, because now public Leisure cannot serve to complete these
things that are necessary to be done to the Queen, it is thought convenient,
that on tenth day of April next to come, shall be assembled and conveened
together at Edinburgh, in quiet and peaceable manner, their Persons following,
They are to say, my Lord Regent, my Lord Duke, the Earls of Huntly, Argyle,
Athol, Mortone, Mar, Glencairn, and my Lord Herries."

"And in case of Absence of any of their Nine Persons, be Sickness or other
lawful Impediment, ane other Nobleman of that Party shall be chosen to supply
his Place. And there in Friendly manner to Treat, Conclude and Agree, upon sick
Heads as shall be performed to the Queen, and what the said Persons shall find
redound to her Honor, (without prejudice to the King) the hail Noblemen on
both sides, shall condescend thereto. And for the Security of the coming of the
Nobility foresaid, my Lord Regent promises on his Honor, that they shall be
Skaithless, and without Danger, in their Coming, Remaining, and Returning."

" Item It is agreed that my Lord Duke Chattlerault, nor his Adherents, shall
not Challenge, Use nor Execute, no Authority of Lieutenandry be any Commission
of the Queen, or that any Impediment be made be them, against the King's
Authority in the mean time, and ordains Forces of fensible Men on all sides to
be dissolved, that no Injury be done to any Subject be way of Deed."

"The Regent promises to perform upon his Honor, so far as concerns his Part;
and therefore Wills the Duke's Grace, the Earl of Cassilis, and my Lord Herries
to enter sufficient Pledges presently, for performance of their Parts; to wit,
for the Duke, one of my Lord Duke's Sons, for the Earl of Cassilis, the said
Earl's Brother, and for my Lord Herries, the said Lord's eldest Son."



According to Articles, most of the Persons concerned met at Edinburgh on the
10th of April 1569, to treat at large of a through Agreement, and especially of
such Points as related to the banished Queen. Being all in one Room, the Regent
first rose, and drawing out a Paper, asked the Duke, if he would instantly
subscribe an Acknowledgment of the young King's Authority, or not, to which he
modestly replied, That he and his Friends had laid down their Arms
conditionally, nor could he think himself, or them, obliged to subscribe their
Allegiance to the King, unless according to these Conditions, the Regent at the
same time should grant what might be reasonably demanded, in behalf of the
distressed Queen, and therefore hoped he would not proceed to Acts of Force and
Fraud too, since not only he and his Friends, but their Hostages likewise were
in his Hands, desiring him to remember that they had religiously observed every
Article of the late Treaty, and had come secure and unarmed as to a Friend,
faithfully relying on his Honor, and those assurances of Safety he had given
them in the most solemn manner under his own Hand. To this easy Remonstrance
of the Duk's, Murray made no manner of return (says my Author) Drumsoy's
Memoirs.
but against all the Laws of Honor sent him to the Castle of Edinburgh
Melvil's Memoirs.
, where he was kept close Prisoner till the Regent was murdered by James
Hamilton of Bothwell-haugh on the 23 of January 1570, then he had his
Liberation, after having purged himself by Oath from all manner of Suspicion in
that Affair.

What a loyal and honest Part my Lord Duke of Chattlerault acted for the
Interest of his Sovereign Queen Mary in the time of her greatest Distress, is
so well known and was so frequently owned and acknowledged, by her Majesty,
that I don't think it necessary to be further insisted on here Queen Mary
always called the Duke of Chattlerault Father.
, and that his Loyalty was not easy to him, is evident from the manifold
Sufferings and Hardships he underwent during the continuance of the Civil War;
for as soon as the Earl of Lennox was elected Regent, he burnt down the Castle
and Town of Hamiltoun; and that these honest Patriots might be heartily
humbled, not so much as the Cornfieldsd and Trees belonging to a Hamiltoun were
spared, the Duke himself with his two Sons, and most of the Gentlemen of the
Name of Hamilton were all forfaulted for their Rebellion against the young
King; notwithstanding he resolutely persisted in the Queen's Service, and had a
large share in the Misfortunes of that unfortunate Queen, but being aged, for
the better Security of his Person from the violence of his Enemies, he retired
into France, where he stayed some time during the Rage of the War, which had
reduced his Country to the last extremity; and returning home he gave way to
Fate on the 22 of January 1575. As for his Character, notwithstanding the Envy
of some, and the Malice of others, it shone very bright, in that great and
difficult Trust of Governor of Scotland, which he held in the most difficult
Times, so he discharged it for twelve Years with no less Prudence and Dexterity
than Honor and Reputation, a Praise which few of his Enemies ever denied him
in any time. For in his Court, says a reverend Historian Archbishop
Spottiswood's History of the Church of Scotland.
, There was nothing to be seen the severest Eye could censure in the public
Administration, such a Moderation was kept as no Man was heard to complain. And
continues my Author, He was a Nobleman well inclined, plain, and without all
Dissimulation and Fraud, that by the goodness of God, who always favors the
Upright, he was carried through many Difficulties, and died in Peace and Honor,
well advanced in Age.

This noble Duke married Margaret eldest Daughter of James Douglas Earl of
Morton, by whom he had Issue,

James Earl of Arran his eldest Son, a Gentleman of the highest Expectations,
who gave early Proofs of inheriting all the Virtues of his Ancestors to an
eminent Degree, but he became Defective in his Understanding, and thereupon
retired from the World, dying without Succession, Anno 1609.

Lord John, thereafter Marquess of Hamilton.

Lord Claud Progenitor to the Earl of Abercorn.

Lord David who dyed a young Man.

Lady Margaret married to Alexander Lord Gordon, Son and Heir of George Earl of
Huntly, sans Issue, and after his Death to James Lord Fleming, Ancestor to the
Earl of Wigton.

Lady Anne to George Earl of Huntly, Lord High Chancellor of Scotland,
Progenitor to the present Duke of Gordon.

Lady Jean married to Hugh 3 d Earl of Eglingtoun, but had no Succession.

His Successor in the Honor was James Earl of Arran his eldest Son, but he
being non compos mentis, John his next Brother represented the Family. This
noble Lord was born in the 1532, and had by the bounty of King James V. the
Commendatory of Arbroath Abbey, one of the richest Benefices in Scotland,
bestowed on him, Anno 1541 Charta in Bibliotheca Juridica MS. a Gulielmo Wilson
Clerico Sessionis deputato, Facultati Juridicae donata, codemque in Regni hujus
Antiquitatibus haud parum versato.
, by which Title he was designed for some time after. We hear not much of his
Conduct till the breaking out of the Civil War in Queen Mary's Time Anno 1567,
that he most faithfully adhered to her Majesty's Interest, and upon her
Imprisonment in the Castle of Lochlevin, his Lordship with several others
entered into an Association, wherein they promise "To use their utmost
Endeavors by all reasonable Means to procure her Majesty's Freedom and
Liberty, upon such honest Conditions as may stand with her Majesty's Honor,
the Commonweal of the whole Realm, and Security of the whole Nobility, who at
present have her Majesty in keeping. Whereby this our Native Rea^m, may be
governed, ruled, and guided by her Majesty and her Nobility, for the common
Quietness, the Administration o^ Justice, and Weal o^ the Country. And in case
the Noblemen, who have at present her Majesty in their Hands, refuse to set her
at Liberty upon such reasonable Conditions, as said is, in that Case, We shall
employ our Selves, our Kindred, Friends, Servants and Partakers, our Bodies and
Lives to set her Highness at Liberty, as said is; and also to concur to the
Punishment of the Murder of the King her Majesty's Husband; and for sure
Preservation of the Person of the Prince, as We shall Answer to God, and on our
own Honors and Credit; and to that effect shall concur every one with other at
our utmost Power. And if any shall set upon Us, or any of Us, for the doing, as
aforesaid, in that Case, We promise faithfully to espouse one another's
Interest under pain of Perjury and Infamy, as We shall answer to God."

My Lord Hamilton's most Loyal and firm Adherence to the Crown was very dear to
him, for the contrary Faction who were Masters of the young King, prosecuted
him and his Family with the utmost Severity, for no other Reason but because
they owned Queen Mary's Authority, and therefore in one of their Parliaments
held in October 1579, both he and his Brother Lord Claud were forfaulted. My
Lord John to avoid the Storm that threatened him, fled on Foot in a Sea-mans
Habit into England, and from thence made his Escape into France, where he was
kindly entertained by James Beaton Bishop of Glasgow, then Ambassador at the
French Court for Queen Mary, here he had great Offers made him by the House of
Guise, if he would change his Religion, and embrace Popery, but such was the
goodness of God toward him, that he persever'd in his Religion, which though it
lost him the Favor of the French Court, it preserved him the Peace of his
Conscience, which he ever afterward reckoned one of the most signal Favors of
Heaven toward him. Notwithstanding the hard Usage his Lordship met with, he
continued true and faithful to the Queen to the last, of which her Majesty was
so sensible, that when that severe and unparalleled Sentence of Death was
passed on her in England, she took a Ring off her Finger and gave it to one of
her Servants, and ordered him to carry it to her Cousin Lord John Hamilton, and
tell him that, that was all she had to Witness her great Sense of his Families
constant Fidelity to her, and their Sufferings for her Interest, and desired it
might be still kept in the Family as a lasting Evidence of her Kindness to it
This Ring is still preserved with a due regard in the Family to this Day, and I
have seen it in my Lady Duchess of Hamilton's Custody.
.

This noble Lord in the Course of his Exile sojourned in diverse foreign Parts
till some time after King James IV. came to manage by his own Councils, that he
returned to Scotland, and on the first of November 1585, together with several
other Lords and Barons, petitioned the King to redress certain Grievances of
the Nation Sir James Melvil's Memoirs.
, representing to him in a humble manner, That the hard handling by partial
Persons about his Majesty, had compelled them upon plain Necessity, and for
their last Refuge to take the boldness to come into his Presence in Arms for
the Surety of their Lives and Lands; Adding, That they were ever humbly minded
to serve his Majesty, and obey him hereafter, as became dutiful and loyal
Subjects. To which the King replied, That though their Enterprise was Treasonable
yet in Respect of their Necessity, and in hope of their good Behavior in time
coming, he would remit the Crime: And further directing himself to my Lord
Hamilton, He said, My Lord, I did never see you before, and must confess, that
of all this Company you have been the most wronged, you were a faithful Servant
to the Queen my Mother in my Minority, and when I understood not, as I do now,
the State of Things, hardly used. Hereupon a Parliament was called, wherein the
Act of Forfaulture of the Hamilton's was repealed, and the Family again
restored to all the Titles of Honor, Estate and Precedence, lost either by the
Attainder of himself, or of James Earl of Arran his Brother; and the same Year
his Lordship was sworn of the Privy Council, and constituted Captain of his
Majesty's Castle of Dumbartoun. The King placing great Confidence in the
Fidelity of this Lord, was pleased in the 1588 Writes of the Privy Seal in the
public Records.
to give him a Commission under his Privy Seal to be Ambassador Extraordinary
to accomplish the Marriage betwixt his Majesty and the Princess Anne of
Denmark, and this with full Consent of his Privy Council; but his Lordship
declining that Honor by reason of his Age, and the King himself going in
Person to Denmark, his Majesty named my Lord Hamilton Lieutenant of the South
of Scotland, which great Trust he discharged fully to his Majesty's
Satisfaction, and the Expectations he had conceived of him. The Royal Favor
toward his Lordship did not stop here, but the King in Memory of his long and
faithful Services, was pleased to raise him, to the Degree and Dignity of
Marquess of Hamilton with great Ceremony on the 19 of April 1599 Sir George
Mackenzies Herauldry.
, continuing ever afterward without any the least Interruption in great Esteem
with that Prince who gave him frequent Visits at his Palace of Hamilton, and
treated him with the same Respect, the Queen his Mother had done the Duke of
Chattlerault, and called him always Father. To conclude, this noble Person died
in the highest Favor with Prince and People, the 12th of April 1604 Chart^ in
Cancellaria S D. N R.
, and was interred among his Ancestors in the Collegiate Church of Hamilton,
leaving a Son and a Daughter behind him by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of John
Lord Glamis, Ancestor to the Earl of Strath more, James his Successor, and
Margaret married to John Lord Max well Ancestor to the present Earl of
Nithsdale.

John Marquess of Hamilton was succeeded by James his Son, who was born in the
1589. After his Accession to the Honor, he was appointed one of the Lords of
his Majesty's Privy Council, and afterward preferred to be one of the Gentlemen
of the Bed Chamber; and that he might the better support his Character, his
Majesty was pleased to dissolve from the Crown the Abbey Lands, with the
Patronages and Tithes of the Monastery of Arbroath in Forfar-shire, and to
e^ect them into a temporal Lord ship in favor of my Lord Marquess, and that
especially in Consideration of his Fathers Faithfulness and Sufferings for
Queen Mary, by his royal Charter bearing Date the 5th of May 1608 Charta in
Rotulis Jacobi VI. ad annum 1608.
.

Besides this vast Augmentation of his Fortune in Lands, he likewise bore
several great Offices in that Princes Reign, as Lord High Steward of his
Majesty's Household, and Lord High Commissioner to the Parliament which began on
the 25 of July 1621 Mr. Calderwood's History of the Church of Scotland.
, wherein the five Articles of Perth Assembly were ratified, and after having
surmounted all the Difficulties that occurred in that Ticklish Juncture, he put
a period to that Session on the 27th Day of August ensuing. His Lordship highly
meriting for his Services to the Crown, his Majesty was pleased in Recompense
thereof, on the 16 of June 1619 to creat him a Peer of England by the Honor of
Earl of Cambridge (a Title that had only been born by very illustrious Persons,
all of the Royal Family of England:) And as a further Instance of his Royal
Favor, to admit his Lordship into the most noble Order of the Garter, and
accordingly he was installed at Windsor 7th of July 1623; from henceforth
living in the highest Favor with his Prince, whose Affection and Esteem he had
a greater Power over than any Man of that time, says one, the Duke of
Buckinghame only excepted: He departed this Life at London in the prime of his
Age 3 d of March 1625, aged 36 Years, to the great Grief of the King, who
prophetically apprehended, that as the Branches were now cut down, the Root
would quickly follow, for the Duke of Lennox died the 16 of February
preceding, and his Majesty's Death happened on the 27th of March ensuing.

He married Anne Daughter of James Earl of Glencairn, by whom he had Issue
three Sons and three Daughters

James Duke of Hamilton.

William Duke of Hamiltoun.

Lord John Hamilton died young.

Lady Anne married to Hugh Earl of Eglingtoun, and had Issue,

Lady Margaret to John Earl of Crawfurd and had Issue,

Lady Mary to James Earl of Queensberry, but had no Issue.

James Marquess of Hamilton his Son was born on the 19th of June 1606, he had
his Education in Scotland till the 14th Year of his Age. He was sent for to
Court, and married to the Lady Mary Feilding Daughter of William Earl of
Denbigh, by Susanna Sister to George Duke of Buckinghame. After which he went
to the University of Oxford, where he continued during the Time it was judged
necessary his Lordship should follow his Studies there.

The next Qualification for a young Nobleman, was to accomplish himself with
traveling into Foreign Countries, which he did into France, Spain, and several
other Parts beyond Sea, Dr. James Baillie of Carnbrew accompanying him as his
Governor, who faithfully discharged the Trust reposed in him.

Upon King Charles's coming to the Crown he was sworn of his Majesty's most
honorable Privy Council in both Kingdoms; and that he might have a nearer
Relation to the Court, was constituted Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and on the
18th of June 1628, preferred to be Master of the Horse, then void by the Death
of the Duke of Buckingham Dr Burnet's Memoirs of the Dukes of Hamilton.
. Neither are we to forget that his Majesty was pleased to honor his Lordship
with the Dignity of the most noble Order of the Garter, Anno 1630, at the
Baptism of K. Charles II. where my Lord Marquess had the Honor to Represent
the King of Bohemia as one of the Godfathers at the Font.

In the 1629, his Majesty taking into his Consideration the State of the King
of Bohemia his Brother-in-Law, was pleased from the entire Confidence he had in
the Marquess to allow him to Treat with Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden for
raising an Army of Six Thousand Men to join that Monarch in his Expedition into
Germany, to be employed against the Imperialists, for the Recovery of the
Palatinate Dr. Burnet makes out this fully.
. And it is more remarkable, that this Lord should be entrusted with so great a
Command, because he was but then Twenty three Years of Age, but that Enterprise
ending without so much Advantage as was expected from such an Army to the
Protestant Cause, neither his Absence, nor want of thorough Success in his
Negotiation, diminished in the least his Masters Esteem of him, for upon his
return to Court, he was received with all the Respect that could be given a
Subject.

Upon the first Insurrection in Scotland, Anno 1638, occasioned by the pressing
of the Liturgy, he was sent down as his Majesty's High Commissioner to the
General Assembly of the Church, with Instructions to compose and appease the
Disorders of the Nation, then in a great Ferment, but in that Judicature my
Lord Marquess not being able to carry what the King designed, he according to
Order dissolved the Meeting, and Inhibited them to sit any longer under pain of
Rebellion, which was all his Lordship could do. Next Year he was entrusted with
the Command of the Fleet sent down to reduce the Covenanters to their Duty to
the King, his Majesty himself being on the Head of Six Thousand Landforces,
advanced as far as Berwick, but by the Marquess's Mediation and good Offices
with the King, a Treaty was set on Foot, and a Pacification ensued.

On the breaking out of the Civil War in England, Anno 1642, he was one of the
Peers who signed a solemn Declaration, That his Majesty abhorred all Designs of
making War upon his Parliament, and that all his Endeavors tended to the firm
and constant Settlement of the true Protestant Religion, the Privileges of
Parliament, and the Laws, the Peace and Prosperity of the Subject The Earl of
Clarendon's History of the Rebellion.
; and at the same time he offered to the King to go into Scotland, undertaking,
that he would at least keep that People from doing any Thing that might seem to
countenance the Carriage of the English Parliament, but to be only Spectators
of what was done in England without engaging themselves in the Quarrel, and
would endeavor, if possible, to oppose the Calling of a Parliament in
Scotland, which the King had absolutely refused to do, till the time came
agreed on at his Majesty's last being there The Earl of Clarendon's History of
the Rebellion and Civil War.
, but as soon as he came down to Scotland, he quickly discerning the strength
of the Covenanters, gave way to it that there should be a Meeting of the
Estates, reasonably enough concluding that the absolutely refusing to suffer a
Parliament to be called, would not quiet the Debates, nor secure the King, but
more inflame those who desired it, and who would take some other time, when
many of them who opposed it should be absent to propose it, and so would carry
it; and that therefore they were better be absent at first, whereby the other
Party might without Opposition send out their Summons for a Parliament to
assemble at the Day they should think fit; and that as they who would serve the
King, would not be there, so they should prevail with as many others as they
could, not to be there like wise, where by the Number which appeared would be
so inconsiderable, that they would not dare to sit and perfectly disperse, and
this Disappointment would for ever quash that Design, and render those who
advised it odious to the People, as Men who desired illegally to engage the
Nation in unjustifiable Ways to disturb the public Peace; but his Lordship
changing his former Opinion concerning their being absent at the time of the
Meeting or Parliament, since their mere absence would not be discountenance
enough, and that they who sat, as indeed many would have done, would carry the
Reputation of a Parliament, and the People would be guided by them, and
therefore he proposed to the King's Friends, that they would all resolve to be
present and take their Places, that when the House should be set, and any Man
should stand up to propose the taking any Business into Consideration, he would
first make his Protestation against proceeding in so unlawful a Convention, and
that they should all make the same Protestation, and he did hope that the
Number of the Protesters would be great enough to dissolve the Meeting, and
thus they should put the best End to the Matter that could be desired; but if
it should succeed otherways, then would be the time to withdraw, and put
themselves in Arms, toward which he would make the best Preparation he could,
and desired them to do the like, and this last Overture the King himself liked
best and approved of, that they should meet in the Convention, which they did
accordingly at the Day appointed. Then his Lordship, according to his Promise
and Concert, took an Opportunity to make a Protestation against the Legality of
the Meeting, upon which many of the Members who had been always most engaged
against the King were very warm, and demanded that he should declare himself
clearly, whether he did protest against the Parliament; but his Lordship
fearing, as he declared, the fatal Issue of adhereing to his Protestation to
the King's Service, he excused himself after the best manner he could, though no
Man had a greater dislike of the high Proceedings of that Meeting, in exceeding
the Limits of their Duty to the King, or had a greater Affection for his
Majesty's Service than my Lord Marquess had, for he opposed all their
Determinations with all the vigor he thought seasonable, concurring only so far
with them as was necessary to keep up his Credit, whereby he might with the
more Authority advance the King's Cause and a Peace, which he and all good Men
so passionately desired. His Majesty, that he might testify the Esteem he had
of my Lord Marquess's Services, and of his Fidelity to his Interest, was
graciously pleased to promote him to be Duke of Hamilton on the 12th of April
1643 Diploma Jacobi Ducis de Hamilton in Rotulis Car: I.
. How this Convention in Scotland was consen'd and overreached by Sir Henry
Vane, every one knows: for he persuaded them that there was nothing intended
against the King by the English Nation, but only that they should interpose for
a good Peace to them, which would be an Honor to them, and a great Obligation
to his Majesty Earl of Clarendon's History of the Rebellion,
: As for the History of this Convention and its subsequent Acts, and the fatal
Effects as well as Infamy of the Scots joining with the English Parliament
against the King as the consequent of the Solemn League and Covenant, are all
particulars so well known, and have been so much enlarged on in several
Treatises particularly wrote to that purpose, that the further mentioning of
them in this place, will be but needless, seeing the noble Person whose Memoirs
I write, was free from any Accession or Guilt therein.

As soon as the Convention was over, the Duke and his Brother the Earl of
Lanerk left Scotland to give the King, then at Oxford, an Account of all their
proceedings; but notwithstanding of his Grace's good Intention toward the King,
his Enemies, for not a few he had, used all the Artifi^es they could to render
him suspected to his Majesty, as if he secretly countenanced, at least did not
sufficiently abhor the unnatural Rebellion of his Countrymen, and this
Imputation was with so great Art insinuated, that it got so much Credit, with
those about the Court, that the King upon my Lord Duke and his Brothers
arrival, commanded them to keep their Chambers, and ordered a Guard to attend
them Ibidem.
, so after some time his Grace was sent in Custody to the Castle of Bristol,
and from thence to Exeter, and so to the Castle of Pendinnis, whence he was
removed to St. Michael's Mount in Cornwall, upon the surrender of which to the
Parliaments Forces, Anno 1646, he obtained his Liberty, which he employed with
much Zeal in the King's Service to the loss of his Life, by which he was not
only vindicated in the Opinion of all Men from all those Jealousies and
Aspersions he had lain long under, but the proceedings that had been against
him at Oxford, were looked upon by many as void of that Justice and Policy
which had been requisite, and they concluded by what he did after a long
Imprisonment, how much he might have done more successfully if he had never
been restrained Ibidem.
.

As soon as my Lord Duke was at Liberty, it was believed that the Animosity was
so great between him and some others of great Name, that he would rather
meditate a Revenge, than concur in any Action which might advance the King's
Interest, but his Grace well considered both his Duty to his Majesty, and his
own Danger at such a Juncture, to think of private Contention and matters of
Revenge, when the public was so much at Stake, so that his former Treatment
made no other Impression upon him, then to make him show his steadiness more
and more to his Majesty's Service, who then so much stood in need of the
Assistance of his faithful Subjects.

When the King put himself into the Scots Army before Newark in the 1646, my
Lord Duke having obtained his Liberty, came to wait on his Majesty Bishop
Burnet's Memoir's of James Du^e of Hamilton.
, and was well received by him. After they had conversed some time together,
his Majesty was pleased to express the sense he had of his long Sufferings, and
told him in these Words, That he had ever judged him Innocent as to the bulk of
things, tho he confessed there were some particulars he was not so well
satisfied with, but that his Restraint was extorted from him against his Heart,
for he had stood out against all the Importunities of his Enemies till the very
Morning he came to Oxford.

His Lordship's next Care was to bring his Majesty and the Committee of Estates
to a happy Peace and Accommodation Dr. Burnet's Memoirs.
; and as he earnestly endeavored to have them satisfied with the Kings
Concessions, so he dealt fervently with his Majesty to yield to the abolishing
of Episcopacy in England, as he had in Scotland, as the only way to induce the
Presbyterian Party to declare for him, but the good King could not be be
prevailed on to consent to buy his Peace, as he said, at so dear a Rate as the
peace of his Conscience, so the Treaty at that time had not its desired effect.

When it came to be considered in Parliament what way his Majesty's Person
should be disposed of, still in the Scots Army, my Lord Duke finding that the
House by a Majority were inclined to deliver him up to the English Parliament,
his Grace took an Opportunity that he might declare to the World his abhorrence
of an Action attended with so much Infamy, and spoke against it to this purpose,

Would Scotland now quit a Possession of 1500 Years Date, which was their
Interest in their Sovereign, and do it to those, whose Enmity both against Him
and them did visibly appear? Was this the effect of all their Protestations of
Duty and Affection to his Majesty? Was this their keeping of their Covenant,
wherein they had sworn to defend the King's Majesty's Person and Authority? Was
this a suitable return to the King's Goodness, both in his consenting to all
the Desires of that Kingdom, An. 1641. and in His late trusting His Person to
them? What Censures will be past upon this through the whole World? What a
stain would it be to the whole Reformed Religion? and in fine, what Danger
might be apprehended both to the King's Person, and to Scotland, from the Party
that was now prevalent in England.

But notwithstanding all the Opposition the Duke and his Friends could make
against it, yet the same was carried upon the 16th of January 1647, That the
King should be delivered up into such Hands as the English Parliament had
appointed to receive him Ibidem.
, to the great Grief of the Duke, and all true hearted Scots-Men, and that his
Grace might again in any Degree retrive the Dishonor the Nation suffered in
the giving up that excellent Prince, he endeavored all he could to infuse a
sense of Shame and Horror in all People for the late Action, which might
prepare them to a Reparation of it by a generous engaging in the King's
Quarrel, and in doing so, most of the Year 1647 was spent even till the meeting
of the next Parliament, which sat down the 2 d of March 1648 Bishop Guthrie's
Memoirs.
, at the opening of which my Lord Duke did all he could to inflame the People
with Zeal for his Majesty's Relief, and against the Army of England who he
said, "had forced the Parliament there to break the Treaty between the two
Kingdoms in their ill usage of the King, who was Imprisoned by the Army, nor
was it in the power of the Parliament to set him at Liberty, That they had now
upon the matter, absolutely deposed him, by not suffering him to perform the
Office of a King, not permitting any of his Subjects to repair to him; in which
the Kingdom of Scotland was concerned, in that being independent upon England
and the Paliament of England, they were by them deprived of their King, and
could not be admitted to speak with him, nor his Majesty to send to them; which
was such a Presumption, and violation of the Law of Nations, and such a
perfidious breach and contempt of the Solemn League and Covenant, and of the
Treaty between the two Kingdoms, that they were bound by all the Obligations
Human and Divine to be sensible of it, and to redeem their King's Liberty, and
their own Honor, with the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes, and all that was
dear to them: and therefore he desired that they might enter upon those
Counsels, which might soonest get an Army together, which should no sooner
enter England, but it would find a conjunction from that whole Kingdom, except
only the Army; and that it would then quickly appear that the Parliament of
both Kingdoms desired the same thing, and to live happily under the Government
of the same King."

This Discourse urged by the Duke and seconded by many of the principal
Members, was entertained with so general a Reception, that it was agreed to,
that an Army should be raised for the Relief of his Majesty, whereof his Grace
was appointed General, which being Levied with all the Diligence imaginable,
entered England about the 8th of July 1648, consisting of twelve thousand Foot,
and five thousand Horse, and next day had the Town of Carlyle delivered to them
from Sir Philip Musgrave The Life of James Duke of Hamilton.
, and after some Days stay there, he marched to Kendal, and thence to Prestoun
in Lancashire, where he was so closly pursued by Cromwell's Horse, under
Lambert, that on the 20th of August 1648, his whole Army was routed, and his
Grace put to the necessity of rendering himself Pri^oner upon Articles of
Capitulation at Exeter in Staffordshire to the Lord Gray of Groby The
Capitulation is set down a^ length in Dr. Burnet's Memoirs of the Dukes of
Hamilton, and Peerage of England.
, from whence he was carried to Ashby, where he continued till the beginning of
December, he was sent Prisoner to Windsor, where he had the Society of the
Earls of Norwich and Holland and the Lord Capell, common Sufferers in the same
Cause with himself, where they were all kept in close restraint till the murder
of the King. The Duke then perceiving his own Danger, attempted to make an
escapec, in which he had so well succeeded that he was out of his Enemies hands
full three Days, but being impatient to be at a greater distance from them, he
was apprehended as he was taking Horse in Southwark and carried Prisoner to the
Tower, from whence he was on the 6th of February 1649 brought before that
monstrous High Court of Justice, whose Hands were still reeking in the Blood of
their Sovereign. Mr. Steel and Mr. Cook Council for the Parliament Life of
James Duke of Hamilton.
, exhibited a Charge of high Treason against him, That he the Earl of Cambridge
had traitorously invaded the Nation in a hostile manner, and levied War to
assist the King against the Kingdom and People of England, etc. In his Defense
he used all the lawful means in the World, and insisted upon the Right and
Privilege of the Kingdom of Scotland, that it had not the least Dependence
upon the Kingdom of England, but was entirely governed by its own Laws, that he
being a Subject of that Kingdom, was bound to obey the Commands thereof, and
the Parliament of that Kingdom having thought it necessary to raise an Army for
the relief of their King, and constituted him General of that Army, it was not
lawful for him to refuse the Command thereof, and whatever Misfortune he had
undergone with it, he could not be understood to be liable to any Punishment
but what a Prisoner of War was bound to undergo. He was told, That the Rights
and Laws of the Kingdom of Scotland were not called in question, nor could be
violated by their proceedings against him, who was a Subject of England,
against which he was charged with Rebellion and Treason, that they did not
proceed against him as Duke Hamilton of Scotland, but as Earl of Cambridge of
England, and they would judge him as such.

His Council Mr. Hales, Mr. Chute, and Mr. Parsons defended him with great
Learning and Judgment, as may be seen in Bishop Burnet's Memoirs of his Life
at large, but all Arguments in his favor signified nothing, he was born down
with the Torrent of the Times, and together with the Earls of Holland and
Norwich, the Lord Capel, and Sir John Oven, had Sentence of Death pronounced
against them to los^ their Heads. To conclude the Fate of this great Person, he
was on the 9th Day of March 1649 brought to Westminster, the Place appointed
for his Execution, and ascending the Scaffold with a composed and undaunted
Courage, He spoke of his Devotion to the Church of Scotland and the Protestant
Religion established by Law, and professed in that Church, of his Loyalty to the
King, whose Restoration and Prosperity he heartily prayed for, and Affection
to the Welfare and Happiness of the Kingdom as Matters unquestionable. After
which with a mavelous Tranquillity of Mind he delivered his Head to the
Block, which severed it from his Body at one Blow, which, together with the
Body was convoyed by Sea into Scotland, and buried in the Church of Hamilton,
according to his own Order.

His Grace by Mary his Wife aforesaid, Daughter of William Earl of Denbigh,
besides three Sons and a Daughter who died in their Childhood, he had two
Daughters who survived him, Lady Anne Duchess of Hamilton and Lady Susanna
married to John Earl of Cassils.

James Duke of Hamilton being thus impiously cut off, leaving no Sons behind
him, his Estate and Honor did descend to William Earl of Lanerk his Brother;
he was born 14th December 1616 Life of William Duke of Hamilton
, being deprived of his Father in the 9th Year of his Age: his Mother, a Lady
among the most Eminent in all Virtues, redoubled her Care of his Education in
the Schools and University at home, and then his Brother the Duke sent him
abroad Bishop Burnet's Memoirs of the Dukes of Hamilton.
to qualify him by Travel and otherways for the service of his Country,
continuing beyond Sea till his twenty first Year Ibidem.
Anno 1637. His Majesty King Charles I. conceiving an extraordinary good
Opinion of him, was graciously pleased as a distinguishing mark of his Favor,
by Letters Patent bearing Date the 31 of March 1639, to honor him with the
Titles of Earl of La^erk, Lord Machanshire and Polmont Diploma Gulielmi Comitis
de Lanerk in Rotulis Car. I. ad annum 1639.
, and William Earl of Stirling Secretary for Scotland giving way to ^ate in the
beginning of the Year 1640 Lives of the Officers of State, MS. penes me.
, the King discerning my Lord Lanerk adorned with all the Qualifications he
judged necessary for the discharge of that Employment, was pleased to promote
him thereto, an Office his Lordship discharged with eminent Sufficiency, and
the general applause of all Men for some Years after, though it is remarkable he
was but aged twenty four Years at his Promotion.

The cruel and bloody Civil War hastening on, my Lord Lanerk used his utmost
Endeavors to allay the unhappy Differences which had arisen between his
Majesty and his Subjects of both Kingdoms, and bent all his Thoughts to mediate
a Peace to the Honor and Safety of the King, and the Wel^are and Happiness of
the Kingdom. In the Convention of Estates which met on the 22 of June 1643 The
Bishop of Duakeid's Memoir of the Civil War.
, his Lordship acted with his usual Zeal for the public good, but discerning
that the Royal Party in that Assembly had not Authority or Power enough to
cross any thing that was done to the prejudice of the King Earl of Clarendon's
History, and Bishop Burnet's Memoirs compared.
, and that a direct Protestation against the Convention in that conjuncture of
time was to destroy themselves to no purpose, his Lordship and other loyal
Peers did give in a Declaration, and took Instruments both in the King's Name
and their own Burnet's Memoirs.
, which was all that could be pradently done in that Season, soon after which
my Lord Lanerk, for Reasons, and from Motives that History is altogether silent
in, and which is not clear enough to this time, he put the King's Signet, with
which he was entrusted as Secretary, to the Proclamation for the general
Rendevouz of all Men in the Kingdom from such an Age to such an Age, whereby
the Army was presently formed, which afterward joined with the Parliament of
England against the King, the fatal Consequences of which are so well known,
that they need not be told Clarendon's History.
. This Action was not thought capable of any Excuse, and was afterward very
much represented to his Disadvantage, and was the first Cause of the King's
Jealousy both of the Duke his Brother and his Lordship, and thereby their
Sincerity and Affection to his Majesty's Service came to be very much called in
question, but the Earl of Lanerk presuming he had enough to excuse himself of
any Disloyalty, as soon as the Convention was over, went with his Brother the
Duke to wait on the King at Oxford Guthrie's Memoirs.
, being confident that when he should be admitted to speak with his Majesty, he
would give him satisfaction in that Affair Clarendon's History.
. Upon their arrival there, both the Brothers were put under a Confinement, but
the Earl perceiving Burnet's Memoirs.
that they were not like to obtain a Trial for clearing their Innocence, and
discovering the Forgeries of their Accusers; and his Lordship fearing a long
and cruel Imprisonment, he made his escape by means of Sir James Cuningham, and
presently repaired to London; After some stay there, returning to Scotland, he
easily found means to make his Peace with the Estates by taking of the Covenant
Guthrie's Memoirs.
, whereby he came to have a great Influence on their Counsels and did not a
little contribute to moderate the fury of the leading Men of that side to
hearken to Propositions for Peace and Accommodation with the King.

After this we hear not much of the Conduct of the Earl till the 1646, when the
King came to the Scots Army at Newark, he was with other two Lords sent
Commissioner from the Committee of Estates with an humble Offer of their Duty
to his Majesty, and of their sincere Intentions to serve him, and withal to
give him assurance that the Preservation of his sacred Person, and his just
Power and Greatness, was and should ever be dear to them. Here my Lord Lanerk
used all the Persuasions, and all the Importunities he could with his Majesty,
to give Satisfaction to the Desires of his Subjects, and as a Preparation to
this, that he would send his positive Orders to the Marquess of Montrose to lay
down his Arms, extirpate Prelacy out of England as he had done in Scotland, and
to agree to such Propositions as should be brought from the two Houses in
England. The first Proposal he graciously condescended to; To the next, he
returned this Answer, That when he was satisfied in his Conscience of the
lawfulness of what they desired, then and never till then would he grant their
Demands. As for the Message from the English Parliament, it was so high, that
his Majesty could not grant ^^, ^or my Lord Clarendon says, It contained such
an Eradication of the Government of the Church and State, that the King told
them, he knew not what Answer to make to them till he should be informed what
Power or Authority they had left him and his Heirs, when he had given all to
them which they desired.

On that ominous Day 16th of January 1647, when the great Transaction came to
be debated in Parliament about the disposing of his Majesty's Person, who was
in the Hands of the Army, Whether they should leave him in England to the two
Houses, yea or not. Thus was the Question stated, against giving up of the
King, my Lord Lanerk argued strenously, and spoke against it, as the most
barefaced Violation of their Faith and Allegiance to deliver up their Native
Prince, who had put himself into their Hands against his Will and Consent, into
the Custody of such as would put his Sacred Person in eminent hazard, but to
the eternal Infamy of the Majority of that Convention it was carried, To
deliver up the King, whereat his Lordship was so perfectly overwhelmed with the
horror of so sinful and shameful a Deed, that he expressed his Dissent from it
in so passionate a manner, that it would be to do him wrong to omit to give it
in his own Words, As God shall have mercy on my Soul (said he) at the great
Day, I would rather choose to have my Head struck off at the Cross of
Edinburgh, than give my Consent to this Vote, and then adds, That this was the
blackest Day that ever Scotland saw Bishop Burnet's Memoirs, I wish latest
Posterity may not for ever have cause to remark, with equal Sorrow and Regret
the same ominous Day threescore Years, viz. sixteenth of January one thousand
seven hundred and seven, on which the late Treaty of Union betwixt the two
Nations was ratified and approven b^ Act of Parliament, whereby alas! Scotland
is now no more; well may Scots-Men, who think on the Transactions of that Day
say with the Poet, Quis talia fand^ temperes a lachrimis.
.

As the Earl of Lanerk had from the very beginning of the War been always
disposed to Peace, so shortly after this by his Dexterity and Influence, a
Treaty was set on foot betwixt the King and the Parliament of Scotland, his
Lordship, with the Earls of Lauderdale and Loudon being appointed Commissioners
for that end, in pursuance of which laudable design they repaired to his
Majesty as soon as he was at the Isle of Wight, and undertook to invade England
with an Army to restore him to his just Rights, and in order to this they
proposed to him many Conditions which would be necessary for his Majesty to
perform toward the Nation, without whichit ^ould not be easy to induce them to
be so unanimous in an Engagement for him, as was necessary for such an
Enterprise. They required that the Prince of Wales should be present with them,
and march in the Head of their Army. That such a number of Scots-Men should be
always in the Court, of the Bedchamber, and all other Places about the Persons
of the King, Prince, and Duke of York. That Berwick and Carlyle should be put
into their Hands. They demanded moreover, that as soon as his Majesty could
with Freedom, Honor and Safety be present in a free Parliament, to confirm the
Solemn League and Covenant by Act of Parliament Clarendon's History.
, providing that none who was unwilling should be constrained to take it. They
likewise obliged his Majesty to confirm Presbyterian Government in England for
three Years, and after the Expiration of that time, such a Government shall be
determined by his Majesty and the two Houses of Parliament as was most
agreeable to the Word of God. That an effectual course shall be taken for the
suppressing of all Heresies, and all Principles and Practices contrary to the
Principles of Christianity. This Agreement his Majesty was pleased to sign the
26 of December 1647 The Earl of Clarendon in his History has the Substance of
the Treaty.
, and to oblige himself in the Word of a King to perform his part of the
Treaty, as the Commissioners also engaged themselves, upon their Honor, Faith
and Conscience, and all that is dear to honest Men, to endeavor to the utmost
of their Power that the Kingdom of Scotland should engage to perform what was
on its part to be performed.

Any Body who reads this Treaty, in which his Majesty's Concessions are so
full, could scarcely have thought that any Party would not have been perfectly
pleased with it, and so all would indifferently concur in that dutiful, loyal
and generous Design of relieving the King, then made a close Prisoner by Oliver
Cromwell and the Officers of the Army: but the rigid Clergy and the Lords of
that Side, not only declared against the Engagement as unlawful and sinful
Bishop Guthrie's Memoirs.
, and all the Persons who advanced and promoted it as Deserters of the
Covenant, but also raised what Force they could in the Western Counties to
oppose it, which at last came to be formed into a kind of an Army under the
Command of the Earls of Eglintoun, Lowdoun, and some of the leading Clergy
Ibidem.
, whom for Respect to their Character, as Church men, I will not name. Against
this illegal Insurrection the Committee of Estates ordered some Troops to be
levied, which the Earl of Lanerk was chosen to command, but his Lordship was ^o
sincerely and thoroughly devouted to preserve the Peace of his Country, and to
accommodate Matters calmly and without Blood, that he brought the Matter to an
Agreement very much against his Mind, and to his Prejudice; yet so violent and
Perfidious, beyond what can be imagined, were these Times, that though my Lord
Lanerk complied with them in their own Terms, in whatever they demanded, yet
knowing his Lordship to be a through-paced Loyalist, and that his Principles
were quite opposite to their Designs, they resolved to be rid of him at any
rate: and therefore, without the least Pretense of any Breach of any Article of
their Treaty, they put him under a Restraint, resolving to send him to their
Brethren in England, who had by this time barbarously murdered the King, to be
punished as an Incendiary, that is, to have his Head cut off; wherefore he
thought it his most advisable course to get out of the sight of the Calamity
of his Country, and to retire beyond Sea, which he did into Holland, with an
offer of his Service to King Charles II. And brought with him, says the Lord
Clarendon, A Heart and Affection clearer and less clogged with Scruples and
Reservations for the King's Service, than any other of the Nation had. When his
Lordship arrived at the Hague, he first came to know that he was Duke of
Hamilton by the Slaughter of his Brother, this sad News afflicted him so much,
that he kept his Chamber for some Days, without so much as waiting on the King,
who sent a gracious Message to him to condole for the loss of his Brother: And
all the Lords, and other persons of Qualility about the King made their Visits
of Condolence to him with all Civility. His Grace stayed in the Netherlands
till the King and the Commissioners from Scotland had agreed to the Terms on
which they would make him their King: My Lord Duke being very instrumental to
prevailupon his Majesty to submit to the most rigid Terms the Kirk required of
him. At the same time, in the end of the 1649, his Majesty was pleased to
acknowledge and recompense the Dukes Loyalty and Merit, by bestowing the Garter
on him as a distinguishing mark of his Royal Favor. He accompanied his Majesty
to Scotland Anno 1650, but his Enemies would not permit him to come to Court;
so having given his Majesty the best Advice he could, with his leave, he
retired to the Isle of Arran, where he stayed till the Parliament met at
Stirling in 1651, then his Grace was suffered to come to Court, being welcomed
by the King, and nearest in his Confidence. So soon as the Army was raised for
restoring the King, my Lord Duke raised a Troop of Horse for his Majesty's
Service on his own Charge, with which he marched to the fatal Battle of
Worcester 3d of September 1651, charging the Enemy very vigorously, he received
a Shot in his Leg, whereby he fell into the Enemies hands, and on the 11 of
September died of his Wounds, and thereby prevented the being made a Spectacle
as his Brother had been, which the Pride and Animosity of his Enemies would no
doubt have caused to be, having the same Pretense for it by his being a Peer of
England, as the other was. The Earl of Clarendon having furnished me a
Character of this noble Duke in his History of the Civil War, I shall presume
to insert it in his Words. He was (says that noble Lord) A Man not inferior in
Wisdom and Parts of Understanding to the wisest Men of the Nation, of great
Honor, Courage and Sincerity in his Nature, and which was a rare Virtue in the
Men of that time, was still the same Men he pretended to be, and in truth was
in all Respects a very accomplished Person, of an excellent Judgment, and
clear and ready Expression, and though he had been driven into several
unwarrantable Actions, he made it very evident he had not been led by any
Inclination of his own, and passionately and heartily run to all Opportunities
of redeeming it, and in the very Article of his Death he expressed a mavelous
Cheerfulness, that he had the Honor to lose his Life in the King's Service,
and thereby to wipe out the Memory of his former Transgressions which he always
professed were odi^us to himself.

He married, in the 1637, Elisabeth Daughter and Coheir of James Maxwell Earl
of Dirletoun, by whom he had a Son James, who died an Infant; also four
Daughters.

Lady Anne married to Robert third Earl of Southesk, and had Issue.

Lady Elisabeth to James Lord Kilmaurs, Son to the Earl of Glencairn, and again
to Sir David Cuningham of Robertland, sans Issue.

Lady Mary to Alexander Earl of Callendar, after his Death to Sir James
Livingstoun of West Quarter, and last of all to James Earl of Finlater.

Lady Margaret to William Blair of that Ilk, in Vicecomit. de Air, and had
Issue.

Upon the decease of William Duke of Hamilton without Issue Male of his own
Body, the Estate and Honor of the Family, did devolve on his Niece the Lady
Anne, eldest Daughter of James Duke of Hamilton, a Lady, who for constancy of
Mind, evenness of Temper, solidity of Judgment, and an unaffected Piety, will
leave a shining Character, as well as Example to Posterity, for her Conduct as
a Wife, a Mother, a Mistress and in all other Conditions of Life. Her Grace
married William Douglass Earl of Selkirk eldest Son of William the first
Marquess of Douglass, by Mary his second Wife, Daughter of George Marquess of
Huntly, who by the Marriage Articles yielded to change both his Surname, and
the Surname of all his Children to Hamilton, whereupon he was by King Charles
II. raised to the Dignity of Duke of Hamilton for his own Lifetime Charta in
Rotulis Car. II. ad annum 1660.
by Letters Patent on the 20th of September 1660, but such was the Humor of
the Times and the prevalency of Parties, that save that his Grace was in the
Council, he had no Employment in the State during all King Charles's Reign,
though he had a large share of his Majesty's Esteem, which he testified when he
chose him into the Society of the most noble Order of the Garter Miscellany
Collections.
Anno 1682.

When King James VII. came to the Throne in the beginning of the 1685, he found
more Favor with the Court than he had done in the former Reign, for he was not
only a Lord of Council, but also of the Treasaury, and Session, an
extraordinary Lord; Also on the 14th of October 1687, he was sworn a Privy
Counselor for England History of England Vol. III.
, in all which Offices he continued till his Majesty retired into France, in
the end of the 1688. On the grand Revolution of the Government, upon the Prince
of Orange's coming over to England, the Duke being at London at the Head of
diverse of the Scots Nobility and Gentry, who were then in Town, waited on his
Highness the Prince, who received them with great Respect, and soon after
making choice of the Duke their President, they addressed the Prince to take
upon him the Administration of all Affairs Civil and Military, the disposal of
the public Revenue and Fortresses of the Kingdom, that he would do every thing
that was necessary for the Preservation of the Peace of the Kingdom, until a
Meeting of the Estates of the Nation, which they desired his Highness to Call,
to be holden at Edinburgh the 14th of March 1689.

The Convention, upon the Prince of Orange's Letters, meeting at the Day
appointed, began with the choice of a President, which fell on his Grace the
Duke of Hamilton, by a Majority of ten Voices more than the Marquess of Athole
Memoirs ^f the Convention of Estates MS.
, after which they passed an Act asserting and maintaining the lawfulness of
the Meeting, and declaring that they would not dissolve, but continue sitting
until the Government, Religion and Property were settled and established Acts
of the Convention of Estates.
. Their next care was to publish a Proclamation requiring all Persons from the
Age of Sixty to Sixteen to be ready to take Arms upon Advertisement from the
meeting of Estates, for securing the Protestant Religion, the Laws and
Liberties of the Kingdom Acts and Orders of the Convention of Estates.
. At length on the 11th of April they proceeded, and came to the following
Resolution, viz. That King James VII. being a professed Papist, did assume the
regal Power, and acted as King without ever taking the Oath required by Law,
and has by the Advice of evil and wicked Counselors invaded the fundamental
Constitution of the Kingdom, and altered it from a legal limited Monarchy to an
Arbitrary despotick Power, and has exercised the same to the Subversion of the
Protestant Religion, and the Violation of the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom, inverting all the Ends of Government, whereby he has forfaulted the
Right to the Crown, and the Throne is become vacant. Upon which the Estates
ordered a Committee to bring in an Act for settling the Crown upon William and
Mary King and Queen of England, and likewise to prepare an Instrument of
Government to be offered with the Crown, for redressing the Grievances, and
securing the Liberties of the People, in pursuance whereof the Committee drew
up an Act Ibidem.
reciting, in fourteen Articles, the method by which King James had invaded the
Constitution of the Kingdom, and in other twenty four Articles, their Claim and
Declaration of their ancient Rights and Liberties; which Act being read and
agreed to, it was enacted that King William and Queen Mary should be declared
King and Queen of Scotland, To hold the Crown and royal Dignity of the said
Kingdom, to them the said King and Queen during their Lives, and the longest
Liver of them, and that the sole and full exercise of the regal Power be only
in, and exercised by him the said King, in the Names of the said King and Queen
during their joint Lives, and after their decease to the Heirs of the Body of
the said Queen, which failing, to the Princess Anne of Denmark, and the Heirs
of her Body; which also failing to the Heirs of the Body of the said William
King of England. After which the Meeting of Estates was adjourned on the 24 of
May, till the 5th of June Acts and Orders of the Estates of the Kingdom of
Scotland Anno 1689.
: My Lord Duke being again their Majesty's High Commissioner, the Convention
was turned into a Parliament, wherein they abolished Episcopal Government,
rescinded the Forfaulture of the Earl of Argyle, and adjourned on the 2d of
August 1689. The Throne being filled with King William and Queen Mary, his
Grace became the Prime Minister, was Lord President of the Privy Council, one
of the extraordinary Lords of Session, and Lord high Admiral of Scotland. But
it seems that King thought not all this enough to reward his signal Merit and
Services, so he was pleased again to make him Lord high Commissioner in that
Session of Parliament, which began on the 18th of April 1693 Acts of Parliament.
, wherein several Acts for the benefit of Trade and Commerce passed, his Grace
having ordered the Lord Chancellor to prorogue the Parliament to the 12th of
September, he set out for London some time after, from whence returning in the
Month of March, he was taken ill in his Health after an Indisposition that
would not yield to the Art of the Physician, that handsome Body of his sunk
extremely, yet without any Alteration in his Mind and Senses, and with a full
prospect of Death, and a Christian Preparation for it, he departed this
transitory Life, at the Abbey of Holy-rood house on the 18 April 1694, in the 60
Year of his Age, and was interred in the Collegiate Church of Hamilton in the
Vault of the Family, where there is a Monument erected for him of various
colored Marble embellished with his own Coat of Arms, and the Coats of these
Eight noble and ancient Families Engraven upon the Pillars thereof, viz.
Marquess of Douglass, Lord Oliphant, Graham of Morphie, Earl of Errol: Marquess
of Huntly, Duke of Lennox, Duke of Chattlerault, M. de Antraguess, and upon a
Tablet of black Marble there is the Inscription that here follows, Memoriae
Sacrum Illustrissimi Principis Gulielmi secundi Hamiltoniorum Ducis,
Clydsdaliae Marchionis Arraniae Lanerici etc. Comitis Avaniae, Polmontis,
Macchaniae, etc. Reguli, Celsissim^ Duglassiorum Marchionis ex secundis Nuptiis
cum Maria Gordon Marchionis de Huntlie Filia Filii natu maximi Regii palatii
Sanctae Crucis Custodis perpetui, in Trium Regni Ordin Commit. saepius Proregis
Secretioribus Conciliis Regni Scotiae Praesidis, Tribus etiam Regibus
succedaneis Ab intimis Regni Angliae Coneiliis Sacri io^dem Aerarii comitis In
supremo Foro Juridico senatoris Extraordinarii, Regni Scotiae Thalassiarchae,
Nobilissimi Ordinis Periscelidis Equitis Socii, Patriae Propugnatoris strenui,
Familiae Instauratoris tanquam divinitus missi Hoc (Famae nunquam interiturae)
Monumentum M^rens posuit Vidua Anna (Post seriem tredecim procerum Familiae
principem) Ipsa Familias Haeres Praeter Jacobum Haeredem Quinque alios reliquit
Filios Tres itidem Filias illustrissimis Familiis in Matrimonium collocatas.
Natus 24 die December 1634. Denat. 18 April 1694.

The Duke of Hamilton's Character being easily to be collected from what has
already been said, there remains nothing more to be observed of him, but that
by her Grace Anne Duchess of Hamilton he had a numerous Posterity of Sons and
Daughters, viz.

James Duke of Hamilton.

Charles Earl of Selkirk.

John Earl of Ruglen.

George Earl of Orkney.

Lord Basile Hamilton of Baldoon, a Gentleman of singular Accomplishments, and
of an affable and generous Disposition, which procured him a general Esteem,
and had undoubtedly appeared an Ornament to his Country, had not Death taken
him away in the bloom of his Life, Anno 1701. By Mary his Wife Daughter and
sole Heir of Sir David Dunbar of Baldoon Baronet, he left Issue Basil Hamilton
Esquire his Son and Heir.

Lord Archibald Hamilton late Member of Parliament for the County of Lanerk,
who was by her Majesty Queen Anne in the Month of August 1710 State of Europe
for the Year 1710.
appointed Captain General and Governor in Chief of the Island of Jamaica.

Lady Catherine married to John 1 st Duke of Athole.

Lady Susanna to John 2 d Earl of Dundonald, and thereafter to Charles 3 d
Marquess of Tweddale.

Lady Margaret married to James 4 th Earl of Panmure.

His Grace's eldest Son James late Duke of Hamilton, in his Father's time
called Earl of Arran, was born the 11th of April 1658 Memoirs of James fourth
Duke of Hamilton.
. His Education was suitable to his illustrious Birth, which being qualified by
Travels rendered him a most accomplished young Lord. Upon his return home, he
was by the Favor of King Charles II. on the 17th of January 1679 made one of
the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Bedchamber History of England Vol. III.
with ample Acknowledgements of the Loyalty of his illustrious Family which had
not fuffered a little for the Crown: his Lordship continuing in great Esteem
with that Prince, he was sent Envoy-extraordinary to the Court of France, to
congratulate the Dauphine upon the Birth of his second Son Philip Duke of
Anjou, the present King of Spain, of whom the Dauphiness was delivered,
November 9th 1683 Genealogical History of the House of Burboun.
.

When King James VII. came to the Throne, my Lord Arran was no less that
Prince's Favorite than he had been his Brothers, for his Majesty named him one
of the Grooms of the Bedchamber, Master of the Wardrobe Memoirs of James late
Duke of Hamilton MS.
, and conferred on him the Command of a Regiment of Horse Ibidem.
; also in April 1687, he elected him one of the twelve Knights of the most
noble Order of St. Andrew called The Thistle Howels History:
, which his Majesty was then pleased to revive. At the Revolution his Lordship
firmly adhered to his unfortunate Master, and never left him till he attended
him to Rochester Sand^ord's Genealogical History of the Kings of England.
, where his Majesty embarked for France, 23d December 1688. In the beginning of
January 1689, when the Prince of Orange desired the advice of the Scots
Nobility and Gentry then at London, what was fit for him to do in reference to
the Affairs of Scotland, this occasioned a free Conference among them, and my
Lord Arran offered his Opinion in these Words Miscellany Collections of the
Year 1689.
, I have all the Honor and Deference for the Prince of Orange imaginable, I
think him a brave Prince, and that we owe him great Obligations in contributing
so much for our Delivery from Popery; but while I pay those Praises, I cannot
violate my Duty to my Master, I must distinguish betwixt his Popery and his
Person, I dislike the one, but have sworn and do owe Allegiance to the other,
which makes it impossible for me to sign away that which I cannot forbear
believing is the King my Masters Right, for his present absence from us in
France can no more affect my Duty, than his longer absence from us has done all
this while, and the Prince desiring our Advice, mine is, that we should move
his Majesty to return and call a free Parliament for the securing our Religion
and Property, which in my humble Opinion, will at last be found the best way to
heal all our Breaches.

His Lordships Constancy to the Interest of King James, even after the Prince
of Orange was declared King of England, occasioned such a Suspicion of his
Conduct, that he was sent Prisoner to the Tower History of England Vol. III.
, but being discharged some time after, he retir^d for a time into Scotland,
his Father's Death happening in the 1694. brought no Accession either o^ Honor
or Estate to the Earl, the same being hereditary to the Duchess his Mother,
who nevertheless, with the Consent of King William, before the end of that
Princes Reign, resigned that Title to him The Patent making the Earl of Arran
Duke of Hamiltoun bears Date at Lo the 10th of August School. but it allows him
the Precedence by his G^^nd-father's Creation, 12th of July 1643.
, whereby he became a Peer.

His Grace for many Years after was not engaged in any public Affairs except
Parliamentary ones as they occurred, where he ever on all occasions showed a
tender Concern for the Honor and Prosperity of Scotland, more particularly in
the great Opposition he made in the Union of the two Kingdoms, which as it did
demonstrate his entire Affection to his Country, so on that account it
c^allenges a just Esteem and honorable Remembrance of his Memory as a noble
Patriot by all the Lovers of their Country to perpetuity.

The Matter of the Union being concluded in Parliament, his Grace retired to
his Country House in Staffordshire History of Europe for the 1708.
, upon the News of the Invasion from France Anno 1708, he was by Order of the
Council taken into the Custody of a Messenger upon Suspicion of his being privy
to that Expedition; but his Grace was admitted to Bail, the Duke o^ Newcastle,
the Earl of Whartoun, the Lord Hailyfax being Surities for him. Whatever
sinister Opinion some in England might entertain of the Duke at this Juncture,
it is certain the Scots Nobility had quite different Sentiments of him, for on
the 17th of June, at a solemn Election of the Peers, to testify the Honor and
Esteem they had of him, he was nominated and chosen one of the Sixteen Peers to
the ensuing Parliament.

When things came to take a new turn at Court, upon her Majesty's change of her
Ministry, his Grace was on the 1st of October 1710, appointed Lord Lieutenant
of the County Palatine of Lancaster History of Europe for the 1710.
in the room of James Earl of Darby, and on the 13th of December thereafter, he
was sworn of the Privy Council Ibidem.
, and accordingly took his place at the Board; Also in the Month of June 1711,
the Queen was pleased to make him a Peer of Great Britain by the Titles of
Baron of Dutton, and Duke of Brandon, and the Preamble to his Patent runs thus.
Cum generis claritate promeritorum praestantia, constanti and immaculata
fidelitate, vel ad mortem usque and sanguinis etiam propinquitate, Majores
perquam fideles and intime admodum dilecti Consanguinei and Consiliarii Nostri
Jacobi Ducis Hamiltonii, Machionis Clidsdaliae, Comitis Arraniae and Lanarci,
Domini Polmontiae, Avenniae, Manchanshiriae and Innerdaliae, sese
Praedecessoribus Nostris Regiis Gloriosissimae Memoriae plurimum
commendaverint: Nos animadvertentes quod praedictus Jacobus Dux Hamiltoni
praeclaris nobilissimae suae Familiae vestigiis insistens and virtutis laud
and inconcussa Fidelitatis constantia sanguinis Conjunctionem quae Regiam
Nostram Domum prope attingit porro illustrare perrexerit; quo ipse and
singularis Nostrae Benevolentiae Monumenta habeat and posteri ipsius Gloriae
and Dignitatis amplitudine ad res eximias ad Nominis Exce^lentiae pares
efficiendas accendantur, novis Titulorum honoribus avitum splendorem ornare
atque exaugere de crevimus. Sciatis, etc.

At the sitting down of the Parliament in December thereafter, the Duke claimed
his Place in the House of Peers, upon which many of the English Lords
apprehending it might be dangerous to their Constitution to admit into their
House a greater Number of the Scots Peers than were agreed to by the Act of
Union, and therefore resolved to oppose the said Claim. Hereupon, Monday the
10th, a Motion was made for taking that Matter into Consideration, which was
done accordingly, but after a few Speeches the Debate was adjourned to the
12th. and after some time spent therein, the further Consideration of that
Business was put off till the 20th. Upon which Day the Lords resumed the
Debate, the Queen being present incognito, after learned Council in the Law for
her Majesty, the House of Lords and the Duke of Hamilton, several Speeches were
made on both sides, so that the Debate lasted till near Eighth in the Evening,
when the Question was put whether the Twelve Judges should be consulted with,
which being carried in the Negative by Fourteen Voices, Proxies included.
Another Question was put, Whether Scots Peers created Peers of Great Britain
since the Union, have a Right to sit in that House, which was also carried in
the Negative by five Voices. Although by this Decision the Royal Prerogative, the
Duke of Hamilton and the whole Peerage of Scotland received a great
Mortification, yet her Majesty was pleased to continue her Royal Favor to his
Grace, by making him Master General of the Ordnance, and Knight of the most
noble Order of the Garter, at a Chapter held at Windsor 26th of October 1712,
and shortly after appointed him to go Ambassador extraordinary to France upon
the Conclusion of the Peace; but while he was preparing his Equippage suitable
to the Grandeur of his Character, he had the Mis^ortune upon the 15th of
November 1712, to fight a Duel in Hyde-Park with the Lord Mohun, where he
killed that Lord upon the Spot, and his Grace died of his Wounds by the time he
got into his Lodgings Nota, His Grace the Duke of Hamilton and the Lord Mohun
had married two Ladies who were near Relations, both Nieces to Charles late
Earl of Maclesfield, and having been at Law for some time about an Estate, they
met twice, and the last time on the 13th of December at Mr. Orlebars in
Chancery, at his Chamber in the Rolls, where, upon the Examination of Mr.
Whiteworth, who had been Steward to the Lady Gerard and the Maclesfield Family,
the Duke happening to say, He had neither Truth nor Justice in him. Mohun in
Answer replied He had as much truth as his Grace: This was the unhapp^
beginning of the Quarrel, upon which a Challenge was carried by
Lieutenant General Mack^rtney, the Lord Mohun's Second, who according to the
positive Oath of Colonel Hamilton the Duke's Second and the general Clamor,
wounded the Duke in the Side after the Lord M^h^n ^ell, which I suppose was the
immediate Cause of his Death, notwithstanding the Rewards promised both by the
Government, and her Grace the Duchess of Hamiltoun, and the ^trictest Search
after him, he made his escape and got off.
, his Death was universally lamented for the many noble Qualities he was endu'd
with, of which Love and Zeal for his Native Country was not the least, and for
that Reason his Loss can never be sufficiently be ^ail'd by all true Scots-Men,
and who ever after him shall deserve best of the Scots Nation, he can never
think himself undervalu'd when he is laid in the Balance with, and compared to
the Duke of Hamilton.

He married two Wives, first Anne Daughter of Robert Spencer Earl of
Sunderland, and again Elisabeth Daughter and sole Heir of Digby Lord Gerard of
Bromly of the Kingdom of England, by Elisabeth his Wife Sister to Charles late
Earl of Maclesfield, by whom he had Issue,

James Lord Marquess of Clidsdale, now Duke of Hamiltoun, Lord William, and
Lord Anne, so Cristen'd, in regard of her Majesty's standing God Mother, Lady
Catherin who died young, Lady Charlott and Lady Susanna.

ARMS.
Quarterly Gules, three Cinquefoils Ermine, 2d and 3d Argent, a Ship with her
Sails turss'd up Sable, Supporters two Antilops Proper, Crest, a Saw sawing
through a growing Oak, Motto, Through.

HARRIES, Lord Harries.
THAT this ancient Family is of much longer continuance in Scotland than the
Reign of King David II. to which some assign their Original, is evident from
the Register of the Abbey of Kelso, where Nigellus de Herize is mentioned in
the Time of King William the Lion Sir James Dalrymple's Collections.
. They are said to be derived from a Son of the Count de Vendome in France,
whose Arms they carry, viz. Argent three Hurcheons Azure Mackenzie's Herauldy.
, tho the first remarkable Person of the Lineage, is Sir John Harries Knight,
who had a Grant of the Barony of Terregles from King David II. Dalrymple's
Miscellany Collections.
in reward of some remarkable Service, whence his Successors were commonly
designed, till the Reign of King James IV. that in the 1493, Herbert Herries of
Terregles Knight, came to be Lord Herries Charta Herberto Domino Harries in
Rotulis Jacobi IV.
, he married Marion Daughter to the Lord Carlyle of Torthorald Ibidem.
, by her he had Andrew his Son and Heir, who was killed in the Battle of
Flowdoun, leaving Issue by Janet his Wife Daughter of Archibald Earl of Angus
Charta penes Ducem de Douglass.
, William his Son and Heir, who dying 26th of September 1543 Charta in Rotulis
Jacobi V. etiam Genealogia Familiae Harreziae MS.
, by Catherin Daughter of John Kennedy of Blairquhan his Wife Charta in
publicis Archivis.
in Vic. de Air, he left three Daughters his Coheirs.

Agnes married to Sir John Maxwel Knight, who came to inherit the Honor of
Lord Harries.

Catherine to Alexander Stewart of Garlies Genesis Harreziae.
, Ancestor to the Earl of Galloway.

Janet to William Cockburn of Sk^rling Ibidem.
in Vic. de Roxburgh.

HOPE, Earl of Hopetoun.
THE first Raiser of the Family of the Hopes, was Sir Thomas Hope of Craighall,
Son of Henry Hope, an eminent and wealthy Merchant of the City of Edinburgh, by
Jaque de Tott his Wife a French Woman Genealogical Deduction of the Family of
the Hope's in MS.
, who after he had gone through his Humanity and Philosophy, applied himself to
the Law, and made such progress in that Study, that he was admitted to the Bar
at an Age very little advanced. He was not taken notice of for Practice, till
the 1606 he was chosen to plead the Cause of the Presbyterian Ministers who
were Indicted of high Treason for declining the King's Authority in Matters
Ecclesiastical Mr. Calderwood's History of the Affairs of the Church of
Scotland.
, which gave him much Reputation with that People afterward, and grafted him in
the entire Confidence of them, that he was looked on as the Oracle of the
Party, and advised with them in all their Counsels and Designs Bishop of
Dunkeld's Memoirs.
. Upon the Fame of his Abilities and Learning in the Profession of the Law, his
Majesty King James VI. in the end of his Reign, was pleased to make him joint
Advocate with Sir William Oliphant, who giving way to Fate on the 13 of April
1628, Sir Thomas Hope was not long after constituted sole Lord Advocate, and
enjoyed the place till after the Civil War broke out with great Reputation for
Learning, and all other Advantages which attend the most eminent Men of that
Profession, as the several Works he left behind him do undeniably evince, of
which this is a Catalogue,

Carmen seculate in serenissimum Carolum I. Britanniarum Monarcham, Edin. 1626.

Major Practicks MS.

Minor Practicks M.S.

Paratitillo ex universo juris Corpore MS.

Psalmi Davidis and Canticum Solomonis Latino Carmine M.S.

A Genealogy of the Earls of Mar Bishop Nicolson's Scots Historical Library
All his Works are in the Lawyer's Library, save the Genealogy of the Earls of
Mar
MS.

His Wife was Elisabeth Daughter of John Bennet of Wallingford Registers of the
Heralds Office.
, by whom he had 1 st. Sir John Hope of Craighall, 2 d. Sir Thomas Hope of
Carse, 3 d. Sir James Hope who was the Origin of the House of Hopetoun, to
which Branch I shall at present confine my Memoirs of the Hopes.

This Sir James pursuing his Father's Steps in the Study and Practice of the
Law, in short time became so much taken notice of for his Abilities, that he
was chosen one of the Senators of the College of Justice Anno 1649 Guthry's
Memoirs.
, in which Station he continued till that Judicature was dissolved by Oliver
Cromwell Anno 1651. He married Anne Daughter of John Fowlis of Lead-hills, in
Vic. de Lanerk, by whom he had John his Successor, and a Daughter Rachel
married to David Beaton of Balfour, in Vic. de Fife, and after her Death
Margaret Daughter of William Earl Marshal, by whom he had only one Son Sir
William Hope of Balcomy.

John Hope of Hopetoun his Son, among other Persons of Quality accompanying his
Royal Highness James Duke of York from London by Sea into Scotland, was cast
away the 7th of May 1682 Vita Jacobi VII.
, leaving Issue by Margaret his Wife Daughter of John Earl of Haddingtoun, a
Lady eminent in all the Virtues of her Sex, Charles his only Son and Heir, and
Heleanor a Daughter married to Thomas Earl of Haddingtoun.

Which Charles, as soon as he came of Age, being returned Member of Parliament
for the County of Linlithgow, of which he is high Sheriff, in the first
Parliament of Queen Anne, her Majesty was pleased to call him to her Privy
Council, and by Letters Patent bearing date 15th of April 1703 Charta in
Cancellaria S. D. N. Reginae.
, to raise him to the Honor of Earl of Hopetoun, and to his Heirs Male; in
default of which to his Heirs Female for ever. He married Henrietta Daughter of
William 1 st. Marquis of Annandale, by whom he had Issue,

John Lord Hope.

Charles.

Sophia.

Henrietta.

Margaret.

Helen. all young.

ARMS.
Azure, a Cheveron charged with a Bay Leaf Vert, betwixt three Beasants Or,
Supporters two Women holding Anchors in their Hands, Crest, a Rainbow
surmounted of a Globe, Motto, At spes infracta.

HUME, Earl of Hume.
IT IS evident that this Noble ancient Family are derived from Sir William a Son
of Patrick Earl of Dunbar, who assumed a Surname from his Patrimonial Lands of
Hume Patricius Comes makes a Donative of the Church of Hume to the Abbey of
Kelso before the Year 1166, that according to the Chron. of Melross he made his
Exit out of this World, and Willielmus Dominus de Hume and de Greenlaw filius
Patricii afterward ratifies the Grant of Lands to the same Abbey, which Dominus
Willielmus Dominus de Greenlaw filius Patr cii quondam Domini de Dunbar fecit
Ecclesiae Sanctae Mariae de Kelso, in Registro dicti Monasterii
, as early as the Surname of Dunbar became Hereditary to the Earls of March.
This William gave in pure Alms to the Monastery of Kelso unum Toftum and unum
Croftum and d^as bovatas terrae in territorio villae suae de Greenlaw
Chartulary of Kelso in Bib. Juridica Edin.
pro salute animae suae.

This Sir William of Home was succeeded by a Son of the same Name, who designs
himself Willielmus Dominus de Hume filius and here is nobilis viri Domini
Willielmi Militis quondam Dominus dictae villae de Hume, when he yields his
Right to some Lands that had been the Matter of Dispute betwixt him and the
Abbot of Kelso, Crastino conceptionis Beatae virginis Mariae 1268. The Family
after several descents became very powerful, and in the Reign of King Robert
III. Sir Thomas Hume of that Ilk then taking to Wife Nicolas Heir of the Pepdie
Family in the County of Berwick Mr. David Hume in his History of the Family of
Douglass, and Mr. Thomas Crawfurd's Notes on Buchanan's History
, who brought him the Lordship of Dunglass, whereby his Fortune was much
increased, and in gratitude of that Match, he added to his paternal Coat of
Arms Azure, three Papingoes Vert Mr. Alexander Nisbet's Treatise of Herauldry.
. By the said Nicolas his Wife he had Alexander his Successor, and David the
first Baron of Wedderburn, in Vic. de Berwick This David Hume obtained the
Lands of Wedderburn from Arch. Earl of Douglas propter sua Multiplicia
servitia, as the original Grant bears, dated Anno 1414, mentioned by Mr David
Hume of Godscroft a Son of the Family in his Preface to the History of the
Douglasses, of this Branch are come the Earls of Dunbar and Marchmont, the
Barons of Manderstoun, Blackadder, Renton, and there several Cadets.
.

To Sir Thomas Hume succeeded Sir Alexander his Son, a very warlike Person, he
was in that Expedition against the English at Homildown, where he was taken
Prisoner, and died a Captive in England, Anno 1402 Mr. David Hume in his
History of the Douglasses, for this he cites the black Book of Scoon.
, leaving Alexander his Son to succeed him, who distinguished himself in the
Wars of France in the Reign of Henry VI. he accompanied the Earl of Douglas to
the Battle of Vernoil, where he was slain with that valiant Earl Anno 1424
Ibidem.
, having married Jean Daughter of...... Hay of Yester, he had Alexander his
Successor in the Family, Thomas first of the Humes of Tinningham This from Mr.
David Hume of Godscrofts Preface to the History of the Douglasses
, and George who was the Stock of the Family of Spot.

Sir Alexander Hume the next of the Line of this noble House raised the Glory
and Reputation of the Family, by the vaste Estate he acquired both by Marriage
and otherways, ou^ of which he erected the Collegiate Church of Dunglass, a
very noble Foundation, and that out of Piety to his Ancestors and Relations,
for whom the good Man thought he could Merit in the other World, and whom he
commemorates with a very tender Concern and Respect Foundation of the
Collegiate Kirk of Dunglass, among the other Foundations collected from the
Records and elsewhere, since the Days of King James I. MS. wherein there is
mention of Sir Alexander Hume his Father, Jean Hay his Mother, Thomas his
Grandfather and several other collateral Relations.
. He married two Wives, first Marjory Heiress of Landal I have both the
Authority of Sir George Mackenzie in his MS. Baronage of Scotland, and Mr.
Thomas Crawfurd's Notes on Buchanan.
in Vic. de Berwick, by whom he had first Alexander who died in his own
Lifetime, second George Hume first of Aitoun All the Sons are made out from an
Entail of their Father of his Estate, Anno 1453, in the Rolls of King James
III. etjam charta in Rotulis Jacobi IV.
, third Patrick of Fastcastle in the County of Berwick. His second Wife was
Margaret Daughter of Alexander Lord Montgomery Charta Alexandri Hume de Eodem
Militi and Margar^tae Montgomery sponsae suae in Rotulis Jacobi III.
, by whom he had Thomas Hume of Langshaw in Vic. de Air Charta in Rotulis
Jacobi III. ad annum 1467.
.

Alexander Hume of that Ilk Junior dying before his Father, he left Issue five
Sons, Alexander who succeeded his Grandfather Charta in Rotulis Jacobi IV. ad
annum 1489.
, 2 d George Lord Hume, after his Brother's Death. 3 d David Prior of
Coldingham, died Anno 1517 Holinshed's Chronicle
. 4 th. John Hume of Coldingknows Charta in Rotulis Jacobi IV. ad annum 1489.
, Ancestor to the present Earl of Hume. 5 th. William who was Execute with his
Brother Alexander; also several Daughters, Elisabeth married to James Earl of
Arran Charta in Rotulis dicti Regis
, Helen to Alexander Lord Erskin Ibidem.
,...... to James Hepburn Esquire Master of Bothwell.

Sir Alexander Hume of that Ilk dying a very old Man, his Estate devolved on
Alexander his Grandson and Heir, who was the first Peer of the Family: Upon
the Accession of K. James IV. to the Crown he was appointed one of the Privy
Council, and October 7th. 1488 constituted Lord high Chamberlain of Scotland
Charta in Rotulis Jacobi IV.
. The next Year January 10^h. 1489, he was made Captain of Stirling Castle, and
Governor to John Earl of Mar the King's Brother then in Minority Ibidem.
, likewise on the 25th of August thereafter made Warden of the East-Marches for
the space of seven Years Ibidem.
and in or about the 1493, came to the Honor and Title of Lord Hume Charta
Alexandri Domino Hume in Rotulis Jacobi IV. ad annum 1493.
, he continued the principal Favorite of that Prince during his Life, and had
the chief Administration of all Affairs sometime after the King's Death, till
he procured John Duke of Albany to be made Governor to the young King James V.
but after all this Honor and Greatness, he was by the Governor charged with
Crimes of a very high Nature, for which being put in the Castle of Edinburgh,
he was found guilty of high Treason, and together with William his Brother, on
the 16th of October 1516 lost their Heads Sir James Balfour's Annals MS. in
Bibliotheca Juridica Edin.
. By Nicolas his Wife Daughter and Heir of George Kerr of Suma^lstoun Charta in
Rotulis Jacobi IV.
, he had only one Daughter Janet who survived him, married to Sir John Hamilton
natural Brother to James Duke of Chatlerault Charta in Rotulis Jacobi V. ad
annum 1531.
.

George Brother and Heir of Alexander Lord Hume was repon'd to his Estate and
Honor Anno 1521 Hume and Drummonds Histories.
, he was a very brave Man, and performed many Warlike Exploits for the Service
of his King and Country during the Reign of King James V. particularly at the
Fight of Haldinrig against the English, where his Conduct and Valor was very
notable Drummond.
. He took to Wife Marion second Daughter and Coheir of Patrick Lord Halyburton
Charta in Rotulis Mariae R.
, by her he had a Son Alexander, and a Daughter Margaret married to Sir
Alexander Erskin o^ Gogar Charta in Rotulis Jacobi VI. ad annum 1586.
, Ancestor to the Earl of Kelly.

Alexander Lord Hume his Son was made Warden of the East Marches Anno 1565
Charta in publicis Archivis.
, he was on the young King's side at first in the time of the Civil War in
Queen Mary's days Melvil's Memoirs.
, and was with the Earl of Murray Regent at the Battle of Langside, but he
afterward joined himself to the Queen's Party, and deported himself so
honorably afterward, that a certain Author says, He was so true a Scots man
that he was unwinnable to England to do any thing prejudicial to his Country
Ibidem.
. He married twice, first Margaret Daughter of Sir Walter Kerr of Cessfoord,
Ancestor to the Duke of R^xburgh Charta in Rotulis Mariae Reginae ad annum 1563.
, by whom he had one Daughter Margaret married to George Earl Marshall, 2 dly.
Agnes Daughter of Patrick Lord Gray, Widow of Sir Robert Logan of Restalrig
Charta in Rotulis Jacobi VI.
, by her he had Alexander first Earl of Hume, and a Daughter Isobel married to
Sir James Hume of Eccles and had Issue The most famous and learned Antiquary
Mr. Thomas Crawfurd's Notes of Buchanan's History, likewise Mr. Alexander
Nisbet's Treatise of Herauldry Page 151
. This Lord departing this Life in the Year 1576 Johnston's Poems.
was succeeded in his Estate and Honor by Alexander his Son, who was a great
Favorite with King James VI. whom he accompanied to England Anno 1603, being
then one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council. He was very
instrumental in the suppressing of the Rebellion of Francis Earl of Bothwell:
In Consideration of which sigular Service he had a Grant of the dissolved
Priory of Coldingham to him and his Heirs, and was on the 4th of March 1605
dignified by that Prince with the Honor of Earl of Hume Balfour's Annals
. His first Wife was Margaret Sister to William Earl of Morton, by her he had
no Succession. He next married Mary Daughter of Edward Sutton Lord Dudly of the
Realm of England Peerage of England.
, by her he had James his Successor in the Honor, and two Daughters, Margaret
married to James Earl of Murray, and Anne to John Duke of Lauderdale, and dying
the 5th of April 1619 The famous William Camden's Annals.
.

James his Son succeeded in the Title of Earl, he married first Catherin
Daughter of Henry Viscount of Falkland Lord Leiutenant of Ireland Genealogy of
the Family of Hume.
. 2 dly Grace Daughter of Francis Earl of Westmoreland Peerage of England new
Edition of 1713. Vol. I.
, but dying without Issue Anno 1634, the Honor of Earl, by reason of an Entail
on Heirs Male, came to Sir James Hume of Colding-knows his nearest Cousin on
the Male line This Sir James Hume of Coldingknows who succeeded to the Honor
of Earl of Hume, was Son of Sir John Hume of Coldingknows by Mary eldest
Daughter and Coheir of George Hume Earl of Dunbar.
, who obtained a Ratification of the Honor of Earl of Hume from King Charles
I. with all the Privileges and Precedence formerly enjoyed by Alexander or
James Earls of Hume his Predecessors 22 May 1636 Charta in Rotulis Caroli I.
. This Earl married Jean Daughter of William Earl of Morton, by whom he had
three Sons all successively Earls of Hume, Alexander, James and Charles, and
dying Anno 1666 Mr. Thomson's Miscellany Collections MS.
. Alexander succeeded him in his Honors, and married Anne Daughter of Richard
Earl of Dorset Peerage of England.
, but dyed without Issue Anno 1674 Mr. William Dunlop late Principal of the
College of Glasgow his Collections for a Peerage of Scotland MS.
, the Honor devolving to James his Brother, who marrying....... Daughter of
George Earl of Dalhousie, dyed Anno 1688, leaving no Issue, so that his Estate
and Honor came to Charles his next Brother, who married Anne Daughter of Sir
William Purves of that Ilk, and dying 20th of August 1706, left Issue three
Sons and three Daughters, 1 st. Alexander his Successor, 2 d. James, 3 d.
George, Jean 1 st. Daughter married to Patrick Lord Polwarth, 2 d. Marjory, 3
d. Margaret.

Which Alexander was on the 10th of November 1710 elected one of the 16 Peers
of Scotland to the Parliament of Great Britain, and the next Year was made
General of the Mint in the Room of John Lord Balmerino, he married Anne
Daughter of William Marquis of Lothian, and has Issue, Charles Lord Dunglass,
William and James.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st. and 4th. Vert, a Lion rampant Argent, 2d. and 3d. Argent, three
Papingoes Vert, beck'd and membred Gules, over all in a Shield Or, an Orle
Azure, supported by two Lions rampant, Crest a Lions Head eras'd Argent, Motto,
True to the End.

CARMICHAEL, Earl of Hyndford.
OF this Family which assumed its Surname from the Lands of Carmichael in
Lanerk-shire, where they still have their chief Seat, was John de Carmichael
who was infest in the said Lands, by a Precept of James Earl of Douglas and
Mar, who was killed at the Battle of Otterburn Anno Dom. 1388 Charta penes
Jacobum comitem de Hyndford, I could not condescend of the particular date of
the Precept, but it must be betwixt the 1586 and the 1588.
. This John attaining the Honor of Knighthood, was one of the many brave
Scots-men who accompanied Archibald Earl of Douglas to the Assistance of
Charles VI. of France against the English, was at the Battle of Baug^ Anno
1422, where he did eminentiy signalize his Valor in dismounting the Duke of
Clarence the English General, whereby the Glory of the Victory accru'd to the
French and Scots Memoirs of the Family of Carmichael.
, in the Action he broke his Spear, in remembrance of which renowned and
remarkable piece of Service his Successors had a Badge added to their Coat of
Arms viz. A dexter Hand and Arm armed, holding a broken Spear proper, which is
still born as the Crest of the Family. This Sir John by......... his Wife
Daughter to the Earl of Angus Ibidem.
, had William his Successor, and of a younger Son Robert, did the Family of
Meadowflat descend Ibidem.
of whom the Carmichaels of Balmadie did spring.

Which William Carmichael of that Ilk is one of the Barons upon the Retour of
Sir David Hay of Tester Anno 1437 Charta penes Marchionem de Twedale.
. He was succeeded by John Carmichael of Carmichael his Son: George Carmichael
Doctor in Divinity a younger Son of the Family, at this time was promoted to
the Episcopal See of Glasgow Anno 1482, then void by the decease of Bishop
Laing Reliquiae sancti Kentigerni sive vitae Episcoporum Glasguen. penes me MS.
, and the same Year he was joined in Commission with sundry Lords and Barons to
treat of a firm and lasting Peace with the English Nation Mr. Rymer's Foedera
Angliae.
.

Which John abovementioned, in the 1482, obtained from King James III. diverse
Lands in Consideration of his good and faithful Services done, and to be done
by him Charta in Rotulis Jacobi III. ad annum 1482.
. He left behind him two Sons, William, and Walter first of the Branch of
Hyndford and Park Genealogia familiae de Carmichael MS.
.

William the next of the Family flourished under King James IV. and is
particularly mentioned in the Records of that Reign Charta sub magno sigillo
Jacobi IV. ad annum 1507.
he was succeeded by

John his Son, who married Elizabeth Daughter of Hugh Lord Somervel Charta in
publicis Archivis ad annum 1541.
, by whom he had

Sir John his Successor.

Archibald Carmichael of Edrem Hume's History of the Family of Douglas
, in Vic. de Berwick.

Which Sir John was knighted in the time of Queen Mary, and constituted Warden
of the Midle-Marches toward England, in which Station he behaved himself very
worthily, and with General Applause. In 1588 he was with Sir John Va^ss of
Barnburrow and Mr. Peter Young sent Ambassadors to Denmark to propose a Match
betwixt King James VI. and Anne a Daughter of that Crown, which was soon after
happily accomplished, and about the same time he was constituted Captain of his
Majesty's Guard Johnstoni Historia rerum Britannicarum.
, and the next Year sent Ambassador to Queen Elizabeth of England Ibidem ad
annum 1590.
to confer with that Princess upon Matters of the highest Importance to the two
Nations, which Service he worthily discharged: Also in 1598, he was again
constituted Warden of the Midle-Marches Ibidem.
, in the exercise of which Office he was barbarously murdered by some dissolute
Borderers of the Surname of Armstrong on the 16th of June 1600 Johnstoni Hist.
Brit.
to the universal Regret of all good Men; and the famous Dr. John Johnston
testified his Grief for him in this Epitaph. Dum parat extremis populis prope
limite in ipso,
Aevus ubi Anglorum distinet amnis agros.
Dicer^ jus, ac jure, va^^s cohibere latro^^s,
Principis August (...) vicemque obiens.
Gens legum impatie^^, gens rapto vivere sueta,
Exceptum diris sustulit infidiis.
Ne^^ magis gravidas callens torquere sarissas,
Et patrii moris nemo magis retinens,
He^, ubi nunc jus fas, si sic impune verendi
Sacra Magistratus contemerare licet.


This gallant Man was wedded with Margaret Daughter of Sir David Douglass of
Pittendreich, Sister to David Earl of Angus and to James Earl of Morton Regent
of Scotland in the Minority of King James VI Charta in Rotulis Mariae Reginae.
. by whom he had

Sir Hugh Carmichael his Successor.

Mary married to John Bothwel Commendator of Holy-rood-house, afterward created
Lord Holy-rood house Anno 1607 Charta penes comitem de Hyndford.
, and had Issue.

Abigail to Hugh Weir of Clowburn in Vic. de Lanerk.

Anne to Dr. Walter Whiteford Bishop of Brechin, in the Reign of King Charles
I. and had Issue.

Sir Hugh Carmichael of that Ilk being a Person of great Parts, was of the
Privy Council to King James VI. and in the 1593, was constituted Master of the
Horse, and the same Year employed in an Embassy to Denmark; which great Trust
he discharged to his Majesty's Satisfaction and his own Honor. He married
Sybilla Daughter of..... Baillie of Lammingtoun, by whom he had John his Son
and Heir, who dying without Issue, the Estate came to James Carmichael of
Hyndford a Collateral Branch of the Family; whose Ancestor.

Walter Carmichael was a younger Son of the House of Carmichael, as appears
from an ancient Roll written about the time of King James VI. which shows the
Descent of this Walter from the Family The Roll is in the Custody of the Earl
of Hyndford.
, whose Grandson James Carmichael of Hyndford and Park marrying Marion Daughter
of Sir Hugh Campbel of Lowdoun Genealogia familiae de Hyndford ac etiam
Genealogia familiae de Lowdoun.
, by her he had Walter his Son and Heir, who by his virtuous and prudent
Conduct, considerably improved his Estate, and consequently raised the
Reputation of his Family in the Country, departing this Life about the 1612, he
left Issue by Grisel his Wife Daughter of John Carmichael of Meadowflat Captain
of Crawfurd Charta penes Jacobum Comitem de Hyndford.
James his Successor, and several Daughters.

1. Marion married to James Stewart of Allantoun in Vic. de Lanerk. 2 dly to
Robert Denholm of West-shiell in Vic. Praedicto, and had Issue.

2. Rachel to Archibald Hamilton of Halcraig in Vic. de Lanerk.

3. Margaret to Stephen Lockhart of Wicket-shaw in the County of Lanerk.

Which James was a Gentleman of excellent Parts, and came first to be taken
notice of at Court by the Patronage of George Earl of Dunbar Lord high
Thesaurer of Scotland. His agreeable and winning Deportment was first seen and
liked by King James at a Match of Jumping, in which Exercise he exceeded all
the Court. He was first preferred to be one of the Cup-bearers, and soon after
his Majesty's Carver, advancing daily in favor he was appointed Chamberlain of
the Principality, in which Employment he deported himself with Prudence and
Integrity for many Years.

King Charles I. had so great an Esteem of his Conduct and Dexterity in his
Business, that he continued him in his former Employment, and created him
Knight Baronet 17th July 1627 Charta in Rotulis Car. I.
. The Justice Clerks Office falling vacant through the decease of Sir George
Elphinstoun in the 1634, Sir James Carmichael was promoted thereto, which he
demitted two Years after in favors of Sir John Hamilton of Orbistoun, being in
lieu thereof made Thesaurer Depute, and one of the Senators of the College of
Justice.

Upon the breaking out of the unhappy Civil War in that Reign, he approved
himself a most faithful Subject and Servant to his Sovereign in his greatest
Distress, and lent him considerable Sums of Money at a time when they were
looked upon as Enemies to the Peace of their Country who owned the King's
Cause: Of this his Majesty was so sensible, that when he had nothing left to
reward such of his Subjects as firmly adhered to him then, by conferring sundry
Titles of Honor on them, he was graciously pleased to advance him to the
Honor of Peerage, by the Title of Lord Carmichael 27th of December 1647
Diploma Jacobi Domini Carmichael penes Comitem de Hyndford.
.

Upon the Accession of K. Charles II. to the Throne of Scotland 1 st. January
1651, he had his former Patent of Lord ratified, and was constituted one of the
Lords of the Privy Council, and Justice Clerk, of which he was soon after
deprived by the English Usurpation, and through the whole course of the Exile of
the King, and Suppression of the Royal Cause, he deported himself with great
Caution, and retained a dutiful Affection to the King, and heartily concurred
in the Restoration, which he survived 14 Years, giving way to Fate 29th
December 1672 Retour of John Lord Carmichael to James Lord Carmichael his
Grandfather in the Chancery.
. His Wife was Agnes Sister to John Wilkie of Foultoun, by whom he had three
Sons and four Daughters, viz.

1. Sir William his eldest Son, who in his Youth went over to France, where he
learned the Art of War, and was one of the Gens d' Arms to Lewis XIII.
returning home some time after the commencing of the Civil War, he engaged in
the Service of the Parliament, and commanded, as Colonel, the Regiment of the
Shire of Clidsdale against the Marquis of Montrose at the Battle of Philiphaugh
1646. He married Grisel Daughter of William first Marquis of Douglas, by whom
he had John who succeeded his Grandfather, and two Daughters, 1 st. Mary
married to Sir Archibald Stewart of Castlemilk, and had Issue, Martha to James
Weir of Stonebyres, and had Issue.

2. Sir Daniel Carmichael of Mauldsly Thesaurer Depute to King Charles II. who
dyed without Succession.

3. Sir James Carmichael of Bonnytoun, who was a Colonel in the Service of King
Charles II. at the Battle of Dunbar, 3d. September 1650.

1 st. Daughter Mary married to Sir William Lockhart of Carstairs, Son of Sir
James Lockhart of Lee. 2 dly. to Sir William Weir of Stonebyres, and had Issue.

2 d. Agnes to Sir John Wilkie of Foultoun, and had one Daughter Agnes his sole
Heir, married to William Lord Ross.

3 d. Anne to Sir David Carmichael of Balmadie Baronet, and had one Daughter
Agnes married to John Dundass of Duddingstoun.

4 th. Martha to John Kennedy of Kirkmichael in the County of Air, but had no
Issue.

To James Lord Carmichael succeeded John his Grandson and Heir, who was one of
the Scots Peers, who appeared most early in the Revolution, for which, and many
other good Services upon the Prince of Orange's advancement to the Throne of
these Realms Anno 1689, he was made one of the Commissioners for executing the
Office of Lord Privy Seal, and sworn of his Privy Council. In the 1690 he was
Commissioner to the General Assembly; in which Character he served several
times: Likewise in the 1693, he was constituted Colonel of a Regiment of
Dragoons, which he kept till the Peace at Reswick was concluded. In the 1696,
his Lordship was promoted to be one of the principal Secretaries of State, and
by the favor of the same King raised to the Honor of Earl of Hyndford, 25th
June 1701, the Narrative of the Patent being, Propter fidelitatem continuam and
affectum fidelissimi nostri Joannis Domini Carmichael nostrae personae and
Regnum and quod diversis insignis muneribus nobis ipsi concreditis summo cum
honor and fidelitate sancitus sit. This noble Lord in the great Affair of
Darien, did show a more than ordinary Concern for the Interest of his Country,
which ought to derive his Name down to Posterity as a Patriot of his Country.
His Lordship married Beatrix Daughter of David Lord Maderty, by Beatrix
Daughter of John Earl of Montrose, by whom he had three Sons who came to
Maturity.

1. James now Earl of Hyndford.

2. Mr. William Carmichael Advocate.

3 d. Mr. Daniel Carmichael of Mauldsly.

Beatrix 1st Daughter married to John Cockburn Esquire Son and Heir apparent of
Adam Cockburn of Ormiestoun one of the Senators of the College of Justice, sans
Issue.

Mary 2 d to John Montgomery Esquire Son and Heir apparent of Mr. Francis
Montgomery of Giffen, and had Issue.

Anne 3 d to John Maxwell Esquire first Cousin and apparent Heir to Sir John
Maxwell of Pollock Baronet, one of the Senators of the College of Justice, and
has Issue.

He departed this Life the 20th of September 1710 Charta in Cancellaria S. D.
N. R.
, and was succeeded by

James his Son the present Earl of Hyndford, who was in the 1706 made Colonel
of a Regiment of Dragoons, and Anno 1710 constituted a Brigadeer General. He
married Elizabeth Daughter of John Earl of Lauderdale, by whom he has Issue
John Lord Carmichael.

ARMS.
Argent a Fess wrethie Azure and Gules, supported on the Dexter with a
Chevaleer Armed in all Points, holding in his Hand a Batton proper, and on the
Sinister with a Horse Argent furnished Gules, Crest a dexter Hand and Arm
issuing out of a Torse armed holding a broken Spear Proper, and for Motto, Tout
jour Pressed.

KER, Lord Jedburgh.
N.B. There is a very ancient Family of this Surname in the County of Air,
Entitled Ker of Kersland, where they have been fixed since the Reign of King
Alexander II. as appears from Authorities I have seen, they give a Coat of Arms
much the same that the Peers of this Name do, with this difference, that
Kersland wears the three Molets on a Bend dexter, and they bear them upon a
Cheveron. This Family continued from that time in a direct Male Succession till
the Days of Queen Mary, that Robert Ker of Kersland having no Male Issue of his
Body, Janet his eldest Daughter became his Heir, then the Wife of the famous
Captain Thomas Crawfurd of Jordanhill, a younger Brother of the House of
Kilbirny, sorenown'd in the History of King James VI. by whom she had several
Children, the eldest Son Daniel assumed the Name of Ker, and was the great
Grandfather of Major Daniel Ker of Kersland, who was killed at the Battle of
Stainkirk Anno 1692.
THERE are two eminent Families of the Ker's in the County of Roxburgh,
Cessfurd and Ferniehirst, both long since raised to the Peerage of this Realm,
of the latter was Sir Andrew Ker of Ferniehirst, who was one of the Wardens of
the Borders in the time of King James V. Anno 1516 Sir George Mackenzies
Account of the Family of Ferniehirst in his Baronage MS.
. He was afterward in 1528, by the same King joined in Commission with Sir
William Scot of Balwery and Adam Otterburn of Aldam, to treat about a Peace
with the English, which they concluded for the space of five Years Rymer's
Foedera Angliae.
. He married Janet Daughter of Sir Patrick Hume of Polwarth, Ancestor to the
Earl of Marchmont, and by her he had two Sons, Sir John his immediate
Successor, and Robert Ker of Ancrum, Progenitor to the Marquess of Lothian, by
whom the Male Line of this noble Family became preserved.

Which Sir John was knighted by the Duke of Chatlerault for his good Service
against the English, in restraining the Incursions of the Borderers in the time
of Queen Mary Anno 1548, he departing this Life in July 1562 Charta penes
Marchionem de Tweddale.
, left Issue by Catharin his Wife Daughter of Sir Andrew Ker of Cessfurd,
Ancestor to the Duke of Roxburgh, Thomas his Successor, and a Daughter Margaret
married to John Lord Yester Charta penes Marchionem de Tweddale.
.

Sir Thomas Ker of Ferniehirst his Son, was a very Loyal Subject to Queen Mary,
and asserted her Interest upon all occasions with great Zeal, for which he
suffered much from the opposite Party who had the Power in their Hands. He
first Married Janet Daughter of Sir William Kirkaldy of Grange Charta in
Publicis Archivis.
, by whom he had Andrew his Successor, and Margaret Wife of Robert Lord Melvil
Ibidem.
. 2 dly Jean Daughter of Sir Walter Scot of Buccleugh Ibidem.
, by her he had Sir James Ker of Crailing, Sir Robert Ker the great Favorite of
King James VI. first created Viscount of Rochester and then Earl of Somerset,
who left a Daughter his sole Heir Mary, married to William Duke of Bedford;
also two Daughters, Juliana married first to Sir Patrick Hume of Polwarth,
after his Death to Thomas Earl of Haddingtoun, and Anne to John Lord Balmerino,
he dying in March 1586 Ibidem.
, was succeeded by Sir Andrew his Son and Heir, who was constituted one of the
Gentlemen of the Bedchamber to King James VI. Anno 1584 Charta in Rotulis
Jacobi VI.
, and continuing long in his Favor, he was at length pleased to create him
Lord Jedburgh, by Letters patent bearing date 2d February 1622 Ibidem.
. He married Anne Daughter of Andrew Master of Ochiltree, by whom he had Andrew
his eldest Son, who was one of the Senators of the College of Justice and
Captain of his Majesty's Guards Calderwood's Hist.
, he dyed 20 December 1628, leaving no Issue.

This Lord by his Excess of Expense so entirely consumed almost the whole
Fortune, that at his Death when the Title came to his Brother Sir James Ker,
there was left upon the Matter nothing to support it; so that he declined to
take upon him the Honor, but Robert, Sir James's Son, by his Industry and
Frugality recovering a part of the old Estate of the Family, reassumed the
Title of Lord, but having no Children of his own, he made a Resignation of his
Honor in favor of William Lord Newbottle, Son of Robert then Earl afterward
Marquis of Lothian, his nearest Heir Male, to be inherited by the eldest Son of
that Family, as a distinct Peerage for ever.

ARMS.
Gules on a Cheveron Argent, three Molets of the first, Supporters two Angels,
Crest, a Bucks Head caboss'd Proper, Register of the Lions Office.
Motto, Forward in the Name of God.

CAMPBEL, Earl of Islay.
ARchibald Earl of Islay is the second Son of Archibald 1st Duke of Argyle and
Elizabeth Talmash his Duchess, who being a young Nobleman of very bright
Parts, his Polite and early Accomplishments appeared first publicly in the
Parliament 1705, where he had the place of Lord high Thesaurer of Scotland,
being then but 21 Years of Age, herein his excellent Faculties became soon very
much perceived and admired, in so much that when her Majesty nominated certain
Commissioners to treat upon that important Affair of uniting the two Crowns,
his Lordship was appointed one of that Number for the Kingdom of Scotland; and
soon after the Conclusion of the Treaty by them, her Majesty was graciously
pleased to raise him to an hereditary Honor by the Titles of Earl of Islay,
Viscount of Islay, Lord Ornsay, Dunoon and Aross, 29th of October 1706, Charta
in Rotulis Annae Reginae.
and to the Heirs Male of his Body lawfully begotten. When the Parliament of
Scotland determined upon the Commencement of the Union, my Lord Islay was
chosen one of the 16 Peers that first composed the Parliament of Great Britain;
likewise to two Parliaments following since that time, in which he
distinguished himself as a Person truly interested in the Service of his
Country.

In the 1708 his Lordship was made an Extraordinary Lord of the Session; but
that being a place of Honor not of Profit, the Queen to reward his Services
preferred him to be Justice General of Scotland, upon the surrender of George
Earl of Cromarty Anno 1710, which together with the Government of Dunbarton
Castle, he at present enjoys, and is one of her Majestys most honorable Privy
Council, to which he was called, the 13th December 1711.

James Campbel, Earl of Irvine.
WAS the only Son of Archibald 7th Earl of Argyle, by Anne his second Wife
Daughter of Sir William Cornwallis of Bromme, in Vic. de Suffolk, who betaking
himself early to the profession of Arms, entered into the Service of Lewis
XIII. of France, and had the Command of a Regiment in the War against the
Spaniards, which broke out in the 1634, wherein he deported himself so
worthily, that King Charles I^ to countenance his Merit, was pleased to confer
on him the Honor of Earl of Irvine, 28th of March 1642 Charta in Rotulis
Caroli I.
but he left no Son to succeed him in the Honor, which thereby became extinct
sometime before the Restoration of King Charles II.

INGRAM, Viscount of Irvine.
AMong other well deserving and worthy Persons of the English Nation, who have
been raised to Scots Honor since the Union of the Crowns, was Sir Arthur
Ingram of Temple-Newson of the County of York, who was by King Charles II.
honored with this Title, by Letters patent, bearing Date the 3d of May 1661,
Charta in Rotulis Caroli II.
.

MACDONALD, Lord of the Isles.
Although the Macdonalds do not yield to any other Name or Family in Scotland
either in Antiquity or Grandeur, yet the History of them does not run higher
than Somerled Thane of Argyle in the Time of Malcolm IV. yet the Monuments that
remain of him do show that his Race was great and anterior to the Age he lived
in. This Somerled the first conspicuous Person of this Line being a very great
and powerful Man by his own hereditary Possessions upon the Western Continent,
became yet greater, by adding the Aebudae or West Isles to his Fortune, by the
Marriage of the Heir Female of Olaus, formerly the Lord thereof, whereupon he
assumed to himself the Title of King of the Isles, which was so ill taken by
King Malcolm, that he proclaimed Somerled a Rebel, and sent a Body of Men
against him under the Command of Walter high Stewart of Scotland, by whom his
Army was routed, and himself killed in the Battle Anno Chr. 1164 Chron. de
Melross.
, but the Macdonald's contravert this upon the Authority of their Bards and
S^^^chies, whose memorial Records are in great Veneration with that People: Be
this as it will, it is certain that Somerled was succeeded in the Jurisdiction
and Property of the Isles by his Son.

Reginald always designed filius Sorleti, and promiscuously Dominus de Ergyle
and Inchegal Charta fundations Monasterii de Sandal in publicis Archivis and
Chartulario Monasterii Pasletensis.
. He was a prodigious Benefactor to the Church, when the Faith of the Age was,
That whatever was given to the Church and the Clergy, did not a little Merit
with God Almighty, for he founded the Abbey of Sandale within his own Territory
of Kintyre for Cistertian Monks Monasticon Scoticanum penes me MS.
, and mortified thereunto the Lands of Glassaddill and Baltebean, together with
the Lands of Casken in the Island of Arran Charta Confirmationis in Rot^lis
Jacobi IV Davidi Episcopo Lismoren. Abbaciae de Sandal annexatum Episcopatui
suo Anno 1507.
: and to the Monastery of Paisly he gave very great and ample Donations that he
and Fonia his Wife be entitled to all the Privileges of Brotherhood in that
Convent, and of the whole Rights and Order of Cluny Chartula Pasletensis penes
Comitem de Dundonald.
, when or where he passed from this to another Life, does not appear to me; but
he left a Son behind him to inherit his Estate,

Dovenald by Name In the Mortifications to Paisly he is designed Dovenaldus
filius Reginaldi filii Somerledi.
, who imitated the Liberality of his Father to the Church, particularly the
Monks of Paisly shared of his Munificence right liberally, for to that House he
gave in free Gift and Donation many and very ample Testimonies of his Charity
and good will, on the Condition, Quod ille, uxor sua, haeredes sui and homines
sui participes sint in perpetuum omnium bonorum quae in Domo de Paslet and in
toto ordine Cluniacensi fient tam in orrationibus quam in coeteris divinis
servitiis. This Dovenald left Issue two Sons, Aengus of Isles, and Alexander
who founded another Tribe, called The Macalasters, of whom Loup in Argyle-shire
is reckoned to be the Stem and Chief.

This Aengus, as his Father and Grandfather had done, entered himself a Brother
in the Convent of Paisly, for which he gave the House Dimidiam Marcam argenti
de Domo sua propria and de singulis domibus per omnes terras suas de quibus
fumus exit unum denarium singulis Annis in perpetuum in puram Eleemosynam.
Moreover, he gave to the same Monastery the Patronage of the Church of Kilkeran
in Kintyre, Pro salute animae Domini sui Alexandri illustris Regis Scotiae and
Alexandri filii ejus, etiam pro salute sua propria and haeredum suorum Charta
Mortif. Aengusii filii Dovenaldi Ecclesiae de Kelkeran Abbati and Conventui de
P^slet in Chartulario Dicti Monasterii in mea Custodia per favorem Nobilissimi
Comitis Joa^nis Comitis de Dundonald.
. During the Reign of Alexander III. this great Person deported himself very
loyally and dutifully to the Crown, and when that King came to settle the
Succession upon his Grandchild Margaret of Norway. He was one of the Primores
Regni, Prime Nobles, who swore that they would faithfully adhere to and defend
her Title, to which he set his Seal in a solemn Assembly held in the Year 1284
for that effect. He died not long after this, leaving two Sons, Alexander, and
John of whom the Clan Ean of Ardnamurchan and its Branches are sprung.

Which Alexander Lord of the Isles I find this Alexander designed Filius and
haeres Aengusii Donaldi de Insulis, in a Confirmation by him to the Monks of
Paisly, of the Patronage of the Church of St. Querran, recorded in the Register
of that Abbey.
, whom I have found entitled Alexander de Insulis Scotiae filius Aengusii
filii Dovenaldi, in a Commission directed to him for keeping the Peace within
his Bounds of the Isles,. after the Death of Queen Margaret, Anno Dom. 1292 Mr.
Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
, and was one of the Loyal Barons who declared he would own the Title of
whatever Person should be adjudged to have the nearest Right in Blood to the
deceast Alexander III. Accordingly, when the Crown was decreed to John de
Baliol, he owned his Title, submitted to his Authority, and stood by him as
long as that unworthy Prince could think any honest Scots Man was bound to
adhere to him. As he was a most loyal, so he seems to have been a very Devout
Man, according to the Piety of the Time, for he ratified to the Monks of Sandal
the Donations and Concessions of his Ancestors, adding also several more of his
own to that Convent for the ordinary Performances that Gifts were then given to
the Church for; Memorial of the Mackdonalds, in the hands of Sir Donald
Mackdonald of Slate.
and to the Abbacy of Paisly he ratified his Father's Grant of the Church of
Kilkeran, to which he appends his own Seal, together with the Seals of Laurence
Bishop of Argyle, and Robert Bruce Earl of Carrick, for the more sure
Verification of his Deed Register of the Abbey of Paisly.
. He made his Exit out of this Life in the 1303, and was succeeded by

Aengus More, his Son, a Person of eminent Affection and Fidelity to King
Robert the Bruce. He was among the first who did engage himself with the Royal
Party, and raised a Body of two thousand Men, and on the Head of them charged
at the Battle of Bannockburn against the English, with as much Courage and
Gallantry as Man could do, which the venerable Mr. Barber has recorded as
follows. Angus of Isles and Boot alswa,
And of the plain Lands, he had (...)
Of armed Men a noble Rout,
His Battle stalward was and Stout,
He said the Rear guard he would man,
And even before him should ga
The Vanguard, and on either hand
The other Battle should be gangand,
Behind oneside a little space,
And the King that behind them was
Should see, whair there was may mister
And then reli^^ them with his Banner.


As this illustrious Person had no little share in the Honor of that glorious
Victory, so he continued in his Princes Service with singular Loyalty and
Constancy to the End with all the Disadvantages it was liable to, only out of
Conscience to the justice of the Cause, and Compassion to his bleeding Country,
which has derived his Name down to Posterity, as a noble and most worthy
Patriot. By..... Daughter of..... his Wife, he had Issue,

Aengus Lord of the Isles, his Son, of whom I find nothing remarkable either in
History, or in their own Traditions, only that by his Wife a Daughter of O
Cane, the Chistain of a Tribe in Ireland Genealogy of the Mackdonalds, in the
Custody of Sir Donald Mackdonald of Slate.
, he had a Son

John of Isle, Lord of the Isles who being a very powerful and well deserving
Person, stood in so great favor with King Robert II. especially for his loyal
Deportment toward him in the beginning of his Reign, that he gave him the Lady
Margaret his Daughter in Marriage There are three distinct Charters in the
Rolls of King Robert II. to this John Lord of the Isles, and Margaret his Wife
the King's Daughter in the 1376.
, which produced three Sons and two Daughters, viz. Donald Lord of the Isles,
John of Isle the 2d was first of the Branch of Dunniveg and Gli^s I have
several Documents to prove this Descent of Dunniveg
, Ancestor to the Earl of Antrim of the Kingdom of Ireland, Alexander the 3d
Progenitor of Mackdonald of Keppoch Sir George Mackenzie's Collections MS.
, in Vic. de Inverness.

Margaret first Daughter married to Nicolas Earl of Sutherland Genealogical
History of the Earls of Sutherland, by Sir Robert Gordon MS
, and had Issue.

Elisabeth the 2d to Lachlan Mackgillean of Dowart Charta in publicis Archivis.
, and had Issue.

Donald Lord of the Isles, Son of the last named John, thought fit to
strengthen himself in the beginning of his Days by bestowing several Vassalages
on great Men, upon Condition to become his Retainers Ibidem.
, which made him very powerful in these Parts. He continued Loyal till that
Robert Duke of Albany the Governor of Scotland, in the Reign of King James I.
prevailed upon Eupha^e the young Countess. of Ross, to resign the Earldom of
Ross, when she rendered her self a Religious in Northberwick Nunnery, in
favors of John Earl of Buchan his Son, in pre judice of this Lord and his
Wife; who was Aunt to the said Countess of Ross, and so undoubted Heir of that
Earldom after her decease: But when he put in his Claim, the Governor told him
the Resignation was legal, and that he would maintain it. Whereupon Donald Lord
of the Isles resolved to assert his Right by force of Arms, and incontinently
raised an Army of ten thousand Highlanders, and marched through Ross and Murray
down to Aberdeen shire, where he was encountered by Alexander Stewart Earl of
Mar, with the Army under his Command the Governo^r had raised to oppose him, at
a Village called Hairlaw, on St. James's Day 1411, Where a bloody Conflict
happened, with great Loss on both sides; yet the Lord of the Isles had the
better, and thereby put himself in Possession of the Earldom of Ross, which was
such a vast Addition to his paternal Fortune, that he became too great a
Subject, and afterward was the occasion of the fall of his Family. This Donald
Earl of Ross, died Anno 1427 Sir George Mackenzie's Genealogical Collections.
, leaving Issue by Euphame his Wife, Daughter of Walter Lesly Lord of the
Earldom of Ross by Euphame his Wife, Daughter of William Earl of Ross Charta
penes Dominum Saltoun
,

Alexander Earl of Ross his Son and Heir, who was one of the Peers that sat
upon the Trial of Murdo Duke of Albany, by whom that unhappy Duke was adjudged
to lose his Head, Anno 1424 History of Scotland by John Major compared with the
History of the Royal Family published 1710.
. After which he fell into several disloyal Practices, but upon his humble
Submission was pardoned, and to repair for all these Transgressions, he gave
several Donations to the Monks of Sandal, and to other religious Persons, as
the most compendious way to atone God's Justice, and procure him the favor of
Heaven, as was the Belief of that Age Charta in publicis Archivis ad annum 1507.
. He was also in the 3d of King James II. Anno 1440 Justiciar of Scotland
benorth the River of Forth Ibidem.
, which Office he executed for some Years after. His Wife was...... Daughter of
Sir Alexander Seaton of Gordon, Sister to Alexander first Earl of Huntly Mr.
Ferrerius History of the Family of Huntly courteously afforded me by that great
and noble Patron of Learning and Antiquity George Earl of Cromerty.
, by whom he left Issue,

John Earl of Ross

Hugh of Isle of Slate, Ancestor to Sir Donald Mackdonald of Slate Baronet.

Elisabeth married to John Earl of Sutherland.

Which John Lord of the Isles and Earl of Ross, continued a very loyal Subject
to King James II. till he entered into an offensive and defensive League with
the Earls of Douglass, Crawfurd, Murray, and Ormond, by which each Party was
obliged to assist one another upon all extraordinary occasions: But that
Combination being adjudged treasonable, he submited himself to the King's
Clemency, and was received into favor. Soon after which, when a Treaty of
Peace was concluded with the English Anno 1457, he was appointed one of the
Conservators thereof Mr. Rymer's Foedera Angliae lately published.
.

Upon the untimely Death of King James II. this Lord being dissatisfied with
the Government of the Regents, to whom the Administration of Affairs was
committed during the Minority of the young King James III. he broke out into an
open Rebellion, and so far renounced his Allegiance to his Native Prince, as to
bind himself to become Liege-man and Subject to Edward IV. of England, by a
solemn Indenture betwixt them in the 1460 Ibidem.
, for which, and other high Misdemeanors, he was on the 27 of Nov. 1475
forfaulted by a Sentence of Parliament Charta in publicis Archivis.
, notwithstanding the King at the Request of his Queen, and the whole
Parliament assembled at Edinburgh, 25 July 1476, and by reason of the
Propinquity of Blood the said John stood in to the Crown, his Majesty with
Consent of the Estates of Parliament, was pleased to restore him, in Dominium
nostrum Parliamenti and Baronum, and de novo facimus and creamus ipsum Joannem
Dominum Insularum perpetuis temporibus nuncupand and damus dicto Joanni suisque
haeredibu^ and Successoribus temporibus futuris Insulam de Tla, and omnes alias
insulas quae sibi Joanni ante dictam forisfacturam haereditarie pertinuerunt,
ac terras de Morvern, Garmorvern cum pertinen. in Vic. de Innerness, ac terras
de Greenend cum pertinen. in Comitatu de Carrick and Vic. de Air, Dominium de
Lochaber, Terras de Dunern, Glatail, in Vic. de Innerness, ac Terras de
Kinedward in Vic. de Aberdeen, cum omnibus aliis Terris suis excepto Commitatu
de Ross, Dominium de Kintyre and Knapdail dicto Joanni and haeredibus masculis
ipsius corporis quibus deficientibus Aengusio de Tle filio suo naturali and
haeredibus masculis ipsius corporis legitime procreatis, quibus deficientibus,
legitimis haeredibus masculis dicti Joannis quibuscunque Ibidem ad annum 1476.
.

This Earl married Elisabeth Daughter of James Lord Livingstoun, Lord high
Chamberlain of Scotland, by whom he had no Issue, so that the Lordship of the
Isles upon his decease in the 1493, devolved to Donald his Grandson, Son of
Aengus his natural Son, by Isobel Daughter of Colin Earl of Argyle, who dying
unmarried, about the 1535, King James V. assumed the Lordship of the Isles into
his own hands, tho, according to the Conception of the Act of Restoration of
John Earl of Ross abovementioned, it was provided to his Heirs Male, and
consequently the Right of Succession came to the Family of Slate, the
Descendents of Hugh of Isle, younger Brother of John Earl of Ross, whose
Descendents have been always distinguished from the other Tribes of the Name,
and called Mackdonalds absolutely, and by way of Eminence. Mr. Martin's
Description of the Isles page 211.
This John Earl of Ross, gave by his Charter Carissimo fratri suo Hugoni
Alexandri de Insulis Domino de Slate, Terras de Sherb^g Charta in publicis
Archivis.
. He married Fyn vola Daughter of John Mackean Baron of Arduamurchan, in Vic.
de Argyle Genealogy of Slate penes D. Donaldum Mackdonald Baronet.
, by whom he had a Son John, who succeeded him; also by his second Wife
Daughter of........ Gunn of Sutherland, he had Donald of whom the Family of
Slate is descended. This Hugh dying Anno 1498 Ibidem.
,

John his Son succeeded him, and died sans Issue, Anno 1502 Ibidem.
, his Estate descending to

Donald his Brother, who died a young Man about the 1506 Ibidem.
, leaving a Son Donald by...... his Wife Daughter of..... Mackdonald, a Branch
of that Name of the Kingdom of Ireland,

Who succeeded him, and married a Daughter of Mackdonald of Mudort, by whom he
had Donald who succeeded him. He died Anno 1534.

Which Donald upon the Death of his Cousin Lord Donald of the Isles in the 1535
Ibidem.
, claimed the Lordship of the Isles, as lawful Heir Male of John Earl of Ross,
but King James V. for the better effectuating the Project of civilizing the
Highlanders, thought the suppressing the greatness of the Lord of the Isles,
and the dissolving his Vassalage, a very proper and expedient Mean for
attaining that End, and positively refused to give him Possession of the Lands
and Lordship of the Isles, which had formerly been erected by Act of Parliament
in favors of John Earl of Ross, and his Heirs Male: Whereupon he resolved to
possess himself of what he thought was his Right by force of Arms, and raising
a considerable Body of Men, he laid formal Siege to the Fort of Elendounan,
where the King had placed a Garrison, before which he was shot dead with an
Arrow, Anno 1537 Ibidem.
, leaving a young Child his Son Donald by Margaret his Wife Daughter of
Roderick Mackleod of the Jews, Ancestor to the Earl of Cromerty, who
notwithstanding of the For^aulture of his Father, was afterward restored by
Queen Mary to his Estate of Slate, tho never to the Lordship of the Isles, he
making no Claim thereto, by reason of the unquiet State of the Country,
occasioned through the Civil War, which broke out in the 1567: this Gentleman
then acting a very loyal and grateful part for the Interest of the Queen, and
persisting in her Service to the end of the War. He wedded Mary Daughter of
Hector Mackclean of Dowart, and departing this Life Anno 1585, left Issue three
Sons, Donald, Archibald and Alexander.

Which Donald being a Man of Parts and Letters, was particularly favored and
esteemed by King James VI. at whose Command he contributed very much toward
suppressing the In^olencies of the Mackleods of Jews, and other disorderly
Highlanders, and reduced them to much greater Civility and Loyalty than they
had been accustomed to, or was formerly known in these Parts. He married
Margaret Sister to Colin Mackenzie Lord Kintail Ibidem.
, by whom he had no Issue, and departing this Life in the Month of December
1616 Chart^ in Cancellaria Sereniffimae D^min^^ nostrae Reginae.
, his Fortune came immediately to

Donald Mackdonald his Nephew, Son of Archibald his Brother, by Margaret his
Wife, Daughter of Aeneas Mackdonald of Dunniveg and Glins, in Vic. de Argyle,
Ancestor to the Earl of Antrim in Ireland. Which Donald being a Gentleman of a
fair Fortune, and standing much in the Favor of King Charles I. his said
Majesty on the 14 of July 1625, the Year he erected the Degree and Dignity of
Baronet, promoted him to that Honor, his Patent having this Speciality, viz.
Quod dictus Dominus Donaldus Mackdonald de Slate, haeredes sui masculi and
assignati locum habebunt ante Dominum Willielmum Douglas de Glenbervy Militem
Baronettum, Dominum Alexandrum Strachan de Thorntoun Militem Baronettum and
Dominum Davidem Livingstoun de Dunipace militem Baronettum, non obstan. quod
ipsorum literae patentes sub sigillo nostro hactenus expeditae sunt, hac
ratione, quod priusquam nos ipsorum signaturas signavimus express nobis pacti
sunt and concordarunt and volenter consenserunt quod dictus Dominus Donaldus
Mackdonald ante ipsos locum haberet ut praemititur. So by virtue of this Clause
he came to be immediate next Baronet to Sir Robert Gordon of Gordonstoun, and
the second of that Order in the Kingdom of Scotland. When the Civil War broke
out, Anno 1639, be devoted himself entirely to the King's Service, and
contributed very much to make some Discoveries of the secret Designs of the
Covenanters of great Consequence to his Majesty: But he died not long
thereafter in October 1643, leaving Issue by Janet his Wife, Sister to Colin
first Earl of Seaforth, Sir James, of whom hereafter; Donald Mackdonald of
Castletoun, who was famous for his Loyalty in the time of the Civil War,
Archibald, Aeneas and Alexander; likewise four Daughters.

1. Margaret married to Aeneas Lord Mackdonald.

2. Catharine to Kenneth Mackenzie of Garloch.

3. Janet to Donald Mackdonald Captain of Clan Ronald.

4. Mary to Sir Evan Cameron of Lochiel.

Sir James Mackdonald of Slate his Son followed his Father's steps in adhering
to the Royal Cause in the time of the Civil War, was with the Marquis of
Montrose at the Siege of Innerness Anno 1645, and contributed much in making
the Clans join that renowned General, when he promulgated the King's
Commission. After the Murder of the King, and the total Suppression of the
Royal Party, he, like many others of the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom,
affected to lead a retired Life during the Usurpation that followed for several
Years after, taking care to live with that Circumspection which was necessary
in so ticklish Times. But this did not secure him from being called in Question
upon the King's Restoration for his not being active enough against the
Rebels; tho I Am credibly informed from a very noble and worthy Person, who knew
him particularly well The Right Honorable George Earl of Cromerty his Nephew
in Law.
, that there was not a more Loyal Gentleman in Scotland. His first Wife was
Margaret Daughter of Sir Roderick Mackenzie of Tarbat, Grandfather to the Earl
of Cromerty. By her he had Sir Donald his eldest Son, Hugh Mackdonald of
Glenmore, Sorlie Mackdonald of Sartle, Catharine Wife of Sir Norman Mackleod of
Bernary, and Florence married to John Mackleod of that Ilk. His second Wife was
Mary Daughter of Roderick Mackleod of that Ilk, by whom he had a Son John
Mackdonald of Backny. He departed this mortal Life 8 of December 1678.

Sir Donald Mackdonald his Son, married Mary Daughter to Robert Earl of Morton.
By her he had 1 st, Sir Donald his Son and Heir. 2 d, James of Oransay. 3 d,
William Mackdonald Esquire Isobel eldest Daughter married to Sir Alexander
Bannerman of Elsick, in Vic. de Aberdeen; and Barbara to Coll. Mackdonald of
Keppoch. He made his Exit out of this Life 5 Feb. 1695, and was succeeded by
Sir Donald his Son, who married Mary Daughter to Donald Mackdonald of
Castletoun, and had Donald his Son and Heir.

ERSKINE Earl of Kelly.
IS descended of Sir Alexander Erskine of Gogar Son of John Lord Erskine by
Margaret Daughter of Archibald Earl of Argyle, who upon the Death of his
Brother John Earl of Mar Regent of Scotland, was entrusted with the Custody of
the young King, and the keeping of the Castle of Stirling: Which great Trust he
discharged with Honor and Integrity. Likewise in the 1578, he was constituted
Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh, and one of his Majesty's most honorable
Privy Council, and last of all, Vice-Chamberlain of Scotland, Anno 1580.
Crawfurd's Memoirs.
His Character is thus drawn by Sir James Melvill his Contemporary, That he was
a gallant well natured Gentleman, loved and honored by all Men for his good
Qualities and great Discretion, noways Factious or Envious, a lover of all
honest Men, and desired ever to see Men of good Conversation about the Prince,
rather than his own Friends, if he found them not so meet. He married Margaret
Daughter of George Lord Hume, Charta in publicis Archivis.
by whom he had Sir Alexander his eldest Son, a very hopeful young Gentleman,
who was slain at the Surprise of the Castle of Stirling, 20 of April 1578.
Crawfurd's Memoirs.
Sir Thomas the first Earl of Kelly, Sir George Erskine of Innertyle, one of
the Senators of the College of Justice. Likewise three Daughters, Jean married
to James Crichton of Ruthven, and had Issue, Janet to John Lesly of Balquhain,
Mother by him to Walter the first Count Lesly of Germany; Mary to Sir Dugal
Campbel of Achinbreck, and had Issue.

Sir Thomas Erskine the first Earl of Kelly, being educated with King James VI.
from his very Childhood, came thereby to have a more than ordinary Familiarity
with that Prince, who made him one of the Gentlemen of his Bedchamber, Anno
1585, and bestowed many Marks of his special Esteem on him. He lived always at
Court without doing any thing on Record till the 5 of August 1600. He was one
of those who were the happy Instruments in rescuing the King from the
treasonable Attempt of John Earl of Gowrie and his Brother Alexander Ruthven,
Sir Thomas happning to kill the latter as he came down Stairs, where he and his
Majesty had the Conference. In regard of which signal and m^ritorious Service,
he was rewarded with the Lands and Lordship of Dirletoun, from which place he
had the Title of Lord conferred on him, Anno 1603, at which time accompanying
his Majesty to England, he was made Captain of the English Guard, upon the
removal of Sir Walter Rawleigh. Further, in the 1606, he was raised to the
Dignity of Viscount of Fentoun; and finally, in Consideration of his long and
faithful Services to that Prince, he was created Earl of Kelly 12 March 1619,
and elected Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter; and departing this
Life 12 June 1639, Balfour's Annals.
he left Issue by Anne his Wife Daughter of Gilbert Ogilvy of Pourie, two Sons
Thomas and Alexander, and a Daughter Anne, Wife of Sir Robert Moubray of
Barnbougal.

Which Thomas second Earl of Kelly died unmarried in the 1643, Guthrie's
Mem^irs.
his Estate and Honor devolving on Alexander his Brother, who suffered much
for his Loyalty during the Usurpation, but living to see the King restored, he
died Anno 1677, Charta in Cancellaria sereniss. D. N. R.
leaving Issue by Anne his Wife Daughter of Alexander Earl of Dumferm^ing,
Alexander his Successor, and Sir Charles Erskine of Cambo Lord Lion King at
Arms: Likewise three Daughters, Mary married to Gavin Earl of Carnwath, Sophia
to Alexander Lord Saltoun, Margaret to William Lord Forbes, but had no Issue.

Which Alexander married first Mary Daughter of Colonel Kilpatrick Governor of
the Bush in Holland, by whom he had only a Daughter Mary married to Sir
Alexander Erskine of Cambo Lord Lion King at Arms. His second Wife was Mary
Daughter of Sir John Dalziel of Glenae, by whom he had a Son Alexander who
succeeded him upon his Death, Anno 1692. Ibid.
He married Anne Daughter of Colin Earl of Balcarras, and departing this Life 8
March 1710, Ibid.
left a Son Alexander now Earl of Kelly to inherit his Estate and Honor, and a
Daughter Lady Jean.

ARMS.
Quarterly first Gules, an imperial Crown within a double Tressure
counterflowr'd Or, 2d Argent, a Pale Sable supported by two Griffons. Crest, a
Demi-Lyon Rampant Gules. Motto, Decori Decus addit avito.

MACLELLAN, Lord Kirkcudbright.
ANY who reads the History of the Scots Nation, will plainly perceive the
Antiquity as well as the Grandeur of this Family: That they were likewise
Sheriffs of Galloway in ancient Times, is past Dispute; which Office continued
in their Family till the Reign of King James II. that by a Forfaulture it came
to the Crown. Then it was erected into two distinct Jurisdictions, viz. The
Sherifship of Wigtoun, and the Stewartry of Kirkcudbright, both these Offices
being given to other Families. It was at that time likewise, I Am told, that the
Writs and Evidents of Bombie were destroyed, which is the Reason I have not
seen much concerning them before that Period, tho by the Tradition they were
then so numerous and well spread in Branches, that there were no fewer than
twelve Knights of the Name, concerning some of whom I have seen Writings which
make them very considerable in the Government of Murdoch Duke of Albany. I have
seen a Charter in the Hands of Robert Maclellan of Barclay in the 1422, wherein
there is mention of Sir John Maclellan of Gelstoun* The rest of the Knights of
the Maclellans before the Forfaulture. the Tradition says, were Ravenstoun,
Kilchrichie, Sorby, Glenshinnock, Troquhain, Barholm, Kirkonell, Kirkormock,
Kirkgaunan, Bardrochat, Borg, Coven and Barscob, all extinct save the last,
which of consequence is an ancient Family.


Sir Patrick Maclellan of Bombie, Nephew to the Lord Gray by his Mother in the
Reign of King James II. happening to take part with the Lord Harris his near
Ally against the Earl of Douglas, Maclellan was besieged by the Earl in his own
Castle of Raebery, which at last he forced him to surrender; and
notwithstanding the King's Interposition, he put him to Death; which Deed
afterward cost the Earl his Life. Sir Patrick Maclellan was interred in the
Abbey Church of Dundrenan, under a Monument of Freestone, containing his
Effigies, as big as the Life, with this Inscription in great Roman Capitals.
Hic jacet vir honorabilis Dominus Patricius Maclellanus. Dominus de Wigtoun,
and Vice comes Gallovidiae qui obiit Anno Domini millesimo quadringentesimo
quinquagesimo secundo, cujus anima requiescat in pace.

The Death of this Gentleman Sir Patrick Maclellan was so deeply resented by
his Relations of the Surname of Mackclellan, that they committed great
Depredations upon the Douglas's Lands within the bounds of Galloway, without
any Warrant or Authority; for which Action, the Lord of Bom^i^ himself, and
most of his Friends who were engaged in that Enterprise were forfaulted in the
Reign of King James II. The B^rony of Bombie was again recovered by the
M^clellans, as the Tradition goes, after this Manner. In the same Reign, says
an Author of no small Credit, Sir George Mackenzie in his Baronage MS.
it happned that a Company of Sarace^s or Gypsies from Ireland, infested the
Country of Galloway; whereupon the King emitted a Proclamation, bearing, That
whoever should disperse them, and bring in their Captain dead or alive, should
have the Barony of Bombie for his Reward. So it chanced that a brave young
Gentleman the Lord of Bombie's Son fortuned to kill the Person for which the
Reward was promised, and he brought his Head on the point of his Sword to the
King, and thereupon he was immediately seized in the Barony of Bombie; and to
perpetnate the Memory of that brave and remarkable Action, he took for his
Crest a More's Head on the point of a Sword, and THINK ON for his Motto.

His Successor Thomas Maclellan of Bombie, in the Reign of King James IV. was
active and serviceable to the Crown on sundry Occasions, and seems to have been
a very considerable Man in the account of that Age. By Agnes his Wife Daughter
of Sir James Dunbar of Mochrum, Mr. Thomson's Genealogical Collections.
he had three Sons, Sir William his Successor. Gilbert the second Son was
Ancestor of the Maclellans of Barmagachan in the Stewartry of Kirkcudbright
There is a Charter in the Hands of Ephraim Maclellan of Barmagachan, which
instructs that this Gilbert his Predecessor, was married to Janet Daughter to
the Lord Harris, and that he had by her two Sons, Thomas Maclellan his
Successor in Barmagachan, and William Maclellan of Balmangan, of which Branch
Sir Samuel Maclellan late Provost of Edinburgh was descended by a younger
Brother. The foresaid Thomas the elder Brother, was Father of another William
Maclellan of Barmagachan, and he of Thomas, as he was of another Robert
Maclellan of the Place foresaid, Father of another Robert, whose eldest Son is
Ephraim Maclellan of Barmagachan, and Robert Maclellan of Barclay is his 2d
Son, by whom I had the most part of the Memoirs of this Family transmitted to
me, of which I have composed this Account.
, and John Mackclellan of Achlean, which Branch is long ago extinct.

William Maclellan of Bombie, Son to the former Thomas, was knighted by King
James IV. who likewise gave him many Lands in the parts of Galloway. He was
slain with the said King his Master at the Battle of Flowdoun 9 Sept. 1513.
leaving Issue by Elizabeth Mur^ his Wife Charta in Rotulis Mariae Reginae.
a Son Thomas Maclellan of Bombie, who was killed by the Barons of Drumlanrig
and Lochiuvar his potent Neighbors, with whom he had a Feud at the time on the
high Street of Edinburgh the 11 of July 1526, History of Scotland in Manuscript.
leaving a Son Sir Thomas to succeed him, then in Minority, who in the 1542
obtained a Charter from Queen Mary, of all the Lands which he held of the
Crown, belonging either to Thomas Maclellan of Bombie his Father, or which Sir
William his Grandfather died possessed of, Charta in Rotulis Mariae Reginae.
which in those Days was a very fair Fortune. He made a prudent and discreet
Match with Helen Daughter of James Gordon of Lochinvar, Ibidem.
to reconcile and agree a Feud betwixt the Families; and after her Death Grisel
Daughter of John Maxwel Lord Harris, by whom he had Sir Robert Maclellan the
first Lord Kirkcudbright, William Maclellan of Glenshinnoch, and John Maclellan
of Bourg. He departed this mortal Life Anno 1607, and was interred in the Vault
of the Family, within the Church of Kirkcudbright, with this Inscription on his
Tomb, Hic situs est D. T. Maclellanus and uxor,
D. Grisel Maxwell marmor utrumque tegit
Hic Genitus R. L. Kircubrius; ecce Sepulchrum
Posuit hoc Chari patris honor sui,


Sir Robert Maclellan of Bombie his Son, was made a Knight by King James VI.
whose Favorite he was, and afterward one of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber.
King Charles continued him in the same Employment, and first raised him to the
Honor of Baronet; and thereafter by Letters Patent bearing Date the 25 of May
1633, preserred him to the Peerage by the Title of Lord Kirkcudbright. Charta
in Rotulis Caroli I.
He married first Margaret Daughter of Sir Matthew Campbel of Lowdoun, by whom
he had a Daughter Marion, married to Sir Robert Maxwel of Orchardtoun; 2 dly,
Mary Daughter of Hugh Montgomery Viscount of Airds of the Kingdom of Ireland,
but by her he had no Issue, and departing this Life Anno 1641, his Estate and
Title of Lord came to Thomas Maclellan his Nephew, who marrying Janet Daughter
of William Earl of Queensberry, died without Issue in May 1648 Charta in
Cancellaria Serenis. D. N. R.
. John Maclellan of Bourg succeeding him in the Honor, this Lord did signalize
himself in his Loyalty to King Charles II. in the time of the Civil Troubles,
and at his own proper Charge raised a Regiment of Foot for his Majesty's
Service, which necessarly brought a vast Burden of Debt on him, and the Expense
being never refounded, his Estate was evicted by his Creditors after the
Restoration of the King, and dying Anno 1664, he left Issue by Anne his Wife,
Daughter of Sir Robert Maxwel of Orchardtoun, William Lord Kirkcudbright his
Son and Heir, who died a young Man unmarried, Anno 1669, so that the honorary
Title of Lord should descend to James Maclellan of Achlean, his Cousin and
nearest Heir Male; but there being nothing remaining of the Fortune to support
the Dignity, it has not been used since that Time.

ARMS.
Or, A Cheveron surmounted of another, Sable; Suppporters two Chevaliers, Crest
a Moor's Head on the point of a Sword, Motto, Think on.

GORDON, Viscount of Kenmure.
SIR Adam Gordon Knight, his Ancestor, obtained from King Robert I. the Barony
of Stichhell in Roxburgh-shire, in the ninth Year of his Reign, in reward of
his good Services. Miscellany Collections of Charters.
Hence in the time of James III. descended John Gordon of Lochinvar, who by
Margaret Lindsay his Wife Charta in publicis Archivis. There are sundry
Charters under the Great Seal by King James IV. to this John Gordon of
Lochinvar: As also I have seen a Charter of Confirmation by the same King,
ratifying a Grant which Dougal Maclellan made of the Lands of Traquhain to
George Gordon Brother to John Gordon of Lochinvar, 2d March 1494, whose lineal
Successor is James Gordon now of Traquhain.
had Sir Alexander his eldest Son, who was killed at Flowdoun, leaving no Male
Issue: Sir Robert his Successor, and William who was first of the Branch of
Crichlaw, Charta in Rotulis Jacobi IV. ad annum 1506.
which Sir Robert married Marion Daughter and Heiress of John Carsen of Glen,
Ibidem
and had James his Son and Successor, who was killed at the Battle of Pinky, 10
September 1547, leaving Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Robert Crichton
of Kilpatrick, Ibidem.
a Son Sir John and several Daughters.

Janet, married to William Earl of Glencairn, Margaret to Sir William Douglas
of Drumlanrig, Charta in publicis Archivis.
Helen to Thomas Maclellan of Bomby, Ibidem.
Elisabeth to John Grierson of Lagg, and afterward to William Adair of Kilhilt,
Ibidem.
Jean to Patrick Agnew of Lochnaw, Sheriff of Galloway Ibidem.
.

Sir John Gordon of Lochinvar was a zealous Loyalist for Queen Mary's Interest,
for which he suffered both in his Person and Fortune. He married first Juliana
Daughter of Sir David Hunce of Wedderburn, Charta in publicis Archvis.
by whom he had one Daughter Margaret married to Hugh Lord Loudoun, Ibidem.
and again Elisabeth Daughter of John Lord Harries Ibidem.
. By her he had Sir Robert his Successor, William Gordon of Penningham, Grisel
married to Alexander 1 st Earl of Galloway, Elisabeth to James Lord Torthorald,
he died on the 23 of August 1604 Ibidem.
.

Sir Robert his Son succeeding him, who was one of the Gentlemen of the Privy
Chamber to Henry Prince of Wales. His Wife was Isabel Daughter of William Earl
of Gowrie, by her he had John the first Viscount of Kenmure, James Gordon of
Buttle, and Elisabeth a Daughter married to John Lord Harries. He died Anno
1627, Johnstoni Historia rerum Britannicarum.
and was succeeded by

Sir John his Son and Heir, who was by King Charles I. on the 8 of May 1633
created Viscount of Kenmure Charta in Cancellaria Serenissimi Domini Nostri
Regis.
, and to his Heirs Male for ever. He departed this Life 21 of September 1634,
leaving a Son John to succeed him in the Honor, but he dying young the Title
came to John Gordon his Cousin German, who dying unmarried, Robert his Brother
was Heir to him, and he dying without Issue in the Year 1663, his Estate and
Honor devolved to Alexander Gordon of Penningham his nearest Heir Male, who
married Marion Daughter of....... Maculloch of Ardwell, by whom he had William
his Successor in the Honor, Jean married to William Gordon of Shirmers, Marion
to Alexander Gordon of Earlstoun, and Elisabeth to William Maxwel of Newlaw,
next Grisel Daughter of James Earl of Galloway. By her he had John Gordon of
Gree^law, James Gordon of Grange; also three Daughters, 1 st Mary married to
Sir Patrick Maxwel of Sprinkel, Baronet; 2 d, Isobel to John Mackgie of
Balmagie. 3 d,....... he dying Anno School, was succeeded by William his Son and
Heir, who married Mary Daughter of Sir John Dalziel of Glenae, and had two
Sons, Robert Master of Kenmure, and John.

ARMS.
Azure, three Boars Heads Coupe, Or,

LIVINGSTON, Viscount of Kilsyth.
THE Barony of Kilsyth in the Shire of Stirling, in the Reign of King Alexander
II. was given by Maldwin Earl of Lennox, to Malcolm the Son of Duncan of
Calentyre in Marriage with Eva his Sister, Charta penes Will. Vice-comitem de
Kilsyth.
and so continued in the Family of Callendar till the Reign of King James I.
That William Livingston younger Son of Sir John Livingston of Callendar, by
Agnes his Wife, Daughter of Sir James Douglas of Dalkeith, got the Lands of
Wester Kilsyth in Patrimony, his Successors since acquiring the whole Ibidem.
, This William married Elisabeth Daughter and one of the Coheirs of William de
Caldcoat, whereby he got the Lands of Greden in Berwick-shire, Ibidem.
and by her he had Edward his Successor, and Sir Henry Livingston Preceptor of
Torphichen, Ibidem.
which Edward was retoured to his Father on the 23 of April 1460, Ibidem.
and left a Son William to succeed him in the Barony of Kilsyth, who
married...... Daughter of Thomas Lord Erskine Charta penes Will. Vice-comitem de
Kilsyth.
, and had William his Son and Heir, who by Janet his Wife, Daughter of.....
Graham of....... had William Livingston of Kilsyth his Son and Successor, who
was killed at the Battle of Flowdoun, leaving a Son William by Janet Daughter
of....... Bruce of Airth, who was retoured Heir to his Father on the 3 d of
January 1514 Ibidem.
. He married Mary Daughter of Sir Duncan Forrester of Garden, Comptroller of
the Household in the Reign of King James IV. Genealogy of the Family of Garden.
By her he had three Sons, William Livingston of Kilsyth, Alexander Livingston
of Inches, Charta penes Vicecomitem de Kilsyth.
and Robert Livingston of Baldoran. Charta in publicis Archivis, ad Annum 1545.
Likewise three Daughters, Elisabeth married to Gabriel Cunningham of
Craigends, Charta penes Vice-comitem de Kilsyth.
Isabel to Colin Campbel of Achinhove, Ibidem.
and Margaret to Ninian Bruce of Kinnard, 2 dly to Alexander Baillie of
Jervistoun, Ibidem.
which William was knighted at the Creation of Henry Duke of Albany, Anno 1565.
He married Christian Daughter of William Earl of Monteith, Ibidem.
by whom he had Sir William his Son and Heir, and Christian Wife of John Lawson
of Boghall.

Which Sir William being a Man of Parts and Learning, was made one of the
Senators of the College of Justice Anno 1609, List of the Lords of Session, etc.
and swo^^ of his Majesty's Privy Council 13 of May 1613 Balfour's Annals.
, and the same Day constituted Vice Chamberlain of Scotland. He married first
Antonia de Board, a Lady of Quality of the Kingdom of France, by whom he had
Sir William Livingston of Darnchester, his eldest Son, who was knighted at the
Baptism of Prince Henry in the 1595, and a Daughter Christian married to George
Lord Forrester, and had Issue. His second Wife was Margaret Daughter of John
Houston of that Ilk; By her he had Sir James Livingston of Bancloich, afterward
Viscount of Kilsyth, and a Daughter Margaret married to Robert Montgomery of
Haslehead, in vic. de Air.

Here it will not be improper to take notice, that Sir William Livingston of
Darnchester, younger of Kilsyth, in his Father's time married Anne Daughter of
John Earl of Wigtoun, Charta penes Vic. de Kilsyth.
and died in the Lifetime of his Father, leaving a Son William who succeeded
his Grandfather upon his Death, which happened in the Year 1627 Charta in
Cancellaria Serenissimi Domini Nostrae Regis.
, which William so succeeding, wedded Margaret Daughter of George Lord Ramsay;
By her he had a Son William and two Daughters, Margaret married to Andrew
Rutherford of Hunthill, Charta penes Vic. de Kilsyth.
and Christian to James Viscount of Oxenford; which William Livingston of
Kilsyth died in his Minority, Anno 1647, Charta in Cancellaria S. D. N. R.
his Estate devolving upon Sir James Livingston of Bancloich, his great Uncle,
who having suffered much for his steady and constant Loyalty during the
Usurpation, was, in regard of his great Merit upon the King's Restoration,
honored with the Peerage of this Realm by the Titles of Viscount Kilsyth and
Lord Campsy, 17 August 1661 Charta in Rotulis Caroli II. ad annum 1661.
, but he did not enjoy the Honor one whole Month, for he died at London on the
9 of September thereafter, and was interred at Kilsyth among his Ancestors,
leaving Issue by Euphame his Wife Daughter of Sir David Cunningham of
Robertland, Baronet, in Vic. de Air. James Viscount of Kilsyth who died a
Bachelor in 1706, and William the present Viscount, also a Daughter Elisabeth
married to Major General Robert Montgomery Son to Alexander Earl of Eglintoun,
and had Issue.

Which William was one of the Sixteen Peers elected for Scotland to sit in the
Parliament of Great Britain, in the last Parliament of Queen Anne. He took to
Wife first Jean Daughter of William Lord Cochran Son and Heir of William Earl
of Dundonald, by whom he had a Son William, who died an Infant, 2 dly Barbara
Daughter of...... Mackdonal of Macker stoun in Vic. de Roxburgh. By her he had
a Daughter Barbara, who died young, Anno 1700.

ARMS.
Argent, three Gellie Flowers slipped, Gules, within a double Tressure
Counter-flowered, Vert, supported by two Lyans rampant, Gules, Crest, a Them:
Savage wreathed about the middle with Laurel, Motto, Spe expecto.

BOYD, Earl of Kilmarnock.
THE common bearing of the Boyds and Stewarts, has given ground to a Conjecture
that they are branched from the Royal Family of Stewart, long before the
Surname o^ Stewart was u^ed by the younger Sons of that illustrious Family, but
upon what occasion they assumed this Name, I shall not account ^or. Sir Robert
Boyd did signalize his Valor in the Battle of the Largs against the
Norvegians, Anno 1263, for which Service he had a Grant of diverse Lands in
Cunningham. Another Sir Robert Boyd a descendant from him, added no small
Luster to the Famimily by his Loyalty to King Robert the Bruce, to whom he most
faithfully adhered in all the Vicissitudes of Fortune that besel him, in reward
of which signal Merit, in the second Year of his Reign he gave him terras de
Kilmarnock, Bondingtoun and Hairshaw quae fuere Joannis de Balliolo totam
terram de Kilbride ac totam terram de Arneil quae fuere Godofridi de Ross, and
totam terram quae fuere Will. de Mora in tenemento de Dalray Charta penes
Comitem de Kilmarnock.
. This Sir Robert was succeeded by Sir Thomas his Son, who by....... Daughter
of..... left three Sons, Sir Thomas his Successor, William Author of the Boyds
of Badinheath, Charta in Rotulis Rob. II. ad Annum 1374. per Tho Fleming de
Fulwood dudum Comitem de Wigton, Wilielmo Boyd filio Thomae Boyd de Kilmarnock,
militi de omnibus terris ejusdem Thomae in Baronia de Lanzie.
and Robert first of the House of Portencross in Airshire I have seen a Charter
on the 10th of June 1444, per Thomam Boyd de Kilmarnock dilecto avunculo suo
Roberto Boyd terrarum de Arneil.
.

Which Sir Thomas obtained the third part of the Barony of Tester by Marriage
of...... one of the four Daughters and Coheirs of Sir John Giffard, Charta
pene^ Marchionem de Twedale.
by whom he had Thomas his Son and Successor, who was one of the Hostages for
the Ransom of King James I. He married Janet Daughter of....... Montgomery of
Ardrossan, and departing this Life 7 July 1432, was interred in the Paroch
Church of Kilmarnock Historical Collections by Mr. Timothy Pont, in the Hand^
of Sir Robert Sibbald, M.D. MS.
, where the Portraiture of himself and his Wife are to be seen in fair Stone as
big as the Life, with this Inscription over; them. Hic jacet Thomas Boyd de
Kilmarnock qui obiit septimo die Julii Millessimo quadringentesimo tricesim^
secundo and Joanna Montgomery ejus sponsa orate pro illis.

Sir Thomas Boyd of Kilmarnock his Son did not long survive his Father, for he
was killed at Craignaught-hill in Renfrew shire, by Sir Alexander Stewart, on
the 9 of July 1439, Buchan. Historia rerum Scoticarum.
in Revenge of the Lord Darnly's Death, whom Sir Thomas Boyd had killed in a
Feud some time before, leaving Issue by..... Daughter of..... his Wife, Robert,
thereafter Lord Boyd, Sir Alexander Boyd of Duncow, Ancestor to the present
Lord Boyd Charta penes Alanum Dominum Cathcart.
, and a Daughter..... married to John Maxwel of Calderwood.

Which Robert, being a Person of great Parts, was one of the six Noblemen who
were chosen Regents of Scotland in the Minority of King James III. Anno 1460;
after which in 1466 he was chosen sole Governor of the Realm Charta in Rotulis
Jacobi III.
, and on the 25 of August 1467, constituted Lord high Chamberlain Charta penes
comitem de Kilmarnock.
: Being thus advanced to the highest pitch of Honor, the more to strengthen
himself, he married the Lady Mary the King's eldest Sister to Thomas Master of
Boyd his eldest Son, who thereupon was created Earl of Arran Charta in Rotulis
Jacobi III. Nota, Robert Lord Boyd the Governor was married to Marion Daughter
to Sir Robert Maxwel of Calderwood. By her, beside Thomas Earl of Aran, he had
another Son Archibald Boyd of Bonshaw, and Elizabeth a Daughter married to
Archibald E. of Angus.
, and sent Ambassador to Denmark to treat about a Marriage with the young King
and Margaret Daughter of Christian the I. But behold the Instability of humane
Affairs: During his absence, his Enemies contrive the ruin of his Family. They
represent the Boyds to be ambitious, and too great Subjects, and they prevailed
so far with the King, that he called a Parliament, before which the Lord Boyd,
the Earl of Arran his Son, Sir Alexander Boyd his Brother were summoned to give
an account of their Administration. The old man himself, being afraid of the
power of his Enemies, fled to England, where in a short time he died of
Heart-broken. Sir Alexander his Brother appearing, was indicted of high
Treason, and was executed. The Earl of Arran having brought the Queen from
Denmark into the Firth of Forth, being informed of the Circumstances he and his
Friends were in, immediately with his Wife in his Company retired again into
that Country, whence he traveled into France, and thence into Burgundy, where
shortly after he ended his Days, leaving Issue by the Lady Mary his Wife
foresaid, James a Son, and Margaret a Daughter, married to Sir Alexander
Forbes, and afterward to David Earl of Cassils. After the fall of the Boyds
the Barony and Lordship of Kilmarnock came to the Crown, and so continued till
the 24 of October 1482, that King James III. for the Love and Affection he bore
to his Sister, made a Grant to James Boyd her Son of the Baronies of
Kilmarnock, Dalray, Kilbride, Noodsdale, Muirfad, Gairnhill, Warrockland,
Ormsheugh, Dolyra, Robertoun, Bolinshaw, Chapeltoun, Miltoun, Crevoch,
Cultstra, Corshill, Clerkland, Blacklaw, and Nether Robertland, quae fuerunt
quondam olim Roberti Domini Boyd, and quondam Thomae Boyd militis filii sui avi
and patris dicti Jacobi In the Charter he is only designed James Boyd, in the
Sasine following thereupon he is designed Nobili and Illustri Domino Jacobo
Domino Boyd.
: But he dying Anno 1484 without any Children, the Lordship of Kilmarnock
returned again to the Crown.

The present Earl of Kilmarnock is descended from Alexander Boyd Son of Sir
Alexander Boyd of Duncow, Brother to Robert the great Lord Boyd: Which
Alexander was by King James IV. made Baillie and Chamberlain for the Lordship
of Kilmarnock Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
, from whom he had a Grant of diverse Lands within the said Lordship Charta in
Rotulis Jacobi IV.
by Janet his Wife Daughter of...... Colvil of....... He had three Sons,
Robert, afterward Lord Boyd, Thomas, first of the Branch of Pitcon Charta penes
Tho. Boyd de Pitcon.
, and Adam, of whom sprung the Boyds of Pinkhill and Trochrig Preface to Mr.
Robert Boyd's Commentary on the Ephesians.
.

Robert Boyd Esquire Son and Heir of the former Alexander, was a Person much in
favor with King James V. whom he faithfully served both at Home and Abroad,
wherefore that Prince bestowed upon him the Lordship of Kilmarnock, 20 May 1^36
Charta in publicis Archivis.
, as he afterward had, by the Grant of James Earl of Arran Governor of
Scotland in the Minority of Queen Mary, many Lands that had formerly pertained
to his Ancestors, and at the same time he is served and retoured Heir to James
Boyd of Kilmarnock his Father's Brother's Son Charta penes comitem de
Kilmarnock, data 23 of October 1544.
. He married Helen Daughter of Sir John Somervel of Camnethan, by whom he had
Robert his Successor, and Margaret married to John Son and Heir of Sir Niel
Montgomery of Lainshaw, sa^s Issue.

Robert Lord Boyd his Son, being a Man of Parts, was much trusted by Queen
Mary, to whom he faithfully adhered till the total Suppression of her Interest.
He was also in the 1578 appointed one of the Commissioners to Treat with the
English about suppressing the Incursions of the Borderers; and again Anno 1586
he was with the Earl of Bothwel and Hume of Coldingknows sent Ambassador to
England to Treat about the Continuation of a firm and lasting Peace betwixt the
two Realms Camden's History of Queen Elizabeth.
. He married Margaret Daughter and sole Heir of George colquhoun of Glins
Charta penes comitem de Kilmarnock.
, by whom he had Robert Master of Boyd, who died in the Lifetime of his Father.
2 d. Thomas, his Successor in the Honor. 3 d. William, who obtained the Lands
of Badinheath by Marriage of an Heiress of his own Name; likewise sundry
Daughters, Giles, married to Hugh Earl of Eglinton, Agnes to Sir John Colquhoun
of Luss, and had Issue, Christian to Sir James Hamilton of Evandale; and had
Issue, Elizabeth to John Cuningham of Drumquhasle. He gave way to Fate on the 3
d of January 1589, aged 72, and was interred with his Ancestors at the Church
of Kilmarnock under a fair Tomb, whereupon you may read this Epitaph. Here lies
yat godly, noble, wise Lord Boyd,
Who Kirk and King, and Commonwell decor'd,
Which were, while they this Jewel all enjoyed,
Maintained, governed, and council'd by that Lord.
His ancient House so often peril'd he restored,
Twice six and sixty Years he lived, and sine
By Death the third of January devor'd,
In Anno thrice five hundred eighty nine.


Thomas Lord Boyd his Son married Marion Daughter of Sir Matthew Campbel of
Lowdoun, by whom he had Robert Master of Boyd, who died in the Lifetime of his
Father, Anno 1597 Monumental Inscriptions at the Church of Kilmarnock.
, and Sir Thomas Boyd of Bedlay. Marion his eldest Daughter was married to
James Earl of Abercorn, Isobel the second to John Blair of that Ilk, and after
his Death to Sir Dougal Campbel of Auchinbreak; and had Issue, Agnes the
youngest to Sir George Elphinston of Blythswood, and had Issue; and departing
this Life in the 1611, Robert his Grandson, Son of Robert Master of Boyd by
Jean his Wife, Daughter of Mark Earl of Lothian, succeeded him in the Honor,
and married first Margaret Daughter to Robert Montgomery of Giffen Charta penes
comitem de Kilmarnock ad A^num 1614.
, and next Christian Daughter of Thomas Earl of Hadingtoun, and departing this
Life in the end of August 1628, left Issue by the said Christian his Wife,
Robert his Son and Heir, and four Daughters, Jean married to Sir Alexander
Morison of Prestongrange, and had Issue. Isobel to Sir John Sinclair of
Stevenson, and had Issue, Christian to Sir William Scot of Harden, and had
Issue, Marion to Sir James Dundass of Arnistoun, and had Issue. Which Robert
was a young Nobleman of great Hopes and Parts, died much regrated on the 17 of
November 1640 Balfour's Annals.
, leaving no Issue by Anne his Wife Daughter of John Earl of Wigton, so that
his Estate and Honor came to James Boyd his Father's Brother, who married
Katharine Daughter of...... Craik Esquire of the City of York. By her he had
William his Successor, and a Daughter Eva married to Sir David Cunningham of
Robertland, he dying in May 1654, was succeeded by William his Son Charta in
Cancellaria S. D. N. Regis.
. Which William was by the special favor of King Charles II, by Letters patent
bearing Date 7 of August 1661, promoted to the Honor of Earl of Kilmarnock,
and to his Heirs Male for ever Charta in Rotulis Caroli II.
. He married Jean Daughter of William Earl of Glencairn, by whom he had William
his Successor in the Honor, Captain James, Charles, Robert, Mary Wife of Sir
Alexander Mackclean, and Katharine married to Alexander Porterfield of that
Ilk, in Vic. de Renfrew, and had Issue. He dying in the Spring of the Year 1692
was succeeded by William his Son and Heir, who did not survive his Father full
two Months, for his Death happened on the 20 of May thereafter, leaving two
Sons by Lettice his Wife Daughter and Heir of Thomas Boyd of the City of Dublin
Merchant, William the present Earl, and Mr. Thomas Boyd Advocate, which
William, the present Earl, married Euphame eldest Daughter of William Lord
Ross, and had Issue William Lord Boyd.

ARMS.
Azure, A Fess Checque Argent and Gules. Supporters two Squirrels proper.
Crest, a Dexter Hand pointing forth the Thumb and two Fingers. Motto, Confido,
and on a Compartment the Word, Gold-Berry.

BRUCE, Earl of Kincardin,
IS descended of Sir George Bruce of Carnock, third Son of Sir Edward Bruce of
Blairhall This Sir George Bruce of Carnock, was immediate younger Brother to
Edward Lord Kinloss, Ancestor to the Earl of Ailsburry and Elgin.
, who by Merchandise and other means attaining to great Wealth, he purchased a
fair Estate about Culross in Perth-shire, for which Borough he was frequently
elected Member of Parliament, and was one of the Commissioners for the Treaty
of Union then designed betwixt the two Nations, Anno 1604 Spotiswood's History.
, soon after which he had the Honor of Knighthood conferred on him. He married
Mary Daughter of...... Primrose of...... by whom he had two Sons, Sir George
Bruce of Carnock, and Robert Bruce of Broomhall, one of the Senators of the
College of Justice, Ancestor to the present Earl of Kincardin, and departing
this mortal Life 3d of May 1625, Charta in Cancellaria S. D. N. Regis ad Annum
1625.
was succeeded by Sir George his Son, who taking to Wife Mary Daughter of Sir
John Preston of Valleyfield, had by her Edward and Alexander, both Earls of
Kincardin; likewise three Daughters,

1. Margaret married to Sir John Lumisden of Innergelly.

2. Magdalen to Sir John Arnot of Cockburnspath, sans Issue.

3. Mary to David Lord Cardross, and had Issue.

Which Edward was by King Charles I. honored with the Title of Earl of
Kincardin, 26 December 1647 Charta in Cancellaria S. D. N. Regis ad Annum 1647.
, and to his Heirs Male, but his Lordship dying unmarried Anno 1662, the Honor
devolved on Alexander his Brother and Heir, who was one of the Privy Council to
King Charles II. and one of the Commissioners of the Thesaury during that
Reign, and dying Anno 1680 Memoirs of the Earls of Kincardin MS. penes me.
left Issue by Veronica Van Arsen his Wife, Daughter to the Baron of Sommerdyke
in Holland, Alexander his Son and Heir.

Mary married to William Cochran of Ochiltree, and had Issue.

Anne to Sir David Murray of Stenhope, and had Issue.

Elizabeth to Mr. James Boswel of A^chinleck Advocate, and had Issue.

Which Alexander died a Batchellor in November 1705, whereupon there arose a
Competition for the Title of Honor betwixt Lady Mary Bruce the Earl of
Kincardin's eldest Sister and Sir Alexander Bruce of Broomhall the Heir Male,
which at length was adjudged to belong to Sir Alexander Bruce, and accordingly
he was admitted Earl of Kincardin on the 10 of October 1706. By Christian his
Wife Daughter of Robert Bruce of Blairhall, he had Robert Lord Bruce,
Alexander, Thomas Bruce Esquire married Rachel Daughter of Robert Pauncefort of the
County of Gloucester Esquire and had Issue William Bruce Esquire Likewise five
Daughters, Janet, Christian, Helen, Mary and Veronica married to Duncan Campbel
of Keames.

ARMS.
Quarterly, first Argent, a Lion rampant Azure, second Or, a Saltyre and chief
Gules. Motto, Fuimus.

SEATON, Viscount of Kingstoun.
SIR Alexander Seaton, the first of this Branch of Seaton, was a younger Son of
George 2 d Earl of Winton, by Anne his Wife Daughter of Francis Earl of Errol.
He obtained first the Honor of Knighthood from King Charles I. Anno 1633, and
having faithfully served the said King in diverse Negotiations during the Heat
of the Civil War, King Charles II. to reward and countenance his Merit, created
him Viscount of Kingstoun 6 of January 1650 Memoirs of the Family of Seaton by
this noble Lord himself, who was a curious Searcher into Antiquities, MS. penes
me.
. He married first Jean Daughter of Sir George Fletcher Knight, by whom he had
one Daughter married to James Lord Mordingtoun. His second Wife was Elizabeth
Daughter of Sir Archibald Douglass of Whittingham, by whom he had Archibald his
Successor, James who succeeded his Brother in the Honor, and Elizabeth Wife of
William Hay of Drumelzier. He married to his third Wife Elizabeth Daughter of
John Lord Belhaven; and last of all Margaret Daughter of Archibald Lord Angus,
but by neither of these had he any Issue.

Archibald Viscount of Kingstoun succeeded his Father in the Honor, and died a
Batchellor in 1714, his Estate and Title of Honor falling to James Seaton Esquire
his Brother, who married Jean Daughter of Colin Earl of Balcarass, Widow of
Alexander Earl of Kelly.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Or, three Crescents within a double Tressure flowr'd
Gules. 2d and 3d Argent, a Dragon Vert. Supporters two Blackmores armed with
Darts. Crest, a Crescent flaming. Motto, Habet and suam.

KEITH, Earl of Kintore.
THE First of this Family was Sir John Keith third Son of William Earl Marshal,
by the Lady Mary Erskine his Wife, Daughter of John Earl of Mar, who having
been instrumental in preserving the Regalia of the Kingdom, the Crown, Sword
and Scepter, during the Usurpation, was in Consideration thereof upon the
Rest^uration of King Charles, created Knight Marshal Anno 1660 Mercurius
Britanicus published Anno 1661.
: Afterward his said Majesty called him to his Council, and honored him with
the Title of Earl of Kintore on the 26 of June 1677 Charta in Rotulis Car. II.
, and thereafter constituted his Lordship Thesaurer Depute, and one of the
Lords of his Privy Council in the Year 1682, in which Office he was continued
till the Thesaury was turned into Commission, sometime after King James's
Accession to the Throne. He married Margaret Daughter to Thomas Earl of
Hadingtoun, by whom he had William Lord Inverrurie his Son and Heir, Jean
married to Sir William Forbes of Monimusk, and Margaret to Gavin Hamilton of
Raploch, and had Issue.

Which William married Katharine Daughter to David Viscount of Stor^^nt, and
had John his eldest Son. and Katharine married to David Falc^ner of Newtoun.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th Gules, a Scepter and Sword Saltirways, with an Imperial
Crown betwixt the upper Corners, all Proper within a Border of eight Thistles
Or. 2d and 3d Argent on a Chief Gules. Three Paletts, Or, supported by two
Chevaleers completely armed with Picks in their Hands. Crest, an aged Lady from
the middle upward, holding in her right Hand a Garland of Laurel Proper
Register of the Lion Office.
. Motto, Quae amissa salva.

KINNAIRD, Lord Kinnaird.
THAT the Family of Kinnaird in the Shire of Perth, was of a very fair
Antiquity, the following Authorities do sufficiently manifest, for King William
gave Radulph^ dicto Rufo the Lands of Kinnaird I have seen the original Charter
in the hands of my Lord Kinnaird; likewise in the Historical Collections by the
learned and laborious Antiquary Mr. Robert Martin of Clermont, and civilly
communicated to me by the present Clermont his Son MS
, from whence Richard his Son took the Surname and Denomination of Kinnaird,
and his Descendants continued to possess these Lands till the time of King
Charles I.

The Lord Kinnaird's Ancestor, Kinnaird of Inchture, a Branch of this Family,
took beginning in the Reign of King Robert III. Reginald de Kinnaird Son to Sir
Richard de Kinnaird, Knight, then taking to Wife Marjory Daughter and sole Heir
of John de Kirkaldy, and in her Right became possessed of the Barony of
Inchture in the County of Perth, which was ratified to them and their Heirs, by
a Charter bearing date 28 January 1399 Charta penes D. Kinnaird, presently in
my Hands by the favor of Mr. Charles Kinnaird his Lordships Uncle.
, whereupon he and his Successors added the Coat of Kirkaldy to their Paternal
Arms.

Walter Kinnaird of Inchture the next of the Line in the 26 of King James III.
made a Resignation in the Hands of his Sovereign Lord the King, of all the
Lands which he held of the Crown, for new Infestment to be given to John
Kinnaird his Grandson, and Heir apparent Charta in Rotulis Jacobi III.
, whose Son Patrick Kinnaird of Inchture by Mari^n his Wife, Daughter of.....
Hepburn of...... Charta in Rotulis Mariae Regin^, ad annum 1542.
, had John his Son and Heir, who resigns the Land and Barony of Kinnaird in
favors of Patrick his Son and Heir apparent, 23 of Queen Mary, Anno 1565,
which last Patrick by Margaret his Wife Daughter of Moncur of that Ilk, in Vic.
de Perth Charta in publicis Archivis.
, had Patrick his Son and Heir, who married first a Daughter of the Family of
Kinnaird of that Ilk, and again Euphame Daughter of James Gray of Ballegarno,
and had by her Patrick his Son and Successor in the Barony of Inchture, who
took to Wife Euphame Daughter and Coheir of Gilbert Gray of Balindoran Son to
the Lord Gray Ibidem.
, by her he had John who died unmarried, and George; likewise a Daughter
Margaret married to Sir Andrew Hay of Kil^^r, Mother by him to John Earl of
Errol.

Which George having not a little testified his Loyalty to the Crown during
Cromwell's Usurpation, upon the King's Return he was in Commemoration thereof
knighted Anno 1661, having likewise served Member in diverse Parliaments for
the County of Perth, was called to his Majesty's Council, and at last on the 28
of December 1682 raised to the honor of Lord Kinnaird of Inchture, and to the
Heirs Male of his Body Charta in Rotulis Caroli II. ad annum 1682.
, and departing this Life 29 December. 1689, he left Issue by Margaret his Wife,
Daughter of James Crichton of Ruthven, Patrick his Successor in the Honor,
Charles Kinnaird Esquire George Kinnaird Esquire

Which Patrick married Anne Daughter of Hugh Lord Lovat, by whom he had George
Master of Kinnaird, who died 27 of August School Register of the Lion Office.
. Patrick his Successor, and Charles Kinnaird Esquire likewise a Daughter Anne
married to Thomas Drummond of Logi^almond. This Lord dying 18 February 1701
Charta in Cancellaria S. D. N. Regis.
, was succeeded by Patrick his Son, who married first Henrietta Daughter of
Charles Earl of Dunmore, and after her Death Elizabeth Daughter of Patrick Earl
of Strathmore, Countess Dowager of Aboyn, by whom he had Patrick his Son and
Heir.

ARMS.
Quarterly, 1st and 4th Or. A Fess waved betwixt three Molets Gules. 2d and 3d
Gules. A Saltyre betwixt four Crescents Or.

HAY, Earl of Kinnowl.
AMONG the various ways by which Men in all Times have ascended to Honor and
Preferments, that of personal Merit is without doubt the fairest and most
likely way to climb by. This cannot be more properly said in any Case than in
that of the Person I am now to speak of, viz. George Hay the first Earl of
Kinnowl, his Birth could be no Impediment to his future Greatness, for he was
the Son of Peter Hay of Meggi^s by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Sir Patrick
Ogilvy of Inchmartine Charta in Rotulis Jacobi VI, ad Annum 1609.
, a collateral Branch of the illustrious Family of Errol, that had been fixed
in Perth-shire for some Descents, and very honorably allied in that County.

He was by the Care of his Father well brought up, and for the Improvement of
his Education sent into France, where he spent some Years under the Tuition of
Mr. Edmund Hay his Uncle Scots Tarvets Memorial of the Officers of State for
one hundred Years, MS.
, and returning to Scotland by the time he was 21 Years old, he was brought
into the Court by his Kinsman Sir James Hay, afterward Earl of Carlyle, a most
accomplished Courtier, under no other Character than a Person well qualified,
by his Breeding and Study in human Learning fit for any Service his Master
should honor him with. By these Means, and a notable Affability in his
Behavior, he wrought himself into a particular Affection and Interest with the
King, who quickly raised him to be one of the Gentlemen of his Bedchamber, and
gave him the Priory of the Charter House of Perth, by his Royal Grant, 18
Febrary 1598 Charta in publicis Archivis ad annum 1598.
. Sir George being eminently qualified, and advancing daily in Favor at Court,
his Majesty was pleased to make him Clerk Register, Anno 1616 Lives of the
Officers of State in Scotland.
, in which Function he behaved himself very well, and appeared equal to it,
continuing in that Employment till the 1622, that Alexander Earl of Dumfermling
Lord High Chancellor of Scotland giving way to Fate, he was preferred thereto,
and had the Great Seal delivered him on the 12 of July the same Year. Which
Office he had continued on him by King Charles I. who looked upon him as a wise
and able Servant, and worthy of the Trust he reposed in him, therefore his
Majesty as a Testimony of his gracious Esteem, by Letters Patent bearing date 4
of May 1627, advanced him to the Degree of Viscount of Dupline Charta in
Rotulis Caroli I.
; and by other Letters Patent 25 May 1633, honored him with the Title of Earl
of Kinnowl Ibidem.
. His Lordship enjoyed the Chancellor's Place with the universal Approbation of
the whole Kingdom, and the general Applause of all good Men for his Justice,
Integrity, sound Judgment and eminent Sufficiency in the discharge of his
Office for the Space of about fourteen Years, even to his Death, 16 December
1634 Balfours Annals.
, some Months before he was sixty Years of Age. He was interred at the Church
of Kinnowl on the 19 of August 1635, where there is a very sumptuous Monument
erected over him, with his Statue as big as the Life, habited in his Robes, and
Dr. Johnston composed an Epitaph for him Sir Robert Sibbald's Collection of
Epitaphs MS.
, of which this is a Part. Gone is the wise Licurgus of our Time,
The great and grave Dictator of our Clime,
To whose Desert the sacred Sisters ow,
As much as ever of old they did bestow,
Of their Pirean Treasure to give Fame
To painful Curious, or grave Cato's Name,
Had thou, brave Judge, lived in such golden Days,
Thy Head had long ever now been crowned with Bays,
But Wisdom now is richly prized by none,
Nor Virtue Guardian finds, till she be gone.
Six hundred Years ago how happy I,
That Day when thy brave Ancestor did die,
His Face with Danick Blood, he did bequeath
Life to his Country at the Doors of Death,
Yet this brave Act was closed with one fair Day,
But thou did still for many Years display
The Ensigns of thy Virtue, and fierce Jarrs,
Intestine Broils worse than the worst of Wars
Did quell, Combustions safe did keep from Harm,
Chaste Piety and raging Wrath disarm, etc.


By Margaret his Wife Daughter of Sir James Haliburton of Pitcur Balfour's
Genealogical Collections MS.,
, in Vicecomitatu de Forfar, Widow of Patrick Ogilvy of Inchmartine paternal
Ancestor to the present Earl of Finlater; he had Issue Sir Peter Hay his eldest
Son, who died unmarried, George his Successor in the Honor, and Margaret Wife
of Alexander Lindsay Lord Spainzie.

Which George was Captain of the Yeomen of Guards to King Charles I. and one of
the Lords of his Privy Council. Upon the breaking out of the War in that Reign,
he applied himself to his Majesty's Service with great Resolution, Courage and
Constancy, and often ventured his Person, and lost most of his Estate in the
steady Pursuit of Loyalty and Duty to the King, in which he continued to his
Life's end. He married the Lady Anne Douglass, eldest Daughter of William Earl
of Morton Lord High Thesaurer of Scotland, by whom he had William the next
Earl, and two Daughters, Margaret married to William Earl Marshal, and
Katharine to Sir James Baird of Auchmedden and had Issue.

Which William Earl of Kinnowl took to wife Mary Daughter of Robert Earl of
Cardinghan, by whom he had no Issue; and again Elizabeth Daughter of James Earl
of Salisbury, by her he had George Earl of Kinnowl, who died in Hungary Anno
1687, and William the late Earl who died a Bachelor on the 10 of May 1709. The
Honor devolving on Thomas Viscount of Duplin his nearest Heir Male The present
Earl of Kinnowl is the Son and Heir of Thomas Hay of Balhousie by...... his
Wife Daughter of Sir Thomas Nicolson of Carnock, Son of Mr. Francis Hay of
Balhousie, by Margaret Daughter of James Oliphant of Bachiltoun, Son of Thomas
Hay Brother to George the first Earl of Kinnowl; so that the two great
Grandfathers of William the late Earl and Thomas now Earl of Kinnowl were
Brothers both Sons of the House of Meggins; of which Family also Sir James Hay
Father to the Earl of Carlyle, the great Favorite of King James VI. was a
younger Son.
, who was on the 3 of October 1713, elected one of the sixteen Peers from
Scotland to the Parliament of Great Britain; but it was not the first time his
Lordship had served his Country in that Character. He married Elizabeth
Daughter of William Drummond Viscount of Strathallan, by whom he had

1. George Lord Duplin.

2. Colonel John Hay.

3. Margaret married to John Earl of Mar one of the Secretaries of Great
Britain.

4. Elizabeth to James Lord Deskford, Son and Heir of James Earl of Finlater
and Seafield.

Which George Lord Duplin being first constituted one of the four Tellers of
the Exchequer, Her Majesty was pleased to make him a Peer of Great Britain by
the Title of Lord Hay of Berwarden on the 31 of December 1712 Memoirs of the
Life of Queen Anne, published 1714.
. He married Elizabeth Harlaw eldest Daughter of Robert Earl of Oxford, Lord
High Thesaurer of Great Britain, by whom he has two Sons, Thomas Master of
Duplin, and Robert Hay Esquire

ARMS.
Argent, Three Escutcheons, Gules, within a Border Ermine, supported by two
venerable old Men. Crest, an old Man from the middle upward. Motto, Renovate
Animos.

MAITLAND, Earl of Lawderdale.
IT appears from sundry ancient Deeds and Evidents, that the Maitlands were
very early Possessors of the Barony of Thirlstane in Hadingtoun-shire, for I
find that Dominus Ricardus de Mautlant gave to the Monks of Dryburgh Terras
suas de Haubentside in Territorio suo de Thirlestane pro salute animae suae and
sponsae suae Antecessorum and Successorum suorum in perpetuum Chartulary of
Dryburgh in the Lawyers Library MS.
. Likeas he gave in pure Alms to the said Convent Omnes Terras quas Walterus de
Giling tenuit in feod^ suo de Thirlestane and pastara in communi de Thirlestane
ad quadraginta oves sexaginta vaccas and ad viginti equos.

To Sir Richard succeeded William de Mautlant his Son in the Barony of
Thirlestane, who ratified and confirmed to the Monastery of Dryburgh omnes
Terras quas Dominus Ricardus de Mautlant Pater suus fecit dictis Monachis in
Territorio de Thirlestane Chartulary of Dryburgh in the Lawyers Library, MS.
.

The next of this noble Family I have found, is Thomas de Thirlestane, who gave
in free Alms to the Religious of Dryburgh, Decimas Molendini sui de Thirlestane
Ibidem.
, pro salute animae suae; and to the Abbot of Kelso he grants a Wadset of
diverse Lands within the Territory of Thirlestane Memoirs of the Family of
Lawderdale MS.
, for a certain Feu-duty to be paid to him by the Convent for ever.

Sir Robert Maitland, Successor to the former, obtained a Grant of the Lands of
Lethingtoun from Sir John Giffard Knight, Lord of Tester, to be holden Blanch
of the Granter, which is confirmed the 15 of October 17, of King David II. Anno
1346 Ibidem.
. He was succeeded by

John his Son and Heir, who designs himself Joannes de Mautlant, Dominus de
Thirlestane, filius and haeres Roberti Mautlant quondam Domini ejusdem, when he
makes a Donation of the Lands of Snaldon to the Monks of Dryburgh, pro salute
animae suae, Patris and Matris suae. He married Agnes Dunbar Daughter to
Patrick Earl of March Charta penes Carolum Maitland de Eccles M.D. of the Lands
of Tibbers Joanni Maitlant de Thirlestane and Agnetae Dunbar sponsae suae.
, by her he had

Robert Maitland of Thirlestane his Son and Heir, who had the charge of the
Castle of Dumbar from his Uncle George Earl of March, when he went to England
in discontent, conceiving himself affronted by King Robert III. when he
espoused David his Son the Prince, to the Earl of Douglas Daughter, after he
had been affianced to Elizabeth Dunbar March's Daughter, and when the Earl of
March was forfeited, Thirlestane his Nephew run the same Fate Sir George
Mackenzie's Baronage of Scotland MS. penes me.
, but was again restored by the King's Bounty. He took to Wife Marion Daughter
of James Scrimgeor of Dudop, Constable of Dundee Memoirs of the Family of
Lawderdale MS. penes me.
, and left a Son,

William to succeed him in his Fortune, who obtained from Archibald Duke of
Tourain and Earl of Douglas a Grant to himself and Margaret Wardlaw his Wife of
the Lands of Blyth, Hedderwick, Tullus and BurncleUgh on the 23 January 1432
Ibidem.
. He was succeeded by his Son

John Maitland of Thirlestane, who by..... Daughter of.... his Wife had two
Sons, William Maitland of Lethingtoun, and James Maitland of Archincastle in
Drumfries-shire, of whom branched the Maitlands of Eccles I have seen a Charter
in the 1506, granted by William Maitland of Lethingtoun to James Maitland of
Achincastle his Brother, of the Property of the Barony of Tibbers whose lineal
Male Descendant and Representative is Dr. Charles Maitland of Eccles Physician
in Glasgow, whose Predecessor was Robert Maitland Son to the said James
Maitland of Achincastle.
. Here it is not improper to take notice, that William Maitland of Lethingtoun,
Son and Heir apparent of John Maitland of Thirlestane married Martha Daughter
of George Lord Seaton, and was killed at Flowdon Field with King James IV. 9
September 1513, leaving Issue by his Wife foresaid, Sir Richard who succeeded
his Grandfather, and a Daughter Janet married to Hugh Lord Somervel.

Which Sir Richard was served Heir to his Father William on the 15 October
1513. This noble Person who first raised the Grandeur of his Family, being a
Man of Parts and Literature, was made one of the Senators of the College of
Justice the 12 November 1561 Memoirs of the Family of Lawderdale penes me
in place of Sir William Hamilton of Sanquhar, and on the 20 of December 1562,
was constituted Lord privy Seal Charta in Rotulis Mariae Reginae, ad Annum 1562.
then void by the Demise of Donald Abbot of Cowper, which Office he held till
the 1567, he resigned and gave up the Signer, whereupon Mr. John Maitland his
second Son was invested in that Office. Sir Richard continued a Lord of the
Session during all the turbulent Times of the Regents in the Minority of King
James VI. till the 1584. He resigned his Place to Sir Lewis Ballenden, and his
last Breath on the first of April 1586 Historical account of the College of
Justice MS.
, leaving Issue by Mary his Wife Daughter of Thomas Cranston of Corsby Memoirs
of the Family of Lawderdale MS.
, three Sons, Sir William, Sir John, and Mr. Thomas, who is the Prolocutor with
Mr. Buchanan in his Treatise De Jure Regni apud Scot^s; likewise several
Daughters.

Helen married to John Cockburn of Clerkingtoun Charta in publicis Archivis.
, and had Issue.

Margaret to James Heriot of Trabroun Ibidem.
, and had Issue.

Mary to Alexander Lawder of Hattoun, and had Issue.

Isobel to William Douglas of Whitingham Memoirs of the Family of Lawderdale.
and had Issue.

But to return to Sir William Maitland of Lethingtoun, Sir Richard's eldest
Son; the first Preferment I find he had was in the 1558, when he was
constituted Secretary of State to Queen Mary Charta in Rotulis Mariae Reginae,
data 4 December 1558.
, and one of her Majesty's Privy Council 1561. When the Civil War broke out
Anno 1567, Lethingtoun's Wisdom and Reputation was such, that both Parties
courted him to be of their side; but he did not determine himself to any Party
at first, but did fall in with either of them as he thought they intended the
Honor and Safety of the Queen, and the Good of the Country; and as he could
not justify the Queen's Actings, so he was a strenuous Opposer of those Methods
that were taken against her by her own Subjects at the Court of England, as
importing high Contempt against their Native Princes, and highly derogatory to
the Honor of Scotland, in subjecting it and their Sovereign to the Cognizance
of a foreign Court; but his warmest Side was ever toward the Queen, in whose
Interest he appeared, by joining with Sir William Kirkaldy in keeping out the
Castle of Edinburgh against the young King and the Authority of the Regent, for
which he was deprived of the Secretaries place Anno 1570 Charta in Rotulis
Jacobi VI.
. Notwithstanding he continued his faithful Services to the Queen till his last
Moments, his Death happening on the 9 of June 1573 Mr. Hume's History of the
Douglasses.
, leaving Issue, by Mary his Wife Daughter of Malcolm Lord Fleming, a Son
James, who died without Male Issue, and a Daughter Mary married to Robert first
Earl of Roxburgh Johnstoni Historia rerum Britannicarum.
.

Sir John Maitland Sir Richard's 2d Son, being a Gentleman of great Parts and
Learning, was first preferred to be Lord privy Seal by Queen Mary 26 of August
1567 Charta in Rotulis Mariae Reginae.
, bearing then the Title of Commendator of Coldingham. This Office he kept till
the 1570, he lost the Seal for his Loyalty to the Queen, and it was given to
Mr. George Buchanan the Historian Lives of the Keepers of the privy S^al MS.
penes me.
: But King James who was ever mindful of those who had been faithful to the
Queen his Mother, was pleased to make Sir John Maitland one of the Senators of
the College of Justice 26 of April 1581 Memoirs concerning the College of
Justice.
, thereafter to be Secretary of State Lives of the Secretaries of State penes
me MS.
in the room of Robert Commendator of Dumfermling in the Year 1584, and the
Chancellors Place falling vacant by the Deprivation of Sir James Stewart, then
styled Earl of Arran, he was promoted thereto the 1st of June 1586 Lives of the
Chancellors of Scotland penes me MS.
, which Office he discharged worthily to himself, justly to the Prince who
employed him, and advantagiously for his Country: In Consideration of all his
great and loyal Services, his said Majesty, who had a singular Value and esteem
for him as a wise and faithful Servant, was pleased to put a lasting Mark of
his royal Favor upon his Family, and therefore raised him to the Honor of
Lord Maitland of Thirlestane, and to the Heirs Male of his Body Anno 1590
Memoirs of the Family of Lawderdale MS.
. He married Jean only Daughter of James Lord Fleming, by Barbara his Wife
Daughter of James Duke of Chatlerault. By her he had John his Successor, and
one Daughter Anne married to Robert Lord Seaton Son and Heir apparent to George
1 st Earl of Winton. This worthy Lord made his Exit out of this World on the 3d
of October 1595, and was interred at the Church of Hadingtoun, King James
honoring him with this Epitaph of his own Composure. Thou Passenger that spies
with gazing Eyes,
This Trophie sad of Death's triumphant Dart,
Consider when this outward Tomb thou sees,
How rare a Man leaves here his earthly Part.
His Wisdom and his uprightness of Heart,
His Piety, his practice of our State;
His quick Engine so verst in every Art,
As equally not all were in Debate.
Thus justly has his Death brought forth of late
An beavie Grief in Prince and Subjects all,
That Virtue, Love, and Vice do bear at hate,
Though vicious Men rejoices at his Fall.
As for himself, most Happy does he die,
Though for his Prince it most unhappy be.


John Lord Thirlestane the Chancellor's Son, was a Nobleman of great Honor and
Probity, and managed his Affairs with that Conduct and Discretion, that he made
considerable Additions to his Fortune. He was much favored by King James VI.
who created him first Viscount of Lawderdale, and thereafter honored him with
the Title of Earl of Lawderdale, by Letters Patent bearing date 24 of March
1624 Charta in Rotulis Jacobi VI.
. For what I know he had no State Employment, save that he was some short time
President of the Council and one of the ordinary Lords of the Session, from
which he was removed Anno 1626 Balfour's Annals.
. I think it not foreign here to remark of this noble Lord that he was so very
well acquainted with his own Affairs, that he made exact Inventars of all his
Charters and Writs, which was very happy for the Family afterward, for the
Charter Chest being concealed under ground for Preservation in the time of the
Civil War, the Writs were so entirely defaced at the Restoration, that they
were become illegible, but by reason of the Character this Earl had of
Integrity, these very Inventars were by Order of Parliament appointed to supply
the place of the ancient Records and Evidents of the Family, the Clerk Register
signing every Page of the Book in which they were written. This worthy Lord
departing this Life in February 1645 Bishop Guthri^^ Memoirs from the 1638, to
the 1649.
, was interred at the Church of Hadingtoun with his Ancestors; and the learned
Mr. Drummond of Hawthornden made this Epitaph upon him. Of those rare Worthies
who adorned our North,
And shined like Constellations, thou alone
Remaind'st last, great Maitland, charged with worth
Second in virtues Theater to none,
But finding all Excentrick in our times,
Religion into Superstition turned,
Justice silenced, exiled or inurn'd,
Truth, Faith and Charity reputed Crimes,
The young Man destinate by Sword to fall,
And Trophies of their Countries Spoils to rear;
Strange Laws the aged and prudent to apal,
And forced sad Yokes of Tyranny to bear,
And for, nor great, nor virtuous Minds a Room,
Disdaining Life thou shroud'st thee in thy Tomb.


By Isobel his Wife only Daughter of Alexander Earl of Dumfermling, Lord High
Chancellor of Scotland, by Lilias his Wife Daughter of Patrick Lord Drummond,
he had first John Duke of Lawderdale. 2d Robert who married Margaret Daughter
and sole Heir of John Lundin of that Ilk, by whom he had one Daughter Sophia
Lundin of that Ilk, married to John Earl of Melfort. 3 d Charles thereafter
Earl of Lawderdale.

John Earl, afterward Duke of Lawderdale, in the beginning of the Civil War was
among the most forward for the Covenant, and prosecuted it for some time with
the most eminent Animosity The Earl of Clarendon's History of the Civil War.
. He was much trusted by that Party in the management of Affairs both in Church
and State. When he was a very young Man his Lordship was sent one of the
Commissioners from the Church of Scotland to the Assembly of Divines who met at
Westminster Anno 1643, for the framing a new Model of Government in the Church.
The next Year he was appointed one of the Commissioners from the States of
Scotland to treat with the King at Uxbridge Ibidem.
, but that Treaty ending without the Effect desired, he was again commissioned
from the Parliament to treat with his Majesty at Hampton Court in the Year 1647
Ibidem.
, the Conclusion of which was the raising an Army from Scotland toward the
rescue of his Majesty. As soon as the Army was ready to march into England, his
Lordship was sent over to Holland to require that the Prince of Wales might
repair to the Scots Army, which was agreed to in the Treaty, but the Misfortune
that befell the Army at Prestoun put a stop thereto, so that the Earl, after a
few Weeks stay at the Hague, bent his Course homeward to employ his Interest
for serving the King, but before he came thither he came to understand that the
state of Affairs were so much altered, that the Engagement was declared
unlawful, and to what Penalties he himself and all others who were the
Promoters thereof were liable to; whereupon, without suffering his Ship to go
into any Port, he returned again into Holland Ibidem.
to offer his Service to the Prince, who by that time was become King by the
Murder of his Father. Here my Lord Lawderdale staid till after his Majesty's
coming over to Scotland in 1650, his Lordship soon followed, tho he was not
admitted to come near the Court, or so much as wait upon the King till the
meeting of the Parliament 1651, wherein all the different Parties seemed to be
unite for his Majesty's Service Ibidem.
. His Lordship marched with the King into England upon the loss of the Army at
Worcester, he was taken Prisoner and committed to the Tower, where he underwent
a long and severe Imprisonment for the space of nine Years, till by the
Restoration of his Majesty in 1660, he obtained his Liberty, when his Lordship
became the prime Minister of State and for the space of twenty Years ^e
disposed of all the Offices and Honors of the Kingdom entirely without a
Rival. He was first constituted sole Secretary of State Anno 1661, President of
the Council, one of the extraordinary Lords of the Session, first Commissioner
of the Thesaury, when the Thesaury was turned into Commission, and one of the
Gentlemen of his Majesty's Bedchamber: Also in the 1669 he was appointed high
Commissioner to the Parliament, and bore the same Character in four succeeding
Sessions, and had the Honor likewise to represent his Majesty's Person in the
Convention of Estates 1678: In all which important Trusts deporting himself
with great Ability, his Majesty in Testimony thereof upon the 2d of May 1672,
raised him to the Dignity of Duke of Lawderdale, and to the Heirs Male of his
Body Charta in Rotulis Caroli II. ad Annum 1672.
; also upon the 25 June 26 of Charles II. his Grace was made a Peer of England
by the Title of Earl of Guildford Sir William Dugdale's Baronage of England,
Vol. 2.
, and one of the Privy Council in that Kingdom; and last of all, as a further
Testimony of his Majesty's Favor, he was elected one of the Knights,
Companions of the most noble Order of the Garter. But notwithstanding all those
high Advancements in Honor and Preferments, together with the long and
uninterrupted Favor of his Prince, upon a new Turn of Affairs at Court toward
the end of King Charles's Reign, his Grace was obliged to resign all his
Offices, except those that were to continue during his Life, and he died under
a Cloud soon thereafter on the 24 of August 1682, and was interred in the Vault
of his Family at Hadingtoun Church, where you may read this Inscription on a
Tablet of Brass fixed on his Coffin. In Spem beatae Resurrectionis, Hic
conditur illustrissimus and nobilissimus Prin-ceps (...) Dominus, D. Joannes
Dux de Lawderdale, Marchi^ de March, Comes de Lawderdale and Guildford,
Vicecomes Maitland, Dominus de Thirlestane, Musleburgh, Bolton and Petersham;
saepius ad Parliamenta and Ordinum hujus Regni Conventus tenenda Prorex; a
Restauratione Regiae Majestatis, per 20 Annos solus, pro Regno Scotiae, Regum
optimo, Carolo Secundo, a Secretis; Praeses Secreti Concilii; praedicto
potentissimo Regi, in Regno Angliae, a Secretioribus Conciliis and ex
Cubiculariis Primariis unus; Castelli Regii Edinburgeni Constabularius and
Gubernator: Nobilissimi Ordinis Garterii Eques. Natus 21. Maii M.DC.XVI.
Leidintonae. Obiit 24 Die Augusti, prope Fontes de Tunbridge, Anno humanae
Salutis M.DC.LXXXII. Aetatis 68.

This great Duke married first Anne Daughter and Coheir of Alexander Earl of
Hume, by whom he had only one Daughter Anne married to John 2d Marquis of
Tweddale, and after her Death Elizabeth eldest Daughter and Heir of William
Murray Earl of Dysart, Widow of Sir Lionel Talmash of Helingham, but by her he
had no Succession.

The Duke of Lawderdale dying thus without Male Children, the Dignity of Duke
extinguished with himself, the Honor of Earl devolving upon Charles Maitland
of Hattoun his Brother; which Charles was constituted Thesaurer Depute Anno
1670, as his Lordship was also one of the Senators of the College of Justice,
and General of the Mint during the Ministry of the Duke his Brother. He married
Elizabeth Daughter and Heir of Richard Lawder of Hattoun, by whom he had a
numerous Issue.

Richard Earl of Lawderdale.

John Earl of Lawderdale.

Charles Maitland Esquire who married Lilias Daughter to Sir John Colquhoun of
Luss, Widow of Sir John Stirling of Kier.

William Maitland Esquire who married Christian Daughter and Heir of Robert
Viscount of Oxenford.

Alexander Maitland Esquire

Isobel the eldest Daughter married to John Lord Elphinston.

Mary the youngest to Charles Earl of Southesk.

This Earl died upon the 9 of June 1691 Public Prints of 1691 in the Lawyers
Library.
, the Honor devolving upon

Richard his Son and Heir, who in his younger Years was bred up to every thing
that was proper to qualify him for those great Employments his Ancestors had
enjoyed in the State, and his Improvement so far exceeded his Years that he was
very early admitted into the Privy Council, and made Lord Justice Clerk Anno
1681, but his Father-in-law the Earl of Argyle having made his escape out of
the Castle of Edinburgh, and some Letters of his being intercepted and
deciphered, whereby it appeared some had been written to him, and tho the
Matter of them was very innocent, yet it being Correspondence with a Person
condemned, it brought him under a Cloud Memoirs of the Earls of Lawderdale.
, and he was deprived of his Place; but notwithstanding he continued inviolably
devoted to the Interest of King James, and upon the Revolution he followed the
Fortune of the said King into France, where he died some Years thereafter,
leaving no surviving Issue by Anne his Wife, Daughter of Archibald Earl of
Argyle, so that the Title of Earl of Lawderdale came to

Sir John his Brother, who being bred a Lawyer, was promoted to be one of the
Senators of the College of Justice Anno 1689, and thereafter to be General of
the Mint, which Office he enjoyed till his Death, which happened the 13 of
August 1710 History of Europe for 1710.
. By Margaret his Wife only Daughter of Alexander Earl of Glencairn he had
three Sons, viz. John Lord Maitland, who in his Father's time married Jean
Daughter of John Earl of Sutherland, and dying in the beginning of the Year
1710, left one Daughter Lady Jean. 2 d Charles the present Earl 3 d Alexander,
and a Daughter Elizabeth married to James Earl of Hyndford.

Which Charles was constituted General of the Mint upon the removal of
Alexander Earl of Hume, so after King George's Accession to the Crown, which
Office his Lordship at present enjoys, he married Anne Daughter of James Earl
of Finlater and Seafield, and his Issue John Lord Maitland.

ARMS.
Or, a Lion Rampant couped in all its Joints Gules, within a double Tressure
counterflowr'd Azure. Supporters two Eagles proper. Crest, a Lion sejant full
faced Gules, holding in his dexter Paw a Sword Proper, hilted and pomell'd Or,
in the Sinister a Flower-de-Luce Azure, corwn'd Or, Motto, Consilio and animis.

LENNOX, Earl of Lennox.
I Find from ancient Records and Writings that Aluin M'Arkill, i e. the Son of
Arkill, the Founder of this illustrious Family, was a great Man in the time of
King David and Malcolm IV. In the Chartulary of Dumfermling there is a Charter
granted by Constantine Comes, who is Earl of Fife, to that Monastery de Schyra
de Kirkaldy, which King David confirms, in which Deed this Aluin M'Arkill is a
Witness.
, and appears to have been a Favorite, and is frequently a Witness in the
Grants of both these Princes to the Religious of Dumfermling In a Donation to
this Abbacy of the Lands of Inchmaduchan for the Soul of King David by King
Malcolm, this Aluin filius M'Arkill is a Witness.
. He had a Son Aluin who was made Earl of Lennox by King William, probably upon
the Demise of David Earl of Huntington the King's Brother, who formerly had
Right to the Lands which composed this Earldom I find in the Chartulary of
Paisly an Instrument of Possession of some Lands in Kilpatrick by the Monks of
Paisly, which they had tempore quo David frater Regis Scotiae tenuit Comitatum
de Levinax.
. This Earl imitated the Piety of the King his Master in his Charity to the
Church and the Clergy, for he gave to the Monks of Paisly in honorem sancti
Patricii and Ecclesiae de Kilpatrick Terras de Cochnach and Edenbarren
Chartulary of Paisly.
, and that in presence of Joceline Bishop of Glasgow Chartulary of Paisly.
, he left Issue Malduin his Successor in the Earldom, Dungal Rector of the
Church of Kilpatrick Ibidem.
, Malcolm This Malcolm Brother to Malduin Earl of Lennox had a Son who I find
is designed Finlay de Campsey, who left three Daughters his Coheirs, Mary Wife
of John de Wardroba, Helen of Bernard of Earth and Feneleth of Norine de
Monorgan, all which is evident from the Registers of Paisly.
, Amalick, and a Daughter Eva married to Malcolm Thane of Calender Charta penes
Vicecomitem de Kilsyth.
.

Which Malduin Earl of Lennox was a great Benefactor to the Church, for he gave
to the Monks of Paisly, Divinae Charitatis intuitu and pro salute domini sui
Alexandri Regis, nec non pro salute sui ipsius and anima patris sui and matris
suae omnium parentem suorum and haeredum ecclesiam de Kilpatrick cum omnibus
pertinentiis suis. Moreover he gave to the said Abbey pro salute Domini sui
Alexandri Regis and salute sua and Elzabethae Sponsae suae totas Terras de
Drumthoch^r and Drumthaglanen, that he might have the benefit of a burying
Place within the Abbey-Church, and that the Aniversary of himself and his Wife
should be celebrated with all due Solemnity in the Convent for ever Chartulary
of Paisly.
. By the said Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of Walter Lord High Steward of
Scotland I have seen an original Charter granted by Walter Senescallus Scotiae
confirming the Donations of his Grandfather Walter, to the Abbey of Kelso, in
which Deed Malcolm ^ilius Comitis de Lennox nepoti suo is a Witness.
, he had Malcolm his Son and Heir, Father to Earl Malcolm, who was one of those
noble and loyal Patriots who entirely and without Reserve devoted himself to
the Service of his Country in the Wars of Bruce and Baliol, and stood always
firm in his Loyalty to King Robert the Bruce, for which that Monarch did
royally reward him upon his Accession to the Crown, and gave him many great and
singular Privileges and Immunities which were not ordinarily given to Subjects
in these Times Charta penes Ducem de Montrose.
, as the Reward of his constant Fidelity to him. This noble Earl was one of the
Scots Nobility who wrote that memorable Letter to the Pope, asserting the
Independency of Scotland so valuable a piece of Antiquity, that most of all the
modern Scots Authors have Copies of it in their Writings Spotiswood, Mackenzie,
etc.
. This Earl was succeeded by Donald Earl of Lennox his Son I have seen sundry
Charters granted by him to Vassals, particularly one of a Carrucate of Land
Mauritio filio and haeredi quondam Mauritii de Buchanan ad Annum 1353,
contained in the Register of Charters belonging to the Burgh of Dunbartoun.
, who dying without Male Issue, the Earldom devolved to Margaret his Daughter
and Heir who married Walter Lord of Foscelen Ibidem.
, who in her Right became Lord of the Lennox, they had a Son Sir Duncan Lennox
Knight, in whose favor they resigned the Earldom of Lennox in the Hands of
King Robert II. Register of Dunbartoun.
whereupon he became Earl. This is that Duncan Earl of Lennox who being
attainted of High Treason with his Son in-law Murdoch Duke of Albany in the
Reign of King James I. was executed at Stirling upon the 23 of May 1426
Extracta and Chron. Scor^^ MS.
, and his Estate came to the Crown by Forsalture. He left behind him three
Daughters, Isobel married to Murdoch Duke of Albany, Elizabeth to Sir John
Stewart of Darnly, Ancestor to the latter Dukes and Earls of Lennox, Margaret
to Robert Monteith of Rusky, by whom he had Murdoch Monteith of Rusky his Son,
who left two Daughters Coheirs to him Charta penes Joannem Haldane de
Gleneagles.
, Agnes married to Sir John Haldane of Gleneagles, and Margaret to John Napier
of Merchistoun, Ancestor to the present Lord Napier Charta penes Georgi^m
^^pier de ^ilmahew, ad Annum 1491.
.

In the Reign of King James III. there was a long Dispute betwixt John Lord
Darnly Grandson of Elizabeth Daughter of Duncan Earl of Lennox, and Agnes
Monteith Lady Gleneagles, Grand child of Margaret another Daughter of the said
Earl's, anent the Superiority of the Earldom of Lennox, which was afterward
amicably composed betwixt them by certain Arbiters chosen for that effect, Anno
1477 I have seen several Charters and Writings belonging to the Lord of
Gleneagles, that instruct this Competition about the Earldom of Lennox, as also
the Settlement that was agreed to.
, so that in the 1483 John Lord Darnly came to be created Earl of Lennox.

STEWART, Duke of Lennox.
THIS illustrious House which has produced so many glorious Patriots and Heroes
both at Home and Abroad, was the first collateral Branch that sprang from the
Royal Family of Stewart. Sir Robert Stewart their Ancestor, was the Son of
Walter second of that Name, Lord High Steward of Scotland Lesly Hist. Scot.
, who being by his Father's Grant Lord of the Barony of Torboltoun in the
County of Air, added to that and his other Possessions the Lands of Crucksfie
and Neilstoun in Renfrew-shire by the Heir Female of Robert de Crock a great
Baron of that Time The Crooks of Neilstoun and Cruicksfie were great Men in the
Barony of Renfrew, as soon as the Records of the County begin.
, whom he obtained in Marriage, and had Robert Stewart Lord of Cruickstoun and
Darnly I find in the 1513, That Robert Stewart Lord of Cruikstoun, was Baillie
to the High Steward of Scotland within the Barony of Renfrew, from the
Registers of the Monastery of Paisly.
, who seems to be the Father of Sir Ala^ Stewart of Darnly, who was early in
the Interest of King Robert I. upon whose Advancement to the Throne he obtained
the Lands of Dreghorn, which before that time belonged to John Bali^l for
Service and Homage to be done by him, as the Charter bears This Charter is
extant in the Rolls of King Robert I.
. He was slain at the Battle of Halidonhill in the Service of his Country upon
St. Mary Magdalen's Day 1333, leaving John Lord of Darnly his Son and Heir, who
was a Person of great Consideration in his Time, for when King David Bruce was
taken Prisoner by the English at the Battle of Durham, John Stewart Son and
Heir to this Sir John Stewart Lord of Darnly was given as one of the Hostages
for his Ransom, Anno 1348 Mr. Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
. This last John is Witness in many Charters of King Robert II. when he was
Earl of Strathern, and on the 31 of January 1361 he obtained from Robert Earl
of Strathern a Charter of the Lands of Cr^cksfie, Inchennan and Perthick upon
his own Resignation, and to Robert Stewart his Son in Fie, and to the Heirs
Male of his Body, which failing, to Walter and Alexander Stewarts his Brothers
successively Collection of Charters by the Earl of Hadingtoun in the Lawyers
Library.
. This Alexander did actually succe ed to the Lordship no doubt upon the
failure of the other Members of the Tailzie This Sir Alexander Stewart of
Cruickstoun is so designed in a Record Anno 1397.
, and further augmenting his Estate by marrying of Janet Daughter and Heir of
Sir William Keith of Galstoun Charta penes me ad Annum 1407.
, by her he had 1 st Sir John his Successor, 2d Alexander Stewart of Torbane
Ibidem.
, and a Daughter Janet married to Thomas Somervel of Carnwath Charta in Rotulis
Roberti III. ad Annum 1390 in publicis Archivis.
, Ancestor to the Lord Som^^^el.

Which Sir John being a Gentleman of a Military Temper betook himself to the
French Service, and had a considerable Command against the English at the Siege
of Bauge. Afterward upon the Death of the Earl of Buchan, Anno 1424, he was
constituted General of all the Scots Forces in France and made a Marshal of
that Kingdom, having performed many noble Services to that Crown, King Charles
VII. raised him to be a Peer of France, by the Titles of Count d' E^reux
Seigneur de Counterfald and d' Aubigny Scoti Chron.
: Also in the 1426 he was sent Ambassador to Scotland to renew the old League
betwixt the Two Crowns, and to propose a Match betwixt Lewis the Dauphine and
Margaret Daughter of King James I. Drummond's History of Scotland.
. and continuing in the French Service with much Honor and Reputation: He was
thereafter slain in the Battle of Hering, fighting against the English, Anno
1429, leaving Issue by Elizabeth his Wife one of the Daughters and Coheirs of
Duncan Earl of Lennox, Sir Alan his Successor, Sir Alexander Stewart of
Bielmouth Ibidem.
, John Lord d' Aubigny, Father to Bernard Lord d' Aubigny, famous in the
Neapolitan War under Charles VIII. and Lewis XII. of France.

Which Sir Alan took to Wife Katharine Daughter to Sir John Seton Lord of
Seton; and had Issue 1 st, John Earl of Lennox. 2 d, Alexander, of whom the
House of Galstoun and the Lord Pitenweem did descend. Charta penes D. Gals^^^n
ad Annum 1452.
: 3 d, Thomas, who was Ancestor to Stewart of Barscabe I have seen a Charter
granted by Matthew Earl of Lennox dilecto consangineo suo Thomae Stewart of the
Lands of Barscabe 1495.
. And, Elizabeth, a Daughter, married to Sir John Maxwel of Pollock: He was
slain September 29th, Anno 1439, by Thomas Boyd of Kilmarnock, which was the
Occasion of great Bloodshed and Devastation in the Western Parts, and kindled
such a Flame, as was not extinguished for a long Time thereafter.

Which John, in the 3d of King James III. Anno 1463, having served himself Heir
to Duncan Earl of Lennox, his Great Grandfather, did assume that Title, but it
being found he had not Right to the whole Earldom, he was obliged for a long
Time to disuse it, till Dame Agnes Monteith Lady Gleneagles, another of the
Coheirs, came to compose the Matter amicably, that then with the Approbation
of King James III. he ass^med the Style of Earl of Lennox, Anno 1483. This
Noble Lord was in the 1472 appointed one of the Commissioners from Scotland to
treat with the English touching a Peace betwixt the Two Nations Rymer'^ Foedera
Angliae.
; also in the 1481, he was constituted Warden of the West Marches Black Acts of
Parliament.
; and in 1484, was one of the Ambassadors that were nominated to treat with
English Commissioners, for the Good, Peace, and Utility of the Two Kingdoms
Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
.

When the Civil War broke out in the Time of King James III. he was upon the
King's Side against the Prince; nevertheless upon King James IV's coming to the
Crown, he was made Captain of Dumbartoun, Anno 1488 Ch^rta in Rotulis Jacobi IV.
and giving Way to Fate Anno 1494, he left Issue by Margaret his Wife Daughter
of Alexander Lord Montgomery, Ancestor to the Earl of Eglingtoun; 1 st. Matthew
his Successor. 2 d, Robert Lord d' Aubigny Historical Deduction of the House of
Lennox.
. 3 d, William, who was Captain of the Scots Gens' d' Arms in France. 4 th,
John Stewart of Glanderstoun, who by Marion Daughter of Sir Thomas S^^pil of of
Eliotstoun had one Daughter his Heir, Margaret, married to John Fraser of Knock
in Airshire Charta in Rotulis Jacobi IV.
. 5 th. Alan first of that Branch of the Stewarts of Cardonald Charta in
Publicis Archivis ad Annum 1494.
, of whom by an Heir Female is descended the Lord Blantyre, who is now the only
remaining Branch of this Illustrious Family. Besides those Sons, he had
moreover several Daughters.

1. Elizabeth married to Archibald Earl of Argyle and had Issue.

2. Marion, to Robert Lord Crichton of Sanquhar Simson's Collections from the
Writs of the Family of Sanquhar.
, and had Issue.

3. Janet, to Ninian Lord Ross of Halkhead Charta in Publicis Archivis ad Annum
1515.
, and had Issue.

4. (...) to Sir John Colquhoun of Luss, and had Issue.

Matthew Earl of Lennox, the next of this Illustrious Family, was of the Privy
Council to King James IV. with whom he lost his Life at the Battle of Flowdon 9
September 1513, leaving Issue by Elizabeth his Wife Daughter of James Lord
Hamilton, by the Lady Mary his Wife Daughter of James II. King of Scotland;
John thereafter Earl of Lennox.

1. Margaret married to John Lord Fleming Charta penes Comitem de Wigtoun.
and again to Alexander Douglas of Mains, and had Issue.

2. Elizabeth, to Sir Hugh Campbell of Lowdon Charta in Rotulis Jacobi V.
, Ancestor to the Earl of Lowdon.

3. Agnes, to William Edmonston of Duntreath Charta penes Arch. Edmonston de
Duntreath.
, and had Issue.

Which John was appointed one of the Lords of the Regency by King James V. Anno
1524, but the Earl of Angus taking upon himself the whole Administration, and
detaining the young King upon the Matter a Prisoner, this Earl with diverse
others of the Nobility endeavoring his Majesty's Enlargement, was slain in the
Attempt by Sir James Hamilton, at a Conflict near Linlithgow-Bridge, on the 4th
of September 1526 Memoirs of the Affairs of Scotland MS. penes me.
. By Anne his Wife, Daughter of John Stewart, Earl of Athole, he had Matthew
the next Earl, Robert Bishop of Caithness, thereafter Earl of Lennox, John Lord
d' Aubigny, who was Captain of the Scots Gens d' Arms, and Governor of
Avignon, of whom descended the late Dukes of Lennox; likewise a Daughter Helen,
married first to Andrew Earl of Errol, and thereafter to John Earl of
Sutherland.

Matthew Earl of Lennox, like other great Men of that Age betook himself to
Arms, and served the Crown of France in the Wars of Italy, where his gallant
Behavior procured him a very great Name and Reputation. He was always in very
high Esteem with his own Prince, King James V. for his Father's Sake, after
whose Death he was sent over from France, to prevent any Detriment to that
Crown by the Minority of the young Queen, but being a frank and open-hearted
Person, he fell into the Snare laid by Cardinal Beaton Bishop of St. Andrews
for him, and in a little Time lost the French King's Favor; and when it was
come to that Pass, that he could neither stay at Home, nor return to France
with Safety, he went into England Anno 1543, and put himself under the
Protection of Henry VIII. who generously received him into his Favor, and gave
him his Neice Lady Margaret Douglas in Marriage, and an Estate in England, to
the Value of Seventeen Hundred Merks Sterling per Annum, as an Equivalent for
his own Fortune, which was forfeited in Scotland; and this Agreement the Earl
made with that Prince, that he should deliver into his Hands the Castle of
Dumbartoun, with the Isle of Bute, and the Castle of Rothesay Rymer's Foedera
Angliae.
, which though the Earl resolutely undertook, yet the Success did not answer. He
lived at the Court of England till the 1563; he was called Home by Queen Mary,
and his Forfeiture repealed by Act of Parliament, after he had been banished
from his Country for 20 Years, his Son Henry Lord Darnly soon following him,
who being a young Nobleman of Illustrious Birth, extremely handsome, and of a
Temper as well mixed as his outward Proportions, Queen Mary at first Sight
became so enamored of him, that neither the Menaces of Queen Elizabeth, nor
any other Considerations, could deter her from marrying him, when, to render
him the fitter Match for her, she raised him to the Dignity of Duke of Albany.
After this, when he had not been above Five Months in Scotland, and did not
exceed his Nineteenth Year, she married him, and with the Consent of most of
the Peers declared him King, of which happy Marriage upon the 19th June 1566,
to the perpetual Advantage of all Britain, her Majesty was delivered of a Son
King James VI. First Monarch of Great Britain.

But though the Queen's Love to the Lord Darnly at first had been very warm, yet
it began soon afterward as much to cool toward him, the Unkindness between
them being chiefly fomented by one David Rizio an Italian, her Secretary for
the French Tongue; which Indignity the King revenged, by entering into the
Cabal with those who contrived and and murdered the poor old Man, with
Circumstances that were not at all allowable; and it is probable that it was in
Resentment of Rizio's Death, that the Earl of Bothwel and Others, officiously
as thinking it might gratify the Queen, most inhumanly murdered this lovely
Prince, in his own Lodgings as he lay a Bed, on the 9th of Feburuary 1567; though
Bothwel who was the Murderer did maintain the Queen's Innocence to his last
Moments: And I think there was no other Ground for believing the Queen to be
concerned in that ^oul Action, but her imprudent marrying that profligate
Person so soon thereafter, who, by common Fame, was reputed to be the Murderer
of her Husband.

Upon the Death of King Henry, the Earl of Lennox, his Father, prosecuted the
Earl of Bothwel as the Regicide, but that Earl's Interest at Court so over
ruled the Jury, that he was formally acquitted of all Sus^^cion as well as
Action in the Murder, which Lennox was forced to acquiesce in, and from that
Time forth he lived in Retirement till the Death of the Earl of Murray the
Regent, that he was unanimous^y chosen Reg^nt to the young King James VI. his
Grandson; which great Tru^^ he executed for 13 Months till he was murdered by a
Party of the Queen's Friends, on the 4th of September 1571 Buchanan's History.
. He was interred in the Chapel within the Castle of Stirling, with this
Inscription on his Tomb, Lo here a Prince and Potentate,
Whose Life to understand
Was good, he Just and Fortunate,
Though from his Native Land,
His Enemies Thrice did him out-thring,
He Thrice returned again;
Was lawful Tutor to the King,
And Regent did remain,
While he with Rigor Rebels rackt,
They wrought his fatal End.
Lo this Respects the Death, no Might,
When GOD permits the Time.
Yet shall the Vengeance on them light
That wrought this cursed Crime.


Mr. George Buchanan his very humble Servant, who had a great Attachment to his
Lordship and his Family, has left us the following Epitaph on the Regent, in a
more polite Strain; Regis avus, Regis Pater, alto e sanguine Regum
Imperio quorum terra Britanna subest,
Matthaeus: genuit Levinia, Gallia fovit,
Pulso Anglus thalamum, remque decusque dedit.
Coepi invicta manu, famam virtute refelli,
Arma armis vici, consilioque dolos.
Gratus in ingratos, patriam justeque pieque
Cum regerem, hostili perfidia cecidi.
Care nepos, spes una domus, meliore senectam
Attingas fato, caetera dignus avo.


To Matthew Earl of Lennox succeeded Charles his Second Son in his Estate and
Honor, he took to Wife Elizabeth Daughter of Sir William Cavendish, Sister to
the Earl of Devonshire, by whom he had one Daughter the Lady Arabella Stewart,
who was married to William Marquis of Hartford, but had no Issue. He died a
young Man at London, Anno 1576, where he was interred with this Inscription
over his Grave; Hic situs est Carolus Comes Lennoxiae qui duxit filiam
Willielmi Cavendish Militis, ex qua cum Arabellam unicam filiam suscepisse^,
diem obiit Anno aetatis suae 21, and Salutis humanae 1576.

To Charles Earl of Lennox succeeded Robert Bishop of Caithness his Uncle. This
noble Person being at first a younger Brother, applied himself to Learning, and
devoting himself to the Service of the Church, entered young into Orders. He was
elected Bishop of Cathness Anno 1542 Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
, but taking Part with his Brother the Earl of Lennox, against the Earl of
Arran the Governor, he was forfeited and lived mostly in Exile till the 1563;
he returned to his Native Country, and concurred in reforming the Church from
the Errors of Popery, tho not as a Bishop, and turned Protestant himself. He
did not long retain the Title of Earl of Lennox, but voluntarly resigned it in
Favors of Esme Lord d' Aubigny his Great Nephew, and in lieu thereof had the
Style and Title of Earl of March conferred on him by King James VI. his Nephew,
together with the Priory of St. Andrews, which he enjoyed till Death took him
away on the 29th of August 1586 Spotiswood's Church History.
, leaving no no other Issue than a natural Daughter Margaret, married to Robert
Algoe of Easter-Walking shaw.

When Robert Earl of Lennox resigned the Earldom, as before mentioned, his
Majesty King James VI. erected it into a Duchy in Favors of Esme Lord d'
Aubigny his Cousin, Son and Heir of John Lord d' Aubigny, Brother of Matthew
Earl of Lennox, who coming over from France Anno 1579, his Majesty King James
embraced his Lordship with singular Kindness, admitted him into his inwardest
Councils, and made him Duke of Lennox, and Lord High Chamberl^in of Scotland,
Anno 1580. This extraordinary Favor of his with the King, procured him Envy
from many who secre^ly mattered that he being a Man most devoted to the Romish
Religion, was sent from France to subvert the true Religion, and that which
increased the Suspicion the more, was, that he applied himself, and gave
Countenance to those who were most in the Interest of the King's Mother; so
that William Earl of Gowrie and Others employed all their Wi^^ ^o remove him
from the King, ^^d thus they went to Work.

The Duke having gone from Perth where the King then lay, to Edinburgh, to
exercise his Jurisdiction as Chamberlain, Gowrie and Others taking the
Opportunity when he was out of the Way, invited the King to Ruthven Castle,
Gowrie's own House, and there detained him against his Will, all his
faithfullest Servants they removed from him, constrained him to call Home the
Earl of Angus and Others from Banishment, and to send Lennox back again to
France. The Duke being a Man of a very mild Spirit, did for the Public Quiet's
Sake, and at the King's seeming Persuasion (which they had forced him to use
with him) return to France, where, he soon after contracting Sickness, died at
Paris 26th May 1583, and at the Point of Death openly professed, as he had done
before, the Protestant Religion, confuting thereby the Malice of those who had
falsely defamed him to be a Papist. He was married with Katharine Daughter of
William Seigneur d' Antrague; by whom he had

Lodovick Duke of Lennox.

Esme Lord d' Aubigny.

Lady Henrieta, married to George first Marquis of Huntley, of whom his Grace
the Duke of Gordon is descended.

Lady Mary, 2d Wife to John Earl of Mar, Lord High Treasurer of Scotland in the
Reign of King James VI. of which illustrious Marriage the Lineal Heir is David
Earl of Buchan.

No sooner was the Duke of Lennox dead, but King James called over from France
Lodovick his Son, and in grateful Remembrance to the Memomory and Merit of his
Father, gave him both the Estate and Offices that had belonged to his
Ancestors, taking (...) likewise to have him educated according to his noble
Birth and Fortune, and by Degrees advanced him to Honor and Preserments, as he
grew in Years. He was both High Chamberlain and Admiral of Scotland when his
Majesty sent him Ambassador to France Anno 1601. In which Negotiation he
behaved very well, and to his Majesty's Satisfaction. Upon the King's Accession
to the Crown of England, his Grace accompanied his Majesty ^^^o that Realm,
where he was likewise made a Peer, first by the Title of Earl of Newcastle, and
thereafter raised to the Honor of Duke of Richmond, being likewise Master of
the Household, first Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and Knight of the most noble
Order of the Garter. He married first Sophia Daughter of William Earl of
Gowrie, next Jean Daughter of Sir Matthew Campbel of Lowdon, and last of all
Frances Daughter of Thomas Viscount of Bindon of the Kingdom of England, and
dying without Issue, 11. February 1623, was interred at Westminster, where a
stately Tomb was erected to his Memory, with this Epitaph upon it. Depositum
illustrissimi and excellentissimi Princi pis Ludovici Stuarti Esm^i Leviniae
Ducis filii, Joannis Propatrui serenissimi Regis Jacobi Nepotis, Richmondiae
and Leviniae Ducis, Novi Castelli ad Tinam, and Darnliae Comitis etc. Magni
Scotiae Camerarii and Thalassiarchae Hereditarii, sacri Palatii Jacobi Regis
Senes^ali, Cubieulariorumque Principalium primi, Regi a sanctioribus Conciliis,
Sanct. Georgiani ordinis equ. Scoticorum, que per Gallias Cataphractorum
Praefecti, viri excelsi ad omnia magna and bonanati, ad meliora defuncti: Vixit
ann^s 49, menses 4, dies 17.

To Ludovick Duke of Lennox succeeded Esme Lord d'Aubigny his Brother, who
enjoyed the Honor but a short time, his Death happening on the 14 th of
February 1624, leaving Issue by Katharine his Wife Daughter and sole Heir of
Gervaise Lord Lightoun of Bromswold,

1 st James his Successor in the Honor.

2 d George Lord d'Aubigny, who lost his Life in the King's Service at the
Battle of Kennetoun 23. of October 1642, leaving Issue by Frances his Wife
Daughter of Theophilus Earl of Suffolk, Charles his Son, who was honored by
King Charles I. with the Title of Earl of Lichfield upon the Demise of Bernard
Earl of Lichfield his Uncle, and a Daughter Katharine married to Henry Lord
O'Brian Son and Heir of Henry Earl of Thomond of the Kingdom of Ireland, by
whom he had one Daughter Katharine married to Edward Earl of Clarendon.

3 d Bernard who had the Command of the King's Troop of Guards in the time of
the Civil War, and was slain fighting bravely at the Battle of Chester 1645,
whom the Earl of Clarendon characterizes thus, He was, says he, a very
faultless young Man, of a most gentle, courteous and affable Nature, and of a
Spirit and Courage invincible; whose Loss, continues he, all Men exceedingly
lamented, and the King bore it with extraordinary Grief.

4 th Lord John Stewart, who was General of the Horse in the King's Service in
the time of the Civil War, being the third Brother of this illustrious Family
that sacrificed their Lives in this Quarrel; for he was killed at the Battle of
Alresford, little more than one and twenty Years of Age, whose Courage was so
signal that Day, that too much, says an Historian of that Time, could not be
expected from it if he had outlived it, and he was so generally beloved, that
he could not but be very generally lamented.

Lady Elizabeth his eldest Daughter was married to Thomas Howard Earl of
Arundel.

Lady Anne to Archibald Lord Angus, Son and Heir to William first Marquis of
Douglas.

Lady Frances to Jerome Westoun Earl of Portland.

James Duke of Lennox, as he was of the noblest Extraction, so his Majesty King
Charles I. took great care of his Education, and sent him to France, Italy and
Spain, where he was created a Grandee of that Kingdom Clarendon's History.
, and as soon as he returned, though he was scarce one and twenty Years of Age,
made him a Privy Councellor: And as he had many great Offices by Inheritance,
so his Majesty, out of his abundant Kindness to him, made him Master of the
Household, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, and Knight of the most noble Order
of the Garter.

When the War began in 1642 he adhered to the King's Interest with signal
Fidelity and Affection, and made so entire a Resignation of himself to his
Majesty, that he abhorred all Artifices to shelter himself from the Pejudice of
those, who, how powerful soever, failed in their Duty to the King, and
therefore he was pursued with all imaginable Malice by them, as one that would
have no Quarter; and as he had received great Bounties from the King, so he
sacrificed all he had to his Service, as soon as his Occasions stood in need of
it, and he lived with unspotted Fidelity some Years after the Murder of his
Master, and was suffered by those that then governed to pay that last Duty to
him of putting him into his Grave, and died without the Comfort of seeing the
Restoration of the Crown on the 30. of March 1655 Dugdal's Baronage of England.
. By Mary Daughter of George Duke of Buckingham his Wife, he had Esme who
succeeded him, and died in his Minority Anno 1660, and a Daughter Mary married
to Richard Butler Earl of Arran of the Kingdom of Ireland.

To Esme Duke of Lennox succeeded Charles of Earl of Lichfield his Cousin
German, who being sent Ambassador extraordinary from King Charles II. to the
Crown of Denmark, his Grace died at Elsenure in that Kingdom 21. December 1672
Ibidem.
, leaving no Issue of Farnces his Wife Daughter of Walter Stewart Esquire Son of
Walter Lord Blantyre, so that the Honor of this princely Family became
extinct, and his great Fortune and Hereditary Offices came to King Charles II.
as his nearest Heir Male, the King's Great Grand-father's Father and the Duke's
being two Brothers.

But his Majesty considering with what Luster and Glory the House of Lennox had
shone in former Times, and that while the Dignity was in his Majesty's own
Royal Person, it was suppressed in the Crown; wherefore, that the Honor might
be again revived, and his Majesty having bestowed the Estate of Lennox upon the
Lord Charles Lennox one of his Natural Sons, whom he so surnamed by Lovisa de
Querovale Duchess of Portsmouth, was pleased to create him Duke of Lennox,
Earl of Darnly, Lord Torboltoun, 9 th of September 1675, and to the Heirs Male
lawfully descending of his Body Char^ in publ. Arch.
. Likewise by other Letters Patent passed in England, August 9, 27 of King
Charles II. he was created Baron of Sitiringtoun, Earl of March, and Duke of
Richmond, and on the 20 th of April 1681, was installed Knight of the Garter.

Upon the Removal of the Duke of Monmouth, he was made Master of the Horse to
the King, in which Office he continued till his Father's Death, Anno 1685. He
married Anne Daughter of Frances Lord Brundnell, by whom he had Charles Earl of
Darnly his Son and Heir, Lady Lovisa married to James Earl of Berkly, and Lady
Anne Lennox.

LESLY, Earl of Leven.
SIR Alexander Lesly first Earl of Leven, was the Son of Captain George Lesly,
extracted from the House of Balquhain in the County of Aberdeen, one of the
most illustrious Families of the Leslies Laurus Lesl^ana.
. Being a younger Brother he entered early into the Life and Condition of a
Soldier, upon that Stage, where some of all Europe then acted, between the
Spainard and the Dutch, in the Lord Vere's Regiment in Holland, where he
attained the Reputation of a very good Officer in the Quality of a Captain, to
which he attained after few Years Service.

After which he went to Sweden and entered into the Service of the greatest
General of that Age, Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden against the Imperialists,
where he performed such great Actions as procured him a general Estimation, and
thereby gained so much Honor, that the King promoted him to be Lieutenant
General and then Velt Marshal of his Armies, with general Approbation, as a
Person who well deserved the Preferment. Yea, that King had so great an Opinion
of Sir Alexander Lesly, that in the 1628, when the Emperor had reduced all
Germany except Strals^nd, which was then invested by Count Walstein, the
Citizens having a Jealousy of their Governor, at the desire of some of the
German Princes, made application to the King of Sweden, to send them an Officer
to command in that Place, which he willingly granted, and pitched upon Sir
Alexander Lesly, as a Person fit for that Station, and he acquitted himself
with so much Conduct and Gallantry, that though the Plague was in the City, the
Outworks in a very ill condition, and Count Walstein the Imperial General
before it with a formidable and victorious Army, he obliged him to raise the
Siege with considerable loss; though it is reported the Count was so confident of
Success, that he swore: Though Stralsund were hung in Chains, betwixt Heaven and
Earth he would have it; and General Lesly's behavior was so agreeable to the
Burghers, that they made him a rich Present in Gold, and struck several
glorious Medals upon that Occasion, some of which they presented him with One
of which I have had ^he Honor to see still preserved in his Family.
.

In the 1630, General Lesly was sent by the King of Sweden, to make an Attack
upon the Isle of Rugen, in order to drive the Imperialists out of it; which he
effected: And his Conduct and Bravery on this occasion was so very remarkable,
that it drew upon him the greatest Encomiums both from Friends and Enemies that
could be devised, by which means he opened a Way for the King of Sweden's
marching into Germany.

General Lesly continued in the Swedish Service, after the Death of King
Gustavus, under his Daughter Queen Christiana, till the Year 1638, that the
Troubles began in Scotland, he returned to his Native Country, upon an
Invitation from the disaffected Nobility, and as soon as the Covenanters began
to list Men toward the raising an Army under the Obligation of the Covenant, he
was chosen to be their General, to which he was by all Men held very equal,
having had good Experience of the most active Armies of that time, and a
Courage very notorious: But that Enterprise ending without any Action, by
reason of a Pacification, which was then agreed to; the General had no
Opportunity to signalize himself at that time: But the Peace being of a short
Duration, and a new War breaking out the next Year, Sir Alexander Lesly was
again constituted General of the Scots Army, which entered England in August
1640, who, having routed a Party under the Lord Conway at Newburn, took
Possession of Newcastle, where they kept their head Quarter. Soon after which a
Cessation was agreed to, and a Treaty appointed at Rippon, and afterward
carried to London, where a Peace was happily concluded. The particular Articles
whereof were ratified by his Majesty in the Parliament 1641, at the Conclusion
of which General Lesly was created Earl of Leven.

The Irish Rebellion breaking out at this time, his Lordship was appointed
General of the Scots Forces that were raised and transported into that Kingdom
upon the Charge of England, for suppressing the Rebellion there; in which
Service he continued till the 1643, he was called over by the Parliament to
form and command the Scots Army that was sent into England, to assist the
Parliament against the King, by whose help the Paliament's Forces obtained
their great Victory at Marston-Moor 16. July 1644, where a noble and judicious
Memoirist of the English Nation, I mean the Lord Hollis, does General Lesly the
Honor, as well as the Justice, to ackowledge that his Lordship, who commanded
the Scots Horse, and his Countryman Major General Crawford, who was Major
General to the Earl of Manchester's Brigade, were the Persons who did the
principal Service that Day, quite contrary to what another celebrated Historian
of the same Nation says of the General's Conduct in the Battle: Only it is to
be observed, that that Author's Account of this Affair is wrote with so much
Rancor and Prejudice, and with such Circumstances of Inconsistency, that the
manner of the Narrative takes off much of the Credit of what he wrote in that
Matter.

In the Year 1648, when the Estates of Scotland raised an Army for the Relief
of King Charles, when he was made a Prisoner in the Isle of Wight, General
Lesly so well preserved his Reputation with those of his own Country, who
wedded the King's Interest most, that he had the Command of the Army offered
him; but he thought fit to decline it upon Account of his Age and Infirmities:
which was happy for him considering the unfortunate Issue of it.

After the Murder of the King, his Lordship appeared mighty earnest and forwad
for restoring of King Charles II. and the Re-establishment of our Old
Constitution, and frankly entered into those Designs and Measures that were set
on foot for the raising an Army for his Majesty's Service, and was at the
Battle of Dumb^r in Person, in the Quality of a Volunteer. After the Defeat of
the Scots Army there, and when another Design was set on foot, for raising an
Army to march with the King into England, no Body appeared more forward in that
Service than his Lordship; but while General Monk lay before Dundee, the old
General, with several other Noblemen, having appointed a Meeting at Eliot in
Angus, to consult of Means to relieve the Town, and other Matters concerning
the War, of which Monk having got Advertisement, sent a strong Party of Horse
and Dragoons, commanded by Colonel Morgan, to surprise them: Which he did in
the Night, and the old General and the Principals of them being taken, were
sent to London, and committed Prisoners to the Tower. And notwithstanding all
the Services he had done the English Parliament, his Lordship did not receive
the least Favor from them, nor from Cromwell; but underwent Sequestration, and
all other Severities the most loyal of his Countrymen suffered: But the Crown
of Sweden having entered into an Alliance with the Parliament of England, her
Swedish Majesty, calling to Remembrance the great Services performed by General
Lesly to the Crown of Sweden, was pleased to interpose by her Resident then at
London for his Liberation; which being obtained, his Lordship was so sensible
of the Honor that Princess had done him, that to show his Gratitude for so
singular a Favor, he went over in Person to Sweden, to return her Majesty his
humble and hearty Thanks. At which Court his Lordship was treated with all the
Civility and Respect due to his Quality and Merit, and returning thence to his
Native Country, lived mostly at his Seat of Balgony in a voluntary Retirement,
till Death put a Period to his Life, some time of the Year 1662, leaving Issue
by Agnes his Wife, Daughter of -- Renton of Billy, Alexander Lord Balgony,
likewise five Daughters.

1. Anne married to Hugh Master of Lovat, Son and Heir of Hugh Lord Lovat, and
again to Sir Ralph de la Vall, and had Issue.

2. Margaret to Sir James Crichton of Frendraught 1 st Viscount of Frendraught.

3 Mary to William Lord Cranstoun.

4. Barbara to Sir John Ruthven of Dunglass.

5. Christian to Walter Dundas junior of that Ilk.

Alexander Lord Balgony addicting himself to a military Life, was a Colonel in
the Scots auxiliary Troops that went over to Ireland in the Year 1642, under
the Command of General Lesly his Father, Death preventing his rising to other
Preferments in the very Blossom of his Youth, to the Regrate of his noble
Relations, leaving Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of John Earl of Rothes,
a Son Alexander, who succeeded his Grandfather in the Honor, and a Daughter
Catharine, married to George 1 st Earl of Melvil.

Which Alexander, second Earl of Leven, married Margaret, Daughter of Sir
William Howard, Sister to Charles 1 st Earl of Carlisle Peerage of England.
, and dying without Issue Male of his Body, Anno 1663, his Estate and Honor
devolved on Margaret his eldest Daughter, who married Mr. Montgomery, a Brother
of the Earl of Eglington's, and she dying Anno 1674, the Honor came to
Catharine Countess of Leven her Sister, and this Lady dying a Maiden, the
Estate and Title fell, by Reason of an Entail, to David Melvil Esquire her
Cousin-german, at that Time second Son of George Lord Melvil.

Which David, in Imitation of his Ancestors on the maternal Side, dedicated
himself from his Youth to the Profession of Arms, and transporting himself
Abroad Anno 1585, entered into the Service of the Duke of Brandeburgh, where his
Lordship first served in the Quality of a Captain of Horse, and then was made
Colonel of a Regiment of Foot by his Electoral Highness, which he brought over
with the Prince of Orange in his Expedition into Great Britain Anno 1688. Upon
that Prince's Accession to the Crown, my Lord Leven was sworn of the Privy
Council, and made Constable and Governor of Edinburgh Castle, on the 4 th of
July 1689 Charta penes Comitem de Leven.
. His Majesty King William reposing great Trust and Confidence in his
Lordship's Affection to his Service, was pleased to join him in Commission with
Major General Mackay, and Major General Sir George Monro, to model the Forces
in this Kingdom, which were to be employed in the Reduction of the Highlands;
and accordingly his Lordship was present at the Head of his Regiment in the
Action at Gillycranky on the 27 th of July 1689, where his Courage and Conduct
was very signal and brave. Also in 1692 he carried over his Regiment to
Flanders, where he continued during the Campaign. His Lordship continued
Governor of Edinburgh Castle, till, after the Death of King William, he was
removed from that Station, the Earl of March being put in his Room: But upon
another Turn at Court his Lordship quickly recovered so much Favor, that her
Majesty Queen Anne was pleased on the 1 st of January 1703 to make him Major
General of the Forces in Scotland, and in little more than a Year thereafter
reinstalled him in the Government of the Castle of Edinburgh, and soon
thereafter appointed him General of the Ordnance, and without parting with any
of his other Employments, on the 2 d of March 1706 he was constituted
Lieutenant General and Commander in chief of all her Majesty's Forces in this
Kingdom: All which Stations his Lordship held till the 1712, when he was
removed from all public Employments. He married Anne Daughter of Margaret
Countess of Weems, by whom he had George Lord Balgony and Raith, Alexander
Lesly Esquire, and a Daughter Mary, married to William Lord Haddo, at that Time
Son and Heir apparent of George 1 st Earl of Aberdeen.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th. Azure, a Thistle proper, Ensign'd with an Imperial
Croun, Or, 2d and 3d Argent, on a Bend Azure, Three Buckles, Or. Supporters two
Chevaliers carrying the Banner of Scotland. Crest a Chevalier. Motto, Pro Rege
and Patria.

KER. Marquis of Lothian,
IS descended of Mark Ker Son of Sir Walter Ker of Cesford by Agnes his Wife,
Daughter of Robert Lord Crichton of Sanquhar Chapter in publ. Arch.
, who being the younger Son of his Father, was educated in the Schools of
Learning, with a Prospect of engaging in the Service of the Church; and entering
into Orders, he was at length, after having passed through some inferior
Station in the Church, promoted to be Abbot of Newbottle anno 1546. In which
Function he continued till the blessed Turn of the Reformation, in the Year of
our Lord 1560: He was one of the few of the dignified Clergy who renounced
Popery, and with it all the Errors and Idolatry of the Romish Church, by which
means he held his Benefice in Commendam till the time of his Death anno 1582.
By Grizel his Wife, Daughter of George Earl of Rothes, he had three Sons and a
Daughter, viz. Mark thereafter Earl of Lothian, Andrew Ker of Fentoun Hope's
Decisions.
, Mr. George Ker, and Katharine married to William Maxwel Lord Harries.

Which Mark was by the Care of his Father, who himself had been a Judge in the
Session, bred up in the study of the Law, in which he made a notable progress,
insomuch as he was made a Lord of the Session anno 1582 Memoirs of the Sess.
, tho then but a very young Man, and thereafter constituted Master of Requests
to King James VI. Chapter in publ. Arch.
, by whose Bounty he had a Grant of the Lands of the Abbacy of Newbottle by
Letters Patent October 15 th 1591, then erected into a Temporal Lordship Ibidem.
, and thereafter was by his Majesty's Favor, dignified with the Honor of Earl
of L^thian on the 10 of July 1606 Ibid.
; and departing this Life in the Month of April 1609 Ibid.
, he left Issue by Margaret his Wi^e, Daughter of John Lord Harries, Robert his
Successor, Sir William Ker of Blackhope, Sir Mark Ker; likewise Seven Daughters.

1 st. Jean married to Robert Master of Boyd, and next to David Earl of
Crawfurd.

2 d. Janet to William Earl of Glencairn.

3 d. Margaret to John Lord Yester, and afterward to Andrew Master of Jedburgh.

4 th. Isabel to William 1 st Earl of Queensberry.

5 th. Lilias to John Lord Borthwick.

6 th. Mary to Sir James Richardson of Smeatoun.

7 th. Elizabeth to Sir Alexander Hamiltoun of Innerweek.

Which Robert married Annabella, Daughter of Archbald Earl of Argyle, but
having no Male Issue of his Body, with his Majesty's approbation, he made over
his Estate and Honor to Anne his eldest Daughter, and the Heirs of her Body;
to which she accordingly succeeded on the Death of her Father, which happened
July 15 1624 Balfour's Annals.
. This Countess married Sir William Ker, Son to Sir Robert Ker, thereafter Earl
of Ancrum, his Majesty King Charles I. conferring the same Honor upon him.
When the Troubles began in 1638, his Lordship appeared very zealous for the
Liberty and Property of the Subject against the inchroachments the Court was
then thought to intend upon the Constitution, and after the taking of the
Covenant, he carried the Prosecution of the ends of it as high as any, tho he
bore no public Character in the State till the 1648, that the Parliament, or
that Remains of the Convention of Estates who called themselves so, had
declared the Engagement for the Relief of the King unlawful, and the Assembly
of the Church joining with them, had excommunicated all who had the most
eminent Parts in the promoting of it, and made them incapable of bearing any
Office in the State: By which Judgment the Earl of Lanerk being deprived of the
Secretary's Office, it was by the governing Party that then prevailed,
conferred on the Earl of Lothian anno 1649; soon after which he was sent from
Scotland to the Parliament of England, as soon as it was known they intended to
proceed against his Majesty before the high Court of Justice, to take away his
Life Clarendon's Hist.
, when he did in the name of the Parliament and Kingdom of Scotland, declare
their Dissent from the said Proceedings, and that it might be manifest to the
World, how much they did abominate and detest so horrid a Design, he did
protest that as they were altogether free from the same, so they might be free
from all the Miseries and evil Consequences that might follow thereupon. After
the Murder of the King, he contributed his hearty Endeavors to bring King
Charles the II. to the Exercise of his Royal Power in Scotland, in which as one
of the Commissioners from the Parliament at the Treaty of Breda anno 1650, he
had been very instrumental. By Anne Countess of Lothian his Wife, he had Robert
his Successor, Sir William who was made Director of the Chancery upon the
Restoration of the King anno 1661, Charles Ker of Abbots-rule; likewise seven
Daughters.

Anne married to Alexander Master of Saltoun.

Elizabeth to John Lord Borthwick.

Mary to James Brody of that Ilk.

Margaret to Sir James Richardson of Smeat^un.

Vere to Lord Niel Campbel, Son to the Marquis of Argyle.

Henrietta to Sir Francis Scot of Thir^stane.

Lady Lilias Ker.

Which Robert was, upon the first establishing of the Government under King
William, named of the Privy Council, and constituted Lord Justice General of
Scotland, and thereafter by the Favor of his said Majesty, his Lordship was
raised to the honor of Marquis of Lothian, by Letters Patent 23 June 1701, and
departing this Life 16 Frebruary 1703, he left Issue by Jean his Wife, Daughter
of Archibald Marquis of Argyle, William the present Marquis of Lothian, Lord
Charles Ker Director of the Chancery, Lord John and Lord Mark both Brigadiers,
and Colonels in the Army, and a Daughter Mary married to James Marquis of
Douglas.

Which William being one of the Lords of the Privy Council in the Reign of
Queen Anne, and a Colonel of Dragoons, was by her Majesty's special Favor
elected a Knight of the most Noble Order of the Thistle, into which he was
invested in November 1705. He married Jean Daughter of Archibald Earl of
Argyle, by whom he had William Lord Jedburgh, likewise four Daughters; Jean
married to William Lord Cranstoun, Anne to Alexander Earl of Hume, Elizabeth to
George Master of Ross, at that time Son and Heir apparent to William Lord Ross,
and Lady Mary.

William, Lord Jedburgh, married Margaret Daughter of Sir Thomas Nicolson, by
whom he has Lord William his Son and apparent Heir.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Azur, the Sun in his Splendour Or, 2d and 3d Gules on a
Cheveron Argent, three Moletts of the first. Supported on the dexter by a
Cherub and on the Sinister by a Heart proper. Crest, the Sun in his Splendour.
Motto, Sero sed Serio.

FRASER Lord Lovat.
THe Surname of Fraser is upon Record as ancient as the Time of King Malcolm
IV. that Adam Fraser, filius Udardi filii Kelvert, gave in pure and perpetual
Alms to the Convent of Newbottle sundry Lands in tenemento de Southale
prosalute animae suae. In the Reign of King Alexander III. Gilbert Fraser the
Head of the Family was Vicecomes de Travoquair, as is manifest from his
Donations to the Monks of Newbottle; and it appears the Frasers were even then
extended into diverse Branches; for Bernard Fraser is Sheriff of Stirling in
that Reign, and another William was Lord high Chancellor of Scotland: It
likewise appears that Sir Gilbert was succeeded by Sir Andrew his Son, and he
by Sir Simon, who is the Loyal and eminent Patriot mentioned in the History of
King Robert I. who dying without Male Issue, his Estate, together with the
Sheriffship of Tweddale went to his two Heirs Female, the one married to Sir
Gilbert Hay of Locherwart, Ancestor to the Marquis of Tweddale, and the other
to Sir Malcolm Fleming Predecessor to the Earl of Wigtoun, for which Cause
these two noble Families carry the Coat of Fraser in their Achievement even to
this Time.

Sir Alexander Fraser, called Brother to Sir Simon, was one of those worthy Men
who strenuously adhered to the Interest of Robert de Bruce against the Baliol
and all his Adherents and Abettors; for which, after the Accession of that
Prince to the Crown, he had a Grant de omnibus terris suis de Strachachy^, de
E^^^ly, Balbrochy, and de Achincrosks I have seen this Charter in the Custody
of Sir Peter Fraser of Doors, which, for the satisfaction of the Curious, who
may not so well understand the Style of Old Charter Latin. I shall Translate
into English as follows. Robert by the Grace of God, King of Scots, Know ye we
have given and Granted, and by the Tenor hereof, gives and Grants to our well
beloved Sir Alexander Fraser, for his Service and Homage done to Us, all and
hail the Lands of Strachychen, Essuly, Balebrouchy and Achencroskes, with their
Pertinents, to be held by the said Sir Alexander and his Heirs, of Us and our
Heirs, in one entire Barony. In Testimony whereof, we have caused append our
Seal to this Our Deed, at Air the fourth Day of November, and of Our Reign the
Tenth Year. 1316;
, dicto Alex. and heredibus suis de nobis and heredibus nostris in feudo and
hereditate per omnes rectas metas and divisas suas in unam liberam baron^am
faciendo nobis and heredibus nostris dictis Alex. and heredes sui forinsicum
servitium quantum pertinet ad baroniam praedictam. In cujus rei testimonium
praesenti cartae nostrae sigillum nostrum praecepimus apponi apud Air, primo
die Novembris, anno Regni nostri decimo. 1316.

This Sir Alexander being highly in Favor with King Robert, was in the 20 th
of his Reign constituted Lord high Chamberlain of Scotland, which Office, the
greatest then in the Kingdom, he exercised till the Death of the King. He
married the Lady Mary Bruce Sister to King Robert I. Widow of Sir Neil Campbel
of Lochow, Ancestor to the Duke of Argyle, by whom he had several Sons, John,
and Alexander, who thereafter obtained the Thanedom of Doors from King David
Bruce, and was the Root of that ancient Family of the Frasers: But Sir John,
the elder of the Brothers, dying without Male Issue, the Baronies of
Strachachyn, Fetteresso, Dalpercy, etc. fell to the Share of Margaret his
Daughter, who became the Wife of Sir William Keith Marishall of Scotland. By
her he had Sir John Keith his Son and Heir apparent, who married..... Daughter
to King Robert II. by whom he had a Son Robert, whose only Daughter and sole
Heir, was married to Alexander the 1 st Earl of Huntley, with whom he got the
Baronies of Aboyne, Glentanner, Glenmuck, Sachin, and Touch; by Reason whereof
he assumed the Coat of Fraser into his own, which is still bore by his
Successor the Duke of Gordon in his Grace's Achievement.

But to return to Sir Alexander Fraser the younger Son of Sir Alexander the
Chamberlain; this noble Person treading in the Steps of his loyal Father,
faithfully served King David II. and it could not well choose to be otherwise,
considering the Nearness of his Alliance to the Crown, in Consideration whereof
he obtained, no doubt, in Reward of his Loyalty and Merit, as well as his near
Relation in Blood to that King, a Grant of the Thanedom of Doors, by his Royal
Charter under the great Seal David by the Grace of God King of Scots, Wit ye Us
to have given, and by the Tenor hereof, gives and Grants to Our well beloved
Cousin Alexander Fraser, all and hail the Lands and Thanedom of Doors, within
our County of Kincardin, to be held by the said Alexander and his Heirs, in Feu
and Heritage, in one entire Barony, paying to Us and Our Heirs, by him and his
Heirs, their Suit and Presents, at Our Three head Courts of the County of
Kincardin, and the Service of one great Tenent in Our Army. In Witness whereof
We have Appended Our Great Seal to this Charter, at Edinburgh the fourth of
September, and of Our Reign the Fortieth Year.
.

David, Dei gratia, Rex Scotorum, omnibus probis hominibus totius terrae suae,
salutem. Sciatis nos dedisse, and hac praesenti charta nostra confirmasse
dilecto cansanguineo nostro Alexandro Fraser, omnes and singulas terras nostras
Thanagii de Duirys cum pertinen. infra vicecomitat. de Kyncardyn tenend. and
habend. eidem Alex. and haeredibus suis de nobis and haeredibus nostris in
feudo and hereditate in unam integram liberam Baroniam per omnes rectas metas
and divisas suas, in boscis and planis, in pratis and pasturis, in moris,
maresiis, viis, semitis, aquis, stagnis, molendinis, mulcturis, and eorum
sequelis, aucupationibus, venationibus, and piscariis, cum forca and fossa,
sacca and sacco, cum thol and theme, and cum omnibus aliis and singulis
libertatibus, commoditatibus, aysiamentis, and justis pertinen. suis
quibuscunque ad dictas terras spectantibus, libere, quiet, integre, and in
pace; faciendo inde annuatim tres sectas ad tria placita nostra capitalia
vicecomitat. de Kyncardyn, ac servitium unius archietenentis ad exercitum
nostrum pro omni alio servitio quae de dictis terris aliquo tempore exigi
poterint seu requiri. In cujus rei testimonium praesenti chartae sigillum
nostrum praec^pimus apponi, apud Edinburgh quarto die mensis Septembris, Anno
Regni nostri quadragesimo 1369.

From this Sir Alexander Fraser is Sir Peter Fraser of Doors Baronet descended
in a lineal Course of Succession, as appears from his Writings, which proves
the Family beyond Dispute to be one of the most ancient and best extracted
Families in the County of Kincardin, where it has still remained, and, except
for a short Interval, still continues with Luster. A more particular Account of
which may be deduced in the subsequent part of this Work, whereby it will
appear to be very honorable, as well considered in it self, as in its
illustrious Alliances and Branches.

The Family of Lovat, which this Title leads me more particularly to treat of,
as it is one of the best extracted, so it is one of the most noble and most
numerous of all the Frasers. They are derived from Sir Simon Fraser Son of Sir
Alexander Fraser, and Nephew to King Robert I. who obtained the Barony of
Lovat, and other fair Possessions in the northern Parts, by Marriage of the
Heir Female of the Bissets, in the latter end of King David II. whose Arms he
thereupon took into his own, and which is still bore by his Descendants. The
Wealth and Reputation of the Lovat Family was not a little advanced thereafter
by the marrying of a Lady of the Fentouns, whom Hugh Fraser of Lovat took to
Wife in the Reign of King James I. Geneal Famil. Lovat.
since which time they have been accounted among the Number of the greater
Barons, who were called Lords of Parliament. He left a Son, Hugh Baron of
Lovat, who married Janet, Daughter of Thomas Dunbar Earl of Murray by whom he
had Thomas his Son and Heir, and a Daughter Agnes married to Kenneth Mackenzie
of Kintail.

Which Thomas made no small Figure in the Northern Parts under James IV. whose
Justiciar he was. He married first Janet, Daughter of Sir Alexander Gordon of
Midmar, and Niece to the Earl of Huntley: By her he had Thomas his eldest Son,
who was slain at the Battle of Flowdon Geneal. Famil. de Lovat.
, and Hugh his Successor in the Honor; secondly Janet Daughter to the Lord
Gray, by whom he had James Fraser of Kinkel, and Janet Wife of John Crichton of
Ruthven. This Lord dying very aged, Anno 1530, was succeeded by Hugh his Son,
who married first Katharine, Daughter of John Grant of Freuchie, by whom he had
Simon Master of Lovat, next Janet Daughter of Walter Ross of Balnagown, Ibid.
who bore him Alexander his Son and Heir, and a Daughter Agnes married to
William Mackleod of Dunwegan. This Lord entered into a fatal Quarrel with the
Mackraynolds, which cost him dear; for in a Conflict with that other Clan at
Lochrochty in Ross-Shire on the 2 d of June 1544, both he and his eldest Son
lost their Lives Ibid.
, besides a great many other Gentlemen of the Frasers, to the Number, say they,
of eighty.

To Hugh Lord Lovat succeeded Alexander his Son, who dying Anno 1558 Chart. in
publ. Arch.
, left Issue by Jean his Wife, Daughter of Sir John Campbel Thane of Calder,
Niece to the Earl of Argyle, two Sons, Hugh his Successor, and Thomas first of
that Branch of the Frasers of Strichen Geneal. Famil. Lovat. MS.
, which Hugh at the Dissolution of the Church Lands in the Time of the
Reformation acquired the Lands and Tithes of the Priory of Beuly from the Abbot
of that Convent, whereby he increased the Wealth and Dependency of his Family.
He married Elizabeth Daughter of John Earl of Athole, and giving way to Fate on
the 1 st Day of January 1576 Chapter in Cancel. S. D. N. R.
left a Son Simon to succeed him in the Honor, who took to Wife first Margaret
Daughter of Colin Mackenzie of Kintail, Ancestor to the Earl of Seafort, by
whom he had Hugh his Successor, and after her Death, Jean Daughter of James
Stewart Lord Down: By her he had two Sons and a Daughter, viz. Sir Simon Fraser
of Inerallachy, Sir James Fraser of Brae, Margaret married first to Sir Robert
Arbuth^^t of that Ilk; 2 dly, to Sir John Haldane of Gleneagles. This noble
Lord made his Exit out of this World on the 3 d of April, 1633 Ibid.
. Hugh his Son succeeding him in his Estate and Title, he married Isabel
Daughter of Sir John Weems of that Ilk, Ancestor to the Earl of Weems, by whom
he had Hugh Master of Lovat, who died in the Lifetime of his Father, and Thomas
Fraser of Beaufort; also three Daughters, Anne married to John Earl of
Sutherland, Mary to David Ross of Balnagown, Katharine to Robert first Viscount
of Arbuthnot, and thereafter to Andrew Lord Fraser.

Here it is proper to take Notice that Hugh Master of Lovat in his Father's Time
married Anne Daughter of Alexander 1 st Earl of Leven, and dying in the Blossom
of his Days in the Month of May 1643 Ibid.
, left a Son Hugh who succeeded his Grandfather in his Estate and Honor, upon
his Death, which happened February 16 th 1646 Ibid.
. Which Hugh married Anne Daughter of Sir John Mackenzie of Tarbat, by whom he
had a Son Hugh and three Daughters, Anne married to Patrick Lord Kinnaird,
Isabel to Alexander Mackdonald of Glengary, Margaret to Colonel Andrew Monro,
and departing this Life upon the 27 th of April 1672 Geneal. Familiae de Lovat.
, was succeeded by Hugh his Son, who married Aemilia Daughter of John Marquis
of Athole; but having no male Issue, and his Estate being by his
Marriage-Articles provided to his Heirs what someover, and considering that the
Title of Honor, in default of Heirs-Male of his Body, was to descend to
Captain Simon Fraser of Beaufort his first Cousin, and that little would have
accompanied the Dignity after his Death, his Lordship for these Reasons
resigned the Honor in the King's hand, who was pleased to confer it again upon
himself, and to his Daughters in case of Failure of his Heirs Male, and dying
anno 1696, left behind him four Daughters, 1 st. Aemilia Baroness of Lovat, who
married Alexander Macke^zie of Prestonhall, who changed his Name to Fraser, and
has a Son Hugh Master of Lovat. 2 d. Anne married to Norman Mackleod of that
Ilk, next to Peter Fotheringham of Powrie. 3 d. Katharine to William Murray
then Son and Heir apparent to Sir Patrick Murray of Auchtertyre. 4 th. Margaret.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Azure, three Frazes Argent; 2d and 3d Gules, three
antic Crowns, Or. Supporters two Bucks sejant in the middle of a Bush of
Holin. Crest, a Buck's Head erased proper. Motto, I am ready.

STEWART, Lord Lorn and Innermeath.
OF the illustrious Family of Darnly the Stewarts of Lorn were a Branch, which
took Beginning in the Reign of King Robert I. Sir Alexander Stewart their
Ancestor then obtaining from that Prince a Grant of the Lands of Garmeltoun and
Dunning in Perth-Shire Chapter in Rotul. Rob. I.
. Sir Robert Stewart of Innermeath was his Successor; he is one of the Barons
who recognized the Earl of Carrick's Right to the Crown anno 1374. And dying
anno 1386 left Issue John Stewart of Innermeath and Lorn, and Robert Stewart of
Durisdier, of whom were the later Stewarts of Rossyth Mr. Day. Symson's Geneal.
of the House of Rossyth.
, which John was frequently employed in Negotiations of Peace with the English,
in the Beginning of the Duke of Albany's Government Rymer's Foed.
. By... his Wife, Daughter of Robert Duke of Albany Symson's Collect.
, he had Robert his Successor, Sir James Stewart called The Black Knight of
Lorn, and a Daughter Christian married to James Dundas of that Ilk. Which
Robert Stewart, designed Lord of Lorn, was one of the Commissioners appointed
to treat with the English about the Redemption of King James I. and thereafter
one of the Hostages for the Ransom Rymer.
. Likeas he was in the 1436 named by the Parliament one of the Judges who were
to hear and report all Causes and Controversies which were to be moved and
insisted on during that Session Black Acts of Parl.
. He left a Son John to succeed him in the Title of Lord Lorn, who dying
without Issue Male anno 1469, left three Daughters Coheirs to him, Isabel
married to Colin 1 st Earl of Argyle, Margaret to Sir Colin Campbel of Ottar.

However the Title of Lord Lorn was not discontinued, but fell to Walter
Stewart his nearest Heir upon the Male-Line, who resigned the Title of Lord
Lorn together with all Right he had to the Lordship of Lorn, to Colin Earl of
Argyle in Exchange for the Earl's Lands of Innermeath, of which he obliged
himself to procure him the Title of Lord from King James III. and which he
actually did perform Ch, penes Ducem de Argyle.
. From which Walter, in a direct Line in the fifth Descent, was John Lord
Innermeath, who by the special Favor of King James VI. was raised to the
Honor and Title of Earl of Athole, by Letters Patent on the 6 th of March
1596, upon the Demise of John 5 th of that line, Earl of Athole Charta in Pub.
Archivis ad Annum 1596.
. This Earl married first Margaret Daughter of Sir David Lindsay of Edzle, who
was Farl of Crawfurd, by whom he had James his Son and Heir, and a Daughter
Margaret married to Sir James Stewart of Balliechin, next to Sir Robert
C^ichton of Cluny. 2 dly, Mary Daughter of William Earl of Gowrie Widow of John
the former Earl of Athole, and dying anno 16^5, James his Son succeeded him in
the Honor, and married Mary second Daughter of John 5 th Earl of Athole, but
having no Issue, he resigned the Earldom of Athole in Favors of William Master
of Tillibardin, and Dame Dorothea Stewart Mistress of Tillibardin his
Sister-in-law Charta in Rotulis Jacobi VI.
, on the 17 ^h of October 1612.

LESLY, Lord Lindores.
PAtrick Lesly Commendator of Lindores Abbey, Son of Andrew Earl of Rothes, had
by the Bounty of King James VI. the said Abbacy erected into a Temporal
Lordship to him on the 25 th December 1600 Ibidem.
. He married Jean Daughter of Robert Earl of Orkney This is supported by Mr.
Lesly's (...) I^^^^^na.
, by whom he had James his Son and Heir, Colonel Lodovick Lesly, and
Lieutenant General David Lesly 1 st Lord Newark; also several Daughters,
Margaret married to John Lord Maderty, ELizabeth to Sir William Sinclair of
May,.... to George Lesly of that Ilk, Mary to David Barclay of Colearny.

Which James married Mary Daughter of Patrick Lord Gray, by whom he had John
his Successor in the Honor. 2 dly... Daughter of... York Esquire by whom he had a
Daughter Mary married first to John Stewart of Innernity, and again to John
Bruce of Blairhall.

John Lord Lindores married Marion Daughter of James Earl of Airly, and dying
anno 1706, left David his Son and Heir, who married Margaret Daughter of
Archibald Stewart of Dune^n, Niece to the Earl of Murray.

LIVINGSTON, Earl of Lithgow.
IT is clear from the Records of Holy-rood-house Abbey, that in the Time of
King David I. one Livingius was then possessed of that Barony in West-Lothian,
which he called Livingstoun from his own Name, according to the Custom of that
Age, for he makes a Donation to the Monks of the Holy-Cross at Edinburgh, de
Ecclesia de Livingstoun cum dimidia carrucata Terrae ad dictam Ecclesiam
pertinente, prosalute animae suae Records of Holy-rood-house Abbey in the
public Registers of King (...)
. He was succeeded in the Barony of Livingstoun by his Son Thurstanus, called
filius Livingii in a Charter of Confirmation to the Convent of Holy-rood-house
of the Church of Livingstoun, with the Lands and Tithes thereunto belonging for
the Prosperity of his Soul, both here and hereafter Sir James Dalrymple's
Historical Collections.
. He left a Son Alexander filius Thurstani, as he is designed in a Charter of
King William's, who being Lord of the Barony of Livingstoun, assumed first that
Appellation, and transmitted it to his Posterity for a Surname, in whose Line
it continued above 400 Years, till the Reign of King James IV. that Mr.
Bartholomew Livingstoun of that Ilk, died without Issue Chapter in pub. Arch.
, and with him the Family was extinct.

The immediate Ancestor of this Noble Family was Sir William Livingston, who in
the 17th of King David II. had a Grant of the Barony of Calendar in the County
of Stirling, then in the Crown by the Forfaulture of Patrick de Calendar Charta
penes Vicecomitem de Kilsyth.
; whose only Daughter and Heir Christian he took to Wife, the better to fortify
his Title thereto: Likeas in the 34th of the said King, they had a Grant to
themselves and their Heirs, of the Lands of Kilsyth, then in the King's Hands,
by the Decease of Margaret Daughter of Robert De la Wall, This Robert De la
Wall had acquired, I find, the Barony of Kilsyth from Malcom Fleming Earl of
Wigton, who was the King's Donatar upon the Forfaulture of Patrick de Calendar.
.

This Sir William was a brave Man, and one of the Scots Barons who were taken
Prisoners with King David Bruce at the Battle of Durham, on the 17th of October
1346, Rymer's Foedera.
: But being afterward released, the next ensuing Year, when a Treaty was set on
foot for the King's Redemption, he was one of the Commissioners employed in
that honorable Negotiation Ibidem.
, tho without Success at that Time: Likewise in the 1357, he was together with
William Bishop of St. Andrews, Thomas Bishop of Caithness, Patrick Bishop of
Brechin, Patrick Earl of March, and Sir Robert Erskine appointed by Robert Lord
high Steward of Scotland Lieutenant, as he is designed, to the most illustrious
Prince David by the Grace of God King of Scotland in a full Council holden at
Perth, with Advice and Consent of the Prelates, Nobles and whole Community of
the Kingdom, Plenipotentiaries and Commissioners with Power to them, to treat
about the Redemption of the King, and a final Peace with England; which was
happily agreed to on the 3d of October thereafter, the Ransom being a 100000
Merks Sterling. Money Ibidem.
, for which Sir William Livingston's Son and Heir was delivered one of the
Hostages.

By the foresaid Christian de Calendar his Wife, he had Sir William his Son and
Heir, Father of Sir John Livingstoun of the Calendar; who was slain in the
Service of his Country at the Battle of Homildoun against the English on the
4th of March 1401 Hume's History of the Earls of Douglas and Angus.
. His first Marriage was with.... Monteith Daughter to.... Monteith of Carse
Genealogy of the House of Livingston penes me.
. By her he had Sir Alexander, and two younger Sons, Robert Progenitor of the
first Branch of the Livingstons of Westquarter, of whom sprung the House of
Kinnaird, first raised to the honor of Viscount, and then Earl of Newburgh;
and John Livingston Esquire. His second Wife was Agnes Daughter of Sir James
Douglas of Dalkeith Charta penes Vicecomitem de Kilsyth.
, by whom he had Sir William Livingston first of the House of Kilsyth Ibidem.
, and a Daughter Agnes Wife of Sir John Gordon of Gordoun.

Which Alexander was one of the Hostages for the Ransom of King James I. when
he was relieved from his Captivity in England Anno 1423 Rymer's Foed.
: By whom he was made a Knight, and frequently employed in Affairs of the
highest Importance; for I find he was one of the Barons that sat upon the Trial
of Murdoch Duke of Albany, by whom that Duke was Sentenced and condemned to
lose his Head. Upon the Death of King James I. he was by the Advice and Consent
of the three Estates of Parliament appointed Tutor to the young King James II.
whose Person was still in the Custody of Sir William Crichton the Chancellor,
in the Castle of Edinburgh, of which he was Governor; tho very probably he was
kept by him contrary to Law: Wherefore that Sir Alexander Livingston on whom
the Parliament had conferred that high Trust might get the King's Person into
his own Custody, he fell upon this Stratagem to bring it about.

The Queen Mother was entirely in Sir Alexander's Interest, and to effectuate
her Purpose comes from Stirling to Edinburgh, pretending a friendly Visit to
her Son, which the Chancellor very willingly allowed her in the Castle several
Days: During which Time she cajolled the Prince into an Obedience to her Will,
and the Chancellor into a Belief that she designed nothing but what she owned:
At length she told the Chancellor, that she would but stay one Night longer in
the Castle, being the next Day to set out for Whitekirk in Buchan, to perform a
Vow which she had made for the Health of the King, whose Person she earnestly
recommended to his Care till she should return. He assured her of his Fidelity
both in that and all other respects, and so left her. Thus all Eyes, but those
of a trusty Few being asleep, the young King was carefully put up in a Chest
among his Mother's Furniture, and then convoyed to Leith, and from thence by
Water to Stirling; where Sir Alexander Livingston, and those of his Party
received him with great Joy.

But notwithstanding this great Favor of the Queen's to Sir Alexander
Livingston, yet, for some Reasons of State, not long thereafter, he and some of
his Friends did restrain her Majesty in the Liberty she had some while enjoyed
of the Company of her Son. Which her Majesty resented as a very high Indignity:
But on the 4th of September 1439, the Business was settled betwixt the Queen
and Livingston by a solemn Indenture still extant in the Earl of Linlithgow's
Custody: And because it seems very much to correct all our Historians, even the
very latest Writers of the Life of King James II. in the Chronology, and sets
the History of that Prince's Minority in a truer light, than it has been
hitherto done; I shall here insert the original Indenture.

"This Appointment made at Strivyline the furd Day of the Month of September
the Yher of our Lord M.CCCC.XXXIX, proportis, yat it is accordit betwix a right
hye and mighti Princess, Jehane be the Grace of God Queen of Scotland, on the
ta part, and Sir Alexander of Livingston of Kalentar, Sir William of Cranston
Knightis, James of Livingston Son and Heir to the said Sir Alexander, and John
of Livingston Brother to the foresaid Sir Alexander, on the the other part, with
the Avyse and the Consent of the three Estats be and yare in the general
Counsele, there halden and gaderit in form and manner after folowande, That
is to say, In the first touching the Declaracion of the Fame and Worship of
the foresaids Persons, for the Restriction of the said Princess Will and
Liberte made be thaym and their Assistance: The said Princess with her
Counsele, has ripely examinit and discussit the Causes and the Motyvis, be the
whilks the foresaid Persons war stirit to withdraw the foresaid Liberte fra
her, and has consider it and knawleges yat what thing the said Persons did in
yat Matter touching her, y^i did it of good Zele and Motife and of great Truth
and Leaute yat was in yam, bath to our Soveryne Lord the King and his sawfte,
and to the said Princess in her Worship: And in yat Matter and all utheris,
Scho reputes haldes and trustis yam all and yair Assistance tharin bath lele
and true to her, doand that thing as true Lieges, aw to do for yair Soveryne
Lord and her Estate and Worship, and nane utherwyse. Item touching the
Declaracione of the Fame and Worstship of the said Princess, the foresaid Sir
Alexander, Sir William, James and John, and yair foresaid Assistentes, declaris
and knawleges in yair Leaute yat yair withdrawing of whilk Liberte fra her, and
yat yai did in yat Matter was naught done in Vilany na for Vilany, harm na
Sclandre to her Person, na for na Lak, Crime, na Fault yat yai or any of yaim
wist or knew to her Womanhede, but anevely for the Safete of our Soveryn Lord,
the Worstship of her Person, and the Common Good of the Reamme. Atour for sa
mikle as the said Princess be the occasioun of whilk withdrawing of Liberte
fra her consaved grief and displeasance again the said Sir Alexander, Sir
Willam, James and John and yair Assistantes, considering yat whilk thing was
done of good Zele and Motif, as before is declared. Scho has remittit and
removes all the faide grief and displeasance yat scho consavit again yaim or
any of yaim, for the foresaid Cause, or any uther done or said in time begane:
And forther out forth yat the said Princess had fulle declaracione and varry
witting of troth and leaute yat was and is in the forsaid Sir Alexander and
all the other Persons for written in mare appert takin of Traiste and
hartliness; in time cummyng scho has be the Avyse of the said three Estates
committit to the said Sir Alexander's keeping our said Soueryne Lord the King
her derrast Son, unto the time of his Age, and lent to him for his Residence
for the said time her Castle of Strivylyne, and assignit to the said Sir
Alexander to the Uphald of our said Soueryn Lord and his Sistris in the forsaid
Castle, to his said Age 4000 Markis of the usuale Monee of Scotland, the
whilkis war assignit to her be the said three Estates, and for the same Cause.
Alsua the said Princess sal have access to visit our said Soveryn Lord her
Son in the said Place with unsuspect Personis at her liking as is accordit
betwix yaim. Item for the mair sikernes, the said Princess sal make sic Lordis
as are her Men and retenewe at the desire of the said Sir Alexander, and of the
Personis before written, gif the forsaid Sir Alexander and Personis yair Letters
under yair Seelis, yat gi^ the said Princess cummis in the contrar of any of
the Appointment accordit in this Writ, yat yai sal naught assist to her, na be
in contrar of him, na of the said Personis in ya Materis, but erar with him
and them in the fulfilling thereof. And the said Lordis yat are Men and
Retenew to her sal be oblyst in yair said Letters, yat yai sal nouther do na
say to the said Sir Alexander na to the said Personis, na yair Assistents, na
procure to be done, na say to him na yaim, Schame, Vilany nar Harm in any wise
for the forsaid Cause. Item gif it happins, as God forebide, yat our said
Soueryn Lord deceese, or yat he cum to his said Eld, the said Sir Alexander sal
ressave the forsaid Princess in her forsaid Castle freely, with money or Few at
her Plesance; likeas he is obliste to her of before be his Letters. Item give
it happenis the said Sir Alexander to decese within the said Age of our forsaid
Soueryn Lord, his said Son and Air, and all the Persons for written or yat sal
be in the said Castle, sal be obliste to delyver the said Castle freli to her
togidder with our said Soueryn Lord withoutten obstakle or demand at her
desire, and asking outher be her Word or her Letters under her Sele: Sa yat
nouther the said Sir Alexander, Sir William, James and John, be naught the
ne^rar the Deed, be the miene of the said Princess, her Procuracione or
Servants. To the whilkis all and sundry things foresaid leleli and truili to be
kepit without Fraud or G^le, the said Princess and Sir Alexander, Sir Willam,
James and John the haly Ewangelis touchit, has geven yair bodily Aiths: And
the sud Princess and Sir Alexander has enterchangeably to yis Writ indentit,
set yair Seeles togidder with the Seeles of reueren des Fadres in Crist John,
John, John, and Michael be the Grace of God Bishopis of Glasgu, Murreve, Ross
and Dunblane, for the part of the Clergy; and the Signet of a hye and mighti
Lord Willam Erl of Douglas havand the force and the effect of his Seele; the
Seele of a Noble Lord, Sir Alexander Lord of Gordon procurit be the Lord of
Crechton Chancellar of Scotland for him in Absence of his own Seele, and for
the said Lord of Gordon for himself, and the Seele of a Noble Lord, Sir Walter
Lord of Dirlton for the part of the Barouns; and the Seeles of James of Parcle,
Commissare of Linlithgu, and of a venerable Fader in Criste, David Abbot of
Cambuskynneth procured be Willam of Cranston Burges and Commissare of
Edinburgh, and Androw Read Burges and Commissare of Innernes, Day, Year and
Place before written; for the part of the Burrows."

Sir Alexander Livingstoun having thus got the young King into his Custody, in
order to countenance his after Actions; he began to carry with a very high
Hand, as being assured that none would dare to control him, in so much that he
created many Enemies to himself, and among the rest the Queen Mother, whom upon
Suspicion or Pretense that she and Sir James Stewart her Husband were carrying
on some Intrigue with the Earl of Douglas, committed Sir James to Prison, and
the Queen her self to a narrow Apartment in the Castle of Stirling, which so
much incensed her, that she resolved upon Revenge, and being as yet Mistress of
her Son's Inclinations, very soon brought about a second Turn of Affairs at
Court: For while Sir Alexander Livingston was at Perth, employed in the public
Affairs, Drummond's Hist. of King James the II.
She carried on a Plot so closely and dexterously with the Chancellor, that one
Morning as the King was Hunting in the Park of Sirling, his small Retinue were
on a sudden surrounded with a Body of about 4000 Horse commanded by the Lord
Chancellor in Person, so that the King was carried off, without any Opposition,
to Edinburgh, where he was welcomed by the Acclamations of the People.

Sir Alexander Livingston, upon Advice of what had happened, came to Edinburgh,
and wisely considering that the Chancellor could not more probably stand his
Ground amidst so many Difficulties without him, than he had done without his
Assistance, he thought the best way was to endeavor to bring him to Terms of
Accommodation, which by the Mediation of the Bishops of Aberdeen and Murray was
at length effected; the Chancellor continuing in his Office as formerly, and
the Custody of the King's Person was again committed to Sir Alexander, which
high Trust he executed with great Fidelity, till the 1444, that the King now
arrived to the Age of 14 Years, began to govern in some Measure by himself.
Soon after which, the Earl of Douglas became the principal Favorite at Court,
who bearing no good Will to Sir Alexander Livingston or any of the former
Ministry, prevailed so far with the King as ^o call a Parliament: Which
accordingly met at Perth Black Acts of Parliament.
. Thither he and others of his Party were Summoned to Answer to such
Accusations, as should be ex^^^ited against them. Sir Alexander was accused of
having alienated the Crown Lands, wasted the Royal Revenues, and seized upon
the King's Jewels, the Furniture of his Houses, and what else he could divert
to his own private Use: In consequence of which he was declared Rebel, his
Estate confiscated, and sent Prisoner to Dunbartoun, there to remain during
Pleasure. This Treatment of Sir Alexander's was thought very hard: But the Fate
of William Livingston his second Son, Sir Robert Livingston of Drumray late
Lord Treasaurer was much harder; for they were both beheaded in the Castle of
Edinburgh, where Authors say that Mr. Livingston being a young Man of admirable
Parts and great Eloquence made such a moving Discourse upon the Vanity of the
World, and the Vicissitude of humane Affairs, as drew Tears from the Eyes of
all that were present. But after some time of Imprisonment, the King was
pleased to restore Sir Alexander Livings^on to his Estate, called him to his
Council, and constituted him Justice General of Scotland, Anno 1449 Rymer's
Foedera.
. The same Year he was appointed one of the Plenipotentiaries to treat with the
English anent the Prorogation of a Truce betwixt the two Nations. He
married...... Dundas Daughter to Dundas of that Ilk, Genealogy of the House of
Livingston.
. By her he had James Lord Livings^on his Successor, William, and A^exander of
whom the House of Dunipace and its Cadets The House of Dunipace is now
represented by Livingston of Pantasken, as appears from Writs I have seen in
his Hands.
: Also two Daughters, Janet married to James Lord Hamilton, and Elisabeth to
James Dundas of that Ilk, Genealogy of the House of Dundas MS
and had Issue.

To Sir Alexander Livingston Lord Calendar succeeded James, styled Lord
Livingston, his Son, who being a Nobleman of great Courage and Prudence, was
constituted Captain of the Castle of Stirling, and had the Custody of the young
King committed to him by his Father, when he was the King's Governor Charta
penes me ad Annum 1447.
. Which great Trust he faithfully discharged, and I have Ground to believe that
when his Father was discourted, the King still re^ain'd a Favor to Sir James,
perhaps for his Civility to him when he was Governor of Stirling I have seen
the Note of a Charter among the Collections of Mr. David Simpson granted of the
half of the Lands of Kelwood to John Son to Asplan Crawford, dated 3d April
1444, wherein James Livingston, Custos personae Regiae and Capit. de Stirling,
is a Witness.
. In 1452 he made him Master of his Household, and one of the Lords of his Privy
Council; and two Years thereafter raised him to be Lord High Chamberlain of
Scotland, in which great Office ^^ continued even till his Death Anno 1467,
leaving four Children behind him, viz.

James Lord Livingston.

Alexander Livingston Esquire

Elisabeth married to John Mackdonald Lord of the Isles, and Earl of Ross.

Euphame to Sir Malcolm Fleming Charta penes Comitem de Lithgow.
Son and Heir of Robert Lord Fleming.

Which James Lord Livingston was first espoused to Christian Daughter and Sole
Heir of Sir John Erskine of Kinnoul Ibidem:
; but that Design not taking effect, he married afterward Christian Daughter of
Sir Robert Crichton Lord Sanquhar, but dying without Issue, his Estate and
honor o^ Lord Livingston fell to Sir James Livingston Knight, his Nephew; who
took to Wife first Elisabeth Daughter of Robert Lord Fleming Charta penes
Comitem de Wigton.
, by whom he had William his Successor, next Margaret Daughter of Sir John
Houstoun of that Ilk Charta in Rotulis Jacobi IV.
. By her he had a Son Alexander, of whom sprang the Livingstons of Glentyran,
long since extinct.

Which William Lord Livingston by Agnes his Wife, Daughter of Patrick Hepburn
Lord Hales, Sister to Patrick Earl of Bothwel Charter by James Hepburn Bishop
of Murray to Alexander Lord Livingston his Nephew, of the Lands of Birthwood
1518, in the Rolls of King James IV. and this Bishop was Brother to Pat. Earl
of Bothwel. Charta in Rotulis Jacobi IV.
, had Alexander his Son and Heir, and two Daughters.

Margaret married to John Lord Hay of Yester, Ancestor to the Marquis of
Tweddale.

Isabel to Nicol Ramsay of Dalhousie, Ancestor to the Earl of Dalhousie.

Which Alexander had the Tuition of Queen Mary committed to him in her Nonage:
His Lordship also accompanied her Majesty into France Anno 1548, where he died
Anno 1550, Genealogy of the Lord Livingston.
, leaving Issue by Agnes his Wife Daughter of James Earl of Mortoun,

John Master of Livingston his eldest Son, who married Janet Daughter of
Malcolm Lord Fleming Charta in publicis Archivis
, and was killed at the Battle of Pinky, leaving no Issue.

William afterward Lord Livingston.

Thomas, who obtained the Barony of Haining by Marriage of Agnes eldest of the
two Daughters and Coheirs of William Crawfurd of Haining Ibidem.
, was the first of that Branch of the Livingstons.

Elizabeth married to John Buchanan of that Ilk Charta penes Comitem de Lithgow
, and had Issue.

Janet to Sir Alexander Bruce of Airth Charta in publicis Archivis.
, and had Issue.

Magdalene to Arthur Erskine of Grang^ Brother to John Earl of Mar, 2 dly to
Sir James Scrimgeour of Dudop Ibidem
, sans Issue.

Mary to John Semple of Beltrees Charta penes Robertum Semple de Beltrees.
, Son to Robert Lord Semple, and had Issue.

William Lord Livingston adhered firmly to Queen Mary, and was entirely trusted
by her. So great a Confidence his Princess had in him, that when her Majesty
was a Prisoner in Lochlevin, she named him one of the Commissioners for her, to
treat with the Earl of Murray the Regent, about restoring her to the Exercise
of her Authority, and to represent to him, that her Consent was not spontaneous
in resigning the Crown, or to his being preferred to the Regency: But he flatly
refusing to do so, the Business came to nothing. Upon the Queen's Escape from
Lochlevin, he was one of the Peers who met her at Hamiltoun with his Friends
and Followers, whereupon ensued the Fight at Langfide. When her Majesty fled
into England, upon the Loss of that Day, he was one of the Commissioners on the
Queen's part, who met at York the 8th of October 1568, for informing the Queen
of England of the true State of the Quarrel betwixt Queen Mary and her
Subjects, who had dethroned her, and were then accusing her in a foreign
Country; and he continued loyal to his distressed Sovereign till the end of the
Civil War, to the great Prejudice of his Fortune. He married Agnes Daughter of
Malcolm Lord Fleming, Ancestor to the present Earl of Wigtoun. By her he had
Alexander first Earl of Lithgow, John Livingston of Westquarter, and William of
whom the Branch of Badlormie, Jean eldest Daughter married to Alexander Lord
Elphinstoun, and Margaret to Sir Lewis Ballenden of Broughtoun Justice-Clerk in
the Reign of King James VI. and afterward to Patrick Stewart Earl of Orkney Sir
John Scot's Memoirs of the Officers of State, from 1550 to 1650 MS penes me.
, and had Issue.

Which Alexander Lord Livingston was much esteemed by King James VI. to whose
Care that Prince committed the Education of his Daughter the Princess
Elizabeth, afterward Queen of Bohemia; and when his Majesty King James did
succeed to the Crown of England Anno 1603, his Lordship carried the Princess
from Lithgow to London with a Retinue, upon his own Charge, suitable to her
Birth and Dignity; which her Royal Highness did always gratefully remember and
acknowledge to him and his Family. His Lordship was by the Favor and Bounty of
the said King raised to the Honor of Earl of Lithgow by Letters Patent,
bearing Date 15th November 1600, and appointed one of the Commissioners to
treat about an Union of the Kingdoms upon his Majesty's Accession to the
English Crown, and departing this Life within the Month of September Anno 1622
Charta in Cancellaria S. D. N. Regis.
, left Issue by Eleanor his Wife Daughter of Andrew Earl of Errol,

Alexander his Son and Heir.

Sir James Livingston first Earl of Calendar.

Anne married to Alexander Earl of Eglintoun.

Margaret to John Earl of Wigton.

Which Alexander married first Anne Daughter of George 1 st Marquis of Huntley,
by whom he had George his Successor, and again Mary Daughter of William Earl of
Angus, by whom he had Alexander second Earl of Calendar, and two Daughters,
Margaret married to Sir Thomas Nicolson of Carnock, and had Issue: 2 dly, To
Sir George Stirling of Keir. And last of all to Sir John Stirling of Keir, sans
Issue: And Lady Eleanor who died unmarried; his Lordship dying Anno 164.

George his Son succeeded him in the Honor: He adhered to the Cause of King
Charles II. in the time of the Civil War, and suffered for it; but upon the
Restoration he was made one of the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, and
constituted Captain of the Royal Regiment of Foot Guards: Which Office he held
till the Year 1681, he was removed from that Employment, and in Compensation
thereof was made Justice General of Scotland: In which Station he continued
till the Revolution of the Government Anno 1689, which he survived but short
while; for he died on the first Day of February 1690 Ibidem.
, leaving two Sons and a Daughter by Elizabeth his Wise Daughter of Patrick
first Earl of Panmure, Widow of John Earl of Kinghorn, George Earl of Lithgow,
Alexander third Earl of Calendar, and Henrietta married to Robert Viscount of
Oxenford.

Which George was Anno 1692 sworn of the Privy Council to King William and
Queen Mary, and made one of the Commissioners of the Treasury; and it is said
the King designed him the Chancellor's Place, had not Death prevented his
Promotion to the Honor. He died on the 7th Day of August 1695 Ibidem.
, leaving no Issue by Henrietta his Wi^e Daughter of Alexander Lord Duffus, so
that his Estate and Honor devolved to James Earl of Calendar his Nephew, who
is Governor of the Castle of Blackness by Inheritance, and hereditary Sheriff
of Stirling Shire. His Lordship was in Anno 1713 elected a Peer from Scotland
to the Parliament of Great Britain, upon a Vacancy through the Demise of James
Duke of Hamilton He married Anne Daughter of John Earl of Errol, by whom he had
James Lord Livingston who died on the 30th of April 1715, and a Daughter Lady
Anne.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Argent, 3 Cinquefoils Gules, within a double Tressour
Counter-flowr'd Vert. 2d and 3d Sable, a Bend betwixt 6 Billets Or, in Surtout
Azure, an Oak Tree Or, within a Border Argent, charged with 8 Gelliefl^wers
Gules. Supporters two Savages, carrying Battons, wreathed about the Head and
Loins with Laurel Crest a De^^ savage holding in his left Hand a Batton, and a
Serpent linked about the other proper, Motto, Si je puis.

CAMPBEL, Earl of Lowdon.
ACcording to the Custom of Families of the greatest Antiquity, this of Lowdon
seems to have taken its Surname from the Lordship of Lowdon in the County of
Air, where it flourished in the earliest Ages, as one of the most considerable
in that Shire; for it is certain from very clear Accounts, that in the Reign of
King William called the Lion, Richard Morvil Lord High Constable of Scotland,
gave the Barony of Lowdon Jacobo filio Lambini Charta penes Comitem de Lowdon.
, who assumed a Surname from thence, and left it with his Lands to his
Posterity: But it did not last a full Century in the Male-Line, for it became
extinct in James de Lowdon, whose Heir Female was married to Sir Reynald
Crawfurd Knight, a Branch of the Family of Crawfurd in the County of Lanerk,
who besides the Barony of Lowdon, had Possession of many other Lands in
Lanerk-Shire the paternal Estate of his Ancestors, and had the Honor to
execute the Office of high Sheriff of the County of Air in the 17th of King
Alexander II. Anno 1228 Chartulary of Kelso in the Lawyers Library MS.
; by which Title he is a frequent Witness to the Grants of that Prince to the
Religious of Kelso Abbey, which is all I can find in History concerning him
proper to be inserted here. He left a Son

Hugh his Successor, who added to the Barony of Lowdon the Lands of Crosby, and
a Portion of the Village of Stevinstoun in Cuningham by the Donation of Alan of
Galloway high Constable of Scotland his Superior Lord, Grandchild and Heir to
the forementioned Richard Morvil, to be held of him and his Heirs for ever.
This Hugh together with Malise Earl of Strathern, Alexander Lord high Steward
of Scotland, with diverse other Barons of the first Quality, obtains Letters of
safe Conduct and Protection from the King of England Anno 1255, to come into
that Realm, but upon what Occasion or for what Cause the Record does not
mention Mr. Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
.

Sir Reynald Crawfurd high Sheriff of Air was his Son and Successor, so much
celebrated in the History of these Times. In the grand Competition for the
Crown betwixt Bruce and Baliol, of which King Edward I. of England was made
Arbitrator, he was one of the Barons chosen on the part of Robert de Bruce, who
met at Berwick on the 2d of June 1292 to be a Witness to the Decision which was
then to be made of that Affair Ibidem.
; which at length that King having adjudged to Baliol, and afterward having
extorted a Superiority from the most part of the Kingdom, and among others Sir
Ronald Crawfurd swore Allegiance to him: Yet such was the Iniquity of the
Times, that, upon what pretended Crime I know not, he was basely murdered in
the English Garrison at Air, Anno 1297; and the Fact was still the more horrid
that it was upon a Day of Truce, when a Justice Air had been proclaimed to be
held there. He left Issue by Cecil his Wife, Daughter of.. Sir Ronald his
Successor, and a Daughter... married to Sir Malcolm Wallace Knight, Mother by
him to the immortal Hero Sir William Wallace Governor of Scotland.

Sir Ronald Crawfurd, commonly called the Younger, was a strenuous Asserter of
the Honor and Independency of his Country, in Defense of which he lost his
Life, Anno 1303, leaving only a Daughter his sole Heir Susanne married to Sir
Duncan Campbel, Son of Sir Donald Campbel of Redcastle Charta penes Comitem de
Lowdon.
, who in the 12 th of King Robert I. had a Grant to himself and his Wife de
omnibus terris de Loudon and de Stenston, praedict. Duncanum and Susannam
sponsam suam hereditarie contingent. ratione dictae sponsae, and eorum
heredibus inter eos legitime procreatis; quibus deficientibus ad praefatam
Susannam and propinquiores heredes suos fine aliqua con tradictione reversuros.
Test. Bernardo Abbate de Arbroath Cancellario, Will. de Linasay Camerario
nostro, apud Penycook quarto Januarii, Anno Regni duodecimo Charta penes
Comitem de Lowdon.
. By the foresaid Susanne his Wife he left Issue

Sir Andrew his Son and Heir, who in the 30 th of King David II. had a Grant in
Reward of his Loyalty and Merit, of omnes terrae, reditus, and Burgagium in
villa and territorio de Innerbervy in Vic. de Kincardin Ibidem.
. He afterward resigned the Lands and Barony of Redcastle in Forfar Shire in
Favors of Sir Robert Stewart Knight, which is all I have found memorable of
him. By... Daughter of... his Wife he left Issue, Sir Hugh his Son and Heir,
who made a very great Figure in the Reign of King Robert III. and in that of
his Son and Successor James I. I find in 1423 he was one of the great Barons
who were appointed to attend and wait on King James from Durham to Scotland,
when he was relieved from his Captivity out of England Rymers Foedera Angliae
ad Annum 1423.
. By... Daughter of... his Wife he had Issue,

Sir George his Son and Heir, who was one of the Hostages for the Ransom of
King James I. Ibid.
. By his Wife Daughter of... Stewart of Darnly Martin's Genealogical Descent of
the House of Lowdon penes me.
he had

Sir George his Son and Heir, who had the Honor of Knighthood conferred on him
by King James II. in the 13. of whose Reign he resigned the Sheriffship of Air
Shire in the Sovereign's Hands for a new Gift in Favors of himself, which he
obtained, and to his Heirs Male for ever. By.. his Wife Daughter of... he had

Sir George his Son and Heir, who had a new Grant of the Sheriffship of
Air-Shire from King James IV. Anno 1489 Charta in pub. Archivis.
By his Wife, Daughter of... Lord Kennedy he had Issue Hugh his Successor,
George first of that Branch of the Campbels of Killoch Ibidem.
, likewise a Daughter Elizabeth, married to Robert Lord Erskine, Ancestor to
the Earl of Mar.

Which Hugh was made a Knight by King James IV. He married Isabel Daughter
of... Wallace of Craigy Gift by King James IV. to Sir Hugh Campbel of Lowdon
Knight, and Isabel Wallace his Spouse of the Ward of the Lands belonging to
John Wallace of Craigy, then in the King's Hands, through the Decease of
Hutcheon Wallace of Craigy his Father, in the 18th of the said King, Anno 1506,
in the Registers of the Privy Seal.
and departing this Life, Anno 1508 Charta in Rotulis Jacobi IV.
, left Issue, Hugh his Successor; and five Daughters.

Annabel married to Thomas Boswel of Auchinleck Charta in Rotulis Jacobi V. ad
Annum 1515, where she gets the Gift of the Ward of her Son David Boswel's
Lands, in Regard Thomas his Father was killed at Flowdon.
, and again to John Cunningham of Caprington Charta in Rotulis Jacobi V. ad
Annum 1521.
, and had Issue.

Helen to Laurence Crawfurd of Kilbiruy Charta penes Pat. Vicecomitem de
Garnock, ad Annum 1547.
, Ancestor to the Viscount of Garnock.

Isabel to Mungo Mure of Rowallan Charta in pub. Archivis.
in Vic. de Air, and had Issue.

Janet to John Campbel of Cesnock Ibidem ad Annum 1533.
, and had Issue.

Margaret to Thomas Kennedy of Bargany Charta in Rotulis Mariae Reginae ad
Annum 1558.
, in Vic de Air, and had Issue.

Sir Hugh Campbel of Lowdon was knighted by King James V. whom he served with
great Fidelity upon all Occasions. He marred first the Lady Elizabeth Stewart,
Daughter of Matthew Earl of Lennox Ibidem ad Annum 1535.
, and again Agnes Daughter of John Drummond of Innerpeffrey, and died in the
Month of February 1561 Ibidem ad Annum 1562.
. By the Lady Elizabeth his first Wife he left Issue,

Sir Matthew his Son and Heir, who was very zealous for the Reformation of
Religion, and yet very loyal to Queen Mary. When the War broke out in that
Reign, he was on the Queen's Side at the Battle of Langside, where he was taken
Prisoner, Anno 1568 Crawfurd's Memoirs.
.

He married Isabel Daughter of Sir John Drummond of Innerpeffrey Charta penes
Comitem de Lowdon.
, by Janet his Wife, natural Daughter of King James IV. By her he had several
Children, viz. Sir Hugh Campbel of Tarrinzen, thereafter Lord Lowdon.

Jean married 1 st to Robert Montgomery of Giffen, Master of Eglinton, and
after his Death to Ludovick Duke of Lennox Charta in Rotulis Jacobi VI ad Annum
1607.
.

Marion to Thomas Lord Boyd Charta penes Comitem de Kilmarnock.
, and had Issue.

Margaret to John Wallace of Craigy Charta in Rotulis Jacobi VI. ad Annum 1586.
, and had Issue.

Agnes to William Cunningham of Caprington Ibidem.
, and had Issue.

Isabel to William Crawfurd of Lochnoris Genealogy of the House of Lochnoris
penes me.
, and had Issue.

Jean to Sir Robert Maclellan, 1 st Lord Kirkcudbright.

Annabel to Daniel Ker of Kersland, and had Issue Charta penes Dom. Annam Ker
de Kersland.
; and again to David Dunbar of Enterkin.

Which Sir Hugh being a Gentleman of a fair Fortune, was by the Favor of King
James VI. first called to his Majesty's Council, and thereafter raised to the
Honor of Lord Lowdon, Anno 1604.

He married to his first Wife Margaret, Daughter of Sir John Gordon of
Lochinvar Charta in Rotulis Jacobi VI. ad Annum 1581.
, Ancestor to the Viscount of Kenmure: By whom he had

George Master of Lowdon his only Son, who dying in the Lifetime of his Father,
Anno 1612 Charta in Cancellaria S. D. N. Regis ad Annum 1612.
, left Issue by Jean Daughter of John Earl of Wigtoun, two Daughters, Margaret
Baroness of Lowdon, and Anne Wife of Sir Hugh Campbel of Cesnock, and had Issue.

Beside the Master his Son, his Lordship had also three Daughters, first
Juliana married to Sir John Campbel of Glenurchy Baronet, Sans Issue; second
Isabel to Sir John Maxwel of Pollock Knight, and had Issue; third Margaret to
John Kennedy of Blairquhan.

His second Wife was Isabel Daughter of William Earl of Gowrie, formerly Wife
of Sir Robert Gordon of Lochinvar, by whom he had two Daughters,... married to
Sir William Cunningham of Cunningham head, and... to David Crawfurd of Kerse.

He married to his third Wife Margaret, Daughter of Sir David Home of
Wedderburn, but by her he had not any Succession; and dying very aged on the 15
th of December 1622 Charta in pub. Archivis.
, his Estate and Honors devolved on

Margaret Baroness of Lowdon his Grandchild, who was married with John Campbel
Esquire at that Time Son and Heir of Sir James Campbel of Lawers This Sir James was
the lineal Descendant of John Campbel the Founder of the House of Lawers, who
was the eldest Son of Sir Colin Campbel of Glenurchy, by Margaret Stirling his
second Wife, a Daughter of the House of Keir.
, by Jean his Wife, Daughter of James Lord Colvil of Culross, whom his Majesty
King Charles I. honored with the Title of Earl of Lowdon Charta in Rotulis
Caroli I. ad Annum 1633.
, by Letters patent, bearing Date 12 th of May 1633, and that for the greater
Splendour of his Majesty's Coronation.

When the Troubles broke out in the Year 1637, the Earl of Lowdon was one of
the most leading of the Peers, who testified a Dislike of the Ways and Methods
had been taken in Reference to the Liturgy, and the other Innovations then
brought into the Church; and as soon as the Party who pressed for Reformation,
did resolve themselves into Societies, his Lordship was one of the Nobility who
were chosen to conduct their Affairs, and to represent their Grievances, which
he did in a Speech before the Council on the 21 st of December, to this
Purpose. "That by the Methods lately taken, it appeared there was an entire new
Model of Government in Church and State intended; That the late Service Book,
and the Book of Canons, which were then set out and imposed on the Nation, had
passed no Approbation of the Assembly, nor any Convocation of of the Clergy,
nor had been so much as communicated to the Privy Council, but appeared to be
so many new Laws imposed on the Kingdom by the King's sole Authority, contarary
to the established Laws of the Land, merely contrived by the Bishops, on whom
he craved Justice in a legal way."

When his Majesty had raised an Army against the Covenanters in 1639, and was
advanced as far as the Borders, my Lord Lowdon was one of the Peers who signed
an Address to the King, "Lamenting their ill Fortune, that their Enemies had so
great Credit with his Majesty as to persuade him to believe that they were or
could be disobedient to him; a Thing that could never enter into their loyal
Hearts; that they desired nothing but to be admitted into the Presence of their
gracious Sovereign, to lay their Grievances at his Royal Feet, and leave the
Determination of them entirely to his own Wisdom and Pleasure."

The Humility of the Style wrought so upon the King's Nature, who thought it
great Pity that any Blood should be spilt in a Contention which he himself
might put an End to by his own Royal Word, as soon as he should hear their
Complaints; That he easily consented to bring the Business to a fair Treaty, to
which the Earl was named one of the Commissioners upon the Part of the
Covenanters, and who accordingly met with such English Commissioners as his
Majesty was pleased to appoint at the Berks, where they entered upon, and
concluded a Pacification, whereby "The Armies were to be disbanded; an Act of
Oblivion passed; the King's Forts and Castles to be restored, and a Parliament
and a General Assembly to be called, for a full Settlement, and that thereby
all Factions and Animosities might be reconciled and composed." But this Peace
was of a very short Duration; for the Pacification being ill kept on both
Sides, the King disowning what had been said to have been transacted upon his
Part, and the Covenanters remitting nothing of their Zeal against the Bishops
and the Liturgy, having likewise entered a Protestation "That they did not
intend by any Thing contained in the Treaty to vacate any of the Proceedings
which had been in the late General Assembly of Glasgow:" By these Proceedings
the Breach became greater and wider, and Preparations for War began to be
renewed on both Sides with more Vigor than ever. But before Things should come
to the last Extremity, and that, if possible, Matters might be composed without
Blood, his Majesty thought fit to require the Covenanters to send some Persons
entrusted by their Body to attend him, to give an Account of their Proceedings,
and which was the Thing they always most desired. Accordingly certain
Commissioners were named, of which Number the Earl of Lowdon was one. At this
Time when the Commissioners repaired to London there happened to be a Letter
intercepted, and transmitted to his Majesty, that had been signed by the Earl
of Lowdon and the chief of the Covenanters, written to the French King, and
directed An Roy, a Style only used by Subjects to their natural King: "In which
they complained of the Hardness and Injustice of the Government that was
exercised over them, put him in mind of the Dependence Scotland formerly had
upon that Crown, and desired him now to take them into his Protection, and give
them Assistance Clarendon's History of the Civil War.
." This Letter being seen and perused by the Lords of the Council of England,
and the Lord Lowdon being examined, and refusing to give any other Answer than,
"That it was writ before the Agreement; and thereupon reserved, and never sent,
that if he had committed any Offense, he ought to be questioned for it in
Scotland, and not in England; and insisting upon his safe Conduct, demanded
Liberty to return." But notwithstanding all the Defenses the Earl was able to
make, he was committed Prisoner to the Tower, and tho his Commitment was highly
resented by the Parliament, as a Breach of the public Faith, yet he continued
in Prison some Months thereafter, till, by the Interposition and Intercession
of the Marquis of Hamilton, he was enlarged on the 27 th of June 1640 Burnet's
History of the two Dukes of Hamilton.
, when his Lordship renewed all Professions of Duty to the King, and a
Readiness to engage in his Service, as ^oon as he should return to his native
Country, (where his Power and Interest was as great as any Man's,) which he did
by disposing all those upon whom he had Influence to hearken to all Over tures
for a Peace with his Majesty. But notwithstanding all the Endeavors of the
Lord Lowdon and others, who heartily desired an Accommodation, Matters came to
a second Rupture, and upon a Party of the Covenanters having routed the Lord
Conway at Newburn, who appeared for the King, and having taken Newcastle, they
thought fit after that to present a humble Petition and Address to the King for
a new Treaty, which his Majesty condescending to, and Rippon being named the
Place of Meeting, the Earl of Lowdon was appointed one of the Commissioners for
the Treaty. But all they they did there was only to agree to a Cessation of
Arms, a safe Conduct being granted to his Lordship and the rest of his
Colleagues for going to London to carry on and conclude the Treaty there: Which
they did with all possible Diligence, and which his Majesty confirmed, and the
Lords of the Privy Council were made the Conservators of the Peace, during the
Interval of Parliaments.

The Peace betwixt the two Nations being thus happily concluded, it was judged
necessary that the Treaty should be ratified by the Parliament of Scotland,
which in the 1641, his Majesty was pleased to hold himself in his own Royal
Person, for the full Satisfaction of his People, and wherein all Particulars
that had been in Dispute were adjusted to the seeming Joy and Satisfaction of
every Man, and the Security of all that was then established was sufficiently
provided for. In the End of the Session his Majesty was pleased to bestow
Honors and Offices on some principal Persons, who had merited well at his
Hands, and who were best able to serve him; so the Chancellour's Place was
bestowed upon the Lord Lowdon, during Life, and that with the full Consent and
Approbation of the Parliament Rescinded Acts of Parliament.
, who looked on him, as he was throughout the whole Kingdom, as a very wise
Man, excellently fitted and qualified for the Discharge of that great Trust, as
the Exigence of Affairs then stood.

When the Civil War broke out in England, the Chancellor repaired to the King
at York Clarendon's History.
, when his Majesty did so fully satisfy his Lordship with the Justice and
Honor of his Carriage toward his English Parliament, that he wrote to the
Scots Commissioners at London, in the Name and by the Direction of the Lords of
the Secret Council; "That they should present to the two Houses, the deep Sense
they had of the Injuries and Indignities which were offered to the King, whose
just Rights they were bound to desend, and that they should conjure them to
bind up those Wounds which were made, and not to widen them by Sharpness of
Language, and to give his Majesty such real Security for his Safety among them,
by an effectual declaring against Tumults, and such other Actions as were
justly offensive to his Majesty, that he might be induced to reside nearer to
them, and comply with them in such Propositions as should be reasonably made
Ibid.
." Soon after which, taking leave of the King, his Lordship renewed all
imaginable Professions of Duty to his Majesty, and a Readiness to engage in his
Service; which the King was very well assured he could do.

In the 1643, the Chancellor was sent Commissioner from the Privy Council of
Scotland, who called themselves the Conservators of the Peace between the two
Kingdoms, to his Majesty while he was at Oxford, desiring to pass as a Mediator
betwixt the King and the two Houses in England, when his Lordship used all
Importunity and Arguments to persuade the King in private to consent to the
Alteration of the Government of the Church of England, assuring him that it
would be a Mean not only to hinder the Subjects of Scotland from adhering to
the English Parliament, but that it would oblige them to assist his Majesty to
the outmost, in the Vindication of all his Rights: But he found the King too
strongly fixed to be swayed, in what he thought a Case of Conscience, by a
Consideration of Convenience.

He then betook himself to his own proper Errand, which consisted of two Parts;
the one, to offer the Mediation of the Conservators of the Peace of the
Kingdom, for the Composure of the Differences between his Majesty and the two
Houses; the other, to desire his Majesty that he would summon a Parliament in
Scotland. In Answer to the first Demand of Mediation; His Majesty told him,
"That he could not find any color or pretense of Authority granted by the Act
of Pacification, by which the Commissioners for Scotland could conceive
themselves interested in a Faculty of Mediation; that the Clause mentioned by
them related only to the Differences that might grow between the two Nations,
which his Majesty said had been and should be inviolably observed by him; and
therefore he could not admit of any such Mediation as they proposed." For the
other Demand, of a Parliament in Scotland; The King told him and the rest of
the Commissioners, "That against the Time by which they could legally demand a
Parliament, naming the Day, which was to be on the first Tuesday of June 1644,
he would issue out his Writs, and there being no emergent Cause to do it
sooner, he would forbear to put his Subjects there to that Trouble, which those
Meetings (how necessary soever) would naturally carry with them." So his
Lordship perceiving that he should not receive Satisfaction in either of these
Proposals, at last returned home re infecta.

In the 1644, when his Majesty did renew his Offer of Peace to the two Houses
of Parliament, which they likewise agreeing to, and Uxbridge being assigned for
the Place of Meeting, the Chancellor, the Earl of Lawderdale, Sir Charles
Erskine, and Mr. Robert Barclay Member of Parliament for the Burgh of Irvine,
and Mr. Alexander Henderson (in Matters only which related to the Church) were
sent Commissioners from Scotland: But that Treaty unhappily coming to nothing,
a bloody civil War thereupon ensued.

When the King put himself into the Scots Army before Newwark, and the English
positively demanded the Delivery up of the King's Person, the Earl of Lowdon
was appointed to treat with the Parliament of England about that important
Affair, where, in a free Conference with the two Houses, he publicly declared,
"That an eternal Infamy would ly upon the whole Nation, if they should deliver
up the Person of the King, the securing of which was equally their Duty, as it
was the Parliament's, and the Disposal of his Person in order to that Security,
did equally belong to them as to the Parliament: However he said, he would use
all the Persuasion, and all the Importunity he could with the King, that his
Majesty might yield and consent to the Propositions the Parliament had sent to
him."

In the 1647, the Lord Chancellor was one of the Commissioners appointed to
attend the King from the Parliament of Scotland, while he was at the Isle of
Wight, to treat with his Majesty anent a full Accommodation with that Kingdom,
and which they at last concluded on Terms of great Advantage to the Nation; in
Recompense of which, the Chancellor and his Colleagues undertook to raise an
Army to rescue and relieve his Majesty from the Captivity he was then under,
and to restore him to his just Rights, and that no Time might be lost, as soon
as the Treaty was signed, the Chancellor departed for Scotland, where (at
first) he used his outmost Endeavors to procure such Persons to be elected
Members to the Parliament, as he knew to be most inclined to the Service in
hand, in which the Honor of the Country was so much concerned.

When the Parliament met on the 2d of March 1648 Rescinded Acts.
, the Lord Chancellor was chosen President of the Convention, wherein he
employed all his Power and Interest to bring the Parliament to comply with the
Engagement and declare for the King; and tho the Affair met with great
Opposition, yet the Resolution was carried in putting the Country in a Posture
Defense, and raising an Army to relieve the King. I need not here recount the
Fate of that Army which marched into England under the Conduct of the Duke of
Hamilton, nor how unsuccesfull it proved for the Design it was intended. ( b)
Cromwell's Indemnity to the People of Scotland.
All I shall further observe is, that as there had been a Party in the
Parliament whom the King's Concessions did not satisfy, so they declared
against the Engagement as unlawful and ungodly, and the violent Party of the
Clergy joining with them, they passed an Act against the Engagers, that was,
all those who had been the Promoters of it, ranking them into several Classes,
whereby they were excluded from all Offices of public Trust, and vote in
Parliament till they had satisfied the Church by a public Profession of their
Repentance, for their Accession to the unlawful Engagement as it was called.

When the Parliament met, after the Murder of King Charles I. the Lord
Chancellor was chosen President of that Session, who by their 14 Act,
proclaimed King Charles II. It Is beyond all Doubt the Chancellor gave all
imaginable Assistance he could to bring over the King from Holland, and to
raise the Army that marched with his Majesty into England, but that Army being
unhappily defeated at Worcester, and the Usurpers absolutely prevailing over
all the three Kingdoms; the Chancellor was not only outed of his Office, but
was for ced, for the Security of his Person, to fly to the Highlands, where he
lay concealed, till the Earl of Glencairn by virtue of his Majesty's Commission
drew together a small Body of Horse and Foot for his Majesty's Service, that
the Earl of Lowdon repaired to him, for which he was for^eited by the Powers
that then prevailed; and thereafter when Cromwell granted an Indemnity to the
People of Scotland, both the Earl of Lowdon and the Lord Machline his Son were
particularly excepted. After which his Lordship the Chancellor continued in
the Hills till all Hope of serving the King was given over, that he capitulated
to lay down his Arms, and live quietly at his own House, which he did in a
Country Retirement, till it pleased God to bring back King Charles II. to his
Throne, which the Lord Lowdon did not long survive, for he died in the
Beginning of the 1663. This noble Lord left Issue by Margaret Baroness of
Lowdon, his Wife aforesaid, James his Successor, Lady Jean married to George
Earl of Panmure, Lady Anne to John Lord Balmerino.

Which James married Margaret Daughter of Hugh Earl of Eglingtoun, and dying
Anno 1683, left Issue, Hugh his Successor in the Honor, Colonel John Campbel
of Shankstoun, and Colonel James Campbel, Colonel of the Royal Gray-Dragoons,
likewise four Daughters.

1 st, Margaret married to Colin Earl of Balcarras.

2 d, Jean to Sir James Campbel of Aberuchel Baronet.

3 d, Christian to George Ross of Galstoun, in Vic de Air.

4 th, Eleanor to James 1 st Viscount of Primrose, and again to John 2 d Earl
of Stair.

Hugh Earl of Lowdon being a Nobleman of Parts and Abilities, was first
constituted one of the Lords of the Privy Council to King William, and then
named one of the Extraordinary Lords of the Session Anno 1699.

In 1704 his Lordship was made one of the Lords of the Thesaury and one of her
Majesty's Knights of the most noble Order of the Thistle; and the next ensuing
Year her Majesty Queen Anne was pleased to prefer him to be one of the
principal Secretary's of State: In which Station his Lordship served first in
Conjunction with the Marquis of Annandale, and thereafter with the Earl of Mar,
to the general Satisfaction of all Men, and the universal Approbation of the
whole Nation, till after the Union of the Kingdom, that in the 1708 the Scots
Secretary-Office was taken away; in Lieu of which, his Lordship was made Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal, which Office he held till the Year 1713 he was
removed, and the Earl of Finlater got the Great Seal, with the Title of Lord
Chancellor of Scotland.

After the Accession of King George to the Crown, the Earl of Lowdon was made
Lord Lieutenant of Air shire, Anno 1715. And I cannot but remark that this
noble Lord has ever been since the Union, and now is one of the most honorable
Privy Council of Great Britain. He married Margaret Daughter of John 1 st Earl
of Stair, by whom he had Issue

John Lord Machline.

Lady Margaret.

Lady Jean.

ARMS.
Gyronee of Eight Pieces Ermine and Gules, supported on the Dexter, with a
Chevalier holding a Lance in his Hand, and on the Sinister, with a Lady holding
a Letter of Challenge in her Hand. Crest a Phoenix displayed; proper. Motto, I
bide my Time.

LYLE, Lord Lyle.
SOme who have enquired into the Antiquity of Sirnames with much Curiosity,
think that the first Ancestor of this Family was one of those Scotsmen who fled
from the Usurpation of Mackbeath into England, and returned with Edgar Atheling
and his Sister the Princess Margaret, afterward Wife to King Malcolm Canmore,
upon the Invasion by William the Conqueror, and got Possessions in the Isle of
Bute, in the Western Parts of this Realm, from whence they took the Demonation
of Le Isle, which they kept after they came to be settled upon the Continent at
Duchal-Castle in Renfrew-shire. Tho I have not seen directly any Mention of
them till King William's Time, that William de Isle is one of the Witnesses to
that Deed, which Walterus Dapifer Regis made to the Monks of Paisley, when he
founded that Convent of the Lands of Espinder Chartulary of Paisley.
. He is the same Person, as I take it, who is one of the Barons taken Prisoner
with King William at the Battle of Alnwick Rymer's Foedera.
on the 13th July 1174.

The next in order of Succession, if not his Son, to be taken notice of is
Radulphus de Isle, who is a Witness to the Donation, which Baldwin de Bigris,
Sheriff of Lanerk made to the Abbot and Convent of Paisley, and to the Monks
serving GOD there, as the Gift bears, in pure Alms, Ecclesiam de Innerkip cum
tota illa terra inter tumulos ubi Ecclesia est fundata, ita libere sicut dicti
Monachi possident reliquas Ecclesias de Strath-Grief, ex dono Walteri filii
Alani-Dapiferi Regis Scotiae.

The next of this Lineage is Alanus de Isle, who is a Witness to that Excambion
which Walter High Steward of Scotland made of the Lands of Kylingtoun for the
Lands of Innerweek, the Tithes of which he made over to the Abbot of Paisley,
for the Welfare of himself and his Successors, both here and hereafter
Chartulary of Paisley.
. He is also to be found in the Confirmation which Alexander High Steward of
Scotland made to the Monks of Paisley, of all the Donations made by himself or
his Ancestors down to that Period of Time, in the Year of our Lord 1151.

Radulphus de Isle, Insula, dominus de Duchal, probably the Son of the former,
is Witness to the Vendition of the Lands of Aldingstoun to the Abbot of
Paisley, and his Title being added to the Surname, is an undoubted Evidence
that he was then a very remarkable Person; for I cannot but observe, that this
is the very first time I have found any in the Western Parts adding a local
Title to the Surname.

In the grand Competition betwixt Bruce and Baliol for the Crown, Sir Walter
Lyle was upon the Bruce's Side, as his Friend and Namesake; Sir Allan Lyle was
upon the Baliol's afterward, and adhered to the Interest of Edward Baliol, in
all the Turns of the Times: In Consideration whereof, upon his coming to the
Crown, he made him Sheriff and Governor of Bute, and Lord High Chamberlain of
Scotland Sir James Balfour's List of Chamberlains.
. But whether this Sir Alan Lyle was the Head and Representative, or only a
Branch of the Family, I do not know; however it is certain, that John Lyle of
Duchal was in Favor with King David Bruce, in the 39th of whose Reign he had a
Grant to himself and Margaret de Vauss his Wife, of the King's Lands of
Buch^^han, in the County of Stirling, and to their Heirs Charta in Rotulis Dav.
11.
: After which he obtained the Honor of Knighthood; for I have found him
designed Joannes de Lyle Dominus de Duchal M^les, in a Charter of Confirmation
by Alan Erskine of Baruchan to Sir Robert Erskine, of the Lands of Dunerbook
and Achintorly, in the End of King David's Reign. He left a Son

John, whom I have found designed Filio and haeredi apparents Joannis Lyle de
Duchal, militis, in Charters of King Robert II. when Earl of Strathern, He
married a Lady who was one of the Coheirs of the Earldom of Mar, though I know
not precisely who she was: But in her Right the Lord Lyle, in the Time of King
James II. laid Claim to a Part of that Estate, and from thenceforth added the
Coat of Mar to his Paternal Arms. This John was succeeded by his Son

Robert Lyle, styled Chevalier de Duchal, in the Letters of safe Conduct that
were granted by the King of England, to a Number of great Men of Scotland, to
come into his Dominions in the 1422, to wait on King James home, when he was
relieved from his Captivity out of England. I find he was also one of the
Hostages for the King's Ransom Rymer's foedera.
. When the King possessed himself of the Earldom of Mar, upon the Death of
Alexander Stewart Earl of Mar, who was not born in lawful Marriage he put in
his Claim as one of the Heirs of that Earldom, to which he and the Lord Erskine
should have succeeded by Right and Proximity of Blood, as Fordon's Continuator
says, Anno 1438, Obiit Alexander Stewart Comes de Mar, and quia Bastardus
erat, Rex illi successit, quamvis jure haereditario Domini Erskine and Lyle
successisse debuissent. It Is probable the King componed with Sir Robert Lyle
about his Right, for in all the Disputes betwixt the King and the Lord Erskine
about his Claim to the Half of the Earldom of Mar, there is no Mention made of
his Title. He married.... Daughter of Sir William Stewart of Castlemilk, Charta
in Publ. Archivis.
by whom he had Robert his Son and Heir, who in the Reign of King James II. was
raised to the Peerage of this Realm, by the Title of Lord Lyle: For in a
Charter of Lands by him to Sir John de Ross of Haulkhead, Anno 1445, he is
designed Dominus de Douchal; and in a Confirmation of the same Charter, under
the Great Seal in the Year 1458, he is designed, Dilectus Consanguineus Noster
Robertus Dominus Lyle, which does plainly show the Time he was raised to the
Honor; after which he had sundry Grants from the Crown, particularly of the
Royal Castle of Re^frew, with the Orchards and Meadows, for the Payment of a
Tack-duty of Five Pounds yearly to the King's Exchequer Charta penes D. Ross.
. He founded a Hermitage at Side, within the Barony of Duchal, and a Chantry
within the Abbey Church of Paisly, for celebrating Divine Service for the
Health of his Soul, the Souls of his Ancestors and Successors for ever, to
which he gives the Fishing of Crockat-shot upon Clyde Anno 1452. He married
first Elizabeth Daughter of Andrew Gray Lord of Fowlis Charta penes D. Gray.
; and next Margaret, Daughter of.... Wallace of..... by whom he had Robert Lord
Lyle, and a Daughter Agnes married to Alan Lyle of Craigbra^ Charta in Publ.
Archivis.
.

Which Robert did very remark ably distinguish himself in his Service to his
Country, in the time of James III. In the 1472, being then one of the King's
Privy Council, he was joined in Commission with diverse Lords and Barons, to
treat upon a Truce with the English; which being concluded, he was again named
one of the Ambassadors on the Part of Scotland, to treat of a Marriage betwixt
the Prince of Scotland, and Anne Daughter of John Duke of Suffolk: At which
times a Truce was agreed on between the two Nations, from the 29 September
1484, for the full Term of three Years thereafter Rymer's foedera.
, he being named one of the Conservators thereof. Likewise in May 1488 he was
one of the Commissioners sent into England, to treat with that State, anent the
keeping of a firm and lasting Peace betwixt the two Crowns. Before their return
Home, the King being killed at the Battle of Stirling, his Lordship was by Act
of Parliament appointed one of the Privy Council to King James IV. Black Acts
of Parliament.
, and constituted Justice General by South the River of Forth Charta in Publ.
Arch.
.

But notwithstanding of these Promotions, his Lordship being dissatisfied with
the Measures that had been taken in Reference to the late King, he together
with Matthew Master of Lennox took up Arms, in order to revenge his Death, but
was defeated in the Attempt by the Lord Drummond, for which he was forfeited;
But again restored upon the general Indemnity Anno 1491, and restored to be
Justiciary by South the Water of Forth Charta penes Jacobum Montgomery de
Lainshaw.
. Which Office he discharged with Courage and Fidelity for several Years
thereafter. He married first.... Daughter of John Seaton Son and Heir apparent
of George Lord Seaton, and again Elizabeth Daughter of Archbald Earl of Angus,
and had Issue, Robert his Successor, George Lyle of Langlebank, Margaret
married to James Stewart of Blackhal Charta in Publ. Arch.
, Marion to Peter Houstoun Esquire Ibidem.
and Agnes to John Maxwel of Stainly.

Robert Lord Lyle his Son married Marion Daughter of.... Lindsay of Dunrod, and
dying Anno 1511, left Issue, John his Son and Heir, and two Daughters, Agnes
married to Alan Cathcart, at that time Son and Heir apparent of John Lord
Cathcart Ibidem.
, and Katharine to Archibald Macklachlane of that Ilk.

Which John, being under Age at the Death of his Father, the Ward and Benefit
of his Marriage was assigned by his Majesty King James IV. to James Bishop of
Glasgow, whose Niece Elizabeth, Daughter of Sir David Beaton of Crich, Lord
High Treasurer of Scotland; a very good Alliance, though she was only a
Gentlewoman; (for the Countess of Arran and the Lady Buckcleuch were Daughters
of the same Family,) he had by her James, Master of Lyle, and a Daughter Jean
married to Sir Neil Montgomery of Lainshaw. This Lord upon the Death of King
James V. was one of the Peers who entered into a solemn Association to maintain
and defend the Infant Queen Mary against all Assaults either of Scots Men or
English Men, who were in the Interest of England. The Master of Lyle being a
profuse Man and of no Expectation, the Father caused first interdict him: But
that Method proving ineffectual, he resolved to dispose of his Estate to his
Daughter and her Heirs, and that he might more easily and securely convoy it to
her and her Children, he disposed of a great many considerable Baronies in a
short Time, and upon the Master's Death Sir Neil Montgomery came to be the Heir
of this Ancient Noble Family N^tandum, I find, that upon the Death of John Lord
Lyle, Jean Lyle his Daughter and Heir, with Consent of Sir Neil Montgomery of
Lainshaw her Spouse, makes several Transactions with those who had acquired her
Father's Estate, particularly with Sir Colin Campbel of Lundy, about the Barony
of Lundy, the Instructions of which are still in the Hands of James Montgomery
of Lainshaw his Heir of Line. This Sir Neil Montgomery by Jean Lyle his Wife,
had Sir Neil his Successor, and two Daughters.... married to the Lord of
Ardross, and Margaret to John Pollock of that Ilk. Which Neil as Heir to John
Lord Lyle, and Jean Lyle his Mother, made an Agreement with William Porterfield
of that Ilk, about his Right to the Mains and Forty Shillings Land of Duchal
Anno 1599, which had been long in dispute betwixt them. His Wife was Elizabeth
Daughter of... Cuningham of Aiket he had Neil his Successor, John Montgomery of
Cocklibee, and William Montgomery of Bridgend; of whom the Montgomeries of
Bridgend, Belliskeoch, Clonies and Beoch are descended, and two Daughters...
to... Graham of Grugar, and... to... Johnstoun of Wamfr^y. Neil Montgomery next
of Lainshaw married Marion Daughter of Sir William Muir of Rowalan, and had
Neil his Successor, Jean married to William Buntin of Airdoch... to...
Montgomery of Achinhood... to... Campbel of Skeldon... to... Houstoun of Park.
Neil Montgomery next of Lainshaw married Margaret Daughter of... Lockhart of
Bar, and had John his Son, who married Helen Daughter of Sir Lodovick Houstoun
of that Ilk, but having no Issue they disponed their Estate to their Cousin and
Heir-Male David Montgomery eldest Son of John Montgomery of Cocklibee: Which
John married first... Cuningham Daughter to Cuninghame of chinharvie, and had a
Daughter Jean married to William Caldwel of that Ilk. Secondly, Jean Daughter
of Captain Daniel Forrester of the House of Carden, Envoy in King James V ^'s
Time to Italy and Spain; by whom he had David Montgomery of Lainshaw, John
Montgomery of Crivock, and four Daughters. Agnes married to Thomas Kennedy of
Kirkmichael. Karharine to Fergus Macubin of Knockdolian. Barbara to William
Montgomery of Belliskeoch. Margaret to Mr. Miller Minister at Neilstoun. David
Montgomery of Lainshaw his Son married Marion Daughter of James Dunlop of that
Ilk, and had James Montgomery of Lainshaw, and a Daughter Jean married to the
Reverend Mr. Laing Parson of Donachadee. Which James upon the Revolution, was
made Clerk to the Justiciary during Life; which he at present enjoys, and is
married with Barbara Daughter of John Kennedy of Craig, Heir and Representative
of an ancient Family of the Kennedies of Barc^anachan in Air-shire.
. And since the Right of Blood does not prescribe his Heirs may claim the Lord
Lyle's Honors when they think fit.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th, Azure a Bend betwixt six Cross Croslets, Or, a Frete
Gules, 2d and 3d, Or, Supporters two Cats Sable. Crest, a Cock crowing. Motto,
An I may.

DRUMMOND, Lord Maderty.
THE first of this Family was James Drummond Commendator of Inchaffrey, Son to
David Lord Drummond by Lilias his Wife, Daughter of William Lord Ruthven, who
having acquired a Right to the Monastery of Inchaffrey from Alexander Gordon
Bishop of Galloway, then Commendator of that Convent, had by the favor of King
James VI. the Lands and Tithes which composed that Benefice erected to him in a
temporal Lordship by the Style of Lord Maderty Anno 1607. He married Jean
Daughter of Sir James Chisholm of Cromlix, and had Issue, John Lord Maderty,
Sir James Drummond of Machany; likewise four Daughters.

1 st Lilias married to Lawrence Lord Oliphant.

2 d Jean to Andrew Wood of Largo in vic. de Fife.

3 d Margaret to James Muirhead of Braidesholm in Vic. de Lanerk.

4 th Katherine to Andrew 1 st Lord Rollo.

John 2 d Lord Maderty married Margaret Daughter of Patrick 1 st Lord Lindores;
and had two Sons, David his Successor, and Lieutenant General William Drummond
of Cromlix, 1 st Viscount of Strathalan, and three Daughters.

1 st Anne married to Patrick Rattray of Craighal in Vic. de Perth.

2 d Jean to Patrick Graham of Inchbracko, in Vic. de Perth.

3 d Margaret to Sir Robert Crichtoun, alias Murray of Cookpool Knight.

Which David married Beatrix, Daughter of John Earl of Montrose; by whom he had
three Daughters, Margaret married to John Graham Son to Patrick Graham of
Inchbracko, Post-Master-General of Scotland. Beatrix to John 1 st Earl of
Hindford, Mary to John Halden of Gleneagles, the Dignity of Lord Maderty
falling to William Viscount of Strathalan his Nephew.

MAR, Earl of Mar.
WE shall look no further back into the Antiquity of this noble illustrious
Family, than the Reign of King Alexander I. in the seventh Year of which 1114,
Gratnach Comes Earl of Mar was one of the Nobles who gave their Assent to that
Prince's founding the Priory of Scoon for Augustine Monks Chartulary of Scoon,
in the Custody of the Viscount of Stormont.
, which is all I have discovered of him.

The next in order of Succession of this illustrious House is Morgund Comes,
Earl of Mar, who is one of the Witnesses to that Deed which King David made to
the Monks of Dumfermling, of the Lands of Balchristan Chartul. of Dumfermling,
This Morgund Comes is also a Witness to the Mortification which King Malcolm
made of the Lands of Inchmalder to that Convent pro anima Regis i avidis avi
sui.
, for the health of his Soul. This Earl imitated the Piety of the King in his
Liberality to the Church; for he gave Deo and Ecclesiae Sancti Andreae and
Canonicis ibidem Deo servientibus and servituris Ecclesiam sancti Mathulnoth de
Thartulend, cum decimis and oblationibus eidem Ecclesiae pertinentibus cum
Molendino in eadem terra sundato, and unam carrucatam terrae quae dicitur
Gochilstoun, pro salute animae suae, and Agnetis Comitissae sponsae meae omnium
antecessorum and successorum meorum in perpetuum Chartulary of the Priory of
St. Andrew's, in the Hands of Mr. Samuel Semple Minister of the Gospel at
Libertoun.
. By the said Agnes his Wife he had three Sons, Gilchrist and Duncan,
successively Earls of Mar. and Malcolm who ratified and confirmed the Grant of
the Church of Mulnoth, to the Priory of St. Andrew's Charta in Biblioth. jurid.
^din.
. In which Deed he is designed Malcolmus filius Morgundi Comitis de Mar.

Gilchrist Earl of Mar made a considerable Figure in the time of King William,
he is a frequent Witness in the Deeds of that Prince to the Episcopal See of
Murray, to which he was himself a Benefactor by his Gift of the Church of
Aberdour, which had been formerly in dispute between him and Brice Bishop of
Murray, they both making over their respective Claims to the Monks of
Dumfermling at the King's special Instance Charta in Bibliotheca Juridica.
Chart. of Dumfermling. This Earl Gilchrist is much earlier found mentioned than
Earl Duncan, which makes me think he was the elder of the Brothers, as will, by
the Authorities here cited, appear.
. He dying without Issue.

Duncan his Brother fell to be Earl of Mar, of whose Munificence to the Church
there is this Memorial, viz. that he gave Deo and Sancta Maria de Minimus, and
Keldeis ibidem Deo servientibus Ecclesiam de Lochyl, pro anima Domini sui
Willelmi Regis and pro anima Morgundi Comitis de Mar patris sui, and Agnetis
Comitissae matris suae antecessorum and successorum suorum, and pro salute and
prosperitate Domini sui Alexandri Regis and omnium suorum, and pro prosperitate
sui ipsius, and uxoris suae and ^mnium Heredum Register of the Priory of St.
Andrews.
. This Duncan left Issue

William Earl of Mar, who in the 5 th of King Alexander III. was constituted
Lord High Chamberlain of Scotland, in place of Henry de Baliol Chartul. of
Dumfermling.
. Also in the 1250 he is one of the Peers, who entered into a solemn Agreement
with the Welsh that Scotland shall not make a separate Peace with the English
without the Consent of that State Rymer's foedera.
: He was likewise a Benefactor to the Prior and Canons of St. Andrews, and
ratified the Donations which Morgund Comes avus suus and Agnes Comi tissa avia
sua fecerunt dictis Monachis Ecclesiae de Umycht Register of the Priory of St.
Andrews.
decimo Calendas Februarii M.CCLX.

Donald Earl of Mar his Son This Donald and Duncan his Brother are both
Witnesses, in their Father's Mortification to St. Andrews abovementioned.
, in the 1284 was one of the Nobility who obliged themselves to own and
acknowledge Margaret the Maiden of Norway, as lawful Queen of Scotland, in case
that King Alexander III. her Grandfather should die without Heirs Male of his
Body Rymer's foedera.
. Upon the Death of that Princess when the grand Competition for the Crown
arose, he openly declared for the Right of Robert de Bruce; but the contrary
Faction prevailing, he was obliged to submit to the Fate of the Nation at that
Time, and afterward to take an Oath of Fidelity to the prevailing Power of
Edward I. of England, when he had overrun Scotland. This Earl dying in or
about the 1294, left Issue, but by whom I have not discovered, a Son Gratney
his Successor, and a Daughter Isabel married to King Robert Bruce, by whom he
had only one Daughter, the Princess Marj^ry Wife of Walter Lord High Steward of
Scotland, Mother by him to King Robert II. first of the Stewartine Line.

Of Gratney Earl of Mar History has taken no Notice, save that he married....
Bruce Daughter to Robert Earl of Carrick Mr. Andrew Winton's History of
Scotland MS. in Biblioth. J^rid.
, and Sister to King Robert I. by whom he had Donald his Successor, and Helen
married to Sir John Montieth Knight, by whom he had one Daughter Christian,
married to Sir Edward Keith, whose only Daughter and Heir Janet was married to
Thomas Lord Erskine, Mother by him to Robert Lord Erskine, who laid Claim to
the half of the Earldom of Mar in the Reign of King James II.

Donald Earl of Mar made a very considerable Figure in all the Transactions of
the Times he lived in; for no sooner did his Uncle King Robert Bruce take the
Fields in the Year 1306, in order to free his Country from the Yoke of
Servitude it was under, than this noble Earl joined with him, and fought
stoutly in his behalf, a^ the Battle of Methven, against the English, where he
had the hard Fate to be taken Prisoner, and sent to England, where he endured a
long and tedious Imprisonment, of no less than eight Years, till after the
Battle of Bannockburn, he was exchanged for another Person of Quality Anno 1314
Rymer's foedera.
. How, or where he passed the rest of his Life, till the 1331, I cannot take
upon me to ascertain, that Thomas Earl of Murray (Governor of Scotland in the
Nonage of King David Bruce dying,) the Earl was chosen Guardian of that part of
Scotland that lies upon the North side of Forth: But he did not long enjoy the
Honor, for he lost his Life at the Battle of Duplin, on the 3 d of August 1332
Mackenzie.
, leaving Issue by Isabel his Wife, Daughter of Sir Alexander Stewart of
Bonkill, Sister to John Earl of Angus History of the Royal Family of Stewart.
, Thomas his Son and Heir, and a Daughter Margaret married to William 1 st Earl
of Douglas, and again to Sir John Swinton I have seen a Charter granted by
James Earl of Douglas and Mar, to the Monks of Melross in the 1388, in which
this Sir John Swinton is called the Earl's dearest Father.
Knight.

Thomas Earl of Mar in the 29 th of King David II. Anno 1358 executed the
Office of Lord High Chamberlain of Scotland I have seen a Charter for this in
my hands.
. He married first the Heir of the Montieth Family Fordon. Much about this
time, I find the Earl granting a Charter, Adae de Strachan and Margaretae
Sponsae suae cousanguineae dicti Comitis de una Davata Terrae quae vocatur
Glenkindy, still extant in the Lord of Glenkindy's hands, which I have seen.
, and next Margaret eldest Daughter and Coheir of Thomas Stewart Earl of Angus,
but dying without Issue in the Year 1379, his Estate and Honor devolved to
Margaret Countess of Douglas his Sister, who convoyed the Honor of Mar to
James Earl of Douglas her Son, who being slain at the Battle of Otterburn on
the 31 of July 1388, without any Child of his own Body, Lady Isabel Douglas his
Sister was Heir to him in the Earldom of Mar. She married first Sir Malcolm
Drummond of Cargil, who in her Right was entitled Lord of Mar; but she being
left a Widow by him, without any surviving Children, remarried Sir Alexander
Stewart eldest Son of Alexander Earl of Buchan, Brother to King Robert III.
when she resigned the Earldom of Mar and Lordship of Garioch, which was vested
and seized in her Person, in the hands of King Robert III. for new Infeftment
to them and the Heirs of the Marriage; failing of which to the Heirs of the
said Sir Alexander Stewart, bearing Date on the 12 th of August 1404 Chart in
Rotulis Rob. III.
, whereupon he was styled Earl of Mar, and as such in the 1406 was one of the
Ambassadors sent from Scotland, to treat with the English for the Prorogation
of a Peace betwixt the two Crowns Rymer's foedera.
, which was done accordingly. In the 1411 he commanded the Royal Army at the
Battle of Harlaw, against Donald Earl of Ross, and having made a great
Slaughter upon the Highlanders, effectually secured the Government against the
like Attempts for many Years thereafter: But tho he had great Wealth at home,
yet he showed himself so averse to Idleness and Pleasure, that with a gallant
Company of his Countrymen Volunteers, he went over to the Low Countries after
the Battle of Harlaw, and entered into the Service of the Duke of Burgundy
Abercromby.
, where he made so fine a Figure in that Country, that after the Death of his
first Lady, he gained the Countess of Holland in Marriage, and in her Right
laid Claim to that Sovereignty. But the Hollanders would not submit to the
Government of a Foreigner, which obliged him to return to Scotland in the Reign
of King Jomes I. in whose hands he resigned the Earldom of Mar, in favors of
Sir Thomas Stewart his Natural Son Charta in Rotulis Jac. I.
, reserving his own Liferent; but he dying without Issue, as well as his
Father, whom Death overtook in the Year 1436, there arose a Competition betwixt
the King and Robert Lord Erskine about the Earldom of Mar, the main Plea for
the King was a Right from the last Earl. It was pleaded in behalf of the Lord
Erskine that his Right was derived from his Ancestors by Proximity of Blood, as
nearest Heir of Lady Isabel Douglas the last Countess of Mar. In the End
Judgment was given against his Lordship, in favors of the King, who thereupon
possessed himself of the Earldom of Mar, and annexed it to the Crown, where it
continued till King James II. gave it to his Brother John then created Earl of
Mar Charta in publ. Archivis.
: But he dying without Issue, it fell back again to the Crown, where it
remained till the 1562, Queen Mary erected it into an Earldom, in Favors of
James Prior of St. Andrews her natural Brother, and thereafter restored John
Lord Erskine to be Earl of Mar by way of Justice Anno 1565, in lieu of which
the other noble Lord was made Earl of Murray.

ERSKINE, Earl of Mar.
Although it is not above three hundred Years since the Erskines had any Title to
the Earldom of Mar, yet this illustrious Family considered in it self is very
great and eminent, if we respect either its Antiquity, or the many great
Employments and Perferments they have been honored with these four Hundred
Years past, and tho I cannot show the precise Time when, or by whom the Name
was first assumed, yet it is certain, it was derived from the Barony of Erskine
in the Shire of Renfrew, and so being a local Surname, is of Consequence very
ancient; tho the first mention I have found of them, is no higher than the Time
of King Alexander II. in the 12 th of whose Reign Henry de Erskine is Witness
in the Gift which Amelick Brother of Maldwin, Earl of Lennox, made to the
Chanons of Paisly of the Patronage of the Church of Roseneth, with the Tithes
thereunto belonging, for the welfare of the King his Sovereign Lord Char. of
Paisly ad Annum 12^6.
. Sir John de Erskine Knight his Successor is a Witness to that Donation, which
Walter Stewart Earl of Montieth made to the Abbot of Paisly of the Church of
St. Colmonel, for the Good of his Soul, according to the Devotion of those Days
Ibidem ad Annum 1262.
. He was the Father of Sir John de Erskine, and he of William, who succeeded
him in the Barony of Erskine, and of John who obtained a Grant from James High
Steward of Scotland of sundry Lands within his Tenement of Largis; in which
Deed he is designed Joannes de Erskine filius Joannis de Erskine filii and
heredis Joannis de Erskine Militis This Charter I have seen, and it is a noble
Document for the Family of Mar, for it distinctly instructs three distinct
Generations, and tho it be without Date, yet it is certainly before the 1309
that the Granter died, I apprehend it has been about the 1300 from the
Witnesses. Viz. To. Episc. Glasguen, Reginald. de Crawfurd, Milite Joann, de
Erskine, Walter. de Logan, etc.
, reserving the Lands which William the Son of Sir John Erskine, held of him
there.

Sir William Erskine the next of this Noble Family, was a forward Asserter of
the Right of King Robert Bruce, to whose Interest faithfully adhering, he was
one of those Patriots, who in the 1322 joined the Earl of Murray and Sir James
Douglas, when they made an Expedition into England, where his gallant Behavior
procured him the Honor of Knighthood Barber and Abercromby.
and other Marks of the royal Favor. He le^t behind him two Sons Robert his
Successor, and Sir Alan Erskine who ^^^^ined the Barony of Inchmartine in Perth
Shire, by the marriage of the Heir of Sir John of Inchmartine Knight, which
came the same way to the Glens, and so to Sir Andrew Ogilvy Ancestor to the
Earl of Finlater in the Reign of King James II.

Which Sir Robert Erskine of Erskine being a Person well versed both in Peace
and War, was no less conspicuous for his firm and steadfast Loyalty to King
David, than his Father had been to King Robert, even when his Interest was at
the very lowest, and the Usurper Baliol upon the Throne; for as soon as the
Loyalists took the Fields, and Declared for their lawful Sovereign, Sir Robert
Erskine joined the Lord High Steward and other Patriots, who fought with, and
defeated the Rebels, and thereby recovered a great part of the Country to the
King's Obedience; for which he was afterward rewarded as his singular Merit
deserved.

When a Treaty was set on Foot for redeeming King David from Captivity, when he
was taken Prisoner at the Battle of Durham Anno 1346, Sir Robert Erskine Lord
of Erskine, as he is called in the Record, was one of the Commissioners
employed in that honorable Negotiation Rymer's foedera.
; but that Treaty not taking effect, he was always one of the Plenipotentiaries
that were appointed for the same purpose, and renewed every Year, tho all of
them were unsuccessful till the 1357, that Robert Lord High Steward, Guardian
of Scotland, then commissioned Sir Robert Erskine and other Noble Persons to
treat about the Redemption of the King, and a final Peace with the English
Nation, who at length agreed, that King David should be released, set free, and
ransomed for 100000 Merks Sterling Money, to be paid Yearly by 10000 Merks,
till the whole Sum was paid; to which no Man seems to have contributed more
frankly than Sir Robert, and gave his eldest Son one of the Hostages for
Performance of the Treaty Rymer.
. This signal Loyalty to his distressed Sovereign could not fail to be nobly
rewarded; and therefore his Majesty no sooner returned home, than he
constituted him Justiciary for the Northern District of Scotland Anno 1359
Charta in publ. Archivis.
, and the same Year he was appointed to go upon a solemn Embassy to France, to
renew the ancient League betwixt the two Crowns, Sir John Grant and Norman
Lesly Esquire being his Colleagues Rymer's foedera.
. Also in the 1364 he was appointed one of the Commissioners to treat about a
final Peace with those named by the King of England for the same effect, when a
Truce was prorogued betwixt the two Nations Ibidem.
; not long after which, Sir Robert Erskine was constituted Lord High
Chamberlain, in place of Mr. Walter Biggar Parson of Errol Memoirs of the
Officers of State MS. penes me.
, in the 40 th of his Reign, and made High Sheriff of the County, and Governor
of the Castle of Stirling during Life Charta. in Rotulis Dav. II.
, likewise of Edinburgh and Dumbartoun. All which he had under his Command at
the Death of the King Anno 1371 Mr. Winton's History MS.
, when he declared for King Robert II. which Contributed not a little to bring
that Prince peaceably to the Throne, and to extinguish the hopes of any other
Pretender to the Crown. Having done all the Service he could for King Robert
II. toward his advancement to the Throne, his Majesty did not then forget to
dispense his Royal Favors to him, and more particularly he made him a Grant of
an Annuity of Forty Me^ks Sterling for merly payable to the Crown, out of the
Barony of Cadzow, which he exchanged with Sir David Hamilton for his Lands of
Alands, Barns and Barn hill, within the Barony of Renfrew Charta in Rotulis
Roberti II.
;

But his Majesty's Bounty did not stop to him here, for soon thereafter he
bestowed on him a third part of the Revenue acrescing to the Crown out of the
Borough of Dundee, together with a third of the Lands of Pitcarach Hadington's
Collections from the Registers.
then in the Crown, by the demise of John Campbel Earl of Athole.

He was a great Benefactor to the Church; for to the Cathedral of Brichen, he
gave an Yearly Rent out of the Barony of Dundee, for the support of two
Priests, to celebrate Divine Service for the good Estate of himself and his
Wife during their Lives, and for the health of his Soul after his Departure
hence, and the Souls of his Ancestors and Successors for ever. Also to the
Monks of Cambuskenneth, he made over his Right of the Patronage of the Church
of Kinnoul, with the Lands of Fintalach, pro salubritate status nostri and
Christianae Keith Sponsae nostrae dum vixerimus, and pro salute Animarum
nostrarum, cum ab hac luce migraverimus; nec non pro salute Animarum omnium
Antecessorum, and Successorum nostrorum, and omnium fidelium defunctorum
Chartulary of Cambuskenneth belonging to the Earl of Mar.
.

He married first Beatrix Daughter of... Lindsay of.... and again Christian
Relict of Sir Edward Keith Charta in publ. Arch.
, and dying Anno 1385, left Issue, two Sons and a Daughter.

Sir Thomas his Successor.

Sir Nicol Erskine of Kinnoul I find a Charter granted by King David II. to
this Nicol Erskine of the Lands of Kinnoul, upon the Resignation of his Father
anno 1366,
. Which Branch in the Reign of King James II. determined in an Heir Female,
Christian, Daughter and sole Heir of Sir John Erskine of Kinnoul, married to
Sir Robert Crichton of Sanquhar, Ancestor to the Earl of Drumfrise.

Marion married to Sir Maurice Drummond of Concraig Genealogy of the Drummonds
by Major General Drummond.
.

Sir Thomas Erskine had a large share of Favor with King Robert II. by whom he
was raised to the Honor of Knighthood, and in 1384 appointed to go to England,
upon a solemn Embassy, to treat about the Prorogation of a Truce betwixt the
two Realms. He was no less valued and esteemed by Robert III. for his Wisdom,
Prudence and Experience; for in 1392 that King sent him his Ambassador into
England, to treat with that State upon Affairs of the highest Consequence
Rymer's foedera.
. It Is not unworthy our Remark, that in both the Commissions the King calls Sir
Thomas Erskine Consanguineus noster. He married first Janet Daughter of Sir
Edward Keith of Sinton Knight, by Christian his Wife, Daughter and Heir of Sir
John Montieth, and of Helen his Wife, Daughter of Gratney Earl of Mar Charta
penes Comitem de Mar
, by whom he had Robert his Successor: And next Jean Daughter of.... Barclay
of.... By her he had a Son John, who was the first Baron of Dun Charta in
Rotulis Roberti. III. ad annum 1399.
, in Forfar-Shire, of whom branched the Erskine's of Pittodry Charta in Publ.
Archivis.
, whose Ancestor Sir Thomas Erskine of Brichen, was Secretary of State in the
Reign of King James V.

Robert Lord of Erskine the next of this noble Family, in Imitation of his
Ancestors, signalized his Loyalty to King James I. when that Prince was a
Prisoner in England, and as soon as an Attempt was made by the Governor toward
effecting his Majesty's Freedom anno 1421 Rymer's foedera.
, Robert Lord of Erskine was one of the Commissioners appointed to go to
England, to ascertain the Faith of the Treaty: And as soon as it was finally
concluded in the 1424, he was one of the Hostages sent into England for the
Security of the Ransom Mr. Rymer's foedera Angliae, where I find that at this
time the yearly Revenue of the Lord Erskine's Estate did then amount to 1000
Merks Sterling Money, which was a very great Sum in those Days
. But the King being unwilling to be deprived of Sir Robert's Services, upon
the payment of the first Moiety of 2000 Merks, he was by the King of England's
Order set at Liberty upon the 19 th of June 1425 Ibidem.
. Upon the Death of Alexander Earl of Mar anno 1436, he laid Claim to the half
of that Earldom, for the Reasons which have been mentioned before; and
accordingly was served Heir to Isabel Countess of Mar his Cousin, before the
Sheriff of Aberdeen, on the 22 d of April 1438 The Writs relating to this, I
have seen among Sir John Cuningham's Papers.
, and thereupon assumed the Title of Earl of Mar I have seen a Charter granted
by him, wherein he is designed Rob. Comes de Mar, Dominus Erskine Patricio
Galbraith terrarum de Garscadne data 1444.
. But the Ministry in the Minority of King James II. intenting a Process
against his Lordship in reference to his Right, and the Case coming to be
tried, it continued a long Plea with the Crown, which was not determined in his
Days, Death putting a Period to his Life Anno 1453 Cuningham's Collections
. Leaving Issue by.... Stewart his Wife, Daughter to the Lord Lorn, Thomas his
Successor, and a Daughter Agnes, married to Henry Douglas of Lochlevin,
Ancestor to the Earl of M^r^^u^.

Which Thomas did prosecute his Father's Claim to the Earldom of Ma with all
the Vigor imaginable, but, having a powerful Party, the King, to deal with, at
length a final Sentence was given against him in Parliament, on the 5 th of
November 1457 Information of the Earl of Mar. anent his Right to the Earldom of
Mar.
, which he was obliged to acquiesce in: But notwithstanding the hard Measure he
thought he had undergone from the Crown, and which might have been thought
would have made him ready to have taken all Occasions of being severe to it,
yet he was a Person of so much Honor and Virtue, that in the succeeding Reign
of James III. when he had a very fair Opportunity to be revenged, yet he no
sooner saw the ways of Duty toward the King declined, and his just Power
invaded by a strong Party of the Nobility, than out of pure Conscience to serve
his Majesty when he was in Distress, he frankly engaged in his Quarrel, and
when the War broke out, accepted a Command in the Army, in which he continued
till the very End, that the King was miserably killed in the Field of Stirling
on the 11 th of June 1488, where some Authors, without any just Ground, have
asserted that his Lordship had the same Fate with his Master; But that it was
not so, evidently appears from several Memorials concerning him, which I have
seen after that time There are several Charters in the Register of Charters
granted to him in the Year 1489.
. He married Janet Daughter to the Earl of Morton; By her he had Alexander his
Successor, and two Daughters;

Elizabeth married to Sir Alexander Seaton of Touch The Viscount of Kingstoun's
History of the Family of Seton, MS. penes me.
, and had Issue.

Mary to William Livingstoun of Kilsyth Charta penes Vicecomitem de Kilsyth.
and had Issue

Alexander Lord Erskine was Governor of Dumbartoun Castle in the 15 th of King
James IV. and of the Privy Council to that Prince. He sounded a Chaplainry
within the Paroch Church of Alloa of his own Patronage, In honorem sanctae and
individuae Trinitatis, Patris, Filii and Spiritus Sancti, Beatae Mariae
virginis, and Sancti Kentigerni, to which he mortified a certain Annuity, for
the Maintenance of a fit and qualified Person, to celebrate Divine Service at
St. Katharines Altar, pro salute animae quondam Jacobi III. Regis Scotorum, pro
prosperitate Jacobi moderni Regis, necnon prosalute animae sui ipsius, and
animae Christianae Crichton quondam sponsae suae, and pro salute Elenae Hume
sponsae suae modernae, and omnium heredum and successorum suorum Charta in
Rotulis Jacobi IV. ad annum 1497
. By Christian his Wife, Daughter of Robert Lord Crichton of Sanquhar Genealogy
of the House of Erskine MS.
, he had Robert a Son, and two Daughters, Christian married to David Stewart of
Rossyth Genealogy of the Family of Rossyth from the Writs of that House, MS.
penes me.
; and Agnes to Sir William Montieth of Carse.

Which Robert married Elizabeth Daughter of Sir George Campbel of Lowdo^,
Ancestor to the present Earl of that Name, and had Issue, John Lord Erskine,
James Erskine of Sauchy, first of that Branch of Balgony I have seen a Charter
in the public Rolls to this James Erskine of the Lands of Little Sauchy and
Katharine Stirling his Spouse and to their Heirs: They had Issue James Erskine
of Balgony, and Mr. William, who got the Parsonage of Campsay upon the
Reformation in Commendam: he was afterward promoted to the Commendatory of
Paisly anno 1579, and after that in 1587 made Titular Bishop of Glasgow, tho
all the while he was a Laick: He afterward was Knighted by King James VI. and
left a Daughter Janet, married to Sir William Alexander of Menstry, first Earl
of Stirling.
, Katharine married to Alexander Lord Elphinstoun, and Margaret to John Halden
of Gleneagles Charta in Rotulis Jac. V.
, and had Issue. This Lord accompanying his Sovereign King James IV. to the
Battle of Flowdon, was there slain with the Flower of the Nobility and Gentry,
on that memorable Day 9 th September 1513, and was succeeded by

John his Son, who being a Nobleman of great Honor and Probity, upon the
untimely Death of James IV. had the Tuition of the young King, James V.
committed to him, and Stirling Castle being thought the most proper place for
his Residence, his Lordship was then made Governor thereof. In that High Trust
he approved himself with so much Fidelity, that the King, when he came to Age,
highly valued him, insomuch that he sent him upon a solemn Embassy into France
anno 1534, to propose a Match betwixt the King and a Daughter of that Crown;
which having performed to his Majesty's Satisfaction Buchanani Historia Rerum
Scoticarum.
, he soon thereafter employed his Lordship in the same Quality to Henry VIII.
of England, to congratulate that King for their joint Prosperity, and to
consult with him about a Marriage betwixt his Nephew King James, and a Daughter
of the Duke of Vendosme's, whom the French King had offered him, his own
Daughter being of a weak and sickly Constitution Mr. Drummond of Hawthorden's
Life of King James V.
, which Office he discharged with Exactness and Fidelity, and was one of those
Peers who attended his Master into France when he espoused Magdalene Daughter
of Francis I. anno 1537.

Upon the King's Death in the end of the Year 1542, he had the keeping of the
Young Queen Mary his Infant Sovereign committed to him in Stirling Castle:
which great Trust his Lordship discharged with the same Fidelity he had done in
her Father's Minority till the 1548, when the Governor and the Three Estates
thought fit to order him to carry over his Royal Pupil into France. He married
Margaret Daughter of Archibald Earl of Argyle, by whom he had

1. Robert Master of Erskine who was taken Prisoner at the Battle of Solway
anno 1542, for which he was obliged to pay a Ransom of 200 Lib Rymer's foed.
Ang.
. before he obtained his Freedom. He married Margaret Daughter of William Earl
of Montrose I have seen the Contract in my Lord Montrose's Charter Chest.
; But was slain at the Field of Pinky September 10 th 1547 Balfour's Annals.
There is a Genealogy of the House of Mar that mentions that Robert Mr. of
Erskine left a Natural Son Mr. David Erskine who was Commendator of Dryburgh.
, leaving no lawful Children.

2. Thomas Master of Erskine, who being a Nobleman of great Parts was employed
in several Embassies into England Rymer's foedera Angliae.
, whereby he won great Reputation to himself, and served his Country very
faithfully. He married Margaret Daughter of Malcolm Lord F^eeming Charta penes
Comitem de Wigton.
: But was taken away in the Flower of his Age, leaving no lawful Issue behind
him The Genealogy of the House of Mar mentions that Thomas Mr. of Erskine left
a Natural Son Mr. Adam Erskine who was Commendator of Cambuskenneth, he with
his friend the Commendator of Dryburgh, were two of the Instructors of King
James VI.
.

3. John who succeeded his Father in the Honor, and was thereafter Earl of Mar.

4. Sir Alexander Erskine of Gogar, Ancestor to the Earl of Kelly.

5. Arth^r Erskine of Blackgrange. Margaret married to Robert Douglas of
Lochlevin, Ancestor to the present Earl of Mortoun.

Elizabeth to Walter Seaton of Touch Charta in publ. Archivis.
, and had Issue.

Janet to John Murray of Polmais Ibidem.
, and had Issue.

John Lord Erskin was a Person of such noble Nature generous Disposition, and
other bright Qualities, as rendered him very capable of acting the Part of a
most consummate Statesman, which he did afterward in the highest and most
eminent Stations a Subject could attain to. Being at first a younger Brother,
his Father judged the best way was to provide for him in the Church, and
therefore having given him Education accordingly, he was in due time made
Commendator of Inchmach^mo^ in the end of King James V's. Reign, no doubt for
his better Support in the prosecution of his Studies to qualif^e him for a
higher Office in the Church; but both his Brothers dying without Heirs of their
Bodies, he was obliged to quit the Character of a Churchman and marry, in order
to raise up Heirs to the Family: Which he did, and matched with Annabella
Daughter of William Murray of Tillibardin, Paternal Ancestor to the present
Duke of Athole, by whom he had John his Successor, and a Daughter Margaret
married to Archibald Earl of Angus.

Upon his Accession to the Honor, through the Demise of his Father, tho he was
but then a very young Man, he had so fair a Reputation, and was so generally
well esteemed, that the Queen Regent thought fit in the 1553, Dr. Anderson's
History of Scotland MS. in Biblioth jurid Edin.
to give his Lordship the Command of the Castle of Edinburgh, in which Station
he behaved so well, that he preserved himself in the good Opinion of the
Queen's Majesty, and the whole Nation.

When Queen Mary returned from France Anno 1561, her Majesty having made Choice
of a new Privy Council, my Lord Erskine was named one of that Number, in which
Station he soon rendered himself very gracious to the Queen, insomuch that she
made him a Grant of the Abbey of Inchmachomoe and diverse other Church Lands
then newly dissolved. His Interest at Court now being very great, he thought it
a favorable Opportunity, and a proper Season for him to renew his Claim to the
Earldom of Mar, and having made good a Title through a long deduced Pedigree
from Gratney Earl of Mar, his Pretensions being supported by the Queen's
Countenance, his Claim was allowed and ratified by Act of Parliament: And though
my Lord Mar was a very zealous Protestant, it is worthy our Remark, Queen Mary
trusted him as much as she could have done any of her own Profession, which she
did eminently manifest by the Confidence she reposed in him, for as soon as she
was happily delivered of the Prince, James VI. her Majesty committed him to the
Tuition and Custody of the Earl, in the Castle of Edinburgh, then under his
Command, and he discharged that great Trust so well, and was so much superior
to all Tentations of Infidelity that when the Earl of Bothwell had married the
Queen, he could not prevail with my Lord Mar, either by Promises or Menaces, to
deliver up the Prince to him, which was the Thing in the World, that wicked
Earl had set his Heart most upon, when it is known his Lordship could have made
his own Terms: In the End, when Bothwell found all his Offers rejected, he was
glad to allow the Earl to carry the Prince to Stirling-Castle, of which he
himself was heritable Governor, and then delivered up Edinburgh Castle to
Bothwell, on the 21st of May, 1566, who immediately placed a Creature of his
own, Sir James Balfour, in it, by which Means, the Earl of Mar became, under
God, the happy Instrument of the Prince's miraculous Preservation, during his
long Minority: However, he still retained great Duty and Affection to the
Queen, even after Things came to an Extremity; so it would appear, that nothing
but a pure Principle of Conscience for the Preservation of the Heir of the
Kingdom, first engaged his Lordship in the Company of those who set the Crown
upon the Head of the Prince, when he was an Infant little more than one Year
old. When the Civil War began, I do'nt find this generous and prudent Lord much
engaged on either Side, for his particular Province being to take Care of his
Royal Pupil, he stayed himself much with him, and as he grew up in Years, gave
him a Princely Education, appointing the famous Mr. Buchannan, Mr. Peter Young,
Mr. David Eriskine, Commendator of Cambuskenneth, and Mr. Adam Erskine,
Commendator of Dryburgh, to be his Instructors, Gentlemen who wanted none of
those Qualities which were to be wished to be in the Persons to whom the
Education of a great and hopeful Prince was committed, and for framing his Mind
and Manners, in his young and tender Years.

My Lord Mar bore no public Office in the State till the 1571, that upon the
Death of Matthew Earl of Lennox, the Regent, the Earl of Mar, was a Nobleman so
generally well esteemed, that he was, by the unanimous Consent of the King's
Party, chosen Regent of Scotland, in his Room, Sept. 5, 1571. In which great
Office he had, says one, Less Satisfaction than he expected, for when he had
strugled no less under the turbulent Councils of his own Party, than the
Insolences of his Adversaries, died for very Grief, after he had governed only
Thirteen Months, upon the 28 th of October 1572, and left behind him so
unblemished a Reputation, as cannot be very easily paralleled in the like
Circumstances: He was interred in the Vault of his Family, among his Ancestors,
in the Paroch Church of Alloa, under a plain Monument, without any other
Inscription, than signifying him to be the Person there interred.

To John Earl of Mar succeeded John his Son, then under Age, of whom I have
found little memorable, till the 1582, his Lordship being then very young, he
was induced to join with others of the discontented Nobility, who seized on the
King at Ruthven-Castle, and petitioned his Majesty, that he would remove Sir
James Stewart, who then styled himself Earl of Arran, from his Councils, being
a Person of evil Fame, and Disaffection to the public Peace of the Kingdom,
and an Instrument of Discontent between the King and his Nobility: But the Way
and Manner of that Enterprise being afterward adjudged treasonable, the Earl
was obliged to give up the Command of Stirling-Castle, and to leave his
Majesty's Dominions, which he did, and transporting himself into Ireland, from
whence he came over to England, and joined the the Lord Hamiltoun, and others
who had been outlawed during the Regency of the Earl of Mortoun, with whom he
returned to Scotland Anno 1585, when he obtained his Majesty's Pardon, was
restored to his Command of Stirling-Castle, and to a more than ordinary Share
of his Majesty's Favor, which his Lordship never afterward forfaulted by any
undutiful Behavior.

In the 1593, when it pleased God to bless his Majesty with a Son, Prince
Henry, the King reposing full Confidence in his Lordship's Fidelity, committed
the Tuition of his Royal Highness to him, and his Majesty was at the same Time
pleased to write with his own Hand the following Letter to his Lordship. My
Lord of Mar,
BEcause in the Security of my Son, consists my Security, I have concredited
to you the Charge of his Keeping, upon the Trust I have in your Honesty. This I
command you out of my own Mouth, being in the Company of those I like,
otherwise from any Charge that can come from me, you shall not deliver him; and
in Case God call me at any Time, see that neither for the Queen, nor Estates,
their Pleasure, you deliver him, till he be Eighteen Years of Age, and then he
command you himself.




How the Earl discharged this great Trust, will best appear from the
Exoneration which his Majesty gave him, under the Great Seal, when his Lordship
carried the Prince to London, upon his Father's Accession to the English Crown,
a Copy of which I shall here insert. JAMES, by the Grace of GOD, King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, etc. Whereas it is not unknown, that upon
just and necessary Considerations, we did commit in the Year of our Lord 1596,
the Custody of the Prince our Son, to our Right Trusty and wellbeloved Cousin
and Councellor, the Earl of Mar, as well in Regard of our Security, which
consists in his Security, as in Respect there was none more fit to take that
Charge than the Earl, of whose Sincerity in Religion, Affection and Fidelity to
our Person, to our State, together with his Discretion and Judgment, we have
had so good Experience, having now otherwise resolved to dispose of him, and
considering how just and necessary it is for us to give as ample a Discharge to
our Cusin, the Earl of Mar, as may be. We do therefore first declare to all
Persons whatsoever, by these Presents, That we have very great Cause most
graciously to allow of that great Care which he has showed in providing for
his virtuous Education. Next, That he has observed our Directions for his
Delivery. And lastly, That he has been received in so good State of Health and
Constitution of Body and Mind, that we have Occasion not only to take Comfort
in God's Favor thereby, so confirmed to us, but do now testify and declare by
Virtue of these present Letters, that we do discharge, acquit, and exonerate
against us, our Heirs, and Successors, our said Cousin, the Earl of Mar,
concerning the Education and Delivery of our Son, as foresaid, and do hereby
notify to the World, that we have received full and entire Satisfaction,
answerable to the Trust reposed in him, and are resolved to lay it up in
Memory, as a Record of his constant Love and Duty toward us, and taking
ourselves bound on the Honor and Gratitude of a Prince, not only to give him
Acquittance, but to reward him in Time coming, for so great and memorable a
Service. 28 June 1603.

Neither are we to forget, That in the 1601, his Majesty sent him Ambassador to
Queen Elizabeth, to congratulate that Princess, upon her suppressing the
audacious Attempt of the Earl of Essex: In which Negotiation, his Lordship
deported himself with such Prudence and Conduct, that he brought the Principals
of the English Ministry to favor his Majesty's Succession to that Crown, which
took Effect in less than Two Years there after; which, upon another Occasion,
his Majesty did very gratefully acknowledge, and own, that next to the Goodness
of God, he ascrib^d to the Earl of Mar 's last Negotiation in that Kingdom, his
peaceab^e Accession to the Crown of England.

His Majesty, upon his Accession to the Crown of England, did not forget to
dispense his Royal Favors to his Lordship: More particularly, he began with
conferring the Garter upon him, the Ensigns of which he was invested with on
St. George's Day, April 23d, 1603, and shortly thereafter caused him to be
sworn of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council of England, and made him a
Grant of sundry Abbacies and other Church Lands then dissolved from the Crown.
But his Majesty being still more and more desirous to confer greater Honors on
his Lordship, was graciously pleased to constitute him Lord High Treasurer of
Scotland, upon the Removal of Sir Robert Ker, Earl of Somerset, and had the
White-Staff delivered to him, on the 2d of December 1615, in which Office he
demeaned himself so well, that he did his Master much Service, and preserved
himself in the good Opinion and Acceptance of the whole Nation; and he had the
Treasury so full at the King's coming down to Scotland, in 1617, that the Court
were entertained with the greatest Magnificence imaginable, out of the Profits
of the Crown, and it was observed by the English Nobility, who attended the
King in that Progress, that his Majesty appeared with no less Lusture at
Holy-Rood-House than at Whitehall.

He continued in the Treasurer's Place till the 1630, his Lordship being grown
aged and infirm, he resigned the Office, which was immediately put into the
Hands of the Earl of Mortoun, and declining to be put into any other public
Employment, he retired to his Seat in the Country, where Death put a Period to
his Days, on the 16th of December, 1635, aged 79.

He married first Anne, Daughter of David, Lord Drummond, by whom he had John
his Son and Heir: Next, the Lady Mary Stewart, Daughter of Esmae, Duke of
Lennox, by whom he had a numerous Issue, viz.

1. Sir James Erskine, who, in Right of Christian, his Wife, Daughter and sole
Heir of Robert Douglas, Earl of Buchan, came to enjoy that Honor, the King
bestowing the Title de novo upon him and his Heirs-Male.

2. Henry, Commendator of Dryburgh, Lord Cardross, Ancestor to the present Earl
of Buchan.

3. Sir Alexander Erskine, Commendator of Cambuskenneth, and one of the
Senators of the College of Justice, in the Reign of K. Chapter I.

4. Sir Charles Erskine of Alva.

5. Sir John Erskine of Otterstoun.

6. Sir Arthur Erskine of Scots-craig.

7. William Erskine, Esquire

Lady Mary, Eldest Daughter, married to William, Earl Marishal; and next, to
Patrick, first Earl of Panmure.

Lady Margaret, to John, Earl of Rothes.

Lady Martha, to John, Earl of Kinghorn.

Lady Catharine, to John, Earl of Haddingtoun.

John, Earl of Mar, was made One of the Knights of the Bath, at the Creation of
Henry, Prince of Wales, on the 30th of May, 1610, and thereafter, July 20th,
1615, he was sworn of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, and named
One of the Senators of the College of Justice: Which Station he prudently and
faithfully discharged till the 1626, his Lordship was removed upon a general
Statute That no Peer could be an Ordinary Lord of the Session. Whether it was
this or any other Act of Unkindness he met with from the Court, I cannot say,
but it is certain, upon the first Appearance of the Troubles in 1638, his
Lordship being then Governor of Edinburgh-Castle, his Majesty did not seem to
be absolutely satisfied of the Affection of the Earl to his Service, and
therefore removed him from that Command, and put the Castle into the Hands of
Major General Ruthven, as a Person on whom he could firmly rely, and yet his
Majesty was willing that his Lordship's Remove might not be attended with any
Act of Disobligation, and therefore gave him 3000 lib. which the Marquis of
Hamiltoun gave Security for. When the Civil War broke out, he applied himself
with great Resolution and Fidelity to the King's Service, and therefore was
reckoned among the first Rank of Malignants, and suffered accordingly.

He married Jean, Daughter of Francis, Earl of Errol, by whom he had John, his
Successor in the Honor, and a Daughter, Elizabeth, married to Archibald, Lord
Napier; and departing this Life in the 1654, was succeeded by

John his Son, who, during the whole Course of the Civil War, most eminently
signalized his Loyalty to King Charles I. He was one of the Peers who joy'nd
the Marquis of Montrose at the Battle of Philiphaugh; after which he had the
General's Leave to capitulate, which he did upon no other Terms, than laying
down his Arms, and living quietly at his own House, retaining always his
Affection and Fidelity to the Crown, to his dying Day.

He married first, Mary, Daughter of Walter, Earl of Bucleugh; and again, Mary,
Daughter of George, Earl of Seaforth. By her he had Charles, his Son and Heir,
likewise Three Daughters.

Barbara, married to James, Marquis of Douglas.

Mary, to John, Earl of Glencairn.

Sophia, to Alexander, Lord Pitsligo.

Charles, Earl of Mar, his Son, was one of the Lords of the Privy Council to
King Charles II. and King James VII. During whose Reign he was Colonel of a
Regiment of Foot. He died in the Flower of his Age, April 23. 1689, leaving
Issue by Mary his Wife, Daughter of George, Earl of Panmure,

1. John his Son and Heir.

2. James Erskine of Grange, whose Parts in the Profession of the Law, being
very conspicuous, was by the special Favor of her Majesty Queen Anne, promoted
to be one of the Senators of the College of Justice, in 1706, and thereafter
made Justice-Clerk. Of whose real Worth and Merit, every one that knows him,
can say a great Deal, and all I can mention in this Place, would be too little.

3. Colonel Henry Erskine, who was killed at the Battle of Almanza, in Spain,
Anno 1707, to the great Grief of his noble Relations.

4. Jean, married to Sir Hugh Paterson of Bannockburn, Bart.

John. Earl of Mar, being the Heir of a noble and illustrious Family, as soon
as he came to Age, her Majesty Queen Anne took him into her immediate Care,
made him first a Privy-Councellor, gave him the Command of a Regiment of Foot,
and made him a Knight of the Order of St. Andrew, in the Beginning of her Reign.

In 1705, her Majesty promoted him to be Secretary of State, in the Room of the
Marquis of Annandale; and the next ensuing Year, his Lordship was named one of
the Commissioners to treat of an Union betwixt the Two Nations; which being
agreed to by the respective Parliaments of both Kingdoms, his Lordship,
throughout the whole Affair, merited so well of the Court, that he had a
Pension settled on him, as an Equivalent for his Secretary's Place; which was
then suppressed, and consolidated into the Secretary-Office of Great Britain.

In 1708, the Queen named his Lordship of her most honorable Privy Council,
and striking in with the Earl of Oxford, on the Change of the Ministry, he was
in 1713, preferred to be Third Secretary of Great Britain, which had been vacant
from the Death of the Duke of Queensberry; in which eminent Station his
Lordship continued till after the Death of his Mistress, the Queen. Upon the
Arrival of King George in Britain, his Majesty was pleased to acquaint the Earl
a few Days thereafter, that he had no longer Occasion for his Service, in the
Quality of Secretary of State; to which his Grace the Duke of Montrose was
preferred on the 24th of September, 1714.

He married first Margaret, Daughter of Thomas, Earl of Kinoul, All the
original Writs mentioned, on which the foregoing Account of the Family of Mar
is supported, are taken from the Writs of the Family, the public Registers,
Spotiswood's History, and Rymer's foedera Angliae.
by whom he had only one Son

John, Lord Erskine.

Secondly, Frances Pierpont, Daughter of Evelyn, Marquis of Dorchester, by whom
he had one Daughter,

Lady Frances Erskine, an Infant.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Azure, a Bend betwixt Six Cross-Croslets, Or, 2d and 3d
Argent, a Pale Sable supported on the Dexter by a Lion, Gules, and on the
Sinister with a Griffin Proper. Crest, a savage Hand, holding a Cutless,
Register of the Lyon's Office.
Motto, Je Pense plus.

DUNBAR. Earl of March.
GOspatrick, Son of Gospatrick, Earl of Northamberland, being deprived of his
Estate by William the Conqueror, Kennet's Pariochial Antiquities.
fled to Scotland, where King Malcom III gave him the Territory of Dunbar, and
the adjacent Lands in Lothian, Mr. David Simpson's Account of the Earls of
Dunbar and March.
of great Value and Extent.

Gospatrick his Son, was created Earl of Dunbar by King David I. Anno 1130,
Ibidem.
he is designed Gospatrick Comes, without any local Appellation, in a Deed which
he made to the Religious of Kelso, of the Churches of H^me, Lamden, and
Greenlaw, Register of Kelso.
and dying anno 1147, was succeeded by

Gospatrick who was a great Benefactor to the Church, as his Donations to the
Abbeys of Kelso and Caldstream do manifest Symson.
; who giving Way to Fate in 1167, Cron. de Melross.
left a Son,

Waldav^, the next Earl of Dunbar, of whom History is altogether silent, save
that following the Example of other great Men, he gave great Donations to
religious Persons and Places. He died anno 1182, Ibidem.
leaving

Patrick his Son and Heir, a Man famous for warlike Exploits, in his Time. He
married Adda, natural Daughter to King William, and dying in 1232 Cron. de
Melross.
left Two Sons Patrick, and William, who assuming his Surname fom his
Patrimonial Lands of Hume in Berwick-Shire Chat. of Kelso.
, was the Ancestor of the Earl of Hume, and the other Branches of that
illustrious Family.

Patrick, Earl of Dunbar, his Son, died in an Expedition to the Holy Land, anno
1248, Cron. de Melross.
leaving a Son,

Patrick, Earl of March and Dunbar, who by Christian de B^uce, his Wife, had

Patrick, Earl of Dunbar and March, his Son, who in 1291; upon the Demise of
Queen Margaret, laid Claim to the Crown of this Realm, as deriving a Title from
King William Rymer's Foedera.
but the Right of Succession being adjudged to John B^liol, he did not
peaceably acquiesce as the other Competitors did, but kept up his Pretensions
till Death took him away in 1294, leaving Issue by Cicilia his Wife, Daughter
of John de Were Symson.
.

Patrick, the Succeeding Earl, who was most loyal and faithful to King Robert
I. He died in the 1315 Ibidem.
.

Patrick his Son, was his Successor in the Earldom and Honor, who in 1332, was
chosen Governor of Scotland besouth the River of Forth, upon the Death of
Thomas Earl of Murray, in the Minority of King David II. and he discharged the
Trust reposed in him with great Wisdom and Fidelity.

Patrick, Earl of March, his Son and Successor, had a very considerable Share
in all the Transactions of that Time, in which he made a very great Figure. He
married Agnes Randolph, Daughter of Thomas, Earl of Murray, Sister, and at
Length sole Heir of John, Earl of Murray, by whom he had George, Earl of March,
and Earl of Murray, in Right of his Wife, also several Daughters,

Margaret, married to William, Earl of Douglas.

Agnes to Sir James Douglas, Lord of Dalkeith; Charta penes me.


Elizabeth, to John Maitland of Leidingtoun.

Which George was Warden of the Marches toward England, in the Time of King
Robert II. Anno 1380, when the War broke out with England, in that Reign, the
Earl, with a strong Body of Horse and Foot, entered England, burnt Penreith,
plundered the Country, took and demolished the Fortresses of Werk, Ford and
Cornwall; but after all these great and loyal Services to his Prince and
Country, he revolted to the English, in the Time of Robert III. the Occasion of
which is thus delivered by our Historians.

The King, in Consideration of a great Sum of Money, say they, a Part of which
he actually received, had contracted his eldest Son, the Prince, to Elizabeth
Dunbar, the Earl of March's Daughter: But Archbald, Earl of Douglas, having
endeavored all he could to obstruct the Marriage, and having great Interest
with the King at the Time, prevailed with his Majesty to rescind the former
Contract, and to substitute the Lady Marjory Douglas, his own Daughter, in
Place of Elizabeth Dunbar. The Earl of March's high Spirit being unable to bear
so signal Affront, he therefore committed the Care of his Castle of Dunbar to
Sir Robert Maitland of Leidingtoun, his Nephew, renounced his Allegiance to the
Crown of Scotland, and withdrew into England with 100 Horse in his Retinue.
When he was there, he entered into a close Friendship with Sir Henry Piercy,
and some other Borderers, with whom he continually harassed the Borders of his
native Country, making a great Havoc wherever he came, especially upon the
Douglas's Lands, for which his Estate was forfaulted. But afterward he sued for
Pardon to the Duke of Albany, then Governor, which having obtained, he returned
to Scotland, where he passed the Remainder of his Life in great Concord with
his Neighbors, and faithful Subjection to the Crown till his Death, which
happened Anno 1416, Mr. Baillie of Castlecarry's Historical Collections.
leaving Issue by Christian his Wife, George his Son and Heir, John Earl of
Murray, Sir Gavin Dunbar, Knight. and Sir Patrick Dunbar of Beill.

George, Earl of March, his Son, was one of those noble Persons employed to
treat with the English, Anno 1423, about the Relief of King James I. which at
last was successful, and happily terminated in the King's Redemption, Rymer's
Foedera.
at the Solemnity of whose Coronation he had the Honor of Knighthood among
other Noblemen conferr^d on him: But afterward the King calling to Mind the
long and obstinate Rebellion of the Earl's Father against his Father, committed
him Prisoner to Edinburgh-Castle, and gave Orders to seize his Castle of
Dunbar: And to show, that he meant to do nothing contrary to Law, he appointed
a Parliament to meet at Perth, the 10th of January 1434. The next Day, both the
King as Pursuer, and the Earl, styled Sir George Dunbar, as Defendant,
compeared by their Procurators. They for the Earl, pled, That his Father had
been pardoned by the Duke of Albany, the supreme Magistrate for the Time; but
the Advocates for the King replied, That the Power of restoring Exiles was
never lodged in the Person of a Governor. In the End, after a long Debate, the
Parliament found and declared, Quod Ratione forisfacturae Domini Georgii de
Dunbar, quondam Comitis Marchiae and Domini de Dunbar, ^mne jus tam,
proprietatis quam possessionis, omnium and singularum terrarum Comitatus
Marchiae, and Dominii de Dunbar, aliarumque terrarum quae de Domino nostro Rege
tenuit in capite, cum omnibus and singulis suis pertinentiis, fu^sse,
spectasse, and pertinuisse; ac esse, spectare, and pertinere, debere, tam in
possessorio quam in Petitorto, ad Dominum nostrum Regem.d

Yet such was the King's Bounty toward the poor Earl, that commiserating his
low Condition, his Majesty was graciously pleased to give him a Pension out of
the Earldom of Buchan, which supported him according to his Quality, during his
Life.

The Earldom of March being thus annexed to the Crown, it therein remained till
the 1478, King James III. gave it to his Brother Alexander, Duke of Albany;
which he having for faulted by his unnatural Rebellion, it was again unite in
the Crown, where it continued till King James VI. revived the Title, and
bestowed it upon his Uncle, the Bishop of Cathness, in Liew of the Earldom of
Lennox. Acts of Parliament.


Robert Stewart, Earl of March,
WAS the second Son of John, Earl of Lennox, by Anne his Wife, Daughter of
John, Earl of Athole; who being educated suitable to his noble Birth, with a
View to the Service of the Church, the first Step he made into it, was to be
Provost of the Collegiat-Church of Dunbartoun, and after that he was preferred
to the Episcopal See of Cathness, Anno 1542, but while he wasonly Elect, taking
Part with his Brother the Earl of Lennox, against the Earl of Arran, the
Governor in Queen Mary's Minority, he was deprived of his Bishopric, and lived
in Exile upwards of 20 Years, till the 1563, he was again restored, at least to
the Profits of the Sea; and complying with the Reformation of Religion, he had
for his Share of the Riches of the Church, the Priory of St. Andrews given him
from the Crown. In the 1576, the Honor of Earl of Lennox devolved on him by
the Death of Charles Earl of Lennox, his Nephew, but having no Male Issue of
his Body, he resigned the Honor to his great-Nephew Es^ae, Lord d' Aubigny,
and in Place thereof was made Earl of March, in the 1579, after which he lived
privately at St. Andrews, where he spent his old Age in a studious and retired
Manner, happily free from any Faction, till the 29th of March 1586, Death
brought his Life to a Period, in the 70th Year of his Age.

DOUGLAS. Earl of March.
THE Title of Earl of March, lay dormant for the Space of One Hundred and
Eleven Years, that it was revived again, in the Person of Lord William Douglas,
second Son of William, first Duke of Queensberry, whom King William honored
with this Title, by Letters Patent, on the 20th of April, 1697 Charta in
Cancellario S. D. N. R.
.

He married Jean, Daughter of John, first Marquis of Twadel, and departing this
Life in September 1705 Ibidem.
, left Issue William, the present Earl, and a younger Brother, Mr. Douglas, a
Youth.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th, the quartered Coat of the Family of Queensberry, 2d and
3d Gules, a Lion rampant Argent, within a Border charged with Eight Roses of
the first. The Coat of the Dunbars, Earls of March, supported on the Dexter
with a Horse winged Argent, and on the Sinister with a Lion Rampant, Gules.
Crest, a Hart-winged, ensign'd with an Imperial Crown, issuing out of a
Ducal-Coronet. Motto, Forward.

HUME. Earl of Marchmont.
SUrnames given for Difference of Families, and continued as hereditary, were
used by no People anciently but the Romans. This Custom, the Learned observe,
they took up after the League with the Sabines, and called such Names Nomina,
or Nomina Gentilitia. The English and we call them Surnames, not as if they
were the Name of the Sire or Father, but because they are superadded to the
Christian Name. The Hebrews, to keep up the Memory of their Tribe, in their
Genealogies, instead of Surnames, used the Name of the Father, with Ben, i. e.
Son, as Melchi Ben Addi. The old Britons used Ap in the same Sense, as Oven Ap
Harry; and our Ancestors made Use of Mac to the same Purpose as Donald
MacDonald, and so on. About the Year of our Lord 1000, Surnames began to be
taken up in France; in England about the Time of the Conquest, and with us in
Scotland, not before the Time of King Malcolm Kanmore. And I have observed, at
first Surnames were only used by the better Sort, and that they were not fully
settled among the common People till about the Time of King Robert I.

The most ancient Surnames are local, with de before them, as Patrick de
Dunbar, Archibaldus de Douglas, Will^elmus de Hume, Reginaldus de Crawford,
Patricius de Polworth, Many curious and judicious Remarks have been made by
Patrick the first Earl of Marchmont, in an Essay by his Lordship on Surnames in
Mr. Collier's Dictionary, wherein is interspersed an unusual Variety of useful
and curious Observations worthy so noble and celebrated an Author, and which
the Reader will find to be very diverting as well as instructing; and in both
Respects highly deserving his diligent Perusal.
having been either the patrimonial Possessions or Birth-Places of great
Persons. In Scotland infinite Numbers of Families have had their Surnames from
Places; for it is a sufficient Proof, says Mr. Camden, of ancient Descent, when
the Inhabitant has the Name from the Place he inhabiteth. According to this
Custom, the Proprietors of the Barony of Polwarth, in the County of Berwick,
assumed a Surname from their own Lands when local Appellations were first
assumed, though I have not found any Mention of them sooner than the Time of King
Alexander II. in the End of whose Reign, Adam de Polworth de Polworth, Knight. had
the Lands of Beeth given him from Sir Alexander Seato^n of Wintoun, in frank
Marriage wi^h Eva his Sister, as the Deed yet extant does confirm Chartul. of
Dunfermling in Biblioth. Jurid. Edin.
. He left Issue Patrick his Successor in the Barony of Polwarth, and Adam, who
by a solemn Deed made over Domino David de Gram^ cognato suo, totum tenementum
illud quod frater suus Patricius de Polworth dedit sibi in foeudo de Dunipace,
in excamb^um quatuor accrarum terrae in foeudo de Wedderly Charta penes Ducem
de Montrose. In the Deed this Adam designs himself, Filius Adae de Polworth.
. From this Time the Family of Polwarth continued in the direct male Line till
the Reign of King Robert II. that Sir Patrick de Polwarth, Knight. having no Heir
male of his Body, married his only Daughter Elizabeth to Sir John Sinclair of
Herdmanstoun, Knight. the Heir of a very ancient and nobly allied Family of the
Sinclairs, in whose Favors he resigned his Lands and Barony of Polwarth, on
the 12th of November 1377 Charta penes Comitem d^ Marchmont. The first Ancestor
of the Sinclairs of Herdmanstoun in Lothian, as appears from the Writs of that
Family, was Henry de Sancto Claro, who got the Lands of Herdmanstoun from
Richard Morvile, Constable of Scotland, before the Year 1162, whose Successor
was Sir William Sinclair, who by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Sir William
Sinclair of Rossin, Sister to Henry, first Earl of Orkney, had Sir John his Son
and Heir, who married Elizabeth, Daughter and Heir of Sir Patrick de Polwarth
of that Ilk.
. By her he had Sir William Sinc^air of Herdmanstoun and Polwarth his Son and
Heir, Father of another Sir John Sinclair of Herdmanstoun, whose Son and Heir
apparent John Sinclair Esquire obtained a Charter from King James II. on the 27th
of July, 1444, to himself and Catharine Hume his Wife, Daughter of Sir Thomas
Hume of that Ilk, of the Barony of Polwarth, and to their Heirs: But he dying
without Male Issue, the Barony of Herdmanstoun, by Reason of an Entail to Heirs
Male, fell to Sir William Sinclair his Brother, and Polwarth and Kimmergham to
his Two Daughters, Marion the elder marrying Sir George Hume of Wedderburn, and
Margaret the Younger Patrick Hume, Esquire Son of Sir David Hume, first Baron of
Wedderburn, younger Son of Sir Thomas Hume of that Ilk. With her he got the
Barony of Polwarth, and thereupon ^^ok a Cross ingrail'd, Azure, the Coat of
Sinclair, and three Piles ingrail'd Gules, in a Field, Argent, the Arms of
Polwarth of Polwarth. Both which he quartered with his own Paternal Arms.

This Sir Patrick Hume being a warlike Man, gave many signal Proofs of his
Valor, on several Occasions; more particularly he signalized himself at the
Siege of Roxburgh, where King James II. was ^ain and in most of the other
Actions betwixt the Scots and the English in his Time. By the foresaid Margaret
Sinclair his Wife, he had Patrick his Son and Heir, who inherited his Father's
Valor and martial Qualities, as well as his Fortune. Being a Baron of great
Power and Authority on the Borders, the Duke of Albany, when he was forming his
unnatural Rebellion against his own Brother King James III. thought to secure
the Lord of Polwarth to his Interest, by giving him Lands and other Favors
Charta penes Comitem de Marchmont.
: But the Duke no sooner invaded his native Country by the Assistance of an
English Army, than he joined the King's Forces, and did his Majesty so notable
and eminent Services, that he had the same Lands confirmed to him by a Charter
under the Great Seal, wherein his Services i^ resisting the English Invasion
are set forth in very honorable Terms Charta in Publicis Archivis.
. He made a very great Figure in the Time of King James IV. was much in that
Prince's Favor, who bestowed upon him many Lands in the Counties of Stirling
and Perth, and at last preferred him to be Comptroler of Scotland in the 1499
Ibidem.
, which Office he discharged with singular Ability and Integrity, till the
1502. Being aged, he was removed, and John Stirling of Craigbarnet put in his
Room; and departing this mortal Life Anno 1504, was interred with his Ancestors
in the Collegiat-Church of Dunglass.

He married first Margaret, Daughter of Sir John Edmondstoun of that Ilk Litera
prosapiae D. Alex. Hume fratris germani D. Pat. Hume de Polwarth, militis
Baronetti ad annum 1669.
, by whom he had Alexander his Successor; Secondly, Helen, Daugter of Sir James
Shaw of Sauchie Charta in Rotulis Jacobi IV.
, Widow of Archbald Haliburton, Esquire Son and Heir apparent of George Lord
Dirletoun: By her he had George, first of the Line of the Humes of Argathy in
Stirling-Shire; likewise four Daughters, Alison married to Sir James Shaw of
Sauchie Ibidem.
, Janet to Sir Andrew Kerr of Ferni^hirst, Ancestor to to the present Marquis
of Lothian Ibidem.
, Marion to Sir William Baillie of Lamingtoun, and Margaret, who rendered
herself religious, and was Abbess of the Nunnery of North-Berwick.

Alexander Hume, 3d Baron of Polworth, of that Name, by his good Economy and
other virtuous Means, very considerably augmented his Fortune, which he made a
Fund for the Provision of his younger Sons, and took care to let his paternal
Inheritance descend entire to the Heir of his Family. His first Wife was
Margaret, Daughter to Robert Lord Crichtoun of Sanquhar, Ancestor to the Earl
of Dumfries Charta in Rot. Jacobi V.
: 2dly, he married Margaret, Daughter of Robert Lawder of Bass; and departing
this Life in the End of the 1532, as appears from the Probate of his Testament,
he left Issue, Patrick his Son and Heir, Alexander, of whom sprung the Humes of
Heugh, Gavin Hume, first of the Branch of Rhodes; also Three Daughters,
Margaret, married to Patrick Hepburn of Craig Charta penes Comitem de Marchmont.
, Catharine to Robert Pringle of that Ilk, and Isobel Abbess of North-Berwick
Charta in Pub. Archivis.
, who was a very bountiful Lady to the Family.

Patrick, the next of the Family, married Elizabeth, Daughter of Sir Patrick
Hepburn of Wauchtoun Ibidem.
. By her he had Three Sons, Patrick, who succeeded him in his Estate, Sir
Alexander Hume of North-Berwick, who was chosen Provost of Edinburgh, Oct. 2d.
1593 Calderwood's Church History, M.S.
. which Office he discharged with Prudence and Moderation, insomuch that he
became so acceptable to King James VI. that his Majesty sent him Ambassador to
England: In which Negotiation he behaved himself so well, that he has the
concurring Testimony of our Historians, of being a wise and prudent Man. Mr.
Adam Hume, first Protestant Rector of the Church of Polwarth, where he exerced
his pastoral Function, till Death took him away very aged, Anno 1596, leaving
behind him the Character of a pious and devout Man. Besides these Sons, he had
also Two Daughters, Margaret married to John Baillie of St. John's-Kirk Charta
penes Comitem de Marchmont, etiam in Pub. Archivis.
, and Anne to French of.... Thornydike Ibidem.
, in the County of Berwick.

Patrick Hume the next Baron of Polwarth, was zealous for the Reformation of
Religion. I find he was one of those who in the 1560, entered into a mutual
League and Bond of Association to promote the sincere Preaching of the Word,
and to defend the Teachers thereof The Copy of the Bond in my Hands, the
Original is in the Custody of the Family of Hamiltoun.
. When the Civil War broke out, he was on the young King's Side, as most of the
Professors of the Reformed Religion were, and was unfortunately slain in a
Conflict by a Party who appeared for Queen Mary, at Cairny, 2d June, 1571
Crawford's Memoirs.
, leaving Issue by Agnes his Wife, Daughter of Alexander Hume of Manderstoun,
Ancestor of George Earl of Dumbar, Lord High Treasurer of Scotland, in the
Reign of K. James VI. Sir Patrick his Successor; Alexander Rector of L^gr;
Gavin, of whom came the Humes of Johns-Cleugh in Berwick-Shire, Sir John Hume
of North-Berwick, Ancestor of that Branch of Castle-Hume, in the County of
Fermanach in the Kingdom of Ireland, where they still continue with Luster,
David Hume of Rowiestoun, George Hume of Belyhose, Jean married to David Hume
of Law, Agnes to... Edmondstoun of Woolmet, and Margaret to Thomas Cranstoun of
Crosby; and dying in the Month of May, 1592 Charta in Cancellaria S. D. N. R.
ad Annum 1592.
, was succeeded by

Patrick his Son and Heir, who was in great Favor with King James VI. His said
Majesty first preferred him to be Master of his Household, anno 1591, one of the
Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, and Warden of the Marches toward England, which
Office was suppressed upon the Union of the Crowns in 1603; and departing this
Life the 15th of June 1609 Charta in Pub. Arch. ad Annum 1609.
, left Issue by Juliana his Wife, Daughter of Sir Thomas Kerr of Ferniehirst,
Sister to Andrew Lord Jedburgh, and to Robert Earl of Somerset, Lord High
Treasurer of Scotland, the great but unfortunate Favorite of King James VI.
Sir Patrick his Successor, Thomas Hume of Caldstream, Mr. George Hume of
Kimmergham, Elizabeth married to Sir John Carmichael of that Ilk, Jean to
Christopher Cockburn of Chausley, and Sophia to Mr. Joseph Johnstoun of
Hiltoun, and had Issue.

Which Sir Patrick was much respected by King James VI. who in 1621, gave him a
Pension of 100 lib. Sterling, and bestowed sundry other Marks of his Royal
Favor on him. King Charles had also a Value for Sir Patrick, and made him a
Knight Bart. soon after the first Institution of that Order in the 1625. He
married Christian, Daughter of Sir Alexander Hamilton of Innerweek, by whom he
has Patrick, first Earl of Marchmont, Alexander Hume, Esquire a Gentleman of great
Parts of Learning, who betaking himself to the Profession of Arms, attained in
few Years to the Degree of a Colonel, but was taken away by Death in the Prime
of his Days, much lamented, and the more that he left no Issue to be remembered
by; also Two Daughters, Juliana, married to Richard Newtoun of that Ilk, in
Vicecom. de Berwick; and Anne to Alexander Hume Esquire Son of John Hume of
Manderstoun; and dying in April 1648, was succeeded by

Sir Patrick his Son and Heir, who was born on the 13th of January 1641: Being
young at his Father's Death, his Mother, a Lady eminent in all Virtue, took
great Care of his Education under the best Masters, and he made such
Proficiency in all the Parts of Learning that were proper for a Gentleman, that
he fully answered what could be expected from the most eminent Instructers.

In the 1665, he was chosen Knight of the Shire for the County of Berwick to
the Parliament, wherein he served with distinguishing Zeal for the Liberties of
his Country, and upon every Occasion opposed and contradicted all Taxes and
Impositions on the Subject, that were not exactly according to Law.

In 1676, the Privy Council having arbitrarily imposed a Tax upon the Shire of
Berwick, that was not altogether legal, Sir Patrick Hume was chosen to
remonstrate against it, and to apply to the Lords of Session for Redress in the
ordinary Course of Justice; which was so highly resented by the Council, as an
Act of Insolence, and a Contempt of their Authority, that he was ordered to
crave Pardon in the most submissive Manner, and to submit to their Sentence:
But S^ Patrick insisting on the Legali^^ of what he had done, and absol^^ely
refusing to make any such Compliance for what he thought so solemn an Act of
his Duty, his Attendance was continued from Day to Day, to his great Charge and
Vexation; and when he could neither be persuaded nor threatened to submit, was
at length cast into Prison, in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, where he continued
some Time, till he was sent under a strong Guard to Dumbartoun-Castle, and from
thence to the Castle of Stirling, where he underwent an Imprisonment of no less
than 13 Months, with all the Circumstances of Severity and Rigor, till at
Length, by the Interposition of some of his Relations at Court, particularly
the Countess of Northumberland, he obtained his Liberty.

After this, Sir Patrick went to England; but the Malice and Animosity of the
chief Ministers of State was so great against him, that as soon as the Court had
Notice of his being at London, it was resolved he should be apprehended and
imprisoned as a Man worthy of their Fear; though they could not charge him with
any Practices that were not precisely agreeable to the Duty of a good and
faithful Subject, but only a Suspicion of his Disaffection to the Government
from the Company he haunted, the Principals of whom were the Earl of Shaftsbury
and the Lord Russel, his near Relation. But Sir Patrick having got timeous
Warning of the Design of the Court, thought it his most advisable Course, to
step out of the Way, and traveling beyond Sea he retired to Geneva, from
whence he came down to Holland, where he was received with great Kindness and
Generosity by ^^e Prince of Orange, who looked ^n him as a Confessor for the
Prot^^ant Religion, and the Liberties of his Country. Here he sojourned ^ll the
Death of King Charles II.

Upon the Duke of York's coming to the Throne, Sir Patrick Hume having always
with more than ordinary Zeal shown himself against a Popish Successor to the
Crown, which was the Sourse of all his Troubles, and King James having made
open Profession of Popery, he joined with the Earl of Argyle, and came over
with him in the Invasion 1685; but that Attempt being, by the Providence of
GOD, overthrown, and the Party dispersed, Sir Patrick found Means to conceal
himself in Air-Shire for Three Weeks, a Report being industriously spread
abroad by his Friends, that he was dead, that the Search for him might be
discontinued, till a Vessel was provided for him on the West-Coast, which in a
few Days safely landed him at Dublin; but not thinking it safe for him long to
continue in Ireland; for by this Time he was forfaulted and declared a Rebel,
he went over to Holland, where he met with the same kind and generous Reception
from the Prince of Orange as formerly, though perhaps not so avowedly: And there
he continued to reside till the 1688, he came over with the Prince of Orange,
in his Expedition to Britain. The Prince had so great an Esteem of his
Sincerity to the Protestant Religion, and of his Fidelity and Affection to his
Highness's Design, that he thought fit particularly to consult with Sir Patrick
in that difficult Juncture: And when the Government was dissolved, upon King
James's withdrawing into France, Sir Patrick Hume was one of the most leading
and forward in the Address from Scotland to the Prince of Orange, to take upon
him the Administration of Affairs both Civil and Military, till a Meeting of
the Estates should be called to settle the Nation; which his Highness having
called, Sir Patrick was chosen a Member thereof for the Shire of Berwick,
wherein he became very instrumental in bringing about the Revolution, and in
procuring the Settling of the Crown on King William and Queen Mary. As Soon as
their Majesty's came to constitute a Privy Council, Sir Patrick was named a
Privy Councellor, and appointed one of the Commissioners to treat of an Union
betwixt the Two Nations; and as a farther Mark of their Royal Favor, he was
raised to be a Peer of this Realm, by the Title of Lord Polwarth of Polwarth,
on the 26th of December 1690. wherein their Majesty's did express their great
Esteem of Si^ Patrick's Services and Merit, in the Preamble of his Patent, in
these Words,

Quand^quidem nos grato admodum animo recolentes merita egregia and singularia
servitia admodum fidelis and praedilecti nostr^ Conciliarii Domini Patricii
Hume de Polwarth, Mili^is Baronetti, propter firmam suam Re^ormatae Religioni
Adhaesionem, Fidelitatem ipsius insignem ac fidem intemeratam, tum in justis
Diadematis and Monarchiae juribus, tum in Legibus and Libertatibus hujus
antiqui Regni nostri Scotiae conservandis, claram and conspicuam, idque
temp^ribus difficillimis and asperrimis; nosque itidem perpendentes, quod in
nuper a generosa and celeberrima nostra expeditione, pro bac, coeterisque
Nostris Regnis, a Papismo and Tyrannide liberandis, alacriter Nos a Belgio est
concomitatus; quodque nobis summa ^ide and studio in i^^ustrs illo proposito
promovendo and per^iciendo inservivit; utque idem Dominus Patricius ulterius
excitetur ad firmiter and immobiliter persistendum in fidelitate ^ua erga Nos,
and cura ^ssidua ad ministeria nostra praestanda. Noveritis igitur, Nos
cre^sse, etc. Charta penes Comitem de Marchmonti
.

Here I cannot omit taking Notice, that King William was pleased in the very
Patent creating his Lordship into the Honor, to assign him an Orange proper,
ensign'd with an Imperial Crown, to be placed in a Su^tout, in his Arms, in all
Time coming, as a lasting Mark of his Majesty's Royal Favor to the Family of
Polwarth; and in Commemoration of his Lordship's great Affection to his said
Majesty, a Warrant being directed to the Lord Lion for that Effect. And that
his Lordship might have the more Interest in his own County, and appear the
more considerable there, their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, were
pleased to constitute him Sheriff Principal of Berwick-Shire, on the 2d of
October: 1692. And to aggrandize him more and more, he was named one of the Four
Extraordinary Lords of the Session, and took his Place accordingly the 28th of
November 1693, Charra penes Comitem de Marchmont.
. But these Employments being mostly honorary, that his Lordship might a little
more effectually taste of the Royal Bounty, his Majesty was pleased to prefer
him to be Lord High Chancellor of Scotland, on the 2d of May 1660 Ibidem.
, upon the Removal of the Marqui^ of Tweddale; and the Title of Lord Baron,
being thought too low a Degree of Honor for the Lord Chancellor, before his
Lordship had continued one whole Year in the Place, his Majesty was pleased to
augment his Honors, and therefore advanced him to be an Earl, by the Style and
Title of Earl of Marchmont, Viscount of Blassonberry, Lord Polwarth of
Polwarth, Redbrays and Greenlaw, by Letters Patent, 23d of April 1697 Ibidem.
, and the next ensuing Year was named High Comissioner to represent his
Majesty's Person in Parliament, and was likewise one of the Commissioners both
of the Treasury and Admiralty. After which he held the Chancellor's Place above
Four Years, with the universal Approbation of the whole Kingdom, and the
general Applause of all Men, for his Justice, Integrity, sound Judgment, and
eminent Sufficiency in the Discharge of that Office, a Praise which none of his
Enemies ever denied him in any Time. And the King his Master was so fully
satisfied with his faithful Discharge of that and all the other great
Employments committed to him, while he was the first and prime Minister of
State, that he was pleased to give him a very ample Approbation of his
Services, under the Great Seal, April 19th, 1700, wherein his Majesty declared,
Quod praefatus Comes, in omnibus muneribus a nobis concreditis, ^andore and
integritate summa, cum approbatione and satisfactione nostra sese gessit and
exoneravit.

In 1702, his Majesty was pleased to appoint the Lord Chancellor to be
Commissioner to represent his Royal Person in the Assembly of the Church: But
during the Sitting of the Assembly, King William died, which did very sensibly
affect his Lordship and all the hearty Lovers of the Revolution. His Commission
being determined by the Death of the King, her Majesty Queen Anne, the very Day
she came to the Crown, granted a new Commission to the Lord Chancellor to
represent her Royal Person, and hold her Place in the Assembly. In the End of
1702, her Majesty having made some Alterations in the Ministry, the Earl of
March^ont was removed from being Chancellor, to which Office the Earl of
Seafield was preferred: But his Remove did not in the least diminish his
Lordship's Zeal for what he thought the Interest of his Country, but rather
^eightned his public Spirit; for having always most at Heart the Security of
the Protestant Religion, and a Successor to the Crown of that Religion, in the
first Parliament after the Queen's coming to the Crown, the Earl was the first
who proposed an Overture for settling the Succession to the Crown on the
Princess Sophia, Duchess Dowager of Hanover, and the Heirs of her Body, being
Protestants, in Default of Issue of her Majesty Queen Anne; and at the same
Time presented another Act for securing and settling the Presbyterian
Government in Doctrine and Worship, as being most agreeable to the Word of GOD.
But though the first Overture did not at that Time take, the Parliament having a
View of an Union with England, yet the last carried, and was approved by a
great Majority: And when the Treaty of Union came before the Parliament, his
Lordship there, as well as in the Commission of the General Assembly of the
Church, used his utmost Endeavors to have it brought about, as the only Means
he thought could secure Religion, and establish a firm and lasting Peace
betwixt the Two Nations; a Protestant Successor to the Crown being thereby
secured, which was the Thing his Lordship longed most passionately to see
before he should leave this World. And when that Settlement took Place by the
Accession of King George to the Throne, his Majesty was pleased to restore the
Earl to be Sheriff of Berwick-Shire, on the 16th of November 1714, in the Room
of the Earl of Hume, who had been made Sheriff in the End of Queen Anne's Reign.

He married Grisel, Daughter of Sir Thomas Kerr of Cavers, a Lady adorned with
all Virtues that enter into the Character of a good Wife; by whom he had

1. Patrick Lord Polwarth, a young Nobleman of great Honor and Generosity, who
in the Parliament School, had the Honor to sit and vote as Lord High-Treasurer.
He married Elisabeth, Daughter of Sir John Hume of Hume-Castle, in the Kingdom
of Ireland; and again, Jean, Daughter of Charles Earl of Hume, but died in the
Prime of his Years, without any Issue, Anno 1710.

2. Alexander, Lord Polwarth.

3. Sir Andrew Hume of Kimmergham, Bart. who being educated a Lawyer, was
promoted to be one of the Senators of the College of Justice, upon his Brother
the Lord Polwarth's resigning that Office.

4. Lady Grisel married to George Ba^llie of Jerviswood, and had Issue.

5. Lady Anne to Sir John Hall of Dunglass, Bart.

6. Lady Julian to Charles Billingham, Esquire and had Issue.

7. Lady Jean to James Lord Torphichen.

Alexander Lord Polwarth, being at first a younger Brother, was bred to the
Law, in which he made a notable Progress, by an early Eminence in Practice as
an Advocate, insomuch that he was preferred to be one of the Lords of the
Session in 1704, before he was 30 Years of Age; which Office he discharged with
great Abilities and singular Reputation for Learning and Integrity. After the
Death of his elder Brother, his Lordship being then the Head and Representative
of the Family, resigned his Place in the Session; and upon the Accession of
King George to the Crown, betook himself to the Court, where he has had Offices
and Employments more suited to his Humor and Nature, and to the Character and
Dignity of a young Peer.

He married Margaret, Daughter and Heir by Entail of Sir George Campbell of
Cesnock, Lord Justice Clerk in the Reign of King William; by whom he had
George, Master of Polwarth, Hugh, who being to succeed to the Estate of
Cesnock, is called Compbell, and Alexander; likewise 3 Daughters, Lady Anne,
Lady Grisel, and Lady Jean.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th, the quartered Coats of the Earl of Hume. 2d Argent,
Three Piles conjoining in the Top ingrail'd, Gules. 3d Argent, a Cross
ingrail'd, Azure, Over all in a Surtout Argent, an Orange proper, leased,
stalked and slipped, Vert. ensign'd with an Imperial Crown, supported by Two
Lions regardant, Argent. Crest, a Dexter Hand and Arm issuing out of a Heart,
Gules, holding a Cymeter. Motto, True to the End.

Aeneas MacDonald, Lord MacDonald,
HIS Ancestor was Celestine de Insulis of Lochalsh, Fr^ter carnalis, as he is
designed, to John Earl of Ross, in a Charter by the said Earl to him, of many
Highland Lands in Inverness-Shire, and to the Heirs Male to be procreated
betwixt him and Finvola his Spouse, Daughter of La^chlan Mac-Lean of Dowart
Charta in ^^blicis Archivis. The Defignation of Carnalis will not infer this
Celestine to have been a Bastard So^. of Alexander Earl of Ross, for several
Reasons, and particularly in a Charter by John Earl of Ross, Hugoni Alexandri
de Insulis de Slate. This Celestine de Insulis de Lochalsh the Earl designs
fratri nostr^ simply.
. He left a Son, Alexander, who is designed Alexander Celesti^i de Insulis, who
was made a Knight by King James IV. whose Son and Successor Sir Donald
MacDonald, dying without Issue, Margaret his Sister and Coheir, was married to
Alexander MacDonald of Glengary Charta in Pub. Archivis.
, by whom he had Angus or Aeneas his Son and Heir, Father of Donald MacDonald
of Glengary, who is designed Donald Mac Angus Mac Alaster, in a Retour
Margaretae de Insulis Aviae suae Ibidem, ad Annum 1584.
. He married Margaret, Daughter of Alexander MacDonald, Captain of Clan-Ronald
Probative Quarters of Aeneas Lord MacDonald, M.S. penes me.
, by whom he had a Son, Alexander, who by Jean his Wife. Daughter of Allan
Cameron of Lochiel, had Aeneas MacDonald of Glengary, his Son and Heir, who in
a most eminent Manner manifested his Loyalty to King Charles I. and II.
throughout the whole Civil War and Usurpation that followed, and living to see
a happy End of them, was upon the King's Return, in Commemoration thereof,
raised to the Honor of Lord MacDonald of Aross Charta in Pub. Arc^.
, and to the Heirs Male of his Body for ever, on the 20th of September, 1660.

He married Margaret, Daughter of Sir Donald MacDonald of Slate, but dying
without Issue in 1680, the Honor died with himself, and his Estate devolved to
MacDonald of Glengary, his Heir Male.

KEITH, Earl Marischal,
ACcording to our Historians, this noble ancient Family derives its Origin from
a certain brave Man who signalized himself in the Battle of Barry against the
Danes, in the Reign of King Malcolm II. where Camus the Danish General was
slain Hist. Scot.
. His noble Services were rewarded by that Prince with the Barony of Keith in
Lothian, from whence his Posterity took their Surname; and either he or some of
the first who descended from him, were dignified with the hereditary Title and
Office of Marischal of Scotland; for we don't find by our History, or any other
Document, that this Office was ever in any other Family, than that of the
Keith's.

In the Reign of King William, called, The Lion, Henry, the Son of Philip de
Kieth, was the King's Marischal, as appears from a Deed which he made to the
Monks of Kelso, of the Patronage of the Church of Kieth, in pure and perpetual
Alms, for the Health of his Soul Reg. of Kelso, M S. in Bibleoth. Jurid.
. By Adda his Wife, Daughter and Heir of Hugo de Lorens Ibidem.
, he had Harveus his Son, Father of Sir John Kieth, Knight. who released to the
Convent of Kelso, all Right or Title he had to the said Church, Sicut says he,
Charta Herveii Marischalli Patris mei testatur Ibidem.
. Robert Kieth his Son confirmed to the Religious of Kelso the Deeds of his
Ancestors to that Convent, adding moreover, of his own Gift, the Church of
Hundebeth, with the Lands thereunto belonging, pro salute animae suae, whose
Son or Successor, another Robert de Kieth, upon the Accession of John Baliol to
the Crown, Anno 1292, had a Charter from that Prince of his own Lands of Kieth,
Michalstoun, Ellem, Mule net, in liberam warrenam Dalrymple's Historical
Collections.
. But no sooner did that misfortunate Prince unking himself by surrendering the
Sovereignty of his Crown to a Foreign Prince, then the Marischal deserted him,
and went over to Robert Bruce, and contributed his utmost Endeavors to bring
that brave Prince to the Throne, who had so gloriously redeemed his Country
from Slavery and Usurpation, King Robert had a great Value and Esteem of Sir
Robert Kieth, insomuch as in 1325, he sent him Ambassador together with the E.
of Murray, to France, to treat with that Crown upon very weighty Affairs
relating to the Two Nations, which was performed by them with Honor and
Conduct Foedera Scotiae, M S.
. This brave Man had so lively a Sense of Freedom and the Liberty of his
Country, that when the English attacked us in both during the Minority of King
David II. though Sir Robert Kieth could not, but by this Time be well advanced in
Age. yet he was personally engaged in the Battle of Duplin, in Defense of his
Country, where he had the Misfortune to lose his Life, the 3d of August 1332
Hist. Scot. by Mackenzie.
, leaving Two Sons, Robert his Successor, and Sir William Kieth, Knight. who was
slain at the Battle of Durham, in the Service of his Country.

Which Sir Robert Kieth was conspicuous for his Wisdom, Loyalty, and Valor in
the Time of King David II. He left a Son Sir Edward Kieth, who was slain at the
Battle of Durham, Anno 1346 Abercrombie.
, leaving Issue by Isobel de Kieth his Wife, Sir William, and John, who was the
Founder of the House of Inner^gie, which Lands he obtained by a Marriage of an
Heir Female of the Chynes Charta in Pub. Arch.
, whose Arms he thereupon took into his own.

Sir William Kieth, Marischal, made a very great Figure under King David Bruce,
in the 1369, he was appointed one of the Commissioners on the Part of Scotland,
to treat with the English touching a Peace betwixt the Two Realms, which was
concluded by them Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
. He married Margaret, Daughter and Heir of Sir John Fraser Charta penes D. P.
Fraser de Doors.
, with whom he obtained a vast Estate in the County of Kincardine and
elsewhere, by her he had

John his eldest Son, who died in the Lifetime of his Father, leaving Issue
by.... his Wife, Daughter of King Robert II. Charta in Rotolis Roberti II.
a Son, Robert, apparent Heir to his Grandfather Ibidem.
, But he dying without Male Issue, his Heir Female was married to Alexander,
first Earl of Huntly, and his Estate and Honor fell to Robert Kieth his Uncle
Charta in Rotolis Roberti II.
. Sir William had likewise Two Daughters, M^uriella married to Bobert, Duke of
Albany Ibidem.
, and Christian to Sir William Lindsay of Byres Charta penes me
, Ancestor to the present Earl of Crawford.

Which Sir Robert was in great Favor with King Robert III. under whom he held
sundry Offices of Honor and Trust, besides his own hereditary Honor, which he
discharged with Reputation and Fidelity. He married.... Daughter of.... By her
he had William his Heir, and Elisabeth married to Sir Alexander Irvin of D^um
Menteth's Theater of Mortality, Page 86.
, in vicecom. de Aberdeen.

Sir William Kieth Marischal was one of the great Men who showed themselves
most forward for the redeeming and restoring of King James I. from his
Captivity in England. And when the Treaty for his Liberation was happily
brought about, Sir William gave his Obligation in the strictest Manner, that
either he himself o^ his eldest Son should be an Hostage for the Ransom Rymer's
Foedera Angliae.
. By Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of David, first Earl of Cranford Geneal.
familiae Kiethorum, M S.
, he had John, who died in the Lifetime of his Father, Sans Issue, and Sir
William, who was by the Favor of King James II. created Earl Marischal, anno
1455 Ibidem.
, He married Margaret, Daughter of James, Lord Hamiltoun Ibidem.
. By her he had a Son, William, and a Daughter, Janet, married to John L^st,
Grandson and Heir apparent to George, first Earl of Rothes Charta penes Comitem
de Rothes.
, but had no Issue.

Which William, Earl Marischal, in the turbulent Times of King James III. acted
a most wise and prudent Part, and so tempered his Duty to that misfortunate
Prince with his Affection to his Country, that he endeavored by all possible
Means to preserve the Honor of the one, and the Interest of the other. He
married Elizabeth, Daughter of Alexander Earl of Huntly, by whom he had Robert
his eldest Son, who was slain at the Battle of Flowdoun, 9th September 1513, in
the Blossom of his Youth, before his Father, and William, of whom came the
Kieths of Troup Charta in Pub. Arch^vis.
; also two Daughters, Janet married to William, Earl of Montrose Charta penes
Duc^m de Montrose, ad annum 1516.
, and Elizabeth to William Lord Sinclair Charta in Pub. Archivis, ad annum 152^.
, and had Issue

Robert Kieth, Esquire Son and Heir apparent of William Earl Marischal, in the
Lifetime of his Father, married Beatrix, Daughter of John Earl of Mortoun
Ibidem, ad annum 1506.
, by whom he had William, who was Heir to his Grandfather, and Robert Abbot of
Deer Letters of State during the Reign of Queen Mary, ad annum 1544, M S. in
Bio. Ju^id. Edinb.
, of whom was the Lord Dingwall, in the Time of King James VI. Elizabeth
married to George Earl of Huntly Charta in Pub. Arch.
, Janet to John Lord Glames Ibidem.
, Agnes to Sir Archbald Douglas of Glenbervy, Ancestor to the Duke of Douglas.

Which William, Earl Marischal, was one of the Peers who concurred in the
Reformation of Religion, though I don't find he did otherways meddle in the great
Changes that ensued. He married Elizabeth, eldest Daughter and Coheir of Sir
William Kieth of Innerugie Ibidem.
, by whom he had Two Sons and Seven Daughters.

William his eldest Son, who married Elizabeth, Daughter of George Ea^l of
Errol Ibidem ad annum 1553.
, and dying on the 10th of August 1580 Johnstoni Heroes.
, le^t a Son George, who succeeded his Grandfather, likewise Three Daughters,
Mary married to Sir Robert Arbuthnot of that Ilk Charta in Pub. Archivis.
, Barbara to Alexander Forbes of Pi^^l^go Ibidem.
, Mary to William Kieth of L^dquhairn Mr. David C^lderwood's Church History, M
S. in Bibl. Academiae Glasguen.
, and had Issue.

Robert Commendator of Deer, who had by the special Favor of King James VI.
that Abbacy erected to him in a Temporal Lordship, by the Style and Title of
Lord Altree. He married Elizabeth, Daughter and Heir of Robert Lundy of Benholm
Charta in Rotolis Jacobi VI.
, by whom he had One Daughter, Margaret married to John Erskine of Dan Ibidem.
; so the Peerage failed, and his Estate fell to the Family of Marischal.

Alison eldest Daughter, married to Alexander Lord Abernethy of Saltoun, and
had Issue.

Agnes to James Earl of Murray, Regent; and again, to Colin Earl of Argyle.

Marion to John Campbel of Calder Ibidem, ad annum 1577.
: and had Issue.

Elizabeth to Sir Alexander Irvine of Drum Ibidem.
and had Issue.

Beatrix to John Allardice of that ilk Ibidem.
, and had Issue.

Jean to James Crichton of Frendraught Ibidem.
, and had Issue.

Margaret to Sir John Kennedy of Blairquhan Ibidem.
and had Issue.

This Earl dying very aged, on the 7th of October 1581 Johnstoni Heroes.
, was succeeded in his Estate and Honor by his Grandson

George Earl Marischal, who was by the Care of his Grandfather well brought up;
and for the further Improvement of his Education, was sent Abroad, where he
spent Two or Three Years in Foreign Parts, and studied under the best Masters,
parti cularly the celebrated Mr. Beza. Upon his Return, having the Reputation
of a very fine Gentleman, he was made a Privy Councellor, and then in 1589, was
sent Ambassador-Extraordinary to Denmark, to espouse Anne a Daughter of that
Crown, in Name of King James VI. in which he appeared with all the Luster the
Wealth of Scotland could adorn him with, all or most being upon his own proper
Charge; which the King received as so great an Obligation, that he always loved
and esteemed him very much as a Man to be relied on in Point of Honor and
Fidelity.

In the 1593, when a Rising toward a Rebellion was threatened in the Northern
Parts, His Majesty named the Earl Marischal his Lieutenant, with a Power to
raise what Forces he should judge necessary for that Service, and he behaved so
well throughout the whole Affair, that he entirely suppressed the Insurrection,
without the Effusion of one Drop of Blood, which made his pacifick Master very
much applaud and commend his Conduct. The same Year his Lordship made a noble
Foundation of a College at Aberdeen Middleton's Appendix to Bishop Spotiswood's
History.
, which he endued with sufficient Funds toward the Support and Maintenance of a
Principal and Three Professors of Philosophy; and tho'other Professors have
been since added by the Piety and Bounty of other great and learned Men; yet
the Earl being the first Founder, his Memory on that Account, ought to be
alwise honored by all the Lovers of Learning, with that Gratitude and Respect
which so signal a Piece of Service to his Country and Posterity deserves.

Though the Earl Marischal was his Master, the King's particular Favorite, I
don't find he was ever in any public Character or Office in the State, save
that he was High Commissioner to the Parliament 1609, which his Majesty
conferred on the Earl, more to do him Honor than for any Profit could accrue
to him thereby: But that was what he did not care for, his own Estate being one
of the best in Scotland. And continuing in great Favor with his Prince, and
Men of all Qualities, he died exceedingly lamented, on the 2d of April 1623 Mr.
Arch. Simson's Hist. of the Church of Scotland, from whom I borrowed this
Epitaph.
, and was interred with his Ancestors, at the Church of St. Brides, with this
Epitaph upon him. Cum Patriam and Proavos raris virtutibus ornes,
nonne ergo debet Scotia multa tibi.
Ecclesia, Turrts, Pallatia splendida abunde,
ingenio jam stant edificata tuo.
Est Marischalla domus Borea lux maxim pura,
Semper Romani a Dogmate Pontificis.
Rex and Regna tibi debent quoque Danica, quod tu
Curaris Thalamis consociare suis.
Sic merito Rex, Religio, Respub. musae
L^gens in Tumulo nunc Marischalle tuo.
Struxit Aberdoniae Solymam, fundavit Athenas,
Phoebus ubi cantant, and sacra turba vigent.


This noble Lord married first Margaret, Daughter of Alexander Lord Hume, by
whom he had William his Successor, and a Daughter Anne, married to William Earl
of Mortoun; Secondly, Margaret Daughter of James Lord Ogilvy, by whom he had
Sir James Kieth of Benholm, who by Agnes his Wife, Daughter of Sir David
Lindsay of Edziel Charta in Rotolis Jacobi VI.
, had a Daughter married to Sir Archbald Primrose of Dalmeny, Clerk-Register in
the Reign of King of Charles II. Ancestor to the Viscount of Primrose.

William Earl Marischal was a great Patron of Learning and Virtue, which
recommended him much to the Favor of King Charles I. who finding him a Man of
great Honor and Fidelity, called him to his Privy Council, where the carried
himself very well in every Thing relating to the Crown and to the Government in
Church and State. He died in the Prime of his Age, on the 28th of October 1635
Balfour's Annals, M S.
, leaving Issue by Mary his Wife, Daughter of John Earl of Mar, Three Sons,
William and George, both Earls Marischal, John Earl of Kintore; also Two
Daughters, Mary married to John Lord Kilpon^, Son and Heir of William Earl of
Airth and Monteith, and Jean to Alexander Lord Pitsligo.

Which William, in the Time of the Civil War, adhered to the King, and upon his
own Charge, levied a Troop of Horse, for his Majesty's Service, at the Head of
which he behaved with great Courage at the Battle of Preston. Afterward
remaining firm in his Fidelity to the Crown, he appeared no less zealous for
the Restoration of K. Charles II. but while he was raising Forces by his
Interest and Industry in the Northern Parts, he was surpised at Eliot, and
taken Prisoner by a Party of English detached from the Garrison at Dundee, Anno
1560, and from thence sent to London by Sea, and imprisoned in the Tower;
where, after Ten Years Imprisonment sustained with great Firmness and
Constancy, he lived to receive some Reward of his Merit, after the Return of
the King, who made him first a Privy Councellor, and afterward Lord Privy Seal;
which Office he discharged till his Death, in 1670. He married first Elizabeth,
Daughter of George Earl of Winton, by whom he had Three Daughters, Margaret
married to Sir James Hope of Hoptoun; and again to Sir Archbald Murray of
Blackbarony, Mary to Robert Viscount of Arbuthnot, Jean to George Lord Banff;
Secondly, Anne Daughter of Robert Earl of Mortoun, but by her he had no Issue.

To William Earl Marischal, succeeded Colonel George Kieth his Brother, who was
a great Asserter of and Sufferer for the Royal Cause. During the Usurpation, he
married Mary, Daughter of George Earl of Kinoul, and departing this Life in
1694, was succeed by

William Earl Marischal his Son, who was not in the Measures of the Court,
either in the Reign of King William, or in the first Years of Queen Anne, was
very opposite to the Union of the Kingdoms; for, beside what other Reasons he
might have for his Opposition, he thought his Family might suffer by the
suppressing his heritable Office of Great Marischal of Scotland, with Relation
to which he entered a Protestation in Parliament Rolls of Parliament.
, before the Conclusion of the Union, in these Words.

'I do hereby protest, that whatever is contained in any Article of the Treaty
of Union betwixt Scotland and England, shall in no Manner of Way derogate from,
or be prejudicial to me or my Successors in our heretable Office of Great
Marischal of Scotland in all Time coming, or in the full and free Enjoyment and
Exercise of the whole Rights, Dignities, Titles, Honors, Powers, and
Privileges thereto belonging, which my Ancestors and I have possessed and
exercised as Rights of Property these Seven Hundred Years; and I do further
protest, that the Parliament of Scotland, and Constitution thereof may remain
and continue as formerly: And I desire this my Protestation to be inserted in
the Minutes, and recorded in the Books of Parliament, and thereupon take
Instruments.'

Upon the great Change which happened in 1710, when the Earl of Oxford came to
be the chief Minister of State, the Earl Marischal was elected one of the Peers
to serve in the Parliament of Great Britain, as one of the Representatives of
the Peerage of Scotland; in which Capacity when he had not served full Two
Years, Death cut the Thread of his Life, on the 27th Day of May 1712 History of
Europe for 1712.
, leaving Issue by Mary his Wife, Daughter of James Earl of Perth, George his
Son and Heir, James Kieth Esquire Lady Mary married to John Earl of Wigtoun, and
Lady Anne Kieth, a Lady justly esteemed for her Wit and Beauty, and all the
Qualities worthy her noble Birth.

Which George being a young Nobleman of very bright Parts, and his Genius
leading him to a military Life, Queen Anne, to encourage and countenance his
promising Inclinations, gave him, when he was Lord Kieth, and only a Youth, a
Troop of Horse, and then preferred him to be Captain of her Majesty's Guards,
upon a Vacancy through Demise of the Earl of Crawford, February 3 d, 1714 Life of
Q. Anne.
; and he continued in the Post till some Time after the Accession of King
George to the Crown, his Lordship was removed, and his Command given to the
Earl of Delorain.

ARMS.
Argent on a Chief, Gules, Three Palets Or, Supporters Two Stags. Crest, a
Stag's Head, all proper, Motto, Veritas vincit.

MELVIL. Earl of Melvil.
IF Tradition may be credited, the Melvils are as ancient in Scotland as the
Reign of King Malcolm III. that a Gentleman from Hungary accompanied Queen
Margaret the Wife of that Prince into this Realm, where he got Lands in
Lothian, which he called Melvil after his own Name, and there fixed his
Residence. But be this as it will, it appears from Writs I have seen, the
Melvils were very considerable in the Time of King William, both for the many
Lands they enjoyed, and the great Offices they held under the Crown. Galfred de
Malevile, in that Reign, gave the Church of Malevile to the Monks of
Dunfermling, cum tota illa Terra quam eidem Feclesiae assig navit in
Dedicatione coram Hugone Episcopo Sanctae Andreae Chartulary of Dunfermling.
And it is to be remarked, That this Hugh Bishop of St. Andrews was by King
William promoted to the Episcopal See, soon after the Year 1178, and died 1188.
And further, it is worth taking Notice of that some Families Abroad in Foreign
Parts, particularly in Hungary, still carry the Surname of Malevile, and give a
Coat of Arms much the same with the Earl of Melvil, viz. Gules, Three
Crescents, Argent, within a Border, charged with Eight Roses of the First.
. This Family divided itself into Three collateral Branches from as many
Brothers, viz.

William de Malevile, who was Progenitor of the Melvils of Melvil, which ended
in an Heir Female married with Sir John Ross of Haukhead, Knight. Ancestor to the
Lord Ross; whereupon he took her Arms into his own, which is still quartered in
the Atchievment of that noble Family.

Philip de Malevile, Vicecomes de Merns, in the Time of King Alexander II.
Chartul. of Arbroth.
, was Ancestor of the Melvils of Glenbervy in the County of Kincardine, which
likewise in the Reign of King James II. ended in an Heir Female, Giles,
Daughter and Heir of Alexander Melvil of Glenbervy, married to Sir John
Auchinleck of that Ilk Charta in Pub. Arch.
, in the County of Air, by whose Grandchild, and Heir Female in the Time of
King James IV, the Barony of Glenbervy went by Marriage to Sir William Douglas
of Braidwood, Son to Archbald Earl of Angus.

Walter de Malevile, another Son of Galfred de Malevile Chartul. of Dumfermling.
was the Root of the Melvils of Raith, the only remaining Branch of that
ancient Family, whose Successor Sir John de Malevile, Knight. of the County of
Fife, is one of those Barons who swore Felty to King Edward I. of England, Anno
1296; from whom descended Sir John Melvil of Raith, Knight. in the Time of King
James II. who married Margaret, Daughter of Sir William Scot of Balweary
Geneal. of the House of Raith.
, by whom he had William his Successor, and Alexander Melvil of Finnaly Charta
penes me, ad annum 1458.
, in the County of Roxburgh.

Which William married Margaret, Daughter of...... Douglas of Longniddry
Geneal. of the House of Raith, etiam Chartul. de Dumfermling.
; and again, Margaret, Daughter of Sir Robert Lundy of Balgony Geneal. of the
House of Raith.
, by whom he had a Son John, and a Daughter Margaret, married to James Bonnar
of Rossie. Which John was made a Knight by King James IV. with whom he lost his
Life at the Battle of Flowdoun, 9th September 1513, leaving Issue by Margaret
his Wife, Daughter of William Bonnar of Rossie,

John his Son and Heir, who had the Honor particularly to be known and
favored by King James V. For the King, finding him a Person of Wisdom and
Integrity, made him General of the Ordnance Charta in Pub. Arch. ad annum 1525.
, and Captain of his Majesty's Castle of Dunbar Melvil's Memoirs.
, and a Knight; and to the very Hour of his Death, prosecuted him with all
Manner of Kindness and Respect. This worthy Man was among the first of Note, in
those Parts, who embraced and favored the Reformed Religion, which made him
the Object of the Hatred and Malice of the Romish Clergy: Bishop Beaton of St.
Andrews, and Mr. Durie, the Abbot of Dunfermling, his Neighbors, did
particularly own it. The Bishop accused him before the King of Heresy; at least
a Favourer of Luther's Doctrine, which as the Times went, could not fail of
being penal to him, if the King, who had a particular Favor to Sir John
Melvil, had not interposed, and saved him from their further Prosecution. But
the wicked Bishop did not rest here, for what he could not effect in Course of
Law, he intended to execute by a barbarous Assassination, having for that End
hired some Villains to intercept and murder Sir John in the Way, as he rode
Home to his own House: But by the good Providence of Almighty GOD, and the
Courage and Fidelity of his own Servants and Retainers, who were very ^umerous,
the Design was prevented. But what Bishop Beaton could not bring to pass, his
Successor Bishop Hamilton effected, on Pretense of a treasonable Correspondence
with the Nation's Enemies abroad, and the Matter was thus. In the Minority of
Queen Mary, a War breaking out betwixt Scotland and England, upon the Breach of
the Marriage-Articles that had been agreed on betwixt Edward Prince of Wales
and Queen Mary, whereupon all Correspondence betwixt the Two Nations was
forbid, upon the highest Penalties: And it happening that Sir John Melvil
having before that sent his eldest Son to England for the Improvement of his
Education, after the War broke out he wrote to him, wherein the good old Man
admonished his Son to live and demean himself as became a Christian, and a
Gentleman, without any Thing relating to a treasonable Correspondence or
Intelligence, as was pretended; but the Letter being intercepted, was brought
to the Bishop of St. Andrews; and his Interest being th^n superior to any
Man's, with his Brother the Earl of Aran the Governor, Sir John was suddenly
seized, and sent Prisoner under a strong Guard to St^rling; and it being
resolved he should be cut off in a seeming Way of Justice, an Indictment of
High Treason was prepared against him; and Care being taken before by his
Accuser, the Bishop, to provide Witnesses to prove the Charge, he was found
Guilty, and condemned to lose his Head, which was accordingly executed on him
in the End of the Year 1549: Nor did Bishop Hamilton's Malice abate toward him
after his Death, for they seized on his Estate, dispossessed his Lady and
Children with all the Circumstances of Barbarity Malice could invent, and never
left persecuting his Family, till they had reduced it to the lowest Penury and
Want, by disposing and giving away all the Fortune that should have supported
them: But they were under the Care of a higher Hand, for the Almighty ordered
Matters so, that all the younger Children were better provided for than they
could have been by their Father if he had been alive, as Sir John himself had
^oretold his Lady to comfort her under the disconsolate Circumstances of his
Death. By Helen his Wife, Daughter of Alexander Napter of Merchistoun, Ancestor
to the Lord Napier, he had, 1. John his eldest Son, thereafter Lord of Raith.
2. Robert Lord Melvil. 3. Sir James Melvil of Hallhill, a great Statesman and
Courtier, who wrote Memoirs of his own Time, with great Judgment and Learning,
which will be a lasting Monum^nt of his Fame. 4. Mr. William Melvil,
Commendator of Tungland and Kilwinning, one of the Senators of the College of
Justice. 5. Sir Andrew Melvil of Garvock, who was Steward of the Household to
Queen Mary and King James VI. 6. Captain David Melvil of Newmill: Also Two
Daughters, Janet married to Sir William Kirkaldie of Grange Charta in Pub.
Archivis.
, Lord High Treasurer of Scotland in the Reign of King James V. and Margaret to
James Johnstoun of Elphinstoun Melvil's Memoirs.
, and had Issue.

Of these Sons Sir Robert the Second being the Person who laid the Foundation
of this Honor, I Am to speak of him more particularly. He was by the Care of
his Mother well brought up, and for his further Improvement, at a proper Age,
was sent abroad to travel, which he did into Foreign Parts, where he spent
diverse Years. After which he betook himself to the Court of France, where he
was much taken Notice of for his prudent and generous Behavior, insomuch as
Henry II. soon placed him in his Service, in a very honorable Station, in
which he continued many Years, to his Master's great Satisfaction.

Upon his Return to Scotland, his known great Parts, and the very good general
Reputation he had acquired, inclined Queen Mary to call him to her
Privy Council, and to send him Ambassador to England, Anno 1562, and he
discharged his Trust with Prudence and Dexterity, insomuch as when King James
VI. came to act by himself, his Majesty sent Sir Robert Ambassador to England,
in Conjunction with the Master of Gray, to inte^pose with Queen Elis^beth in
Behalf of Queen Mary, that the Sentence of Death, which was passed on her,
might not be put in Execution; where, says my Author Sir James Melvil's Memoirs.
, He spoke such brave and st^^t Language before the Council of England, that
the Queen threatened his Life, and would have retained him Captive, had not the
Master of Gray 's Interest prevented it who was his Colleague. But as this
faithful Discharge of his Trust did and alwise will reflect Honor on his
Memory, so it endeared him very much to King James, who reposing great
Confidence in Sir Rob^rt, named him Vice Chancellor of Scotland, when the
Chancellor the Lord Thir^stane was abroad in Denmark, negotiating the King's
Marriage, made him also Treasurer-Depute, and a Lord of the Session; and last
of all, to reward his Merit and Services. made him a P^er, by the Title of Lord
Melvil S^bald's History of Fife.
, April 30. 1616.

He married first Catharine, Daughter of William Adamson of Graycrook, next,
Mary, Daughter of Andrew Earl of Rothes; and again, Jean, Daughter of Robert
Earl of Orkney, Widow of Patrick first Lord Lindores, and dying in the uncommon
Age of 94, Anno 1621 Mr. Martin of Clermon's Historical Collections.
, was succeeded by Robert his Son, who was a Lord of the Session and of the
Privy Council to King James VI. He married first Anne, Daughter of Sir Thomas
Kerr of Ferniehirst Charta in Pub. Arch.
, and again Jean, Daughter of Gavin Hamilton of Raploch, Widow of Robert Lord
Ross, and dying without Issue on the Ninth of March 1635 Balfour's Annals.
, the Honor, by Reason of an Entail, came to John Melvil of Rait^.

Which John Lord Melvil so succeeding, married Anne, Daughter and Coheir of
Sir George Erskine of Innerteill, one of the Senators of the College of
Justice, Brother to Alexander first Earl of Ke^ly, by whom he had George his
Successor, James Melvil of Cossingray, and a Daughter Anne, married to Thomas
Boyd of Pinkhill; and departing this Life in 1642 Charta in Rot. Caroli ^. N.
B. John Melvil of Raith, who succeeded Robert Lord Melvil in the Honor, was
the Son and Heir of John Melvil of Raith, who died on the 17th of January 1626,
by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Sir William Scot of Balweary, and he Son of
another John Melvil of Raith, who died 13 of January 1603, Brother to Robert
first Lord Melvil, by..... his Wife, Daughter of...... Lundin of that Ilk:
Which John Melvil of Raith, was restored to his Estate by the Queen Regent of
Scotland, about the 1553, at the special Instance of Henry II. of France, in
Favo^r to Sir Robert Melvil his Brother, who was then in that Prince's Service.
, was succeeded by

George his Son and Heir, who during the Reign of King Charles II. lived in a
private and retired Manner notwithstanding, because of the Prejudice some in
Authority had against him, upon the Account of his Principles and Relations was
obliged to fly over to Holland, and because he did not appear when cited, his
Estate was for faulted upon very slender Grounds.

While his Lordship was abroad, he had the Honor to be acquainted with the
Prince of Orange, King William, who had a great Value and Esteem for him. After
the Prince's accepting of the Crown, he was restored to his Estate and Honor,
made an Earl Patent creating the Lord Melvil Earl of Melvil, in the Records of
1690.
, sole Secretary of State, and Lord High Commissioner to the first and second
Sessions of the Parliament 1690 Records of Parliament 1690.
, But the next ensuing Year, upon a Change in the Ministry, he was removed from
being Secretary, and named Lord Privy Seal, and the Master of Stair, and James
Johnstoun Esquire were made Conjunct Secretaries. The Earl of Melvil kept the
Privy Seal till the 1696, it was given to the Duke of Queensbery: Whereupon his
Lordship was constituted President of the Council, and he enjoyed the Office
till, after the Death of King William, in the End of the 1702, he was removed,
and the Marquis of Annandale put in his Room Memoirs of Scotland in 1714.
: And the Earl being now grown aged he lived most Part privately at his Seat in
the Country, where Death overtook him on the 20th of June 1707 State of Europe
for 1707.
leaving Issue by Catharine his Wife, Daughter of Alexander Lord Balgony, Son
of Alexander first Earl of Leven, Three Sons and a Daughter.

Alexander Lord Raith, who being a Nobleman, of very pregnant Parts, was in the
1689, made Treasurer-Depute Sir James Dalrymple's Edition of Camden 1695.
; which Office he held for the Space of Nine Years, even till his Death, which
happened on the 21st of March School Epitaph of Alexander Lord Raith.
, leaving no Issue by Barbara his Wife, Daughter of Walter Dundas of That-Ilk.

David Earl of Leven, who succeeded his Father in his Estate and Honor; but
the Dignity of Leven being the Elder Peerage, his Lordship now goes by that
Title.

Mr. James Melvil of Balgarvie.

Margaret, married to Robert Lord Burleigh; and had Issue.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Argent, a Fess Gules, 2d and 3d Gules, Three Crescents
within a Border Argent, charged with Eight Roses of the First, supported on the
Dexter with a Ratch-Hound, and on the Sinister by an Eagle. Crest, a Ratch-Head
eras'd Sable. Motto, Denique Coelum.

DRUMMOND. Earl of Melfort.
THE first who bore this Title, was John Drummond of Lundin, second Son of
James Earl of Perth, by Anne his Wife, Daughter of George Marquis of Huntly.

Which John, toward the End of the Reign of King Charles II. Anno 1680, was
made General of the Ordnance; after that in 1682 constituted Treasurer Depute,
when the Duke of Queensberry was made Lord High-Treasurer: In which Station he
continued till the 1684, he was preferred to be Conjunct Secretary of State,
upon the Promotion of Charles Earl of Middleton, to be One of the Principal
Secretaries for the Kingdom of England; and he held the Office till the Death
of King Charles. Upon King James's coming to the Crown in 1685, he made him
again Secretary, and advanced him to the Honor of Viscount Melfort, on the
20th of April 1685 Charta in Cancellaria S. D. N. R.
and that he might the better support the Honors his Majesty had conferred on
him, he had a Grant of the Lands and Barony of Muirhall, in Argyle-Shire
dissolved from the Crown for that Effect, and ratified by Act of Parliament.
But his Majesty being desirous to confer a higher Dignity on the Secretary, who
was by this Time become his Master's great Favorite, he was ^y Letters Patent,
bearing Date 12th of August 1686, raised to the Title of Earl of M^lfort Ibidem.
, and the next ensuing Year chosen one of the Twelve Knights of the most noble
Order of the Thistle. He continued Secretary till the Revolution, he
accompanied King James into Ireland, and thence into France, and not returning
in the Time limited by Law he was forfaulted by Act of Parliament, July 2d,
1695 Act of Parliament, whereby it was declared, That the Forfaulture of the
said Ear should no ways affect or ^aint the Blood of the Children procrea^ed
betwixt him and Sophia Lundin, Heiress of Lundin.
. He sojourned in France upwards of Three and Twenty Years, till the 15th of
January 1714, he paid his last Debt to Nature, at St. Germains, where he was
interred.

He married first Sophia, Daughter and Heir of Robert Lunain of that Ilk, by
whom he had James, who by express Stipulation, bore the Surname of Lunain, as
all the other Sons of the Marriage did; but dying a very hopeful young Man
unmarried, his Estate fell to his Brother, Robert Lunain of that Ilk. The Earl
had likewise Th^ee Daughters, who all used their Father's Surname of Drummond,
viz.

Lady Anne married to Sir John Houston of that Ilk, Bart. and had Issue.

Lady Elisabeth to William Viscount of Strathallan, and had Issue.

Lady Mary to Walter Scot of Highchester, and had Issue.

His second Wife was Eupham, Daughter of Sir Thomas Wallace of Craigie Bart.
Lord Justice Clerk, and one of the Senators of the College of Justice in the
Reign of King Charles II. to the Heirs of which Marriage, the Honor was
specially provided. By her he had, beside Thomas his eldest Son, who lives in
France, and there styles himself Duke of Melfort, several younger Children, all
abroad.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th, Three Bars wave, Gules; 2d and 3d, Or, a Lion rampant,
Gules, armed and languid, Azure, within a double Tressure, flowered and
counter-flower'd of the Second, supported by Two Lions, Gules, colored Or,
Crest, a Demi-Lyon, Gules, crowned with an Antic Crown, Or, holding in his
Dexter-Paw a Sword proper, and in the Sinister a Flower de Lis, Azure. Motto,
Dei dono sum quod sum.

STEWART. Lord Methven.
HEnry Stewart Lord Methven, was the younger Son of Andrew Lord Evandale, by
Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Sir John Kennedy of Blairquhan, who betaking
himself to the Court of King James V. had the good Fortune to be taken Notice
of for the Beauty and Gracefulness of his Person, particularly by the Queen
Mother, who carrying a singular Favor and Affection toward him, insomuch as
she was pleased to do him the Honor to marry him, and then got him made a Peer
by the Title of Lord Methven, Anno 1528 Drummond's History of King James V.
, from a Barony in the County of Perth, then dissolved from the Crown, and
erected in a Lordship to him and his Heirs Male, upon the Queen's resigning her
Join^ure of the Lordship of Stirling Mr. Baillie of Castlecarry's Notes upon
Dalrymple's Edition of Camden 1695.
: But by her Majesty his Lordship had no Child save one, who died an Infant
before her self.

He married after the Death of the Queen, Janet Daughter of John Earl of
Athole, Widow of Alexander Master of Suth^rland, by whom he had a Son and Three
Daughters, viz. Henry, who lived long to enjoy the Honor of Lord Methven, but
was killed at Brughtoun, by a Shot of a Cannon-Bullet from the Castle of
Edinburgh, Anno 1572 Crawford's Memoirs.
, leaving no Issue.

Janet, married to Sir Colin Campbel of B^chquhan Charta penes Ducem de Argyle.
, thereafter Earl of Argyle.

Dorothea to William Lord Ruthven Charta in Pub. Arch.
, first Earl of Gowrte.

Margaret to Andrew Master of Ochiltree Ibidem ad annum 1563.
, Son of Andrew Lord Ochiltree.

Some not knowing of the Lord Methven's second Marriage, did imagine, that the
Children he had, were born him by Queen Margaret, who was Daughter of Henry
VII. of England, and have of late improved it so far as to allege, that this
was one of the Motives of the Death of John Earl of Gowrie at Perth, 5th of
August 1600, because he stood in an equal Degree of Relation in Blood with King
James VI. to the Crown of England: But this being now known and owned as a
Mistake, I need not enlarge much upon disproving what has been said upon that
Subject: But to put the Matter beyond Dispute, I have seen Marriage-Articles
betwixt Sir Colin Campbel, Son to Archbald Earl of Argyle, and who was
thereafter Earl him self, and Janet Stewart, Daughter of Henry Lord Methven,
wherein her Mother Janet Stewart, Mistress of Sutherland, Spouse to Henry Lord
Methven, is expressly mentioned as a Party Contracter with her said Daughter
Charta penes Ducem de Argyle.
. And when in the 1661, the Funerals of the great Marquis of Montrose who was
Grandson, by his Mother, of Dame Dorothea Stewart, Countess of Gowrie, the Lord
Methven's Daughter, were performed in the most solemn Manner, upon the
Eschutcheons of his maternal Line, the Arms of the Earl of Athole, were placed
as the Father of the Lady Methven, which appears from the printed Account of
the Marquis's Funerals. And it is not to be imagined, if this illustrious Person
had been descended of the Royal Family of England, that such a great Mistake
would have been committed, as to have placed the Arms of the House of Athole
instead of the Royal Arms of England, at his Obscquies, where the outmost Care
and Charge was bestowed to perform them with all imaginable State and
Solemnity. So it would appear this Story has been the Invention of later Years.

MENTETH. Earl of Menteth.
THE Country of Menteth had Earls very early. In the Beginning of the Reign of
King Davia I. Murdack was Earl of Menteth Chart. of Dunfermling.
, and Gilchrist was Comes de Menteth in the Time of Malcolm IV. Register of
Scoon.
, by whose Heir Female the Earldom came to Sir Walter Cumming, who in Right of
his Wife, was Earl of Menteth, and he dying without Issue Male, his Daughter
and Heir was married with that noble Patriot and Hero Sir Walter Stewart, so
much celebrated in the History of his Time, to whom she brought the Title of
Earl of Menteth Chart. of Pasley.
, who being put to Death by the English, anno 1296, left Issue Alexander his
Successor, and Sir John Menteth, designed Custos Comitatus de Menteth, in that
memorable Letter written by the Nobility of Scotland to the Pope, Anno 1320
This Sir John Menteth had a Son John, designed Dominus de Arran, who took to
Wife Helen Daughter of Gratney Earl of Mar, whose Heir Female was married to
Sir Thomas Erskine of That-Ilk.
. This is that Sir John Menteth who betrayed and delivered up the brave Sir
William Wallace to Edward I. of England; but he had the Prudence and Foresight
to make a very seasonable Atonement, for the Villainy he had committed, by his
early Appearance in Behalf of King Robert the Bruce, whose great Favorite he
afterward became.

Alexander Earl of Menteth, was a strenuous Asserter of the Honor, Freedom and
Independency of his Country in the Time of the War with the English, under
Edward I. which will derive his Name down to latest Posterity, as a Patriot of
his Country. By Matilda his Wife, he left Three Sons, Allan and Murdack, Earls
of Menteth, and Sir John first of the Branch of the Menteths of Rusky Charta
penes me, Murdaci Comitis de Menteth, filius Domini Alexandri Comitis de
Menteth, terrarum de Thora, in Comitat. de Menteth. Waltero de Menteth, filio
quondam D. Joan. de Menteth The Family of Rusky continued in the Male Line till
the Reign of King James III. that Murdack Menteth of Rusky dying without Heirs
Male, his Daughters became his Heirs; Elizabeth the elder marrying Sir John
Halden of Gleneagles; and Margaret the Younger, John Napier of Merchistoun.
, of whom by a younger Brother, did the Menteths of Carse The first of the
House of Carse was Sir John Menteth, Son of Sir Walter Menteth. He obtained the
Barony of Carse, together with the Sheriffship of Clackmannan-Shire, by the
Marriage of Mary, Daughter and Heir of Sir John Stirling, Knight. toward the End of
the Reign of King David II. as appears from Authorities in my Hands. And there
is a Charter in the Chartul. of Arbroth, granted by the Abbot of that Convent,
Joanni de Menteth, filio quondam Walteri de Menteth, militis de Salina in le
Carse, ad annum 1366. This Family continued till the Reign of King Charles I.
that Sir William Menteth sold his Estate to Sir William Livingston Lord
Kilsyth, Anno 1631.
descend.

Which Allan Earl of Menteth was slain at the Battle of Duplin, 3d of August
1332 Hist. Gentis Scot.
, leaving one Daughter, Mary, thereafter Countess of Menteth, his Estate and
Honor devolving on

Murdack his Brother, who being slain at the Battle of Hallid^nhill, soon
thereafter, viz. Anno 1333 Ibidem.
, both his Estate and Honor fell to Mary Countess of Menteth, his Niece, who
brought the Title to her Husband the brave Sir John Graham, who was cruelly
executed in England after the Battle of Durham, Anno 1346 Rymer's Foedera
Angliae, ad annum 1346.
, leaving Issue one Daughter his sole Heir, Margaret Countess of Menteth, who
was married to the Lord Robert Stewart, second Son of King Robert II. Sir
Robert Sibald in his List of the Earls of Fife, in his Description of that
County, mentions an Indenture that had passed betwixt Allan Earl of Menteth,
the Grandfather of the Lady Margaret, Wife of Robert Senischal, Earl of Menteth
and Isobel Countess of Fife, of the Date, Penult of March 1371.
who thereupon was Earl of Menteth, thereafter Duke of Albany; and by the
Forfaulture of Duke Murdack his Son, Anno 1424, the Earldom of Menteth was
annexed to the Crown.

GRAHAM. Earl of Menteth.
THE first of this noble Family was Sir Patrick Graham, eldest Son of Sir
Patrick Graham, Lord of Kincardine, by Eupham his second Wife, Daughter of Sir
John Stewart Lord of Railston, Brother to King Robert II. who came to be Earl
of Strathern, in Right of Eupham his Wife, Daughter and Heir of David Earl of
Strathern, but he did not live long to enjoy the Honor, for he was killed by
Sir John Drum mond in 1413, leaving Issue by Eupham his Wife, Maliss his Son
and Heir; also two Daughters, Eupham, married first to William Earl of Douglas;
and thereafter to James Lord Hamilton; and Elizabeth to Sir Patrick Lion, Lord
Glames.

Which Maliss was in 1423, sent to England one of the Hostages for the Ra^som
of King James I. Upon the Return of the King, when his Majesty began more
narrowly to inquire into his Royal Patrimony, it was found, that though both this
Maliss and his Mother had used the Title of Earl and Countess of Strathern, yet
they had no other Right to it than a ^e^r Connivence of the Governors in the
Absence and Minority of the King; in Respect that King Robert II. had given
that Earldom to his Son David, and his Heirs Male: Whereupon King James resumed
it, and gave Sir Maliss Graham the Earldom of Menteth, in Recompense of his
Claim to the other, September 6, 1428.

This Earl, while he was in England an Hostage for the King, married a Lady of
that Nation, Anne, Daughter to the Earl of Oxford, by whom he had Alexander his
Son and Heir apparent, who died in the Lifetime of his Father, Sir John Graham
of Kilbride, Ancestor of that Branch of the Grahams now of Gartmore, and to
those of Nedderly and Esk There is a Charter in the Custody of Robert Graham of
Galangad and Gartmore, granted by Maliss Earl of Menteth, to John Graham his
Son, of the Lands of Kilbride, on the 7th of April 1464, and another I have
seen in the Public Records, by the Earl to the said John his Son, of the Lands
of Port-Coldon, Monievrechie, etc. with the Loch of Inchma^omo, and Isles
thereof, on the 8th of December 1485. This Sir John ^y his Wife, a Lady of the
Family of the Campbells, had beside Thomas the Heir of his Family, who carried
on the Line directly of this Branch of the Grahams, two younger Sons, one of
whom fixed his Residence in the Northern Parts of England, and was the Root of
that Branch of the Grahams of Nedderly and Esk, the Lord Viscount of Preston's
Ancestor; and the other Brother settled himself in Argyle-shire, where his
Posterity were called M'Uilwarnocks, though now according to the modern Way, they
use the Name of Graham, and go by the Title of M'Uilwarnock alias Graham of
Oibb. Of his Family was Dr. Archbald Graham, who in the 1680, was by King
Charles II. preferred from being Parson of Rothsay to be Bishop of the Isles,
where he exerced his Function, till the Revolution he was deprived of his
Bishopric. The immediate Successor of Sir John Graham was Thomas his eldest
Son, Father of John Graham, styled of Duchray, who was Father of another
William, who by a Daughter of Stewert of Kilbeg, his Wife, a Brother of the
noble Family of Ochiltry, had John his Son and Heir, who sold the Lands of
Duchray, and acquired Galangad; from whom he took his Title. Which John was a
gallant Gentleman; and in the Time of the Civil War, in the Reign of King
Charles I. gave frequent Testimony of his signal Courage in several Actions in
the Service of his Country, particularly in suppressing the Insolences of the
Highlanders, in the more remote Corners of the Shires of Perth, Stirling, and
Dunba^toun, the Chief of whom he apprehended, and brought to exemplary Justice:
After which the Peace and Order of the Country was secured; and he was very
terrible to those dissolute People who choice to live by Stealing and Robbing
on the Highway. William Graham his eldest Son and Heir, acquired the Lands of
Gartmore from John Alexander, Esquire the Earl of Stirling's Son, who had married
the Heir Female of that House, whence he took his Title and Designation. He was
a Gentleman who eminently signal^z'd his Loyalty in the Time of King Charles
II. And, when the Parliament raised an Army, Anno 1650, to oppose the Invasion
of the English under the Command of Oliver Cromwell, the Earl of Airth being
then infirm, and not able, by Reason of his Age, to lead out his Men, his
Lordship reposed so much Confidence in Gartmore's Loyalty and Sufficiency, that
he directed a Commission to his well beloved Cousin, William Graham of
Gartmore, to call together and command all the Earl's sencible Men, whenever he
should judge it necessary for the Service of the Country: And his Majesty King
Charles II. placed so great Confidence in Gartmore's Loyalty, and Affection to
his Service, that on the 12th of July 1651, he gave him a Commission to guard
the Passes on the River of Forth, and to apprehend and secure all Deserters
from the Army: And he discharged the Trust reposed in him with such Fidelity
and Diligence, that William Duke of Hamilton wrote him a Letter of Thanks in
the King's Name, dated at Stirling the 22d July 1651, a few Days before the
King marched into England, wherein his good Services are very thankfully
acknowledged. After the Return of the King, in Reward of his Loyalty and Merit,
he was made a Knight Baronet, by Letters Patent, bearing Date, 28th June 1665.
He married the Lady Elizabeth Graham, Daughter of John Lord Kilpont, by whom he
had Sir John his Son and Heir, who died unmarried on the 12th of June 1708, and
was succeeded by Robert Graham of Gallangad, his Cousin-German, who is now the
Heir Male and Representative of Sir John Graham, Son to Maliss, first Earl of
Menteth, for his Bravery, called, Sir John with the bright Sword, the first
Cadet of this noble Family.
; and Walter, first of the Family of Buchquhaple, who had by his Father's Grant
the Lands of Lochton, Glaskalzie, Colyart, etc. on the 8th of December, 1485.

To this Earl succeeded Alexander his Grandson and Heir, Son of Alexander
Master of Menteth, who was retoured Heir to his Grandfather, 6th May 1493
Charta penes Ducem de Montrose.
. He married..... Wauchop, Daughter of....... Wauchop of Nidd^^, and dying,
Anno 1537, left William his Successor, and Walter, of whom is the Branch of
Gartur.

William the next Earl, married Margaret, Daughter of...... Moubray of
Barnbougal, by whom he had John his Son and Heir, Robert Graham of Gartmore,
who died without Issue, and was succeeded in his Estate by Gilbert Graham his
Brother, whose Successors continued in good Reputation till the Reign of King
Charles I. that Robert Graham of Gartmore dying without Male Issue, his Estate
went by Marriage of his Daughter and Heir, to John Alexander, Esquire Son of
William first Earl of Stirling. Beside these three Sons, this Earl had also a
Daughter, Margaret, married to Archbald Earl of Argyle.

To William succeeded John Earl of Menteth, his Son, who married Marion
Daughter to George Lord Seaton, by whom he had William his Son and Successor;
also Two Daughters, Mary married to John Buchanan of That-Ilk, and Christian to
Sir William Livingston of Kilsyth; and dying Anno 1570, was succeeded by
William his Son, who married Margaret, Daughter of Sir James Douglas of
Drumlanrig, and had Issue John his Successor, George Graham of Rednock; which
Lands, by Marriage of Marion his Grandchild and Heir Female, went to John
Graham, Grandfather to the present Alexander Graham of Duchray.

John Earl of Menteth was served Heir to his Father, 29th of October 1587* He
married Mary, Daughter of Colin Campbel of Glenurchy, by whom he had William
his Successor, and a Daughter Christian, married to Sir John Blackadder of
Tulliallan.

Which William Earl of Menteth, being a Man of excellent Parts, was by King
Charles I. called to his Majesty's Council, and made Justice General of
Scotland, upon the Surrender of that Office by the Earl of Argyle, in 1628, and
in little more than a Year thereafter, constituted President of the Council;
and he discharged all the Offices committed to him with great Honor and
Sufficiency: But while his Lordship was in the Height of his Greatness, and
very much in the King's Favor, he served himself Heir to his Ancestor David
Earl of Strathern, and thereupon applied to his Majesty, to have that Title
conferred upon him; and the King, without considering any Inconveniency that
might attend that Creation, gave him a Patent, ratifying and approving him in
that Dignity. But it is reported, being very much exalted with that Title, his
Vanity was not a little supported with the general Error of our Historians of
David Earl of Strathern's being the eldest Son of King Robert II's first
Marriage with Eupham Ross his Queen; and some high Expressions in Reference to
his Right to the Crown, having inadvertently dropped from the Earl, the Matter
came to be talked at Court, and his Majesty was pleased so far to take Notice
of it, that he deprived his Lordship of all the Offices he held under the
Crown, and gave Order to Sir Thomas Hope, Lord Advocate, to raise a Decree of
Reduction of his Title, whereby he was not only deprived of the Title of Earl
of Strathern, but also of that of Menteth: But his Majesty was graciously
pleased, soon thereafter, to make him Earl of Airth, with Precedence due to the
Creation of Maliss Earl of Menteth, his Ancestor, by King James I. He married
Agnes, Daughter of Patrick Lord Gray, by whom he had John Lord Kilpont, Sir
Charles Graham, Sir James Graham, and several Daughters, Mary married to Sir
John Campbel of Glenurchy; Margaret to Alexander Lord Gairles, next to Lodovick
Earl of Crawford; and Anne to Sir Mungo Murray of Blebo.

John Lord Kilpont, after the breaking out of the War in the Reign of King
Charles I. adhered to his Majesty, and as soon as the Marquis of Montrose
declared for the King, he resorted to him; but was soon thereafter most
barbarously assassinated in the Camp, Anno 1644, by James Stewart of
Ardv^rlich, leaving Issue by Mary his Wife, Daughter of William Earl Marischal,
a Son, William, who succeeded his Grandfather in the Honor; and Two Daughters,
Mary married to George Allardice of That-Ilk, and Elizabeth to Sir William
Graham of Gartmore, Bart.

Which William having no Issue of his Body, convoyed his Estate to James, then
Marquis, now Duke of Montrose, and died on the 12th of September 1694.

MIDDLETON, Earl of Middleton.
OF this Ancient Family, which originally took its Surname from the Lands and
Barony of Middleton, in the County of Kincardin, was Humphredus de Middleton,
who in the 24th of Alexander III. is a Witness to the Grant which Robertus
Filius Warnebaldi de Cunningham, and Sponsa ejus Richenda, Filia and Haeres
Humphredi de Bar^^^^, made Ecclesiae sanctae Thomae Martyris de Arbroath, de
toto feudo suo in Parc^ de Fordun, pro salute Animarum suarum Chartulary of
Arbroath.
. And a Descendant from him, another Humphredus de Middleton, was one of those
Barons who did Homage for his Lands, which he held of the Crown, in the County
of Forfar, Anno 1306 Rymer's Foedera Angliae, ad Annum 1306.
. Likeas Gilbert Middleton of That-Ilk, did execute the Office of Sheriff of
Forfar, the 3d of King James V. Charta penes me.
. In the 26th of whose Reign John Middleton of Middleton, disposed of the Lands
of Middleton to David Falconar of Halkerton; after which his Successors, I
think, went by the Title and Designation of Cadham, in the County foresaid.

Lieutenant General John Middleton was the Son of John Middleton of Cadham, by
Helen his Wife, Daughter of John Strachan, of the Family of Thornton, who being
bred a Scholar, intended to have made his Fortune that Way, but the Civil War
breaking out, he laid aside that Resolution, and betaking himself to the
Profession of Arms, engaged in the Service of the English Parliament, where the
Eminency of his Courage made him so much taken Notice of, when he was not above
the Degree of a Captain of a Troop of Horse, that by the Time Sir William
Waller was sent with an Army into the West of England, distinct from the other
commanded by the Earl of Essex, Captain Middleton was made his Lieutenant
General Clarendon's History of the Rebellion.
; and he continued in that Service with singular Reputation, till the
Parliament cashiered the Earl of Essex, and made their new Model; he quit all
Command there, and betook himself to the Service of the Estates of Scotland,
where he gave frequent Testimonies of signal Courage and Valor, in several
Actions, insomuch as when the Parliament, Anno 1647, raised an Army for the
Rescue of the King, upon his being made Prisoner in the Isle of Wight, he was
appointed Lieutenant General of the Horse; and at the Battle of Preston, he
maintained a Dispute with the Enemy with great Courage, and with very great
Loss to them for several Hours Memoirs of John first Earl of Middleton, M.S.
till losing his Horse, he had the ill Fortune to be taken Prisoner, and sent
to Newcastle Ludlow's Memoirs.
, where he continued till after the Murder of the King, he found Means to
corrupt the Marshal who had the Keeping of him, and made his Escape into
Scotland by the Time K. Charles II. arrived in this Kingdom, where he was
received by his Friends with great Joy, to whom such a brave Officer, and of
such entire Affections to his Majesty, could not at such a Season but be very
acceptable, and when the Parliament had raised another Army to march into
England with the King Clarendon.
, whereof his Majesty himself was General, Lieutenant General Middleton had the
Command of the Horse; and at the Fight of Worcester, 3d of September 1651, at
that Part where Middleton commanded there was a very brave Resistance made, and
he charged the Enemy so vigorously, that he beat that Body that charged them,
back in great Disorder, and with great Loss Ibidem.
: But in the Action he received several Wounds whereby he fell into the Enemy's
Hands; and as soon as he was fit to be removed, was sent Prisoner to the Tower
of London Ibidem.
, and destined to be sacrificed by Cromwell, against whom he thought he might
more warrantably proceed, than against any other of the Scots Prisoners,
because he had heretofore, in the Beginning of the War, served the Parliament;
and to that Purpose he erected a high Court of Justice, for the Trial of some
Persons that had been troublesome to him, especially Major General Middleton:
And the Time approaching that he was to be tried, his Friends in London gave
him so good and so particular Advertisement, that he ma^^ his Escape, and after
he had co^c^aled himself there a Fortnight or Three Weeks, that the Diligence
of the first Examination and Enquiry was over, he had the good Fortune to get
himself safely transported over to France, and came to the King to Parts, to
the Grief and Vexation of the very Soul of Cromwell, who earnestly thirsted
after the Blood of this noble Person.

Lieutenant General Middleton continued to attend on the King till the 1653,
his Majesty being importuned by many Exp^esses, as well from the Scots Lords
who were Prisoners in England, as from those who were at Liberty, that
Lieutenant General Middleton might be sent over to the Highlands with his
Majesty's Commission, and with some Supply of Arms; and that by the next Spring
they would have an Army ready, strong enough to meet with General Monk; and
though the King did not (says the Lord Clarendon) expect that any notable Service
would be performed by his Friends in Scotland, for his Advantage, or their own
Redemption; yet did not think fit to seem to undervalue the Professions and
Overtu^es of those who had, during his being among them, made all Professions
of Duty to him, and therefore gave such a Commission and Instructions to the
Lieutenant General as were necessary, and dispatched him to Scotland, where he
arrived with some few Officers, and such a Supply of Arms and Ammunition as
could be got upon his own Credit and Activity, in the Winter of the Year 1653,
when the Earl of Glencairn delivered up the Command of the Troops to him, and
he continued at the Head of them for a whole Year thereafter, but never getting
any Supplies from Abroad, he was at length totally routed and suppressed by
General Monk, after which he found Shelter in some honest Men's Houses, where he
was concealed, till Opportunity served to transport him beyond Sea; that he
came to the King at Cologn, 1655, and attended his Majesty's Fortune throughout
the rest of the Exile.

Upon the Restoration, his Majesty, in Commemoration of the long and faithful
Services of General Middleton. was pleased to raise him to the Degree of an
Earl, by the Title of Earl of Middleton, by Letters Patent, bearing Date 1st of
October 1660 Charta in Rotulis Caroli II.
, made him Commander in Chief of his Majesty's Forces in Scotland, Governor of
Edinburgh Castle, one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council; and appointed him Lord High Commissioner to the 1st and 2d
Sessions of the Parliament 1661 and 1662. But being impatient to be the sole
Favorite, in his last Session of Parliament, he procured an Act to pass, by
which certain Persons were to be incapacitated from all Offices of Honor or
Trust, and that by a very new and unheard of Way of Billoting: By which Act the
Secretary of State the Earl of Lauderdale, the Treasurer, the Earl of Crawfurd,
the Justice-Clerk, Sir Robert Murray, and Others, who had given very signal
Testimony of their Affection and Fidelity to the King, were particularly
levelled at: But his Majesty finding the Earl had very far exceeded the Limits
of his Commission, in the framing and passing of that Act; and that it was
highly derogatory to his Majesty's Justice and innate Goodness he had such a
deep Resentment of the Indignity, that he gave Orders to reseind the Act of
Billoting, and it fell heavy on the Earl himself, for he was immediately
removed from all the Offices he held under the Crown, the Castle of Edinburgh
was given to the Earl of Lauderdale, and the Command of the Forces to the Earl
of Rothes, who had contributed very much to his Overthrow. But his Majesty
calling to Mind the great Merit and Services of the Earl of Middleton during
the Exile, thought it improper he should be dismissed with any further Marks of
the Royal Displeasure; and therefore, that he might be out of the Way, and
never more in a Condition to compete with, or control the Earl of Lauderdale,
who had the Ascendant of the other in the King's Affections, he was made
Governor of the new English Fort of Tangier in Africa, which was little other
than a more decent Exile; there he lived till the 1673. Death overtook him in
that remote Corner of the World, where his Body was committed to its Rest. He
married first Grisel Daughter of Durham of Pi^kar^, Sister to Sir Alexander
Durham of Large, and again Martha, Daughter of Henry Earl of Monmouth Dugdale's
Baronage of England.
. By his first Wife, he had Charles his Son and Heir, and Two Daughters, Helen
married to Patrick Earl of Strathmore, and Grisel to William Earl of Morton.

Which Charles was bred up at the Court of King Charles II. But whether he had
any Preferment there before the 1682, I cannot take upon me to determine. But
at that Time Complete History of England, Vol. II.
his Majesty made Choice of his Lordship to go Envoy-Extraordinary to the
Emperor, where he proved so successful in his Negotiation, that upon his Return
he was made conjunct Secretary of State for the Kingdom of Scotland with the
Earl of Murray, 26. September the same Year Charta in Rotulis Caroli II.
, also, on the 11th of July 1684, he was sworn of his Majesty's Privy Council
of England, and upon the 24th of August next ensuing, was promoted to be one of
his Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State for that Kingdom in the Room of
Sidney Godolphin, Esquire History of England.
; in which Office he served the Remainder of King Charles's Reign, and through
the whole of that of his Successor King James VII, till the Revolution, Anno
1688, he followed the Fortune of his unfortunate Master, the King into France,
and not returning in due Time, he was forfeited by Act of Parliament Acts of
Parliament.
, 1695.

He married Catharine, Daughter of Robert Earl of Cardigan, of the Kingdom of
England, by whom he had Charles Lord Clermont, and John Middelton, Esquire also Two
Daughters, Elizabeth married to Edward Drummond, Esquire Son to James Earl of
Pearth, and Mary to Sir John Giffard Knight.

ARMS
Parted per Fess, Or, and Gules, a Lion Rampant within a double Tressure,
counter flowered and counter-changed of the same, armed and languid, Azure.
supported by Two Eagles volant, Sable. Crest, A Lion Rampant, Gules, issuing
out of a Tower, Massone Motto, Fortis in Arduis.

GRAHAM, Duke of Montrose.
ACCORDING to our Historians, this noble illustrious Family, is as ancient as
the Restoration of our Monarchy by King Fergns II. and derive their Origin
from no meaner Person than the renowned Greme, who governed Scotland during the
Minority of his Grandchild King Eugene II. fought with the Britons, and by
forcing that mighty Rampart they had reared up between the Rivers of Forth and
Clyde, immortalized his Name so much, that to this Day that Trench is called
Graham's Dyke.

But should the Rise of the Grahams be of a more modern Date, it is certain,
they are as ancient as any in the Nation now upon Record, for William de Greme
is one of the Witnesses to the Foundation of Holy-Rood-House Abbey, by King
David I. Anno Christi 1125 Chron. Sanctae Crucis, coepit fundari Ecclesia
Sanctae Crucis Anno 1125.
; and thereafter, at the special Instance of the said King, he perambulate to
the Monks of Hadingtoun, the Lands of Clerkingtoun, when Adda, Countess of
Northumberland laid the Foundation of that Convent.

( d) Register of the Priory of St. Andrews. M.S.
Sir David Greme, Knight. Pater, the direct Ancestor of the illustrious Family of
Montrose, obtained from King William a Grant of the Lands of Charltoun and
Burrowfield, infra Vic. de Forfar, cum Dominiis and Tenendariis Thanagi de
Kinaber Charta penes Ducem de Montrose.
. ( f) Ibidem.
He left Issue,

Sir David his Son and Heir, who had a Grant from Maldwin Earl of Lennox, of
the Lands of Strathblane and Mugdock; and from the Earl of Dumbar he got the
Lands of Dundaff and Strathcaron, quod fuit forrestum Regis, in Exchange with
Sir David for his Lands of Gartonquhar in Galoueya. By Agnes his Wife he had,

Sir David, the Third of that Name, his Son and Heir, who obtained distinct
Charters of his whole Lands, which were all ratified to him under the
Great-Seal of Alexander III. He got the Barony of Kincardine in the County of
Perth, from Maliss Earl of Strathern, whose Sister Anabella he married Ibidem.
, and by her he had Two Sons, Sir Patrick the Heir of the Family, and Sir David
Greme Knight In the Foedera Angliae ad Annum 129^, Sir David de Graham is
designed Frater Pat. de Graham.
.

Which Sir Patrick did execute the Office of High Sheriff of the County of
Stirling, in the Time of King Aleander III, in the 35th of whose Reign, Anno
1284, he was one of the Magnates Scotiae, who in a most solemn Manner bound
themselves by their Oaths and Seals, that in case King Alexander should die
without Heirs of his own Body, to receive and acknowledge the Princes Margaret,
the Maid of Norway, the King's Grandchild, as their lawful Queen. He was
afterward killed at the Battle of Dunbar, against the English, Anno 1296
Abercomby's martial Achievements of the Scots Nation.
, strenuously asserting the Honor and Independency of his Country, leaving
Issue Sir David his Successor, Sir Nicol Graham, Knight. who got the Lordship of
Eskdale in the South, by the Marriage of the Heir Female of Robert de Avenel
Chartul. of Melross.
; and was the Root of the Grahams of Abercorn, and the Progenitor of Sir John
Graham, that renoun'd Patriot who lost his Life in his Country's Service at the
Battle of Falkirk whom all our Historians do celebrate as the bravest Scotsman,
next to Sir William Wallace, in the Age he lived.

Sir David Graham, the next of this noble Family, was a great Patron of the
Liberties of his Country, after the Abdication of John Baliol, and a strenuous
Opposer of the Encroachments made upon our old Constitution by King Edward I.
of England, for which, when that Prince made an Offer of Indemnity to such of
the Scots Nation as would submit to the Yoke he had imposed on them, Sir David
had the Honor to be one of those few Patriots who were particularly excepted
Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
. As he was a great Patriot of his Country; so he was a very zealous Loyalist
in Behalf of King Robert the Bruce, upon whose Accession to the Throne, he had
diverse Grants of Lands, in Consideration of his good and faithful Services
before that Time performed. He exchanged his Lands of Cardross in Dumbarton
Shire with King Robert, for the Lands of Old Montrose in the Country of Forfar.

The same Sir David was one of those Barons who in 1320, wrote that noble
Letter to the Pope, asserting the Independency of Scotland, wherein they highly
extol King Robert Bruce, as the Nation's glorious Deliverer, and the Preserver
of the Liberties of the People; in which famous Record the Seal of this Noble
Person, I observe, is still entire Charta in Pub. Arch.
. By...... Daughter of........ his Wife, he had

Sir David. his Son, was one of the Magnates Scotiae appointed to treat with
the English touching the Redemption of King David Bruce, when he was taken
Prisoner at the Battle of Durham, Anno, 1346, by.... Daughter of....... his
Wife, he had Issue, Sir Patrick his Son and Heir, and a Daughter married to
William Earl of Ross Charta penes me Hugonis Comitis de Ross, terrarum de
Scatrig. Patricio Graham avunculo suo.
;

Which Sir Patrick de Grame Lord of Dundaf, as he is designed was one of the
Hostages for the Ransom of King David, when the Terms of his Redemption were
concerted by the Commissioners of both Kingdoms, who were appointed for that
Effect, Anno 1357 Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
. Upon the Accession of King Robert II. to the Crown, when the two great
Entails were made in Favors of the King's eldest Son the Earl of Carrick, Sir
Patrick's Name is inserted in the one, and his Seal, I think, is appended to
the other.

He married first Matilda Daughter of.......... by whom he had William Lord of
Graham his Successor; And again Eupham, Daughter to Sir John Stewart, Brother
to King Robert II. Sister to Walter Stewart, Lord of Railston Charta penes
Ducem de Montrose.
; by her he had Issue Sir Patrick Graham of Elieston, the Progenitor of the
Earls of Menteth Ibidem.
2. Robert, 3. David, 4. Alexander, and a Daughter Matilda, married to Sir John
Drummond of Concraig.

Which Sir William of Graham, Lord of Kincardine, in the 1404, was joined in
Commission with diverse other Lords and Barons, to treat with the English anent
the keeping of a Peace and Amity betwixt the two Realms Rymer's Foedera Angli^.
, and Two Years thereafter was sent upon an Embassy to England, with the Earls
of Crawford and Mar, which Negotiation they performed with Honor and Success.
He married first Mariota Daughter of Sir John Oliphant of Aberdalgy, by whom he
had Alexxander his eldest Son, who died in the Lifetime of his Father, and
John; next the Lady Mary Stewart, Daughter of King Robert III. Widow of George
Earl of Angus, and of James Kennedy of Dennure Charta in Pub. Arch.
, by whom he had Sir Robert Graham of Strathcar^n, first of the Branch of the
Grahams of Finitrie and Claverhouse Charta penes Ducem de Montrose.
. Second, Patrick, who being educated a Church man, and entering into Orders,
was first promoted to the Episcopal See of Bre^hen, and translated thence to
the Bishopric of St. Andrews, then void by the Death of Bishop Kennedy, Anno
1466. Third, William, of whom came the Grahams of Garvock Charta in Pub. Arch.
etiam Charta penes Dominum de Duntreath.
and Balgoun Fourth, Walter Graham of Wallacetoun Charta penes me, ad Annum
1444, Pat. D. Graham Waltero Graham Avunculo suo, terrarum de Wallacetoun.
, who was the Ancestor of the Grahams of Knockdolian and its Cadets: And
departing this Life in 1424 Charta penes Ducem de Montrose.
, his Estate and Honor devolved to

Patrick his Grandson and Heir, who was appointed one of the Lords of the
Regency in the Minority of King James II. and he prudently and faithfully
discharged that Trust for several Years thereafter. He died in the Month of
January 1467 Ibidem.
, leaving Issue by Elizabeth his Wife,

William Lord Graham his Son and Heir, who married Jean, Daughter of George
Earl of Angus Charta penes me.
, and giving Way to Fate in the Beginning of the Year 1472, left Issue, William
his Successor, George, of whom is the Branch of the Grahams of Callender Ibidem.
; and a Daughter, Christian, married to James Halden of Gleneagle Charta penes
Comitem de Panmure.
, and thereafter to Sir Thomas Maule of Panmure.

Which William Lord Graham, adhered firmly to King James III, in the Time of
his greatst Distress; and when that misfortunate Prince was forced to take the
Field, and raise an Army in his own Defense, the Lord Graham resorted to him,
and cheerfully took a Command in the Army, in which he continued till the Death
of the King. He was also in great Favor with King James IV, who was graciously
pleased, by Letters of Creation to raise him to the Dignity of Earl of
Montrose, March 3d, 1504 Charta penes Duoem de Montrose.
. He married first Annabella, Daughter of John Lord Drummond Ibidem.
, by whom he had William the Heir of the Family; next, Janet, Daughter of Sir
Archibald Edmonston of Duntreath Charta penes Dominum de Duntreath.
, by her he had Margaret, espoused to John Earl of Lennox; Elizabeth, to Walter
Drummond Grandson and Heir of John first Lord Drummond Charta penes Comitem de
Perth.
; Nicolas, to William Murray of Aberairny; and last of all, Christian Wavane,
by whom he had Two Sons Patrick, first of the Family of Inchbrakoe Charta penes
Dominum de Inchbracko, ad Annum 1513.
, out of which branched the Grahams of Gorthy in the County of Perth; and
Andrew, who was the first Protestant Bishop of Dunblain, to which he was
promoted upon the Deprivation of Bishop Chisolme, Anno 1572 Charta penes D^cem
de Montrose.
. This Earl was slain at Flowdon with King James IV. September 9th, 1513.

William the second Earl of Montrose was one of the Peers to whom John Duke of
Albany, Regent of Scotland, in the Minority of King James V. committed the
Tuition of the young King, when his Highness the Duke went over to France, to
secure that Crown in the Interest of Scotland. He married Janet, Daughter of
William Earl Marshal, by whom he had Robert Master of Montrose, who was slain
at the Battle of Pinky, Alexander Pensioner of Cambuskenneth, Mungo and
William, of whom the Families of Killern and Orchil are descended Charta penes
D. Orchil, etiam Charta penes D. Killern, Will. C. de Montrose, Will. Graham
fili^ suo terrarum de Killern, Ibert and Drumbeg, ad Annum 1560.
. Likewise sundry Daughters, Margaret married to Robert Master of Erskine,
Elizabeth to John Earl of Caithness, Agnes to Sir William Murray of Tilybardin,
Janet to Sir Andrew Murray of Balvaiad, Catharine to John Graham of
Knockdolean, and dying on the 24th of May 1571, was succeeded by

John his Grandson, Son of Robert Master of Montrose, by Margaret Daughter of
Malcolm Lord Fleeming. Upon the Fall of the Earl of Goury the Lord Treasurer,
this noble Lord got the White-Staff on the 1st of May 1582, which he did not
hold long, for upon another Turn at Court, the Earl demitted the Treasurer's
Place to Sir Thomas Lion of Auldbar in the End of the Year 1585; after which
the Earl of Montrose continued in the Council, tho he had no other Office in
the State, till the Chancelour's Place falling to vaik, by the Demise of John
Lord Thirlstane, he was preferred thereunto in January 1598, in which Station
his Lordship continued till the 1604, that it being judged necessary that the
Chancelour should be a Lawyer, his Lordship did resign the Place: But it was
far from being done but with all imaginable Respect to his Lordship; for upon
the Lord Fivie's being made Chancelour, the Earl of Montrose was made Viceroy
of Scotland during Life Charta penes D. de Montrose.
, which great Office he accordingly enjoyed till his Death, November 9th 1608
Ibidem.
, leaving Issue by Jean his Wife, Daughter of David Lord Drummond, John his
Successor, Sir Robert Graham of Innermeath, Sir William Graham of Braco; and a
Daughter Lilias, married to John 1st Earl of Wigtoun.

John Earl of Montrose, being a Person of great Parts and Abilities, was after
the Accession of King Charles I. to the Crown, named President of His Majesty's
most honorable Privy Council, and he enjoyed the Office even till his Death,
November 24th 1626. By Margaret his Wife, Daughter of William Earl of Gowrie,
he had James his Son and Heir, the first Marquis of Montrose; also Four
Daughters, Lilias married to Sir John Colquhoun of Luss Bart. and had Issue;
Margaret to Archibald first Lord Napier; Dorothea to James first Lord Rollo;
Beatrix to David Lord Maderty.

James Earl, afternam'd Marquis of Montrose, was born in the 1612, having had
the Misfortune to lose his Father when he was young, and being I think the only
Son of the Family, his Friends, in order to raise up Heirs to his illustrious
House, prevailed with him, when he was but a Youth, to marry, which he did into
a very noble Family: This Marriage broke off the Course, and gave a great
Interruption to his Studies, but quickly finding the Loss he should sustain if
he did not go through with his Education, he got good Masters at Home, and
entered into a close Course of Study, wherein he made so great a Proficiency
and Progress, that in a very little Time he became not only a great Master, but
a Critic in the Greek and Latin, after which, for his greater Improvement, and
giving an Ornament to his hopeful Person, he traveled into Foreign Parts, where
he spent some Years in attaining the Language, and in learning the Exercises
then in Vogue, in which he excelled most Men, and came over to England, by the
Time he was Twenty two Years of Age.

He then betook himself to the Court, intending to live there in a View of
serving the Crown, and of raising himself to those Honors and Employments both
his Birth and personal Qualifications did entitle him to; but in his Attendance
there, meeting with some Discountenance of the King, which was very artfully
brought about, he left the Court, and returning to Scotland, just before the
breaking out of the Troubles, he joined with the discontented Party, who
appeared most forward for the Redress of Grievances of the Church, which was
all that was at that Time pretended, insomuch as he soon became one of the
principal and most active Lords for the Covenant and Reformation: But after the
first Expedition of the Covenanters into England, the Earl upon his Observation
of the unwarrantable Prosecution of the Ends of the Covenant, he gave over that
Party, and his Command in the Army; and made a full Tender of his Service to
his Majesty, which brought him so much into the Jealousy of the Party he had
formerly been of, that there was no Room left to doubt of his Sincerity to the
King. The Earl of Clarendon does very unjustly insinuate in his History of the
Civil War, that while the King was in Scotland, the Earl of Montrose offered to
make away Two Great Men, he thinks, were not so cordial in the King's Interest
as could have been wished; but as this Calumny is most false, as I am fully
able from Original Writs and Papers to justify him from that Aspersion, so I
shall offer no more here for his Vindication, but to declare to the World, and
which I Am able to demonstrate, that the Marquis of Montrose was a Prisoner in
the Castle of Edinburgh, for corresponding with the King from the Month of June
1641 till January thereafter, and the King came down in August and returned in
November; so it is clear he was a Prisoner all the while his Majesty was in
Scotland Original Instructions of all this I have had the Honor to peruse in
the Duke of Montrose's Custody.
. After his Releasment he lived most part privately at his Seat in the Country,
till the Meeting of the Convention 1643, he privately withdrew out of Scotland,
and came to the King a few Days before the Siege was raised from Gloucester, and
gave his Majesty the first clear Information of the Proceedings of the
Convention, of the Resolutions would be there taken, and of the Posture the
Kingdom would speedily be in; and made some Propositions to the King for the
Remedy; which there was not, says the Earl of Clarendon, then Time to consult
of: But as soon as his Majesty returned to Oxford, after the Battle of Newburry,
he was very willing to hearken to any Overture the Earl should make in
Reference to what could be done, to prevent the Mischief was like to ensue to
his Majesty's Affairs, by a Combination betwixt the Scots Covenanters and the
English Parliament; wherefore, that his Majesty might have this important
Affair brought to a full Resolution, he was pleased to hold several Conferences
with the Earl: But all the Advances which were made toward the Execution of any
Attempt for the King's Service, were checked by his Majesty's not being able to
give any Troops to the Earl, by the Protection whereof, the Loyal Party of the
Kingdom might come to his Assistance, and discover their Affections to his
Majesty, notwithstanding of which, the vigorous Spirit of the Earl of Montrose,
stirred him up to make some Attempt, which he thought might be of Service to
the King: And therefore proposed that his Majesty should give a Command to the
Earl of Antrim, to raise, and send over a Body of Two Thousand Men, into the
Highlands of Scotland, to be a Foundation for raising Forces there, and that if
his Majesty would grant him a Commission to command that Army, he would himself
be in the Highlands to receive them, and run his Fortune with them; and that if
no Time were lost in prosecuting that Design, he did hope that by the Time the
Scots Army should be ready to take the Field, they should receive such an Alarm
from their own Country, as should hinder their Advance into England Clarendon's
History of the Rebellion.
. Upon this Overture the King conser'd with the Two Lords, and finding the Earl
of Antrim forward to undertake the raising as many Men as should be desired,
his Majesty resolved to encourage it all he could; and therefore, that the Earl
of Montrose might depart with the better Character, and Testimony of his
Majesty*s Favor and good Opinion, and be thereby the better qualified to per
form the great Trust reposed in him, his Majesty was pleased to give Order for
a Warrant to make the Earl Marquis of Montrose Charta penes Ducem de Montrose,
data 6 May, 1644.
, and gave him a Commission, constituting his Lordship Captain General, and
Commander in Chief of all the Forces to be raised in Scotland for his Majesty's
Service; and so taking his Leave of the King, accompanied with several
Gentlemen, he began his Journey, as if he meant to make his Way in Company with
them into Scotland; but after he had continued his Journey two or three Days in
that Equipage, which he knew could be no Secret, and that it would draw the
Enemies Troops together, for the Guard of all Passes to meet with him, the
Marquis was found missing one Morning by his Company, who after some Stay and
Enquiry returned back to Oxford, whilst this noble Person with incredible
Address and Fatigue, had not only quitted his Company and his Servants, but his
Horse also, and found a safe Passage, most Part on Foot, through all the Enemies
Quarters, till he came to the very Borders Clarendon.
; from whence, by the Assistance of Friends whom he trusted, he found himself
secure in the Border of the Highlands, with his most faithful Friend the Lord
of Inchbrackie Guthry's Memoirs.
; where he lay quiet without undertaking any Action, until the Earl of Antrim
did make good so much of his Undertaking, that he sent over Colonel Alexander
M^Donald, with a Regiment of Fifteen Hundred Soldiers, who landed in the
Highlands, at or near the Place that had been agreed on Bishop Wishart's
Memoirs of the Marquis of Montrose.
, where the Marquis was ready to receive him, which he did with great Joy, and
quickly published his Commission of being General for the King over all the
Kingdom.

With this Handful of Men thus brought together, with those Circumstances, he
brought in so many of his Countrymen to join with him, as were soon strong
enough to arm themselves at the Charge of their Enemies, whom they first
defeated, and every Day increased in Power, till he fought, and prevailed in
the several Battles of Tippermuir, Alfuird, Aldearn, Aberdeen, Inverlochy, and
Kilsyth, that he made himself in little more than one Year, upon the Matter,
Master of the Kingdom; and did all those stupenduous Acts which are deservedly
the Subject of a History excellently written in Latin by Dr. George Wishart,
thereafter Bishop of Edinburgh, though very ill translated since by an unknown
Hand.

After the Battle of Kilsyth, his Excellency the Marquis mareh'd Eastward, took
the City of Edinbutgh The Bishop of Dunkeld's Memoirs.
; and advancing his Course toward England, he was unexpectedly attacked by
Major General David Lesly, with the whole Strength of the Scots Horse, at
Philiphaugh, on the 13th of September 1645 Bishop Guthry's Memoirs.
, where he was totally defeated; so that his future Triumph was not only
prevented, but he was compelled with great Loss to retire again to the
Highlands, for recruiting of his Army, in which he had wonderfully succeeded,
when he received his Majesty's positive Orders, while he was in the Hands of
the Scots Army before Newark, to lay down his Arms by a certain Day prefixed,
and to leave the Kingdom Lord C^^rendon's History.
, till when they pretended they could no^ declare for his Majesty; and this was
done with so much Earnestness, and by a particular Messenger known and trusted,
that the Marquis obeyed and transported himself into France, toward the End of
the Year 1646 Bishop Wishart's Memoirs of the Marquis of Montrose. Clarendon.
, where he did for some Time reside, and took the Opportunity while he attended
at that Court, to make some Overtures to Cardinal Mazerine, to raise any Army
for the Service of the King, which the crafty Cardinal did not receive, says
the Lord Clarendon, with that Regard the Marquis's great Name deserved.
Thereupon his Excellency left France, and made a Journey into Germany, to the
Emperor's Court; and thence to Brussels, where he lay privately, and as
incognito for some Time, till he heard of the Murder of the King, that he
came to the Hague, and presented himself to King Charles II. with the Tender of
his Service (c)
; and his Majesty received him with a very good Countenance, and as a most
gracious Testimony of his great Fidelity and Merit, presented him with the
Ensigns of the most noble Order of the Garter.

While the King remained at the Hague, there were at this Time, beside the
Marquis of Montrose, and those of the Nobility who adhered to him, the
Commissioners who came from the Council and the Kirk, to invite his Majesty
into Scotland, and the Duke of Hamilton, and others of the Nobility who joined
with him; and though there was nothing the King wished more than that some
Expedient might be found out to unite all those Parties; especially that there
might be an Union and Reconciliation betwixt Mentrose and the Ha^^iltonion
Faction, who had an equal Desire to serve the King, and were as much persecuted
by the Party who then governed, as the Marquis was; yet the Animosity of each
of them was such against him, that they were equally his implacable Enemies,
insomuch as they did not only refuse to meet with him, but as soon as he came
into the Room where they were, though his Majesty himself was present, they
immediately withdrew and left the Room Ibidem.
, and desired that the Marquis, whom they called James Graham, might be
forbidden to come into his Majesty's Presence, because he stood excommunicated
by the Kirk, and degraded and forfaulted by the Judicatory of the Kingdom: With
which Demand his Majesty declared his being very much offended, which he made
manifest by using the Marquis with the more Countenance, and in holding the
more frequent Conferences with him.

But when the Marquis clearly perceived that it was not possible that the Lords
of the other Parties would ever unite with him, and that his Attendance on the
King might possibly bring some Prejudice to his Service, he therefore proposed,
that his Majesty would give him Letters and Credentials to several Princes in
Germany; and to the Northern Crowns, by which he might appear Ambassador
Extraordinary from the King, if he should find it expedient, to the End he
might, by the Help of these Princes, obtain the Loan of Moneys, Arms and
Ammunition, to enable him to prosecute his intended Descent into Scotland; and
the King, says my Author the Earl of Clarendon, glad that he did not press for
ready Money, which he was not able to supply him with, gave him such Letters as
he desired, and a Commission to gather such a Force together, as by the Help of
those Princes he might be enabled to do: Upon which the Marquis went for
Hamburgh, which he appointed for the Rendezvous for all those Troops, which he
expected from Germany, and from whence he could in the mean Time visit such
Courts of the Neighbor Princes, as he should be encouraged to do, and keep
such Intelligence with his Friends in Scotland, as should provide for his
Reception. In a Word, he sent or went in Person, both to Sweden and Denmark,
where he found the Performance very disproportionable to the Hopes and
Encouragement he had received from thence; so that the Marquis was obliged to
return to Hamburgh, with very small Supplies, from either or both these
Kingdoms; and there he received no better Account from those Officers whom he
had sent to Germany; and therefore concluding upon the Whole, that all his
Hopes from Germany and those Northern Princes would not increase the Strength
he had already, which did not amount to above Five Hundred, he caused those
Soldiers he had drawn together, to be embarked for Scotland, and sent Officers
with them, who knew the Country, with Directions that they should land in such
a Place, and remain there till he came to them, or sent them Orders; and then
in another Vessel commanded by a Captain very faithful to the King, he embarked
himself, and near an Hundred Officers, and landed in another Creek, not far
from the other Place whither his Soldiers were directed; and both the one and
the other Party were set safely on Shore, in the Orkneys, on the 15th of April
1650 Memoirs of the Marquis of Montrose.
; from thence he came over to Caithness History of the Revolutions in England,
by a French Clergyman, where Montrose's Expedition is particularly narrated.
, and presently repaired to the House of a Gentleman of Quality, with whom he
corresponded; by whom he was well received, and thought himself to be in
Security, till he might put his Affairs in some Method: After he had staid
there a short Time, he quickly possessed himself of an old Castle, which, in
Respect of the Situation, in a Country so impossible for an Army to march in,
thought strong enough for his Purpose. Thither he convoyed the Arms, Ammunition
and Troops, which he had brought with him; and then he published his
Declaration, That he came with the King's Commission, to assist those his good
Subjects, and to preserve them from Oppression: That he did not intend to give
any Interruption to the Treaty that he heard was entered into with his
Majesty; but, on the contrary, hoped, that his being in the Head of an Army,
how small soever, that was faithful to the King, might advance the same.
However, he had given sufficient Proof in his former Actions, that if any
Agreement were made with the King, upon the first Order from his Majesty, he
should lay down his Arms, and dispose himself according to his Majesty's good
Pleasure. With these Declarations which he sent to his Friends, to be scattered
by them, and dispersed among the People, as they could be able, he writ
likewise to those of the Nobility, and the principal Heads of the Highland
Clans, to draw such Forces together as they thought necessary, to join with
him; and he received Answers from many of them, by which they desired him to
advance more into the Low-Lands, and assured him, that they would resort to
him, with good Numbers of their Friends and Followers, which many of them did
prepare to do, with great Sincerity.

The Alarm of Montrose's Landing startled the Parliament, which was then
sitting at Edinburgh, in so much, that it gave them no Leisure to think of any
Thing else, than of sending Forces to hinder the Recourse of others to join
with him; and therefore, sent Colonel Strachan with a choice Party of the best
Horse they had, to make all possible Haste toward him, and to prevent the
Insurrections which they feared would be in several Parts of the Highlands; and
within few Days after, Lieutenant General Lesly followed with a stronger Party
of Horse and Foot. The Encouragement the Marquis received from his Friends, and
the Unpleasantness of the Quarters, in which he was, prevailed with him to
march with these few Troops more into the Land; and the Highlanders flocking to
him from all Quarters, made him undervalue any Enemy who he thought was yet
like to encounter him; and the Marquis being without any Body of Horse to
discover the Motion of an Enemy, but depending upon all necessary Intelligence
from the Affections of the People; Strachan made such Haste toward him, that he
was within a small Distance of him, before he heard of his Approach, and those
Highlanders who had seemed to come with much Zeal to him, whether terrified or
corrupted, left him on a sudden, or threw down their Arms; so that he had none
left but a Company of good Officers, and Five or Six Hundred Foreigners, Dutch
and Germans; with these he betook himself to a Place of some Advantage, by the
Inequality of the Ground; and there they made a Defense for some Time with
notable Courage; but the Enemy being so much superior in Number, the common
Soldiers being all Foreigners, after about a Hundred of them were killed upon
the Place, threw down their Arms; And the Marquis seeing all lost, threw away
his Ribband and George, and found Means to change his Clothes with a Fellow of
the Country; and so after having gone on Foot Two or Three Miles, he got into a
House of a Gentleman, M'Leod of Assint, Mercurius Politicus ad Annum 1661.
, where he remained concealed about Two Days; but whether by the Owner of the
House, or any other Way, the Marquis was discovered, and became their Prisoner,
and was the next Day or soon thereafter delivered to the General, who was come
up with his Forces, and had now nothing left to do, but to carry him in Triumph
to Edinburgh.

When he came to one of the Gates of Edinburgh, he was met by some of the
Magistrates, to whom he was delivered, and by them presently put into a new
Cart purposely made, in which there was a high Chair, or Bench, upon which he
sat, that the People might have a full View of him, being bound with a Cord
drawn over his Breast and Shoulders, and fastened through Holes made in the Cart.
When he was in this Posture, the Hangman took off his Hat, and rode himself
before the Cart in his Livery, and with his Bonnet on; the other Officers, who
were taken Prisoners with him, walking Two and Two before the Cart; in this
Manner he was carried to the common Goal, and received and treated as a common
Malefactor.

Within Two Days after, he was brought before the Parliament, where the
Chancellor made a very bitter and virulent Speech against him, told him, He had
broken all the Covenants by which the Nation stood obliged, and had impiously
rebelled against GOD, the King and the Kingdom; that he had committed many
horrible Murders, Treasons and Impieties, for all which he was now brought to
suffer condign Punishment; with all those Reproaches, says my Author, against
his Person and his Actions, which the Liberty of that Place gave him Leave to
use.

Permission was then given him to speak, and without the least Trouble in his
Countenance, or Disorder, upon all the Indignities he had suffered, he told
them, Since the King had owned them ^o far as to treat with them, he had
appeared before them with Reverence, and bare headed, which otherwise he would
not willingly have done: That he had done nothing of which he was ashamed, or
had Cause to repent; that the first Covenant, he had taken, and complied with
it, and with them who took it, as long as the Ends for which it was ordained
were observed; but when he discovered, which was now evident to all the World,
that private and particular Men designed to satisfy their own Ambition and
Interest, instead of considering the Public Benefit; and that, under the
Pretense of reforming some Errors in Religion, they resolved to abridge, and
take away the King's just Power, and lawful Authority, he had withdrawn himself
from that Engagement: That for the League and Covenant, he had never taken it,
and therefore could not break it: And it was now too apparent to the whole
Christian World, what monstrous Mischiefs it had produced: That when, under
Color of it, an Army from Scotland had invaded England in Assistance of the
Rebellion that was then against their Lawful King, he had, by his Majesty's
Command, received a Commission from him to raise Forces in Scotland, that he
might thereby divert them from the other odious Persecution: That he had
executed that Commission with the Obedience and Duty he owed to the King; and
in all the Circumstances of it, had proceeded like a Gentleman; and had never
suffered any Blood to be shed but in the Heat of the Battle; and that he saw
many Persons there, whose Lives he had saved: that when the King commanded him,
he laid down his Arms, and withdrew out of the Kingdom; which they could not
have compelled him to have done. He said, he was now again entered into the
Kingdom by his Majesty's Command, and with his Authority: And what Success
soever it might have pleased GOD to have given him, he would always have obeyed
any Commands he should have received from him. He advised them, to consider
well of the Consequence before they proceeded against him, and that all his
Actions might be examined, and judged by the Laws of the Land, or those of
Nations.

As Soon as he had ended his Discourse, he was ordered to withdraw; and, after a
short Space, was again brought in; and told by the Chancellor, That he was, on
the Morrow, being the one and Twentieth of May 1650, to be carried to Edinburgh
Cross, and there to be hanged up on a Gallows Thirty Foot high, for the Space
of Three Hours, and then to be taken down, and his Head to be cut off upon a
Scoffold, and hanged on Edinburgh Tolboth; his Legs and Arms to be hanged up in
other public Towns of the Kingdom, and his Body to be buried at the Place
where he was to be executed, except the Kirk should take off his
Excommunication; and then his Body might be buried in the common Place of
Burial. And it is admirable to consider with what Magnanimity and Firmness of
Soul he heard the Judgment that condemned him to be quartered, concerning which
he said to the Chancellor that pronounced it, That he was prouder to have his
Head set upon the Place it was appointed to be, than he could have been to have
had his Picture hang in the King's Bedchamber: That he was so far from being
troubled, that his Four Limbs were to be hanged in Four principal Cities of the
Kingdom, that he heartily wished he had Flesh enough to be sent to every City
in Christendom, as a Testimony of the Cause for which he suffered.

He desired after the Sentence to have said somewhat to the Parliament, but was
not suffered, and so was carried back to Prison; and the next Day every Part
and Circumstance of the Sentence was executed upon him with all the Inhumanity
imaginable; and he bore it with all the Courage and Magnanimity, and the
greatest Piety that a good Christian could manifest. When he had ended all he
had to say, and was expecting to expire, they acted yet one Scene more of their
Barbarity upon him; the Hangman brought the Book that had been published, of
his truly Heroic Actions whilst he commanded in the Kingdom, which, together
with his Declaration, was tied in a small Cord, that was put about his Neck. At
this new Instance of their Malice the Marquis smiled, and thanked them for it,
and said, he was glad it should be there, and was prouder of wearing it, than
ever he had been of the Garter. and so renewing some devote Ejaculations, he
patiently endured the last Act of the Executioner.

Thus died the gallant Marquis of Montrose, after he had given, says the Earl
of Clarendon, in his Character of him, 'as great a Testimony of Loyalty and
Courage as a Subject can do, and performed as wonderful Actions in several
Battles, upon as great Inequality of Numbers, and as great Disadvantages in
Respect of Arms, and other Preparations for War, as have been performed in this
Age.' And he adds, 'That Montrose was in his Nature fearless of Danger, and
never declined any Enterprise for the Difficulty of going through with it, but
exceedingly affected those which seemed desperate to other Men, and did believe
somewhat to be in himself above other Men, which made him live more easy
toward those who were, or were wi^^ing to be inferior to him, toward whom he
exercised wonderful Civility and Generosity, than with his Superiors or Equals.
He was naturally jealous, and suspected those who did not concur with him in
the Way, not to mean so well as he. He was not without Vanity, but his Virtues
were much superior, and he well deserved to have his Memory preserved and
celebrated amongst the most illustrious Persons of the Age in which he lived.'

His Body was interred at the Place of Execution, where it rested till the
Restoration of the King, that by his Majesty's special Appointment, his
scattered Parts were gathered together and deposited in the Abbey-Church of
Holy-Rood-House, where it remained till the 14th of May 1661, his Corpse was
with the greatest Magnificence and Solemnity that could be devised, carried to
the Cathedral Church of St. Giles, and interred in the Isle belonging to his
Family Relation of the Funerals of the great Marquis of Montrose, printed in
1661.
, b^i^g accompanied by the Lord High Commissioner, the Earl of Middleton, and
all the Members of Parliament, to the Grave; over which this Inscription was
intended to be set up, which I have for the Satisfaction of the Curious, here
insert. Immortali verae Nobilitatis, inaequandae Magnanimitatis, incontaminati
Honoris, and intemeratae Fidelitatis, Magni GRAMI, M.S.

SI quis hic jacet quaeris, Viator, Magnus hic est ille Montis-Rosarum March^^,
generosi genii suae Famil^ae generosus Haeres, qui virescentibus adhuc (licet
ann^sis) majorum suorum pal^nis tot victrices contexuit lauros, ut si omnes
illi huic uni an unus hic illis omnibus plus Gloriae contulerii scire sii
nefas. Hic est nobilis ille Montis-Rosarum Marchio, qui si Prosapia an Virtute
illustrior, Consilio an Dextra prompiior, Aulae an Castris charior, Principibus
suis an exteris gratior, Perduellionis Malleus durior, an Monarchiae Assertor
acrior, Fama an Fortuna clarior, in Vita denique insignior an in Morie
constantior exstiterit, dictu difficile. Hic est, Viator, magnus ille Dux Ducum
sui seculi facile Prin ceps; Dux qui cum Peditum manipulo (ne dicam Exercitulo)
pene inermi, Victus and Amictus inope, Causae, Aequitati, Du cis Magnanimitati
and Gladiis confiso suis, ingentes Hostium Acies armatas duodecim mensium (plus
minus) Spatio sep ties vidit, vicit, delevit. Majora haec Caesaris oculata
Victoria. Sed proh instabilem lubrici Fati rotam! qui Arma, Castra, Oppida,
Turres, Propugnacalo, qui Frigus, Famem, Sit^^, inaccessa montium juga, immo
omnia superare consueverat tandem maligno Fortunae Errore victus, nequissime
Hostibus traditus, quid non passus! Protomartyris Regis sui Martyr pedissequus
plus quam barbaro ^nimicorum Furori (nisi tam generoso S^nguine implacabili)
and effraenae Praest igiatorum Druidum Insolentiae Victima oblatus, invictam
Malis exspiravii Animam. Sic concidit nobile illud Diadematis Ful^rum, sic
occidit resplendens ille Caledoniae Ph^sphorus, sic occubuii magnus ille Martis
Alumnus, and cum illo Mascula quaeque superfoetantis Virtutis Soboles, per
Obstitrices indigenas ipsis Aegyptiis crudeliores trucidata. Post undecennium
Ossa effodi, Membra recol. ligi, and per Proceres and Regni Comitia a Coenobio
Regio S. Crucis per Metropolim, summo cum Splendore ad Aedes D. Aegidio sacras
comitata, impensis suis Regiis sub hoc Monumento magnifico, cum Avo suo nobili,
quondam Scotiae Prorege, sepeliri mandavit August issimus Regum Carolus II.
Imperio suo divinitus restitutus. Vale Viator, and quisquis es, immensam
ferenissimi Principis erga suos Pietatem and posthumum hunc Magni GRAMI
pristinae suae Gloriae redivivi cole Triumphum.



The noble Marquis married Magdalen, Daughter of David, first Earl of Southesk,
by whom he had James his Son and Heir.

This noble Lord was too young to have had a Part in the War under his Father:
After whose Death being divested of his Estate, he lived quietly and privately
under the Powers that then prevailed, retaining his Affection and Fidelity to
the Crown, which he made manifest in performing all the Offices of Fidelity and
Duty to the King, throughout the whole Course of the Usurpation, that a
generous and worthy Person could find any Opportunity for; with which his
Majesty was abundanty satisfied and pleased.

Upon the Return of the King, the Marquis was restored to his Estate, and the
Act of his Father's Forfaulture repelled, and he was named one of the Lords of
his Majesty's Privy Council: But that which was thought strange, and
administered much Discourse, both then and afterward, was, that his Lordship
was not preferred to any of the great Offices of the Crown, considering the
transcendent Merit of his Father, and the great Value and Esteem the King had
of himself, as a Nobleman of great Honor and Integrity; but the Reason I have
ever heard assigned for it, was, that the Marquis did not affect any public
Character, a Life of Privacy and Quiet being really his own Choice, and what
was more suited to his Humor and Nature; and dying in the Month of February,
in the 1669 Charta in Cancellaria, S. D. N. R.
, was upon the 23d of of April thereafter interred at the Chapel of
Aber-Ruthven in Perth Shire, where the Bones of his Ancestors were committed to
their Rest, and his Funeral Sermon was preached by Dr. Alexander Burnet, then
Archbishop of Glasgow, wherein he gave the Marquis a very good Character. He
was a Nobleman of great Honor and Probity, so great a Lover of Justice, and so
strict in the Observation of his Word and Promise, that no Man was ever more
worthy the Title of, An honest Man.

He married Isobel, Daughter of William Earl of Morton, Widow of Robert, first
Earl of Roxburgh, by whom he had James his Successor, and Lord Charles, who
died a young Man of great Hopes and Courage; like wise three Daughters,

Lady Anne, married to Alexander Earl of Calendar.

Lady Jean to Sir Jonathan Urquhart of Cromarty.

Lady Grisel to Mr. William Co^hran of Kilmaronock, Son to William Lord Cochran.

James Marquis of Montrose his Son was a Nobleman of great Parts, which were
improved by a good Education. Upon the Death of his Father the King took him
into his immediate and eminent Care, made him first, Captain of the Guard; and
then, that he might fit him by Degrees for the greatest Trust and Employments,
preferred him to be President of the Privy Council; but Death overtook him not
long thereafter, in the Prime of his Years, upon the 25th of April 1684 Charta
in Cancellatia, S. D. N. R. data 23d February 1705.
, to the general Regret of the whole Nation, and the particular Sorrow of his
own Relations, who lamented his Death exceedingly, as a great Loss to his
Family. By Christian his Wife, Daughter of John Duke of Rothes, he had only a
Son James, the present Duke of Montrose.

This noble Lord being a Person of very bright and distinguishing Parts, and
the Head of a very noble Family, that had in no Time swerved in its Fidelity to
the Crown, her Majesty Queen Anne, soon after he came to Age, called him to her
Privy Council, made him first, Lord High Admiral of Scotland, in the Beginning
of the 1705 Ibidem, data 28 February 1706.
, and then Lord President of the Council in little more as a Year thereafter
Ibidem.
; in which Station, and in all other Capacities, his Lordship did exert himself
with the most ardent Zeal and Vigor, in promoting the Succession to the Crown
in the Protestant Line, and on that Account did all he could to consolidate the
Two Kingdoms in an incorporating Union, and thereby giving a Sanction to the
Title of the most serene House of Hanover, to the Crown of this Realm; in
Consideration whereof, as well as in Respect of his Lordship's personal Merit,
and in Honor of his noble Family, for which the Queen did always prosess a
very great Value and Regard, her Majesty was pleased by Letters Patent 24th of
April 1707, to make the Marquis Duke of Montrose Ibidem.
; and it is to be observed as a special Instance of her Majesty's more immediate
Favou^, that the Honor was not restricted to the Heirs Male of the Duke's own
Body; but was to descend to his Heirs of Entail.

His Grace continued Lord President of the Council, till the Parliament of
Great Britain thought fit to dissolve the Scots Privy Council some Time after
the commencing of the Union, that the Duke of Montrose was made Lord
Privy Seal, upon the Removal of the Duke of Queensberry, the 28th February
1709; and he held that Office, till the 1713 Ibid.
, he was laid aside for not complying with the Measures of the Court during the
Earl of Oxford's Administration, and the Duke of Athole was made Privy Seal in
his Place.

The Duke's firm and inviolable Adherence to the Protestant Succession, which
his Grace had so early, and with so much Zeal maintained and asserted, could
not fail to entitle him to a more than ordinary Favor of the illustrious
Family, in whom the Right was established by Law; and therefore, when the
Successor, his Electoral Highness the Duke of Brunswick was by Act of
Parliament empowered to nominate so many Persons as he should think proper, to
be joined with the Seven great Officers of State, in the Administration of the
Government till his Arrival An Historical Account of the Affairs of Great
Britain, with the most remarkable Occurrences from the Accession of King George
to the Throne, 1714.
, his Royal Highness did repose such Confidence in the Duke's Affection and
Fidelity to his Interest, that he had the Honor to be named one of the Lords
of the Regency: But being at his Seat in the Country when the Act of Settlement
of the Crown did actually take Effect, by the Demise of Queen Anne, of glorious
Memory, on the 31st of July 1714, his Grace made Haste to Edinburgh, where he
was present at the Proclamation of King George; and taking Post for London, he
arrived there on the 10th of August thereafter, where he concurred cordially and
cheerfully with the other Lords Justices, in taking Care to issue out such
Orders as were necessary to support the Honor and Dignity of the Crown, and to
secure the Peace and Tranquillity of the Kingdom. King George having arrived in
Britain on the 18th of September, Six Days thereafter his Majesty was pleased
to appoint his Grace the Duke to be One of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries
of State, in the Room of the Earl of Mar, and in a very gracious Manner to
honor him with several distinguishing Marks of his Royal Favor.

His Grace married the Lady Christian Carnegie, Daughter of David Earl of
Northesk, a Lady of the most consummated Virtue, by whom he had James Lord
Graham, who died in his Infancy, David Marquis of Graham, Lord William; and a
Daughter, Lady Margaret.

ARMS.
Quarterly First and Fourth on a Chief, Sable, Three Escalops of the First.
Second and Third, Argent, Three Roses, Gules. Supporters, Two Storks proper.
Crest, a Falcon Azure, killing a Heron, Argent. Motto, Ne Oblie.

MONYPENNY, Lord Monypenny.
THE first of this Surname I have found upon Record, was Richardus de
Monypenny, who in the Reign of King Alexander II. obtained from Thomas, Prior
of St. Andrews, the Lands of Pitmulin, in the Shire of Fife Sir Robert
Sibbald's History of the Shire of Fife.
, which Lands of Pitmilly his Posterity enjoy even to this Time.

Sir William Monypenny of Monypenny, Knight. a Son of this Family, having
faithfully served King James I. and II. in diverse Foreign Negotiations, with
Diligence, Honor, and Success, was in Reward of these his acceptable Services,
by the special Favor of King James II. raised to the Honor of Lord Monypenny,
May 1st, 1450 Charta in Pub. Archivis, whereby several Lands are erected into
the Barony of Monypenny, in Favors of this Sir William, after which he is
always designed in the Records, Wil^elmus Dominus Monypenny.
. He left a Son,

Alexander Lord Monypenny Charta in Pub. Arch.
, who having no Male Issue of his Body, exchanged the Barony of Earlshall in
Fife, with Sir Alexander Bruce, for his Lands called Escariot in France, Anno
1495 Ibidem.
, and the Peerage failed in himself.

DOUGLASS, Lord Mordington.
SIR James Douglass, Second Son to William Earl of Angus, having married Anne
only Daughter and Heir of Laurence Lord Oliphant, was by the Favor of King
Charles I. created Lord Mordington, with the Precedence of the Peerage of
Oliphant.

By the said Anne his Wife, he had Issue William his Successor, and a Daughter
Anne, married to Robert Lord Semple.

Which William, by Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of Hugh, Lord Semple, had James
his Successor, who married........ Daughter of Alexander Viscount of Kingston,
and left Issue George the present Lord.

DOUGLASS, Earl of Morton.
THE first of this collateral Branch of the illustrious Family of Douglass, was
Sir James Douglass of Louden, Knight. who in the First of King Robert the Bruce,
Anno 1306, had a Grant from that Prince of the Lands of Kincavel and
Calderclear, and to his Heirs Charta penes Comitem de Morton.
. He left Issue Two Sons, Sir William Douglass, Lord of Lydsdale, who, for his
Bravery was called, The Flower of Chivalry, who died without Issue, Anno 1353,
and Sir John Douglass, Captain of the Castle of L^chliven, under King David II.
who in the Minority of that King strenuously defended that Fort against the
English, who ofnter than once assaulted it, for which Service to his Country,
the Historians of that Time have not been wanting to transmit such a Character
of him to Posterity, as his Merit deserved. By Agnes Monfode his Wife Ibidem.
, he had Issue Sir James Douglass of Dalkieth, his Son and Heir, Sir Henry
Douglass of Lugton and Lochliven, Progenitor to the present Earl of Morton, and
Nicolus, of whom the Branch of the Douglasses of Mains Ibidem.
, in the County of Dunbarton.

Sir James succeeded his Father in his paternal Estate, and his Uncle the Lord
Lydsdale, in the Baronies of Dalkieth and Aberdour; and the rest of his
Fortune, which was of great Exte^^ and Value, whereby he came to be placed
among the first Rank of the greater Barons. He married first Agnes Dunbar,
Daughter to the Earl of March Ibidem.
, by whom he had James his Son and Heir, William Douglass, designed of
Mordington Ibidem.
; likewise Three Daughters, Janeta married to Sir John Hamilton of Cadzio^
Ibidem, ad Annum 1388.
, Agnes to Sir John Livingston of Calendar Ibidem, ad Annum 1381.
, Margaret to Philip Arbuthnot of That Ilk Ibidem, ad Annum 1372.
; next, Giles, Daughter of Walter, Lord High Stewart of Scotland, Widow both of
Sir David Lindsay of Crawford, and of Sir Hugh Eglington of That-Ilk Ibidem.
by whom he had no Issue.

James Lord Dalkieth, his Son, married the Lady Elizabeth Stewart, Daughter of
King Robert III. Charta penes Comitem de Morton, Roberti tertii dilecto filio
suo Jacobo Douglass, filio and haer^^j Jacobi de Douglass, Domini de Dalkieth,
and sponsae suae Elizabethae, filiae nostrae carissimae, ad Annum 1402.
, by whom he had James his Successor; and after her Death, Janet, Daughter of
William Lord Borthwick, by whom he had William Douglass, the first of the House
of Whitingham Ibid.
.

Which James married first Margaret, Daughter of James Earl of Douglass; and
after that Elizabeth, Daughter of..... Giffard of Shireffhall, by whom he had
James, thereafter Earl of Morton, and Henry Douglass, first of Corhead Ibid.
and Lang Niddry.

Which James was, by the special Favor of King James II. raised to the Dignity
of Earl of Morton, in Parliament on the 14th of March 1457 Ibid.
. He married the Lady Jean, Daughter of King James I. Dowager Countess of Angus
Charta in Pub. Arch.
, by whom he had

John his Successor, who married Janet, Daughter of........ Crichton of
Cranston-Riddle. By her he had James his Son and Heir, Richard Douglass, Esquire
Elizabeth married to Robert Lord Kieth, and Agnes to Alexander Lord Livingston.

Which James married Catharine, Natural Daughter of King James IV. by whom he
had Three Daughters,

Margaret married to James Earl of Arran, thereafter Duke of Chattlerault.

Beatrix to Robert Lord Maxwell.

Elizabeth to James Douglass, Son of Sir George Douglass of Pittendrich.

This Earl having no Male Issue of his Body, made an Entail of his Estate and
Honor to Robert Douglass of Lochliven, a Male Relation of his own, which was
ratified by a Charter under the Great-Seal of King James V. Anno 1540 Charta
penes Comitem de Morton.
, But after the Death of that King, the Earl having it still in his Power to
alter that Destination any Time in his own Life, thought fit actually to change
the Settlement, and to make a new Convoyance of his Estate and Honor to James
Douglass his Son-in-Law; by Virtue of which he came to enjoy both on the Death
of the old Earl, in the 1553, but he having no Issue by his Lady the Earl of
Morton's Daughter, in the 1567, made an Entail of the Earldom of Morton, in
Favors of Archbald Earl of Angus his own Nephew, and in Case of Failure of his
Issue Male, to William Douglass of Lochliven, Son to the beforementioned
Robert, who had been slain in the Service of his Country, at the Battle of
Pinky; which Settlement thereafter took Place upon the Death of the Earl of
Angus.

In the 1558. the Earl of Morton was one of the Peers who entered into a Bond
of Association to promote the Reformation of Religion, and the Year thereafter
was sent Ambassador to England to treat with Queen Elizabeth, about the
maintaining a firm and lasting Peace betwixt the Two Crowns, when he
established himself so much in the Favor of that Princess, that her Friendship
was never in any Degree diminished toward him till his dying Day.

After Queen Mary returned home from France in 1561, her Majesty made Choice of
the Earl as one of her Privy Council, and in less than a Year thereafter, he
was sent Ambassador to the Queen of England, in which Negotiation he behaved
himself with great Prudence and Dexterity, insomuch as upon his Return he was
preferred to be Lord High-Chancellor; and he continued in the Office till the
20th of March 1565, he was deprived, and forced to flee to England, for
alleged Accession to the Murder of David Rizio, the Queen's French Secretary:
But in a short Time thereafter, by the Mediation and Interposition of the Earl
of Bothwell, he obtained his Pardon, which he paid dear for afterward; for that
Earl thought by this Favor, to bring the Earl of Morton over to his Interest;
but he soon found himself mistaken. For though he had all Duty and Gratitude to
him as a Friend, yet the wicked Earl Bothwel did no sooner propose to him the
Design, and craved his Assistance, toward the Murder of the Lord Darnly, the
Queen's Husband, as a Piece of Service which would be very acceptable to her
Majesty; but he conjured him to lay ^side the Thoughts of so base and unworthy
an Enterprise; and which would be attended with so much Infamy and Danger: And
when he could not prevail in that Point, in Testimony he did abhor so
detestable a Design, he left the Court, and retired to the Country, when that
bloody and barbarous Tragedy was to be acted. And I think the Earl of Morton's
Circumstances at this Time, cannot but be pitied; for if he had revealed the
Earl of Bothwel's Design of taking away the King's Life, it had cost him his
own; and his concealing it then, brought him to die upon a Scaffold many Years
thereafter.

After the Murder of King Henry, when the Nation, both Protestants and Papists,
began to be alarmed with the Queen's Marriage with the Earl of Bothwell, who
was shrewdly suspected as the Murderer of her former Husband, and the Danger
the young Prince was in by such an Union; the Earl of Morton was one of the
most forward among the Nobility, who entered into an Association for the
Preservation of the Prince; and when the Queen resigned the Government to the
End her Son might be invested in the Sovereignty the Earl of Morton took the
Coronation Oath for the Infant King, at his Inauguration, on the 29th of July
1567.

In this new Turn of Affairs the Earl of Morton's Share was so considerable,
that as soon as the Earl of Murray had accepted the Regency, the Earl of Morton
was declared Chancellor, upon the Removal of the Earl of Huntly, who adhered to
the Queen, and made heritable Lord High Admiral of Scotland, and
Sheriff-Principal of Edinburgh-Shire Charta penes Comitem de Morton, ad Annum
1570.
. He held the Chancellor's Place till the 24th of November 1572, he was by the
unanimous Choice of the King's Party, elected Regent, a Month after the Death
of his Predecessor in Office, the Earl of Mar.

I shall not here enter upon the Detail of the Earl of Morton's Administration
during his Regency, that would not consist with the Brevity of this Work; and
generally his Proceedings are complained of on one Side, or commended on the
other, as Opinions and Party lead Men to, I shall only take Notice, that the
first Motion he made to resign the Government in the 1578, was accepted in a
general Convention of the Nobility, wherein it was agreed to, that the young
King should take upon him the Administration, when he was not full Thirteen
Years of Age; and yet the new Court kept fair with the Earl, for they procured
a Parliament to be called, wherein the late Regent obtained a Remission and
Exoneration during his Regency, in the most ample Manner he himself could
devise; and after that he played his Game so well, that he was in a short Time
again made President of the Council, and was in great Credit with his Majesty
Melvil's Memoirs.
; but that being what was not at all acceptable to the other Party, who had the
young King in their Hands, and who were willing to be rid of the Earl of Morton
at any Rate; for that End Sir John Mattland and Sir Robert Melvil, his
professed Enemies, brought about his Ruin, by pushing on Captain James Stewart,
the Lord Ochiltree's Son, to accuse him as accessory to the Murder of the
King's Father, which the Captain did before the Council, where the Earl himself
was present, on the 31st of December 1580; whereupon he was committed Prisoner
to the Castle of Edinburgh, and was thence sent under a strong Guard to
Dunbarton; from whence he was on the first of June thereafter brought to his
Trial at Edinburgh; and being found guilty by his Peers, of Art and Part in the
Murder of the King's Father, in so far as he had concealed and not revealed it
when the Earl of Bothwell proposed it to him; he was condemned to be hanged,
drawn and quartered, which the King was pleased to mitigate so far, that
instead of being hanged, he had the Favor to be beheaded, which was
accordingly execute on him at the Cross of Edinburgh, on the 2d of June 1581.

Upon the Death and Forfaulture of the Regent, the Title of, Earl of Morton was
bestowed upon the Lord Maxwell; but his Majesty having recalled and revoked
that Deed, and being further willing and desirous, that all Animosities and
Grounds of Contention among the Nobility might be removed, for that End a
Parliament was called in the 1585, wherein his Majesty passed an Act of
Oblivion, whereby every Body who had been forfaulted during the Troubles in the
King's Minority were indemnified, except such as had been accessory to his
Father's Murder: And though the Earl of Morton had been convicted of that Crime,
and suffered for it, yet his Majesty considering, Bona, fidelia, gratuita
Servitia Nobis facta per quondam Comitem de Morton, in Gubernatione and
Administratione Nostri Regni; nec non alia debita and egregia Officia Nobis in
Nostra Minoritate per ipsum praestita and impensa; considerantes etiam quod
dictus quondam Comes de Morton, nullatenus conscius fuit Artis and Partis dicti
Criminis, neque ejusdem Fac^noris and Caedis Perpetrationi ullatenus consensit,
sed tantummodo predict^m Caedem praecognovit, and celavit; quam ob causam
praefatus Comes de Morton in Corpore satis superque luit juxta dictam
Sententiam Forisfacturae contra eum latam and promulgatam, unde Legibus and
Nostro Honori abunde ex hac Part satisfactum fuit Charta penes Comitem de
Morton, data 2^ January, 1585.
. Nos igitur, etc. For these and other Reasons, his Majesty was pleased by
Letters under his Great Seal, in Pursuance of the Act of Parliament to
rehabilitate the Earl of Morton, in the most ample Manner, thereby enabling his
Heirs to succeed to his Lands and Honors, by Virtue whereof, Archbald Earl of
Angus, the Earl's Nephew, did succeed as Heir of Entail to the Earldom of
Morton, and which he accordingly enjoyed till his Death, which happened in the
1588, the Estate and Title of Earl of Morton, came to William Douglass of
Lochliven, as the next Heir of Entail Ibidem ad Annum 1589.
. This Earl so succeeding, married Agnes, Daughter of George Earl of Rothes; by
whom he had Robert his Son and Heir apparent, who perished going over to the
Low Countries in the 1583 Hume's Hist. of Douglass.
, leaving Issue by Jean his Wife, Daughter of John Lord Glames Charta in
Rotulis Jacobi VI.
, a Son William, who succeeded his Grandfather. The Earl's second Son was James
Commendator of Melross, the Third Sir Archbald Douglass of Kirkness, the Fourth
Sir George Douglass of Killour; likewise Five Daughters,

Christian married to Laurence Master of Oliphant, and thereafter to Alexander
first Earl of Hume.

Mary to Sir Walter Ogilvy of Findlater, first Lord Deskford.

Eupham to Sir Thomas Lion of Aldbar Charta in Rotulis Jacobi VI. ad Annum 1589.
, Lord High Treasurer of Scotland, in the Reign of King James VI.

Agnes to Archbald Earl of Argyle.

Elizabeth to Francis Earl of Errol.

This Earl dying on the 27th of September 1606 Hist. Ecclesiae Scoticanae,
Authore Arch. Symson, Pastore Dalkiethensi, M.S. in Bibliotheca Academiae
Glasguensis.
, was succeeded by

William his Grandson and Heir, who being a Nobleman of great Parts and
Reputation, was by King Charles I. called to his Council, and thereafter
preferred to be Lord High Treasurer, Anno 1630, upon the Surrender of the Earl
of Mar Charta in Rotulis Caroli I data 12 April 1630.
; and he continued Treasurer till the 1635, he was removed, and the White Staff
given to the Earl of Traquair; in Recompense of which he was constituted
Captain of his Majesty's Guard, and installed a Knight of the Garter.

He married Agnes, Daughter of George Earl Marischal, and dying the 7th of
October 1648 Memoirs of William Earl of Morton, the Treasurer, penes me.
, left Issue Robert his Successor, Sir James Douglass, thereafter Earl of
Morton, John, who was killed in the King's Service at Carbersdale, in 1650
Memoirs of the Family of Morton.
, and George Douglass, Esquire likewise Five Daughters,

Anne married to George Earl of Kinoule.

Margaret to Archbald Marquis of Argyle.

Mary to Charles Earl of Dunfermling.

Jean to James Earl of Hume.

Isobel to Robert first Earl of Roxburgh; and again to James Marquis of
Montrose.

Which Robert married Elizabeth, Daughter of Sir Edward Williers, Sister to the
Lord Viscount Grandison, and Niece to the great Duke of Buckingham, and dying
Anno 1649, left Issue, William his Successor, and Two Daughters, Anne married
to William Earl Marischal; and Mary to Sir Donald Macdonald of Slate, Bart.

Which William married Grisel, Daughter of John first Earl of Middleton Charta
in Rotulis Caroli II.
; but dying without Issue 1681, his Estate and Honor devolved on Sir James
Douglass his Uncle, who dying 25th of August, 1686 Memoirs of the Earls of
Morton.
, left Issue by Anne his Wife, Daughter and Heir of Sir James Hay of
Smithfield, Three Sons.

James his Successor, who was one of the Lords of the Privy Council in the
Reign of Queen Anne, and one of the Commissioners for the late Treaty of Union,
which commenced in 1707. He died a Batchellor 10th December 1715.

Robert, the present Earl, a Peer of good Parts, of great Integrity, and well
affected to the Crown and Protestant Interest, as his Predecessors were.

Colonel George Douglass, a Member of the present Parliament.

ARMS.
Quarterly First and Fourth Argent, a Heart, Gules, crowned with an Imperial
Crown, Or, on a Chief, Azure, Three Mollets of the First. Second and Third,
Argent, Three Pyles, Gules, and in Chief, Two Stars of the First, supported by
Two Savages wreathed about the Head and Middle with Laurel, holding a Club
downward in their Dexter Hand. Crest, a Sanglier proper, sticking in the Clift
of an Oak-Tree, with a Lock holding the Clifts of the Tree together. Motto,
Lock Sicker.

RANDOLPH, Earl of Murray.
THE Earldom of Murray is of a very ancient Erection, for in the Reign of King
David I. Angus Earl of Murray, raised a Rebellion in the Northern Parts, Anno
1330 Chron. Sanctae Crucis de Edinburc, mentions, that in 1130, Anegus Comes
Moraviensis, a Scotis interfectus est.
, which ended in the Ruin of himself and his Abettors.

King Robert the Bruce, in the 1321 gave the Earldom of Murray, to his
Favorite Nephew, the renowned Sir Thomas Randolph, comprehending omnes Terras
suas in Moravia, sicut fue runt in Manibus Domini Alexandri Regis Scotorum,
Predecessoris nostri ultimo defuncti Haddington's Collections from the Public
Records.
. This nobel Earl was upon the Death of his Uncle, King Robert, by the
unanimous Consent of the Estates, as well as by the Destination of the King,
named Regent to the young King, David II. but before he had continued two full
Years in that exalted Station, which he very worthily discharged, he was taken
away by Death in the 1331, leaving Issue by Isobel his Wife, Daughter of Sir
Alexander Stewart of Bonkil, John his Son and Heir, and several Daughters,
Agnes married to Patrick, Earl of March, and Isobel to Sir William Murray, Knight.

Which John did eminently signalize himself in his Loyalty to King David, and
in his Affection and Duty to his Country, during all the Attacks were made upon
our Constitution, either by the English or a disloyal Party of our own
Countrymen, who adhered to Edward Bal^ol at that Time.

He married Eupham, Daughter of Hugh Earl of Ross, but was slain fighting
gallantly in the Service of his Country, at the Battle of Durham, in 1346
Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
, leaving no Issue, so that his Estate and Title devolved to the Countess of
March his Sister, in whose Right, or by the Courtesy of Scotland, the Earl her
Husband designed himself Earl of March and Murray.

DUNBAR, Earl of Murray.
IN the 1373, King Robert II. did by his Royal Charter under the Great Seal,
erect the Earldom of Murray in Favors of John Dunbar, the Earl of March's Son,
and Marjory his Wife, the King's Daughter Charta in Rotulis Roberti II. data in
pleno Parliamento, 9 March, Anno Regni R. R. Secundo.
, and to their Heirs.

They had Issue, Thomas Earl of Murray, and Alexander Dunbar of Frendraught.
This Thomas was the Father of another Earl of the Name of Thomas, one of the
Hostages for the Ransom of King James I. but dying without Issue Male, his
Estate and Title fell to James Dunbar of Frendraught, his Cousin, who espoused
first Isobel, a Lady of the Family of the Inneses, who bare him a Son Sir
Alexander Dunbar, who was thereafter Sheriff of Murray: But this Lady dying
before the Marriage could be consummated according to the Rites of the Romish
Church, which behoved to proceed upon a Dispensation, by Reason of
Consanguinity betwixt the Parties. The Earl married again Janet, Daughter to
the Earl of Huntly, by whom he had Two Daughters, Janet the Elder, married to
the Lord Crichton's Son, and Marion the Younger to Archbald Douglass, Son to
the Earl of Douglass, who in Right of his Wife was Earl of Murray, but
unhappily taking Part with his Brother the Earl of Douglass, in his Rebellion,
in the Reign of King James II. was forfaulted with him and others his
Adherents, in 1455.

STEWART, Earl of Murray.
FROM the Time of King James III, the Earldom of Murray continued in the Crown,
and there remained till the Reign of King James V. that that Prince by Letters
Patent, bearing Date on the 20th of J^ne 1501 Charta in Rotulis Jacobi IV.
, gave it to James Stewart his Natural Son, whom he had by Jean Kennedy, the
Lord Kennedy's Daughter, his Paramont.

He married Isobel, Daughter to the Earl of Argyle, and dying 12th of June
1544, left only one Daughter Mary married to John Master of Buchan, so the
Earldom of M^rray went back again to the Crown; and being in the Sovereign's
Disposal, Queen Mary on the 18th of February 1548 Ibid. in Rotuiis Mariae R.
, gave it to George Earl of Huntly: But her Majesty recalling that Deed, she
was afterward graciously pleased to bestow the Earldom of Murray upon James
Prior of St. Andrews.

He was the natural Son of King James V. by Margaret, Daughter of John Lord
Erskine, who being by the Care of his Father as of all the rest of his
illegitimate Sons were, bred to the Church; he was when very young provided to
the Priory of St. Andrews, Anno 1539, then void by the Promotion of Patrick
Hepburn, to the Episcopal See of Murray; but by Reason of his Nonage, Dr.
Alexander Miln, Abbot of Cambuskenneth, and President of the College of
Justice, was appointed Administrator of the Benefice, Charta in Pub. Arch.
, both with Respect to the Spiritual and Temporal Discharge of the Function.

By Reason of the Prior's Youth, I have met with nothing memorable of him, till
the Beginning of the Reformation, he was among the first who embraced the
Protestant Reformed Religion, tho'he was far from giving any Countenance to the
Popular Reformation, as is manifest from the many and frequent Addresses he and
others of the Protestant Nobility, made to the Queen Regent, that she would
please to concur by her Authority in reforming of the Church.

But the Queen peremptorily refusing not only to comply with their
Supplications, but having also violated some Articles of Pacification, she had
very solemnly entered into with the Protestant Lords, of which the Prior of St.
Andrews himself stood Guarantee; he thereupon left her, and joined himself with
the Lords of the Congregation, as they were called, whereupon the Prior, the
Lord James, was summoned before the Council, but he did not think fit to answer
the Charge otherwise, than to return this Answer to the Messenger, That her
Majesty had broken the Conditions with the Lords of the Congregation, which by
Warrant from herself, he had made and entered into with them, he would have no
more Meddling in such dishonest Courses, and would do the best to repair Things
he could. This Answer gave Occasion to the Queen to signify to the Prior, That
she suspected that Religion was the least Thing he or his Party had in their
Thoughts, and that she did not doubt, but that under the Covert and Pretext of
Religion, he intended to make an Attempt upon the Crown. The Prior in the mean
Time disowns the Charge, and thought himself obliged for his further
Vindication, to make a very solemn Protestation, that he had no other View or
Design in what he had done, than the Advancement of the true Reformed Religion,
and the Preservation of the Liberties of his Country, which he could not but
bewail he saw so signally invaded by her, at least by those who pretended to
act by, and derive their Authority from her; after which he was so hearty a
Promoter of the Reformation, that he became the Head of the Protestant Party.

When Queen Mary became a Widow by the Death of King Francis II. the Prior of
St. Andrews was sent by the Protestant Nobility, to invite the Queen home; and
soon after her Arrival, her Majesty having named a new Privy Council, the Lord
James her Brother was appointed one of the Number, and not long thereafter he
was sent with a Commission of Lieutenancy to the Borders, to suppress an
Insurrection that was threatened in those Parts; and he discharged the Trust
reposed in him with such Courage and Fidelity, that upon his Return the Queen
was graciously pleased to bestow upon her Brother the Earldom of Mar, then in
the Crown; but the Lord Erskine being found to have Right to the Earldom of
Mar, that Lord was by Way of Justice restored to that Honor, in Lieu whereof
the Prior of St. Andrews was made Earl of Murray, 10th February 1562 Charta in
Pub. Arch.
.

After this the Earl continued in the greatest Favor with the Queen, without
any Interruption, till the 1565 that her Majesty declared her Resolution to
marry the Lord Darnly, that my Lord Murray and many others did oppose the
Match, upon Pretext of the Danger that might arise to Religion and to the State
by that Union, forasmuch as it had not been practiced at any Time, to impose a
King upon the Nation without the Advice and Consent of Parliament; and in order
to put a more effectual Stop thereto, They made, says Sir James Melvil, an
Essay to take the Lord Darnly in the Queen's Company at the Raid of Both, and
as they alleged, to have sent him to England: But sailing in their Enterprise,
they were so closely pursued by the Queen's Troops, that they thought it the
safest Course for them to flee to England, where they met but with a very cold
Reception from Queen Elizabeth, though she had very much encouraged them
underhand to enter into those Measures, to disturb the Peace and Tranquillity
of Scotland, and to fully the Glory of Queen Mary's Reign.

After the Queen's Marriage with the Lord Darnly, a Parliament was called,
before which the Earl of Murray and his Associates were summoned to answer a
Charge of High Treason, which was prepared against them, and the Earl would
have undoubtedly been denounced Rebel, and forfaulted, had not the Murder of
David Rizio prevented it, which happened Three Days before the sitting down of
the Parliament. At the Day appointed the Earl of Murray returned home, and went
straight to the Parliament House, and took Instruments that he was ready to
answer the Summons of Treason; but such was the Confusion of Affairs, that no
Evidence came against him, and the Queen believing him innocent of Rizio's
Murder, was pleased to give him a gracious Pardon, restore him to her wonted
Favor, and to place an unsuspected Confidence in him; but the Broils of the
Country still increasing more and more, especially after the Murder of the
Lord Darnly, he obtained the Queen's Leave to travel, which he did, first into
England, and thence into France, where he remained till the Queen had made a
Resignation of the Government, and the Prince King James VI. her Son, set upon
the Throne, that he was called hom^ to be Regent to the young King; to which
Office he was chosen by those of the Nobility who adhered to the Prince in his
Absence, on the 22d of August 1567. In December thereafter he called a
Parliament, wherein the Pope's Authority was abolished, and the true Protestant
Religion received a new Sanction; thereafter having settled the Government, and
seeming secure in it, he was on the 23d of January 1570, unexpectedly, as he
was riding through the Street of Linlithgow, far from apprehending any Danger,
shot from a Window with a Musket, in the lower Part of his Belly, by James
Hamilton of Bothwel-haugh, in Revenge of a private Injury the Regent had done
him, and in the Instant falling from his Horse, died the same Evening. Few Days
after his Body was removed to Edinburgh, and with great Funeral Solemnity
interred in St. Giles's Church, where a Monument was erected over his Grave,
with this Inscription upon it. Pietas sine Vindice luget: Jus exarmatum est.
Januarii 1570. JACOBO STEWARTO, Comiti, Proregi, Viro, Aetatis suae long
optimo, ab Inimicis omnis Memoriae deterrimis, ex insidiis extincto, ce^ Patri
communi, Patria maerens posuit.

As to the Regent's Character Mr. Buchanan his old Tutor and faithful Friend,
draws a very fair and bright one of him; and some later Writers, whose Pens
perhaps have been directed as much by Malice as Truth, have endeavored to give
the World a very ill Impression of him; and I observe that generally Men pass
their Judgments upon him according to the Party they are of; for these Reasons
I shall not take his Character from any Party Writer, either of the one or the
other Side. And therefore shall rather choice to recite that given by Bishop
Spotiswood, than add any of my own. His Death, says that Reverend Author, was
by all Men greatly lamented, especially by the Commons, who loved him as their
Father, whilst he lived, and now m^urn'd grievously at his Death, the great
Things he had wrought in his Life (having in the Space of one Year and little
more, quieted the State which he found broken and disordered) made his very
Enemies speak of him with Praise and Commendation, above all his Virtues which
were not a few, he shined in Piety toward GOD, ordering himself and his Family
in such Sort, as it did more resemble a Church than a Court; for therein,
besides the Exercise of Devotion which he never omitted, there was no
Wickedness to be seen, nay not an un^eemly wanton Word to be heard, a Man truly
good, and worthy to be ranked among the best Governors that this Kingdom has
enjoyed; and therefore to this Day is honored with the Title of, The Good
Regent.

The Regent married Agnes, Daughter of William Earl Marischal, by whom he had
Two Daughters, Margaret Countess of Murray, the Heir of his Honor and Estate,
and Mary married to Francis Earl of Errol.

Which Margaret was married with James Stewart Lord Down, who in Right of her,
his Wife, became Earl of Murray. He was a Person of great Parts, Magnanimity
and Courage, Nota, The Lord Down's Paternal Ancessor was Sir James Stewart of
Bieth, Third Son of Andrew Lord Evandale, who being one of the Gentlemen of the
Bedchamber to King James V. and in great Favor with that Prince, was made
Captain of Down, and after that Stewart of Menteth. By Margaret Lindsay his
Wife, Dowager Barroness of Innermeath, he had James and Henry, of whom is
Stewart of ^urro. Which James was Commendator of St. Colm, at the Time of the
Reformation; and thereafter was by King James VI. created Lord Down, and made
Collector General of his Majesty's Revenue. He married Margaret, Daughter to
the Earl of Argyle. By her he had James his eldest Son, who married the
Countess of Murray as above, Henry Lord St. Colm, and Two Daughters, Mary
married to Sir John Weems of That-Ilk, and Jean to Simon, Lord Lovat.
and wanted nothing but Age and Experience to have rendered him a most
accomplished Nobleman. Upon some Matters of Interest there fell a
Misunderstanding betwixt him and the Earl of Hantly, which grew into such an
Animosity between them, that the King very much apprehended the Danger of those
Divisions, there having been some Blood shed, and Men killed upon their private
Contests, so that the Country was passionately divided between them; his
Majesty therefore, in order to settle the whole Dispute, upon the hearing all
that could be said by either Party, and being desirous to accommodate the Matter
himself, caused summon them before the Council, and both the Earls obeying the
Charge, it was determined that the Earl of Huntly should be ordered home to the
Country, and my Lord Murray to stay at Court for some Time. But asso^n, says
Sir James Melvil, as Huntly went home, he triumphed, and took sundry Advantages
upon the Earl of Murray 's Lands, giving him just Cause of Complaint; and
Murray, after sundry Representations, getting no Redress, he retired himself
from the Court, and became so malecontent, that he took plain Part with the
Earl of Bothwell, wh^ had attempted to seize upon the King's Person at his
Palace of Holy-Rood-House, in order to oblige his Majesty to receive him into
Favor. The Earl of Huntly being advertised, continues my Author, that his
Adversary Murray was an Outlaw, with the Earl of Bothwell, he returned to
Court, to get some Advantage of him: But in the mean Time the Lord Ochiltree
endeavoring to agree them with Consent of his Majesty, in order thereto drew
the Earl of Murray to Dunibirsel, a Seat of his own in Fife, to be near Hand,
that Conditions and Articles might be added and pared at the Pleasure of their
Friends. The Earl of Huntly being made Privy to Murray 's coming to Dunibirsel,
obtained incontinently a Commission to pursue the Earl of Bothwell, and all his
Partakers; whereupon with an armed Force, consisting most of his own Vassals
and Retainers, he unexpectedly beset the House of Dunibirsel; and upon the
Earl's refusing to surrender himself to Huntly, the House was set on Fire;
notwithstanding the Earl made his Way through the Flames, and also bravely through
his more merciless Enemies, and had so far succeeded in his Escape, that he was
got fairly out of their Hands, and had concealed himself among the Rocks by the
Sea; But the Tip of his Headpiece which had taken Fire before he left the
House, discovered him through the Darkness of the Night Mr. David Simpson's
Historical Narrative of the Murder of the Earl of Murray by the Earl of
Huntly, M.S. penes me.
, whereupon his Enemies set upon, and instantly murdered him with many
Circumstances of Barbarity, on the 7th of February 1592. His Death was
universally regreted, and the King bore it with extraordinary Grief. For little
knew, says Sir James Melvil, his Majesty that Huntly under this general Clause
of pursuing Bothwell and his Accomplices, he was minded to assail the Earl of
Murray at his own House, and to kill him as he did, to the Regret of many. By
the Countess of Murray his Wife, he left Two Sons, James the next Earl, Francis
Stewart, Esquire also Three Daughters.

Margaret married to Charles Earl of Nottingham, of the Kingdom of England; and
thereafter to Sir William Munso^, Viscount of Castlemain.

Mary to Alexander Lord Saltoun.

Grisel to Sir Robert Innes of That-Ilk, and had Issue.

Which James married Anne Daughter of George Marquis of Huntly, by the special
Appointment of King James, to remove the Animosity betwixt the Families of
Huntly and Murray, and to dispose and unite them in a firm Union and
Friendship. By this Lady he had James his Son and Heir; also Two Daughters,
Margaret married to Charles Earl of Nottingham, and Mary to the Lord of Grant,
and departing this Life on the......... Day of August 1638 Balfour's Annals.
, was succeeded in his Estate and Honor by

James his Son, who married Margaret, Daughter and Coheir of Alexander Earl of
Hum^, and dying in March 1635 Charta in Pub. Arch. ad Annum 1653.
, left Issue by the foresaid Margaret his Wife, James Lord Down, who died a
Youth, Alexander his Successor, A^chba^d Stewart of Dunnern: likewise Four
Daughters,

1. Mary married to Archbald Earl of Arg^le.

2. Margaret to Sir Alexander Sutherland, thereafter Lord Duffus.

3. Henrietta to Sir Hugh Campbel of Calder, Knight.

4. Anne to David Ross of Balnagown.

Which Alexander being a Man of Reputation for Parts and Learning, came to be
in great Favor with King Charles II. toward the End of his Reign. He was first
made Justice General, and then on the 10th of October 1680, promoted to be sole
Secretary of State upon the Dimission of the Duke of Lauderdale Ibidem.
, he continued sole Secretary till the 1682, that then the Earl of Middleton,
and thereafter, the Lord Melfort were joined in Commission with him.

When King James VII. came to the Crown, his Majesty made the Earl again One of
his Principal Secretaries, and appointed him Lord High Commissioner to the
Second Session of the Parliament 1686, and as a further Mark of his special
Grace and Favor, elected him one of the Knights of the most noble Order of the
Thistle in 1687. The Earl continued Secretary till the Revolution, that King
James went over to France, he was then removed from all Employments, and
thenceforth lived retiredly, enjoying the Felicities of a private Life, till he
exchanged this mortal Life with a State of Immortality on the 1st of November
1700, leaving Issue by Aemtlia his Wife, Daughter of Sir William Balfour of
Pitcull^, Lieutenant of the Tower of London in the Reign of King Charles I.

James Lord Down, who married Catharine, Daughter of Sir Lionel Talmash, and of
Elizabeth Duchess of Louderdale, and died before his Father, leaving Two
Daughters behind him, Elizabeth married to Brigadier Alexander Grant of
That-Ilk, and Aemtlia first to.... Frazer of Strichen, and again to John Earl
of Crawfurd,

Sir Charles Stewart Bart. who succeeded his Father in the Honor, and is now
Earl of Murray. He married the Lady Anne Campbell, Daughter of Archbald Earl of
Argyle, Widow of Richard Earl of Lauderdale.

Francis Stewart, Esquire who married first Elizabeth, Daughter of Sir John Murray
of Drumcairn, by whom he had no Issue that came to any Maturity; 2dly Jean,
Daughter of John Lord Balmerino, by whom he has James Stewart, Esquire and several
other younger Children.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Or, a Lion Rampant, within a double Tressure, Flowered
and Counter-flower'd Gules, within a Border componed, Azure and Argent; 2d, Or,
a Fess Chequie, Azure and Argent; 3d, Or, Three Cushions within a Double
Tressure, Flowered and Counter-flower'd, Gules; supported by Two Gray-hounds.
Crest, a Pelican feeding her Young. Motto, Salus per Christum Redemptorem.

NAIRN, Lord Nairn.
THE First of this Surname I have observed in any Writing or Record, was
Michael de Nairn, who is a Witness in that Grant which Robert Duke of Albany
made to John Earl of Buchan his Son, of the Lands of Stew^rtoun in Air Shire
Charta penes me, data 23 November 1413.
, and another Alexander Nairn was comptroller of Scotland Charta in Rotulis
Jacobi II.
, for many Years in the Reign of King James II.

Mr. Robert Nairn of Strathurd, in the Time of King James VI. and King Charles
I. being a Lawyer of good Reputation in his Profession, by his Practice and
Industry raised to himself a competent Fortune in Land, which he transmitted to
the Heir of his Family; and departing this Life in the 1652 Charta in
Cancellaria D. S. N. R. ad Annum 1652.
, left Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Sir John Preston of Pennycook,
President of the College of Justice, in the Reign of King James VI. Robert his
Successor, John Nairn of Muckersy, Alexander Nairn of Greenyards, William, who
was slain a Captain in the King's Service at Worcester; also several Daughters,
Agnes married to William Blair of Tarsapie, and Margaret to Sir David Falconar
of Newtoun, President of the College of Justice in the Reign of King Charles II.

Which Robert being bred to the Law, commenced Advocate, Anno 1644 Admission of
Advocates from the Institution of the College of Justice, M.S. in the Lawyer's
Library.
, but thereafter during the Civil War he cast off his Gown, as many other
gallant Men of that Profession did, and cordially and cheerfully put himself in
Arms, in Behalf of his Majesty King Charles II. immediately after the Murder of
his Royal Father; but being with many other Lords and Persons of Quality, at a
Meeting at Eliot in Angus, Anno 1650, in order to concert Measures toward
carrying on the Levies for the Army that was to march to England with the King,
he was unfortunately surpised by a strong Party of the English, and sent
Prisoner to London, and committed to the Tower, where he endured a long and
t^dious Imprisonment of Ten Years; but living to receive the Reward of his
Merit after the Return of the King, his Majesty made him first a Knight, and
afterward a Judge in the Session, where he sat many Years, and discharged the
Office with much Gravity and Learning, insomuch as his Majesty was graciously
pleased to make him a Peer, by the Style and Title of Lord Nairn, by Letters
Patent, bearing Date 27th January 1681 Charta in Pub. Arch.
, for his own Life, and the Honor after his Death, to descend to his only
Daughter, and the Heirs to be procreated betwixt her and a Son of the Marquis
of Athole's, whom the Lady was restricted to marry; and dying Anno 1683, he
left Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Patrick Graham of Inch-brackie,
the foresaid Margaret his only Daughter and Heir, who according to the Concert
in the Patent of Honor, married Lord William Murray, younger Son of John
Marquis of Athole, by whom she had Issue.

John, Master of Nairn, Robert Nairn, Esquire William Nairn, Esquire James Nairn, Esquire
likewise Eight Daughters,

Margaret married to William Viscount of Strathalian.

Aemilia.

Catharine,

Marjory.

Charlota.

Mary.

Louisa.

Henrietta.

John, Master of Nairn, in the Lifetime of his Father, married Catharine,
Daughter of Charles Earl of Dunmore, by whom he has Issue, James Francis Edward
Nairn, Esquire

NAPIER, Lord Napier.
ALTHOUGH the Napiers be a very ancient Family, yet I have not found any of them
upon Record before the Time of the Competition between the Bruce and the Baliol
for the Crown, that John de le Napier, was one of the Freeholders of the
County of Dumbarton, who swore Fealty to King Edward I. of England, when the
general Submission was made to that Prince, Anno 1296 Prin's History 2d Annum
1296.
. Another William de Napier had by the Grant of King David II. the Lands of
Pitfour and Picknot in the County of Perth, with sundry others in
Dumbarton-Shire Haddington's Collections from the Public Records.
, then in the Disposal of the Crown, by the Forfaulture of Dornagaile de
Montefix.

The first conspicuous Person of this noble Family, was Sir Alexander Napier of
Merchistoun, Knight. who being a Man of great Activity and Prudence, was by King
James II, made Comptroller of Scotland, Anno 1450 Charta in Rotulis Jacobi II.
, and the next ensuing Year was one of the Commissioners sent to England, to
treat with the Deputies of that Crown, anent the keeping of a Peace betwixt the
Two Realms Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
.

Upon the Accession of King James III. to the Crown, he was made Vice Admiral
of Scotland, and joined in Commission with diverse other great Men, to treat
with the Commissioners of the Crown of England, about the keeping and
maintaining of a Peace and Amity betwixt the Two Kingdoms Ibidem.
. He married Elizabeth, Daughter of.... Lauder of Hatton Charta in Pub. Arch.
2d Annum 1492.
, by whom he had

John his Son and Heir, who was Provost of the City of Edinburgh in the Year
1484 Charta penes Dominum Cathcart.
, and being a Person of great Wealth and Reputation, he made a very noble and
advantageous Alliance by his Marriage with Margaret Menteth, Daughter and
Coheir of Murdack Monteith of Rusky, and one of the Heirs of Line to Duncan
Earl of Lennox Charta penes D. Gleneagles,
. By her he had Archbald his Successor, and John Napier of Balerno.

Which Archbald married Elizabeth Douglass Charta in Pub. Arch.
, a Lady of the Douglasses of Morton, by whom he had a Son.

Sir Alexander, who lost his Life with King James IV. and the Flower of the
Kingdom, at Flowdoun-Field, the 9th September 1513 Charta in Pub. Arch.
, leaving Issue by Janet his Wife, Daughter of Edmund Chisolm of Cromlix Ibidem.
, Alexander his Successor, and a Daughter Helen, married to Sir John Melvil of
Raith, Ancestor to the Earl of Melvil.

Which Alexander took to Wife Margaret Daughter of Sir Duncan Campbell of
Glenurchy, Ancestor to the present Earl of Brodalbin Ibidem.
, and was slain at the Battle of Pinky, in Defense of his Country, 10th
September 1547 Ibidem.
, leaving Two Sons, by his Wife aforesaid, Sir Archibald his Successor, and
Alexander who transported himself in to England, and settled at Luttenhoe in
the County of Bedford, where his Successors still continue in Luster.

Sir Archibald succeeded his Father in his Estate, and went generally by the
Title of Edinbelly. He was much honored and respected by King James VI. who
made him a Knight, and Master of the Mint, Anno 1587 Balcaras's Collections in
the Lawyer's Library.
: He married first Janet Bothwel, Daughter of Mr. Francis Bothwel, one of the
Senators of the College of Justice, in the Reign of King James V. Ancestor to
the Lord Holy-Road House Charta penes D. Napier.
; by her he had John his Son and Heir: And again, Elizabeth Moubray, Daughter
of......... Moubray Charta in Rotulis Jacobi VI.
, of Barnbougal, by whom he had Sir Alexander Napier of Lawriestoun, one of the
Senators of the College of Justice in the Time of King Charles I. Margaret
married to James Lord Ogilvy; and Agnes to Sir Patrick Gray of Innergowrie
Ibidem.
, and departing this Life on Whitsunday 1608 Sir Thomas Hope's Decisions in the
Lawyer's Library.
, was succeeded by,

John his Son and Heir, who being a Man of great natural Parts, he took Care to
improve them by a good Education in the Schools of Learning, first at Home, and
then by traveling abroad into Foreign Parts, where he spent some Years. Upon
his Return he declined the Court, though he lived near it, and might have found a
very easy Admission to it; and entered into a most vehement Course of Study,
insomuch as in Time he arrived to that immense Knowledge in all the Parts of
solid and useful Learning, that few have equaled him in the Age he lived; and
his great Experience and Abilities in Mathematical Learning, has rendered him
so conspicuous and eminent, especially his Logarithms, that they will to his
great Renown, remain to the World's End a Monument of his being a Scholar of
the most sublime Parts and Penetration; and the Learned have not been wanting
to celebrate his Memory, and preserve him in the List of those who by their
great Learning have rendered themselves Ornaments to the Country they were of,
as well as to the Family they sprang from. He died in a good advanced Age, on
the 3d of April 1617 aged 67 Charta penes Francis. D. Napier.
. His Works that have been published are, 1. Mirifici ipsius Canonis
Constructio, and Logarithmorum ad naturales ipsorum Numeros Habitudines. 1619.
2. Appendix de alia atque praestantiore Logarithmorum Specie constituenda in
qua scilicet Unitas Logarithmus est. 3. Propositiones quaedam eminentissimae,
ad Triangula sphaerica, mira Facultate resolvenda. 4. Rhabdologiae seu
Numerationis per Virgulas, Lib. d^o. 5. Arithmeticae localis Lib. unus. 6.
Ouverture de tous les Secrets de l' Apocalypse, Rochel. 1607. 7. A plain
Discovery of the whole Revelation of St. John 1611.


Nota, Dr. Brigs Geometry-Professor at Oxford, spares no Elogies upon the
learned Merchistoun, speaking of him in one Place, he says, he was Vir sane
omnium seculorum memoria dignissimus, in ^ita Hen. Brigs. And Petrus Crugerus
Dantzicanus, a famous Mathematician abroad, extols him highly, for mentioning
his Logarithms, he writes, Ob id unicum, si ^oetera deessent, immortali laud
dignissimus.
This learned Gentleman was twice married; his first Wife was Margaret,
Daughter of Sir James Stirling of Keir Charta in Pub. Arch.
, by whom he had one Son, Sir Archibald, who was thereafter Lord Napier; and
after her Death he married Agnes, Daughter of Sir James Chisolm of Cromlix
Ibidem.
, by whom he had John Napier of Easter-Torrie Ibidem.
, Mr. Robert Napier, of whom the Branch of the Napiers of Kilcroich; Mr.
Alexander Napier of Gellets, William Napier of Ard^ore; of whom also is Napier
of Craigan^t; Adam, of whom the Napiers of Blackstoun are descended; also
several Daughters, Margaret married to James Stewart of Rossyth, in Vic. de
Fife, and had Issue; Jean to James Hamilton of Kilbrach^^nt, and had Issue;
Elizabeth to William Cunningham of Craigends, and had Issue; Agnes to George
Drummond of Balloch; and Helen to a Reverend and Worthy Divine, Mr. Matthew
Brisbane, Parson of Erskine, and had Issue.

Which Sir Archibald being a Person of admirable Parts and Endowments, was
sworn of the Privy Council to King James VI. 20th of July 1615 Balfour's Annals.
, and after that in 1622, preferred to be Lord Treasurer Depute; and the next
ensuing Year the Lord Justice-Clerk's Place falling vacant by the Dimission of
Sir John Cockburn of Ormistoun, it was conferred on Sir Archibald Napier Charta
in Pub. Arch. data 23. Nov. 1623.
, and so he became Justice-Clerk as well as Treasurer-Depute. He was also the
same Year named one of the Senators of the College of Justice: Soon after which
he resigned his Place of Justice-Clerk, which was thereupon given to Sir George
Elphinston of Blythswood, 9th of Angust 1624.

Upon the Accession of King Charles I. to the Crown, his Majesty was pleased to
continue Sir Archibald Napier both in the Treasurer-Depute's Place and in the
Session, till the 1626, that some new Regulations were made in the College of
Justice, whereby all Peers and Officers of State were declared incapable of
being ordinary Lords of the Session, the Treasurer Depute was removed, and
named one of the Four extraordinary Lords Balfour's Annals, MS.
: And further to reward his signal Merit, and to testify his Majesty's gracious
Acceptance and Estimation of his Services, he was first created a Baronet, and
raised to the Honor of Peerage by Letters Patent bearing Date the 4th of May
1627, by the Title of Lord Napier, and to the Heirs Male of his Body for ever
Charta in Rotulis Caroli I.
; after which the Lord Napier continued in his Place in the Treasury till the
1630, he was removed, and the Lord Traquair made Treasurer-Depute.

But the Lord Napier did not think, as too many in that Time did, that his
Removal did absolve him from all Obligations to the Crown; for as soon as the
Troubles broke out in that Reign, his Lordship adhered with great Firmness and
Fidelity to the King: And though he was a Nobleman of unblemished Reputation, yet
being known to be of eminent Affection to his Majesty, he was seized by the
Covenanters for no other Reason, but declaring himself dissatisfied with their
Proceedings; and without ever being charged with any particular Crime, they
committed him Prisoner to the Castle of Edinburgh, and afterward sent him to
the common Goal at Linlithgow Bishop Guthry's Memoirs, P. 132, 145, 146.
, where he remained till he was set at Liberty by the Marquis of Montrose after
the Battle of Kilsyth; and though he was then very old, yet he joined the
Marquis, and accompanied him to the Battle of Philiphaugh. Upon the Loss of the
Day, he found Means to make his Escape with the General to the Highlands; but
by the Infirmities he had contracted by the severe Fatigues he was exposed to
in the March, and the Coldness of the Season, he lived not to the End of three
Months, Death overtaking him at Fincastle in Athole on the 11th of November
1645 Charta in Publis Archivis.
, to the great Grief of the Marquis, who looked on his Death as a wonderful
Loss to the King's Service, he being a Man of great Wisdom and Experience. He
left behind him a full Relation of all material Passages, as well from the
Beginning of King Charles's Reign, as from the breaking out of the Troubles,
that the Nation is at a great Loss in the Concealment of it, and that it has
not been communicated to the World.

He married Margaret Daughter of John Earl of Montrose, and Sister to James the
Great Marquis of Montrose, by whom he had Archibald his Son and Heir, and a
Daughter Elizabeth, married to Sir George Stirling of Kier.

Which Archibald being a Nobleman of most entire Loyalty and Affection to the
King, did from the Beginning of the Troubles in the Reign of King Charles I.
heartily and personally engage himself in his Majesty's Service, whereby he
came to be ranked in the first Form of those who made themselves most obnoxious
to the Powers that then prevailed Bishop Guthry's Memoirs.
, and at the End of the War he went into Holland where he died at Defshaven in
the Spring of the Year 1660.

He married Elizabeth Daughter of John Earl of Mar, by whom he had Issue,
Archibald his Son and Successor, John Napier, Esquire a young Gentleman of great
Honor and Courage, who lost his Life in the great Sea Fight against the Dutch,
May 28th 1672; also Three Daughters, Jean married to Sir Thomas Nicolson of
Carnock; Margaret to John Brisbane, Esquire Secretary to the Royal Navy, and
Resident from King Charles II. to the Court of France; and Mary who died
umarried.

Archibald, Lord Napier, being a Nobleman of great Honor and Worth, was much
favored and esteemed by King Charles II. who was graciously pleased to receive
and accept of a Resignation of his Lordship's Honor, and to confer the Title
again by a new Patent dated the 7th of February 1677 on himself, and to the
Heirs Male of his own Body, in Remainder of which to the Heirs of the Bodies of
his Sisters successively Charta penes Franciscum Dominum Napier ad Annum 1674.
, and dying a Batchellor on the 6th of August 1683 Ibidem.
, the Honor of Lord Napier devolved to

Sir Thomas Nicolson of Carnock his Nephew by his Sister, but he dying before
he had fully attained the Age of Twenty one Years, June 9th, 1686 Charta in
Rotulis Jacobi VII.
, as much lamented as any young Man of his Time, the Honor thereby devolving
on Margaret Baroness of Napier his Aunt, who by Mr. Brisbane her Husband had
Issue, John Mr. of Napier, who in his younger Years being bred to the Sea was
entered Second Lieutenant of the Somerset Man of War, at the Attack on Vigo,
under the Command of Sir George Rook Admiral, who was on board the said Ship,
and for his singular good Behavior on that Occasion got for some Time the
Command of a Fire-Ship, and afterward became first Lieutenant of the Deptford
Man of War, aboard which Ship he died on the Coast of Guinea 1704, to the great
Grief of his noble Relations; likewise a Daughter Elizabeth, who was married
December 1699 to William Scot Esquire at that Time only Son and Heir apparent to
Sir Francis Scot of Thirlstone, Bart. to whom she had one Son Francis the
present Lord Napier, and Two Daughters, viz. Margaret, and Anne Isobella
Elizabeth who both died young; this Elizabeth Mistress of Napier died August
11th 1705, and Margaret Lady Napier her Mother dying at Bath, in the Month of
September 1706, the Honor of Lord Napier devolved to her Grandson by her
Daughter, Sir William Scot's Son, Francis the present Lord Napier, who as he
enjoys the Estate and Titles, so I wish he may inherit the Virtues of his noble
Ancestors, and that they may shine out in him with additional Splendour.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Argent, a Saltyr, ingrail'd betwixt Four Roses, Gules,
2d and 3d Or, on a Bend, Azure, a Mollet betwixt Two Crescents of the 1st,
within a double Tressure, flowered and counterflower'd Azure, supported on the
Dexter by an Eagle proper, and on the Sinister by a Chevalier, holding in his
Hand a Standard, Crest, an Arm from the Elbow grasping a Crescent proper,
Motto, Sans Tache; and for his Compartment Argent, an Embattlement of a Tour
Mosso^^e Sable, 6 Lances disposed Saltyrways with this Motto, Ready ay Ready.

Edward Barret, Lord Newburgh.
AMONG other English Gentlemen whom King Charles I. did naturalize, and prefer
to Scots Honors, Sir Edward Barret of Evely, of the County of Essex, Knight. was
one whom his Majesty did raise to the Dignity of Lord Barret of Newburgh, by
Letters Patent, bearing Date the 17th of October 1627 Charta in Rotulis Caroli
I.
. He married Anne Daughter of Sir Edward Carrey Sandford's Genealogical History
of the Kings of England.
, but dying without Issue Male, the Peerage did extinguish by his Death.

LIVINGSTON, Earl of Newburgh.
SIR James Livingston, Bart. Son and Heir of Sir John Livingston of Kinnaird,
one of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber to King Charles I. having served his
Majesty in that Station with great Fidelity, he was graciously pleased to raise
him to the Honor of Viscount of Newburgh Charta in Rotulis Caroli I.
, the 13th of September 1647.

After the Murder of King Charles, he was compelled to flee out of England, by
Reason of the Discoveries that Cromwell every Day made, of his corresponding
with the King, and came to the Hague, to his Majesty King Charles II. in the
1650 Clarendon's History.
, and thenceforth attended his Royal Master throughout the whole of the Exile.

Upon his Majesty's Restoration, the Lord Newburgh was constituted Captain of
his Majesty's Guards, and raised to the Honor of Earl of Newburgh, Viscount of
Kinnaird, Lord Livingstoun of Flaccraig, by Letters Patent 31st of December
1660 Charta in Rotulis Caroli II.
, and was ever thereafter in great Favor with his Majesty.

He married Catharine, Daughter of Theophilus Earl of Suffolk, Widow of the
Lord Aubigny, and giving Way to Fate on the 26th of December 1670 Charta in
Cancellaria D. S. N. R.
, left behind him the Reputation of a very fine Gentleman: The Earl of
Clarendon has been so kind to thi^ Earl, as to give him an excellent Character,
in his History of the Rebellion, a Favor, I observe, that noble Author has
thought fit to distribute, with a very sparing Hand, to this Lord's Countrymen,
a very few excepted.

Charles Earl of Newburgh his Son, succeeded his Father in the Honor, and
married Frances Daughter of Francis Lord Brudenel Peerage of England, Edit. 3.
P. 282.
, and died without any Male Issue, about the 1694, though I think the Dignity is
not extinct, if it were claimed by any of the Earl's Relations, in Regard the
Title was granted to the Earl of Newburgh, and to his Heirs whatsoever.

CHEYNE, Viscount of Newhaven.
AS King James VI. and King Charles I. did prefer sundry honorable and well
deserving Persons of the Kingdom of England, to the Peerage of this Realm,
during their respective Reigns, so his Majesty King Charles II. thought fit to
continue the same Practice; and after he had conferred sundry Scots Honors
upon several of that Nation, he was pleased likewise, by Letters Patent,
bearing Date at Windsor 17th of May, 1681, to dignify Charles Cheyne of Chelsy,
of the County of Middlesex, Esquire with the Peerage of Scotland, by the Title of
Viscount of Newhaven, from a Place so called in the Sheriffdom of Edinburgh,
and Lord Cheyne, and to the Heirs Male of his Body for ever Charta in Pub. Arch.
, whose lineal Male Descendant is William the present Lord Viscount Newhaven,
who was in the End of the Reign of Queen Anne, Anno 1712, constituted Lord
Lieutenant of the County of Bucks, in Place of the Earl of Bridgewater, from
which he was removed upon King George's coming over in the 1714.

LESLY, Lord Newark.
LIEUTENANT General David Lesly was the Son of Patrick, first Lord Lindores, by
Jean his Wife, Daughter of Robert Earl of Orknay, being a younger Brother, he
entered when he was a Youth into the Life and Condition of a Soldier, in the
Service of the King of Sweden, in the Wars of Germany, where he grew to be a
Colonel of Horse Sir Tho. Urquhart's Vindication of the Honor of Scotland,
1652.
, and to have the Reputation of an excellent Officer.

When the Civil War broke out, he left the Swedish Service, and betook himself
to the Service of the Parliament of Scotland, by whom he was preferred to be
Lieutenant General of the Army, which in the 1643, was sent to England, to the
Assistance of the Parliament there against the King; and after that, he
continued in the Head of the Scots Army, in all their prosperous Successes,
with singular Reputation, till the End of the War.

When the Parliament declared for King Charles II. and raised an Army to oppose
the English Invasion under Oliver Cromwell in 1680, Lieutenant General Lesly
was chosen General; and though that Army under his Command was quickly and
entirely routed at Dunbar; yet his Reputation was so entire, as an Officer of
great Experience, and the King thought him so faithful to him, and worthy of
any Trust or Command he should confer on him, that as soon as another Army was
raised, to march into England with the King, of which his Majesty was himself
General, he appointed Lieutenant General Lesly, Lieutenant General under him.
And though neither in the March, nor yet in the fatal Day at Worcester, did he
perform the Office of a General, with that Vigor and Spirit as he had done
formerly on other Occasions; yet the King did not believe he had been false to
him: For upon all the Enquiries that were afterward made, when most of the
false and treacherous Actions which had been committed were discovered, there
appeared no Cause to suspect, that the Lieutenant General had been unfaithful
in his Charge; and as it was not a little Vindication to him, that from the
Time of his Imprison meant that he was taken after Worcester, till the
Restoration of the King, he never received any Favor from the English
Parliament, nor from Cromwell; but underwent the same Hardships and Severities
the most loyal of his Countrymen suffered Clarendon's Hist. of the Rebellion.
: And that which put his Fidelity to the King beyond what the utmost Calumny of
his Enemies could invent, was, that his Majesty after his Return immediately
created him a Peer of the Realm, by the Title of Lord Newark, 31st of August
1660 Charta in Rotulis Caroli II.
; and thereafter wrote him a Letter in his Vindication, in these Words.

Although we have upon all Occasions both abroad and since our happy Return,
declared our self fully satisfied with your Conduct and Loyalty in our Service;
and although in Consideration of the same we have given you the Title and
Honor of a Lord, with other Marks of our Favor and Esteem; yet seeing we are
told, that Malice and Slander do not give over to persecute you, We have
thought fit to give you this further Testimony, and to declare under our Hand,
that while ye was our Lieutenant General of our Army of Scotland, you did both
in Scotland and England behave yourself with als much Conduct, Resolution and
Honesty as was possible, or could be expected from a Person in that Trust; and
as we told you, so we do again repeat it, that if we had Occasion to levy an
Army, fit for our self to command, we would not fail to give you an Employment
in it, fit for your Quality. etc. Charta penes D. Newark, data 10 June 1667.
.

He married Jean, Daughter of Sir John York, Knight. by whom he had David his
Successor in the Honor; also Three Daughters,

Elizabeth married to Sir Archbald Kennedy of Colzean, Bart. and had Issue.

Mary, first to Sir Francis Kinloch of Gilmertoun, and had Issue; and after
that to Sir Alexander Ogilvy of Forglen, Bart. one of the Senators of the
College of Justice.

Margaret to Colonel James Campbel, Son to the Earl of Argyle, and had Issue.

Which David married Elizabeth, Daughter of Sir Thomas Stewart of Gairntilly,
by whom he had 5 Daughters, Jean married to Sir Alexander Anstruther, Knight. Mary,
Christian, Grisel, and Elizabeth. He died on the 15th of May, 1694, without
Male Issue, whereby the Title, according to the Conception of the original
Patent of Honor, if there was no other granted by the Sovereign since, did
extinguish with himself, it being to the Heirs Male of the General's own Body.

MAXWEL, Earl of Nithsdale,
THAT this most noble Family, which originally took its Surname from the
Lordship of Maxwel, of old called Macuswell in Dumfries-Shire, has been of
great and eminent Antiquity, does manifestly appear even from the Authorities
our Public, National, and other Records have furnished me with; and no doubt
had I had Access to peruse the Writings of the Family of Maxwel as I have done
most others, I should have been able to carry up the Antiquity of the Name to
those Ages, when Sirnames were first taken up, and written Records preserved
with our Ancestors, which, for what I have seen, was not before the Time of
King Malcolm III.

The first using this Surname was Herbert de Macuswell, who in the Time of King
Malcolm IV. gave in pure Alms to the Monks of Kelso, Ecclesiam suam de
Macuswell Register of Kelso.
, pro salute Animae suae, etc. whose Successor

John de Macuswell, upon the Accession of King Alexander II. to the Crown, in
1215, was one of the Commissioners sent to England, to treat about a Marriage
betwixt King Alexander and a Daughter of that Crown, which they then concluded
Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
. He was thereafter by the same King constituted Lord Great Chamberlain of
Scotland; and he held the Office for many Years, even till his Death in the
1241 Chron. de Melross.
. Then

Eumerus de Macuswell, probably his Son, did execute the Office of Lord
Chamberlain of Scotland, under King Alexander III. Anno 1258, when he was one
of the Magnates Scotiae, who became Guarantee, Quod Scoti and Wallenses non
facient Pacem cum Rege Angliae sine mutuo Assensu and Consensu Rymer's Foedera.
. He was also in the same Reign Justiciary of Galoway, when the Justiciary was
divided into the Three Districts of Scotiae, Laudoniae, and Galuidiae. This
noble Person added to his paternal Estate the Barony of the Mearns in
Renfrew-Shire, by the Marriage of an Heir Female, which thenceforth continued
in the Family till the Reign of King Charles I. He left Issue Herbert his
Successor, and Sir John Maxwel, first of the Maxwels of Nether-Pollock In the
Donation which Herbert Maxwel made to the Monks of Pasly out of the Lands of
Merns, Jo. de Macuswell, Domino de Nether Pollock, frater dicti Herberti, is a
Witness, in the Register of Pasly.
, the Root and Stem of all the Maxwels in the Western Parts, one only Family
excepted. The Successor of Eumer was

Sir Herbert de Macuswell, who in the 1284, is one of those great Men who swore
to King Alexander to maintain the Succession in his Grandchild the Maid of
Norway, if the King himself should happen to die without Heirs Male of his own
Body Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
. The same Sir Herbert, as I take it, gave D E O, and Ecclesiae Sanctae Mariae
and Sanct^ Jacobi de Paslet, and Monachis ibidem D E O servtentibus, and in
perpetuum servituru, octo Acras and dimidium and viginti octo Particat as
Terrae in nova Villa sua de Merns, and sex Mercas Argenti de Proventibus
Molendinorum suorum de Merns, pro Salute Animae suae, and Animarum omnium
Antecessorum and Successorum suorum ^^ perpetuum Register of the Monastry of
Pasly, in my Hands by Favor of the Earl of Dundonald.
.

Herbert de Macuswell, the next I have found of this noble Family, though I
cannot certainly say, he was the Son of the former Sir Herbert, is one of those
Barons who was joined with the Regents and other great Men of the Clergy and
Laity, who were chosen to treat of a Marriage between the young Queen of
Scotland, King Alexander's Granchild, and the Prince of England, Anno 1290
Rymer's Foedera.
; but the Lady dying soon thereafter, the Treaty took no Effect. Sir Herbert's
Son,

Sir Eustache Maxwell of Carlaverock was one of those noble Patriots who most
strenuously adhered to King Robert the Bruce, and stuck close to him in all the
Vicissitudes of Fortune that befell him in attaining the Crown.

Upon the English Invasion he held out his Castle of Carlaverock, and forced
them to raise the Siege, after they had lain some Weeks before it; but least it
might afterward been made a Garrison by the Enemy, and from whence they might
have annoyed the Country, he dismantled it himself, and threw it down to the
Ground; in Recompense of which he afterward obtained from King Robert, in
Commemoration of that noble Piece of Service to his Country, pro fractione and
prostratione Castri de Carlaverock, december Libras Sterlingorum de Annuo redditu,
viginti duarum Librarum Sterlingorum in quibus ipsi and Haeredes sui, nobis and
Haeredibus nostris Regibus Scotiae annuatim tenebantur pro Terris suis de
Carlaverock; unde dict as december Libris praedicto Eustachio and Haeredibus suis
per praesentes remittimus in perpetuum Haddingtoun's Collections from the
Public Records in the Lawyer's Library, M.S.
. He married Agnes, Daughter of..... Maxwel of Nether-Pollock Geneal. of the
House of Maxwel, M.S.
, by whom he had

John his Son and Heir, who was taken Prisoner at the Battle of Durham Dr.
Abercromby's Martial Achievements.
; and dying not long thereafter, left Issue, by..... Daughter of.... his Wife,

John, his Son and Heir, who designed himself Joannes de Macuswell, Filius
Domini Joannis de Macuswell, de Pencaitland, in a Donation which he made DEO,
and Ecclesiae Sanctae Mariae de Dryburgh, de Jure Patronatus Ecclesiae de
Pencaitland, and Capellae de Pystoun, cum Terra Ecclesiastica ejusdem, pro
Salute Animae Patris and Matris suae and omnium Antecessorum and Successorum
suorum in perpetuum Charta penes Comitem de Lauderdale.
. He was likewise a Benefactor to the Monastry of Kilwining; for to that
Convent he gave in Honorem sancti Wynini jus Patronatus Ecclesiae de Liberton,
cum una Acra Terrae juxta dictam Ecclesiam, pro Salute Animae suae and Agnetis
Sponsae suae Charta in Rotulis David II. ad Annum 1357.
: In which Deed he is designed Joannes de Macuswell, Dominus ejusdem. By the
said Agnes his Wife, he left Issue, Robert his Successor, and a Daughter Agnes,
married to Robert Pollock of That-Ilk Charta penes Dominum Rot. Pollock, de
eod. Bart.
, and had Issue.

Which Robert was made a Knight by King Robert II. and obtained from that
Prince a Grant de omnibus Terris quas Dominus Joannes de Maxwel de Carlaverock,
Pater Domini Roberti de Maxwel, tenet de nobis in Capite, and quas dictus
Dominus Joannes, in manibus nostris resignavit Charta in Rotulis Roberti II.
. This Sir Robert, Dominus de Carlaverock, gave in pure and perpetual Alms, D E
O, and Sanctae Mariae de Dryburgh, illam Terram in Territorio suo de
Pencaitland, quam Joannes de Maitland, Dominus de Thirlstane de me tenet pro
Salute Animae meae, and Herberti de Maxwel Filii mei and Haeredis Charta penes
Comitem de Lauderdale.
. By.... Daughter of..... he had

Herbert his Successor, who had by the Grant of Archbald Earl of Douglass, the
Stewartry of Annandale, Anno 1409, which gave him great Authority and Interest
in those Parts, and which the Duke of Albany the Governor ratified and
confirmed.

This Herbert was one of the Barons, who were sent to England as Hostages for
the Ransom of King James I. Anno 1423 Rymer's Foedera.
, at the Solemnity of whose Coronation he had the Honor of Knighthood
conferred on him.

He married the Heiress of the Barony of Balmacluchie in Forfar-Shire Geneal.
of the House of Maxwel.
; by whom he had Robert his Heir, and Eustache, of whom the Branch of the
Maxwels of Teyling in Angus, which Lands he obtained in Marriage with Agnes,
one of the Daughters and Coheirs of Sir John Giffard Knight. Charta penes
Marchionem de Tweedale.
, Lord of Tester.

Which Robert married Janet, Daughter of Sir John Forrester of Carstorphine,
Lord High Chamberlain of Scotland Charta in Pub. Arch.
, and had his Son and Heir,

Herbert, designed, Dominus de Carlaverock, who in 1438, was one of the
Conservators of a Peace which was then concluded betwixt the Two Kingdoms of
Scotland and England Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
. He married first..... Daughter of Herbert Harries of Tareagles Geneal. of
Maxwell.
. By her he had Robert his Successor, and Sir Edward, of whom issued the
Maxwells of Finnald and Monreith Ibidem.
; and again Catharine, Daughter to the Lord Seaton, Widow of Sir Allan Stewart
of Darnly Charta in Rotulis Jacobi III.
, and had by her George, of whom descended the Branch of the Maxwells of
Garnsalloch, Adam, of whom sprung the Maxwells of Suthbar in Renfrew Shire
Ibidem ad Annum 1473. Etiam Charta Joannis Comitis de Lenox, Joanni Stewart
filio suo, Terrarum de Henerstoun, on the Resignation of the Earl's Brother,
Adam Maxwell of Southbar, in Rotulis Jacobi IV.
; and dying 11th of October 1452 Genesis of the Family of Maxwell.
, was succeeded by,

Robert his Son and Heir, who was the First of the Family who i^ entitled
simply Dominus Maxwel; for by that Designation he is in the 1457, one of the
Conservators of the Peace, which was then concluded betwixt the two Nations of
Scotland and England Rymer's Foedera.
. By...... Daughter of...... his Wife, he had John his Son and Heir apparent,
and Thomas, of whom issued the Maxwels of Kirkonel Genesis of Maxwell.
.

Which John Master of Maxwel, died in the Lifetime of his Father, leaving Issue
by J^net his Wife, Daughter and Heir of George Crichton, Earl of Caithness
Charta in Rotulis Jacobi III.
a Son,

John Lord Maxwel, who succeeded his Grandfather, and in the 1494, was one of
the Commissioners sent to England to treat with that State about the
Continuation of a Peace betwixt the Two Realms. He married Agnes, Daughter of
Sir Alexander Stewart of Garles Ibid. in Rotulis Jacobi IV.
, by whom he had Robert his Successor, Herbert, of whom the Branch of the House
of Clouden Genesis of Maxwel.
; and three Daughters, 1st.... married to James Johnstoun of That Ilk. 2d....
to... Charters of Aimesfield. 3d...... to.... Jerden of Aplegirth. This Lord
was slain at Flowdon, with King James IV. 9 September 1513.

Robert Lord Maxwel, his Son, being a Nobleman of great Parts and Courage, made
a very considerable Figure in the Minority of King James V. with whom he was in
great Favor: For when that Prince took upon him the Administration of the
Government, the Lord Maxwel was made Captain of Lochmaben, Colonel of his
Majesty's Guard Charta in Pub. Arch.
, and thereafter constituted Guardian of the East Marches toward England Ibidem.
. In 1538 he was sent Ambassador to France, to treat of a Marriage betwixt King
James and Mary of Lorain, Daughter to the Duke of Guise, which being concluded,
he espoused the Lady in his Master's Name, and brought her over to Scotland,
not long thereafter, to the great Satisfaction of the King, who in Reward of
that and other signal Services bestowed on him the Lands of Eusdale, Eskdale,
and Wachopdale; and made him first Gentleman of his Bedchamber. He accompanied
the King to the fatal Battle of Solloway, where he was taken Prisoner, and sent
to the Tower of London, where he remained till he was forced to procure his
Freedom at 100 Merks Sterling. Ransom Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
.

He married first, Janet, Daughter of Sir William Douglass of Drumlanrig,
Ancestor to the Duke of Queensberry, by whom he had Robert the Heir of the
Family, Sir John Maxwel of Terreag^es, thereafter Lord Harries, and a Daughter
Margaret married first to Archbald Earl of Angus, and after that to Sir William
Ba^ll^e of Lamington. He married to his second Wife Agnes, Daughter of James
Earl of Buchan, and Widow of Adam Earl of Bothwel, by whom he had no Issue; and
dying on the 9th of July 1646 Geneal of the House of Maxwel.
, was succeeded by

Robert his Son and Heir, who in 1551, was one of the Commissioners chosen to
treat with the English, touching the Conservation of the Peace betwixt the Two
Crowns Rymer's Foedera.
. He married Beatrix, Daughter of James Earl of Morton, and dying 14th
September 1552, left his Lady with Child of his Son John, who succeeded him in
his Estate and Honor.

In the 1578 this noble Lord, when he came to Age, was made Warden of the West
Marches, and being in great Favor with King James VI. was, October 29th, 1581
Charta in Pub. Arch.
, created Earl of Morton, upon the Death and Forfaulture of the Earl of Morton
the Regent: But, upon a new Turn at Court, the Lord Maxwel's Right to the Title
of Earl of Morton was revoked, and he removed from his Charge of the Borders,
and his Office given to the Lord of Johnston; which occasioned a great
Bloodshed and Discord betwixt the two Families, and was at last fatal to this
Lord himself; for in a Scuffle betwixt a Party of his Friends and the
Johnstons, he was killed on the 7th of December 1593 Ibidem.
, leaving Issue, by Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of David Master of Angus, John
his Successor, Robert, thereafter Earl of Nithsdale, likewise Three Daughters,
Elizabeth married to William Lord Harris, Agnes to William Douglas of Pinzrie,
and Margaret to Hugh Wallace of Craigie.

Which John being a very turbulent and unruly Man, was by King James VI.
imprisoned in the Castle of Edinburgh, from whence he made his Escape, and
found Means to conceal himself till he had an Opportunity to kill the Lord of
Johnstoun, in Revenge of Johnstoun's killing this Lord's Father; for which he
was afterward beheaded at the Cross of Edinburgh, 21st May 1613, leaving no
Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of John Marquis of Hamilton. But though the
Lord Maxwel had been forfaulted as well as executed for his murdering the
Lord of Johnstoun, yet his Majesty King James VI. was graciously pleased to
rehabilitate Robert his Brother, Anno 1620, whereby he was restored to his
Estate, and created Earl of Nithsdale, with Precedence according to his
Father's Creation of Earl of Morton, by Virtue of which he was ranked in the
Precedence of the Peerage, immediately before the Earl of Winton, and took his
Place accordingly in the Parliament of 1621.

Upon the breaking out of the Civil War in the Reign of King Charles I. he
adhered to the King with the outmost Fidelity, for which he suffered much in
his Person and Fortune, by Imprisonment and Sequestration; but toward the End
of the War he transported himself to the Isle of Man, where he died in the
1647, leaving Issue by Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of Sir Francis Beaumont, a
near Relation to the great Duke of B^ckingham,

Robert his Son and Heir, who died unmarried on the 5th of October 1667 whereby
his Estate and Honor devolved to his Cousin and Heir Male,

John Lord Harris. This Earl so succeeding, married Elizabeth, Daughter of Sir
Robert Gordon of Lochinvar, Ancestor to the Viscount of Kenmure, by whom he had
Robert his Son and Heir, John Maxwel, Esquire William Maxwel, Esquire

Which Robert married Lucy, Daughter of William, Marquis of Douglass, by whom
he had William his Heir, and a Daughter, Mary, married to Charles Earl of
Traquair, and dying in March 1695, was succeeded by,

William his Son, the present Earl, who married Winifrid, Daughter of William
Marquis of Powis, of the Kingdom of England, by whom he has my Lord Maxwel his
Son and Heir apparent.

ARMS.
Argent, a Double Eagle displayed, Sable, Beaked and Membred, Gules, surmounted
of a Shield of the first, charged with a Saltyre of the Second, surcharged with
an Hedgehog, Or. Supporters, Two Staggs proper. Motto, Reviresco.

CARNAGY, Earl of Northesk.
THE first of this noble Family was Sir John Carnagy of Ethie, a younger Son of
David Carnagy of Coluthy, by Eupham his Wife, Daughter of Sir David Weems of
That-Ilk.

Which Sir John being a Person of great Parts, Learning and Industry, acquired
a fair Fortune in Land, which he took Care should descend full and entire to
the Heir of his Family; and his Majesty King Charles I. to countenance and
encourage his Virtue and Merit, was pleased to make him a Peer, by the Style
and Title of, Lord Lour, the 20th of April, 1639 Charta in Rotulis Caroli I.
, and his Lordship having eminently approved himself in his Loyalty during the
Civil War, his Majesty in Consideration thereof was graciously pleased to raise
him to the Honor of Earl of Ethie, Lord Lour and Inglismadie, by Letters
Patent, bearing Date 1st of November 1647 Ibidem.
; and departing this mortal Life, on the 18th of January 1667 Ibidem.
, left Issue by Magdalen his Wife, Daughter of Sir James Halliburton of Pitcur,

David his Successor in the Honor,

Sir John Carnagy of Baysack,

Anne married to Patrick Wood, at that Time Son and Heir apparent to Sir Henry
Wood of Bonniton Ibidem.
.

Margaret to George Lindsay Lord Spainzie, sans Issue.

Marjory to James Scot, Son and Heir apparent to Sir John Scot of Scotstarvet
Ibidem.
, Director of the Chancery in the Reign of King Charles I. and had Issue,

Jean to William Graham of Claverhouse, Mother by him to John Viscount of
Dundee.

David Earl of Ethie, his Son, did with the Permission and Approbation of his
Majesty King Charles II. exchange his Title of Earl of Ethie to Earl of
Northesk, and Lord Lour to Lord Rose-hill. He married Jean, Daughter of Patrick
Earl of Panmure. By her he had Four Sons and a Daughter,

David his eldest Son, the Heir of the Family.

James Carnagy of Finhaven.

Patrick Carnagy of Lour.

Alexander Carnagy of Kinfaunes.

Jean married to Colin Earl of Balcarras.

This Earl giving Way to Fate 12th of December 1679 Charta in Rot. Caroli I.
, was succeeded by,

David the next Earl, his Son and Heir, who dying in the Month of October 1688
Ibidem.
, left Issue by the Lady Elizabeth Lindsay his Wife, Daughter of John Earl of
Crawsurd, David his Son and Heir; likewise two Daughters,

Lady Margaret,

Lady Christian married to James Duke of Montrose.

Which David was by Queen Anne in 1702, constituted Sheriff of Forfar-Shire,
and named one of the Lords of her Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and
thereafter in 1710, his Lordship was elected one of the Sixteen Peers out of
the Nobility of Scotland, to sit and vote in the English House of Lords, and
made one of the Commissioners of the Court of Chamberlanry, to which I think
that of the Police has succeeded. He married the Lady Margaret Weems, Daughter
of Margaret Countess of Weems, by whom he has Issue,

David Lord Rose-hill.

Lady Margaret.

Lady Bettie.

Lady Anne.

Lady Christian.

Lady Mary.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th, Or, an Eagle displayed, Azure, Beaked and Membred,
Gules, 2d and 3d Argent, a Pale, Gules. Supporters Two Leopards. Crest, a
Leopard's Head all proper. Motto, Tache sans Tache.

STEWART, Lord Ochiltree.
THE first of this Branch of the illustrious Family of Stewart, was Sir Andrew
Stewart, Knight, Grandchild of Murdack Duke of Albany, by the Lord James
Stewart his Son, who being a Person of great Courage and Merit, was by King
James II. toward the End of his Reign taken into his immediate and eminent
Favor; and first in the 1458 Charta in Rotulis Jacobi II.
, constituted Warden of the East Marches toward England, and made a Knight. But
this being judged too low an Honor for his illustrious Birth and Quality, his
said Majesty did confer on him the Title of Lord Evandale, Anno 1459 Ibidem.
, a Barony the King gave him, and which came to the Crown by the Forfaulture of
the Earl of Douglass.

In the Beginning of the Reign of King James III. the Lord Evandale was
constituted Lord High Chancellor, Anno 1463, and he held the Office for the
Space of Nineteen Years, till the 1482 Lives of the Lords Chancellors, penes me.
, he was removed, and the Bishop of Glasgow made Chancellor in his Room, and
dying without Issue Male of his own Body, in the 1488, his Estate and Title
devolved to

Alexander Stewart Esquire his Nephew, Son of Walter Stewart of Morphy, his
Brother-German.

He married Margaret, Daughter of Sir John Kennedy of Blairquhan, by whom he
had Andrew his Successor, Henry Lord Methven, and Sir James Stewart of Beith,
Ancestor to the present Earl of Murray, on the paternal Line.

Which Andrew was in great Favor with King James IV. to whom he was Groom of
the Stool, then called Primus Hostiarius Camerae Regis Rymer's Foedera Angliae
ad Annum 1503.
, and thereafter made Captain of His Majesty's Castle of Dunbarton Charta in
Pub. Arch.
.

This Lord in the 1534 Ibid.
, exchanged the Lordship of Evandale with Sir James Hamilton of Finnart, for
Sir James's Barony of Ochiltree, and the Exchange of the Title of, Lord
Evandale to Lord Stewart of Ochiltree, was ratified by Act of Parliament by the
Regent the Earl of Arran, Anno 1543. He married Margaret, Daughter of James
Earl of Arran; and dying Anno 1548, left Issue Andrew his Successor; and
several Daughters, Marjory married to Mr. Knox the great Reformer, and
Christian to John Boswel of Auchinleck.

Which Andrew, for Distinction, called, The good Lord Ochiltree, was a very
glorious and happy Instrument in our blessed Reformation from Popery, when the
Light of the Gospel began first to shine in the Western Parts, in the Minority
of Queen Mary.

He married Agnes, Daughter of John Cunningham of Caprington, by whom he had
Andrew Master of Ochiltree his eldest Son, Sir James Stewart, who was
Chancellor, and Earl of Arran, in the Minority of King James VI. he was looked
on to be one of the evil Counselors of those Times, Sir William Stewart of
Monktoun, Sir Henry Stewart, Knight. Robert Stewart of Wester-Bracko.

Andrew Master of Ochiltree, in the Lifetime of his Father, married Margaret,
Daughter of Henry Lord Methven, by whom he had Andrew, who succeeded his
Grandfather, Josias Stewart of Bonnietoun; likewise several Daughters,

Anne married to Sir. Andrew Ker of Ferniehirst, thereafter Lord Jedburgh.

Margaret to Sir George Crawfard of Liffnorris, and had Issue.

Isobel to Gilbert Kennedy of Bargeny.

Mary to John Stewart of Trequair, Junior and had Issue.

Martha to Nicol Rutherford of Hundely, and had Issue.

To Andrew Lord Ochiltree succeeded Andrew his Grandson and Heir, who was one
of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber to King James VI. General of the Ordnance,
and Governor of Edinburgh Castle in that Reign. He married Margaret, Daughter
of Sir John Kennedy of Blairquhan, by whom he had Andrew Master of Ochiltree,
with whose Consent he alienated his Estate, and with his Majesty's Approbation
and Acceptance, the Title of Lord Stewart of Ochiltree to Sir James Stewart of
Kills, Knight. his Uncle the Chancellor's Son, which the King ratified by a
Charter under the Great Sea^, 9th of Jane 1615 Ibid.
, in Lieu whereof King James created the other Lord Stewart of Castle-Stewart
in the Kingdom of Ireland, by Letters Patent, 9th November, 1619.

This James Lord Ochiltree did afterward in the Reign of King Charles I. accuse
the Marquis of Hamilton of Treason; but when the Affair came to be tried, the
Story appeared to be a Piece of the most notorious Folly and Forgery that ever
was invented; for which he was condemned to perpetual Imprisonment in
Blackness-Castle, where he continued for Twenty Years till the 1652, the
English set him at Liberty; and he dyed before the Restoration, leaving a
Grandson to succeed him in the Honor,

William Lord Ochiltree, a very hopeful young Nobleman, who died about the Age
of Sixteen at the University of Eainburgh, the 12th of February, 1675, with
many Circumstances of Regret, of which this was not the least, that with him
did the Honor of this illustrious Family expire, and come to an End. I have
been told by some who knew this Lord Och^ltree, that he was a most hopeful
Scholar, a great Friend to the Muses; and there are some Fragments of his
Poetical Fancy extant, which very much discover the Excellency of his Genius
that Way.

OLIPHANT, Lord Oliphant.
THE Ancestor of this ancient Family David de Oliphard, was one of those Barons
who accompanied King David I. to England, with an Army to the Assistance of
Maude the Empress, his Niece, against King Stephen, of whom it is memorable,
that after the raising of the Siege of Winchester, in the 1142, King David was
so closely pursued, that he was in a very great Hazard of being made a
Prisoner, had it not been for the singular Valor of this noble Person, who had
the Honor to rescue and bring off the King his Sovereign, to his immortal
Honor Dalrymple's Collections, P. 174.
. This Piece of signal and eminent Service was enough to entitle him to a more
than ordinary Share of that good King's Favor, who with out doubt rewarded him
according to his Merit; and that he was much about him afterward in some Office
of Trust or Attendance, appears from the Frequency of his being found
witnessing the Deeds of that Prince to many religious Places He Is Witness to
the King's Grants to Coldingham and Dunfermling.
, particularly in one to the Prio^y o^ (...), whereto his Seal is append^d,
which by the bearing thereupon, viz. (...) Crescents, clearly prove him to be
the Ancestor of this noble Family, who still bear the same Figures in their
Ensigns Armorial.

Another David de Oliphard, perhaps the Son of the former David, was no less
the Favorite of King Malcolm and King William, than his Predecessor had been
of King David In a Charter by King Malcolm to the Monks of Scoon, he David de
Olyphard is a Witness thereto; and in another by King Will. to the same Convent;
likewise in a Charter by the same King, Fratribus hospitalis Sa^cti Andreae;
also in one to the same Priory of St. Andrews by King William with Nicol.
Cancel.
, in the Beginning of whose Reign he was constituted Justiciartus Laodoniae
David de Olphard Justiciario is Witness in a Grant by King Will. to the Abbay of
Scoon, ratifying the Gift of the Earl of Athole, of the Church of Logy, Mobed
and Justiciario Laodon^ae, as he is designed in a Charter by the said King,
ratifying a G^ant o^ Robert Bishop of St. Andrews, to the Priory there.
; at the same Time, when Comes Dunec^^us was Justiciarius Scotiae, which Office
he held for any Thing I have discovered to the contrary, even till his Death.
To this David succeeded,

Walter de Oliphard, his Son, who in the 9th of King William was one of the
Hostages given for the Ransom of the said King, when he was taken Prisoner by
the English at the Battle of Alnwick, on the 13th of July 1174; and that which
shows Sir Walter was a very great Man, are the Colleagues who were joined with
him, viz. Comes Waldave, Comes Dunecan, Comes Gilebert, together with Richard
Morvil, Great Constable of Scotland Rymer's Foedera.
.

This Walter made a very great Figure under Alexander II. in the 6th of whose
Reign, Anno 1220, he was named one of the Guarantees in a Treaty bet wixt that
Prince and King Henry I. relative to a Marriage betwixt King Alexander and a
Daughter of England, King Henry's Sister Ibid.
; and the next ensuing Year he was made Justiciarius Laodoniae Ibid. ad Annum
1221, he is designed Justiciarius Laodoniae; also in a Grant to Dumfermling the
(...) of King Alex. III. he is in the same Office; and in a Grant by King
Alexander to the Canons of St. Andrews, the 14th of his Reign.
, and he held the Office without any Interruption, even till his Death in the
1242 Chron. de Melross.
. He left Issue by Christian his Wife, Daughter of Ferchard Earl of Strathern
Mr. Freebairn's Hist. of the Families of the Surname of Drummond, M.S.
, Walter his Son and Heir, who renounced any Claim he had to the Church of
Strathgeth to Gilbert Earl of Strathern, the Patronage of which that Earl made
over to the Monks of Inchaffrey, for the Health of his Soul.

Sir William Oliphard or Olyfend, in the 1297, was one of the great Barons of
Scotland, whom King Edward I. as pretending to be direct Superior of the
Kingdom of Scotland, required, upon his Alledgance to attend him in Person with
his Men, Horse and Arms, to go over with him to France, in order to assist him
in the recovering of his Province of Gascony Rymer's Foedera.
; But I don't think he obeyed the Summons, for soon thereafter, when the War
brok^ out betwixt the Two Kingdoms, Sir William had the ill Fate to fall into
the Enemies Hands, who sent him Prisoner to London, where he remained till the
1298, he was liberated upon Condition to return by a certain Day prefixed; and
withal to stay no longer at Home than was necessary to put himself in Equipage
to attend and serve King Edward in the Army he designed to employ against
France: But I have all the Reason in the World to believe he had little Regard
to the Promise he had made, for as soon as he came home, he heartily and
personally engag^d himself in the War against King Edward, for recovering the
Honor and Freedom of his Country which that Prince had so signally invaded;
and thereafter, when the English invaded Scotland in 1303, Sir William Olyfend
was appointed Governor of Stirling-Castle, which he defended with great
Resolution and Courage, for the Space of Three Months, notwithstanding the
English pressed the Siege very hard; but being reduced to Straits for Want of
Provisions, they could not contend with, he was compelled at last to deliver
the Castle upon Articles which were not sacredly observed to the gallant Man.
By Isobel his Wife, Daughter of.... Douglass of..... he had

Sir Walter de Olyfend, who is one of the Barons who swore Fealty, and did
Homage for the Lands which he held of the Crown in the 1304 II^d.
. He left a Son.

Sir William Olyfand, who in the 12th King Robert I. had a Grant from that
Prince, of the Lands of Newtyle and Kil^pynzie, for Homage and Service done and
to be done by him, as the Charter bears Invenrory of the Writings of the House
of Oliphant.
, and was afterward one of the Subscribers of that famous Letter sent to the
Pope in 1320, from the Earls, Barons, etc. of Scotland: And departing this Life
the 5th of February 1329, was interred at the Paroch Church of Aberdalgy, under
a Monument of black Marble, with his Statue thereupon in Armor, as big as the
Life, and this Inscription in great Saxon Capitals,

Hic jacet Dominus Willielmus de Olyphant, Dominus de Aberdalgy, qui obi^t
Quinto Die Mensis Februarii, millesimo tricentesimo vigesimo nono, Orate, etc.

Sir Walter Olyfant his Son, was so gallant and brave a Man, that his Merit
preferred him to a Marriage with the Lady Elizabeth Bruce, Daughter to King
Robert I. and Sister to King David II. for which I have seen a Charter of King
David, to instruct this Royal Alliance, Waltero Olyfant Dilecto and Fideli suo,
pro bono Servitio nobis impenso, and Elisabethae Sp^nsae suae dilectae Sorort
nostrae; erecting the Lands of Gask into a Barony, with the Privilege of
fishing the Water of Ern Three Days of the Week in forbidden Time Charta penes
Jacobum Oliphant de Gask; etiam Charta David II. Waltero Oliphant and
Elizabethae Sponsae suae Terrarum de Pitterrie, ultimo Februarii, 1364.
. By this noble Lady he had Issue,

Walter his Son and Heir, who on the 20th of October, 8th of King Robert II.
Anno 1379, obtained a Grant of the Lands and Barony of Kelly and Pitkereie, on
the Resignation of Sir William his Father Inventory of the Writs of the House
of Oliphant, in the Custody of the Lord of Gask.
. By Mary his Wife, Daughter of Sir Robert Erskine of That-Ilk Geneal. of the
House of Oliphant.
, he had Sir John his Son and Heir, and Malcolm Oliphant of Haslehead in the
County of Air Charta penes Jacobum Oliphant de Gask.
.

Which John had the Honor of Knighthood conferred on him by King Robert II.
from whom he had a Grant in the 1388 of all the Lands he held of the Crown
within the Realm, bearing to have proceeded upon his own Resignation, which is
all I have found memorable concerning him, save that he married, first....
Daughter of....... Borthwick of That Ilk, by whom he had William his Successor;
secondly,....... Daughter of...... Hume of That-Ilk. By her he had a Son
Thomas, who was the first of the House of Kelly, in the County of Fife.

Sir William Oliphant, of Aberdalgy, in 1421, was one of the great Barons who
were appointed to go to England, in order to concert Measures for the
Redemption of King James I. Rymer's Foedera Angliae, ad Annum 1421.
, for which he was afterward one of the Hostages Ibidem ad Annum 1423.
. He married Isobel Daughter of Sir John Stewart of Innermeath, Lord of Lorn,
by whom he had John his Successor, and a Daughter Isobel, married to Sir James
Scrimzeor of Dudop Charta penes Comitem de Lauderdale.
, Constable of Dundee.

Which Sir John having taken Part with the Ogilvies, with whom he was allied by
Marriage, in that great Feud they had with the Lindsays in the Minority of King
James II. was slain at the Battle of Arbroth, 25th January 1445 Hathornden's
History of the Five King James's.
, leaving Issue by Isobel his Wife, Daughter of Sir Walter Ogilvie, Lord of
Auchterhouse Charta in Pub. Arch.
, Laurence the next of the Family, James Oliphant of Archalzie Ibidem.
, Margaret married to William Wardlaw of Torrie Charta penes Jaco^um Oliphant
de Gask.
, Isobel to Alexander Blair of Bethayick Ibidem.
, in vicecomit. de Perth.

Sir Laurence Oliphant of Aberdalgy, in his Youth went over to France, in
Company with the Earl of Douglass, and other young Noblemen, to learn the Art
of War Hathornden's History.
; and after that he traveled into Italy and several Foreign Parts. Upon his
Return, he was by King James III. constituted one of the Lords of the
Privy Council, and raised to the Honor of Lord Oliphant; also in the 1470, he
was made Sheriff of the County of Perth Charta in Pub. Arch.
, and appointed one of the Lords of the Session, for Administration of Justice,
whose Power was then, if we may believe some Authors, so great that from them
there was no Appeal, either to the King or Parliament.

In the 1484, the Lord Oliphant was named one of the Plenipotentiaries on the
Part of Scotland, who met at the Congress at Nottingham, with others
commissioned by the King of England, in order to take away all Grievances
betwixt the Two Realms; by whom at Length a Truce was agreed to, which was to
begin at the Rising of the Sun on the 29th of the Instant Month of September,
and to last till the Setting of the Sun on the 29th of September 1487, of which
his Lordship was one of the Conservators Rymer.
; And in order to take away, as much as possible, all Grounds and Occasions of
Discord betwixt the Two Nations, he was one of the Ambassadors on the Part of
Scotland, authorized to treat about a Marriage betwixt James Prince of
Scotland, and Anne de la Pool, Daughter of John Duke of Suffolk, and Niece of
King Richard of England; which, though it was agreed to, yet by Reason of the
short Life of King Richard her Uncle, and the subsequent Revolution in England,
the Marriage did never take Effect. What Part this Lord acted in the
troublesome Times that ensued in the End of this Reign, I have not been able to
discover. But upon the Accession of King James IV. to the Crown, his Lordship
was appointed by the Parliament, one of the Lords of the King's Privy Council,
Anno 1490 Black Acts of Parliament.
, and empowered and ordained to exercise Justice, and to suppress all Sorts of
Disorders, not only within the Bounds of his own Lands; but had the Country of
Strathbrawin appointed him for the Exercise of that Jurisdiction Ibidem.
.

Thereafter, in the 1491, he was sent upon a Foreign Embassy; and upon his
Return, when a new Treaty was set on Foot, Anno 1492, for prolonging the Truce
with England, the Lord Oliphant was one of the Scots Lords appointed for that
Effect Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
; who accordingly met at Coldstream; and on the 21st of December agreed to a
Truce, which was to continue till the 21st of the same Month 1496, for the
Ratification of which the Commissioners set to the Seals of their respective
Kings, which seemed to be a Practice was not observed till that Time. And
besides what else I have observed of this Lord to make a further Manifestation
of his Greatness; and of the Interest and Dependency he had in the County where
he resided, I shall here exhibit a Catalogue of the Names of such Persons, as
were retained to serve him both in Peace and War, during their respective
Lives, as I extracted them from the very Indentures themselves, in the Custody
of James Oliphant of Gask, his lineal Descendant. Thomas Blair of Bethayick.
Humphrey Murray of Ogilvy. Robert Mercer of Balieff. David Ogilvy of
Inchmartin. Silvester Rattray of That-Ilk. Cristerim Gorthy of That-Ilk. Andrew
Rollock of Duncrub. Robert Rollock of Duncrub, Junior. John Fothring hame of
Powrie. William Ferny of That-Ilk. Robert Bruce of Cultmalindie. William
Rollock of Findon. David Mercer of Innerpeffrey. Niel Stewart of Fothergil.
Lucus Bruce of Cultmalindie.


This noble Lord martied Isobel, Daughter of William Earl of Errol; by whom he
had John his Son and Heir, William Oliphant of Berindale, of whom the present
Branch of the Oliphants of Gask, who obtained the Lands of Berindale and
Strabrock, by the Marriage of Christian Daughter and Heir of Alexander
Sutherland of Duffus Charta in Pnb. Arch. ad Annum 1526, whereby Andrew
Oliphant of Berindale, dispones the Lands of Berindale and Ald-Wick in
Inverness-Shire, and Strabrock in Linlithgow-Shire, to his Cousin Laurence Lord
Oliphant; wherein it is narrated, that by the Death of umquhile Alexander
Sutherland of Duffus, the Marriage of Christian his only Daughter, fell in the
King's Hands, who disponed it to Laurence Lord Oliphant, Grandfather to the
Disponer, who gave her in Marriage to William Oliphant his second Son, this
Disponer's Father. This Andrew had a younger Brother, Laurence Oliphant of whom
the Family of Gask is lineally descended.
, George Oliphant of Balmactorn, and a Daughter Margaret, married to George
Master of Angus, Son and Heir of George Earl of Angus; and departing this Life
in 1500, was succeeded in his Estate and Honor by

John his Son and Heir, who wedded the Lady Elizabeth Campbel, Daughter of
Colin, Earl of Argyle, by whom he had Colin, Master of Oliphant, and Laurence
Abbot of Inchaffrey, who was killed with the Master his elder Brother, at the
Battle of Flowdoun, the 9th of September 1513, the Father surviving his Sons
Three Years, Death overtaking him in the 1516, whereby his Estate and Honor
devolved on,

Laurence his Grandson and Heir, Son of Laurence Master of Oliphant, by
Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of William Earl Marshall. Which Laurence married
Margaret, Daughter of Sir James Sandilands of Calder, by whom he had Laurence
his Successor, Peter Oliphant of Turring; likewise Four Daughters,

Catharine married first to Sir Alexander Oliphant of Kelly, and thereafter to
George Dundass of That-Ilk, and had Issue.

Margaret to William Murray of Abercairny, sans Issue; and again to James
Clepen of Carslogy.

Jean to William Moncrief of That-Ilk, and had Issue.

Lilias to Robert Lundy of Balgony.

This Lord dying the 26th of March, 1566 Charta in Publicis Archivis.
, was succeeded by

Laurence his Son, who was one of the Lords who adhered with the greatest
Firmness and Constancy to Queen Mary, upon the breaking out of the Troubles in
that Reign. He married Margaret, Daughter of George Earl of Errol, by whom he
had Laurence Master of Oliphant, who died in the Lifetime of his Father, and
John Oliphant of Newland, called Master of Oliphant, Ancestor to the present
Lord Oliphant; likewise Three Daughters,

Elizabeth married to William Earl of Angus.

Jean to Mr. Alexander Bruce of Cultmalindie, in vicecomitatu de Perth, and had
Issue.

Margaret to Sir James Johnstoun of Westerhall, in Vicecomitatu de Lanerk, sans
Issae.

Laurence Master of Oliphant; in the Lifetime of his Father, perished going
over to the Low Countries in the 1583, leaving Issue by Christian his Wife,
Daughter of William Earl of Morton, Laurence a Son, who succeeded his
Grandfather; and a Daughter Anne, married to Robert Lord Lindsay.

To Laurence Lord Oliphant succeeded Laurence his Grandson, upon the Death of
his Grandfather, in the 1592. He married Lilias Daughter of James Lord
Madertie, by whom he had only one Daughter, Anne, married to James first Lord
Mordington.

This Lord by an Excess in his Way of Living, squandred away his Estate that
little of the Fortune at his Death fell to his Nephew Patrick, Lord Oliphant,
Son of John Master of Oliphant his Brother, to support the Title, so that the
Family has not since appeared with that Luster it did in former Times. This
Patrick married first Elizabeth, Daughter of Sir Patrick Chyne of Eslemont, by
whom he had one Daughter, Lilias, married to Sir Laurence Oliphant of Gask;
secondly, Mary, Daughter of Sir James Crichton of Frendraught, by whom he had
Charles his Successor, Colonel William Oliphant, and Captain Francis Oliphant.

Which Charles married Mary, Daughter of..... Ogilvy of Milltown, by whom he
had Patrick, the present Lord Oliphant, his Son and Heir.

ARMS.
Gules, Three Crescents, Argent. Supporters, Two Elephants proper. Crest, an
Unicorn's Head, Coupe, Argent, Motto, A Tout Prouvour.

SINCLAIR, Earl of Orkney.
THE Surname of Sinclair, though no doubt originally French, is nevertheless very
ancient in Scotland, for the Lands and Barony of Hermistoun have been possessed
by the Sinclairs since the Reign of King William, that Henricus de Sancto-Claro
had then these Lands by the Grant of Richard de Morvil, Constable of Scotland
Charta penes Mat. Sinclair de Hermistoun, M.D.
; and though I have not found any Evidence so old of the Sinclairs of Roslin, the
Ancestors of the Earls of Orkney and Caithness; yet this noble illustrious
House did not only very far surpass the other, but even most Families within
the Kingdom, for Wealth and Grandeur. They continued their Splendour till the
Reign of King James III. that William Earl of Orkney and Caithness, from
Motives, which, at this Distance of Time, cannot be so well known, did make a
Division of his Estate among Three of his Sons, the Bulk whereof, together with
the Title of Earl, he made over with Consent of King James III. to William
Sinclair, the eldest Son of his second Marriage, whereby the Family lost a
great deal of its Luster, with which it had flowrish'd for many Ages before,
not only in Scotland, but also in Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and other Kingdoms
beyond Sea.

Sir William Sinclair, Lord of Roslin, was High Sheriff of Edinburgh-Shire in
the 30th of King Alexander III. Anno 1278 Chartul. of Dunfermling.
; and after the Death of that Prince was one of the great Barons who were
present at Berwick, in the Plea for the Crown that was betwixt the Bruce and
Baliol, the Decision whereof was referred to King Edward I. of England. This
great Man had Issue Henry his Successor in the Barony of Roslin, William the
martial Prelate of Dunkeld, and very probably Sir Gregory Sinclair, the Founder
of the ancient Family of the Sinclairs of Longformacus Gregory Sinclair swears
Fealty to King Edward I. among other Barons of Berwick-Shire, and I have seen
in the Hands of Sir Robert Sinclair of Longformacus, Bart. an Obligation by
Henry the first Earl of Orkney in the 1384, to his well beloved Cousin Sir
James Sinclair of Longformacus, Knight. whereby the Earl obliges himself to give
his Cousin Sir James a Twenty-Merk-Land, etc. which if it does not prove the
particular Descent, it is certainly a very noble Document for the Antiquity of
the Family of Longformacus.
, in Berwick-Shire.

Sir Henry Sinclair of Roslin, was one of the great Men who swore Fealty to
King Edward I as Direct and Superior Lord of Scotland, an Acknowledgment seems
to have been extorted from them, and which they disowned whenever an
Opportunity offered to assert their own Liberty, and the Nation's Independency.
He was succeeded by

Sir William his Son, who assisted King Robert the Bruce in his Wars, and was
one of the Subscribers of that famous Letter sent to the Pope in 1320, from the
Earls, Barons, etc. of Scotland. He married Elizabeth, Daughter and Coheir of
Maliss, Earl of Strathern, and one of the Heirs of Magnus Earl of Caithness, by
whom he had Henry 1st Earl of Orkney, and two Daughters, Margaret married to
Thomas Earl of Angus, and after his Death to Sir William Sinclair of
Hermiestoun, and had Issue Charta penes Comitem de Marchmont.
; and Jean to Sir John Forrester of Carstorphine.

Which Henry was created Earl of Orkney by Hack^ King of Norway, Anno 1379
Terfeu's History of Orkney.
, which was ratified by his own Sovereign, if he did not also himself confer
the same Honor on Sir Henry; for I have seen a Charter granted by King Robert
of Scotland to this Earl of the Barony of Roslin, resigned by himself, wherein
he is designed Comes Orcadiae, and Dominus de Roslin Charta in Pub. Archivis.
. He married first Florentina, Daughter to the King of Denmark; and thereafter
Jean, Daughter of Sir Walter Hall^burton, Lord of Dirleton Deduction of the
Line of the Earls of Orkney, in Dr. Wallace's History of Orkney.
. By her he had Henry his Heir, Elizabeth married to Sir John Drummond of
Stobhall Charta penes Comitem de Perth.
, Ancestor to the Earl of Perth, and Mary to Sir Thomas Somervel of Carnwath.

Henry second Earl of Orkney, made a very great Figure in the Time of King
James I. in whose Reign he was Lord High Admiral of Scotland, and Governor to
that Prince in his younger Years. He married Giles, Daughter and Heir of
William Douglass, Lord of Nithsdale; by her he had William his Successor, and a
Daughter Beatrix, married to James Earl of Douglass.

William his Son, a mighty Favorite of King James II. was in the 1454 made
Chancellor of Scotland Charta in Rotulis Jacobi II.
, and the same Year sent upon a solemn Embassy to England Rymer's Foedera
Angliae.
: Upon his Return he had a Grant from that Prince of the Earldom of Caithness,
then in the Crown, by the Death of Sir George Crichton: After which he designed
himself promiscuously Comes Orkadiae and Cathaniae Ibid. ad Annum 1461, and
1457, and 1471.
; but thereafter, upon some Transaction with the King, in the Reign of King
James III. the Earldom of Orkney was, by Act of Parliament, 20th of February
1471 The Act of Parliament is at Length in Haddington's Collections from the
Records in the Lawyer's Library.
, annexed to the Crown; but that it did not proceed upon a Forfaulture of the
Earl, as a late Author conjectu^'d, is most plain, for the very same Year he
was in great Favor with his Prince, and named one of the Ambassadors to treat
of a Peace with England, which is the last Time I have found him in any public
Character. He married first Margaret, Daughter of Archbald Earl of Douglass, by
whom he had William Sinclair of Ravensheugh, the lineal Ancestor of the present
Lord Sinclair, his eldest Son, whom he disinherited, and a Daughter Catharine,
married to Alexander Duke of Albany; next, Marjory Daughter of Alexander Master
of Sutherland: by her he had William, in whose Favors he resigned the Earldom
of Caithness; whereupon the King conferred it de nov^ on him, by a Charter under
the Great Seal, 8th of December 1476 Charta in Pub. Arch.
, Sir- Oliver Sinclair of Roslin Charta Wi^^. Comitis Cathaniae, Olivero
Sinclair, filio suo, Terrarum de Roflin and Harbertshire, data 10 December 147^.
, Sir David Sinclair, Knight. John Bishop of Caithness; likewise Three Daughters,
Eleanora married to John Earl of Athole, Marion to Sir John Houstoun of
That-Ilk, and Elizabeth, second Wife of Sir David Boswell of Balmuto, Mother by
him to David Boswel, the first Baron of the Family of Auchinleck, in Air-Shire.

HEPBURN, Duke of Orkney.
FROM the 1471, for the Space of Ninety Six Years, no body bare the Title of
Orkney, that then Queen Mary being abused by the evil Council of some about
her, in Places of nearest Trust and Confidence, was not only advised, but very
solemnly addressed to marry the Earl of Bothwel, as the most effectual Mean to
quiet the Peace of the Country, which was broken and divided by Faction and
Party, her Majesty, in Compliance with their Desires, having resolved to marry
the Earl, she thought his Title too low a Dignity for the Person she intended
to make the Partner of her Ro^al Bed, and therefore the better to fit and
qualify him for that Honor, her Majesty was pleased to raise and advance him
to the highest Dignity a Subject was capable to receive, or the Sovereign to
bestow, that was, to make him a Duke, by the Title of, Duke of Orkney: But no
sooner was the Marriage consummate between the Queen and the Duke, than some of
those very Persons who advised and most advanced the Match, which was certainly
the most unfortunate Step of her Life, entered into Cabals and Associations to
ruin them both, and which they very speedily and successfully effected. For in
less than a Year thereafter, they imprisoned the Queen, and forced the unhappy
Duke to fly out of the Country; and then condemned and forfaulted him, whereby
he was not only depr^ved of his new acquired Title of Duke, but also of Earl,
which had been in his Family for full Eighty Years, and his own He^editary
Offices given to those who had been his principal Conductors to Destruction.

STEWART, Earl of Orkney.
QUEEN Mary did, by a Charter under her Great-Seal, bestow the Crown Lands of
Orkney and Z^^land upon her natural Brother, Sir Robert Stewart of Strathdon,
Prior of Holy-Road-House, 26th May 1565, in Pursuance of which King James VI.
did erect the same Lands into an Earldom, in Favors of his Uncle Sir Robert,
by Letters Patent, bearing Date 28th of October 1581. This Earl married Jean
Daughter of Gilbert Earl of Cassils; by whom he had Three Sons, and Four
Daughters, Patrick Earl of Orkney his Son and Heir, John Lord Kincliven, and
Earl of Carrick, Sir James Stewart, Knight. one of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber
to King James VI. Lady Mary married to Patrick Lord Gray, Lady Jean to Patrick
Lord Lindores, Lady Elizabeth to Sir James Sinclair of Murthil, Lady Barbara to
Rorie MacLeod of the Jews.

Which Patrick was forfaulted for Treason and Oppressions, and beheaded at
Edinburgh, 6th February 1614, whereby the Title of Ear^ of Orkney, was
suppressed: And though the same Title was not conferred upon his Brother, the
Lord Ki^cliven, yet his Majesty King Charles I. in the 1632, was graciously
pleased, in Lieu thereof, to create him Earl of Carrick, from a Village so
called in the Isle of Ethy, in the Orkneys, which was then erected in a Burgh
of Barony, in Favors of the Earl; but he dying without Issue Male of his own
Body, the Title did not descend to his other Heirs, but became extinct with
himself.

HAMILTON, Earl of Orkney.
LORD George Hamilton, Fourth surviving Son of William and Anne, Duke and
Duchess of Hamilton, from his Youth betaking himself to Arms, and having given
early Proofs of a martial Spirit, and distinguished a particular Bravery and
Fortitude in the Battles of Boyne, Achrim, Stank^^k and Landen; and no less in
the several Sieges of Athlone, Limeri^k and Namur; in Consideration whereof,
and to reward his great Merit, King William was graciously pleased to bestow
upon him the old standing Regiment that had been formerly his Uncle the Earl of
Dunb^rton's, immediately after the Battle of Stank^rk, where the Golonel Sir
Robert Douglass of Glenbervy was slain: But that being thought too little to
recompense Lord George's great Services, his Majesty was further pleased to
make him a Brigadier, and to raise him to be an Earl, by the Title of Earl of
Orkney, and to the Hei^s Male of his Body, by Letters Patent, bearing Date the
3d of January 1696; and beside the Motives from the most illustrio^s Family, of
which his Lordship was Son, his own signal Services, are so fully set forth in
the Narrative of the Patent, that I should not think it just to pass them by,
without mentioning them as they are expressed in the Sovereign's own Words,
Quin etiam Considerantes quod idem Dom^nus Georgius Hamilton, Generis sui and
Sang^^nis Nobilitati, propria s^^ Virtute superadd^^it; ac eximiae suae Fidei
and Fortitudinis; multa and praeclar^ dederit Specimina tum in prael^is apud
Boyne, Achrim, Sta^kirk, and Landen; tum in Obsid^onibus de Athlone and
Limerick, nuperrime et^am and em^nenter in Obs^d^one Civit^t^s de Namur, sub
intuitu nostro and observatione. O^ has igitur, plur^masque al^as magni momenti
Res and Rat^ones i^signem and durabilem Regni nostri Favoris Tesseram, in
illum, ejusque ^^miliam confer, noveritis igitur Nos, etc.

In the Beginning of the last War, her Majesty Queen Anne, soon after her
coming to the Crown, was pleased to promote the Earl of Orkney to be a
Lieutenant General, June 8th 1702. But this was not all, for her Majesty would
accumulate more Honors on his Lordship, and therefore on the 4th of February
1704, he was chosen one of the Twelve Knights of the most ancient and most
noble Order of the Thistle, which her Majesty was pleased in Honor of her
ancient Kingdom of Scotland, then to revive. Upon the Commencing of the Union
of the two Crowns, though I don't find the E^^l of Orkney was one of the Peers
named by the Scots Parliament to sit in the e^suing Session, in the English
House of Peers, yet in the first new Parliament thereafter, the Scots Nobility
to testify the Value and Esteem they had of his Lordship, elected him one of
their Number to represent the Peerage of Scotland, in the British Parliament on
the 17th of June 1708. And when that Parliament was dissolved upon the Change
of the Ministry, the Earl of Orkney had the Honor to be rechosen one of the
Sixteen Scots Peers, to the next ensuing Parliament, on the 10th of November
1710, and the Choice of his Lordship being agreeable to the Queen, her Majesty
was pleased upon the 11th of March thereafter to name him one of her most
honorable Privy Council; and in April 1712, to declare him Lieutenant General
of the Foot that were to serve in the ensuing Campaign in Flanders, under the
Duke of Ormond, who was then made General and Commander in Chief of all the
British Forces. Thereafter the Queen made him Governor of Edinburgh-Castle,
upon the Removal of the Duke of Argyle; in which Station King George continued
his Lordship upon his Accession to the Throne; and moreover appointed him one
of the Gentlemen Extraordinary of his Majesty's Bed Chamber; and he took the
Oath of the Office on the 28 of October 1714.

His Lordship married Flizabeth, Daughter of Sir Edward Villiars, Knight. Sister to
Edward Earl of Jersey, by whom he has Three Daughters,

Lady Anne.

Lady Frances.

Lady Henrietta.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st Azure, a Ship within a double Tressure, flowered and
counterflower'd, Or. 2d and 3d, the quartered Coats of the Family of Hamilton;
4th Argent, a Heart Gules, ensign'd with an Imperial Crown, Or, on a Chief,
Azure, Three Molets of the First, supported on the Dexter with an Antelop, and
on the Sinister with an Heart proper. Crest and Motto the same with the House of
Hamilton, viz. a Saw sawing through a growing Tree, with the Word Through.

MACGIL, Viscount of Oxenford.
THE first of this Family was Mr. David Macgill of Nisbet, Son of James
Macgill, Citizen of Edinburgh, and Brother to Mr. James Macgil of Nether
Rankilour, Clerk of Register in the Reign of Queen Mary and King James VI.

Which Mr. David being a Lawyer of good Reputation, was preferred by King James
to be his Majesty's Advocate, and one of the Senators of the College of
Justice, Anno 1582; both which Offices he held till his Death, which happened
in the 1596 Charta in Pub. Arch.
, leaving Issue by Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of..... Forrester of
Carstorphine Ibidem.
.

David his Son and Heir, who by Mary his Wife, Daughter of Sir William Sinclair
of Hermistoun Ibidem.
, had Mr. David Macgil of Cranstoun-Rid^le his Son and Heir, who was one of the
Senators of the College of Justice Dalrymple's Cambden.
, and died without Issue, and Sir James Macgil, Bart. likewise a Daughter,
Elizabeth, married to James Cranstoun, Esquire Son of William first Lord Cranstoun.

Which Sir James being a Gentleman of great Integrity and Learning, was by King
Charles I. made one of the Lords of Council and Session; and thereafter was by
the special Favor of King Charles II. raised to the Honor of Viscount of
Oxenford, by Letters Patent, 19th of April 1651 Charta ^^ Pub. Arch.
. He married first Catharine, Daughter of Sir John Cockburn of Ormistoun Ibidem.
, by whom he had Two Daughters, Elizabeth married to Patrick Hamilton of
Preston, and Anne to Sir James Richardson of Smeatoun; next Christian, Daughter
of William Livingston of Kilsyth, by whom he had Robert his Son and Heir, and a
Daughter Christian married first to Alexander Craw^urd of Carse, and again to
George Ross of Gaulstoun; and dying Anno 1663, was succeeded by,

Robert his Son and Heir, who married Henrietta, Daughter of George, Earl of
Linlithgow, by whom he had a Son George, Master of Oxenford, who died before
himself, in September 1701, and two Daughters, Christian the Heir of his Honor
and Estate, and Margaret married to James Hamilton of Orbist^un, and dying 18th
December 1706. was succeeded by his Daughter

Christian Viscountess of Oxenford, who married William Maitland, Esquire Son of
Charles Earl of Lauderdale, by whom he had Robert the present Viscount of
Oxenford, who succeeded to the Honor on the Viscountess his Mother's Death in
the 1707.

ARMS.
Gules, Three Martlets, Or, supported on the Dexter by a Horse at Liberty,
Argent, garnished with a Viscount's Coronet, whereto a Chain is affixed; and on
the Sinister with a Bull, Sable, colourred and charged as the other Register of
the Lyon's Office.
. Crest, A Phoenix in Flames. Motto, Sine Fine.

VALONIIS, Lord of Panmure.
IN the Time of King William flourished Sir Philip de Valoniis, who in the 11th
of that Reign executed the Office of Lord Great Chamberlain of Scotland
Chartul. of Scoon.
; and he held the Place under that Prince for many Years: As the Lord
Chamberlain seems to have been in the highest Favor with that Prince, so it
appears he made a very considerable Figure in the Public Transactions of those
Times, for when King William had the Misfortune to be taken Prisoner by the
English at the Battle of Alnwick, Anno 1174, Sir Philip de Valoniis was one of
the Hostages sent to England, for the King's Ransom Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
. Upon the Return of the King to reward and commemorate Sir Philip's good and
faithful Services, his Master made him a Grant of the Baronies of Panmure and
Be^vin in the County of Forfar, out of which he gave a Donation to the Monks of
Coupar, in pure and perpetual Alms, Pro salute Animarum quondam Regis David,
Comitis Hen^ici Filii sui, Regis Malcolmi, nec non pro salute Animae Regis
Willielmi David Comitis Fratris sui, and salute sui ipsius, Antecessorum and
Successorum suorum in perpetuum Chartul. of Coupar, penes D. Balmerino.
; and departing this Life 5th November 1215 Chron. de Melross.
, was interred in the Convent of Melross, leaving a Son,

Sir William de Valoniis, who had a Grant from King William, in the Lifetime of
his Father, of the Baronies of Panmure and Benvin, bearing to be made Willielmo
de Valontis, Filio Philippi de Valoniis de Terris illis in Scotia quas eidem
Philippo Patri ejus dedi, scz. Benvin, per rectas divisas suas, and cum omnibus
justis Pertinentiis suis, and Panmore per rectas divisas suas and cum omnibus
justis Pertinentiis, per servitium dimidii Militis sicut charta praedicti
Philippi de Valoniis Patris sui testatur Charta penes Comitem de Panmure. which
is engraven in Mr. Anderson's Collection of Charters.
. This Sir William being a Man of Parts and Merit, King Alexander II. was
pleased to make him Lord Chamberlain of Scotland, a Place his Father had long
and worthily held in the former Reign Chartul. of Scoon and Aberbrothock.
, upon his Father's Demise; and he discharged that great Office for the Space
of Four Years, even till his Death in the 1219 he was buried at Melross beside
his Father Chron. de Melross.
, leaving Issue one Daughter, Christian his sole Heir, who brought the Baronies
of Benvin and Panmure to her Husband, Sir Peter de Maulia, Knight. the lineal
Ancestor of the present Earl of Panmure, and the other Branches of that most
noble Family.

MAULE, Earl of Panmure.
BOETHIUS, and some other Historians of the Scots Nation do reckon, that the
first Ancestor of this ancient and noble Family, came from Hungary to Scotland,
in the Reign of King Malcolm III. in the Retinue of Edward the Outlaw of
England, and of Margaret his Sister, thereafter Queen of Scotland. But as this
Assertion of Mr. Bois's is without Authority, or even so much as Probability;
so I rather incline with some modern Antiquaries, who have enquired with great
Curiosity into the Origin and Progress of Sirnames among us, to think the first
Ancestor of the Maules to have come from France, and extracted from the noble
Family of de Maulia, so called from a fair Lordship of that Name in the Duchy
of Nor mandy; the first of whom I have found using the Surname, was Petrus de
Maulia, Filtus Ansoldi, Filit Guarini, who gave, Anno 1076, to the Monks of
Uttica, the Churches of St. Mary, St. Vincent, and St. Germain, in villa quae
nuncupatur Maulia, for the Salvation of his Soul Odericus Vitalis in his
Ecclesiastical History, Book V. printed in Andrew du Chyne's Collecton of the
Norman Writers.
, according to the Devotion of these Times, when good Works were believed to be
meritorious with Almighty GOD; and departing this Life in January 1101 Ibidem.
, was inter^'d in the Cloister of Uttica, with an Epitaph over his Grave, of
which this is a Part, Post Annos Agni centum cum mill superni,
Flos Procerum Petrus prope Jani decidit idus, etc.


He left Issue by Guindismoth his Wife, a Lady of a noble Family at Troyes,
Four Sons, Ansold, Theobald, Guarin, and William.

Which Ansold was a very warlike Man, and did eminently signalize himself in
the Wars of Italy Ibidem.
, particularly in the Battle where Alexius the Emperor of Constantinople,
received a signal Overthrow; likeas in 1106, he ratified to the Monastry of
Uttica the Rights his Father had made to that Church; and afterward retiring
from the World, for the better disposing himself, as he thought, to Devotion,
he took upon him the Habit of a Monk of St. Bennet, in that Cloister, where he
ended his Days not long after, and was there interred with this Epitaph upon
his Tomb, writ by Odo of Monstrewel, Si quis erit si scire velit, dum vivus
adesset
Quis fuerat quem Tumba tegit, quod nomen haberet,
Ansoldi nomen suit huic, and Militis omen, etc.


By Oldenine his Wife, Daughter of Radulphus de Malevicine, he had seven Sons,
Petrus, Radulphus, Guarinus, Liscardus, Guido, Ansoldus, and Hugo.

Which Petrus de Maulia married Addo, Daughter of the Count de Ghisne, but
being a turbulent Man, Louis the Gross, King of France, for his insolent
Demeanor, demolished his Castle, and deprived him of his Lordship of Maulta;
and though he was afterward so far reconciled to his Prince, as that he
accompanied him to the Battle of Breunivil, against Henry I. of England, in the
1^19 Ibidem.
; yet for what I have found, he never recovered so much Favor as to be
restored to the Possession of his Estate. And it is highly probable, at least
much more, so, than Boethius Story, that upon the falling low of the Family of
De Maulia in France, a Branch of them was transplanted to S^^tland, in the Time
of King David I. who^e Bounty and Generosity we know, was not confined to his
own Subjects; but was also very liberally extended to Foreigners of Birth and
Merit, who were willing to put themselves under his Protection; for in the End
of that Reign, William de M^ulia is Witness in a Donation by Prince H^nry, of
the Lands of Clerkingtoun to the Church of Haddingtoun Reg^sters of the Priory
of St. Andrews.
. But what were the first Lands the M^uies were possessed of, I have not been
able to discover; but they were ^pread into sundry Branches as early as the
succeeding Reign of King Malcolm IV. when that Prince of his Royal Bounty gave
the same William de Ma^^^a promiscuously designed Masculus and ^e M^u^^a, the
Lands and Tenement of (...) in Perth-Shire, out of whi^^ he mertified in pure
and perpetual Alms, DEO, and Canonicalt Ecclesiae Sancti Andreae Capelam de
Foulis, cum Terra quae eidem Cap^lae competebat, antequam Foulis esset mihi
data, cum december acris Terrae, quas in incrementum ded^ ipsi Capelae, pro salute
Animae m^^, etc. coram Roberto Episcopo Sancti Andreae Ibid.
. The same William Ma^culus de Foulis, gave to the Chanons of the Priory of St.
Andrews and Thomae Masculo clertco nepoti suo, ecclesiam suam de Foulis, in
puram eleemosinam Ibidem.
, coram Willielmo Priore Sancti Andreae Comite Dunecano. Adamo pratre Comitis,
Michaele Masculo, Ricardo nep^te suo. But he dying without Issue Male, his
Estate went with his two Daughters, the Elder married to R^ger de Mortimer; and
the Younger (...) to Walter de Rothven, Paternal Ancestor to the Earls of
Gowrie.

For the further Illustration of this Descent, there is a Donation made by Hugo
ae Mortuomari, Lord of (...), whereby he confirms to the Chanons of Sr.
Andrews, Capelam de Foulis, cum terra quae eidem Capelae competeba^, antequam
Foulis esset data Willielmo de Masculo avo suo Chartul. of St. Andrew's. M.S.
; and thereafter Gilbertus de Rothven, Son of Walter de Rothven, in praesentia
Domini Alexandri Regis, in curia apud Schonen, die Veneris ante Dominicam
Palmarum, Anno Gratiae 1262 Charta penes Comitem de Panmure.
, resigns in due Form, Wi^^ielmo de Mortuomar^, cognato suo and haeredibus suis
in perpetuum, totum jus illud quod ille and haeredes sui habuerunt vel habuere
potuerunt per decessum Ciciliae aviae suae filiae domini Willielmi de Maulia,
vel aliquo alio jure, mihi and haeredious meis, contingente in tota terra de
Foulis in Gaurin, vel medietato ipsius, vel in part ejusdem.

The direct Ancestor of this noble Family was Sir Peter de Maulia, great Nephew
and Heir Male of Sir William de Maulia, Lord of Foulis, who in the Beginning of
the Reign of King Alexander II. obtained the Barony of Panmure, by the Marriage
of Christian Daughter and sole Heir of Sir William de Valoniis, Lord of
Panmure, Great Chamberlain of Scotland.

This Sir Peter and the said Christian his Wife, did mortify the Lands of
Brakis and Bothmernock, to the Monks of Arbroth Ibidem, and Chartul. of
Arbroth, in the Lawyers Library.
, in the Tenement of Panmure, for the Salvation of their Souls, as appears from
a Perambulation betwixt them and the Abbot of the said Convent, which narrates,
that after some Dispute betwixt the Two Parties anent the Right of these Lands,
the King had ordered the Earl of Buchan his Justiciary, to march and
perambulate the said Lands; and the Parties having amicably agreed, by the
Mediation of certain noble Persons, viz. William Lord Brichen, Gilbert de Haya,
and Robert de Montealto, the Affair at length was amicably composed Charta
penes Comitem de Panmure.
. He dying in the 1254, left Issue

Sir William his Successor, and

Sir Thomas, who in the 1303, bravely defended the Castle of Brichen, against a
strong Party of the English, for several Weeks, with the outmost Resolution and
Magnanimity: Of whom Matthew Westminster, an Author not to be suspected of
Flattery, when he speaks in Favor of the Scots, says, That he was a Soldier of
undaunted Boldness and Resolution of Mind, that the Vigor and Strength of his
Body were very great, and that he did not fear to hold out the small Fortress
committed to his Charge against a Royal Army. And notwithstanding King Edward
was very sollicitous to have the Place, and for that Purpose brought great
Preparations against it, yet all was to no Purpose, insomuch, says the former
Author, that one Day as the Governor was standing upon the Wall, and watching
where a Stone hit against it, he in Derision wiped the Place with his
Handkerchief: But some Days after, when another Attack was made, the brave
Governor had the Misfortune to receive a Wound in the Breast, of which he died
the same Evening, whereupon the Castle was surrendered.

Which Sir Willi^m, in the 1293, ratified and confirmed to Rodolph of Dundee,
the Grant of Christian de Valoniis his Mother, of the Lands of Benvin and
Balruthry, with the Patronage of the Church of Benvin, to which his Seal is
appended; and still entire, as it is bore by his Descendants, the Heirs of this
noble Family Charta penes Comitem de Panmure.
. He was also one of those Barons who in the 1292, did Homage to King Edward I.
for his Lands which he held of the Crown in the County of Forfar, when the Bulk
of the Nation swore Fealty to that ambitious Prince P^n's History.
. He married Etham de Vallibus Charta penes Comitem de Panmure.
, Daughter of...... de Vallibus, Lord of Dirleton, by whom he had

Sir Henry his Son and Heir, Lord of the Barony of Panmure, who received the
Honor of Knighthood from King Robert I. on Account of his Merit and Services
to that Prince, who was a very bountiful Patron to worthy Men.

This Sir Henry Maule confirmed to John of Glassirth, Son and Heir of Radulph
de Dundee the Lands of Benvie and Balruthry, which his Father Sir William had
formerly given to the said Radolph. Whereupon King Robert I. confirms by his
Charter under the Great Seal, Donationem illam quam Willielmus de Maule, Miles
Dominus de Panmure fecit Radulpho de Dundee. Militi de Terris de Banevy and
Balruthry, cum advocatione ecclesiae ejusdem, cum molendino, and cum omnibus
aliis justis pertinentiis suis, ac ratificationem, approbationem, and
confirmationem Henrici de Maule, militis filii and haeredis Willielmi de Maule
praedicti, factas Johanni de Glassrith, filio and haeredi quondam Radulphi de
Dundee, de terris praedict. cum advocatione ecclesiae, etc. Charta penes
Magistrum Henricum Maule de Kelly, fratrem Comitis de Panmure.
. Test. Waltero de Tuinham, Cancellario nostro, Thoma Randulpho Comite
Moraviae, Domino Vallis Anandiae and Manniae, nepote nostro Jacobo Domino de
Duglas, Gilberto de Haya Constabulario nostro, Roberto de Kieth Marischallo
nastro Scotiae, and Roberto Boyde, (...): Apud Dundee quarto decimo (...)
Aprilis, Anno Regni nostri vicesimo quarto.

He married Margaret, Daughter of......... Hay of (...), Predecessor to the
Marquis, of Tweedale, G^neal. of the House of Lockarit and Yester, and Dunlop's
Collections, M.S.
, by whom he had Walter his Successor, William, and (...), who ^^^king himself
to the Service of the Church, entered into Orders, and had a Dignity in the
Chapter of the Sea of St. Andrews, as appears from the Grants of Bishop
Lamberton, who exerced the Episcopal Function there, under King David II.
Chartul^ of Arbroath.
; likewise a Daughter, Christian married to Alexander Strachan of Carmylie
Charta penes Comitem de Panmure.
, in vicecom. de Forfar.

Walter, the next of this noble Family, flourished under King David II. he gave
in free Alms to the Episcopal See of Brichen, the Chaplanry of Boath of his own
Patronage, with his Lands of Carncorthy, for the Salvation of his Soul Ibid.
, which Charter of this Walterus de Mau^ta King David ratified to his Favorite
Chancellor the Bishop of that See, 20th of November 1360 Ibid.
. By...... Daughter of........ his Wife, he had Sir William his Successor, and
Henry Maule, first of the Branch of the Maules of Glaster Ibid.
.

Which Sir William married Marion, only Daughter of Sir David Fleeming of
Biggar, Ancestor to the present Earl of Wigtoun Ibid.
, by Jean his first Wife, Daughter of Sir David Barclay Lord of Brichen, by
whom he had Thomas his Successor, and a Daughter Jean, married to Alexander
Ouchterleny of Kelly Ibid.
, in vicecomitatu de Forfar.

Thomas Maule of Panmure his Son, was made a Knight. by King Robert III. and
thereafter during the Regency of the Duke of Albany, when the Troubles broke
out upon the Descent of Donald of the Isles, when an Army was sent against that
Lord, under the Command of the Earl of Mar, Sir Thomas Maule was one of those
loyal Barons who joined the General in his March northward, and had a Command
in the Army at the bloody Battle of Hairlaw, where he was slain, in the Flower
of his Age, July 25th, 1411, leaving Issue by Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of
Sir Andrew Gray of Fouls, Ancestor to the Lord Gray Ibidem.
, a Son born after his Death, viz.

Sir Thomas, who was served and retoured Heir to his Father in 1412 Ibidem.
, notwithstanding of his Nonage, in Respect of a Statute of General Council,
made in Favors of those whose Predecessors were killed in the King's Service.

Upon the Death of that Arch-Traitor, Walter Earl of Athole, who murdered King
James I. Sir Thomas Maule laid Claim to the Lordship of Brichen, in Right of
his great Grandmother, who was Sister to Sir David Barclay, Lord of Brichen,
whose Daughter and Heir the Earl had married; but the Ministry in the Minority
of King James II. having in sundry Cases procured Decisions to be made in
Favors of the Crown, when the Competition run betwixt the Sovereign and the
Subject, so Sir Thomas Maule and the Friends of the Family of Brichen were
baulked of their Right to that Lordship, which on the Earl of Athole's
Forfaulture was immediately vested in the Crown, in Regard he was possessed of
it at his Death There is in the Hands of the Earl of Panmure, an Instrument
taken in the 1437, by Thomas Maule of Panmure, upon Walter Earl of Athole,
acknowledging, that he enjoyed the Lordship of Brichen, only by Courtesy, since
the Decease of his Wife Elizabeth Barclay, and that he had resigned the same in
the King's Hands: And another Declaration in the 1435, by Thomas Bisset of
Ballquillo, whereby he judicially declares, that D^me Jean Barclay, Wife of Sir
David Fleeming, was Grandmother to Sir Thomas Maule, who was kill^d at Hairlaw.
. But if ever Sir Thomas received afterward any Compensation for his Claim
thereto, when the King came to Age, I have not been able to discover. He
married Margaret, Daughter, as the Contrract designs her, of a Nobleman, Sir
Thomas Abercromby of That-Ilk Charta penes Comitem de Panmure.
, in the County of Fife, one of the Lords of the Session in the Reign of King
James II. Black Ac^^ of Parliament.
, and dying in the 1450 Charta penes Comitem de Panmure.
, left Issue

Sir Thomas his Son and Heir, who was a Gentleman of great Account in that
Time; from a Principle of Devotion, according to the Piety of those Times, he
ratified and confirmed to the Abbacy of Coupar, and to the Monks serving GOD
there, certain Lands within the Barony of Panmure, with a Right to a Fishing in
the east Haven of Panmure, which had been formerly given to the said Abbacy by
Sir Thomas's Predecessor, Sir Philip de Valoniis, and that pro salute animae
suae, Elizabethae sponsae suae, Alexandri Maule filii sui and haeredis, omntum
antecessorum and successorum suorum in perpetu^m Ibidem ad Annum 1456.
. He likewise founded a Chapel at his own Manor-House of Panmure, dedicated in
Honor of the Blessed Virgin, for the Con^^cration of which he obtained a
License and Order from Julian Bishop of Ostia, the Pope's Legate, to perform
there Divine Service, and all other Offices competent to a Chapel-Devotion for
him and his Family continually, dated in the Year 1487 Cl^^^a penes Comitem de
Panmure.
, the 3d of Pope Innocen. VIII. He married first the Lady Elizabeth Lindsay,
Daughter of Alexander Earl of Crawsurd Ibidem.
, by whom he had a Son Alexander, who died in the Lifetime of his Father, and a
Daughter Elizabeth, married to.......... Lindsay of Evelick; and again when he
was an old Man. Catharine, Daughter of...... Craumond of Ald-Bar, and departing
this Life in the 1498, was immediately succeeded by,

Sir Thomas his Grandson, Son and Heir of Alexander Maule of Panmure, Ju^tor,
by Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of Sir David Gathry of That-Ilk, Knight. Lord
High-Treasurer of Scotland in the Reign of King James III. Ibidem, etiam Charta
in Pub. Arch.
. This Sir Thomas was made a Knight. by King James IV. by whom he was much valued
and esteemed, as a Person well affected to the Government both in Church and
State.

As the King had a great Regard for Sir Thomas Maule, so the Churchmen
professed a more than ordinary Honor and Esteem of him; for the then Abbot of
Coupar, with full Consent and Approbation of his Convent made him Baily of
their Barony of Barry, a Jurisdiction, though of no great Value of itself, yet
was such as the great Men before the Reformation affected to exerce, that they
might be thought friendly to the Church, which was then no ill Politic, all
Things considered. He married first Elizabeth, eldest Daughter and Coheir of
Sir David Rollo of Ballachie Ibidem.
, by Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of Andrew Lord Gray; by whom he had Robert
his Successor, and William, who married Janet, Daughter of John Carnagy of
Kinnaird, the Earl of Southesk's Ancestor, and was the Root of that Branch of
the Maules of Boath Ibid.
; next, Christian, Daughter of William Lord Graham, by Jean his Wife, Daughter
of George Earl of Angus, and Widow of the Lord of Gleneagles, but by her he
had no Issue.

Sir Thomas being the particular Favorite of his Master, King James IV. he
accompanied him to the Battle of Flowdon; and while he was on his Way thither,
he made his Testament at Dundee, that he might free himself of all worldly
Intanglemonts, and the better, as he expresses it himself, to dispose him to
the Service of his King and Country Ibidem.
, in the War. And it is recorded of this Gentleman, to his immortal Honor, that
though many of the first Quality left the King, before the Army engaged with the
Enemy; yet he would not, though he was a very corpulent Man, and advanced in Age,
but personally engaged in the Battle, where he fought with remarkable Courage,
and received many Wounds, of which he instantly died, on the fatal 9th of
September 1513 Charta penes Comitem de Panmure.
, his Estate by his Death devolving on

Robert, his Son and Heir, who was retoured to Sir Thomas his Father, in the
Year 1514, the King's Precept for infefting him bears, Quod est legitimae
aetatis per actum dispensationis a quondam c^rissim^ patre nostro, desuper
concess. Ibidem.
. He was afterward one of those Barons who made that loyal and dutiful Attempt
to rescue King James V. from the Earls of Arran and Angus, who kept him in
little other Condition than that of a Captive, and in order to his Liberation,
joined the Earl of Lenn^x at the Fight at Linlithgow-Bridge, in 1526 The
History of the Family of Panmure, wrote by Mr. Robert Maule, Commissar of St.
Andrews. M.S. penes Comitem de Panmure.
. Though this generous Design proved abortive, and the young King still detained
by those who had him in their Hands, and the Lord of Panmure obliged to take a
Remission for it, as it had been the foulest Treason; yet the King when he came
to Age, retained a very lasting Sense of that Service, as a very loyal
Appearance; and ever afterward treated Panmure on that Account with the
greatest Respect and Esteem, insomuch as after his Majesty assumed the
Government on himself, he grants a Dispensation to this Robert Maule of
Panmure, For the true, good and thankful Service done to his said Majesty by
him, to remain and bide at Home during all the Days of his Life, from all
Hosts, Roads within the Realm, or without the same, by Sea or Land, and from
all Attendance on Parliaments, Courts of Justiciary, of Chamberlanry, etc
Charta penes Comitem de Panmure.
. But how the Lairds of Panmure came to relinquish their Privilege of sitting
in Parliament, I am at a Loss to know, in regard I find several of them
designed in old Writs Nobiles and potentes Domini, a Title which was afterward
made a sufficient Authority, to establish a Family in the Dignity of Lord
Barons, in the Decree of Ranking, Anno 1606.

Though this Loyal Gentleman was after this under no Necessity of ever appearing
in any public Action, by virtue of the King's Dispensation; yet he no sooner
saw his Country threatened with Danger by Party and Faction, after the Death of
King James V. than at the Command of the Regent the Earl of Arran, he raised
his Vassals and Re^ainers, joined the Lord Gray and others, and attacked the
Town of Perth, which the Lord Ruthven held out against the Queen's Authority;
Though they were at first repulsed, and the Lord of Panmure, who first made the
Attack, was taken Prisoner; yet in the End the Affair came to be adjusted to
the Satisfaction of the Governor Mr. Maule's Hist. M.S.
. At the same Time the Lord of Panmure was a strenuous Opposer of the intended
Match betwixt Queen Mary and Edward VI. of England, from an Apprehension his
Country might suffer, not only in its Freedom and Independency, but also in its
other valuable Privileges, by such an Union. So that when the War broke out
betwixt the two Nations, on the Breach of the Articles that had been formerly
agreed to, and on which ensued the Battle of Pinky, Panmure's Affections being
known that Way, the English Governor of Bruchty detached a strong Party from
the Garrison to seize and apprehend him in his own House; and notwithstanding of
the Surprise, yet a very noble and brisk Defense was made within, and the old
Gentleman himself received diverse Wounds; but not being prepared for a Siege,
he was at length forced to surrender Mr. Robert Maule's History, M.S.
. Whereupon he was sent Prisoner to London by Sea, and committed to the Tower,
where he remained a whole Year, till he was set at Liberty at the special
Instances of the Marquis de Elbuife, the French Ambassador to Scotland, with
the Regent of England, in whose Company he came Home in the 1549, and being by
this Time aged, he thenceforth passed the Residue of his Time. in a happy
Retirement, till Death took him away on the 2d of May 1560 Charta penes Comitem
de Panmure.
. He was interred at the Church of Panb^^de, among his Ancestors, where a
Monument was erected over his Grave. He married Isobel, Daughter of Sir
Laurence Mercer of Aldie Ibidem,
, an anicent Family in Perth-Shire, by whom he had Thomas his Son and Heir,
John Moule, Esquire Robert Maule, Esquire likewise a Daughter Margaret, married to the
Lord of Pitcur. After the Death of his first Wife, he married again Isobel,
Daughter of Sir Robert Arbuthnot of That-Ilk Ibidem.
. Ancestor to the present Viscount of Arbuthnot. By her he had Three Sons,
Henry, of whom sp^ang the Maules of Melgum, whose Son and Successor Henry Maule
of Melgum wa^ a learned Antiquary, and the Author of the History of the Picts,
which he left behind him in Manuscript, but is since published; Andrew Maule of
Guildie, and William Maule of G^aster, who being a Person of great Reputation
for Integrity, acquired an opulent Fortune, which at his Death was divided
among his seven Daughters, who were all Coheirs,

Marion married to Sir Alexander Seton of Kilcroich, one of the Senators of the
College of Justice.

Bethea to James Murray of Skirling, and had Issue.

Margaret to Sir Archbald Murray of Blackbarony, and had Issue.

Eleanor to Alexander Morison of Prestongrange, and had Issue.

Jean to William Oliphant of Kirkhill.

Isobel, to James Dundas of Dudingstoun; and again to James Hamilton of Parkly,
and had Issue.

Beatrix to Mr. Robert Burnet of Crimond.

Thomas Maule of Panmure, the next of this noble Family, was by the singular
Care of his Father brought up in all Accomplishments suitable to his Birth; and
for his further Improvement sent to France in the Year 1538 Mr. Maule's History.
, in the Retinue of the Abbot of Arbroth, Dr. Beaton, thereafter Bishop of St.
Andrew's, who was Ambassador from Scotland to that Court. Upon his Return he
signalized his Courage and Valor at the Fight of Haldonrig Ibidem.
against the English, where he had the ill Fortune to be taken Prisoner, and
was sent to Morpeth, where he remained till after the Death of King James V.
that King Henry VIII. did then politically release all the Scots Prisoners of
Note and Character, in Hopes to engage them to promote the Union he designed of
the Two Kingdoms, by the Marriage of his Son Prince Edward, and Queen Mary. But
though the Lord of Panmure had a very grateful Sense of the Favor that Prince
had done him, yet it had never the least Influence on him, to engage him in any
Interest or Party that proved prejudicial to his Country; but upon the breaking
out of the War with England, he heartily and personally engaged in the public
Service, and was at the Battle of Pinky-Cleugh Ibidem.
, where with great Difficulty he got his Escape made; having lost many of his
Friends and Vassals, particularly Thomas Maule of Boath, his own Consin-German.
After the End of the War, as he lived in great Splendour at home, and made a
very considerable Figure in the Country, so he had severals of Notes who were
retained to serve him; and among others, I find John Scrimzeor, Constable of
Dundee, gives him his Bond of Manrent and Service, as his Superior, in
Consequence of a former Obligation of the same Nature, which Sir James
Scrimzeor his Predecessor had formerly made to Sir Thomas Maule of Panmure,
which by his own Obligation he ratifies and renews, of the Date, 10th of May
1563 (...) Comitem de Panmure. I have seen other Bonds of Manrent in the
Custody of the (...) Panmure, by the Gentry of Forfar-shire, but this single
one I thought sufficient to mention.
. This loyal and brave Man afterward accompanied Queen Mary in her Northern
Progress as far as Aberdeen, and would have marched with her all the Length she
designed in those Parts, had not the afflicted Circumstances of his Family
called him to return Home, with the Queen's Permission, so that he was not at
the Fight of Corichy, which happened soon thereafter; but her Majesty did not
want any further Testimony of his Loyalty, having been fully satisfied in his
Fidelity and Affection to the Crown, by many repeated Instances through the
whole Course of his Life before.

When the Troubles broke out in this Reign he did not meddle much with either
Party, but kept himself as much, if not more, out of the Broils of the Times,
than any other of his Quality in the Kingdom; for in all the public
Transactions during the Course of the War, I don't find him ever concerned in
any public Deed, save in that Association (...) Bond at G^asgow, now printed.
which was entered into, in the Year of GOD 1567, by the Bulk of the Nation,
for the Inauguration of the young Prince King James VI. upon the Queen his
Mother's Resignation: And I observe the Bond is not only signed by those who
were the greatest Promoters of the Reformation, but even by others of the
Nobility and Gentry who were of the Roman Religion, and afterward adhered to
the Queen with great Firmness and Fidelity, which gives me Ground to believe
they were not then thoroughly acquainted with the Circumstances by which the
Dimission was extorted from her, otherwise I cannot think, that Men of Honor,
could have shifted as so many of them did, all of a sudden, and become most
inveterate Enemies to the Government that succeeded during the whole of the
young King's Minority.

This Gentleman was first espoused to the Lady Elizabeth Lindsay, Daughter of
David Earl of Crawfurd Contract of Marriage penes Comitem de Panmure, a^ (...)
1526.
, and thereafter he married Margaret, Daughter of Sir George Halliburton of
Pitcur Ibidem.
, and giving Way to Fate the 7th of March 1600 Ibidem
, left Issue by his Wife foresaid, beside Patrick the Heir of his Fortune, Five
other Sons and a Daughter, William, David, Robert who was Commissary of St.
Andrew's; in his Time he had the Reputation of a good universal Scholar, and a
Person of great Integrity. Mr. Maule had a Turn to Antiquities, particularly of
his own Country, in which he was very exact. He wrote several Treaties with
great Judgment and Learning, one, which he calls, Periodi Gentis Scotorum, the
Abstract whereof he gives in these Words, Has in septem partiti sumus; quarum
prima initium ducit a primo Scotorum ex Hispania adventu, and in Albium
appulsu, and tempus illud totum occupabit quo nostri sub Philarchis, usque ad
primum creatum Regem, fuerunt. Secunda vero exordium inde suum habebit quo
primus apud Nos Monarcha ordinatus fuit, ad exilium Scotorum. Tertia vero a
reditu ab exilio ordietur; quae and desinet in excidium Picticae gentis. Quarta
vero a deletis Pictis, and duplicato jam Regno, ad Milcolumbi Canmori
principatum; quo imperante novae apud Nostros Leges, novi item Honorum Tituli
orti. Quinta a Milcolumbo quicquid est annorum complectitur, ad interitum
lachrymabilem Alexandri Tertii. Sexta autem, ab Alexandro optimo Rege extincto,
durabit in obitum Jacobi Quinti. Septima tandem, atque ultima, a Jacobi Quinti
immatura morte, ad abitum Jacobi Sexti in Angliam.

He wrote likewise a History of the noble Family of which he was a Son, and in
which, no Doubt, there were several great Men; as also another Treatise De
Antiquitate Gentis Scotorum, in a tolerable pure Latin Style, which he says,
was written contra Anglorum Calumnias and Mendacia, and seems to be plainly
levelled against the English Antiquary Mr. Cambden, who about that Time, I
think, had published his Britannia, wherein he asserts some Things that the
Scots Antiquaries were mightily displeased with, and none more than Commissar
Maule, who was one of the most strenuous Asserters of the Freedom and
Independency of Scotland, and among the first who attacked Cambden; in which he
was seconded by Mr. Hume of Godscroft, and afterward by the learned Mr.
Drummond of Hawthornden. Beside other very judicious Remarks on the History of
his Country, I observe from the little I have seen of Mr. Maule's M S. that he
has happily hit upon a better Notion of the ancient Culdees, than any Author
before him; and when I have Occasion to peruse more of his Book in Relation to
that Matter, I shall not fail to do his Memory all imaginable Justice, and
frankly own the Helps I had from him in a Dissertation concerning the Culdees I
have by me, and which I intend, GOD willing, to communicate to the World.

Thomas Maule of Pitlivie the fifth Son, married Mary Daughter to...... Lighton
of Ulishaven, by whom he had two Sons, Thomas and Robert Maules, Esquires,
which last was Gentleman of the Privy-Chamber to King Charles I. Thomas Maule
the elder Brother, transported himself to the Kingdom of Ireland, where he
established a Family, which still continues in that Kingdom with Luster, and
being a gallant brave Man, and a most hearty Loyalist in the Service of King
Charles I. in the Time of the Civil War, was Lieutenant Colonel to the Marquis
of Ormond's own Regiment, when he acted as Lieutenant General for the King in
that Kingdom. The Colonel left behind him two Sons, William Maule, Esquire Surveyor
General of the Customs of Dublin, and Thomas Maule, Esquire one of the Grooms of
the Bedchamber to Prince George of Denmark, and Lieutenant of the Yeomen of the
Guard in England, a Gentleman of Honor and Merit.

George Maule, Esquire the sixth Son.

James Maule, Esquire the seventh Son.

Margaret, only Daughter, married to James Stewart, Esquire Son of John Earl of
Athole.

Patrick, the next in the direct Line of this noble Family, tho he was a
Gentleman of very good Parts, yet did not make so great an Appearance as some
of his Predecessors, it being a Time of profound Peace he lived in; tho we
cannot say what Figure he might have made, had he had any Opportunity to exert
himself in the Service of his Country in the Wars against the English; but then
all National Animosities were outwardly removed by the Union of the Crowns in
the Person of King James VI. of glorious Memory, who before the Time of his
Accession to the English Crown, as a Mark of his Favor to the Lord of
Panmure, did make him heretable Bailiff of the Barony of Barry, an Office his
Ancestors had exerced by Commission from the Abbots of Balmerino, or others who
had that Abbacy in Commendam, and which Office his Successors enjoy heretably
to this Time; and dying the first of May 1605 Charta penes Comitem de Panmure.
, left Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Sir John Erskine of Dun Charta
penes eundem Comitem.
, Superintendant of Angus and Mearns after the Reformation, and, as I have
found him designed, Bishop of that Diocese Presentation in my Hands by Sir
James Scrimzeor to one Mr. Gray, wherein he is so designed.
, by Barbara du Borle his Wife, a French Lady, one of the Maids of Honor to
Mary of Lorrain, Wife of King James V.

Patrick the first Earl of Panmure, and several Daughters;

Jean married to David Erskine of Dun, and had Issue. And,

Barbara to James Strachan of Carmylie, and had Issue.

Which Patrick being a Person of good Parts and Qualities, and of a Family
which had always been firm to the Crown, in his Youth betook himself to the
Court of King James, and being of a pleasant Humor and Disposition, of a
notable Affability in his Behavior, and well qualified by his Breeding for any
Service his Master should think fit to employ him in, he quickly grew to be
very acceptable to the King, and into a general Esteem with the Court, insomuch
as his Majesty in a short Time made him one of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber,
about the Time or a little after his Entrance to England in 1603, and as he
attended his Majesty into that Kingdom, so he lived upon his own Fortune,
without any other Support than the Profits of his Place, and his Majesty's
Favor. Mr. Maule lived always decently, and in a fair Intelligence with the
Favorites, having always Credit enough to provide for his own Interest,
without troubling himself with that of other Men. And that which made him
exceedingly beloved in the Court, was, that he never desired to get that for
himself which others labored for, but was ever ready to use his Interest with
his Master, to promote the Pretenses of worthy Men. As this his Behavior made
him many Friends, so few or none had the Confidence to avow themselves to be
his Enemies: and as he had always a full Share in his Majesty's Esteem and
Favor, who looked on him as a wise and faithful Servant, so he was graciously
pleased to give many Testimonies thereof, particularly in a new Charter to him,
under the Great Seal, of his ancient Barony of Panmure in 1610. The Narrative
bears the Grant to be made by his Majesty, i^ Consideration of the good, loyal
and acceptab^e Service done and performed to Us, by Our entirely beloved,
familiar, faithful and domestic Servant Patrick Maule of Panmure, one of the
Gentlemen of Our Bedchamber, in his faithful and diligent Attendance upon Our
Royal Person for these many Years past, even from his Youth, and his ready
Disposition and Capacity to do Us all laudable Service at all Times and on all
Occasions, as he shall be commanded by Us, of which his most faithful and
acceptable Service, We have full and sufficient Experience. Moreover in the new
Gift of the same Charter, whereby the King dispones to him the Patronage of the
Church of Panbride; His Majesty declares his Motive to the Grant, to be upon
His own sufficient Experience of the Wisdom, Di^cretion and Judgment of the
said Patrick Maule of Panmure, and his prudent Management of his own Affairs,
and of the ardent Zeal and Affection which he has for the Propagation of the
Gospel.

For King James was ever most solicitous, after the restoring of Episcopacy, to
have the Laick Patronages in the Hands of such Persons as were Friends to the
Church as then established by Law; and his Son King Charles of ever blessed
Memory, who did not come short of his Royal Father, but rather exceeded him in
his Zeal for the Church, being fully satisfied of Mr. Maule's Affection that
Way, and of his unblemished Integrity in the Protestant Religion, his Majesty
gave his Royal Consent and Approbation to the Transaction, which passed betwixt
him and the Earl of Dysart, by which he purchased the Abbacy of Aberbrothock,
which was erected into a temporal Lordship, with the Right of Patronage of the
Churches of Aberbrothock, Arbirlot, Monikie, Muirhouse, Dunighton, Maynes,
Lunan, Inverkilor, Ethie, Monisuith, Clova, Ruthven, Glamis, Kirriemuir,
Kingoldrum, Newtyle, Gaval, Dunbug, Abernethy, Inverness, Aberchirdor, Bamff,
Glamrie, Langlie, Guildie, Kinernie, Banchorie Trinity, Bethelvie, Forgie,
Fyvie, Tarves, Nig and Feterangus Charta penes Coinitem de Panmure.
, all sormerly belonging to the dissolved Monastry of Aberl rothock, which
besides the old Patronages of his own Family, made him among the greatest
Patrons of any in Scotland.

As Mr. Maule of Panmure lived in the greatest Favor and Esteem with King
James, who had always a very good Opinion of him, so at his Death he commended
him to his Son King Charles, as a Person to be relied on in Honor and
Fidelity, of which that Prince himself was also very well satisfied and
pleased, for he not only continued him in his Bedchamber, but made him also
Sheriff-Principal of Forfarshire, when the Crown acquired the Hereditary Right
of that Office from the Family of Gray in 1632 Charta in Rotulis Caroli I. ad
Annum 163^
, the King always lodging these new acquired Jurisdictions in the Hands of such
Persons as he could confide in.

When the Troubles broke out, Mr. Maule, being a Person of most eminent
Affection and of entire Devotion to the Crown, adhered to the King with great
Honor and Fidelity, was with him in all the Battles in which his Majesty was
engaged in his own Royal Person, and thereafter went with him to Oxford, where
he stayed till the first War was brought to an End, by his Majesty's putting
himself in the Scots Army before Newark.

As Soon as it was known where the King was, Mr. Maule repaired to him and
waited on him thence to Newcastle, when his Majesty thought fit to put a
lasting Mark of his Favor on his old faithful Servant, and made him a Peer, by
the Title of Earl of Panmure, August 3d 1646 Charta penes Comitem de Panmure.
, with as great Circumstances of Grace and Favor as could be expressed: For in
the Preamble to the Patent, his Majesty was graciously pleased to call to
Remembrance his Lordship's Services to his Father, and his Fidelity to himself,
which he declared in these Words, WHEREAS We have particular Knowledge of the
long and faithful Service of Our well beloved Patrick Maule Baron of Panmure,
one of the Gentlemen of Our Bedchamber, both in the Reign of Our most dear
Father of ever blessed Memory, and also ever since Our Accession to the Throne,
now these one and twenty Years, by a close Adherence to Our Sacred Person; and
seeing We are most ready to bestow some Mark of Our Royal Favor on the said
Patrick, now that he is turning old: KNOW YE THEREFORE, That We have created,
etc.

Thereafter when the King was delivered up by the Scots Army, to such Persons
whom the English Parliament had appointed to receive him, the Earl of Panmure
attended on his Majesty to Holmby in Northamptonshire; and tho the Parliament's
Commissioners had declared, that his Majesty should be treated with all
Demonstration of Respect and Duty, and waited on by such of his Servants as he
should appoint, yet he had not continued there many Days before the Parliament
gave Orders to dismiss such of his Servants as were there, and had waited on
him at Oxford: And tho the Demand was very grating to the King Journal by the
Earl of Panmure of what passed during his Lordship's Attendance on his Majesty
at Holmb^, penes Comitem de Panmure.
, yet that he might not seem to refuse to give them Satisfaction in any Thing
they required, he yielded to their Desire, but in the Instant they were to be
discharged, the King signified that it would be well pleasing to him, that the
Commissioners would allow only Two of his old trusty Servants to attend him,
and this he would look upon as a Testimony of their Respect to him; which being
granted, his Majesty was pleased to pitch upon the Earl of Panmure and the Earl
of Dirletoun, both the Earls being Persons in whom his Majesty had an absolute
Confidence, and that he was sure neither of them would either deceive or betray
him. The Earl of Panmure was with his Majesty, when Cornet Joice came on the 3d
of June 1647, with a Troop of Horse, and violently seized on the King's Person,
and carried him from Holmby to the Army, and after to Hampton Court; his
Lordship having Liberty to attend his Master in all the Removes he made, which
was to his Majesty's great Satisfaction: And tho at first the King enjoyed
himself much more, having the Liberty of his own Servants, than he had before,
when he was at Ho^mby: Yet alas! It was not long before the chief Officers of
the Army seemed more regardless of the King, and treated his Servants with less
Civility, insomuch as his Majesty (from an Apprehension they had some secret
Design upon his Life) made his Escape upon the 11th November 1648 from Hampton
Court Clarendon's History of the Rebellion.
, and unhappily went to the Island of Wight, which proved so fatal to him.
Thither his Lordship, so soon as he had Intelligence where the King was gone,
repaired to him, having no Reason to doubt but that his Presence would be very
acceptable to his Master Journal by the Earl of Panmure, while his Lordship
waited on the King during his Imprisonment.
: And his Lordship attended in his Office in the Bedchamber, till his Majesty
having refused to give his Royal Assent to the four Bills the Parliament had
then sent to him, which he said did divest him of all Sovereignty, that Colonel
Hamond the Governor of the Place, by Order from his Masters, caused all the
King's Servants to be immediately put out of Carisbrook castle, and forbid any
of them to repair thither any more upon their Peril Clarendon's History of the
Rebellion.
; whereupon the Earl, after the King had used many gracious Expressions of his
Lordships faithful Services, kissed his Majesty's Hands, and took a sad
Farewell of his Master, appearing to have little Hope ever to see him again in
this World, and departing for Scotland, lived quietly at his own House in the
Country, keeping his Heart and Affections always entire for the King.

After the Murder of his Majesty, and the total Suppression of the Royal
Cause, tho the Earl of Panmure was very aged, and so out of Capacity himself to
have appeared in any Action for the King's Service, yet when Cromwell prevailed,
and got himself made Protector, that Arch-Tyrant and Traitor, did by an
Ordinance of his Council very arbitrarily impose a Fine on the Earl of Panmure
of 10000 lib Sterling. Printed Ordinance of Cromwell's Council in 1654, penes me.
, for no other Reason, but his being a Person of known Loyalty, and having his
Sons engaged in the King's Service.

After which he lived with Ease and Plenty in his Fortune, which was very
great, and in great Reputation with all those who wished well to the Crown; the
Restoration of which, as no Man more heartily wished, so he had the Comfort of
seeing it brought about, by a most surprising Act of Providence, when there
appeared least Hope of it, and least worldly Means to bring it to pass, which
was the Thing his Lordship had longed most passionately to see before he should
leave the World. He died on the 22d of December 1661, and was interred in the
Vault of his Family at Panbride Church, with his Ancestors.

This noble Earl married three Wives, first, Frances Daughter of Sir Edward
Stanhope of Grimstoun, of the County of York, Knight, of the same Family with
the Earl of Chesterfield in England; by whom he had four Children, viz.

George Lord Brechin, his Successor in the Honor.

Colonel Hary Maule of Balmakelly, who in the End of the Reign of King Charles
I. betook himself to the Service of the King, and had a Regiment bestowed on
him in the Army, that was raised in order to redeem his Majesty from Prison,
and restore him to his Freedom and Liberty: but being taken Prisoner at the
Battle of Preston, he found Means to make his Escape into Scotland, and with
the same Affections the Colonel engaged again in the Service of King Charles
II. and had the Command of a Regiment of Foot, at the unfortunate Battle of
Dunbar, where he gained the Reputation of a stout and active Officer.

He married first Jean Daughter of John Earl of Weems, by whom he had a
Daughter Mary, who died at Panmure Anno 1693; and again Margaret, a Lady of the
Douglasses of Spot, by whom he left only one Daughter, Margaret married to
Alexander Cochran of Barbachly, and had Issue, and dying in the Spring of the
Year 1667, was on the 8th of April Register of the Church of Holy-rood-house.
interred in the Abbay Church of Holy-roodhouse.

Lady Jean eldest Daughter to Patrick Earl of Panmure, was married to David
Earl of Ethie and Northesk, and had a numerous Issue.

Lady Elizabeth first to John Earl of Kinghorn, Ancestor to the present Earl of
Strathmore; and again to George Earl of Linlithgow, Justice-General of Scotland
in the Reign of King Charles II. and was Mother to three Earls, viz.
Strathmore, Linlithgow, and Calendar.

The Earl married to his second Wife Mrs. Mary Waldrum, one of the Maids of
Honor to the Queen; and after that the Lady Mary Erskine, Daughter of John
Earl of Mar, Lord High-Treasurer of Scotland, by the Lady Mary Stewart his
Wife, Daughter of Esme Duke of Lennox, Widow of William Earl Marshal; but by
neither the other Lady, nor the Countess Marshal, had he any Children that came
to Age.

To Patrick Earl of Panmure succeeded George Lord Brechin his Son. This noble
Lord was too young to be engaged in the War when it first broke out, during
which Time he had his Education in France and Italy: But by the Time King
Charles II. arrived in Scotland in 1650, pursuant to the Treaty of Breda, his
Lordship being now of Age, of Parts, and undoubted Loyalty and Affection to the
Crown, waited on his Majesty, his Father the old Earl being now struck in Years
and troubled with the Infirmities of Age: And as soon as the Parliament raised
an Army for the King, the Lord Brechin being a Nobleman not only firm to the
Principles of Monarchy, but also of great Duty and Affection to the Person of
the King, heartily engaged in the Service himself, and endeavored to dispose
all those, upon whom he had Influence, to take the same Resolutions; and it
soon appeared his Interest in the Country was very great, for his Lordship
being appointed Colonel of the Forfarshi^e Regiment of Horse, many of the
principal Gentlemen engaged themselves in the Service, and came to his Regiment
out of Devotion and Respect to his Lordship, as well as Duty to the King, and
served under him as Officers. His Lordship was at the Head of his Regiment at
the unsuccessful Battles of Dunbar and Inverkeithing, at both which he fought
with very remarkable Courage, and at the last of these his Regiment behaved so
well, and suffered so much, that he himself was wounded, his Lieutenant Colonel
and Major and many other of his Officers killed; and when the Action was over,
his Soldiers were so dispersed, that scarce sixty of them could ever be got
together again. But that Misfortune did not in the least discourage him from
being every Way as active and forward again in advancing and conducing all he
could toward his Majesty's Service, for after the Coronation was over, in which
his Lordship assisted as a young Peer Mr. Douglass's Sermon preached at the
Coronation of King Charles II. first of January 1650.
, when the Parliament appointed another Army to be raised for the Recovery of
his other two Kingdoms, Scotland being entirely united in his Majesty's
Service, no Body appeared more forward to advance the Work in Hand than the
Lord Brechin, in order to which his Lordship was one of those who met with old
General Lesly Earl of Levin, and several other Peers and Officers of Note, at
Eliot in Augus, as a Place which was thought very favorable for making Levies,
which they all intended; but they had not stayed long there, when the Lord
Brechin gave it as his Opinion, that the Place where they were had nothing for
Defense, and advised the General to draw further into the Country for their
Security, and told the General, that he was not sure, that if a Detachment from
the Garrison of Dundee should make a brisk Attempt, they might not be all
surprised and taken out of their Beds: But the General being of another Mind,
his Lordship, who better knew the Country than any of the other Lords, and so
more sensible of the Danger, to secure himself left the Committee, and retired
to Sidlawhills; and it was soon evident what the Lord Brechin had advised was
right, for the very Evening of the Day, or soon after he had left them, the
whole Committee was surprised and taken Prisoners by a strong Party of the
English, and sent to London, and committed to the Tower, where all of them
except General Lesly underwent a long Imprisonment, even till the Restoration
of the King.

The Lord Brechin being at Liberty in the Hills, the Loyalists, from all
Quarters, resorted to him, after the Fight of Worcester, and put themselves
under his Command; and his Lordship behaved in that Station very worthily, and
made often Skirmishes N. B. When the Government was first alarmed by an
Insurrection in the South in 1666, so soon as the Resolution was declared to
raise an Army to suppress it, they who had the chief Direction of Affairs did
repose such Confidence both in the Earl of Panmnre's Loyalty and Skill in
military Affairs, that he was appointed to command the Gentry of Forfar-shire;
but the Defeat at Pentland by General Dalziel prevented the raising that or any
of the Northern Counties, the Peace of the Kingdom being thereby secured.
with the Enemy, and sometimes with notable Advantage, and made frequent
Incursions in the Night into the English Quarters, which gave General Monk some
Trouble; But being convinced of the Impossibility of keeping up an Attempt,
which at last must prove ruinous to himself, and could do the King no Service,
he made his Peace with the General next Year, without any other Compliance to
the present Powers than the laying down his Arms, and thereupon retired to his
own House, where he remained quietly, prepared and disposed to run the Fortune
of the Crown, to which he was most entirely devoted, in any other Attempt.

When the King came Home in 1660, his Lordship repaired to London, to
congratulate his Majesty and the Royal Family upon their happy Restoration; and
though his Majesty received his Lordship with a very good Countenance, yet he was
not rewarded with any great Dignity or Preferment, as was expected, and with
which some others were, who had not been so faithful to the King, as the Earl
of Panmure. But as that was the Fate of very many of the loyal Party, who had
served the King with the utmost Fidelity, as well as his Lordship, so it was
much more to be imputed to the Ministry than to the King himself: For it is
reported, that some in great Credit with his Majesty endeavored to instill
into the King's Mind a Principle, that he must prefer his Enemies, and advance
them, to gain them to be his Friends; and for his old Friends, it was no matter
how he used them, for they would be so still: And indeed it fell out so, that
very many, who had suffered most in their Persons and Fortunes for the Crown,
were not recompensed upon the Restoration, according to their Merit, or
considered as they deserved: Of which Number this Noble Earl, I may truly say,
was one of the most eminent Instances; which mistaken Politic of the then
Statesmen, as it was observed through that whole Reign, so many great and wise
Men have thought, that its being followed, did bring no small Prejudice and
Inconve^^ence to the Crown thereafter. But notwithstanding his Lordship was
overlooked as to any Preserment, yet he did not on that Account, as many others
did, oppose himself to the Court, but in all the Parliaments and National
Conventions, which were called while he lived, and on which his Lordship
constantly attended, he always distinguished himself by a hearty Concurrence in
whatsoever was proposed for advancing the Honor of the Crown, and the Welfare
and Happiness of the Kingdom, which he made manifest by his several Speeches,
whereby he left behind him lasting Monuments of his great Knowledge in our
Constitution and Laws, of his unshaken Loyalty to his Prince, and his entire
Love to his Country, insomuch as I have heard some eminent Men, who were his
Contemporaries, speak of him with great Honor, as a Nobleman in as high
Reputation for his great Abilities and eminent Integrity as any Man of his
Time, and dying 24. of March 1671, he was interred at Panbride with his
Ancestors.

This Noble Earl married Jean eldest Daughter of John Earl of Lowdoun, Lord
High Chancellor of Scotland in the Reign of King Charles I. by whom he had
three Sons and a Daughter, viz.

George, Lord Maule, his Successor in the Honor,

James Maule of Balumby now Earl of Panmure,

Hary Maule of Kelly, who in his younger Years traveled into foreign Parts,
and spent much of his Time at the Courts of France and England. At the
Revolution he was a Member of the Convention of Estates, which he left when he
perceived they would forfeit King James, and has never since been concerned in
any public Affairs, having always continued a Non-juror; but in his Retirement
has greatly improved his natural Parts, by a close Application to the History
and Laws of his Country. He married first Mary, Daughter of William Earl of
Wigton, by Henrietta his Wife, Daughter of Charles Earl of Dumfermling, Lord
Privy Seal in the Reign of King Charles II. by whom he had George, who died an
Infant, James Maule Esquire William Maule Esquire and two Daughters, Henrietta, who
died young, and Jean. He married to his second Wife, Anne Daughter of Mr.
Patrick Lindsay of Kilbirny, and of Margaret his Wife, Daughter and Heir of Sir
John Crawford of Kilbirny, and Sister to John first Viscount of Garnock: By her
he had Patrick, John, Thomas, and a Daughter Margaret, all young, and David and
Charles who died Infants.

Lady Mary Maule, only Daughter of George Earl of Panmure, was married first to
Charles Earl of Mar, and thereafter to Colonel John Erskine, Son of Sir Charles
Erskine of Alva.

George Earl of Panmure being a young Nobleman of very bright and conspicuous
Parts, was by King Charles II. when he came to Age, called to his Majesty's
Privy Council, as he was likewise of the Council to King James. He married
Jean, only Daughter of John Earl of Wigton, by Anne his Wife, Daughter of Henry
Lord Kerr, by whom he had a Son, George Lord Maule, who died an Infant, whom
the Earl himself did not long survive, for Death overtook him on the 1. of
February 1686 Charta in Publicis Archivis.
, to the great Grief, not only of his own Relations, but of all those who had
the Honor to know him, who exceedingly lamented his immature Death, as a great
Loss to his Country. He was interred in the same Vault with his Father and
Grandfather, at the Church of Panbride, the Estate and Honor of the Family
devolving on

James Maule of Balumby his Brother, who alter having passed the Course of his
Studies at Home, together with his younger Brother, traveled abroad into
foreign Parts: He served as a Volunteer at the Siege of Luxemburgh, where he
eminently signalized his Courage, insomuch as his Valor was very particulary
taken Notice of.

Upon his Accession to the Honor he was named one of the Lords of his
Majesty's Privy Council, from which he was soon thereafter removed, for not
complying with the Design of the Court, in taking away the penal Laws against
Popery. But though his Lordship did always show himself very firm to the
Protestant Interest through the whole of that Reign, yet in the Convention of
Estates he vigorously appeared for the Interest of King James; and when the
Crown was settled on King William and Queen Mary, he left the Meeting, and has
since continued a Non-juror.

When the great Affair of the Union with England came to be considered in the
Parliament, though his Lordship did not think fit to qualify himself by taking
the Oaths enjoined by Law, to enter his Dissent against it in a Parliamentary
Way as a Peer, yet no Body was more heartily averse to it, as appeared both
from his meeting with the Principals of those who were the most zealous
Opposers of it, and in promoting and influencing Addresses against it, from the
Places where his Interest lay, judging it against the Honor and Interest of
the Nation, and subversive of the Sovereignty and fundamental Constitution of
the Kingdom. His Lordship married the Lady Margaret, third and youngest
Daughter of William and Anne, Duke and Duchess of Hamilton, but has no Issue.

ARMS.
Parted per Pale, Argent and Gules, a Border charged with Eight Escalops,
countercharged of the same. Supporters, Two Grayhounds, Argent, colored Gules.
Crest, a Dragon Vert, spouting Fire. Motto, Inest Clementia Forti.

DRUMMOND, Earl of Perth.
IN the Time of King Alexander II. flourished Malcolm Beg Drymen, who was then
possessed of the Lands of Drymen in the County of Stirling, from which no doubt
the Surname was first assumed, and was Seneschal to Malduin Earl of Lennox, the
Paternal Ancestor to all our British Kings of the Stuartine Family, whose
Daughter Adda he married Mr. John Freebairn's History of the Drummonds, and
improven by the Viscount of Strathallan, M.S.
; and by her he had Malcolm his Successor, the Father of another Malcolm, who
is designed Malcolm de Drymen Filius Malcolmi Drymen, in a Grant which he
obtained from Malis Earl of Strathern, of the Lands of Culkelly, within that
Earldom, sine data.

This noble ancient Family extended it self into two principal Branches, viz.
the Dromonds of Stobhall and Concraig. And though it is clear the last was the
Younger of the Two Charta penes Comitem de Perth.
, yet it not only continued to flourish for many Ages among the first Rank of
the Gentry of Perth-Shire, but also produced many other Families who still
continue there in Luster, of which Lieutenant General Drummond has given a very
distinct and exact Account, in a curious Collection which he left behind him,
the Perusal of which I have had by the Favor of John Drummond, M.D.

Sir John Drummond of Stobhall, the Head of the Drummond Family in the Reign of
King David II. maintained a long and fatal Fewd with the great Family of the
Menteiths, which at Length was amicably composed by the Mediation of Robert
High Steward of Scotland, and Earl of Strathern, the Earls of Douglass and
Angus, and the Lord of Arran, in Presence of the two great Justiciaries Sir
Robert Erskine and Sir Hugh Eglintoun on Terms of great Honor to Sir John
Drummond, his Friends and Allies, on the 1st of May 1360 Ibidem.
. He increased and enlarged his Estate by the Marriage of Mary, one of the
Daughters and Coheirs of Sir William de Montefix, Knight. Ibidem, Charta D. Joanni
de Drummond, partem omnium terrarum and tenementarum quae fuere Mariae de
Montefixo filiae and unius haeredum quondam Will. de Montefixo Militis.
, Justiciar of Scotland, by whom he had Malcolm his Successor, Sir John
Drummond of Cargil, and William Drummond first of that Branch of the Drummonds
of Carnock in the County of Stirling Ibidem. Charter in Drummond of
Hathornden's Works by King James I. to his Uncle William Drummond of Carnock.
The Family is now represented by Drummond of Hathornden.
, of whom sprang the Family of Hathornden, the Heir of which, William Drummond
Esquire in the Reign of King Charles I. was an Honor to his Name, and an Ornament
to his Country for his great Learning and excellent Parts, as his immortal
Writings do sufficiently testify to Posterity. Besides these Three Sons, Sir
John Drummond left likewise a Daughter, Annabella married to John Ea^l of
Carrick, thereafter King of Scotland, by the Name of Robert III. by which
illustrious Alliance not only our Kings in particular are descended or allied
with the Family of Drummond, but most of all the other crowned Heads of Europe,
an Honor which few private Families can boast of, our Royal Family never
having married with any of their own Subjects after King Robert III. married
this Lady of the Drummond Family, but always thereafter intermarried with other
Princes abroad.

Which Sir Malcolm Drummond married the Lady Isobel Douglass, Daughter of
William the first Earl of Douglass, and of Margaret, Countess and Heiress of
Mar, Heir at length of the Earldom of Mar, to James Earl of Douglass her
Brother; in whose Right Sir Malcolm Drummond was not only styled Lord of Mar
Charta penes Ducem de Douglas.
, but also of Garrioch and Lydsdale; but he dying Anno 1400. without any Issue
by the Lady, her Estate reverted to herself, and his hereditary Fortune
devolved to his Brother

Sir John Drummond, who was one of the Barons delegated to attend King James I.
home from England when he was liberated from his Captivity, Anno 1423 Rymer's
Foedera Angliae.
. He married Elizabeth, Daughter of Henry Earl of Orkney Charta penes Comitem
de Perth.
, by whom he had Walter his Successor, John a younger Son who went abroad, and
a Daughter Elizabeth, married to Thomas Kinnaird of That-Ilk, in vicecom. de
Perth.

Sir Walter Drummond (...) was made a Knight by King James II. and married
Margaret, Daughter of Sir Patrick Ruthven of That Ilk Major General Drummond's
History of the Drummonds, M.S.
; by her he had Sir Malcolm, John who was Dean of Dunblain, Walter Drummond of
Liddercrief, of whom sprang the Drummonds of Blair-Drummond Ibidem.
, and their Cadets.

Sir Malcolm Drummond, his Father's Successor, married Marion, Daughter of Sir
David Murray of Tillybardin, Ibidem.
, by whom he had John, the first Lord Drummond, Walt^r Dean of D^nblain, who
was Clerk Register in the Reign of King James IV. Charta in Rotulis Jacobi IV.
. and James Drummond of Corrievester, Thomas, of whom Innermay, Cultmalind^e,
etc.

Which John being a Man of Parts and Activity, was in 1471 named one of the
Lords of the Session, for the Administration of Justice, and was afterward made
Steward of Strathern, by the special Favor of King James III. After the Death
of that Prince, Sir John Drummond defeat the Earl of Lennox and the Lord Lyle,
who had raised Forces, and were marching northward, endeavoring to join with
others who had taken the same Resolutions with themselves to revenge King
James's Death; for which signal Service he was created Lord Drummond, and
constituted Justiciar of Scotland, in Place of the Lord Lyle Drummond's
History, etiam Charta in Rotolis Jacobi IV.
; which Office he enjoyed till that Lord was again restored.

He married Ebizabeth, Daughter of David Earl of Crawfurd Charta penes Comitem
de Perth.
, by whom he had William his Son and Heir apparent, who died before himself in
1511, Sir John Drummond of Innerpeffrey, of whom by a younger Son Henry, sprung
the Drummonds of Riccartoun in Lithgow-Shire; which Lands he obtained by
Marriage of an Heir Female of the Crichtons; likewise Five Daughters,

Margaret affianced, says my Author, to King James IV. by whom he had a
Daughter Jean, married to John Master of Huntly Major General Drummonds History
of the Drummonds.
, Son and Heir apparent to George Earl of Huntly,

Elizabeth married to George Master of Angus Charta penes Comitem de Perth.
, Son and Heir of Archbald Earl of Angus.

Beatrix to James Earl of Arran, by whom he had one Daughter General Drummond's
History.
, Margaret married to Andrew Lord Ochiltree.

Annabell^ to William Lord Graham Charta in Pub. Arch.
, first Earl of Montrose.

Eupham to John Fleeming Charta penes Comitem de Perth.
, at that Time Grandson and Heir apparent to Robert Lord Fleeming.

William Master of Drummond, married Isabel, Daughter of Colin Ea^l of Argyle,
by whom he had Walter, who carried on the Line of the Family, and Andrew
Drummond, of whom the Drummonds of Belliclon General Drummond's History.
.

Which Walter married Elizabeth, Daughter of William Earl of Montrose, and died
before his Grandfather, leaving a Son David, who immediately succeeded his
Great-Grandfather upon his Death, which happened in the 1519 Charta penes C. de
Perth.
.

Which David married first Margaret, Daughter of Alexander Stewart, Son of
Alexander Duke of Albany, by whom he had one Daughter Sibilla, married to
Gilbert Ogilvy of Powrie; next Lilias, Daughter of William Lord Ruthven, by
whom he had Patrick his Successor, James the first Lord Madertie, also Five
Daughters.

Jean married to John Earl of Montrose I have seen a Discharge for 6000 Merks
of Tocher, which William Earl of Montrose had received from David Lord
Drummond, and Lilias Ruthven his Spou^e, for the Marriage o^ John Master of
Montrose (...) ^randson and Heir, before these Witnesses, William Murray o^
(...). Alexander Graham Pensioner of Cambuskenneth, William Graham (...) of
(...) am of (...), his Sons, data 21 Sept. 1363. penes Comitem de Perth. (...).
, Lord High Chancellor of Scotland.

Anne to John Earl of Mar.

Lilias to David Earl of Crawfurd.

Catharine to John Earl of Tillybardin.

Mary to Sir Archbald Stirl^ng of K^^r.

Patrick, Lord Drummond married Elizabeth, Daughter of Sir David Lindsay of
E^ziel, who was Earl of Crawfurd (...)
, by whom he had Two Sons, James and John, who were successively Earls of
Perth, and Five Daughters,

Catharine married to James Master of Rothes, Son and Heir of Andrew Earl of
Rothes.

Lilias to Alexander Earl of Dunfermling.

Jean to Robert Earl of Roxburgh.

Elizabeth to Alexander Lord Elphinstoun,

Anne to Patrick Barclay of Towie.

Which James was by the special Care of his Father well educated both at Home
and Abroad, upon the Accession of King James VI. to the Crown of Great Britain,
he was sent Ambassador with Charles Earl of Notingham, Lord High Admiral of
England, to Philip III. of Spain, for taking that King's Oath upon the
Ratification of the Articles of Peace concluded betwixt the two Crowns; which
Negotiation he performed with Honor and Success. After his Return his Majesty
was pleased to raise him to the Honor of, Earl of Perth, by Letters Patent,
bearing Date, March 4th, 1605 (...)
. He married Isobel, Daughter of Robert first Earl of Winton, by whom he had
only one Daughter Jean married to John Earl of Sutherland; and dying very young
in December 1611, his Estate and Title devolved to

John his Brother and Heir, who married Jean Daughter of Robert Earl of
Roxburgh, by Mary his first Wife, Daughter of Sir William Maitland of
Lethington, by whom he had James his Successor, Sir John Drummond of
Logie-Almond, Sir William, who became Earl of Roxburgh, by the Marriage of the
Lady Jean Kerr, Daughter of Henry Lord Kerr, Grandchild and Heir of Robert
first Earl of Roxburgh; likewise two Daughters, Jean married to John Earl of
Wigtoun, and Lilias to James Earl of Tillybardin; and dying on the 11th of June
1662 Charta in Pub. Arch.
, was succeeded by

James his Son and Heir, who departing this Life on the 2d of June 1675 Charta
in Cancellaria.
, left Issue by Anne his Wife, Daughter of George Marquis of Huntly, James his
Successor, John Earl of Melfort, and a Daughter Anne, married to John Earl of
Errol.

Which James was in the End of the Reign of King Charles II. constituted first
Justice General on the 1st of May 1682 Ibidem.
, and thereafter preferred to be Lord High Chancellor of Scotland the 23d of
June 1684 Ibidem.
, on the Removal of the Earl of Aberdeen. In which high Station his Lordship
not only continued the Remainder of that Reign, but also through the whole of the
Reign of King James VII. with whom he was the great Favorite, even till the
Revolution, that the Government was dissolved. Upon the King's withdrawing into
France, the Earl after some Time of Imprisonment was suffered to transport
himself thither, to run the Fortune of his Master, who to allay the Sense of
his Sufferings on his Acc^^nt continued him Lord Keeper of the Great Seal for
Scotland, and created him a Duke, and bestowed the Garter on him, as he had
done the Thistle before.

He married first Jean Daughter of William Marquis of Douglas, by whom he had
James Lord Drummond his Son and Heir apparent, and a Daughter M^ry married to
William Earl Marischal.

His second Wife was Lilias, Daughter of Sir James Drummond of Machany, Widow
of James Earl of Tillybardin; by whom he had John Drummond of Balegerno: And
last of all, he married Mary, Daughter of Lewis Marquis of Huntly; by her he
had a Son Edward Drummond, Esquire who lives Abroad in France.

James Lord Drummond, in his Father's Time married the Lady Jean, Daughter of
George Duke of Gordon, by whom he has Issue James, John, Lady Mary, Lady
Catharine, etc.

ARMS.
Or, Three Bars vave, Gules, supported by Two Savages, wreathed about the Loins
proper. Crest, a sloth Hound standing on a Ducal Coronet. Motto, Gang warily.

Frederick Stewart, Lord Pitenweem,
WAS the Son and Heir of Colonel William Stewart of Houston, Commendator of
Pitenweem, Captain of the Guard in the Time of King James VI. a Brother of the
House of Galstoun in Air-Shire, who was by the Favor of King James raised to
the Dignity of Lord Pittenweem in 1609 Ibid.
, but dying without Issue Male, the Honor did not descend to his other Heirs.

FORBES, Lord Pitsligo.
THE First of this noble Family was Sir William Forbes, a younger Son of Sir
John Forbes of Drummanor, who in the Time of King James I. got the Barony of
Pitsligo in Aberdeen-Shire, by the Marriage of Margaret, only Daughter of Sir
William Fraser of Philorth, by Helen his Wife, a Lady of the Douglasses Charta
penes Dominum Saltoun.
, by whom he had

Alexander his Heir, the lineal Ancestor of Sir John Forbes of Pitsligo, who by
Christian his Wife, Daughter of Walter Lord Deskford Charta in Pub. Arch.
, had

Sir Alexander his Son and Heir, whom King Charles I. was pleased to honor
with the Peerage, by the Title of Lord Pitsligo, June 24th, 1633 Ibidem.
. He married Jean, Daughter of William Earl Marischal, by whom he had

Alexander his Successor, and a Daughter married to Sir John Gordon of Haddo,
and dying 26th of October 1635 Balfour's Annals.
, was succeeded by

Alexander his Son and Heir, who by Mary his Wife, Daughter of James Earl of
Buchan, had Alexan^er his Successor, who departing this Life in 1691, left
Issue by Sophiae his Wife, Daughter of John Earl of Mar, Alexander the present
Lord, who married Rebecca, Daughter of John Nortoun of London Merchant, by whom
he has a Son Alexander, Master of Pitsligo.

COLLIER, Earl of Portmore.
COLONEL David Collier, Son of Sir Alexander Collier, was by King William
honored with the Peerage of this Realm, by the Title of Lord Portmore, the 1st
of J^ne 1699 Charta in Pub. Arch.
; and was ^y her Majesty Queen Anne further honored with the Dignity of Earl
of Portmore, by Letters Patent 16th April 1703 Ibid. in Rotulis Regis Willielmi.
. He married the Countess of Dochester, by whom he has J^mes Lord Collier, and
David Collier, Esquire

GRAHAM, Viscount of Preston.
SIR Richard Graham of Neederby, in the County of Northumberland, Son and Heir
of Sir George Graham of Esk, by Mary his Wife, Daughter of J^mes Earl of
Annandale, and Grandson and Heir of Sir Richard Graham of Nortoun in
Yorkshire; branched from the Family of Menteth, was, in Consideration both of
his Grandfather's Sufferings and Loyalty for King Charles I. as well as his own
personal Merit, by the special Favor of King Charles II. raised to the Honor
of Viscount Preston, Lord Graham of Esk, by Letters Patent, bearing Date 22d of
May 1681 Charta in Rotulis Carol^ II.
. He was afterward by King James VII. constituted one of the Principal
Secretaries of State for the Kingdom of England; which Office he enjoyed till
the Revolution. He married Anne, Daughter of Charles Earl of Carlisle, by whom
he had Edward his Successor, whose Son and Heir is Richard the present Lord
Viscount Preston.

PRIMEROSE, Viscount of Primerose.
THE Surname of Primerose, like many others, is local, and has without doubt
been assumed from the Lands of Primerose in Fife-Shire, but the precise Time
when, I have not been able to discover. The direct Ancestor of this noble
Family was Duncan Primerose, descended of an ancient Stock of that Name near
the Borough of Culross in Perth-Shire, where he fixed his Residence in the
Time of Queen Mary, and left Issue by Janet his Wife, Daughter of..... Main of
Arthurhouse Charta Penes Vicecomitem Pr^merose.
, Archbald; and Gilbert Primerose, D.D. who was Minister of the Protestant
Church at Bourdeaux in France, and a Person of good Scholastic Learning. He
wrote a Treatise, La Trumpete de Sion, or, Exhortation a Repentance and J^sne.
Edit. Bergar. 1610 The Book I have seen in the Custody of the Author's Kinsman
the Earl of Rosebery, who has likewise a Book wrote by Dr. Primerose's Son, Mr.
David Primerose, Batchellor of Divinity (...) the University of Oxford, and
Minister of the Gospel to the Protestant Church of Ro^n, Englished out of the
French M.S. by his Father Dr. Primerose. Printed at London in 1626. entitled.
A Treatise of the Sabbath, and of the Lord's Day.
.

Which Archbald being bred a Scholar, and withal a Man of good natural Parts,
he was, when young, employed by the Abbot of Culross Mr. C^lvil, in setting out
the Feus of that Abbacy, of which he acquired a Part himself; and also got
confirmed to Primerose of Burnbrae, the Lands of Burnbrae, which continues with
his Posterity to this Time. He married Janet, Daughter of.... Bleau of
Castlehill, in vicecom. de Perth, by whom he had

David Primerose of Whitehouse, who besides a Son James, in whom his Male Line
failed, he left also a Daughter married to Alexander Monro of Bearcrosis.

James, who carried on the Line of the Family of Primerose.

Eupham married to Sir George Bruce of Carnock, Ancestor to the present Earl of
Kincardine.

Which James being bred to the Law, and a Man of great Industry and Sagacity in
Business, found Means to work himself into the good Opinion of King James VI.
who in 1602, was pleased to make him Clerk of his Majesty's Privy Council; in
which honorable Employment he continued many Years thereafter, and discharged
the Office with singular Fidelity and Approbation, even till his Death in the
Year 1641, leaving Issue by Catharine his Wife. Daughter of Richard Lawson of
Boghall Charta penes Vicecomitem de Primerose.
, in vicecom. de Bathgate, Gilbert his eldest Son, who was Clerk to the
Council. He married.... Foulis, Daughter of..... Foulis of Ravelstoun, by whom
he had a Son James Primerose Esquire who died without Issue.

Archbald, his Successor both in his Estate and Office.

James Primerose Esquire who was likewise one of the Clerks of the Council. He
married Christian, Daughter of... Mercer of Aldie, by whom he left a Son who
died young, and a Daughter Christian his sole Heir, married to Walter Lord
Torphichen. He had also several Daughters, Alison married to the Famous George
Ibid.
Heriot, Jeweller to King James VI. and Founder of that great Hospital at
Edinburgh, which bears his Name, and which he endowed with great Lands and
Revenues; and Margaret to Mr. Thomas Young of Lainie.

Which Archbald being a Person of excellent Parts of Nature, his Father took
great Care to breed him in the Study of the Law; and in which he made a very
notable Progress by an early Eminence in Practice and Learning, insomuch as he
was by the Choice of his Majesty King Charles I. and the full and hearty
Approbation of the Council, preferred to be Clerk to the Privy Council, on the
2d of September 1641 Charta penes Comitem de Rosebery.
, a Place his Father had long and worthily filled; and the King had so good an
Opinion of Mr. Primerose's Fidelity, Judgment and Discrerion, that by a Letter
under his own Royal Hand, bearing Date 18th December 1641, he ordered him to
transmit to Court an Account weekly of what was transacted in the Council, as
his Father had done; and which he continued to do, till all private
Correspondence with his Majesty and all about the Court, was discharged upon
the highest Penalty. During the Civil War he was a great Loyalist; and after
the Battle of Kilsyth repaired to the Marquis of Montrose, at the Time when he
was joined by diverse of the Nobility and Officers of State Bishop Guthry's
Memoirs, Page 156.
, and continued with him till the unfortunate Battle of Philiphaugh, he was
made Prisoner, and tried, and found guilty of High Treason by the Parliament at
St. Andrew's 1646; and though several others who were not more guilty than he
were put to Death, yet by the Intercession and Interposition of his Friends,
particularly the Marquis of Argyle, who was his Lady's near Relation, his Life
was sp^r'd; yet he continued a Prisoner till the Marquis of Montrose and the
Committee of Estates came to a Capitulation, whereby the Marquis was to depart
the Kingdom, which he did; and thereupon several of his Friends were set at
Liberty, of which Number this worthy Person, whose Memoirs I write, was one.
Thereafter when the Parliament declared for the King, and ^ais'd an Army to
relieve him, when he was a Prisoner in the Isle of Wight, no Body appeared more
forward in a prudent Way, to advance that Enterprise, than Sir Archbald
Primerose, which was afterward very gratefully remembered by the Crown upon a
more favorable Conjuncture.

When Sir Archbald had the Honor of Knighthood conferred on him, I cannot say,
but I apprehend it was in the End of 1646, when he was set at Liberty, that he
waited on his Majesty when he put himself into the Hands of the Scots Army
before Newark, though I have not found him so designed in any Write for some Time
after.

Sir Archbald having continued his faithful Services to King Charles II. the
Time he remained in Scotland, he likewise marched with him into England, when
his Majesty, by a Patent under his Royal Hand, bearing Date, At Woodhouse, in
our Royal Army on the South Borders of Scotland, 1 st of August 1651 Charta
penes Comitem de Rosebery.
, made him a Baronet, In Consideration of the many good and faithful Services
performed to us and our Royal Father of blessed Memory, in our most special
Affairs, by Sir Archbald Primerose, Clerk to our Privy Council; and being
desirous to gratify the Deserving of so faithful a Servant, with some special
Mark of our Royal Favor, therefore etc. After the Defeat at (...), that the
Royal Party were totally suppressed Sir Archbald Primerose being reckoned among
the first Form of Malignants, his Estate was not only ^^questrated. but even
what S^m^ of Money could be discovered to be owing him in private Hands, were
discharged to be paid him; for Sir Archbald being a great Creditor upon Sir
John J^h^ston of Elphing ^oun's Estate, I have seen an Order from General
Disborough, straightly inhibiting and discharging Sir John to pay to the said Sir
Archbald any Su^s of Money he might be owing him, upon his Peril.

During the Remainder of the Usurpation, Sir Archbald lived in a private and
retired Manner till the joyful Restoration of the King, the^ he received the
Reward of his Merit, for his Majesty in August 1660, did appoint him Lord
Register of Scotland Charta penes Comitem de Rosebery.
, and one of the Senators of the College of Justice, where he sat many Years,
and discharged the Office with great Judgment and Learning.

The great Services he did his Master the King, and his Country when he was
first made Lord Register, were acknowledged not only by Letters under his
Majesty's own Royal Hand, but by several of the great Men in England,
particularly the Earl of Clarendon, then Lord Chancellor of England, who wrote
him a very civil Letter, wherein he has these remarkable Words, I cannot, my
Lord, but congratulate you for the meritorious Part you have had in restoring
the King and Kingdom (meaning Scotland, to its primitive Hon^ur and Interest
Ibid.
; and concluding he says, I with the same good Spirit may possess you to the
End, and with the same Success while we here endeavor to follow your Example,
which indeed has already been of great Use to us.

He was a great Lover of his Country, which he alwise manifested; for in the
Matter of the Billoting in Parliament, though he was the Parl of Middleton's
Friend, yet he could never be brought to favor that Project but opposed it
with all his Power: Which the Earl of Middleton did not resent against Sir
Archbald, well knowing, as he himself owns, that the Lord Register's opposing
him in the Project of the Billoting, did not proceed from any Dislike to his
Lordships Person, but from his known Principles of Moderation, and the Earl did
not only then acknowledge the Sincerity of the Register's Friendship to him,
but even afterward, at a Time when Professing to be the Lord Middleton's
Friend, was not thought very meritorious.

Thereafter, when the Ministry in that Reign did, as was thought, outface the
Law by many bold Pressures upon the Subject, Sir Archbald Primerose, though he
was courted to enter into a strict Union with them, and that on his own Terms,
yet could never be induced to concur in any Thing that had not a sufficient
Foundation in Law, but rejected all Offers that were made for his own private
Advantage, that were not consistent with the Good of his Country, and therefore
he joined with those Lords who appeared most zealous for the Redress of
Grievances, which brought him so much into the Jealousy of the Court-Party,
that upon a very trivial Account, he was, together with the Duke of Hamilton,
the Earls of Drumfrieze and Kineardine, and the Lord Cochran, all in one Day
turned out of the Council; but the Resentment was carried further against the
Lord Carringtoun, and ( a) Charta penes Comitem de Rosebery.
many and very powerful Efforts were made to get him turned out of his Place
too; but his Majesty, who had a great Esteem of him, as a very wise Man, and
very worthy the Trust he had reposed in him, could not for a long Time be
prevailed with to hearken to any Overture that could be made for his Removal,
till the Court Party, which the King resolved to support, did represent that it
was necessary to have a Person in his Post, in whom they could confide, and
that Sir Archbald being struck in Years, he himself desired to exchange his
Office with another of an easier Nature; and upon this very Supposition, and on
no other Consideration, did the King give Order for his Removal from the
Register's Place, and at the same Time p^efer'd him to be Justice General: But
he continuing still firm to his Party, the Torrent against him ran so high,
that his Majesty, who still retained a very great Kindness for, and Esteem of
him, thought fit at length to take his Place from him, to which Sir George
Mackenzie of Tarbat, a Person of great Honor and Worth was preferred the 16th
of October 1678.

Thereafter, when the Differences run high betwixt the Two Parties, the Duke of
Hamilton, the Marquis of Athole, and the other Lords of that Side, who desired
the Grievances of the Nation might be redressed, humbly petitioned the King for
a Hearing in his own Royal Presence, that the Matters in Difference might be
more clearly understood, and more freely transacted; and his Majesty having
granted their Desire, thought fit to propose that some fit Persons might be
allowed to treat with the like Number of the other Side, in such a Manner as
might best tend to compose all Things in a peaceable Way; and Sir Archbald
Primer^s^ being looked on as a Person of the greatest Wisdom and Experience,
and one who thoroughly understood the whole Frame and Constitution of the
Government in Church and State. The Duke of Hamilton, the Marquis of Athole,
the Earls of Cassils, Perth, and Kincardine, Lieutenant General Drummond, and
the Lord Cochran, well knowing how very useful Sir Archbald would be in the
present Exigence, did all conjunctly write very pressingly, That he should
hasten up to London, to be present at the Conference which was to be in his
Majesty's Presence; and the Earl of Perth wrote him a most pathetical Letter,
lively representing the Dangers which threatened, and were like to overwhelm the
Nation, if not prevented by a speedy Remedy, that now they had an Opportunity
of making their Country happy, by removing all Grievances, if he and others
would do their Duty; and therefore conjured him by many Arguments no longer to
defer his Coming up; and concludes with these Words, My Lord, you see how
Scotland is, you see how your Friends Reputation lies at Stake, you see there
is but this Pull for it; and you see how fairly it lies at your Hand. The great
God direct you toward doing what is for his Honor, your Country's Good, the
King's Interest, your Friends Reputation, and your perpetual Credit.

Sir Archbald thinking he had now a fair Opportunity of advancing the public
Good, and doing all those Offices to his Country he had ever so earnestly
desired; and notwithstanding he was stricken in Years, and troubled with the
Infirmities of Age, yet he undertook a Journey to London, that he might be
assisting in carrying on this good Work. Both Parties being heard before the
King; and his Majesty finding there could be no compounding this Dispute
amicably, but that one Side must be suppressed, he resolved therefore in the
End, by the Advice of some in his nearest Confidence, to dismiss the Lords of
the Country Party, without a present Redress; forasmuch as it would reflect
Dishonor upon his own Government, if he did not approve of the Administration
of a great Minister, whom he had so long employed in his Service, and solely
and entirely trusted in all that related to Scotland and Scots Affairs: And now
all Endeavors for Redress of the Nation's Grievances being rendered fruitless
and to no Effect, Sir Archbald with all convenient Expedition, set out for
Scotland, and sickning in his Return, died within a few Weeks thereafter, on
the 27th of November, 1679.

He married first, Elizabeth, Daughter of James Keith of Benholm, Son of George
Earl Marischal, by whom he had Issue,

Sir James Primerose of Barnbougle, who was a Gentleman of good Parts and
Learning; he died in the Lifetime of his Father, leaving Issue by Elizabeth his
Wife, Daughter of Sir Robert Sinclair of Longformacus, one Daughter his sole
Heir, married to George Hume of Kimmergham.

Sir William Primerose of Carringtoun, the Heir of the Family.

Gilbert Primerose, a Major General in the British Service.

Margaret married to Sir John Fowlis of Ravelstoun, Bart. to whom he gave the
Estate of Dunipace, on Condition his Heir should assume the Name of Primerose,
which Sir John his Son actually did; whose Son and Heir is Sir Archbald
Primerose of Dunipace, Bart.

Catharine to Sir David Carnagy of Pitarow, Bart.

He married after the Death of his first Wife, Agnes, Daughter of Sir William
Gray of Pitendrum, and Sister to William Master of Gray, by whom he had
Archbald Earl of Rosebery, and a Daughter Grisel, married to Francis Lord
Semple.

Sir William Primerose of Caringtoun married Mary, Daughter of Patrick Scot of
Thirlstane, by whom he had Sir James his Successor, thereafter Viscount of
Primerose, and Captain William Primerose, who was killed abroad; likewise Three
Daughters, Mary married to William Lord Bargeny, Jean to Hugh Montgomery of
C^eilsfield, and Elizabeth to Charles Master of Elphingstoun, at that Time Son
and Heir apparent of John Lord Elphinstoun; and dying on the 23d of September
1687 Charta in Pub. Arch.
, was succeeded by

Sir James his Son and Heir, who being chosen one of the Commissioners for the
Shire of Edinburgh, to the Parliament the 1st of Queen Anne, was by her
Majesty's special Favor raised to the Honor of Viscount Primerose, Lord
Primerose of Castlefield, by Letters Patent, bearing Date, November 30th 1703,
and departing this Life the 13th of June 1706 Ibidem.
, left Issue by the Lady Eleanor Campbel his Wife, Daughter of James Earl of
Loudoun, Archbald his Successor in the Honor, Hugh Primerose, Esquire William
Primerose, Esquire and a Daughter Margaret.

ARMS.
Vert, Three Primeroses within a double Tressure, flowered and counterflower'd,
Or. Supporters, Two Leopards proper. Crest, A Demi-Lyon rampant, holding in his
Dexter Paw a Primerose proper. Motto, Fide and fiducia.

DOUGLAS, Duke of Queensberry.
THE Barony of Drumlanrig in Drumfrieze-Shire, did anciently belong to the
Earls of Mar. Thoma^ Earl of Mar, gave these Lands to William Lord of Douglas,
whose Sister, the Lady Margaret he had married which King David II did, by his
Royal Charter, confirm Willielmo Domino de Douglas, Omnes Terras Barroniae de
Drumlanrig, cum Pertinen. Tenend. and Habend. eidem Willielmo Domino de
Douglas, and haeredibus suis, libere and quiet, plenarie, integre and
honorifice, cum omnibus libertatibus, commoditatibus, Assiamentis, and justis
pertinentiis suis, sicut charta dilecti consanguinet nostri Thomae Comitis
Marriae, eidem Willielmo Domino de Douglass, and Margaretae Sponsae suae,
consanguineae nostrae, inde confecta before proportat and testatur.

To this William, Lord, thereafter Earl of Douglass, succeeded James Earl of
Douglass his Son, who by his Charter gave the Barony of Drumlanrig to William
Douglass his Son, which, for the fixing the Origin of this illustrious Branch
of the House of Douglass, I shall present the Reader with an exact Copy of it,
as I transcribed it from the Original.

Omnibus hanc chartam visuris vel audituris, Jacobus Comes de Douglass, Dominus
vailis de Lydale, ac baroniae de Drumlanrig, salutem in Domino sempiternam.
Noveritis nos dedisse, concessisse, and hac charta nostra confirmasse Willielmo
de Douglass, filio nostro, pro homagio and servitio suo, omnes terras nostras
totius baroniae de Drumlanrig, infra vicecom. de Dum^rise, tenend, and habend,
omnes dictas terras praefatae baroniae, cum pertinen, eidem Willielmo and
haeredibus suis, de corpore suo legitime procreandis; quibus deficientibus,
Archibaldo de Douglass filio nostro, and haeredibus suis, de corpore s^o
legitime procreandis, in feudo and haereditate in perpetuum reservata, nobis
and haeredibus nostris, re^alitas ejusdem faciendo inde nobis and haeredibus
nostris, servitium ^nius militis in exercitu nostro, nomine Albae firmae. In
cujus rei testimonium presenti chartae sigillum nostrum fecimus appon^, his
testibus, Domino Archibaldo de Douglass, Domin^ Galuidiae, Jacobo de Douglass,
Domino de Dalkeith, Jacobo de Lindsay, Domino de Crawfurd, Willielmo de
Lindsay, Roberto Colevyle, Willielmo de Borthewick, consanguineis nostris
militibus, Adamo Forrester, Adamo de Hoppringle, Allano de Laudere, and multis
altis.

This Sir Willam Douglass, the first Baron of Drumlanrig, being a brave
Gentleman, signalized himself in the Wars against the English in his Time; in
the 1411, together with Gavin Dunbar, Son to the Earl of March, he burnt and
plundered the Town of Roxburgh Extract^ e Ch^on. Scotiae.
, then in the Possession of the English, which was performed with great
Resolution and Courage. The War at length ending in a Truce in the 1412 Rymer's
Foedera Angliae.
, Sir William Douglass and the Lord Clifford were the chief Challengers at a
solemn Tournament held by the Earl of Westmorland at Carlisle, but my Author
Sir William Dugdale in his Baronage of England.
is not particular as to the Event. The same Year he had the Honor to be sent
by the Governor of Scotland, the Duke of Albany, Ambassador to the Court of
England, to solicit the Release of King James I. who was then keept a Prisoner
in that Realm Rymer's Foedera.
, when he obtained from his Captive Sovereign a Charter, all written fair out
in the King's own Hand, on Vellom Charta penes Ducem de Queensberry.
, the very finest I ever saw, in these Words,

' James, throw the Grace of GOD, Kyinge of Scottis, til all that this Lettre
her is or seis, sendis Gretynge; wit ze, that we have grantit, and be this
present Lettre grantis a special Confirmation in the mast Form, til our Trust
and well belofit Cosyng, Sir William of Douglass of Drumlanrig of all the Lands
that he is posest and charterit of within the Kingdom of Scotland, that is to
say, the Landis of Drumlanrig, of Hanyke, and of Selkirk: The which Charter and
Posessions be this Lettre we confirm. In Witness of the whilk, this present
Lettres we wrate with our proper Hand, and the Signet ussit in selying of our
Lettres as now at Croydon, the last Day of Novembre, the Yeir of our Lord
1412.'

In the 1416, Sir William Douglass of Drumlanrig was joined in Commission with
the Earls of Athole, Fife, Buchan, Mar, Douglass, and Crawfard, George Dunbar,
Son and Heir to the Earl of March, the Bishop of Glasgow, and Si^ William
Graham, to treat with the English about the relieving of King James Rymer's
Foedera Angliae.
, but for some Reasons of State, that Grand Affair could not be brought to a
Close, though it is not to be doubted but those great Men, who had the Honor to
be employed in the Treaty, did all they could to have it concluded. Thereafter
in 1420. when the English carried over King James into France Abercromby's Life
of King James I.
, to try if his Presence could draw the Scots, who were in the French Service,
over to that of the English, Sir William Douglass of Drumlanrig, went over to
wait on his Master; in order to which he had a safe Conduct granted him from
the King of England, but with this remarkable Proviso, that he should do
nothing prejudicial to him, or to his dearest Father the King of France; but
the Scots did well then distinguish the Deference which they owed to their King
when captivated, and when independent and free; for though they sent Persons to
guard his sacred Person, yet they adhered firmly to that Interest which he
seemed outwardly to oppose, though I have no Reason to believe, but that Sir
William Douglass kept his Promise to the King of England, and did not engage
against the English Interest at that Time, yet he afterward lost his Life in
the Service of France, at the Battle of Ag^ncourt in 1427 Mr. David Simpson*s
Account o^ the House of Drumlanrig. M.S. penes me.
, leaving Issue by Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter o^ Sir Robert Stewart of
Durisdeer and Rosyth.

William Douglass, Lord of Drumlanrig, his Son and Hei Charta penes Ducem de
Queensberry, in an Indenture between William Douglass Lord of Drumlanrig, and
William Douglass, Lord of Leswalt, in the 1427.
, who was one of the Host^ges sent to England, for the Redemption of King James
I. in the 1427, in Exchange of another Baron of the same Rank and Fortune with
himself, which was expressly provided in the Treaty of Redemption, but when he
was relieved again, it has not occu^red to me.

This Sir William being like his Father a warlike Man, signalized himself in
most of the Actions between the Sc^ts and English, particularly at the Battle
of Sark, Anno 1448, where the Scots obtained a most glorious Victory, under the
Command of Hugh Earl of Ormond, Brother to the Earl of Douglass, where Sir
William did to a very eminent Degree manifest his Valor and Conduct; and
departing this Life in the 1458 Mr. Simpson's Account of the House of
Drumlanrig.
, left Issue by Janet his Wife, Daughter of Sir Herbert Maxwell, Lord of
Carlaverock Mr. Simpson's Account of the House of Drumlanrig.
.

William his Son and Heir, who, though he did not long outlive his Father, yet he
gave many signal Proofs of his Valor in several Actions, particularly at the
Siege of Roxburgh, where King James II. lost his Life, and in that other bold
Attempt at Alnwick, Anno 1463, where the French Garrison was relieved by the
Earl of Angus, in the Face of a numerous English Army Ibidem.
, which was double the Number of the Troops the Earl had under his Command, and
departing this Life in the 1464 Ibidem.
, left Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of...... Carlyle, Lord of
Torthoral^,

William his Son and Heir, who treading in the Steps of his heroic Ancestors,
was slain in the Service of his Country at the Battle of Kirkonel in that
unnatural Invasion of the Duke of Albany against his own Brother King James II.
on the 22d of July 1484 M^. Thomson's Hist. Collections.
, leaving Issue by Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of Sir Robert Crichton Lord of
Sanquhar, Ancestor to the Earl of Drumfrise Charta penes Ducem de Queensbery.
, James his Successor, Archbald, of whom the Douglasses of Cashogle, George, of
whom the Branch of Pinzire Mr. Simpson's Account of the House of Queensbery.
, John Vicar of Kirkonnel Charta penes Dominum Cathcart ad Annum 1497.
; likewise several Daughters,

Margaret married to John Lord Cathcart Ibid.
, and had Issue.

Elizabeth to John Campbell, Son and Heir apparent of James Campbell Charta
penes Ducem de Queensbery, ad Annum 1496.
of Wester-Loudoun.

Janet to Alexander Gordon, at that Time Son and Heir apparent of John Gordon
of Lochinvar Charta penes Dominum Cathcart.
, Ancestor to the Viscount of Kenmure.

Which James in 1470, married Janet, Daughter of David Scot of Bu^hleugh Charta
penes Ducem de Queensbery, ad annum 1470, November. 5th.
, by whom he had William his Successor, and a Daughter Janet, married to Roger
Grierson of Lag, and dying soon after the 1496 I find him then alive from the
Writs of the Famil^.
, was succeeded by

William his Son, who did not long survive his Father, for he lost his Life
with King James IV. and the Flower of the Kingdom, at the fatal Battle of
Flowdoun, September 9th, 1513, Charta penes Ducem de Queensberry.
, leaving Issue by Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of Sir John G^rdon of
Lochinva^, James his Successor, Robert, Provo^t of Lincluden, of whom the
Branch of the Douglasses of Barfurd Ib, etiam Charta in Pub. Arch. ad Annum
1612.
, and Two Daughters, Janet, married to Robert Lord Maxwell, and Agnes to Andrew
Cunningham of Kirkshaw.

Which James was one of those loyal Barons, who in the 1526, attempted to
relieve King James V. from the Earl of Angus, who kept him in no other
Condition than that of a Prisoner; but the Attempt proving unsuccessful, he was
obliged to take out a Remission for it. During the War i^ the Minority of Queen
Mary, he behaved very loyally, for which the Duke of Chattlerault the
Governor, conferred the Honor of Knighthood on him; and in the 1553 the Queen
made him Warden of the East Marches, with a full Power of Justiciary on the
Surrender of Sir John Maxwell of Tareagles Ibidem.
. Which Office he discharged with great Wisdom and Courage for many Years
thereafter, even till his old Age, that he resigned the Office, which was
thereupon given to Sir John Maxwell Knight. He married first Margaret Douglass
Chart^ penes Ducem de Queensberry. ad Annum 1530.
, Daughter of George Master of Angus, by whom he had Two Daughters, Janet
married to William Douglass of Ca^^^gle Ibidem.
, and again to John Charters of Aimsfield, and Margaret to John Jerdan of
Applegirth Ibidem.
. From this Lady Sir William was divorced, and thereafter by a Dispensation
from the Pope's Legate, he was married again to Christian, Daughter of John,
Master of Eglintoun, Son of Hugh Earl of Eglintoun; by her he had Sir William
Douglass of Ha^ick, who died before his Father, and Four Daughters,

Margaret married to Robert Lord Sanquhair, and again to William Earl of
Menteth.

Helen to Roger Grierson of Lag Ibidem.
, and had Issue.

Janet, first to James Tweedie of Drumlezer Ibidem.
; and afterward to William Kerr of Cesfoord Ibidem.
, Ancestor to the Duke of Roxburgh.

Christian to Sir Alexander Stewart of Garlies Ibid. etiam Charta in Pub. Arch.
, Ancestor to the Earl of Galloway, and had Issue.

Sir William Douglass of Hayick, Sir James's Son, though he died a young Man, yet
he gave many Proofs of his Prudence and Courage in suppressing the English
Inroads, and the Disorders committed on the Borders. When the War broke out in
the Reign of Queen Mary, he adhered to the Interest of the young Prince King
James VI. with singular Fidelity, was at the Field of Langside, where he
signalized his Valor, and contributed very much to the Overthrow of the
Queen's Party; and he was so zealous in the Cause, that afterward he commanded
in that Action betwixt Le^^^ and Edinburgh, in 1572, where the Earl of Huntly,
who maintained the Queen's Authority, was worsted, and many of his Adherents
slain; and dying Anno 1574, left Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of James
Gordon of Lochinvar Charta in Pub. Arch. etiam Charta penes Ducem de
Queensberry.
, James who succeeded his Grandfather, likewise Daughters,

Margaret married to Sir Robert Montgomery of Skelmurly, Bart. Ibidem.
, and had Issue.

Janet to Sir James Murray of Cockpool Ibidem.
, and had Issue.

Christian to Robert Dalziel Younger of That-Ilk Ibidem.
, thereafter Earl of Carnwath.

Sir James Douglass of Drumlanrig dying on the 27th of September 1578 Ibidem.
, was immediately succeeded in his Estate by his Grandson Sir James, who being
a Person of great Wisdom and Prudence, was a very happy Instrument in
reconciling the Discords among the Nobility and the contending Factions at
Court, which had rendered the Reign of King James less pleasant to him, till
his Accession to the English Crown. Sir James was no less wise than valiant, he
having frequent Occasions of exerting his Courage and Conduct in those unhappy
Feuds and mutual Incursions, which infested the South-west Parts of the Kingdom
before the Union of the Crowns. He married Margaret Daughter of John Lord
Fleeming, Sister to John first Earl of Wigtoun Ibidem.
, by whom he had William his Successor, the first Earl of Queensberry, Sir
James Douglass of Mouswald, David Douglass of A^rdoch, George Douglass of
Pinzrie, likewise two Daughters, Janet married to William Livingston of
Jer^^swood, and Helen to John Menzies of Castlehill; and departing this Life
16th of October 1615, was succeeded by

Sir William his Son and Heir, who being a Gentleman of great Parts and
singular Prudence, was particularly known and favored by King James VI. whom
he had the Honor to entertain at his House of Drumlanrig, in his Return into
England, in the Year 1617: Nor was he less regarded by King Charles I. who was
graciously pleased to create him a Peer by the Title of Lord Viscount
Drumlanrig, on the 1st of April 1628 Charta in Pub. Arch.
; and further, for the greate^ Splendour of his Majesty's Coronation, he was by
Letters Patent, bearing D^te 13th of June 1633, raised to the Honor of Earl of
Queensbery Ibid
. He married I^obel Daughter of Mark first Earl of Lothi^n, by whom he had
James his Suc^essor, Sir William Douglass of Killhead, Archbald Dougl^s of
Dornock; and Two Daughters Margaret married to James Earl of Hartsiel, and
Janet to Thomas Lord Kircudbright, and dying on the 8th of March 1640, was
succeeded by

James his Son, who suffe^'d much for his Loyalty to King Coarles I. during the
Civil War, for when he was endeavoring to join the Marquis of Montrose, before
the Battle of Philiphaugh, he was made Prisoner, and afterward fined in 120000
M^rks, which he paid. He married first M^ry, Daughter of James Ma^quis of
Hamilton, by whom he had no Issue; and again Margaret, Daughter o^ John Earl of
Tr^quair, Lord Hig^ Treasurer of Scotland, by whom he had William his
Successor, Lieutenant General James Dougl^s^, who died at Namur in 1691, John,
killed at the Siege of Treves 1675, Rob^rt killed at the Siege of M^estricht
1676; like wife Five Daughters, 1. Mary married to Alexander Earl of Gallow^y,
2 Catharine to Sir James Douglass of Kellhead, Bart. and had Issue. 3 Henrietta
to Sir Robert Gr^erson of Lagg, and had Issue. 4 Margaret, to Sir Alexander
Jerdan of Appleg^rth, Bart. and had Issue. 5 Isobel to Sir William Lockhart of
Carstairs, Bart. and had Issue. And dying on the 15th of August 1671, was
succeeded by

William his Son, who being a Nobleman of very great Parts, was in 1667 sworn
of the Privy Council to King Charles II. and thereafter, June 1st 1680, made
Justice-General Ibid. etiam Charta penes Ducem de Queensberry.
, on the Removal of Sir George Mackenzie of Tarbat; also his Majesty as a
Testimony of his special Favor, was pleased to create the Ea^l, Marquis of
Queensbery, by Letters Patent, bearing Date the 11th of February 1682 Ibidem.
, and in less than Six Months thereafter, upon some Alterations in the
Ministry, the Marquis of Queensbery was preferred to be Lord High Treasurer of
Scotland, and the Earl of Perth made Justice General in his Room Charta in Pub.
Arch. May 1st, 1682, making the Earl of Perth Justice General, and another
making the Marquis of Queensberry Lord High Treasurer, 15th of July 1672.
; likewise in September thereafter he was made Constable and Governor of
Edinburgh Castle, and one of the extraordinary Lords of the Session. Finally,
that no Honor might be wanting which his Majesty could con^er upon him, he was
raised to the Honor of Duke of Queensbery, the 3d of February 1684 Charta
penes Ducem de Queensberry.
; about which Time he was ad^^tted one of the Lords of the Privy Council for
the Kingdom of England.

As the Duke had been in great Favor in the Reign of King Charles II. he was
no less in so the B^ginni^g of King James VII. who not only continued him in
his former Posts, but likewise made him Lord High Commissioner to represent his
Royal Person in his first Session of Parliament 1685; and the same Year he and
J^mes Lord Drumlanr^g his Son, were constituted his Majesty's Lieu^enants in
the S^ires of Drumfrieze and Wigtoun, and the Stewartries of Annandale and
Kirkcudbright. In the 1686, the Treasury being turned into Commission, the Duke
of Queensbery was made President of the Council, but the Measures that were
soon after taken at Court, not suiting with his Temper and Principles, and for
his not complying with the Project of taking away the penal Laws against
Popery; he was in Six Months thereafter deprived of all public Employments,
and thereafter lived prudently and cautiously through the rest of that Reign.

His Grace married Isobel, Daughter of William Marquis of Douglass, by whom he
had James his Son and Heir, William Earl of March, and Lord George, a young
Nobleman of great Hopes, who died in 1693, and a Daughter Anne, married to
David Earl of Weems, and departing this Life at Ediaburgh the 28th of March
1695, was with great Funeral Solemnity interred at the Church of D^risdeer,
with his Ancestors, where there is a magnificent Monument erected for him.

James Duke of Queensbery his Son and Successor, was born on the 18th of
December 1662, after he had gone through the Course of his Studies at the
University of Glasgow, he went into Foreign Parts, to accomplish himself by
Travels, Anno 1680. and upon his Return in 1684, was by King Charles II. made
one of the Privy Council, and Lieutenant Colonel of a Regiment of Horse
commanded by Lieutenant General Graham, thereafter Viscount of Dundee; and he
continued in these Posts till the Year 1688, about which Time he quitted them
for Ill Usage at Court, and upon the Account of the Disagreement of his
Principles with their Measures.

The Revolution then happening to come on, he appeared early in it, and was by
the Prince of Orange, upon his Acceptance of the Government, made Colonel of
the Scots Horse-Guards, and at the same Time one of the Privy Council, and one
of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Bedchamber.

In the 1690 King William sent him into Scotland, to command a separate Body of
Troops under Lieutenant General Mackay; Two Years after, he was made one of the
Lords of the Treasury; and in the Parliament 1693, he was authorized to sit and
vote as Lord High Treasurer, his Father being then alive, and he not a Peer,
could not otherwise sit, but as an Officer of State, which depends on the
Sovereign's Nomination.

The Duke his Father departing this Life as aforesaid in 1695, he laid aside
all Thoughts of Military Employments, quitted the Command of the Guards, and
was thereupon made Lord Privy Seal, and one of the Extraordinary Lords of the
Session.

His Majesty in 1700 was pleased to make him Lord High Commissioner to
represent his Royal Person in Parliament, where he held Two Sessions by virtue
of Two distinct Patents; and upon his Return to Court, his Majesty on the 18th
June 1701, was pleased to honor the Duke with a distinguishing Mark of his
Royal Favor, for that Evening, a Chapter being held of the most noble Order of
the Garter at Kensingtoun, where the Sovereign was present, the Duke was then
elected a Companion of the Order, and installed at Windsor the 10th of July
thereafter. His Grace having served King William as long as he lived with great
Fidelity, her Majesty Queen Anne, upon her Acc^^ssion to the Throne, first made
him Secretary of State; and entertaining the same just Sentiments of his
Ability and Conduct, appointed him to be her Commissioner to represent her
Royal Person in that Session of Parliament which met at Edinburgh, the 9th of
June 1702; but the Legality of that Session meeting with great Opposition from
a strong Party in the Parliament, who declared openly that they did not
conceive themselves warranted to meet and act in that Session as a Parliament
The Duke of Hamilton presented a Paper, which contained the Reasons of his
Dissent, which may be seen at large in the History of Europe, and the Memoirs
of Scotland, but is foreign to my Purpose to insert it here.
, and therefore did not only dissent from any Thing that should be done or
acted therein, but withdrew, and removed from their Attendance: Wherefore her
Majesty, to quiet the Minds of her People, was pleased to order the Duke to
prorogue the Parliament, which his Grace did, and thereupon set out for London;
where he was soon thereafter appointed One of the Commissioners upon the Part
of Scotland, for treating of an Union betwixt both Nations; but though the
Commissioners of the respective Kingdoms met several Times, and settled
Preliminaries on both Sides; yet upon a more mature Deliberation, the Court
concluded that it was not a fit Season to promote that Business, but to suspend
the further Prosecution of it until a more favorable Conjuncture. The former
Parliament being dissolved, it was necessary another should be called, as had
been usual at the Entrance of all Sovereigns to the Crown; and therefore her
Majesty issued out Writs for the Calling of a new Parliament, which met
according to Summons upon the 6th of May 1703, to which the Queen was pleased
to honor the Duke of Queensberry, by appointing his Grace to represent her
Royal Person, as Lord High Commissioner. The Parliament being opened with great
Solemnity, they began cheerfully in passing an Act, recognizing her Majesty's
Title to the Crown; but that Unanimity did not long continue among them; for a
very strong Party in the Parliament having brought in and carried an Act for
the Security of the Kingdom, presented it to the Lord Commissioner, for the
Royal Assent; but the Act of Security being transmitted to the Court, the
English Ministry were so wholly averse to it, and the Country Party in the
Parliament of Scotland as strenuously insisting to have it pass, all the Duke
could well do in such a Conjuncture, was to keep it off till he should receive
Instructions from above; which he did with the outmost Dexterity, till her
Majesty having declared that some Difficulties having fallen in in that Affair,
so much pressed, she would take Time to consider them before she could be
determined to give the Royal Approbation; and therefore ordered the Lord High
Commissioner to adjourn the Parliament on the 16th of September, after they had
sat full Three Months, which the Lord Chancellor did in the usual Forms.

How great soever these Services of the Duke's were esteemed to be for a Time,
yet it is certain, that in less than a Year thereafter, upon a Change of some
Measures at Court, his Grace was removed from all Public Employments, except
that of one of the Extraordinary Lords of the Session, which was for Life, and
of which he could not be deprived.

But upon another Change at Court in the 1705, when the Duke of Argyle was
declared Commissioner for holding the Session of Parliament that Year, the Duke
of Queensbe^ry was made Lord Privy Seal in Place of the Earl of Rothes, and one
of the Commissioners of the Treasu^y. It Is foreign to my Design to assign the
Reasons here of the Change that was found in the Disposition of the English
Ministry, in Reference to the Act of Security, which h^d passed in the
Parliament 1704 from what it had been in the Session before, wherein the Duke
preceded as Lord High Commissioner. However, the forementioned Act of Security
put the English Ministry under a Necessity of effecting the Union of the Two
Kingdoms; and in order thereto, her Majesty being imp^wered by the Parliament
in 1705. did nominate and appoint Commissioners to treat with those of England,
for uniting the two Kingdoms, of which Number the Duke of Queensberry the Lord
Privy Seal was one.

The Commissioners of both Kingdoms having accordingly met at London on the
16th of April 1706, the Preliminaries were easily agreed to on the 24th. The
Two succeeding Months were taken up in carrying on of the Treaty, and being
much forwarded by her Majesty's Royal Presence and Recommendation to bring it
to a Conclusion, the Articles were completed and signed on the 22d of July
there^f^er.

Though the Treaty of Union was concluded by the respective Commissioners of
Scotland and England, yet it b^hooved to be approven and confi^med by both
Parliaments before it could be perfected; and the Parliament of Scotland being
to meet for that End the 6th of Oct^ber, the Duke of Queensberry was pitched on
as the fitte^^ Person to be her Majesty's Commissioner to bring that great
Affair about in Parliament.

So difficult and nice a Work as incorporating the Two Kingdoms, could not be
effected without very considerable Opposition, both from within Doors and
without; but his Grace being supported by her Majesty's Authority, and a f^ll
and hearty Concu^re^ce of a Majority in the Parliament, (who were well affected
to the Union) went on vigorously in the Prosecution of his Duty, and with so
much Dispatch, that the whole Treaty was enacted and ratified on the 16th of
January 1707, by the Lord Commissioner by the Touch ^f the Royal Scepter, in
the usual Manner.

The Duke of Queensberry having thus concluded the Union, and surmounted all
the Difficulties he met in his Way to complete it, in April thereafter set out
for London, where he ^ound that gracious Reception from the Queen which his
eminent Services h^d deserved: And it was but very just that he who had
expended so much of his Time in the public Service, should have some suitable
Compensation; and therefore the Queen gave him the Compliment of a Pension of
3000 L per Annum out of the Fost Office. Her Majesty's Goodness and Bounty did
not stop here, seeing she was pleased in May 1708, to create him a Peer of
Great Britain, by the Titles of Baron Rippon, Ma^quis of Beverly, and Du^e of
Dover; which Honors were to descend to the Earl of Solloway his second Son.

The Queen continuing still her Royal Favors to his Grace, was pleased on the
9th of February 1709, to declare in Council, that by Reason of the Increase of
the public Business, she thought fit to appoint a 3d Secretary of State of
Great Britain, and having named the Duke of Queensberry the Person, he was
thereupon sworn into the Office, which he enjoyed till his Death, July 6th
1711, after a short Indisp^sition, which the Physicians call the I'liack
Passion.

He married the Lady Mary B^yl^, Daughter of Charles Lord Clifford, Son of
Richard Earl of B^rlingtoun and Cork, by whom he had James Ea^l of Drumlanrig,
Lord Charles Douglass, who for the Services of his Father and his Ancestors,
was, in the 1707, created Earl of Solloway, and is now Duke of Queensberry and
Dover, a young Nobleman of excellent Parts and great Expectation, and Lord
George Douglass, likewise Two Daughters,

Lady Jean,

Lady Anne.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Argent, a Heart Gules, ensign'd with an Imperial Crown,
Or, on a Chief, Azure, Three Molets of the first. 2d and 3d Azure a Bend
betwixt Six cross Croslets, Or, all within a double Tressure, Or, flowered and
counterflower'd, Gules. Supporters, Two Horses Argent, winged Or, Crest, a Heart
winged Gules, crowned with an Imperial Crown, surmounted of a Ducal Coronet
proper. Motto, Forward.

MACKAY, Lord Rae.
THE first of this Surname I have found on Record, was Odo, al^as Y Macy, who
obtained from King James IV. pro bono and sideli servitiotam tempore pacis,
quam guerae impenso and assportatione nobis quondam Alex Sutherland de Delred,
and altarum december personarum, ejus complicum nostrorum rebellium, omnes and
singulas terras subscriptas, viz. Terras de Fare, Gosesbey, Catack, Croyn,
Kilblachman, in vicecom. de Inverness, quae quidem Terrae cum s^is Per^^nent^is
fuerunt quondam dicti Alexandri Sutherland haereditar^ae and nunc nobis
pertinen. and in manibus nostris legitime devenerunt, ratione Forisfacturae
dicti quondam Alexandri, etc. Apud Inverness 4 to die Mensis Novembris, 1499
Charta in Rotulis Jacobi IV.
. He left a Son Donald Mackay of Fare, whose Son and Successor Y Mackay of
Fare, by Catharine his Wife, Daughter of.... Sinclair of Dun, left Hugh his
Heir, and Donald Mackay of Scauray Charta in Rotulis Caroli I.
, the Ancestor of Lieutenant General Hugh Mackay, who was Commander in Chief of
the Forces in Scotland, Anno 1689, and was thereafter killed at St^^nktrk, a
brave Man, and esteemed an excellent Officer.

Which Hugh married Jean Daughter of John Earl of Sutherland, by whom he had
Donald his Son and Heir, who being a Person of a martial Spirit, and a Man of
great Honor and Courage, carried over a Regiment of his own Name and
Followers, to the Service of the King of Sweden, under whom he served long in
very eminent Commands, with extraordinary Ability and Success.

Upon his Return to England, his Majesty King Charles I. to countenance his
Merit, was pleased to make him a Peer, by the Title of Lord Rae Charta in
Rotulis Caroli I.
, June 20th 1628.

Upon the breaking out of the Civil War in England, the Lord Rae repaired to
his Majesty, and heartily and personally engaged in his Service; but being
taken Prisoner at the Surrender of Newcastle to the Scots Army, he was sent
down to Scotland to be tried, but he had the good Fortune to be relieved by the
Marquis of Montrose, after the Battle of Killyth, out of the Goal of Edinburgh;
after which he went over to Denmark where he died in 1649, leaving Issue by
Barbara his Wife, Daughter of Kenneth Lord Kintail, John his Successor, who
married Barbara, Daughter of Donald Mackay of Scauray: By her he left Donald
his Successor, Colonel Aeneas Mackay, Colonel Robert Mackay.

Which Donald married Anne, Daughter of Sir George Monro of Culrain, by whom he
had

George the present Lord, who married first Margaret, Daughter of Lieutenant
General Hugh Mackay; by her he had Donald Master of Rae; next Janet, Daughter
of John Sinclair of Ulbster, by whom he likewise has Issue.

ROLLO, Lord Rollo.
THIS noble Family is of very ancient Extraction in the County of Perth, where
they have long remained, and still continue in Honor; and though they have
extended themselves into diverse Branches elsewhere, of very good Reputation I
find from Writs that have passed my Hands, that the Rolloes of Manor, Balmont,
Ballachie, Powis, and Monksholme, of whom Woodfide, are all Cadets to the
Family of Duncruib, and some of them were descended very early from this House.

John de Rollo was (...), Secretary to Robert Duke of Albany, while he was
Regent of Scotland in the Time of King James the First's Minority. Mr. Robert
Rollock, but really as it should, and was ab origin Rollo, in the Time of King
James VI. was Primarius Professor in the new erected University of Edinburgh, a
Person of exemplary Piety and Virtue. He wrote much wherein such a Strain of
Piety runs through his Writings, as will ever render his Memory dear to all good
Men. Mr. Peter Rollock or Rollo, a Minister of good Account in the Time of King
James VI. and a Lord of the Session, by the Title of Lord Piltoun, was in the
1600 promoted to the Bishopric of Dunkeld. He accompanied the King into
England, and was there preferred to a very good Benefice, the Rectory of
Mispertoun, and Brundesburton in the Diocese of York in the 1603. I may also
mention another Minister of very good Esteem, in the Time of King Charles I.
Mr. Henry Rollo, one of the Ministers of the City of Edinburgh.


, yet that which adds a peculiar Luster to the Family of Rollo, is the many
eminent Churchmen it has produced who have been in their several Times, great
Ornaments to the Church for their Learning, Piety and Moderation, a particular
Account of whom, and of their Writings will be found among our learned
Countrymen, in an intended Work which will perhaps very soon see the Light,
and be communicated to the World; and therefore I shall forbear to give the
Memoirs of them here, but only mention their Names among the Authorities I have
here cited

In the Reign of King Robert II. John Rollo the immediate Ancestor of this
noble Family, had by the Grant of David Earl of Strathern, with the Consent of
King Robert his Father, the Lands of Duncruib, Fyndony, Pitinclethy, L^dcathy,
and Pitmedie, bearing Date 13th February 1380 Charta penes Dominum Rollo.
. He left Issue Duncan his Son and Heir, whose Son and Successor was Andrew
Rollo of Duncruib, the Father of another Robert Rollo of Duncruib, and he of
William Rollo of the Place foresaid, who took Possession of his Estate as Heir
to his Grandfather, 9th July 1481 Ibid.
, and afterward obtained from King James IV. a Charter under the Broad Seal,
erecting all his Lands into one entire Barony, the Barony of Duncruib, of the
Date October 26th 1511 Charta in Pub. Arch.
, He married a Lady of the Family of the Oliphants, by whom he had Robert his
Son and Heir, who married Janet Daughter of William Lord Graham, and had Andrew
his Son and Heir, who married Marion, Daughter and Coheir of Sir David Rollo
of Ballachie Charta penes Dominum Rollo.
, by whom he had George his Successor, James Rollo of Thanestand, William Rollo
of Balogrie, Sir Walter Rollo of Gairn; likewise Two Daughters, Marion married
to George Graham of Inchbracko; and again to John Graham of Balgown Charta
penes Dominum Rollo, etiam Charta in Rotulis Jacobi IV. ad Annum 1603.
; and Mary to..... Oliphant of Gask.

Which George married Isobel, Daughter of William Moncrief of That-Ilk, but
dying without Issue, 6th of May, 1581 Charta penes Dominum Rollo.
, was succeeded by

James his Brother and Heir, who departing this Life in May 1684 Ibidem.
, left Issue by Agnes his Wife, Daughter of Robert Collice of Bonnymoon, an
ancient Family in Forfar Shire Ibidem.
, Andrew his Successor, also Two Daughters, Marion married to James Bruce of
Powfouls, and Jean to Alexander Blair of Rossiehall in the County of Perth.

Which Andrew had the Honor of Knighthood conferred on him by King James VI.
and afterward in his old Age was by King Charles II. in Consideration, as the
Patent bears, of the Antiquity of the Family, and the constant Fidelity of his
Ancestors to the Crown, raised to the Honor of Lord Rollo of Duncruib, by
Letters Patent, hearing Date at Perth 10th January 1651 Ibidem.
: And giving Way to Fate 2d of May 1659, left Issue by Catharine Drummond his
Wife, Daughter of James first Lord Madertie, Sir James his Successor in the
Honor, Sir John Rollo of Bannockburn, Mr. Lawrence Rollo of Rossy, Mr. Andrew
Rollo Parson of Dunning, Sir William Rollo a young Gentleman of excellent
Parts, and unblemished Reputation for Loyalty and Courage, who from the
Beginning of the Troubles in the Reign of King Charles I. heartily and
personally engaged himself for the King, and served his Majesty till the End of
his Life, with singular Diligence and Fidelity. He joined the Marquis of
Montrose as soon as he declared for his Majesty, and continued with him till
the unhappy Adventure of Philiphaugh, that being apprehended, he was no sooner
known, but an Order was sent for his Commitment and Trial, and notwithstanding
all the Defense he could make for himself, he was, for being in Arms with
Montrose, which they easily found him guilty of, sentenced to lose his Head,
which Judgment was executed on him at Glasgow, the 28th of October 1645.

Margaret, eldest Daughter to Andrew Lord Rollo, was married to Sir John
Drummond of Carnock, and had Issue.

Jean to John Rollo of Powhouse, and afterward to John Drummond of Pitkellony.

Anne to William Merser of Clevedge, and had Issue.

Isobel to William Hallyday of Tillybool, and had Issue.

James second Lord Rollo, was a Person of known great Parts, and of a general
good Reputation with all Men, which he manifested through the whole Course of the
Civil War, by his laying Hold of all Opportunities to advance all Motions
toward a Peace, for which no Man was ever more sollicitous. He married first
Dorothea Daughter of John Earl of Montrose, by whom he had no Issue; and again
Mary, Daughter of Archbald Earl of Argyle, by Anne his second Wife, Daughter of
Sir William Cornwallis of Broomo, of the County of Norfolk, by her he had
Andrew his Heir, Major Archbald Rollo, also a Daughter Margaret married to Sir
George Oliphant of Newtoun, sans Issue, and departing this Life in the 1671,
was succeeded by

Andrew his Son and Heir, who married Margaret, Daughter of Robert Lord
Burleigh, by whom he had John Master of Rollo, a young Nobleman of good
Reputation, who upon some private Contest was murdered by the young Lord of
Inchbracko, 29th of May 1691 I would have been loath to have expressed the
Death and Slaughter of the Master of Rollo in so harsh a Term, but having for
that End perused the Journal of the Justiciary, in the Denunciation of young
Inchbracko, the Lords declare him Fugitive on the 11th November 169^, for the
Murder and Slaughter of ^^quile John Master of Rollo.
, Robert his Successor, likewise Three Daughters, Aemelia married to William
Irvine of B^^^^w, Isabella to R^bert (...) of W^^^^^, and J^^^; and dying the
1st of March 1700. was succeeded by

Robert his Son and Heir, the present Lord Rollo, who married Mary, eldest
Daughter of Sir Hary Rollo of Wo^side, by whom he had Issue, Andrew Master of
Rollo.

ARMS.
Or. A Chiveron betwixt Three Bears Heads erazed, Azure, supported by Two
Stags. Crest, a Stag's Head Coupe proper. Metto, La Fortune pass par Tout.

PRIMEROSE, Earl of Roseberry.
ARCHBALD Earl of Roseberry was the only Son of Sir Archbald Primerose Lord
Dalmeny, Ancestor to the Viscount of Primerose, by Agnes his second Wife,
Daughter of Sir William Gray, Grandfather to the present Lord Gray, who being
well educated at Schools and Colleges at Home, for his further Improvement,
traveled into Foreign Parts, and made a Campaign or Two in Hungary. Upon his
Return he married a Lady of a Fortune, and betook himself to a Country Life. In
the 1695, he he was chosen Member of Parliament for the County of Edinburgh;
but before he sat long in that Quality in ths House, his Majesty King William
was pleased to raise him to be a Peer, by the Title of Viscount Roseberry, by
Letters Patents, bearing Date 1st of April 1700. Upon the Accession of Queen
Anne to the Crown, he was made one of the Lords of her Majesty's Privy Council,
and raised to the Honor of Earl of Roseberry, the 10th of April 1703, his
Lordship was also one of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber to his Royal Highness
Prince George of D^nmark, who alwise professed a more than ordinary Friendship
for him.

He was also one of the Commissioners on the Treaty of Union, and was chosen
one of the Sixteen Scots Peers, who first sat in the House of Lords in the
Parliament of Great Britain; and was ever thereafter a Member throughout all
the subsequent Parliaments of Queen Anne.

He married Dorothea, Daughter and Heir of Everingham Cressy of Birking, of the
County of York, Esquire Sir William Dugdale in his Baronage of England, takes
Notice, that Birking was of old a Peerage, and that the Everinghams succeeded
thereto in Right of Blood, and the same Way to them the Cresseys; and the
Countess of Rosebery being the Heir of all these Three ancient Families, some
are of Opinion, the Right of that Peerage belongs to her by Descent from the
Birknies, who had Summons to Parliament in the Time of Henry III. and the Earl
of Rosebery has a Warrant in the due Form, from the Lyon-Office of England,
allowing and authorizing him in his Lady's Right, to carry the Arms of Birking,
Everingham, Normanville and Cressy.
, by whom he had James Lord Dalmeny, Richard Primerose Esquire John Primerose Esquire
likewise Four Daughters,

Lady Mary,

Lady Margaret,

Lady Dorothea,

Lady Elizabeth.

ARMS.
Or, Three Primeroses within a double Tressure, flowered und counter-flower'd
Gules. Supporters, Two Lions Vert. Crest, a Demi-Lyon Rampant, Gules, holding
in his Dexter Paw a Primerose Gules. Motto, Fide and fiducia.

ROSS, Earl of Ross.
IN the Reign of King Alexander II. Ferquhard was first Earl of Ross. He left a
Son William, who was his Successor in the Honor Boethius.
. He was the Father of another Earl of the Name of William, who made a very
great Figure in the Competition betwixt the Bruce and the Baliol for the Crown.
He married Matilda, Daughter of Robert Earl of Carrick, by whom he had Hugh his
Successor, who was killed at the Battle of Hallydownhill in the 1333, leaving
William his Heir, Hugh Ross of R^riches, of whom the Rosses of Balnagown
descended Charta penes Dominum Saltoun.
; and Two Daughters, Eupham married to John Randolph Earl of Murray, and
afterward to King Robert II. and Janet first to Monimusk of Monimusk, and again
to Sir Alexander Murray of Abercairny Charta penes Dominum Abercairny.
.

Which William dying without Male Issue, left Two Daughters his Heirs, Eupham
Countess of Ross, and Jean, Wife of Sir Alexander Fraser of Philorth Charta
penes Dominum Saltoun.
.

Eupham Countess of Ross, married first Sir Walter Lesly, who in her Right was
called Lord of Ross, and had Issue by him, Sir Alexander Lesly her Son and
H^ir, who upon the Death of his Mother, was Earl of Ross, and a Daughter Eupham
married to Donald Lord of the Isles. The Countess, after the Death of Sir
Walter Lesly married again Alexander Earl of Buchan, Son to King Robert II. but
by her he had no Issue.

To Eupham Countess of Ross succeeded Sir Alexander Lesly her Son Charta penes
me.
, who married Eupham, Daughter of Robert Duke of Albany, by whom he had no
other Child but a Daughter Eupham, who being deformed, did render herself
religious; and by the Influence of her Grandfather the old Duke, resigned the
Ea^ldom of Ross in Favors of his Son, her Uncle, John Earl of Buchan, who
thereupon used the Title of Earl of Ross, but Donald Lord of the Isles
quarrelling the Destination of the religious Countess, as being done in
Prejudice of his Wife, who was her lawful Heir, and the Duke of Albany and his
Son the Earl of Buchan intending to keep what they had got, the Battle of
Harlaw ensued thereupon. Yet I think that hot Dispute did not determine the
Quarrel, but upon the Restoration of King James I. Alexander Lord of the Isles
got the Earldom of Ross, which he enjoyed all his Time, as his Son John did
also, till the 1476, by his Forfaulture for Treason and Rebellion it came to
the Crown.

ROSS, Lord Ross.
THIS noble Family is of English Extraction, and descended of the Rosses of
Werk, who came to Scotland in the Time of King Alexander III. and flowrish'd in
the Quality of Barons till the Reign of King James IV. that Sir John Ross of
Haulkhead, came to be ranked among the Lords of Parliament. He was slain at
Flowdoun, leaving Issue by Christian Daughter of Archbald Edmonstoun of
D^ntreath, Ninian his Successor, who married first Janet, Daughter to the Earl
of Lennox, and again Elizabeth Daughter of William Lord Ruthven,
Dowager-Countess of Errol, and had Robert Master of Ross, who was slain at
Pinky-Field 1544, leaving a Daughter Elizabeth his Heir, married to John Lord
Fleming, James his Father's Successor, who by Jean his Wife, Daughter of Robert
Lord Semple, had Robert his Son and Heir, and Sir William Ross, Knight. Which
Robert married Jean, Daughter of Gavin Hamilton of Raploch, and dying in 1596,
left Issue by his Wife aforesaid, James his Son and Heir, and a Daughter
Grisel, married to Sir Archbald Stirling of Keir.

Which James married Margaret, Daughter of Walter Lord Buccleugh, by whom he
had James, William, and Robert, all successively Lords; also Three Daughters,
Margaret married to Sir George Stirling of Keir, Jean to John Hepburn of
Wa^c^toun, and Mary to Sir Robert Innes of That-Ilk; and giving Way to Fate in
the Month of December 1633 Charta in Pub. Arch.
, was succeeded by James his Son and Heir, who dying a young Man on the 7th of
March 1636 Ibidem.
, was succeeded by William his Brother; who likewise dying a Minor in 1640
Ibidem.
, Robert his younger Brother came to the Honor; and he dying in 1656 Ibidem.
, was succeeded by

Sir William Ross of M^riestoun, his Great Uncle, who by Helen his Wife,
Daughter of George Lord Forrester, had George his Son and Heir, who married
first Grisel, Daughter of William Earl of D^ndonald, by whom he had William his
Successor, and a Daughter Grisel married to Sir Alexander Gilmoir of
Craigmiller, and had Issue; and again Jean, Daughter of George Earl of
Dalhousy; by her he had Lieutenant General Charles Ross of Balnagown, and a
Daughter Jean, married to William Earl of Dalhousy. And departing this Life in
the 1682, was succeeded by

William his Son and Heir, who in the Reign of Queen Anne had the Honor to
represent her Majesty's Royal Person in the General Assembly of the Church,
Anno 1704. and was also during that Reign one of the Commissioners of the
Treasury, and one of the Lords of her Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.

In the 1705, her Majesty was pleased to appoint his Lordship to be one of the
Commissioners for the Union between Scotland and England; for the accomplishing
of which he was very zealous, by Reason that the Protestant Succession to the
Crown was thereby secured, to which he always showed himself a firm and hearty
Friend.

After the Accession of King George to the Crown, his Lordship was chosen one
of the Sixteen Peers for Scotland, to his first Parliament called by his
Majesty, and thereafter appointed Lord Lieutenant of Renfrew-Shire, in the 1715.

He married first Agnes, Daughter and sole Heir of Sir John Wilkie of Foultoun,
by whom he had George Master of Ross; likewise Three Daughters, Eupham married
to William Earl of Kilmarnock, Mary to John Duke of Athole, and Grisel to Sir
James Lockhart of Carstairs, and has Issue; next,.... Daughter of Philip Lord
Wharton, by whom he had no Issue, and after that Anne, Daughter of John Marquis
of Tweedale, by whom he has one Daughter Anne.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th, Or, a Chiveron Checkie, Sable and Argent, betwixt Three
Water Budgets Or, 2d and 3d Gules, Three Crescents within a Border Argent,
charged with Eight Roses of the Field This Coat of Melvil of Melvil, the Family
of Ross carry quartered with their own, by Reason that one of their Ancestors
married with the Heir Female of that ancient Family; but not having seen any of
the Lord Ross's Writs, I could not assign the precise Time when they got the
Addition of that Barony to their Estate.
. Supporters, Two Haulks. Crest, a Haulk's Head erazed, all proper. Motto,
Think on.

LESLY, Earl of Rothes.
IN regard I had not an Opportunity of doing the Justice to this noble Family,
by perusing their Writings, as I could have wished, it cannot be reasonably
expected, but that my Memoirs of the House of Rothes should be less connected
than others, whose Line and Descent I deduced from the Writings of their own
Families; for, though one Mr. Lesly has set out a Book in Germany, of the Name of
Lesly, he calls Laurus Leslaeana, yet in his Accounts of the Families he treats
of except Balquhain, whose Writs it would appear he had seen and perused the
rest, especially Rothes, is such a Mass of confused unchronological Stuff, that
no Man now a Days, will venture to cite him for an Authority, if he think he
himself is to be believed; and therefore I shall proceed to mention such Writs
and Charters, without Respect to the Laurus Leslaeana, I either observed from
our national Archives or otherwise, as are proper to illustrate the Honor and
Antiquity of this most noble Family.

It Is certain that the first Possessions of this illustrious Family was in
Aberdeen-Shire, the Barony of Lesly in the Garrioch; and from whence, without
all doubt, the Surname has been assumed; for in the Reign of William the Lion,
David Earl of Huntingtoun and Garrioch, the King's Brother, made a Grant,
Malcolmo silio Bartholf, de terris suis de Leslyn, sicut perambulatae fuerunt
ei coram A. Episcopo Aberdeen, per probis hominibus suis, and Hachengart, and
Mailiae, per rectas divisas suas Copy of a Charter in the Custody of the Lord
of Lesly, which seems to have been taken very exactly from the Original, which
was procured me by Sir Samuel Forbes of Foveran: This first is in the Reign of
King William.
. This Malcolm left a Son Norman, filius Malcolmi Ibidem.
, who obtained a Charter from John Earl of Huntingtoun, de terris de Leslyn,
sicut Charta Patris sui inde testatur.

The Family of Rothes took Beginning in the Reign of King Robert I. Sir Andrew
Lesly Knight. Son of Sir Norman Lesly, then obtaining the Baronies of Rothes,
Banbrech, and others, by the Marriage of Mary, one of the Three Daughters and
Coheirs of Sir Alexander Abernethy Copy of a Charter I saw in Mr. Lesly's
Hands, from the Earl of Rothes's Charter-Chest, which makes th^^ clear; and
there are several other concurring Writs in the Duke of Douglass's Hands, fully
clearing this Marriage.
. He is one of the Barons in the Letter to the Pope Anno 1320, wherein the
Independency of Scotland is very fully asserted and vindicated, which is all I
have found memorable of him. A Successor of Sir Andrew was another Sir Andrew
Lesly, who in the First of King Robert III. 1390, resigned in the Sovereign's
Hands, the Lands and Barony of Banbrech in Fife, the Lands of Lour and Dulopy
in Forfar, the Lands and Barony of Rothey-Norman, and C^^cychne, in
Aberdeen-Shire, reserving the Liferent of the whole to Andrew de Lesly his
Father Charta in Pub. Arch.
, but he dying without Issue Male of his Body, was succeeded by

Sir George Lesly, Knight. his Heir of Entail Copy of a Charter furnished me by Mr.
James Lesly, Sheriff-Clerk of Cowpar, which he took the Note of from the Earl
of Rothes's Charter-Chist.
, who first assumed the Title of Rothes Ibid.
. He married Elizabeth, Daughter of Sir Thomas Hay, Lord of Errol Ibid.
, by whom he had Norman his Heir, who in the 1423, was one of the Barons sent
to England, to attend King James home, when he was relieved out of his
Captivity from England Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
; and dying Anno 1539, left Issue by Christian de Seton his Wife,

Sir George Lesly his Son and Heir, who was by King James II. in 1449, raised
to the Dignity of Earl of Rothes. He married Christian, Daughter of Sir Walter
Hallyburton Lord of Dirletoun Charta penes Comitem de Rothes.
. By her he had Andrew Master of Rothes, who in the Lifetime of his Father
married Elizabeth, Daughter of William Earl of Orkney and Caithness Ibidem.
, and left Three Sons, John who left no Issue, George who was his Grandfather's
Successor; but he dying likewise without any Issue Male, the Honor fell to his
younger Brother William, who was slain at Pinky, leaving Issue by Margaret his
Wife, Daughter of Michael Balfour of Montquhany, George his Successor, and John
Lesly of Parkhill.

Which George being a Nobleman of great Wisdom and Prudence, was much esteemed
by King James V. who carried him over to France in the 1537, when his Majesty
was espoused to Magdalen a Daughter of that Crown: After whose Death, during
the Regency of the Duke of Chattlerault, he was sent Ambassador to Denmark, in
which Negotiation he behaved himself with great Prudence and Dexterity; and
being looked on generally throughout the Kingdom as a very wise Man, he was
named one of the Commissioners to go to France, to the Queen's Marriage with
the Dauphine, where he died at Deip, on the 9th of November 1558, not without
Suspicion of being poisoned.

I Am heartily sorry, there are not such Documents in my Hands as should fully
enable me to set the Marriages of this noble Earl in a true Light. Mr. Lesly
gives the Preference to Lady Margaret Crichton, as the Earl's first Lawful
Wife, though I think his Authority is little to be valued; for it is clear from a
Charter of George Earl of Rothes in the 1528, wherein he gives both Nicolas
Somervel and Margaret Crichton a Liferent out of the same Lands; Mrs. Somervel
is expressly called his Wife, and is first mentioned before the other Lady, who
is no otherwise designed than by her Name, though she was of much greater Quality
of Birth than the other: Yet it is also clear by another Charter, in the 1542,
That Lady Margaret Crichton is designed, Countess of Rothes Charta in Pub.
Arch. ad Annum 1542.
, and then is certainly his lawful Wife. For the clearing this Matter, I shall
humbly offer my Opinion about it, from such Writs, as I have seen relative to
it. The Case I take to have been this, The Earl of Rothes in the Heat of Youth,
and without a Dispensation, according to the Rites of the Chuch, for the Earl
and the Lady were within the forbidden Degrees, did uncanonically marry Lady
Mary Crichton, the Lord Crichton's Daughter, which then in the Construction of
the Law, could not be valid without a Dispensation, or the Children considered
as begot in lawful Marriage, though certainly the Earl thought otherwise himself;
for when Norman his Son by her, was a very young Man, he put him in Fie of his
Estate, and in all the Transactions afterward about it, upon his Forfaulture,
he is never designed the Earl's natural Son, but only his Son simply, and Fiar
of the Earldom of Rothes,

And probably the Earl and the Lady disagreeing, they chose to live separate,
or she left him, and he married again, as was commonly done in that Time,
Nicholas Somervel, Daughter of Sir John Somervel of Camnethan, and Widow of
John Lord Fleming, by whom he had Andrew his Father's Successor in the Estate
and Honor; and the Lady dying soon thereafter, the Earl was again reconciled
to Lady Margaret Chrichton, and legally married her, otherwise she could not
have been, as I observed, she was, designed Countess of Rothes; and in this
State of lawful Marriage, she bare the Earl a Son, Robert Lesly, the Founder of
the House of Findrassy; and from his being Brother to Norman the Master of
Rothes, both of the same Father and Mother, has the Mistake proceeded, and the
Story been patched up of his being, as he is called, the righteous Rothes; for
it is plain, that Norman being forfaulted for the Murder of Cardinal Beaton, his
Father the Earl redeemed his own Estate again in the Terms he had made it over
to him, and so could not but in Justice settle it upon his Son Andrew, who
being indisputeably born in lawful Marriage, was preferable to Robert, who was
not born of Margaret Crichton, till very long after the Death of Dame Nicholas
Somervel; for it is plain at first the Earl had no other Son by Margaret
Crichton, but the aforesaid Norman Master of Rothes.

Andrew Earl of Rothes so succeeding, his Father, was very faithful to Queen
Mary, throughout her whole unfortunate Life, and was highly honored by King
James as a Nobleman of great Honor and Probity. He married first Jean,
Daughter of Sir James Hamilton of Evandale, by whom he had James Master of
Rothes, and Andrew Lord Lindores; likewise Three Daughters, 1 Margaret, married
to Archbald Earl of Angus, 2 Eupham, to James Lord Lindsay, 3 Elizabeth to
David Weems. Younger of That-Ilk, and again to James first Earl of Findlater.

He married again Jean, Daughter of Patrick Lord Ruthven; and after that
Margaret Daughter of Durrie of That-Ilk, and had Margaret married to Sir
William Cunninghame of Capringtoun, Mary to Robert Lord Melvil, and Isobel to
James Master of Sinclair,

James Master of Rothes in the Lifetime of his Father, married first Margaret,
Daughter of Patrick Lord Lindsay, by whom he had Four Daughters,

Margaret married to Mr. John Murray Minister of Dunfermling, a Brother of the
Family of Abercairny.

Isobel to....... of Newhall.

Anne to Alexander Wardlaw of Torrie.

Grisel to Alexander Earl of Dunfermling.

His Second Wife was Catharine, Daughter of Patrick Lord Drummond, by whom he
had a Son John, who succeeded his Grandfather, and a Daughter Jean, married to
Alexander Menzies of Weem.

Which John being a Nobleman of very good Parts, and great Address, was one of
those Peers who were most forward and leading for the R^dress of Grievances,
when the Troubles first broke out in 1637; and the Earl being the Person of the
greatest Parts, Interest, and Experience, in all the Popular Party, it cannot
be denied, but he came to be generally looked on as the Principal and governing
Person of the Nation at that Time; and after the Treaty of Rippon, at which he
was the first Commissioner, when the Pacification was concluded, his Majesty
resolved and actually did adjust all his Business with that Party by the Earl,
who undertook that Scotland should rest satisfied with the Concessions which
were in the Treaty; and his Majesty was well satisfied, says my Author
Clarendon's History of the Rebellion.
, 'with the Promises made to him by the Earl': And it is certain the King
expected by his Help and Interest, to have found such a Party in Scotland, as
would, he adds, 'have been more tender of his Honor, than they after expressed
themselves; and did alwise impute the Failing thereof to the Absence of the
Earl, who falling sick, at the King's coming down to Scotland, within Six Weeks
thereafter, died at London, in August 1641', which his Majesty thought an
irreparable Loss to his Service.

He married Anne, Daughter of John Earl of Mar, by whom he had John his Son and
Heir, and Two Daughters, Margaret married first to Alexander Lord Balgony, next
to Francis Earl of Buccleugh, and last of all to David Earl of Weems; and
Christian to Hugh Earl of Eglingtoun.

John Earl of Rothes was too young to have been concerned in the War when it
first broke out in the Time of King Charles I. but when the Parliament 1651,
raised an Army for the Service of King Charles II. for the Recovery of England,
the Earl being then of Age, put himself into the Army, and attended the King
thither. Upon the Defeat at Worcester, he had the Misfortune to fall into the
Enemies Hand, who committed him to Prison, where he remained till the King's
Restoration, that his Majesty King Charles II. to reward his Merit and
Sufferings, was pleased to make him Lord President of the Council, and
thereafter General of the Forces in Scotland; he had the Honor also to
represent his Majesty's Person, as Lord High Commissioner to the Session of
Parliament 1663; and the same Year was constituted Lord High Treasurer of
Scotland, upon the Resignation of the Earl of Crawfurd; and the Chancellor's
Place falling void by the Death of the Earl of Glen^airn, in July 1664, the
Lord Treasurer was not long after preferred thereto; and having discharged this
and all the other great Offices committed to him, to his Majesty's great
Satisfaction, he was graciously pleased, in Consideration of all the Lord
Chancellor's eminent Services, to create him Duke of Rothes, and to the Heirs
Male of his Body for ever, the 29th June 1680; but his Grace did not long
survive his Promotion, for he died in July 1681, the Dignity of Duke by his
Death did extinguish with himself, by Reason of his Want of Heirs Male.

He married Anne, Daughter of John Earl of Crawfurd, by whom he had Margaret
Countess of Rothes, and Christian married to James Marquis of Montrose, and
again to Sir John Bruce of Kinross, Bart.

Margaret Countess of Rothes, a Lady of incomparable Piety and Goodness, was
married to Charles Earl of Haddingtoun, by whom he had Issue John Earl of
Rothes, and Thomas Earl of Haddingtoun; and departing this Life 20th of August
1700, was succeeded by

John the present Earl of Rothes her Son and Heir, who, upon his coming into
the Measures of the Court, was by her Majesty Queen Anne, preferred to be Lord
Privy Seal in the 1704; but upon a Change in the Ministry, the Year thereafter,
he was removed, and the Duke of Queensberry made Lord Privy Seal; from
henceforth his Lordship was alwise a firm Friend to the Protestant Succession,
and when it came to take Place upon the Demise of Queen Anne, his Majesty King
George was pleased to make the Earl Vice Admiral of Scotland, in Place of the
Earl of Weems, and Lord Lieutenant of the County of Fife, in 1715, when the
Militia were first modeled under the Lieutenants.

He married Jean, Daughter of John Marquis of Tweedale, by whom he has John
Lord Lesly, Charles, Thomas, James, William, Andrew, Lady Jean, and Lady
Margaret.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Or, on a Bend Azure, Three Buckles of the first. 2d and
3d Or, a Lion Rampant Gules, surmounted of a Bend Sable. Supporters, Two
Griffins. Crest, a Demi-Griffin all Gules. Motto, Grip Fast.

Dukes of Rothsay.
DAVID Prince of Scotland, eldest Son of King Robert III. was the first
dignified by his Father with this Title in the 1399. He was a young Prince of
great Courage, and of a Spirit that desired to be in Action, yet it was his
Misfortune to indulge himself in Pleasures of all Kinds, in too exorbitant a
Proportion; and Complaints being daily carried to his Father of his Excesses,
the good old King, with a View to reclaim his Son, gave Orders to put him under
Arrest: And the ambitious Governor his Uncle, laying hold of this Opportunity
of cutting off all that stood in his Way to the Crown, did, in Pursuance of
these Orders, first arrest the Prince, and then confined him a close Prisoner
in the Castle of Faulkland, where, by his Uncle's Command, if we may believe
our Historians, he was starved to Death, Anno 1401: Since which Time the Prince
and Stewart of Scotland, the King's eldest Son is born Duke of Rothsay, Earl of
Carrick, and Lord of Renfrew.

KER, Duke of Roxburgh.
THE first of this noble Family who was advanced to the Peerage of this Realm,
was Sir Robert Ker of Cesfoord, Son and Heir of William Ker of Cesford, by
Janet his Wife, Daughter of James Douglas of Drumlanrig, who being from his
Youth much liked and favored by King James VI. was promoted by him, first to
be a Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and had the Honor of Knighthood conferred on
him at the Coronation of Queen Anne of Denmark, Anno 1590.

Sir Robert Ker was one of those Barons, who by his Majest's Appointment
accompanied him into England, at his first Entrance into that Realm, Anno 1603,
when he was honored with the Title of Lord Ker of Cesford, and the next
ensuing Year appointed one of the Commissioners for the Treaty of Union which
was then s^^ on Foot betwixt the Two Nations: A^^^ in 1605, he had a Grant of
the ^^solved Abbacy of K^^^^, which was then in the Crown, by the Forfaultu^e
of (...) Earl of Bothwell Charta in Pub. Arch.
; and continuing in great Favor and Esteem with King James, he was by his said
Majesty further honored with the Title of Earl of Roxburgh, 19th September
1616. This noble Earl was likewise very much in the good Graces of King Charles
I. by whom he was promoted to be Lord Privy Seal, Anno 1637, then void by the
Demise of Thomas Earl of Haddingtoun, which Office he held for the Space of
Twelve Years, till the 1649. He died in January 1650 Ibidem.
.

He married first Mary, Daughter of Sir William Maitland of Lethingtoun, by
whom he had Three Daughters.

Jean married to John Earl of Perth.

Isobel to James Viscount of Duddop.

Mary to James Halliburton of Pitcur, and thereafter to James Earl of S^uthesk.

His second Wife was Jean, Daughter of Patrick Lord Drummond, by whom he had
Henry Lord Ker, who died before his Father in 1643, leaving Issue by Margaret
his Wife, Daughter of William Earl of Errol, Three Daughters, Jean her
Grandfather's Heir both of his Estate and Honor, Anne married to John Earl of
Wigtoun, and Margaret to Sir Henry Innes of That-Ilk.

Jean Countess of Roxburgh, by the Destination and Appointment of the old Earl,
her Grandfather, did marry Sir William Drummond, the Earl of Perth's Son, her
own Cousin-German, who thereupon by the Conveyance of the Honor, was Earl of
Roxburgh. He died in the 1675 Ibidem.
, leaving Issue by the Countess his Wife aforesaid, Robert his Son and Heir,
John Lord Ballenden, and a Daughter Jean, married to Colin Earl of Balcarras.

Which Robert was one of the Lords of the Privy Council to King Charles the
Second. He was cast away aboard the Gloucester Frigate, waiting on his Royal
Highness the Duke of York by Sea from London to Scotland, 7th May 1682, leaving
Issue by Mary his Wife, Daughter of John Marquis of Tweedale, Three Sons,
Robert his Father's Successor, who died in his Travels abroad, on the 13th of
July 1696 Ibidem.
, John the present Duke of Roxburgh, and Colonel William Ker.

Which John being a young Nobleman of very great Parts and Learning, was by her
Majesty Queen Anne promoted to be one of the Principal Secretaries of State in
the 1704: And further, immediately before the Commencement of the Union of the
two Nations, of which his Lordship had been a most hearty Promoter, he was
raised to the Honor of Duke of Roxburgh, by Letters Patent, bearing Date 27th
April 1707. His Grace having been alwise a most sincere Friend to the
Protestant Succession in the House of Hannover; his Electoral Highness the Duke
of Brunswick, now his Majesty King George, reposed so much Confidence in his
Grace's Affection and Fidelity to his Interest, that he named him one of the
Lords of the Regency, which was the greatest Honor his illustrious Highness
could do the Duke, till he should come to the Crown of Great Britain.

His Grace married the Lady Mary Finch, Daughter of Daniel Earl of Nottingham,
Widow of William Marquis of Halifax, by whom he has Robert Marquis of Cesford.

ARMS.
Quarterly first, Vert. on a Chiveron betwixt Three Unicorn's Heads erazed
Argent, Three Mollets Sable. 2d and 3d Gules, Three Mascles, Or. Supporters Two
Savages wreathed about the Head and Loins, with Battons. Crest, an Unicorn's
Head erazed, Argent. Motto, Pro Christo and Patria dulce periculum.

HAMILTON, Earl of Ruglen.
THE first who was honored with this Title, was Lord John Hamilton, Third Son
of William and Anne, Duke and Duchess of Hamilton, whom King William created
Earl of Ruglen, 15th of April 1697.

He married first Anne, Daughter of John Earl of Cassils, by whom he had Issue,
a Son and Two Daughters,

William Lord Riccartoun.

Lady Anne.

Lady Susanna.

He married next the Lady Kennedy, the Relict of the Lord Kennedy, by whom he
has no Issue.

ARMS.
The quartered Coats of the Family of Hamilton, and in Surtout, the Paternal
Arms of Douglas. Supporters, Crest, and Motto the same as the Duke of Hamilton.

RUTHERFOORD, Lord Rutherfoord.
THIS Family is very ancient in the County of Roxburgh, where they have long
continued in great Reputation, and pr^duc'd Men of great Courage, and very
signal in their Fidelity to, and Service of the Crown. Sir Robert de
Rutherfoord in the English War, in the Time of King Edward I. appeared
eminently in the Interest of his Country, insomuch as his Memory ought to be
preserved and honored to Posterity. Richard Rutherfoord, Lord of That-Ilk,
made a very bright Figure in the Reign of King Robert III Charta in Rotulis
Roberti III.
, and James Rutherfoord of Rutherfoord was frequently employed by King James
II. in managing and concluding Treaties with England, as an Ambassador, and in
particular was one of those who concluded the Treaty with that Crown, Anno
1457. By Margaret his Wife, Daughter of....... Erskine of....... Ibidem.
, he had Richard, who died before himself, Thomas, with whom the Barony of
Edzerstoun remained as the Heir Male of the Rutherfoords, and Robert; and dying
Anno 1492, was succeeded by Richard his Grandson and Heir Ibidem.
, who dying soon thereafter, without any Issue of his Body, his Two Sisters
became Heirs to him; Helen the eld^r married to Sir John F^reman of Davene, Knight.
and after his Death to Andrew Rutherfoord of Hunthill, and Catharine to James
St^wart of Traquair Ibidem.
, and had Issue.

Of the Family of Rutherfoord the House of Hunthill was a Branch, as early as
the Time of King James I. Charta penes Dominum Rutherfoord.
, of whom again by a younger Brother, did Andrew Ratherfoord descend, who first
laid the Foundation of this Honor.

He was the Son of William Rutherfoord of Qu^relh^les, by Isobel his Wife,
Daughter of James Stewart of Traquair, who being a younger Son, he entered
early into the Life and Condition of a Soldier, in the French Service, where he
had the Reputation of a very good Officer, when he was yet in no higher Quality
of Command than of a Captain of Foot: But having alwise behaved himself with
great Courage and Vigilance, he was raised to the Degree of a Lieutenant
General. He served in that Army with singular Reputation for Courage and
Conduct till the Conclusion of the Peace betwixt the Two Crowns in 1659. Upon
the Restoration of King Charles II. General Rutherfoord came over to England,
with a very fair Reputation, and a very good Testimony from the French King;
whereupon his Majesty, to countenance his Merit, was pleased to create him a
Peer of Scotland, by the Title of Lord Rutherfoord, January 19th. 1661 Charta
in Pub. Arch.
, but having no Issue of his Body, the Honor was to his Heirs or Assignies, or
whomever he should name in the very Article of his Death. Soon after which the,
Lord Rutherfoord was made Governor of Dunkirk, and he managed that Trust so
much to the Satisfaction of the British Court, especially in the Sale of that
important Place to the French, which he transacted, that upon his coming over
to England, his Majesty, to express the due Sense of his Merit, and of his
acceptable Services, did raise him to the Honor of Earl of Teviot, and to the
Heirs Male of his Body, by Letters Patent, the 2d of February 1663 Ibidem.
, and shortly thereafter placed him in the Government of Tangier; but the
General enjoyed that Command very little Time, for within a few Months or
thereabout, after his Arrival there, making a sharp and bold Sally upon the
Moors, he and most of his Party were unfortunately cut off on the 3d of May
1664 English Annals by George Muretoun 1678.
, the Title of Lord Rutherfoord by his Latter-Will did devolve to Sir Thomas
Rutherfoord of Hunthill, who dying without Issue on the 14th of April 1668
Charta in Pub. Arch.
, was succeeded in the Honor of Lord Rutherfoord, by Archbald his Brother, who
likewise dying without any Issue of his Body, March 16th 1685 Ibidem.
, the Peerage fell to his Brother Robert now Lord Rutherfoord; who neither
having any Issue, has made over his Estate and Title to Thomas Rutherfoord of
That-Ilk, his Cousin, Brother and Heir apparent to Andrew Rutherfoord of
Edzerstoun, reserving the Honor and such a Provision for himself, as supports
him according to his Quality, during his Life.

RUTHVEN, Lord Ruthven.
SIR Thomas Ruthven of Freeland, was created Lord Ruthven by King Charles the
Second, in the 1651. And departing this Life 6th May 1674, left Issue by Isobel
his Wife, Daughter of Robert Lord Burleigh, David his Son and Heir, who died
unmarried in the 1704, and thereby the Honor became extinct; likewise Three
Daughters,

1 Anne married to Sir William Cunninghame of Cunninghame-Head, and has Issue;
again to William Cunninghame of Craigends, but had no Issue.

2 Isobel to Sir Francis Ruthven of Redcastle, and had Issue.

3 Jean, who was never married.

ABERNETHY, Lord Saltoun.
FROM the Family of Abernethy of Abernethy in Fife, did the Abernethies of
Saltoun fetch their Origin. William de Abernethy their Ancestor, obtained the
Lands of Rothiemay in the Time of King David II. for his good Services to the
Crown. They were very early ranked among the Peers, and in that Quality
flowrish'd in the Male Line, till the 1669, that Alexander Lord Abernethy of
Saltoun, then dying without Issue, the Honor devolved to his Nephew by his
Sister, Sir Alexander Fraser of Philorth.

FRASER, Lord Saltoun.
THE Paternal Ancestor of this noble Family, was Sir Alexander Fraser, Knight. who
in the Reign of King Robert II. obtained the Lands and Barony of Philorth by
the Marriage of Jean, second Daughter and Coheir of William Earl of Ross
Charta penes Dominum Saltoun.
, and from him did lineally descend Sir Alexander Fraser of Philorth, who
became Lord Saltoun on the Death of his Uncle aforesaid. He married Elizabeth,
Daughter of..... Seaton of Meldrum, by whom he had Alezander his Son and Heir
apparent, who died before himself, leaving Issue by Anne his Wife, Daughter of
William Earl of Lothian, a Son William, who succeeded his Grandfather in the
Honor, and married Margaret, Daughter of Dr. James Sharp, Archbishop of St.
Andrew's, by whom he had Alexander his Successor, William Fraser Advocate,
James Fraser Esquire likewise Three Daughters, Helen married to Sir James Gordon of
Park, Mary and Isobel, and departing this Life the 18th of March 1715, was
succeeeded by

Alexander his Son and Heir, who married Mary; Daughter of George Earl of
Aberdeen, by whom he has Issue. William Master of Saltoun.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Azure, Three Frazes Argent. 2d, Gules, a Lion rampant
Argent, 3d Argent, Three Pyles Gules. Supporters, Two Cherubims proper: Crest,
an Ostrich holding in her Beck a Horse Shoe, Motto, In God is All.

MACKENZIE, Earl of Seaforth.
AMong the many brave Scots-Men who signalized themselves for the Service of
their Country at the Battle of the Largs, in 1263, there was a Gentleman, a
Foreigner, one Colin Fitz Gerald, Son to the Earl of Kildare or Desmond, of the
Kingdom of Ireland, whose Courage and Valor on that Occasion was so singularly
remarkable, that King Alexander took him into his special Protection, and was
afterward pleased to bestow upon him the Lands of Kintail in Ross-Shire, pro
bono and fideli servitio, tam in Bello quam in Pace; and to be held by him in
liberam b^roniam, as the original Charter bears, dated from Kincardine, 9th of
January 1266 Original Charter of the Lands of Kintail, by King Alexander III.
to this Colino Hybernio, is in the Hands of the Earl of Seaforth, and was
kindly communicated to me by that noble Lord and excellent Antiquary the Earl
of Cromarty, who wrote an Essay on his own Name and Family of the Mackenzies,
which is in many Hands in M.S. The most exact Copy I have seen of these
Memo^^s, is in the Custody of Mr. John Mackenzie of Delvin, who very civily
gave me the Perusal of ^^ and allowed me to take Notes from it.
. From Kenneth, the Son of the first Colin, his Descendants are called
Mackenneths by the Highlanders, and Englished Mackenzie. This last Kenneth was
succeeded by a Son of the same Name, and he by Murdo, who is designed Filius
Kennethi, in a Grant which he had from King David II. of his Lands of Kintail,
in the Year 1360.

Alexander Mackenzie of Kintail his Heir and Successor in Descent in the Reign
of King James III. was looked on as a wise and prudent Man. It was to his
Conduct and Courage the reducing of that formidable Rebel John Earl of Ross,
was in a great Part owing: For which acceptable Service he had a Grant from the
Crown of the Lands of Strachonnan, Str^g^rvie, and several other of the Earl's
Lands, by a Charter under the Great Seal, 7th September 1477 Ibidem.
. By Agnes his Wife, a Lady of the Mackdougals, he had Kenneth his Successor,
and Two younger Sons, Duncan and Hector; of the first did the Mackenzies of
Logie and Hilton descend, and of the other sprang the Branch of the Mackenzies
of Garloch, all in the County of Ross. Which Kenneth was slain at the Battle of
Flowdoun with King James IV. the 9th of September 1513, leaving Issue by Agnes
his Wife, Daughter of Hugh Lord Lovat, John his Heir, Alexander, of whom came
the Branch of Davachmulnack, Roderick, the Root of the Mackenzies of Achilty,
and their Descendants, and Kenneth, of whom issued the Families of Suddy, Ord,
and Inveral^ll Ibidem.
, likewise a Daughter Agnes, married to Roderick Mackleod of the Lewis.

John Mackenzie the next Baron of Kintail, was, for his great Wisdom and
Knowledge, taken by King James V. into the Number of his Privy Council, and
much favored and esteemed by him. He married Elisabeth, Daughter of....
Stewart Charta in Rotulis Mar^ae Reginae, ad Annum 1543.
of...... and had

Kenneth his Successor, who married Elisabeth, Daughter of John Earl of Athole.
By her he had Colin his Son and Heir, and Roderick, who was the Author of the
Mackenzies of Reidcastle and Kincraig; likewise sundry Daughters, Janet married
to Alexander Mackdonald of Glengary, and again to Alexander Chisolm of Comer
Charta in Pub. Arch. ad Annum 1577.
, Agnes to Lauchlan Mackintosh of Dunachtane Ibidem.
,.... to David Ross of Balnagown, Elisabeth to Walter Urquhart of Cromarty
Ibidem.
, and had Issue, and..... to..... Innes of Innerbaackie, and departing this
Life the 6th of June 1568, was succeeded by

Colin his Son, who in the Reign of Queen Mary, after the Troubles broke out,
adhered firmly to that unfortunate Princess, was on her Behalf at the Battle of
Langside, for which he was obliged to take a Remission from the Regent; but
upon King James's accepting the Government on himself, he chose this Gentleman
to be of his Privy Council, and committed the quelling of several Insurrections
in the Highlands to him, which he performed with Courage, Dexterity, and
Success. He married first Barbara, Daughter of John Grant of That-Ilk Earl of
Cromarty's Essay on the Family of Seaforth.
, by whom he had Kenneth, thereafter Lord Kintail, Sir Roderick Mackenzie of
Ta^bat, Ancestor to the Earl of Cromarty, and Clin, of whom the Branch of
Kin^ock Ibidem.
; also Three Daughters, 1 M^rgaret married to Sin Lord L^vat. 2..... to
Lauchlan Maclean of Dowart, 3...... to Sir Donald Mackdonald of Slate, but had
no Issue. His second Wife was Mary, Daughter of..... Mackenzie of
Davachmulanack: By her he had a Son Alexander, of whom the Mackenzies of
Applecross, Cowl, and Assint are descended Ibidem.
, and departing this Life the 14th June 1594 Charta in Cancel. S ^. N. R.
, was succeeded by Kenneth his Son, who being a Person of great Spirit and
Courage, and of a fair Fortune, his Majesty King James VI. was pleased to raise
him to the Honor of Peerage by the Title of Lord Mackenzie of Kintail, on the
19th of November 1609 and giving Way to Fa^e in March 1611 Ibidem.
, left Issue by Anne his first Wife, Daughter of George Ross of Balnagown,
Colin his Successor; also Two Daughters, Barb^ra married to Donald Lord Rae,
and Janet to Sir Donald Mackdonald of Slate. Bart. and had Issue; also by
Isobel his second Wife, Daughter of Gilbert Ogilvie of Powrie, he had George
thereafter Earl of Seaforth, Thomas Mackenzie of Pl^scarty, Simon Mackenzie of
Lochslin, the Father of Sir George Mackenzie of Rose^augh; and a Daughter
Sibilla, married to John M^Leod of That Ilk.

Which Kenneth being a Nobleman of great Parts and signal Loyalty, was by the
special Favor of King James VI. honored with the Title of Earl of Seaforth,
by Letters Pa^ent, bearing Date the 3d of December 1623 Ibidem.
. He married Margaret, Daughter of Alexander Earl of Dunfermling, by whom he
had only Two Daughters, Jean, married first to John Lord Berindale, and after
to Alexander Lord Duffus; and Anne to Alexander Earl of Balcarras, and again to
Archbald Earl of Argyle; and dying on the 15th of April 1633 Ibidem.
, George his Brother of the Half-Blood succeeded him in his Estate and Honor.
This noble Earl, for his fi^m Adherence to King Charles I. had his Estate
sequstrated, and himself excommunicated, and forced to leave the Kingdom. After
the Murder of the King, he repaired to his Majesty King Charles II. while he
sojourned in Holland, who received him graciously, and made him Principal
Secretary of State for Scotland; in which honorable, though not at that ^ime
very profitable Employment. He died Anno 1651 Memoirs of the Family of
Seaforth, in the Dedication to the Lord Seaforth, by Dr. George Mackenzie, in
his first Volume of his Biography, who. I Am hopeful will ob^ige the Nation, by
writing at large the Memoirs of this noble Family, o^ which he has the Honor
to derive his Descent, and which I know the Dr. is so well supp^y^d with
M^terials for, and for that very Reason I have been the le^s particular in my
Account of this noble Family, than perhaps I might have been, presuming that
that more exact Work of his will (...) due Time be communicated to the World.
. He married Barbara, Daughter of Arthur Lord Forbes, by whom he had George his
Son and Heir, Mr. Colin Mackenzie, the Father of my excellent Friend the
learned Dr. George Mackenzie, who has already obliged the World with Two
Volumes of a Biography of his learned Countrymen; for whose great Worth and
Virtues I have that Esteem which he has from all the Lovers of his Country, and
very deservedly.

Kenneth Earl of Seaforth his Son, was very eminent in his L^yalty to King
Charles II. during the Usurpation; for he was so far from being discouraged by
the Sufferings of his Father for the Royal Family, that he did very firmly
adhere to, and support the Royal Cause as long as there was any to appear in
the Field for it; and when he was obliged to submit to the Powers that then
prevailed, he was committed to Prison, where with great Constancy and Firmness
of Mind, he endured a long and tedious Imprisonment, till he was relieved by
the Restoration of the King.

He married Isobel, Daughter of Sir John Mackenzie of Tarbat, and departing
this Life in the Month of December 1678, left Issue by his Wife aforesaid,
Kenneth his Successor, Master John Mackenzie of Assint, and Colonel Alexander
Mackenzie; likewise Four Daughters,

Lady Margaret married to James Lord Duff^s.

Lady Anne.

Lady Isobel to Roderick Mackleod of That-Ilk, but had no Issue; and again to
Sir Duncan Campbell of Lochenell.

Lady Mary to Alexander Mackdonald of Glengary, and had Issue.

Which Kenneth was one of the Lords of the Privy Council to King James VII. by
whom he was chosen one of the Knights Companions of the most noble Order of the
Thistle, Anno 1687, which that Prince was then pleased to revive. Upon the
Revolution, when his unfortunate Master was forced to retire into France, and
thence into Ireland, the Earl soon followed him thither; at which Time King
James did create him a Marquis; but that Honor is not allowed here. He married
the Lady Fran^es Herbert, Daughter of William Marquis of Powis, of the Kingdom
of England, by whom he had Kenneth his Successor, and a Daughter Mary married
to...... Careyll, Esquire and dying in January 1701. was succeeded in his Estate
and Honor by

Kenneth his Son, the present Earl; who is married with Mary, only Daughter and
Heir of Ni^olas Kennet of Coxhow, Esquire of the County of Northumberland.

ARMS:
Azure, a Dear's Head caboss'd Or. Supporters, Two Savages with Clubs, burning
on the Top. Crest, a Mountain in a Flame. Motto, Luceo non uro.

DOUGLASS, Earl of Selkirk.
LORD William Douglass, eldest Son of William first Marquis of Douglass, by his
second Wife Mary, Daughter of George Marquis of Huntly, was by King Charles I.
by Letters Patent, the 14th of August 1646, created Earl of Selkirk; and
thereafter, upon his marrying of Anne Duchess of Hamilton, he was created Duke
of Hamilton.

HAMILTON, Earl of Selkirk.
WILLIAM Duke of Hamilton, having in the Year 1687, resigned the Honor of Earl
of Selkirk, in the Hands of King James VII. his Majesty was pleased to confer
it again with the first Precedence on Lord Charles Hamilton, his Grace's second
Son, who had likewise the Command of his Borther the Earl of Arran's Regiment
bestowed on him, upon the Earl's getting the Lord of Oxford's Regiment; and his
Lordship having afterward complied, and been as far instrumental in the
Revolution, as giving his Voice in the Convention for settling the Crown on the
Prince and Princess of Orange, the Prince being declared King of Scotland, he
was pleased so far to reward the Earl's Merit, as to name his Lordship one of
the Gentlemen of his Bedchamber, as did also his Majesty King George, on his
Accession to the Crown in 1714.

SEMPLE, Lord Semple.
THIS noble Family is very ancient in the County of Renfrew, where they had
great Possessions, and held an Office which made them very considerable there;
for when the illustrious Family of the Stewarts, long before they came to the
Crown, held that County by the Tenure of a Barony, the Ancestors of this
ancient Family were their hereditary Bailiffs and Stewarts. The first
remarkable Person of this noble Family, at least that has come to my Knowledge,
was Robert de Semple, Seneschal. Baroniae de Renfrew, who is Witness in a Grant
which James Lord High Stewart of Scotland, Grandfather to King Robert II. made
Step^ano filio Nicolaii, de illa terra quae data fuit Patricio de Selvinland,
ubi ^quam de Grief cadit in aquam de Clyde Charta penes Robertum Hall de Fulbar.
. The same Robert was one of those heroic Persons, who was alwise firm to the
Interest of King Robert I. upon whose Accession to the Crown, he had a Grant
from that Prince, in Reward of his Merit, de omnibus Terris, cumpertinen quae
fuerunt Joannis de Baliolo, in tenemento de Largis Charta in Rotulis Roberti I.
. He was succeeded by William his Son, and he again by Sir Thomas Semple, the
first I have observed, who was designed Dominus de Elliotstoun, who seems to be
a Man of Mettle and Spirit, and a great Favorite w^^^ Robert Stewart of
Scotland, and Earl of Strathern, after King Robert II. as appears from many
Evidences, and particularly the Frequency of his Witnessing the Earl's
Donations to the Monastry of Paisley Chartulary o^ Pa^^^y.
. He left a Son John, who obtained from John Earl of Carrick, upon his Father's
coming to the Crown, the Lands and Barony of Glassord, of which, in the 4th of
King Robert II. Anno 1375, he had a Charter of Confirmation, under the Great
Seal, whereby the King ratifies Donationem illam quam Primogenitus noster
Joannes Comes de Carrick, fecit and concessit dilecto and fideli nostro Joanni
Simple, filio and haeredi D. Thomae Simple de Terris de Glasford, cum
advocatione Ecclesiae ejusdem. By...... Daughter of...... his Wife, he had John
his Son and Heir, and a Daughter Jean, married to Sir John Stewart, Sheriff of
Bute Charta penes Comitem de Bute
, and had Issue.

Which John made a very good Figure under King Robert III. and in the Regency
that ensued upon his Death, and was particularly employed in transacting the
Redemption of King James I. and when the Treaty was concluded, he was one of
those (...) who went to wait upon the King ^^ Durham to present his Duty to his
Majesty, and to congratulate his happy Restoration. He was succeeded by his Son

Sir Robert Semple of Elliotstou^, who received the Honor of Knighthood from
King James II. He had also from the same Prince a Grant of the Lands of
S^thennen on his own Resignation Charta in Pub. Arch.
, in which there is this remarkable Clause, Quae Terrae fuerunt quondam Joannis
ae Baliolo; from which I presume these Lands were given originally by King
Robert the Bruce, for some very notable and eminent Serv^^^ performed by Sir
Robert Semple against the Baliol, the King's Rival; the Particulars whereof
have not come to my Knowledge. This Sir Robert was succeeded by his Son,

Sir William Semple of Elliotstoun, who is the first designed Sheriff of
Renfrew, in the Reign of King James III Charta penes Dominum Semple.
, who by Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of..... of....... had

Sir Thomas his Son and Heir, who, upon the breaking out of the Troubles in the
Reign of King James III. adhered to that unfortunate Prince, and engaged in his
Service, in which he lost his Life with his Master, at the Battle of
Bann^ckburn, on the 10th of June 1488, leaving Issue Sir John his Successor;
likewise Two Daughters, Margaret married to Robert Crawfurd of Kilbirny Ibidem,
ad Annum 1505.
, and had Issue, and Marion to John Stewart of Glanderstoun, Son to John first
Earl of Lennox, and had Issue.

Which Sir John being a Person of excellent Parts; and standing highly in the
Favor of his Prince King James IV. was by him first dignified with the Title
of Lord Semple. He was very devoted to the Church, for from Motives which he
thought tended to a vance the Honor and Glory of Aimighty GOD, he made a very
noble Foundation of a Collegiate Church, near his own Castle of Semple, a
handsome large Fabric, which he endowed with many Lands and Tithes, for the
Support of a Provost and a Number of Prebends, who were pe^petually to perform
all the Divine Offices, Pro salute and prosperitate serenissimi Principis
Jacobi IV. Regis Scotorum, and Margaretae Reginae suae, nec non pro salute
Margaretae Colvil quondam sponsae suae, ettam pro salute animae suae, and
Margaratae Crichton sponsae modernae, omnium antecessorum and successorum, and
omnium fidelium defunctoru^ in perpetuum Ibidem.
.

As this noble Lord was alwise very faithful to his Prince in his Life, so it is
certain he went with him to the Battle of Flowdoun, where he was slain,
fighting gallantly in the Service of his Country, on the memorable 9th of
September 1513. After the Battle his Body was brought off the Field, and buried
in the Collegiate Church of Semple, where a Monument is erected over him,
embellished with his Arms, without any other Inscription, than signifying him
to be the Person there interred. His first Wife was Margaret, Daughter of Sir
Robert Colvil, Lord of Ochiltree, by whom he had Two Sons, William his
Successor, and G^bri^l Semple of Ladymure Ibidem.
the Ancest^r of the Semples of Cathcart. He married again Margaret, Daughter
of James Crichton of Ruthvendeny Charta penes me.
, Relict of Sir William Stirling of Keir, but by her he had no Issue.

William Lord Semple his Son, the next of this noble Family, was a Nobleman of
very good Parts, and of great Wisdom and Prudence, and alwise very well
esteemed both in the Court and in the Country. King James V. made him one of
the Lords of his Privy Council, and Justiciary within the Regality of Pa^sly
and the Abbots of that Monastry paid him all Manner of Honors and Respect,
particularly in the 1546, Mr. Hamilton the then Abbot, with the full and hearty
Concurrence and Approbation of the Convent, made him heritable Bailiff of their
Regality, which gave him a very great Interest and Influence in the Western
Parts, where he lived. He married first Margaret, Daughter of Hugh Earl of
Eglintoun, by whom he had Robert his Son and Heir, and David, Author of the
Semples of Craigbett Charta penes Dominum Semple.
, a Branch whereof settled in Spain above a Hundred Years ago, and are now very
considerable in that Kingdom, who still own with great Satisfaction their Scots
Original, and the Honor they have to be derived from this illustrious House;
besides, these Sons, he had also several Daughters, Helen married to Allan Lord
Cathcart. and Marion to Sir John Stirling of Keir. His second Wife was Dame
Elizabeth Arnot, Widow of Sir Robert Colvil of Ochil^ree; and his Third and
last Wife was Marion, Daughter of H^gh Montgomery of Haslehead; but by neither
of these had he any Issue; and dying in the Year 1548, was succeeded by

Robert his Son and Heir, who being a Man of great Courage and Magnanimity, did
eminently signalize his Valor at the Battle of Pinky, in the Service of his
Country, where he had the Misfortune to be taken Prisoner, and sent to England,
where he remained till the Peace was concluded betwixt the Two Realms.

Upon the breaking out of the Civil War in the Reign of Queen Mary, though this
Lord was a great Zealot for the Roman Catholic Religion, and very devoted to
the Queen yet no Body more heartily concurred in the Preservation of the young
Prince, King James, or contributed more to settle and establish him on the
Throne; and it ought not to be forgotten, that the brought to the Battle of
Langside, to the Assistance of the Earl of Marray the Regent, a greater Number
of his Retainers, and better appointed than any other Lord on the King's Side,
for his Interest and the Reputation of his Family in the Country was very
great. In Consideration of these his good Services to the young King, the
Regent bestowed on him the dissolved Abbacy of Paisley, then in the Crown by
the Forfaulture of Lord Claud Hamilton, who held that Benefice in commendam
Ibidem.
. He married first Isobel, Daughter of..... Hamilton of..... by whom he ^ad
Robert Master of Semple, who died in the Lifetime of his Father, A^no 1569,
Andrew, commonly called Master of Semple, of whom descended the Semples of
Br^ntshiel and M^llbank; also sundry Daughters,

Grisel married to James Hamilton of Stanhouse, and had Issue.

Margaret to John Hamilton of Broomhill, and again to John Whiteford of
That-Ilk.

Janet to Hugh Montgomery of Haslehead, and had Issue.

.... to Alexander Fle^ming of Barochan, and had Issue.

His Second Wife was Elizabeth Cairlyle, an English Lady, by her he had John
Semple of Bell^rees, and Three Daughters, Jean married to James Lord Ross, and
had Issue. Gri^el to John Blair of That-Ilk, and had Issue. Dorothy to Robert
Montgomery of Skelmurly, and had Issue; and dying very aged in the End of the
1571, his Estate and Honor devolved on

Robert his Grandson, only Son of Robert Master of Semple, by Barbara his Wife,
Daughter of Archbald Preston of Valleyfield Charta pe^e^ Domi^um Semple.
, who being young at his Grandfather's Death, the Earl of Morton, the Regent,
took him into his immediate Care and Tuition. He was far from being of that
Earl's Principles in Politics, for he was alwise a most devoted Servant of the
Crown; and though he was of that Religion that does not dispose Men to be the
quietest Subjects, yet when other Roman Catholic Lords entered into a
Combination with the King of Spain, to overturn the Reformed Religion in
Scotland, the Lord Semple would never meddle in any Degree with them, which
made the King alwise after love and esteem him, as a Man to be depended on in
Point of Honor and Loyalty. In the 1596, his Majesty was pleased to send him
Ambassador Extraordinary into Spain; in which Negotiation he behaved with great
Prudence, and with the concurrent Testimony of his being a very wise Man; and
though King James had a great Value of him, yet he could never employ him in any
of the Civil Offices of the State, because of his Religion, which he never
dissembled; which, considering his Parts, few would have discharged with
greater Sufficiency.

He married first Agnes, Daughter of Hugh Earl of Eglingtoun, by whom he had
Hugh his Successor; also Four Daughters,

1 Anne married to Sir Archbald Stewart of Castle^^isk, and had Issue.

2 Barbara to Sir Coll Laumont of I^^eryne, and had Issue.

3 Grisel to John Logan of Raiss, and had Issue.

4 Margaret to Robert Brishane of Bishoptoun, and had Issue.

Secondly, he married Dame Joanna de Evieland, a Lady of the Low Countries, by
whom he had Sir William Semple of Letterke^y, who settled in the Kingdom of
Ireland, and left one Daughter his Heir, married to Sir Francis Hamilton, Knight.
This Lord dying on the 25th of March 1611 Charta in Pub. Arch.
, was succeeded by

Hugh his Son, who was a Nobleman of confessed Parts and Abilities, yet because
of his Religion, he had no Opportunity to show them in any other Capacity than
a private Gentleman. He lived in great Splendour and Magnificence; was alwise
well attended with a very numerous and noble Equipage when he went abroad, yet
being a frugal Man, he left his Estate in a very opulent Condition at his
Death, which his Successors soon ^ound a Way to diminish. He married first
Anne, Daughter of James Earl of Abercorn, by whom he had one Daughter, Marion
married to Sir George Preston of Valleyfield: and next, Elizabeth, Daughter of
Francis Earl of Errol,; by her he had Fran^is his Son and Heir, Robert his
Brother's Successor in the Honor, Archbald Semple of Dikehead, James who
entered into a religious Order abroad; also Two Daughters, Elizabeth married to
William Lord Mordingtoun, and Jean to William Menzies of Pitfoddel, and had
Issue; and giving Way to Fate in 1637, was succeeded by

Francis his Son, who married Elizabeth. Daughter of George Earl of Winton; but
dying without Issue on the 8th of Novomber 1644, his Estate and Honor devolved
on

Robert his Brother, who married Anne, Daughter of James Lord Mordingtoun,
Brother to William first Marquis of Douglass, by whom he had Robert Master of
Semple, who died in his 18th Year, a very hopeful Youth, Franc^s his Successor;
likewise several Daughters, Anne married to Francis Abercrombie of Feternier,
and J^^n to Alexander Sinclair o^ R^s^^n, and had Issue; and departing this
Life 8th of September 1675, was succeeded by

Francis his Son and Heir, who after the Death of his Father, was by the Care
of his noble Relations educated in the Protestant Religion; so that when he
came to Age, he took his Place in Parliament, where hi^ Ancestors had never sat
from the Time of the Reformation of Religion for above a Hundred Years. He
married Grisel, Daughter of Sir Archbald Primerose of Dalmeny, Ancestor to the
Viscount of Primerose; but dying without Issue in the Year 1684, his Estate and
Dignity came to

Anne Lady Semple his Sister and Heir, who being married to Francis Abercromby
of Feterne^r, as aforesaid, he was, by Reason of his Marriage with this noble
Lady, by King James VII. dignified with the Title of Lord Glassfurd, by Letters
Patent, 25th July 1685, for his own Lifetime, in regard the Honor of Semple
was to descend to the Lady's Heirs; and which it actually did upon her Demise
in the 1691, on Francis Lord Semple, her elde^t Son, a young Man of the most
eminent and sublime Parts, who, to the great Joy of his Relations, did quit the
Superstitions of the Church of Rome, in which he had been educated, and
embraced the Protestant Religion, as practiced in this Church, and took his
Place in the first Parliament of Queen Anne, Anno 1703; in which and all the
subsequent Sessions thereof, he behaved himself with singular Honor and
Integrity, for though he was under very great Temptations, and at the same Time
had very considerable. Offers made him, if he would comply with the Measures of
the Court, in Relation to the Union, yet nothing could corrupt him, or make him
swerve from what he thought was the Interst of his Country; so that he gave the
Union all the Opposition that was in his Power, and voted against every Article
of it; and he was wont to say, That though the Union was attended with no other
Inconveniency, than the making the Peers elective, he wondered very much how
any of that Rank, could be for it, for being all Peers by Right of Inheritance;
their being made elective, he took to be a divesting them of their Peerage,
because not being sure of being always chosen to every Par^iament of Great
Britain, they consequently must lose, when left out, the Benefit of sitting in
Parliament, what was ever deemed an inseparable Right of the Peerage. Beside
his Lordship there were also several other younger Children, Captain Robert
Semple who was killed abroad, John Semple Esquire Captain H^gh Semple, and a
Daughter Mrs. Jane.

ARMS.
Argent, a Cheveron, Checkie, Gules and Argent betwixt Three Bugles Sable,
Garnished of the Second, supported by Two Ratches Or, colored Gules. Crest, a
Stag's Head, Coupe Proper. Motto, Keep Tryst.

SINCLAIR, Lord Sinclair.
IT is plain from many Evidences, that William Sinclair of Newburgh was the
eldest Son of William Earl of Orkney and Caithness by Elizabeth his Wife,
Daughter of James Earl of Douglass; but why he had so small a Share of his
Father's Estate, I cannot assign the Reason precisely. It Is said he was a very
profuse Man, and for that Reason his Father gave his Estate and the Title of
Earl to a younger Son of his own by a Second Wife, and the Barony of Roslyn to
another Son of the same Marriage, Sir Oliver Sinclair. All this is plain from a
Contract dated the 9th of February 1481, betwixt William Sinclair Son and Heir
of the deceast William Earl of Caithness, and Henry Sinclair Son and Heir of
the said William, on the one Part, and Sir Oliver Sinclair Brother to the said
William, on the other; whereby Sir Oliver resigns to the said William the Lands
of Dysart, Cousland and Ravenscraig; on the other Hand, the said William, and
Henry his Son and Heir apparent, make over in the same Manner to the said Sir
Oliver and his Heirs, all Right, Claim and Title, which they may have to the
Lands of Roslyn, Pentland and Pentland Moor, Morton, Mortonhall and
Herbert-shire. Moreover the said Sir Oliver obliges himself in Time to come to
honor and worship the said William, as effeirs and accords him to do to his
elder Brother; and that if there shall be any Debate or Competition betwixt the
said William and William his younger Brother, for the Earldom of Caithness, in
that Case to stand neuter between them Charta penes D. Sinclair, which was in
the Hands of William Wilson, one of the Under-Clerks of the Session; a Person
well seen in the Antiquities of his Country.
. This William married Elizabeth Daughter of George Earl of Rothess, by whom he
had Henry Sinclair of Dysart, Knight. who was created Lord Sinclair by King James
the IV. in 1489, and declared Chief of the Blood, and the Heir of William Earl
of Caithness his Grandfather. He married Margaret Daughter of Patrick Earl of
Bothwell, by whom he had William his Son and Heir, and Two Daughters, Katharine
married to Sir David Weems of that Ilk Charta in Pub. Archivis ad Annum 1512.
, and Margaret to James Lord Ogilvie. This Lord was slain at Flowdoun the 9th
of September 1513.

Which William married Eliz. Daughter of William Earl Marischal Ibidem.
, by whom he had Henry his Son and Heir, who, by Janet his Wife, Daughter of
the Lord Lindsay, had James Master of Sinclair, who married Isobel Daughter of
Andrew Earl of Rothes, by whom he had James Lord Sinclair, who succeeded his
Grandfather in his Estate and Honor, on his Death in the 1601 Ibidem.
; but he dying without Issue, was succeeded by Patrick his Brother and Heir,
who married Margaret Daughter of Sir John Cockburn of Ormistoun, by whom he had
John his Heir, and Elizabeth married to Sir Duncan Campbell of Glenurchy, and
had Issue, and dying in 1615, was succeeded by

John his Son and Heir, who married Mary Daughter of John 1st Earl of Weems, by
whom he had only one Daughter Katharine, his sole Heir, on whom he settled his
Estate and his Title. She married John Sinclair, eldest Son and Heir apparent
of Sir John Sinclair of Hermiestoun, by whom he had Henry the present Lord
Sinclair, who married Grissel Daughter of Sir James Cockburn of Cockburn, by
her he had Issue, John Master of Sinclair, Col. James Sinclair, Capt. William
Sinclair, Henry and Matthew.

1 Grissel, married to John Paterson of Prestonhall.

2. Katharine, to Sir John Erskine of Alva.

3. Mary, to Sir William Baird of Newbyth.

4. Elizabeth.

5. Anne.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th, Azure, a Ship at Anchor, her Sails trussed up within a
DoubleTressure flowered and counterflower'd Or, 2d and 3d. Azure, a Ship under
Sail Or, over all in a surtout Argent. a Saltyre ingrail'd Sable. Supporters,
Two Griffins. Crest, a Swan expanded proper. Motto, Fight.

SOMERVILE, Lord Somervile.
THE Family of Somervile, though originally extracted from Normandy, is very
ancient among us; William de Sumerville is a common Witness to the Grants of
King David I. to the Religious of Dumfermling and Melross. They were Barons of
very great Account, and possessed of a fair Estate in the Reign of King
William, in the County of Lanerk and elsewhere. Willielmus de Sumervilla,
consilio Willielmi Patris sui, gave to the Episcopal See of Glasgow, Ecclesiam
de Carnuad, i. e. Carnwath, pro salute Animae suae and Haeredum in perpetuum
Excerpt of the Chartulary of Glasgow penes me.
. Sir John Somervile was very signal in his Fidelity to, and Service of the
Crown in the Time of King R^bert I. and Sir Thomas de Somerville was no less
faithful to King Davi^ Bruce his Son; for when a Treaty was set on Foot to
relieve the King, after he had been taken Prisoner at the Battle of Durham,
Willi^m de Somerville, Sir Thomas's Son and Heir, was named one of the Hostages
for the Ransom Rymer ad Annum 1357.
of the King. Another Sir Thomas Somervile of Carnwath was one of the
Commissioners on the Treaty for the Redemption of King James I. and one of the
Hostages for the Ransom; which is a further Manifestation of the Luster of this
noble Family, that in those great Transactions, in which they bore so good a
Part, no other were employed but such as were Possessors of very considerable
Estates, and of the most unblemished Honor and Reputation. This Sir Thomas
obtained the Ba^ony of Cam^ethan by the Marriage of Janet Daughter of Sir
Alexander S^ewart of Darnly In Pu^^ Archivis.
, which was afterward given off as a Patrimony by John Lord Somervile, to Sir
J^hn his Son by a Second Marriage with Mary, a Lady of the Family of the
Baill^es, who came afterward by the Favor of King James IV. and his own Virtue
and Industry, to raise a great Fortune, which in Du^y, as well as Gratitude,
made him run the Fat^ of his bountiful Master, with whom he lost his Life at
the Battle of Flowdoun, 9th September 1513. His lineal Heir in a direct
Succes^ion is Somervile of Corhouse.

The elder Branch of the Somerviles, the Family of Somervile itself being so
long worn out, and their Estate dispersed, their Writs are in different Hands,
which I have not had Access to see; so that I cannot exactly t^ace them till we
come down to Hugh Lord Somervile in King James ^he VI's Time; who being
provoked by the Folly and Insolence of his eldest Son Gilbert Master of
Somervile, resolved to dispose of his Fortune to his other Children, that
little should have accompanied the Honor after his Death: And therefore to do
all he could in a prudent Way to preserve, as far as in him lay, the Memory of
his Family, he made over a good Part of his Estate to Hugh Somervile of Drum
his Second Son, viz. The Lands of Drum, Gilmerton and Gutters, Anno 1593 Ibidem,
, and the old Man was not disappointed in his eldest Son; for in few Years. by
an Excess in his Way of Living, he so entirely consumed the whole Fortune that
descended to him, that when at his Death he was forced to leave the Honor to
his younger Brother, having no Male Child of his own to inherit it, he left
nothing to him to support it, which made his Brother decline to take on him the
Title; though his Descendents have undoubted Right in Blood, Somervile of Drum,
to make Use of it, when they find a proper Season, though it has been neglected
ever since the 1618, that the last Gilbert Lord Somervile died.

CARNEGY, Earl of Southesk.
THIS noble Family were anciently Proprietors of the Lands of Balenherd, in the
County of Forfar, which was for a long Time possessed by them. In the Reign of
King David the II. Walterus de Maulia then made a Grant Johanni Filio and
Haeredi quondam Joannis filii Cristini de Belenherd, of the Lands of Carynegy
in baronia de Panmure, infra vic. de Forfar, from whence he took the Surname of
Carnegy; for the Charter has these remarkable Words, Tenend. and habend. eidem
Joanni de Carnegy filio and haeredi praedicti quondam Joannis filii Joannis
filii Cristini filii Joannis de Belenherd, and haeredibus suis in feudo and
haereditate of the Granter Sir Walter Maule, which was confirmed under the
Great Seal of King David II. but the precise Time is not set down ^ad. Collect.
MS.
. Duthacus de Carnegy, a Descendent from him, did in the 1401. acquire a Part
of the Lands of Kinnaird from Richard Air, and thereafter on the 1st of
February 1409 Charta in Pub. Archivis.
, purchased the other full Half of the Lands of Kinnaird from Mariota de
Kinnaird, which was the Title of his Successors till they were raised to the
Honor of Peerage. This Gentleman was killed at the Battle of Harlaw in 1411,
and was succeeded by

Walter his Son and Heir, who under the Sense of his Duty to his Sovereign King
James II. joined the Earl of Huntly against the Lindsays at the Battle of
B^^chen, which was fought on the 1st of May 1452; but how soon the Earl of
Huntly was obliged to march homeward in Defense of his own Country, which was
invaded and overrun by the Earl of Murray, the Earl of Crawford harassed all
those that had appeared against him; and among others the Lord of Kinnaird,
whose House he burnt, and therein all his Writs and Evidents were miserably
consumed Charta penes C. de Southesk.
, which perhaps is one Reason why the Connection betwixt the first John de
Carnegy and Duthack Carnegy of Kinnaird, is not so clear and distinct as might
be wished. He died in the 1479, and was succeeded by his Son,

John de Carnegy of Kinnaird, who on the 4th of November 1479, had a Grant from
David Earl of Crawford his Cousin, of a Liferent out of the Earl's Barony of
Glenesk Ibidem.
, and dying in the 1508, left

John his Son and Heir, who was slain at the Battle of Flowdoun with King James
IV. 9th September 1513, leaving Issue by.... Vauss his Wife, Daughter of.....
Vauss of...... Robert his Heir, and a Daughter Margaret, married to William
Maule of Boath, Son of Sir Thomas Maule of Panmure, and had Issue.

Which Robert being a Gentleman of great Parts and Abilities, was promoted by
the Duke of Chattlerault the Governor to be one of the Senators of the College
of Justice the 7th of July 1547 Ibidem.
, and the next ensuing Year was sent Ambassador to England, to treat about the
Redemption of the Earl of Huntly the Lord Chancellor, who had been taken
Prisoner at the Battle of Pinkie, and upon his Return had the Honor of
Knighthood conferred on him.

In the 1551, the Governor reposing great Confidence in Sir Robert's Abilities,
was pleased to send him upon a solemn Embassy to France, when the French King
first discovered to him the Design he had that the Duke of Chattlerault should
resign the Regency in Favors of the Queen Mother of Scotland, which was
afterward brought about to the general Satisfaction of the whole Nation, in
which Sir Robert Carnegy, whom all Men knew to have a very great Interest with
the Duke, had a very considerable Hand Charta penes C. de Southesk.
. He was again in the Year 1555, together with Sir John Ballanden of Auchinoul,
sent Plenipotentiaries to England, to conclude a Treaty about Commerce and
Trade, which was settled to the general Satisfaction of both Nations; and Two
Years thereafter Buchanan and Lesly.
, he was one of the Commissioners sent to England to treat with that State
about the keeping of a firm and lasting Peace betwixt the Two Nations Rymer's
Foedera A^gliae, etiam Charta penes C. de Southesk.
, and which was inviolably preserved for many Years thereafter. Likewise I find
Sir Robert Carnegy and Mr. David Borthwick of Lochhill were sent over to France
in the 1559, from the Lords of the Congregation, to wait on the Queen their
Sovereign, to endeavor to remove the Prejudice she seemed to entertain against
them and their Proceedings; but what was the Success of this Negotiation, I
have not been able to discover. He died in a good advanced Age, on the 5th of
January 1565 Ibidem,
, leaving Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of.... Guthry of Lunan in vic.
de Forfar Ibidem.
, Sir John his Successor, Mr. David Carnegy of Coll^thy, John Carnegy of
Leuchland, Mr. Robert Carnegy Preceptor of the Maisen Diu of Brichen, James, of
whom the Branch of Balmachie, Hercules of Cookstoun, and Mr. William Carnegie
of Futhie; also five Daughters.

Margaret, married to Sir James Scrimzeour of Duddop, Constable of Dundee
Ibidem.
, and had Issue.

Helen, to William Lundie of Benholm, and again to William Turring of Foveran.

Elizabeth, to Andrew Arbuthnot of That-Ilk, Ancestor to the Viscount of
Arbuthnot.

Katharine, to David Ramsay of Balmain, and had Issue.

Isobel, to..... Gordon of Glenbucket.

Sir John Carnegy was a Gentleman of great Parts, and a firm and steadfast
Friend to Queen Mary, when she fell into her Troubles; and her Majesty had so
great an Esteem of his Fidelity and Prudence, that in the 1570, when a
Cessation was obtained by the Bishop of Ross, she wrote to Sir John Carnegy,
craving his Advice thereupon. He married first Agnes, Daughter of David Wood of
Craig, Comptroller of Scotland in the Reign of King James the V. by whom he had
only one Daughter, married to Patrick Kinnaird of That-Ilk, and had Issue. 2
dly, Dame Margaret Keith, and dying without Issue Male, his Estate devolved to

Mr. David Carnegy of Colluthy his Brother, who being bred to the Law, and a
Person of good Reputation for Wisdom and Integrity, was by K. James VI. named
one of the Senators of the College of Justice, and in the 1595, appoi^ted one
of the Commissioners of the Treasury: All which Offices he held till his Death,
April 9th 1598. Bishop Spotswood gives this Character of him, He was, says that
Reverend Author, a wise, peaceable and so^er Man, in good Cr^^^t and Estimation
with the King, and taken into his Priv^ Counc^l, for his Skill and Knowledge in
Civil Affairs. He married first El^z. Daughter and Heir of William Ramsay of
Collut^y, by whom he had Two Daughters, Margaret, married to William Dundass of
Feinzies Charter of Alien^tion by Margaret Carnegy, one of the Two Daughters
and Heirs of Elizabeth Ramsay of Colluthy, with Consent of William Dundass of
Feinzies her Spouse, of the Lands of Coliuthy, to Mr. David Carnegy her Father,
in the Public Records Anno 1582.
, Elizabeth to John Inglis of Tarvet Charta penes C. de Southesk.
. After the Death of his first Wife, he married again Eupham Daughter of Sir
DavidWeems of That-Ilk, by whom he had David his Successor, Sir John Carnegy of
Ethie, Ancestor to the Earl of Northesk, Sir Robert Carnegie of Dunich^n, Sir
Alexander Carnegy the First of the Carnegies of Bo^ymoon; like wise Three
Daughters.

1 Agnes, married to Alexander Falconer of Halkertoun Ibidem.
, and had Issue.

2 Jean, to James Carmichael of Balmeadie Ibidem.
, and had Issue.

3 Eupham, to Robert Graham of Morphie.

Which David being by the Care of his Father, though his eldest Son, bred a
Lawyer, was by King James VI. preserred to be one of the Senators of the
College of Justice, and by Letters Patent, bearing Date 24th of April 1616,
raised to the Honor of Lord Carnegy of Kinnaird, having served King James with
great Fidelity, King Charles I. had a very good Opinion of him, as a very wi^e
Man; and therefore was graciously pleased to create him an Earl, by the Title
of Earl of Southesk, by Letters Patent bearing Date at Holyroodho^se the 22d of
June 1633 Ibidem.
. In the Preamble to the Patent, the eminent and remarkable Services of Sir
Robert Carnegy his Grandfather to Queen Mary, and in the Service of his
Country, and the Services of his own Father to King James, are very fully
illustrated and set forth: When the Troubles broke out in that Reign, he
approved himself a very faithful and loyal Subject to his Majesty, for which he
was imprisoned; which the King particularly complained of in his Expostulation
with the leading Men of the Covenant Nalson's Collections, Vol. 1. Page 275.
. Thereafter when the Times grew worse, he lived retired at his Seat in the
Country, keeping his Heart and Affections entire for the King: But all this
Caution was not sufficient to secure him from Trouble; for when Cromwell
prevailed, and made himself Protector, he very arbitrarily fined the old Earl
of Southesk in Three thousand Pound, for no other Reason but wishing well to
the King, and being inclined to the Monarchy. He married Margaret Daughter of
Sir David Lin^say of Edzel, by whom he had Four Sons and Six Daughters,

1 David Lord Carnagie, who died long before his Father on the 29th of October
1633 Bal^our's Annals MS.
, leaving Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Thomas Earl of Haddingtou^,
only Two Daughters, Margaret, married to Gavin Earl of Carnwath, and Magdalene
to Sir Gideon Ba^llie of Lochend, and thereafter to Sir John Crawford of
Kilbirny, Ancestor to the present Viscount of Garnock, and had Issue.

2 Sir James Car^agie, his Father's Successor in the Honor.

3 Sir John Carnagie of Craig.

4 Sir Alexander Carnagie of Pittarrow.

Lady Margaret the eldest Daughter was married to William Earl of Dalhousie.

Lady Agnes, the 2d, to James 1st Lord Abercromby.

Lady Katharine, the 3d, to John 1st Earl of Traqua^^.

Lady Marjory, the 4th, to William Haliburton of Pitcur, and after that to
Robert Viscount of Arbuthnot.

Lady Elizabeth, the 5th, to Sir Andrew Murray Lord Balvaird.

Lady Magdalene, the 6th, to James 1st Marquis of Montrose.

James Earl of Southesk his Son and Successor, was a Person of eminent Loyalty
to King Charles I. and his Majesty was so fully pleased and satisfied of the
Fidelity and Affection of this noble Lo^d to his Interest, that he was one of
those for whom his Majesty desired a safe Conduct, to give him a clear
Information of the State of Scotland, in order to compose the unhappy
Differences that had arisen among those who on the Matter all equally wished
well to the King; but the Demand was refused, by a particular Resolve by the
Lords and Commons, on Pretense that he was a Prisoner in England Walker's
Treaty at the Isle of Wight, Page 25.
, but the true Reason was, The Earl was a wise Man, and would have proposed and
advised moderate Courses, which the Leading Men in both Houses were very much
disinclin'd to. He lived in a private Manner in the Country during the
Usurpation; but upon the Restoration of the King, he was named one of the
Lords of the Privy Council, and had the Gift renewed to him and his Son for
their joint Lives, which had been formerly given by King Charles I. to the old
Earl, this Lord's Father, of the principal Sheriff-ship of Forfar-shire, then
in the Disposal of the Crown, by the Surrender of that Office by the Lord Gray
in the former Reign. This noble Earl married Mary Daughter of Robert 1st Earl
of Roxburgh, by whom he had Robert his Successor; likewise Two Daughters, Jean
married first to James Murray Earl of Annandale, and after to David Viscount of
Stormont, and Katharine to Gilbert Earl of Errol; and departing this Life in
the Month of January 1669, was succeeded by

Robert his Son, who, after he had been nobly educated at Home, for his further
Improvement traveled abroad into France, Italy, and other Parts, where he
received great Respect from the Princes themselves of those respective
Countries, particularly Lewis the XIV. made him Captain of one of the Companies
of the Scots Guards in France Commission under the Great Se^^ of France, in the
Custody of the Earl of Southesk, June 24th, 1659.
. After his Return, his own Prince King Charles II. named him Colonel of the
Militia of Forfar shire, and made him a new Grant of the Office of High Sheriff
of the County of Forfar, in which his Son the Lord Carnagie was like wise
included, by a Commission bearing Date at Windsor 29^h of April 1682. He
married the Lady Anne, eldest Daughter of William Duke of Hamilton, by whom he
had Charles his Son and Heir, and William a young Gentleman of great Hopes and
Expectations, who was unfortunately killed in his Travels abroad; and the Earl
himself dying on the 19th of February 1688, was succeeded in his Estate and
Honor, by

Charles his Son, whose Principles in no Degree suiting to the Times after the
Revolution, he chose to live retiredly in the Country, demeaning himself always
with great Firmness of Temper, and inviolable Adherence to the Interest he had
heretofore heartily espoused. He married Mary Daughter of Charles Earl of
Lauderdale, by whom he had only

James the present Earl of Southesk, who married Margaret eldest Daughter of
James Earl of Galloway, by whom he has James Lord Carnagie his Son and Heir.

ARMS.
Or. an Eagle displared Azure, becked and Membred Gules. Supporters, Two Gray
Hounds, Argent. Colored Gules. Crest, a Thunderbolt. Motto, Dead GOD.

LINDSAY, Lord Spainzie.
THE First who enjoyed this Title was Sir Alexander Lindsay, a younger Son of
the Earl of Crawford, who being one of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber to King
James VI. and sometime a great Favorite, was on the 6th of May 1590, created
Lord Spainzie: He was assassinated by the Lord of Edzle in 1607, leaving Issue
by Jean his Wife, Daughter of John Lord Glamis, Widow of Robert Douglass of
Lochlevin, and of Archibald Earl of Angus, Alexander his Son and Heir, who
served the King of Sweden long in Germany in very high Commands, with great
Valor and Courage. He married Margaret Daughter of George Earl of Kinno^l, and
dying in 1647, left Issue by his Wife foresaid, George his Son and Heir, who
married Margaret Daughter of John Earl of Northesk; but dying without Issue in
1670, the Honor came to an End with himself.

STEUART, Lord St. Colme.
THE Ancestor of the Lord St. Colme was Sir James Steuart of Beith, a younger
Brother of the Lord Ochiltree, who having long served King James V. in very
eminent Commands, and with Honor and Success, was made Captain of the Castle
of Down in the 1534 and dying on Whitsunday 1547, left Issue, James and Henry,
of whom branched the Steuarts of Burray in Orkney Charta penes me.
Which James, though his Father's Firstborn, being educated in his Youth for the
Service of the Church, was made Commendator of St. Colme, on the Surrender of
Henry Abbot of that Monastry, Anno 1543 State Letters during the Reign of King
James V. MS.
. Upon the Reformation he renounced Popery, and embraced the Protestant
Religion; and being a wise Man, and of great Industry and Sagacity in Business,
King James the VI. when he came to Age, made him Collector-General of his
Revenue, and erected his Abbacy of St. Colme to himself in a Temporal Lordship,
and created him a Peer by the Title of Lord Down in 1581. He married Margaret
Daughter of Archbald Earl of Argyle, by whom he had James his eldest Son, who
became Earl of Murray by the Marriage of Margaret the Daughter and Heir of
James Earl of Murray the Regent, and thereby the Honor of Lord Down, which was
in his Person, was suppressed as a distinct Peerage, and Henry, to whom his
Father gave the erected Lordship of St. Colme; also Two Daughters, Mary married
to Sir John Weems of That-Ilk, and Jean to Simon Lord Lovat; and departing this
Life on the 20th of July 1590, was succeeded in the Estate of St. Colme by
Henry his Son, who was by the special Favor of King James created a Peer by
the Title of Lord St. Colme, Anno 1611 Charta in Pub. Archivis.
, and dying the 12th of July 1612, left a Son, James Lord St. Colme, upon whose
Demise the Honor expired, and the Estate went to the Earl of Murray.

DALRYMPLE, Earl of Stair.
ALL Antiquaries are agreed, that the most ancient Sirnames are local; the Era
we reckon they were first hereditarily affi^'d to Families, at least, with us,
was in the Reign of King David I. for before that the most eminent Persons, we
find, are distinguished either by some personal Appellative, or Patronymically,
by the Name of the Father, as is clear from the most ancient Writs that are
extant, and of which many Instances could here be given: And that which further
confirms this Opinion is, That the very first Sirnames are all taken from
Lands, as Douglass, Hume, Crawford, Cathcart, Dalrymple, etc. all which have
been assumed from their own Lands by the then Proprietars, when hereditary
Appellations became customary.

The First using this Surname is Adam de Dalrymple, who was possessed of the
Barony of Dalrymple in Air-shire in the Time of King Alexander III. There is a
Charte^ in the Rolls of King Robert II. the first Year of his Reign, Anno 1371,
ratifying a ^^ant which Malcolm filius Gilchrist filius Adae de Dalrymple made
of the Half of the Barony of Dalrymple to Sir John Kennedy; and the Granter
having then a Son John Dalrymple, who ge^s a Charter about the same Time of the
whole Dominium de Dalrymple, it is no Stretch, but a very modest Computation in
Chronology, to place Adam the Great Grandfather as high as ^lexander the III's
^^me.
. Adam was succeeded by Gilchrist his Son, and he again by Malcolm his Son,
from whom sprang John and Roland de Dalrymples, who had the Barony of Dalrymple
divided betwixt them, which their Heirs made over to Sir John Kennedy in the
1378.

Although the Dalrymples ceased to possess their old original Estate of
Dalrymple; yet some of them continued to make a very considerable Figure.
Jacobus de Dalrymple was Clericus R^gis in the Time of King Robert III. Charta
in Pub. Arch.
, and another John de Dalrymple of Bolton, in the Time of King James II. being
a Man of Parts and Experience in Affairs, was joined in Commission with Dr.
Nicol Otterburn, and sent upon a solemn Embassy to the Duke of Burgundy Ibidem
ad Annum 1449.
, to congratulate that Prince for their joint Prosperity.

The Family of Stair, to which I shall now confine my Memoirs of the
Dalrymples, has of a long Time been considered as the chief Family of all the
Dalrymples. They came first to possess the Barony of Stair, which lies near to
Dalrymple, in Right of Marjory the Daughter and Heir of Sir John de Montgomery
The Montgomeries of Sta^^ were certainly one of the ancientest and best
Extracted Families in Air shire. I observe that ^an de Mundegumbri del Cont. de
Air, their Ancestor, is in the Rogman Roll, or the Submission of the Scots
Barons to King Edward I. of England, Anno 1296.
, who brought i^ to her Husband Malcolm de Carrick, the Son of Henry, the Son
of Fergus a Branch of the old Earls of that Name and Title; for though the
Earldom of Carrick went very long before to the Bruces by Marriage, yet the
Surname was carried on by several Male Branches; for beside this Malcolm before
mentioned, there was at this Time another Malcolm de Carrick of Newbigging He
is designed, Filius Joannis filius Negeli de Carrick, Charta penes me ad Annum
1359.
, and a John de Carrick who was Chancellor of Scotlan^, both in the Reign of
King David Bruise, and of King Robert II.

Malcolm de Carrick de Stair was succeeded in that Barony by John his Son
Charta penes C. de Sta^^ ad Annum 1412.
, who dying without Male Issue, left a Daughter his sole Heir, married first to
Ronald de Shanks, but being left a Widow by him without any Issue, she married
again a Gentleman of the Name of Kennedy, by whom he had a Daughter, Agnes; at
length, the sole Heir of the Barony of Stair-Montgomery, who was married to
William Dalrymple, Esquire the paternal Ancestor of this noble Family: But Mr.
Dalrymple and the Lady standing in the Degrees of Consanguinity prohibited by
the Laws of the Church, then in Force, the Marriage did proceed upon a
Dispensation granted by Bishop Kennedy of St. Andrews Charta penes Comitem de
Stair ad Annum 1451.
, by a Delegation from the Pope to that Effect. By the said Agnes his Wife he
left Issue,

William Dalrymple of Stair his Son who married Mar^on Daughter of Sir John
Chalmers of Gadgirth, a Lady o^ great Piety and Virtue Knox's History mentions
this Lady, whose Name he mistakes, and calls Isobel, was summoned before the
Bishop of Glasgow's Court, as one of the Lollards of Shyle in 1494, and was a
Lady of excellent Worth and Virtue.
, by whom he had a Son who died before himself, but left a Son William, who
being his Grandfather's Heir apparent, the old Man in 1541, made over his
Estate to him, reserving such a Provision for himself and ^is Wife, as
supported them during their joint Lives Charta in Pub. Arch.
, which they did not long survive. This last mentioned William married Margaret
Daughter of.... Wallace of Ca^rnhill Ibidem.
, and had by her

James his Son and Heir, who in the Beginning of the Reign of Queen Mary, was
among the very First of any Account who made open Profession of the Protestant
Religion, to which he always continued very firm and constant. In the Year
1544. he joined with the Earls of Lennox and Glenca^rn against the Governor the
Earl of Arran, whom the Protestants pretended was not then altogether so
zealous for the Reformation as he had been at first, and was at the Conflict on
Glasgow Moor; for which he got afterward from the Duke of Chattlerault the
Regent, a Remission for his being in Feir of Weir at the unlawful Convocation
of the Queen's Leidges on the Moor of Glasgow, with Matthew sumetime Earl of
Lennox, and William Earl of Glencairn Ibidem ad Annum 1555.
. He married Isobel Daughter of George Crawford of Lochnorris, by whom he had

James his Son and Heir, who, with his Father's other Virtues inherited his
Zeal for the Protestant Religion; for as soon as a Confession of Faith was
compiled by our Reformers, and ratified by Act of Parliament, he was one of
those who signed it, and entered into a solemn Association for the Defense of
the Tree Reformed Religion, as it was then publicly professed in the Kingdom
Knox's History.
. In the 1565. we find he was one of those, who with the Duke of Chat^lerault
and others, opposed the Queen's Marriage with the Lord Darnley, by Reason of
the Danger they apprehended might arise to Religion by that Union; but the Duke
sailing in the Attempt he made to seize Darnley, and to send him to England,
his Adherents were obliged to take Remissions for it; the Lord of Stair's I
have seen in 1566 Charta in Rotulis Priva^ Sigilli ad Annum 1566, for Treason,
and assisting the Duke of Chattlerault to defend the Castles of Drassan and
Hamilton against the Queen^s Authority.
. Soon after this, when the Nation was alarmed with the Murder of the Lord
Darnley the Queen's Husband, and the Measures that were then taken, no Body
appeared more zealous in a prudent Way than this Gentleman, for the Safety of
the young Prince King James VI. and the Preservation of the Protestant
Religion; for we find he was one of the many Barons, who, together with the
Bulk of the Nation, entered into that famous Association Bond at Edinburgh 1567.
, wherein they bind themselves to Inaugurate the Prince, and with all their
Strenth and Forcis promote, concur, fortify, and assist to the promoting and
establishing him in his Kingdom and Government, as becumis Faithful and True
Subjects to do to their Prince, and to resist all sick as would oppon them
theirto, or to make any Trouble or Impediement to him theirin; and dying in
1586, left Issue by Isobel his Wife, Daughter of Thomas Kennedy of Bargany
Memorial of the Viscount of Stair.
, James Dalrymple of Stair, who by Janet his Wife, Daughter of Fergus Kennedy
of Knockdaw, had James the first Viscount of Stair.

This excellent Person was born in May 1619 Charta in Pub. Arch.
, his Father dying when he was very young: He was by the singular Care and
Affection of his Mother, well brought up, and at a proper Age having been
taught his Humanity at the best Schools in the Country, was sent to the
University of Glasgow, where, having run through his Course of Philosophy with
great Application and Success, he took the Degree of Master of Arts in the
1637. The Civil War breaking out soon thereafter, Mr. Dalrymple betook himself
to the Service of the Parliament, and had a Company of Foot bestowed on him in
the Earl of Glencairn's Regiment. While he was a Captain, upon the earnest
Solicitation of some of the Professors of Glasgow, upon the falling vacant of
a Philosophy Chair in that University, he was prevailed on to stand a Candidate
at a comparative Trial for the Post, to which he was preferred with great
Applause; and he successfully performed that Provence for some Time, and bred
several Scholars, who proved afterward very eminent both in Church and State.
While Mr. Dalrymple continued in this Station, he studied the Greek and Latin
with the History and Antiquities of Greece and Rome, the better to qualify him
for the Study of the Civil Law, to which he betook himself, and wherein he made
a very eminent Progress.

Mr. Dalrymple being esteemed a Man of great Parts and good Address, was
employed by the University to solicit Grants for the Increase of their
Revenues and other Affairs, which led him to see the Form of Proceedings in the
Courts of Justice, and brought him to be known and acquainted with the great
Men who were then at the Head of Affairs, and the most eminent Lawyers both on
the Bench and at the Bar. At length in the Beginning of the 1648, Mr,
Dalrymple, with these useful Preparations and Advantages, entered an Advocate,
and in short Time Time became very eminent in his Profession, for his Abilities
and Reputation for Judgment and Integrity; in so much as when the Parliament
1649. proclaimed King Charles II. and named certain Commissioners to go over to
Breda to treat with him about his coming to the Exercise of his Royal Power,
Mr. Dalrymple was pitched on to be Secretary to the Committee, whereby he had
an Opportunity to be known to the King and the great Men about the Court, who
were very well pleased with the Abilities, Sincerity, and Moderation he showed
in the whole of his Demeanor on that critical Occasion, for which the King did
ever afterward esteem him, and was pleased to express himself very obligingly
of him, even at the Time when he was prevailed on by his Ministers to remove
him from the President-ship of the Session, as being in no Degree a Friend to
the Designs then on Foot: And I cannot but remark, that though Mr. Dalrymple was
then but a young Lawyer; yet he was so well esteemed for his Knowledge in the
Laws, that the Parliament in his Absence, while he was in Holland. named him
one of the Commissioners to revise the Laws, Acts of Parliament, and Practice
of the several Judicatures; but what Advances they made in that Matter is to me
unknown.

Mr. Dalrymple returned with the Commissioners before the King in the 1650, and
so soon as his Majesty arrived, he waited on him at his first Landing, and was
very well received; and thereafter in the Course of Affairs he used his outmost
Endeavors, and did all he could to unite all Parties for his Majesty's
Service, especially in the grand Affair of raising an Army to invade England,
upon which all the Hope, of his Restoration depended.

After the Defeat of the Royal Party at Worcester, Mr. Dalrymple continued his
Practice in the Law during the U su^pation, till the Oath called the Tender,
abjuring the Royal Family of the S^e^arts, was imposed, that he and most of the
eminent Men of that Profession withdrew from the Bar, till Cromwell thought fit
by some Act of Connivance to dispense with it; and a Correspondence being made
up betwixt the Bench and the Bar, we find Mr. Dalrymple was one of the Four
deputed by the Faculty of Advocates to declare to the Judges, That it was their
Opinion, That for the better Administration of Justice, to restore the ancient
Form of the Outer-House, which had been suppressed, and which they accordingly
thought fit to comply with.

Mr. Dalrymple still increasing in Reputation and Practice, he was upon the
Death of Judge Learmont of Balcomy, pitched on by General Monk, with Consent of
the Protector's Council, to be his Successor, and the Choice proceeded merely
upon the Fame of his Abilities and Integrity; and he was far from seeking after
the Employment, he having no Inclination to have any Office under that
Administration; but there being such an universal Desire of the People, that
the Post should be fi^led with a Scotsman, and a Person eminent for Integrity
and Knowledge of the Laws, and being importuned from People of all Ranks and
Persuasions, he was at last persuaded to accept of the Place, and so he
suffered himself to be made one of the Judges, without any other Compliance
with the then prevailing Powers, than taking the Oath de fideli
Administratione, as the Act of his Admission bears, July 1st. 1657. While this
worthy Judge continued in this Station, he took all Opportunities that offered
to serve his Country, and to do all the good Offices he could for his Friends
with those in Power, in getting Grievances redressed, which, as it mightily
increased his Reputation, and very much recommended him to Men of all Degrees,
so it brought him into a particular Acquaintance with General Monk, who had a
great Esteem and Value for him; insomuch as the Day before he marched with his
Army to England, he reposed so much Considence in Judge Dalrymple, as a very
wise Man, and of an excellent Understanding, that he called him to a private
Conference, and desired he would give his Opinion freely, what he thought was
the likeliest Way to settle the Three Nations? To which he readily answered,
That the wisest and fairest Way was to procure a free and full Parliament to be
called; and at the same Time he very earnestly recommended to the General, to
interpose at London for setting the Courts of Justice a going, which were then
stopped by reason of the Disorder and Discomposures of the Times; which Counsel
the General followed, as appears from his Letter to Judge Dalrymple, dated from
Dunstable the 7th Day of January 1659.

Upon the Restoration Mr. Dalrymple went up with the Earl of Cassils to
London, to pay his Duty to the King, and congratulate his Majesty's happy
Restoration; and the King, the first Time Mr. Dalrymple waited on him, was
graciously pleased, as a Mark of his Favor, to make him a Knight; and as a
further Testimony of the Trust and Confidence he reposed in him, named him one
of the Senators of the College of Justice at the first Settlement of that
Judicature in the Year 1661, and in November thereafter, the Lord President Sir
John Gilmoir being called up to London, the Lords applied to the Earl of
Middleton his Majesty's Commissioner, to name a President in the Absence of the
President; and his Grace was pleased to name the Lord Stair to be
Vice President: And I cannot fail to remark, that the Lords themselves had such
an Esteem for the Lord Stair, that they ever choos'd him Vice President, as
often as Sir John Gilmoir's Health, or other Occasions hindered him to be
present, except once when he was at London in the Winter-Session 1670, as one
of the Commissioners for the Treaty that was then set on Foot betwixt the Two
Nations.

The Parliament 1663 having appointed an Oath to be taken, called, The
Declaration, by which all who were in Public Offices, were obliged to declare
against defensive Arms, and the Conduct of the late Troubles, particularly
against the National Covenant, as explained in the Year 1638, and the Solemn
League and Covenant entered into betwixt the Two Nations in 1643, as contrary to
the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom: This caused no small
Uneasiness to the Lord Stair, some Things being in the Oath disagreeable to his
Principles, and withal being absent in the Country at his Mother's
Funeral-Obsequies, when the rest of the Lords subscribed the Declaration, they
acquainted him, That the King in his Letter to the Privy Council, had ordered
the Places of such of the Lords as did not sign the Declaration by a precise
Day, should be declared Void, and that no written Explanation or Declaration
should be admitted, which would look like the stating of a Party. To which the
Lord Stair returned Answer, excusing his not Compliance; for that he had sent
his Demission to the King before the Date of the Letter: Whereupon the Lords
declared his Place vacant on the 19th of January 1664.

The Lord Stair being thus at Liberty, took a Tour into France with John his
eldest Son, who then about Sixteen Years of Age began to travel for his
Improvement; and my Lord Stair returning by the Way of London, and having had
the Honor to wait on the King, his Majesty was pleased to tell him that he
would not accept of his Demission, and allowed him to clear or explain his
Mind, in what Sense he would take the Declaration; and accordingly his Lordship
having satisfied his Majesty, the King by a Letter to the Lords, signified,
That being well satisfied with Sir James Dalrymple of Stair, one of their
Number, his clearing himself in the Matter of the Declaration, and of his
Affection to his Service, and of his great Abilities to serve in that Station;
therefore it was his Pleasure, that the Lord Stair signing the Declaration,
continue in his Place as if the Demission had never been made. Upon Receipt of
the Letter, and Sir James's signing the Declaration, the Lords rescinded their
former Act declaring his Place void, and he took his Place on the Bench again
at the sitting down of the Summer-Session 1664. About this Time his Majesty, as
a further Mark of his Royal Favor to the Lord Stair, was pleased to create him
a Knight Baronet, and to the Heirs Male of his Body for ever.

In the 1670, when a Treaty was set on Foot for uniting the Two Kingdoms of
Scotland and England, the Lord Stair was named one of the Commissioners for
that important Affair; and tho the Treaty did not take Effect, yet the Lord
Stair in the several Discourses that passed on that Subject, gave such clear
Proofs of his great Knowledge in our Constitution and the Laws, that the next
ensuing Year Sir John Gilmoir Lord President resigning his Office, his Majesty
was pleased to confer it upon him, and his Promotion was not attended with any
Envy or Dislike, so far as I have ever heard.

As my Lord Stair was a great Lover of his Country, and had the true Interest
of it always very much at Heart, so he embraced every Opportunity to promote
and advance the Good of the Nation; for it was the Lord President, and several
other Patriots, who concurred with him, who represented to the Duke of
Lauderdale, upon his coming down in the 1677, several Abuses and illegal
Practices that had been committed; and the Duke thereupon was pleased to get
several Acts of Council made correctory of these Abuses, particularly that of
citing Persons for Church-Irregularities, without libelling special
Circumstances of Time and Place, which was very ill taken, and highly resented
by the Archbishop of St. Andrews, and several of his High-flying Brethren.

My Lord Stair did with the same Fidelity labor to dissuade the Duke from
bringing in the Highland Host upon the West, and from obtaining an Order of
Council for a Bond to be taken for discovering, apprehending, and bringing to
Judgment, Presbyterian Ministers who held Conventicles: But though he did not
prevail in this Point, yet the Lord President could never be induced either to
subscribe the Bond, or approve the Highland Inroad, for Reasons founded both in
Law and Religion.

When his Royal Highness the Duke of Albany came down to Scotland in the End of
the 1679, the Lords of the Session and other Members of the College of Justice
thought it their Duty to wait on his Highness at the Abbay of Holy-rood-house,
when the Lord President made a fine congratulatory Speech in the Name of the
Society, wherein among other Expressions he had one to this Effect, That it was
a Matter of great Joy to the Nation to see one of the Royal Family among them,
after being for so many Years deprived of that Honor; and the Nation being
entirely Protestant, it was the fittest Place his Highness could make his
Recess to at that Time. His Lordship did afterward, with a becoming Freedom and
the ourmost Fidelity, dissuade his Highness not to attempt any Thing that might
seem to have the least Tendency to weaken the Establishment of the reformed
Religion, as it was secured by the Laws. In the Parliament 1681, to which his
Royal Highness the Duke of Albany was his Majesty's High Commissioner, the Lord
President was chosen a Member for the Shire of Wigtoun. In the Beginning of the
Session, his Lordship, the Earl of Argile, and several others, were named on a
Committee of the Articles for Religion, which by the Custom of all Scots
Parliaments was the first Thing treated of: Accordingly the Committee did
prepare an Act securing the Protestant Religion; which Act did ratify the Act
approving the Confession of Faith, and also the Act containing the Coronation
Oath appointed by several standing Laws and Acts of Parliament, to be taken by
our Kings before their Entry to the Exercise of the Government: But this
Draught which the Committee had prepared was laid aside, in respect it was
thought to limit too much the Power of a Popish Successor to the Crown; in
Place whereof a general Statute did pass, ratifying all former Laws for
settling and securing the Liberty and Freedom of the Protestant Religion.
However, when the Act asserting the Right of Succession to the Crown, according
to the Proximity of Blood, without Respect to any Difference in Religion, did
pass, it was thought expedient, even by those who promoted it, to have a more
special Law made for Security of the Protestant Religion: Accordingly a D^aught
of the Act about Religion was transmitted to the Parliament, which provided
only for the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, as contained in the Word
of GOD, which could not discover Papists, who pretend to walk conform to that
Rule. The Lord Stair, the Earl of Argyle, and other Patriots were forward to
have a particular Standard of the Protestant Religion established, that might
more effectually prevent Roman Catholics getting into Public Offices, in the
Event of a Popish Prince upon the Throne; and the Lord President urged the
Matter with so much Strength of Reason, that the first Clause in the Test which
was agreed to, did exclude all Persons from Public Trust in the Government,
who did not swear, That they owned and sincerely professed the true Protestant
Religion, contained in the Confession of Faith, recorded in the Parliament
1567; and that they believed the same to be founded on and agreeable to the
written Word of GOD; and that they should adhere thereunto all the Days of
their Lifetime, and educate their Children therein, and that they should never
consent to any Change or Alteration contrary thereunto. Though the Act passed,
yet the urging of that Clause by the Lord President was highly re^ented by his
Royal Highness the Duke of Albany the Lord High Commissioner, who the very
Night the Act passed, said to some about him, and in his nearest Confidence,
That the Lord Stair, by bringing in the Confession of Faith into the Test, had
ruined all honest Men, meaning Roman Catholics

Though the Lord President was pleased with the first Part of the Test-Act, which
seemed to be a very effectual Security against Popery; yet he could not sign
the latter Part of it, which struck against Presbyterian Dissenters, therein
called Fanatics; and therefore he went up to the King to declare so much, and
to desire his Majesty's Leave to retire, and to lay down his Employment; but
before he arrived at London, his Behavior in the Parliament was improved as so
heavy a Charge against him at Court, that he was removed from his Office in the
Session, without mentioning of any Cause, though he held his Place in the
ordinary Way of Judges, ad vitam aut culpam. But his Remove from his Place was
not all he was like to suffer; for after that he was not allowed to live
without Disturbance in his Retirement at his Seat in the Country; for his
Tenants were harassed with grievous Fynes for Nonconformity; and he got a Hint
from his Friend Sir George Mackenzie the Lord Advocate; that he could not
secure him, that he might not be thrown in Prison. My Lord Stair finding
himself in these Circumstances, thought it safer for him to retire, and to go
into a voluntary Exile into Holland in the End of 1682, where he printed his
Philosophia nova Experimentalis, which, as it gained him great Reputation with
the Learned, so it is generally read with great Applause.

While the Lord Stair was abroad, many Witnesses were examined and re-examined,
not only his own Domestics, but some of his nearest Relations, to find out
Matter for a Criminal Pursuit against him; but nothing was discovered, save
that some Persons suspected to have been engaged in the Rebellion 1679 lived
upon his Ground, or lu^ked about his House in the Country, while he attended on
the Session at Edinburgh. However he was pursued for Treason, first before the
Justiciary, and then before the Parliament, upon the common Ground of Harbor
and Reset of Rebels: But the Probation was so scrimp, that by their own Rules
they could not condemn him; for he was a wise Man, and had taken Care to live
with all possible Circumspection and Caution.

The Lord Stair sojourned in Holland till the 1688, he came over with the
Prince of Orange, in his Expedition to Britain, to relieve these Nations from
Popery and Arbitrary Power; in which glorious Design no Man engaged more
frankly than the old Lord Stair: And when the Prince was just setting Sail for
England, it is reported his Lordship took the Freedom to ask his Highness, What
his true Design was in going to England? To which the Prince was pleased to
answer, That he designed the Glory of GOD, and the Security of the Protestant
Religion: Upon which, it is said, the Lord Stair pulled off his Wig, and said,
Though I be now in the 70 th Year of mine Age, I Am willing to venture that,
meaning his Head, and his own and his Childrens Fortunes in such an
Undertaking. This the Prince took in very good Part, and reported it to others,
as that which very much encouraged him to prosecute his Design.

When the Prince landed at Torby, his Highness expressed a particular Concern
about the Lord Stair, and sent to enquire concerning his Health, and
understanding his Horses were not come up, the Prince sent him Horses of his
for his Accommodation.

Upon the Advancement of the Prince and Princess of Orange to the Throne, their
Majesty's, who had a very great Kindness and Esteem for the Lord Stair, as a
Person of great Integrity, and of unquestionable Zeal for the Protestant
Religion, were pleased to restore him to his Office of President of the Session
in the 1689, conform to the Claim of Right: But their Majesty's thought this
Piece of Justice was not enough to reward the Lord Stair's great Merit;
wherefore they were further pleased to raise him to the Peerage, by the Style
and Title of Viscount of Stair, by Letters Patent bearing Date 20th April 1690,
after which his Lordship continued without the least Interruption in the favor
of his Prince, and enjoyed his Office, which he had discharged in all Times,
with great Abilities and singular Integrity till his Death, which happened on
the 25th of November 1695, aged 76, and was with great Funeral Solemnity
interred in the Cathedral Church of St. Giles.

This excellent Person married Margaret, eldest Daughter of James Ross of
Balneel, with whom he had a fair Fortune in Land, and had Issue by her.

1 Sir John Dalrymple, thereafter Earl of Stair.

2 Sir James Dalrymple of Borthwick, who being a Person of great Parts and
Learning, was bred to the Law, and became an Advocate, and was afterward made
one of the principal Clerks of the Session, and a Baronet. Sir James's Genius,
even from his Youth, having led him to the Study of Antiquities My noble and
very worthy Friend Sir James Dalrymple did collect and furnish Sir George
Mackenzie with the most of the Materials of what he wrote in Defense of the
Royal Line, and his Jus Regium, though without any Acknowledgment to his Friend
Mr. Dalrymple, which I and many others have wondered at, when it was so well
known at that Time. Sir James has also published a new Edition of Cambden's
Britannia, wherein he gives us the first right Draught of the Line of the Royal
Family of the Stewarts, and rescued it from the Blunders and Mistakes of all
that ever wrote before him: which is such an eminent and notable Service to the
Crown and his Country, that ought never to be forgotten, but gratefully
remembered to his Honor and the Honor of his Memory; for I can well say, that
all that has been advanced since on the History of the Royal Family, are but
Superstructures upon that Foundation which Sir James has there laid down.
, particularly those of his own Country, he became a wonderful Proficient, and
one of the Learned Men of that Prof^ssion, of which his Book, Collections
concerning the Scots History, is a pregnant Instance; a Book full of Learning,
and that Learning so closely and solidly applied: that it has justly gained him
a very great Reputation with learned Men, as one of the greatest Antiquaries
this, or indeed any other Age has produced.

3 Sir Hugh Dalrymple of Nort^berwick, Baronet, who likewise applying himself
from his Youth to the Study of the Law, commenced Advocate, and advancing daily
in Reputation and Practice, after he had been some time one of the Commissaries
of Edinburgh, he was in the School. promoted to be Lord President of the Session,
which had been vacant from the Death of his Father. Here is a large Field to
expatiate upon the great Learning and other Qualities of this Gentleman; but he
being still alive, I shall entirely wave it.

4 Dr. Thomas Dalrymple, first Physician in Ordinary to his Majesty for the
Kingdom of Scotland.

5 Sir David Dalrymple of Hailes, Baronet, who being a Person of incomparable
Parts, and having studied the Law in his younger Years, came to the Bar with
great Applause, and growing very eminent in Reputation and Practice, insomuch
as her Majesty Queen Anne was pleased to make him Solicitor, and then Lord
Advocate, from which Office he was removed toward the End of that Reign; but
upon the Accession of King George to the Crown, he was restored to his former
Digaity, which he at present enjoys with the universal Approbation of the whole
Nation, and the general Applause of all Men for his Justice, Integrity, sound
Judgment, and eminent Sufficiency in the Discharge of his Office; a Praise
which was never denied him at any Time.

Janet, eldest Daughter of James Viscount of Stair, was married to David
Dunbar, Son and Heir apparent to Sir David Dunbar of Buldoon, Bart. but had no
Issue.

2 Elizabeth, to Allan the present Lord Cathcart.

3 Sarah, to Charles Lord Crichton, Son and Heir of William Earl of Dumfreis.

4 Isobel, to Sir David Cuninghame of Miln^raig, Bart. and had Issue.

John, first Viscount, thereafter Earl of Stair, was by the Care of his Father,
though his eldest Son, bred to the Study of the Law, and being admitted to the
Bar, in short Time became very eminent in Practice; insomuch as when the Earl
of Argyle was pursued for High Treason in the 1681, for his giving an
Explanation of the Test, when he took it, Sir John Dalrymple, who was by this
Time very much taken Notice of as a Lawyer of great Ability and Learning, was
one of the Earl's Council: But quickly after this, the Court conceiving a
Displeasure against the Lord Stair, Sir John's Father, and it being well known
that his own Principles were altogether against the Measures that were then
taken, they had a very jealous Eye upon him, and he became so much the Object
of their Envy, that in the End of the 1682, upon Pretense that he, as heritable
Baillie of the Regality of Glenlace, interfeiring in Jurisdiction with the new
named Justiciar and She^iff of Galloway, Graham of Claverhoase, had fined his
own and his Father's Tenants too low for haunting Conventicles; and though he had
never meddled in any public Matters, yet he was committed Prisoner to the
Castle of Edinbargh, and fined in 500 lib. sterling. but being set at Liberty, he
was again in the 1684, upon various Pretenses, seized on at his own House in
the Country; and though the Officer that apprehended him, brought him to the
Abbay of Holy ro^d house, in Expectation that he might have been bailed: Yet so
great was the Torrent against him, that though they could not find any Ground of
Accusation whereupon to found an Indictment; yet he was committed to the
Tolbooth of Edinburgh, where he lay three Months, and for some Weeks was a
close Prisoner.

Though Sir John Dalrymple was very much frowned on at this Time by the Court, he
would by no Means forego his Principles, though his Wisdom and Experience put him
upon acting circumspectly, and with great Caution, during the Remainder of King
Charles his Reign: But after King James's coming to the Crown, that Prince,
upon his own Observation of Sir John Dalrymple's Abilities in his Pleadings as
a Lawyer, was pleased to conceive a very good Opinion of him; insomuch as he
was pleased to make him Lord Advocate, upon the Removal of Sir George
Mackenzie, who was laid aside in the 1686, for not complying with the Design of
the Court, in taking away the penal Laws against Popery; though it could never be
said by Sir John Dalrymple's greatest Enemies, that he had in any Degree
contributed thereto; but on the contrary endeavored all he could to animate
the Members of Parliament to stand firm to their Religion, and not to open a
Door to let in Popery and many other Inconveniences. Sir John behaved with
great Moderation and Temper while he held that Office; but Sir George Mackenzie
having found Means to reconcile himself to the Court, he was restored to be
Advocate, and Sir John Dalrymple was thereupon made Justice-Clerk, upon a
Vacancy through the Demise of Sir James Foulis of Colingtoun, and he continued in
the Office till the Government was disso^v'd by King James's leaving England,
and retiring to France.

Sir John Dalrymple being a very zealous Protestant, all the Favors he had
conferred on him by King James and others, he might have expected were no
Temptations to bring him into the Court-Measures at that Time; and the
Revolution coming about, he fell heartily in with it, and with those who were
the most zealous Promoters of it.

In the Convention of Estates 1689, Sir John Dalrymple showed himself a steady
Asserter of the Religion and Liberties of his Country, and particularly
expressed on that Occasion a hearty Desire, that a Treaty might be set on Foot
for a nearer Union of the Two Nations: But that Design meeting with Opposition
from Persons of very different Principles, it was dropped at that Time; and when
the grand Affair of settling the Crown came to be debated, the Estates found at
first great Difficulty how to declare the Throne vacant; at length Sir John
Dalrymple ended the Debate by such Reasons, that the Convention went into his
Proposals, and settled the Crown upon the Prince and Princess of Orange. So
soon as it passed into an Act, he was one of the Commissioners sent up from the
Convention with the Offer of the Crown to the Prince and Princess of Orange,
with the Nations Grievances and Claim of Right, which their Highnesses having
accepted of, they were graciously pleased to reward Sir John's Merit and Zeal
shown for their Advancement to the Throne, by making him Lord Advocate in 1690,
and in less than a Year thereafter he was constituted one of the Principal
Secretaries of State; and he discharged the Office with eminent Sufficiency,
till the 1695, that the Parliament having made some Attempts against him about
the Affair of the horrid Massacre of Glenco, he resigned his Place, merely that
the King might not be made uneasy by his continuing in so eminent a Post so
near his Royal Person, though his Majesty did highly resent the Treatment the
Secretary had met with, and turned all those out of his Service, who had been
the greatest Sticklers against him.

Though the Master of Stair did not think he had been well used, yet he never
showed the least Resentment against the Court; but on the contrary by his great
Wisdom and Temper interposed to moderate the Heats and Animosities which arose
both in the Parliament and in the Country, upon the Disappointments of Darien;
and the Figure he made in the public Debates by his Speeches in Parliament
were sufficient to convince every Body that he might have been employed again
in some of the highest Offices of State, but he constantly declined Preferment;
for he was resolved never to be further concerned in public Affairs, than as a
Privy Counselor; ^et at the same Time, not to omit what he really thought his
Duty to his Country upon any Occasion.

When Queen Anne came to the Crown, the Viscount of Stair was named on of the
Lords of the Privy Council; and as a further Testimony of her Majesty's Favor,
was raised to the Honor of Earl of Stair, by Letters Patent the 8th of April
1703 Charta in p^b. Archi^is.
.

The Earl of Stair had from his Youth entertained an Opinion, That an entire
Union of both Kingdoms was the most likely Way to procure the lasting
Tranquillity and Happiness of Britain, and for that End very readily concurred
in the Session of Parliament 1702, that Power should be given to the Queen to
name Commissioners to treat of an Union; pursuant to which, Commissioners were
n^med by her Majesty, of which Number the Earl himself was one: But that Treaty
breaking off without coming ^o any Conclusion, it had no other Effect than ^o
let both Nations s^e it was practicable; and it being ag^in resumed in the
1705, by new Authority from the Parliament of both Kingdoms, his Lordship was
by her Majesty named one of the Commissioners upon the Part of Scotland; in the
carrying on of which he had so considerable a Share, both in the Time of the
Treaty, and in the Parliament of Scotland, that many have thought that without
the Earl of Stair it could not have been brought to a Conclusion, considering
the many Difficulties were raised against it, all which he just lived to see
overcome; for being exceedingly sollicitous to have the Union perfected, he
assisted the Day before his Death at the Debates on that Subject in the
Parliament, pressing the Point with great Earnestness: And tho he walked home,
and dined very cheerfully with Company, yet about Four next Morning he ^^ll
into an Apoplexy, which in a few Hours put an End to his Days, the 8th of
January 1707, aged 59.

He married Elizabeth Daughter and Heir of Sir John Dundas of New-Liston, by
whom he had John the present Earl, of Stair Colonel William Dalrymple of
Glenmure, George Dalrymple Esquire one o^ the Barons of Exchequer; also a Daughter,
Margaret, married to Hugh Earl of Loudoun.

John the present Earl of Stair was born at Edinburgh the 20th of July 1673. He
gave very early Marks of a lively and great Genius, having succeeded beyond his
Fellows in his first Studies of Latin and Greek, both at home and in Holland,
whether, at the Desire of his Grandfather then at Le^den, our young Student was
sent, when he was about Eleven Years old. In a very few Months he acquired the
Habit of speaking French and Dutch; in both which he has been since improved to
a Degree of Perfection, to which seldom any Stranger has attained. His Masters
at Leyden were exceedingly pleased with him, and remaked, that though he seemed
fond of Play, and solicited his Fellows to it, yet he was never found out of
his Place at School: But while he seemed thus devoted to his Play, he advanced
in his Learning as if he had minded nothing else: He was promoted from Class to
Class, with the Approbation of the Magistrates, Professors and Masters of the
School at Leyden, and had one of the first Praemiums at every Promotion,
according to the Custom of that School, for distinguishing the Merit of the
best Scholars, and for exciting in them a greater Desire of going forward.

After the Earl had made a good Progress in the Schools there, he returned to
his Father in Scotland, and in the University of Edinburgh pursued the Study of
the Greek and Latin, adding the Study of the Logicks and other Parts of
Philosophy, under Mr. Kennedy, then Regent in that University. He studied the
Mathematics under the learned and very justly celebrated Doctor David Gregory,
then Professor at Edinburgh, and afterward Savilian Professor at Oxford. The
Earl had also the Assistance of Mr. Gregory the present Professor of the
Mathematics at Edinburgh. And he had the constant Happiness to be the
Favorite of his Masters, and to be much beloved by his follow Students.

In the Beginning of the Year 1688 he went again to Holland to visit his
Grandfather and Grandmother, to whom he was very dear, and returned in October
that Year to Scotland, to reassume his Studies in the University, but the
Commotions that happened at Edinburgh in November, interrupted the stated
Course of every Thing till the Revolution was completed, and the Government
established in the Person of King William. In the Beginning of the Year 1689 he
went with his Father to London. From this Time forward the present Earl, then
Mr. Dalrymple, begun to ply the Study of the living Languages, as well as that
of the dead, and to improve himself in these Kinds of Exercises that belong to
a young Gentleman, still with the same Constancy and good Effect.

He returned again to Scotland with his Father, and saw the Meeting of the
Estates, and the two first Sessions of the Parliament of Scotland under King
William and Queen Mary in the Year 1689 and 1690.

His Father being made Secretary of State in the Beginning of the Year 1691,
his Son, the present Earl, had the Advantage to be much at Court, which was a
new Kind of Education, that added both Ornament and useful Improvement to those
he had acquired before: And when his Father followed the King to Flanders, the
Earl went along. In the Summer he was in the Camp, and was present at the
Battle of Steenkirk, where the brave Earl of Angus was killed on the Head of
his Regiment, with whom the present Earl of Stair advanced to the Enemy as a
Volunteer.

In the Winter the Earl returned once more to his Studies at Leyden, heard the
famous Professors there read on Grotius and the Institutions of the Civil Law,
and had at the same Time Colleges of History, employing every Minute to the
best Advantage.

After these Foundations laid, there remained nothing more to fit the Earl for
Business but traveling to see how Men of different Tempers and Religions lived
among themselves and other Men, and to learn from the first Hand the Genius,
Manners, Constitutions and Languages of some of the most considerable Nations
in Europe. He set out with the Lord Lexington, who went in the Year 1700 to
Vienna Ambassador. The Earl having been some Time at that Court went on to
Italy, visiting on his Way the several great Cities, Republics and Courts in
Italy. At Rome he applied himself to the Knowledge of Antiquities, Architecture,
and other Things which are taught there, studying with much Application the
Italian Language; and because he could not then go into France, during the War
then between King William and that Crown, he studied the French very carefully
by the Help of a French Abbe, whom he found at Rome, that he might enter deeper
into the Strength, Genius and Beauties of that Language so universally in Use.

Having made the Tour of Germany and Italy, he returned to England in the 1701,
and that Year came to Scotland with his Father, where he continued until the
1702, at which Time there being new Regiments to be raised in Scotland, he went
to Court, to offer his Service upon the Appearance of an approaching War. The
King received him very graciously, but a Scheme of Officers was formed for
these Regiments leaving him out. His Majesty having observed it, told, that he
was resolved to provide for Mr. Dalrymple, who by that Scheme was neglected,
and for that Reason his Majesty resolved to make him Second Lieutenant Colonel
of his Regiment of Foot Guards in Scotland. But King William's Death happening
just then, his Commission as Second Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of Foot
Guards was signed by Queen Anne, on one of the first Days of her Reign.

Being now in the Army (where his Inclination had ever led him to serve) he
embraced the first Opportunities to appear in that Way, which soon happened:
For the late Queen being engaged with the Confederates in the Second War
against France, and having sent over an Army under the Command of the Duke of
Marlborough, the Earl made the very first Campaign as a Volunteer, and
distinguished himself in the Actions of greatest Hazard and Consequence, as at
the taking of Venlo and Liege, and at the Cannonade of Peer. He was also
employed by the Duke as his Aidde Camp. It was in this Campaign that he laid
the Foundation of that Friendship with which that great General has constantly
honored him since.

The Account of the Earl from that Period is so interwoven with the great
Events Civil and Military, that have happened, that tho all the Materials for
going through with a just and exact History were at Hand, yet the Nature of this
Undertaking would not admit of pursuing it, or the Share he had in these great
Actions; which besides has been remarkable enough by many very considerable
Circumstances well known. I have therefore contented my self in a plain Way,
and without enlarging on Particulars, to set forth what concerns his Youth and
Education, which has been one constant Series of Application to those Things
which might fit him for the eminent Station where he is now placed.

I shall therefore finish what concerns him with the bare Enumeration of the
Employments he has gone through.

He had a Commission as Colonel of Foot in the Dutch Service in April 1703; in
the Year 1705 he succeeded Brigadeer General Fergusson deceast, in a Regiment
of Foot on the English Establishment; and after the Death of Lord John Hay, he
had the Command given him of the Royal Scots Dragoons, by the Name of the Royal
Greys, by a Commission bearing Date the 24th August 1706, which he continued to
command till the last Year of the late Queen, when he was ordered to sell it to
the Earl of Portmore.

He commanded a Brigade of Foot at the Battle of Ramellies, and was immediately
after that Battle made Brigadeer. His Commission bears Date from the Day of
that Battle. He was Brigadeer in the Battle of Audenard, and carried the News
of the Victory into England; he commarded as Major General at the Battle of
Tanier near Mons; and was made Lieutenant General at the Siege of Deway

He was sent Envoy Extraordinary to the King of Poland in the Winter of the
Year 1709, where he resided till May 1710, that he returned to the Siege of
Doway, and having left his Secretary in Poland, continued in that Character
till the Year 1711, that Mr. Scot was sent to that Court.

Since King George's Accession to the Crown, the Earl has been made Lord of the
Bedchamber; one of His Majesty's most honorable Privy Council in the 17^4; and
in January thereafter he was sent Envoy Extraordinary to the Court of France,
but at the same time he had Powers and Credentials to treat as Ambassador and
Plenipotentiary, and when his Lordship should judge it necessary, to assume
that Character.

His Lordship married the Lady Eleanor Campbell, Daughter of James Earl of
Loudoun, Widow of James Viscount of Primerose; but as yet has not any Issue.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Or, on a Saltyre, Azure, Nine Mascles of the 1st, 2d and
3d, Argent, a Cheveron Checkie betwixt Three Water-Budgets Sable, over all in a
surtout Argent, a Lion Rampant, Gules, Supporters, Two Swans Proper, Crest, a
Rock. Motto, Quiescam.

ALEXANDER, Earl of Stirling.
ALL our Antiquaries agree, that this Family is originally a Branch of the
Macdonalds. Alexander Macdonald their Ancestor obtained from the Family of
Argyle a Feu of the Lands of Menstry in Clackmananshire, where they fixed their
Residence, and took their Surname from the proper Name of their Predecessor.
Andrew Alexander or Menstry, in the Reign of King James V. is the First of this
Family I have found any Mention of in our Records Charta in pub. Archivis.
. By Catherine his Wife, Daughter of..... Graham of..... he had Alexander his
Son and Heir, who had a Grant from Archibald Master of Argyle his Superior, of
the Lands of Menstry, to himself and Elizabeth Douglas, Daughter of Robert
Douglas o^ Lochlevin, his Wife in Li^erent, and to Andrew Alexander their Son
in Fee, which was ratified by a Charter under the Great Seal, 15th of January
1529 Ibidem,
, whose Heir and Successor, William Alexander of Menstry, being a young Man of
very great Parts, he much improved them by a good Education, which being
seasoned with Years, qualified him for the highest Trusts. He traveled at
first abroad as Tutor to the Earl of Argyle, and was a considerable time with
that noble Lord in Foreign Parts. After his Return he betook himself to the
Court, where he lived in great Reputation, under no other Character than a
Gentleman of the most polite Parts and Learning. Mr. Alexander having an
Inclination and a Talent from his Youth to Poetry, he declined all other
Business, and delivered himself up entirely to his own Genius, in which he made
a wonderful Proficiency in the Study of the ancient Poets, by whom he formed an
excellent Goust of Poetry; insomuch as in a short Time he came to be looked on
as one of the most eminent of that Profession. K. James who then reigned, was a
Prince of great Learning and Knowledge, and delighted much in the Conversation
of learned Men, particularly Mr. Alexander, who presented him with several
elegant Poems to the King's great Delight, and the gaining the Applause of
Persons of the first Rank for Quality and Wit to himself, to whom in a short
Time he grew very acceptable. After he had lived some Years about the Court,
his Majesty, who looked on him as a wise Man, was pleased to prefer him to be
Master of Requests, and a Knight in 1614: But his Majesty's Bounty did not rest
in the conferring one single Favor on him; for Sir William being a learned and
projecting Man, and having settled a Colony in Nova Scotia in America upon his
own Charges, King James made him a Grant of it by his Royal Deed on the 21. of
September 1621, and did intend to erect the Order of Baronet for encouraging
and advancing so good a Work: But the Two or Three last Years of that Prince's
Reign having been less pleasant to him, by the Jealousies which about that Time
began in England, he thought fit to suspend the further Prosecution of that
Affair until a more favorable Conjuncture, which he lived not to see. But King
Charles I. who with his Father's other Virtues, inherited his Affection to his
native Kingdom, immediately upon his coming to the Crown, proposed nothing more
than the furthering of that Design, which was projected to be of so great a
Benefit to the Nation, and therefore made Sir William Alexander Lieutenant of
New Scotland, and instituted the Order of Knight-Baronet for the encouraging
and advancing of that Colony, and gave him the Privilege of coining small
Copper-Money, a Gift which was inveighed against, even at that Time, with great
Bitterness: But his Majesty, who thought that too great Encouragement could not
be given to learned and worthy Men, such as Sir William was, and being fully
satisfied of his great Abilities and Integrity, was graciously pleased in 1626
to make him Secretary of State, in place of the Earl of Haddingtoun, and a
Peer, by the Title of Viscount Stirling Charta in Pub. Archivis, dated 4.
September, 1630.
, and after raised him to the Honor of Earl of Stirling, by Letters Patent the
14th of June 1633, at the Solemnity of his Majesty's Coronation at the Palace
of Holyroodhouse, and his Lordship enjoyed the Secretary's Place with universal
Reputation, for the Space of about Fifteen Years, even to his Death on the 12th
of February 1640.

He married Janet Daughter and Heir of Sir William Erskine Knight. Parson of Camsy,
Commendator of the Bishopric of Glasgow, a younger Brother of the Family of
Balgony, and Cousin German to the Earl of Mar the Regent Charta penes me.
, by whom he had

William Lord Alexander his eldest Son, who died his Majesty's Resident in Nova
Scotia, in the Lifetime of his Father, leaving Issue by Jean his Wife, Daughter
of William Marquis of Douglass, a Son, William, his Grandfather's Successor,
and two Daughters, Margaret married to Walter Lord Torphichen, and Beatrix to
Sir Robert Sinclair of Lochermakhouse, and had Issue.

2 Henry Alexander Esquire afterward Earl of Stirling.

3 Sir Anthony Alexander, Knight.

4 John Alexander Esquire

Lady Margaret, married to Hugh Montgomery, Lord Viscount of Airds, of the
Kingdom of Ireland.

Lady Mary, to Sir William Murray of Knockdowie, and had Issue.

To William 1st Earl of Stirling succeeded William his Grandson, who did not
live long to enjoy the Honor; for he died in the Month of March 1640, his
Estate and Honor devolving to Henry Alexander Esquire his Un^le, who married.....
Daughter of Sir Peter V^^l^^e Alderman of London, by whom he had a Son, whose
Heir resides in England, and votes by his Proxy at the Election of our Peers
since the Union.

MURRAY, Viscount of Stormont.
THE first of this collateral Branch of the Murrays was Sir Andrew Murray,
younger Son of Sir William Murray of Tullibardine, who in the Reign of King
James IV. came to enjoy a fair Estate, by the Marriage of Margaret, Daughter
and sole Heir of James Barclay of Arngosk and Kippo Chartulary of Cambuskenneth
MS. etiam Charta penes Ducem de Athole.
, by her he had Issue, Sir David Murray of Arngosk, his Son and Heir, who dying
Anno 1550 Charta i^ Pub. Archivis.
, left Issue by Janet his Wife, Daughter to the Lord Lindsay, Sir Andrew his
Son and Heir, who by Agnes his Wife, Daughter of William Earl of Montrose
Ibidem.
, had Sir Andrew his Successor, and Sir David Murray of Gosparty, who first
laid the Foundation of this Honor.

Sir David Murray being from his Youth bred at the Court of King James VI. was
first made Cup Bearer to his Majesty, in which Employment he soon rendered
himself very gracious to his Master; insomuch that in few Years he was
preferred to be Master of the Horse, and Captain of the Guard, and being
knighted, was made Comptroller of Scotland in 1599, and thereafter a Peer, by
the Title of Lord Scoon, Anno 1604, and having served his said Majesty with
great Fidelity in all the several Employments he was entrusted with, in Reward
of his long and faithful Services, was created Viscount of Stormont, and to the
Heirs Male of his Body, and in Failure of such, to his Heirs of Entail, by
Letters Patent the 26th of August 1621 Charta in Rotulis Jacobi VI.
. He married Elizabeth Daughter of Sir David Beaton of Crich, but dying without
Issue, 27th of August 1631 Form of the Funeral-Sol^^nity of David first
Viscount of Stormont, ^^. (...) ^^.
, he was with great Funeral-Solemnity interred in a Vault within the Church of
Scoon, on the 23d of September thereafter, under a noble Monument erected by
himself of various colored Marble, with his Statue as big as the Life, in a
Pos^ure of Devotion, with this Inscription upon a Tablet of black Marble,
wherein most of his remarkable Actions are set forth. The Right Honorable Sir
DAVID MURRAY of Gospartie, Son to Sir Andrew Murray of Balvaird; his Grandfire
Brother to the E. of Tillybardin; his Mother Daughter to the Earl of Montrose;
his Gooddame of the Father, Daughter to the Lord Lindsay; his Gooddame of the
Mother Daughter to the Earl Marishal; who for his good Services done to King
James VI. whom he faithfully served from his Youth in many honorable
Employments, from a Cup Bearer, Master of his Horse, Comptroller of his Rents,
Captain of his Majesty's Guard, one of his honorable Privy Council, was
created Lord Scoon. He married Dame Elizabeth Beaton, an ancient Baron's
Daughter of Crich, died without Issue, left his Estate to his Nephew of
Balvaird, and to Dame Agnes Murray his Neice, whom he married to a Brother of
the Earl of Tillybardin's, from whom he first descended; he helped his other
Friends, who enjoy the Fruits of his Labor; his Buildings pruifs he was
politic; good Men knew he loved Virtue, and Malefactors that he maintained
Justice; he founded the Hospital, and builded the Church; his So^l enjoys
Happiness: And under this Tomb builded by himself, lies his Body, expecting
the joyful Resurrection.

To David Viscount of Stormont succeeded, by Entail, Sir Mungo Murray, Brother
to the Earl of Tillybardine Charta in Rotulis Caroli I.
, in a Part of his Estate, and to the Honor. He married Ann Daughter of Sir
Andrew Murray of Balvaird; but he likewise dying without Issue in March 1642
Charta in Cancellaria S. D. N. R.
, the Honor of Viscount of Stormont, by Virtue of the first Entail, came to
James Murray Earl of Annandale, and a Part of his Estate to Mr. Andrew Murray
of Balvaird, the first Viscount of Stormont's Nephew, then Minister at Ebdie,
whom his Majesty King Charles I. was pleased to make a Knight in 1633 Bishop
^uthry's Memoin.
, and thereafter by Letters Patent, bearing Da^e 17. November 1641, to raise to
the Honor of Lord Balvaird Charta in Rotulis Caroli I.
, notwithstanding he was a Minister at the time of his Promotion. He married
Elizabeth Daughter of David Earl of Southesk, by whom he had David his
Successor, Sir John Murray of Drumcairn, one of the Senators of the College of
Justice, James Murray Doctor of Physic, and Mr. William Murray a Lawyer;
likewise several Daughters, Barbara married to Andrew Lord Gray, and Marjory to
Sir Alexander Gibson of Durie, and had Issue; and departing this Life in the
Month of September 1644 Ibidem.
, was succeeded by

David Lord Balvaird his Son, who came to be Viscount of Stormont upon the
Demise of James Murray Earl of Annandale, who had that Honor in his Person. He
married Jean Daughter of James Earl of Southesk, Widow of James Earl of
Annandale aforesaid, by whom he had David his Successor, and a Daughter
Katharine married to William Earl of Kintore; and dying 7th July 1667 Ibidem.
, was succeeded by David his Son, the present Viscount of Stormont, who married
Marjory, Daughter of David Scot of Scotst^rvet, by whom he has Issue, David
Master of St^rmont, Mr. James Murray Advocate, a young Lawyer of great Parts
and Reputation, William, Charles; likewise six Daughters.

1 Katharine.

2 Elizabeth.

3 Marjory married to Col. John Hay of Cromlix.

4 Aemilia.

5 Margaret.

6 Jean.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Azure, Three Mollets within a Double Tressure, flowered
and counterflower'd. Or, 2d and 3d. Gules, Three Cross-patees, Argent.
Supported by Two Lions Rampant. Gules, Crest, a Stag's Head, Coupee proper.
Motto, Spero meliora.

DRUMMOND, Viscount of Strathalan
THE First who laid the Foundation of this Honor was Lieutenant General
William Drummond, a younger Brother of the Lord Maderty's, who from his Youth
having dedicated himself to the Profession of Arms, he entered into the Service
of his own Prince King Charles I. after the breaking out of the Civil War, and
had a considerable Command in the Army that was raised in the 1648, for the
Relief of his Majesty, while he was a Prisoner in the Isle of Wight. After that
unfortunate Expedition he transported himself into Ireland, and joined the
Marquis of Ormond who was then in Arms for the King, and continued in that
Service till the 1651, he came over to Scotland, and had the Command of a
Regiment in the Scots Army at the Battle of Worcester, where he was taken
Prisoner; but afterward making his Escape, he went into the Highlands in that
Adventure where Middleton commanded; at which Time he had a Commission to be a
Major General. When that Design was broke, and no further Hope left of serving
the King, he went abroad, and entered into the Service of the King of Prussia,
under whom he exercised very high Commands, and with great Honor and
Reputation, till after the Restoration of King Charles II. that his Majesty
called him home, and made him Major General of the Forces in Scotland; and in
that Caracter he served the Crown for many Years thereafter. Upon King James's
coming to the Throne, he was made General of all the Forces in the Kingdom, and
one of the Lords of the Treasury, and a Peer by the Title of Viscount of
Strathallan, by Letters Patent 16th August 1686 Charta in Cancellaria S. D. N.
R.
, and to his Heirs Male for ever. He died in the Month of January 1688, leaving
Issue by Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of Sir Archbald Johnston of Waristoun,
William his Son and Heir, and a Daughter Elizabeth, married to Thomas Earl of
Kinnoul.

Which William married Elizabeth, Daughter of John Earl of Melfort, and
departing this Life 7th July 1702, was succeeded by

James his Son and Heir, who died a Youth of great Hopes in his 16th Year at
London, 26th May 1711, his his Estate devolving to his Cousin the Lord Duplin,
and the Honor of Viscount, which was to the General's Heirs Male, fell to

William Drummond of Machanny, a remote Relation, though the nearest to his
Lordship in the Male Line, who became thereby also Lord Maderty. He married
Margaret Daughter of William Lord Nairn, by whom he has Issue.

STRATHERN, Earl of Strathern.
THE Title of Comes de Strathern is certainly one of the most ancient Dig^ities
we can instruct, and no doubt was erected into a Comitatus by King Malcolm
Canmore, when he first divided his Lands, and raised to Honors the best
deserving and most loyal of his Subjects, who had been instrumental in his
Restoration. In the very oldest Record we have extant, the Foundation-Charter
of the Priory of Scoon by King Alexander I. Anno 1115 Chron. de Melross Anno
1115, Canonicis tradita est Ecclesia de Scoon.
, Mallus Comes Strathjerniae is mentioned among the other Comites who gave
their Assent and Consent to that Erection Chartulary of Scoon penes Vicecomitem
de Stormont.
. The same Earl Malise Comes Stradarniae signalized his Valor very eminently
at the Battle of Standard Abbas Rivalis, Page 342.
, which the Abbot of Revel in his History has taken particular Notice of. He
was succeeded by Fereth, Comes de Stradern, his Son, who is a Witness in a
Grant by King Malcolm IV. to the Convent of Scoon. He left Issue Three Sons,
Robert his Successor in the Honor, Gilbert thereafter Earl of Strathern, and
Malise to whom King William gave the Lands of Kincardine in the County of
Perth, to be held de Comite Roberto fratre suo Charta penes Ducem de Montrose.
.

In the 1200, this pious Earl, by the Persuasion of the then Bishop of
Dumblain, erected a Convent at Inchaffery, and endued it with a sufficient
annual Revenue for the Support and Maintenance of a certain Number of Religious
Persons to attend the Service of the Church, for the Soul of himself and his
Successors for ever Chartulary of Inchaffery penes Mauritium Murray fratrem
Domini Abercairny.
. He married Mary Daughter of William de Aubigni Ibidem.
Earl of Albemarle, by whom he had Malise his Son and Heir, and Two Daughters,
Anabella married to Sir David Graham of Dundaff, with whom he got the Barony of
Kincardin Charta penes D. de Montrose.
, and Matilda to Malcolm Earl of Fife Originol Charter of Lands by Earl Gilbert
to his Daughter in Sir Robert Sibbald's History of Fife, Page 96.
.

Which Malise made a great Figure in his Time, and was a very warlike Man: By
Mary his Wife, Daughter of Sir John Cummin of Badenoch, he had Malise his Son
and Heir, and a Daughter Mary, married to Sir John Murray of Drumshargard,
Knight; with her he obtained the Lands of Ogilvil, Abercairny, and Glenshirop
Charta penes D. Abercairny.
, which was afterward ratified by Malise Earl of Strathern, narrating, That
Malisius quondam Comes de Strathern Pater suus infeodavit Dominum Joannem de
Moravia de Drumshargard, in the foresaid Lands, cum Mariae de Strathern filiae
suae sponsae dicti Domini Joannis.

Malise the next Earl of Strathern was a most hearty Asserter of the Honor and
Liberty of his Country in the turbulent Times of the Bruce and Baliol. He
married one of the Coheirs of the Earl of Orkney, by whom he had one Daughter,
Joanna Countess of Strathern, who married the Earl of Warren an English Lord,
which engaged the Lady into Treasonable Practices against her Country; for with
sundry unnatural Scotsmen she entered into a Conspiracy with the English to
depose King Robert, and subject the Independency of this Nation to the English
Crown: But the Combination being happily discovered, the Countess and her
Associates were forfeited, and the most considerable of the Party, as the Lord
Brichen and the Lord Souls, suffered Death for the same.

The Earldom of Strathern being thus vested in the Crown, it was in 1543,
bestowed by King David the II. upon his great Favorite Sir Maurice Murray of
Drumshargard Mauricio Comite de Strathern is mentioned a Witness in a Charter
by King David to William Earl of Sutherland, Anno Regni sui decimo septimo.
, not of Bothwell, as our Historians have mistaken.

Thie gallant Earl in the Minority of King David II. performed many Actions of
signal Courage and Bravery in Defense of his Country, and of the Title of his
lawful Sovereign, which ought to be very particularly remembered for the Honor
of his Memory, but being slain at the Battle of Durham on the 17. of October
1346, and leaving no Issue behind him, his Brother Sir John Murray succeeded
only to his personal Estate, the Earldom of Strathern returning again to the
Crown.

STEWART, Earl of Strathern.
IN the 1367, King David II. did dignifie his Nephew Robert Lord High-Stewart
of Scotland with the Title of Earl of Strathern In a Charter 5th March, Anno
Regni Regis David 38, Robertus Seneschallus Scotiae is so designed, and the
first Time I have met with him, Comes de Strathern, penes Dom. Torphichen.
, which he enjoyed, till upon the Demise of his Uncle he came to the Crown, by
the Name of Robert the II. in the 1371, that his Majesty did then erect the
Earldom of Strathern into a County Palatine, in favors of Sir David Steuart,
his eldest by his Second Wife Eupham, Daughter of Hugh Earl of Ross, to be
enjoyed by him as freely as any other Earl of Strathern had done, and quod
dictus David and haeredes sui teneant and possideant ipsum Comitatum in
perpetuum, in liberam Regalitatem, Tertio Julii, Anno Regni nostri primo. He
left a Daughter Eupham his Heir, who, I have observed, was designed Comitissa
Palotinae de Strathern. She married Sir Patrick Graham, Son of Patrick Lord
Graham, who in her Right was Earl of Strathern. Their Son Malise was also Earl
of Strathern: But King James I. having recovered that Earldom from him, as
belonging to the Royal Patrimony, his Majesty in lieu thereof, and of his Royal
Bounty gave him the Earldom of Monteith, September 6th, 1428.

LION, Earl of Strathmore.
SIR Patrick Lion Lord Carse, a learned Lawyer, and a Lord of the Session in
the Time of King James VII. wrote a History of this noble Family, from which he
himself had the Honor to be descended, wherein he deduces their Origin from an
illustrious and very ancient Family, call,d D' Lion in France; a Branch whereof
settled in Scotland above Five hundred Years ago, and had by the Bounty of one
of our Kings, sundry Lands in the Shire of Perth, which were called Glen-Lyon,
after their own Surname, whose Successor Sir John Lion got from King David II.
the Baronies of Forteviot and Forgundeny in Perth-shire, the Lands of
Courtestoun and Drumgovan in Aberdeen-shire, propter fortem and fidelem operam
sibi and Patri s^o praestitam Charta penes C. de Strathmore.
.

Sir John Lion his Son being a Man of of very good Parts and Qualities, and a
very graceful and comely Person, was a great Favorite of King Robert II. for
upon that Prince's Accession to the Crown, he gave him the Lands of the
Thanedom of Glamis in Forfar-shire, propter laudabili and fideli servitio and
continuis labor^^us, as the Charter bears, 7th January 1374 Ibidem.
, and not long after preferred him to be Lord High Chamberlain of Scotland,
upon the Removal of Mr. Walter Biggar Parson of Errol Memoirs of the
Chamberlain^ of Scotland MS. penes me.
, and bestowed his Daughter the Lady Jean upon him in Marriage, and at the same
Time the Barony of Kinghorn nomine dotis, in which the King designs him,
carissimo filio nostro Joanni Lion militi camerario Scotiae.

In the 1382. the Lord Chamberlain was sent Ambassador to England; upon his
Return he had the Misfortune to fall into a fatal Quarrel with Sir James
Lindsay of Crawfurd, by whom he was slain at the Moss of Balhal, to the great
Regret of the King, who could never be prevailed with to pardon Sir James, though
he was his own Nephew by his Sister. By the Lady Jean Steuart his Wife he left
Issue,

John his only Son and Heir, who being young at his Father's Death, the King
his Grandfather took him into his own immediate Care and Patronage, Terras
suas, homines suos, and universas possessiones, omnia bona sua mobilia and
immobilia, strictly inhibiting and discharging any to harm him under the
highest Penalty the Law could inflict. He married Mary Daughter of Patrick
Graham Earl of Strathern, by whom he had

Patrick his Son and Heir, who was sent to England in 1423. one of the Hostages
for the Ransom of King James I. Rymer's Foedera Angliae.
He was of the Privy Council to King James II. by whom he was preferred to be
Master of the Household, upon the Promotion of William Lord Crechtoun to be
Chancellor, 1452 Charta in Pub. Archivis.
, and giving Way to Fate in the 1459 Lord Carse's Account of the Family of
Strathmore.
, left Issue by Isobel his Wife, Daughter of Sir Alexander Ogilvie of
A^chterhouse Ibidem.
, Alexander his Successor, John Lion of Courtestoun, thereafter Lord Glamis,
and William, of whom are descended both the Lions of Easter and Wester-Ogil
Ibidem.
.

Which Alexander married Agnes Daughter of William Lord Crichtoun, and dying
without Issue in 1473 Ibidem.
, his Estate and Honor devolved on

John his Brother and Heir, who, upon the Accession of King James IV. to the
Crown, was named one of the Lords of the Privy Council, and constituted
Justiciary of Scotland, Anno 1489 Charta in Pub. Arch. likewise the Black Acts
of Parliament.
, and departing this Life Anno 1497 Lord Carse's Account of the Family of
Strathmore.
, left Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Sir John Scrimzeor Constable of
Dundee, John his Son and Heir, David Lion first of the Family of Cossins, and a
Daughter Christian, married to William Earl of Errol.

Which John married Eliz. Daughter of Andrew Lord Gray, and had George his
Successor, and John who succeeded to his Brother, and a Daughter Elizabeth,
married to John Master of Forbes, and dying in 1500, was succeeded by

George his Son and Heir, who dying in his Minority, Anno 1505, his Estate and
Honor came to

John his Brother, who married Jean Daughter of George Master of Angus, and
dying a young Man in his 37th Year, on the 8th of August 1528 Charta in Pub.
Arch.
, was succeeded by

John his Son, who in the Year 1537. when but a Boy, was convicted of High
Treason, in that with his Mother he had conspired the Death of the King. By the
Sentence he is declared to have been guilty Art and Part proditoriae
Conciliationis, non Revelationis proditoriae Imaginationis, and Destructionis
nobilissimae Personae Serenissimi Domini nostri Regis per venenum: His Estate
being forfeited, it was annexed to the Crown, Anno 1540 Records of the Court of
Justiciary.
, and the Sentence of Death, by reason of his Youth, was suspended; yet he was
ordered to remain in Prison till he was of Age, and then to be executed. The
young Gentleman's Case was much pitied; for he was only a Boy, and could not be
thought to have any Malice in his Heart against the King, or any Body else. The
true Cause was thought to be the Resentment the King carried against the Earl
of Angus, whose Sister this young Lord's Mother was, and who suffered Death for
the Crime aforementioned: But upon the Death of King James V. in the first
Parliament of Queen Mary, Anno 1543, held by the Earl of Arran the Governor,
the Lord Glamis's Forfeiture was reduced, and he restored to his Estate and
Honor Records of Parliament 1543, in the Laigh Parliament House MS.
. He married Janet Daughter of William Earl Marishal, by whom he had John his
Successor, Sir Thomas Lion of Auldbar, Lord High Treasurer of Scotland in the
Reign of King James VI. and a Daughter Margaret, married first to Gilbert Earl
of Cassils, and after his Death, to John Marquis of Hamilton, and giving Way to
Fate in 1558, was succeeded in his Estate and Honor by

John his Son, who being a Nobleman of great Parts and Learning, was preferred
to be Lord High Chancellor of Scotland in 1575, upon the Demise of the Earl of
Argyle; and he held the Office till he was killed by a Pistolshot in a Tumult
on the Street of Siirling, March 7th 1577. The King sustained a wonderful Loss
in his Death, he being a Man of great Wisdom and Temper, and one very
universally loved and esteemed. Bishop Spot swood speaking of that dismal
Accident, says, The Death of the Chancellor was much lamented, falling out in
the Time when the King and Country stood in most Need of his Service: He had
carried himself with much Commendation in his Place, and acquired a great
Authority. Most careful was ^e to have Peace conserved both in the Country and
Church, and labored much to have the Question of Church-Policy settled; upon
which Subject he interchanged diverse Letters with Theodore Beza, a learned
foreign Divine. He married Elizabeth Daughter of Alexander Lord Abernethy of
Saltoun, by whom he had Patrick his Son and Heir; also several Daughters.

Jean, married to Robert Douglas younger of Lochlevin, Son and Heir apparent to
William Earl of Mortoun; next, to Archibald Earl of Angus, and after that to
Alexander first Lord Spainzie.

Elizabeth, to Patrick Lord Gray, sans Issue.

Which Patrick being one of the Lords of the Privy Council to King James VI.
and a Person of Fame and Reputation for Prudence and Integrity, was named one
of the Commissioners on the Part of Scotland to treat of an Union with England
1604 B. Spotswood's Church History.
, and by his Majesty's most gracious Favor, was by Letters Patent bearing Date
10th July 1606, created Earl of Kinghorn Charta in Pub. Arch.
. He married Ann Daughter of John 1st Earl of Tillybardin by whom he had John
his Successor, James Lion of Auldbar, Frederick, of whom issued the Branch of
the Lions of Brigtoun, and a Daughter Ann, married to William Earl of Errol;
and departing this Life on the 19th of December 1615, was succeeded in his
Estate and Honor by

John his Son, who married first Margaret Daughter of John Earl of Mar, by whom
he had no Issue, and again Elizabeth Daughter of Patrick 1st Earl of Panmure,
by whom he had Patrick his Successor, and a Daughter Elizabeth, married to
Charles 1st Earl of Aboyne. He died on the 12th May 1647 Lord Carse's Account
of the Family of Strathmore.
, and was succeeded by

Patrick his Son, who with the Consent and Approbation of his Majesty King
Charles II. did change his Title from Kinghorn to Srathmore. He was one of the
Lords of the Privy Council both in this and the succeeding Reign of King James
VII. and one of the Four Extraordinary Lords of the Session. He married Helen
Daughter of John 1st Earl of Middleton, by whom he had John his Successor,
Master Patrick Lion of Auchterhouse; also Two Daughters, Grissel married to
David Earl of Airly, and Elizabeth first to Charles Earl of Aboyne, and after
to Patrick Lord Kinnaird; and dying in the 1695, was succeeded by,

John Earl of Strathmore his Son, who married Elizabeth Daughter of Philip Earl
of Chesterfield, of the Kingdom of England; and departing this Life the 10th of
May 1712, left Issue by his Lady aforesaid,

Patrick Lord Glamis, who died a very hopeful Youth,

Philip, who died likewise Lord Glamis, not long before his Father,

John his Successor, the present Earl of Strathmore,

Charles,

James,

Thomas,

Lady Helen married to Robert Lord Blantyre.

Lady Mary.

ARMS.
Argent. A Lion rampant. Azure, armed and langued Gules within a double
Tressure, flowered and counterflower'd of the Second. The Supporters, an
Unicorn Argent. on the Dexter, and on the Sinister a Lion rampant, Gules.
Crest, A Lady above the Middle, holding in her Hand a Thistle, Vert, encircled
with a Garland of Bay proper. Motto, In te Domine speravi.

SUTHERLAND, Earl of Sutherland
THERE is a particular History written of this noble ancient Family in English,
by a very able Pen, the Learned Sir Robert Gordon of Gordonstoun, Baronet; and
very accurately epitomized by Mr. Ross, in Latin the Author of the Pansebeia;
wherein both Sir Robert and Mr. Ross have been at much Pains to vouch the
Antiquity, and illustrate the Descent of the Earls of Sutherlands, and they
have done it so well, and instructed it so clear, that the Peerage of this
illustrious Family is not only one of the oldest with us in Scotland, but for
what I know of any other Nation of Europe. And I cannot but remark, that our
Historians do make mention, that the Family of Sutherland were Thanes before
the Title of Earl was introduced among us; for not only Sir Robert Gordon and
Mr. Ross, but even our public National Historians do take Notice, That Allan
Thane of Sutherland, a brave and warlike Man, gave a very signal Defeat to a
Detachment of the Danish Army who invaded the Country of Sutherland, and that
he was cruelly put to Death and murdered under the Usurpation of Macbeth, for
his firm Adherence to his rightful Sovereign King Malcolm Canmore, King
Duncan's Son, and for endeavoring to set him on his Father's Throne; and when
in Providence that was happily brought about, that heroic and generous Prince
thought it but just to restore the Children of such who had been forfeited on
his Account during the Usurpation; and therefore, Walter, the Son of Allan
Thane of Sutherland, in Memory of his Father's Merit, as well as his own signal
Services in contributing toward the Restoration, was not only restored to his
Estate and Honor, but was likewise one of those whom that King further
dignified with the then introduced Title of Earl 1057 Sir Robert Gordon,
Buchanan, and Hume.
, and dying 1097, was succeeded by,

Robert his Son and Heir who built the Castle of Dunrobin, which he called
after his own Name, which is still the principal Seat of this noble Family.
This Earl was employed to apprehend Harold Earl of Caithness, who had committed
a very horrible and barbarous Murder upon the Bishop of Caithness, whom he
brought to exemplary Justice. He was succceeded by,

Hugh his Son, called for Distinction Hugh Friskin, i. e. Hugh with the ready
Whinger, because he was a bold daring Man. He attacked the Danes when they
invaded his Country, whom he de^eat in Battle at Embo in Sutherland, and slew
their General.

To Hugh Earl of Sutherland succeeded William his Son, who died 1248, and was
succeeded by

William his Son who in the Reign of King Alexander II. entered into a solemn
Agreement with Archibald then Bishop of Caithness, wherein both Parties
narrate, That there had been a long Dispute and Controversy inter venerabiles
Patres Predecessores nostros, Gilbertum, Willielmum, and Walterum, bonae
memoriae, Episcopos Cathaniae, ex una part, and nobiles viros Willielmum
clarae memoriae, and Willielmum ejus filium, Comites Sutherlandiae, relative to
the Lands of Skilbo, Pronsie, Therbolt, and Others claimed by the Chapter of
that See, which after a long Dispute was amicably composed by a solemn
Agreement, dated decimo Kalendarum Octobris 1275 Gordon.
. This Earl the younger made a very great Figure in the Reign of Alexander III.
in the 1284, he is one of the Magnates Scotiae, who solemnly bound themselves
with their Oaths and Seals, That in Default of Male Issue of the King's Body,
to acknowledge and receive Margaret Daughter of Erick King of Norway, King
Alexander's Grandchild by his Daughter, as their Sovereign and Queen of
Scotland Rymer.
. And when the Succession did take Place in the Person of that young Princess,
through the Demise of her Grandfather, this noble Earl was one of the Peers who
addressed King Edward I. of England, That a Treaty of Marriage might be set on
Foot betwixt his Son the Prince of Wales and the young Queen of Scotland,
whereby the Two Kingdoms might be for ever unite under one Sovereign; but the
Death of the young Princess falling out soon thereafter, the Treaty which was
concluded, had no Effect. When the Competition happened about the Succession to
the Crown betwixt Robert Bruce and John Baliol, the Earl of Sutherland was one
of those great Men who were appointed to go to Berwick to hear King Edward's
Decision of that grand Affair; the Determination of which had been referred to
him. Upon the breaking out of the War thereafter, he was firm to that Side
which did most regard the Honor, Interest, and Independency of his Country,
and was very assistant in bringing King Robert the Bruce to, and maintaing him
on the Throne. He did in a very eminent Manner signalize his Valor and Courage
at the famous Battle of Banno^kburn, whereby the Slavery and Usurpation under
which Scotland had long groand, was gloriously redem'd and retrieved. The same
Earl is one of the Peers, who, with other great Men of the Kingdom, wrote that
memorable Letter to the Pope in 1320, to which all of them put their Seals; a
rare Piece of Antiquity. The learned Mr. Anderson has with great Exactness and
Curiosity caused finely engrave it on Copper-Plate in his elaborate Treatise,
De Rebus Diplomaticis Scotiae, collected and published by him at the Command of
the Parliament of Scotland, under the Title of Litera Communitatis Scotiae ad
Papam, A. D. 1320.

To William Earl of Sutherland succeeded Kenneth his Son, who was very faithful
to King David Bruce, as his Father had been to King Robert, in whose Service,
and in that of his Country (for they were inseparable) he lost his Life
fighting gallantly at the Battle of Halidon-hill, where he commanded the Van of
the Army, on the 19th of July 1333 ( c), leaving Issue, William his Son and
Heir, and Nicol, of whom the Sutherlands of the Family of Duffus are derived.

Which William was one of those valiant and loyal Peers who accompanied King
David to the Battle of Durham Anno 1346, and was taken Prisoner with him. After
the Earl's Releasment he was one of the Scots Plenipotentiaries, authorized to
treat with the English anent the Redemption of the King; and when that Treaty
proved successful, Alexander the Earl of Sutherland's Son and Heir was sent to
England one of the Hostages for the Ransom, and how soon the King took Journey
for his own Dominions, he was met and attended by certain of the Nobility with
a great Retinue, of which Number this noble Earl, who had the Honor to be his
Brother-in-law, was one. He married the Lady Margaret Bruce, Daughter of King
Robert I. and Sister of the full Blood to King David the II. from whom he
obtained a very noble Charter, on the 10th of November 1347, to himself and his
Wife the Lady Margaret the King's Sister, which is still preserved in the
Annals of this illustrious Family, as well as our national Records, Willielmo
Comiti de Sutherland, and Margaret^ sponsae suae, carissimae sorori nostrae,
quod ipsi and haeredes legi^imae inter ipsos procreand, habeant, tenean. and
possideant totum Comitatum Sutherlandiae, in liberam Regalitatem in perpetuum.
By the Lady Margaret Bruce aforesaid his Wife, he had Alexander his his eldest
Son, who died in England one of the Hostages for the Ransom of the King his
Uncle, in the Li^etime of his Father, and John, called John ^orn out of Time by
the Highlanders, his Successor in the Earldom. This noble Earl John signalised
his Courage during the War betwixt the two Nations, in the Reign of King Robert
II. particularly in the 1380, together with the Lord Galloway he entered
England, spoiled Cumberland, and returned with a great Booty, and dying Anno
1389 le^t Issue by Mabella his Wife, Daughter to the Earl of March, Nicolas his
Successor, and Hector, of whom the Sutherlands of Dalrite.

Which Nicolas was a Person of great Courage and Conduct, which he manifested
very much in those turbulent Times in which he lived. He married.......
Daughter to the Lord of the Isses, by whom he had Robert his Successor, John of
whom the Sutherlands of Berindale, and Kenneth, of whom came the Sutherlands of
Forse, and departing this Life Anno 1399, was succeeded by

Robert his Son, who signalized his Valor and Courage at the Battle of
Hamildon against the English, Anno 1401. This Earl had many Contests with his
Neighbors the Mackays, which proved fatal to the Latter; and tho he lived in
very turbulent Times, he had the Happiness, by his Prudence and Conduct, to
preserve his Country both from Faction and Invasion. He marrid....... Daughter
of Thomas Dunbar Earl of Murray, by her he had John his Successor, and Kenneth
Sutherland of Torish, and dying Anno 1442, was succeeded by

John his Son, who married Margaret Daughter of Sir William Baillie of
Lamingtoun, by whom he had Alexander Master of Sutherland, who died in the
Lifetime of his Father, leaving no Issue save a Daughter Marjorie, married to
William Earl of Orkney and Caithness, John the next Earl, Nicolas and Thomas;
also two Daughters, Jean married to Sir James Dunbar of Cum^ock, and Elizabeth
to...... Meld^um of that Ilk. He died in the 1460, and was succeeded by

John his Son, who married Elizabeth Daughter of Alexander Earl of Ross, by her
he had John his Successor in the Earldom, who died without Issue, Anno 1508,
and a Daughter Elizabeth Countess of Sutherland, who was her Brother's Heir
both in his Estate and Honor. She married Adam Gor don of A^oyne, Son of
George Earl of Hu^tley, who it appears plainly according to the Custom with us,
was only in the Lady's R^ght Earl of Sutherland. This Adam and the Countess his
Wife did resign the Earldom of Sutherland in the Hands of King James V. in
Favors of Alexander Master of Sutherland their Son, who thereupon obtained a
Charter under the Great Seal, of the same which heritably belonged to the
Countess his Mother, to be held as freely and as honorably by him in omnibus,
and per omnia, ficut dicta E^izabetha, vel predecessores sui dictum Commitatum
tenuerunt se^ poss^derunt, reservato tamen ^iber^ tenemento totius dicti
Comitatus and suis pertinen dictae Elizabethae Comi^issae de Sutherland, and
Adae Gordon sponso suo, pro toto tempore vitae suae, ratione Curialitatis
Scotiae, dated 15th December 1527. This Master of Sutherland married Janet
Stewart Daughter of John Earl of Ath^le, by whom he had a Son, John, who
succeeded to the Earldom on the Demise of his Gandmother, and Grandfather, whom
Death overtook the 7th of March 1537. This Earl was a Man of great Parts, and
most zealously affected to the Roman Catholic Church at the Beginning of the
Reformation, insomuch as the Queen Regent made him Governor and Lieutenant of
the Kingdom from Spey Northward, and of the Shires of Murray and Ross, and got
him made a Knight of St. Michael by Henry III of France, to whose Interest he
was very well affected. He married first Elizabeth, Daughter of Archbald Earl
of Argyle, Widow of James Earl of Murray, but had no Issue by her; next, Helen
Daughter of John Earl of Lennox, Countess Dowger of Errol, by whom he had
Alexander his Successor and a Daughter, Janet, married to Robert Innes of that
Ilk, and last of all, Marion, Daughter of George Lord Seton, Rel^ct of William
Earl of Monteith, but by her he had no Issue; and giving Way to Fate in the
Month of July 1567, was succeeded by

John his Son, who married first Barbara Daughter of George Earl of Caithness,
and again Jean Daughter of Alexander Earl of Huntley, formerly the Wi^e of
James Earl of Bothwell, by whom he had John his Son and Heir, Sir Robert Gordon
of Gordonstoun Baronet, Sir Alexander Gordon of Averdale Knight; also two
Daughters, Jean married to Hugh Mackay of Fare, and Margaret to David Ross of
Balnagown. He died the 6th of December 1594, his Estate and Honor devolving on

John his Son, who married Ann Daughter of John Lord Elphingstoun, by whom he
had John his Successor; also two Daughters, Elizabeth married to Sir James
Crichton of Frendraught, and Ann to Sir Gilbert Menzies of Pitfoddel; and
departing this Life the 4th of December 1615, was succeeded by

John his Son, who being educated in the Protestant Religion, was very zealous
in that Communion, insomuch as he was one of the Peers who were most violent
against the Liturgy and the Service Book, which the King introduced in the
1637; and from the Beginning of the Troubles to the very End of the War, he
adhered to the Parliament with great Firmness and Constancy, and with as full a
Zeal as any Man of that Time; and when the Parliament 1649 would no longer
trust the Privy Seal in the Hands of the Earl of Roxburgh, who was deprived by
the Act of Classes, they preferred the Earl of Sutherland to it, who kindly
accepted it as a Testimony of their Favor, and he held the Place till all the
Offices of State were suppressed by Oliver Cromwell. This noble Lord married Jean
only Daughter of James 1st Earl of Perth, by whom he had

George his Son and Heir, a Nobleman of great Goodness and most exemplary
Virtue, who throughout his whole Life had the Reputation of a Person of
singular Integrity. He married Jean Daughter of David Earl of Weems, Widow of
Archibald Lord Angus, an eminent and devout Lady, by whom he had John his
Successor, and a Daughter Anne married to Robert Viscount of Arbuthnot, and
departing this Life 4th March 1703, was interred at the Abbay Church of
Holyroodhouse, where a sumptuous Monument is erected to ^is Memory.

Which John was one of the Lords of the Privy Council to King William, during
whose Reign he had the Command of a Regiment of Foot. His Lordship was also of
the Privy Council to Queen Anne, by whom he was appointed one of the
Commissioners for the Treaty of Union with England, on the Conclusion of which
he was chosen one of the Sixteen Peers to the first Parliament of Great
Britain; and after the Accession of King George to the Crown, the Earl was
named Lord Lieutenant of the Counties of Inverness, Elgin, Nairn, Cromarty,
Ross, Sutherland and Caithness, and Stewartries of Orkney and Zetland, Anno
1715. He married first Helen Daughter of William Lord Cochran, by whom he had
Issue,

William Lord Strathnaver.

Lady Jean married to John Lord Maitland.

Lady Helen.

He married next Dame Katharine Talmash, Widow of James Lord Down, but by her
he had no Issue.

John Lord Strathnaver married Katharine Daughter of William Morison of
Prestongrange, by whom he has Issue, John Master of Strathnaver.

ARMS.
Gules, Three Mollets, within a double Tressure, flour'd and counterflour'd,
Or, This ancient Family bears a double Treassure, as descended from a Daughter
of King Robert I. which as this illustrious Descent is nobly documented by the
Earl's own Charters, so it is very Honorably attested by the Crown, in the
Warrant to the Lord Lion for that Effect.
Supporters, Two Savages wreathed about the Head and Loins with Laurel, holding
Batons in their Hands. Crest, a Cat. Motto, Without Fear.

WALTER SCOT, Earl of Tarras.
WAS of a very ancient and worthy Family, of the Scots of Harden in
Roxburgh-Shire. Mr. Scot being a young Gentleman of good Parts and Breeding,
and of a competent Fortune for a younger Brother, was preferred to the Marriage
of the eldest Daughter and Heiress of Francis Earl of Buccleugh, the Lady Mary
Scot; whereupon he was by King Charles II. dignified with the Title of Earl of
Tarras for his own Lifetime, by Letters Patent, bearing Date the 4th of
September 1660.

RUTHERFORD, Earl of Teviot.
LIEUTENANT General Thomas Rutherford, being first honored by King Charles II.
with the Title of Lord Rutherford, to him and his Heirs and Assignies, as I
observed on that Pe^r^ge, was further dignified by his said Majesty, with the
Honor of Earl of Teviot: But the Title of Earl being restricted to the Heirs
Male of the General's own Body, it expired with himself, Man 4th, 1664.

ROB. SPENCER, Viscount of Teviot.
THE Honor of Viscount of Teviot was conferred by King (...) VII. (...) 1686,
upon Robert Lord (...), eldest Son of Robert Earl of Sunderland, of the Kingdom
of England; but his Lordship dying in France unmarried, in the Lifetime of his
Father, the Title became extinct.

THO. LIVINGSTON, Viscount of Teviot.
THE next who was dignified with this Title, was Sir Thomas Livingston, Son of
Sir Alexander Livingston Baronet; who, though he lived in Holland, yet was of the
most ancient Extract of the Livingstons of Jerviswood in Lanerkshire in this
Kingdom.

Sir Thomas from his Youth dedicated himself to the Profession of a Soldier,
under the Prince of Orange, the late King William; and having served in several
lesser Commands with great Reputation for Courage, was made Colonel of a
Regiment of Foot in the Prince of Orange's Expedition to Britain. Upon the
Prince's coming to the Crown, Sir Thomas Livingston had the Command of a
Regiment of Dragoons, wherewith having performed many Actions of signal Courage
and Conduct, he was sometime thereafter preferred to be Commander in Chief of
all his Majesty's Forces in Scotland, and named one of the Lords of the Privy
Council. King William had so great a Value for him, that besides the particular
Marks of his Favor, which on many Occasions he evidenced to him before, as a
further Instance of his gracious Favor, was pleased to honor him with the
Title of Viscount of Teviot, by Letters Patent 4th of December: School. Charta in
Rotulis R. Will.
, and to the Heirs Male of his Body for ever: But his Lordship had the same
Fate with his Predecessors in this Title to leave no Issue behind him; for he
died at London on the 14th of January 1711, in the 60th Year of his Age, and
was interred at the Abbay of Westminster, where Sir Alexander Livingston his
Brother, who was his Heir, caused erect a noble Monument to his Memory.

MURRAY, Earl of Tillybardin.
THE Ancestor of this illustrious and most noble Family, was one Friskinus, a
great Baron in the Northern Parts, in the Time of King Malcolm, whose Son
William took the Surname de Moravia from the County of Murray, which was his
own Inheritance by Descent, and left a Son William his Heir, Willielmus de
Moravia, filius Willielmi filii Friskini, whose Son Sir Malcom de Moravia, Knight.
was possessed of a fair Estate in the County of Perth, in the Time of King
Alexander II. and elsewhere, who by his Charter gave Willielmo de Moravia filio
suo totas Terras suas de Lamabude coram A. Episcopo Moraviae, Willielmo de Haya
de Locheruard, and Michaele de Weems Militibus Charta penes Ducem de Athole.
. The same noble Person, designed afterward Dominus Willielmus de Moravia
Miles, filius Domini Malcolmi de Moravia Militis, got the Barony of
Tillybardine by the Marriage of Adda Daughter of Sir Henry Senescal de
Strathern, by Mauriel his Wife, Daughter and Heir of Congal Baron of
Tillybardine Confirm. Alexandri Regis Scotorum, quod Robertus Comes de
Strathern fecit Congal filio Duncani silii Malcolmi, de illis Terris in villa
sua Cacherlanach, quae dicitur Tillybardine, Test Williclmo Episcopo
Glasguensi Cancellario, Tertio Aprilis Anno Reg^^ Regis vicesimo.
, which was ratified to Sir William Murray by Henricus filius quondam Domini
Malissi Seneschalli de Strathern, illam Donationem quam Domina Mauriella matter
mea, filta Congal, dedit and concessit Domin^ Willielmo de Moravia, filio
Domini Malcolmi de Moravia, and Addae filiae dictae Dominae Mauriellae, sororis
meae, de Tillybardine, secundum tenorem Chartae quam dictus Dominus Willielmus
and Adda soror mea habent de praedicta Mauriella maire mea, apud Duffally, die
Martis, in Vigilia omnium Sanctorum, Anno Aerae ^^^llesimo ducentesimo
octogesimoo quarto. From this Sir William the Line of the Family of
Tillybardine being regularly deduced on the House of Athol, I shall not repeat
what is there said; only for illustrating the Title here, it is necessary to
observe, that William the 2d Earl of Tillybardine succeeding to the Dignity of
Earl of Athol, in Right of his Wife Dorothea, the eldest of the Four Daughters,
and Coheirs of John 5th Earl of Athol of the Stewartine Line, did in the 1626.
resign the Title of Earl of Tillybardine, to the End it might be conferred on
his Brother Sir Patrick Murray, which his Majesty King Charles I. was pleased
to do by Letters Patent 31st January 1628. He married Elizabeth Daughter of....
Dent, Esquire by whom he had James his Successor, and William Murray Esquire a young
Man of great Magnanimity and Courage, who was put to Death at St. Andrews,
after Philiphaugh, for being in Arms under the Marquis of Montrose, whose
Memory ought to be patricularly honored and preserved.

Which James married first Lilias Daughter of John Earl of Perth, and again
Lilias Daughter of Sir James Drummond of Machany; but dying without Issue, both
his Estate and Honor devolved on John Marquis of Athole.

SANDILANDS, Lord Torphichen.
IN the 17th Year of the Reign of King David the II. Anno 1346, Willielmus de
Douglas Dom. ejusdem loci, gave dilecto Armigero suo Jacobo de Sandilands, pro
homagio and servitio suo, omnes Terras suas de Sandilands and Reidmyre per suas
rectas Metas and divisas antiquas infra dominium Vallis de Douglas (c). This
gallant Man did very eminent Service to the Crown in the War with England in
that Reign, in which he did very notably signalize his Valor in several bold
Encounters under the Conduct of the brave Lord Douglass, in which they had
always the better of the Enemy, I presume it was in Consideration of his great
Worth and Virtue, that the Lord Douglas bestowed upon him his Sister the Lady
Eleanor Bruce in Marriage, and with her he gave him totam Baroniam de
Wester-Calder, Charta penes D. Torphicnen.
cum omnibus suis pertinentiis, in liberam Moritagiam, and eorum haeredibus
mascults ^eu faemellis inter se pro creandis, in fendo and haereditate in per
petuum, adeo libere, quiet, integre, honorifice, sicut ego aut Prederessores
mei dictam baroatam de Domino Duncano Comite de Fife, liberius aut quietius
tenui vel ten^crunt. By the said noble Lady he had Issue, James his Successor,
and (...) married to Sir Gilbert Kennedy of Dunnure.

Which James being a Person of great Honor an Merit, was made a Knight by King
Robert the II. who had a great Value and Esteem of him, insomuch as he gave him
the Lady Jean, one of his own lawful Daughters, in Marriage; about which time
the King gave (...) and fideli suo Jacobo de Sandiiands mi^iti baroniam de
Dalyel and Modervile, baroniam de Wistoun, cum perti^^n, infra Vic. de Lanerk,
terr as de Otter bannock and Erthby sat, and de Slamenen infra Vic. de
Strivelyn, which Sir James himself resigned tenend. and habend. eidem Domino
Jacobo and Johannae filiae meae charissimae, quam idem Dominus Jacobus Deo Duce
ducet in ^xorem Datum apud Edinb. vicesimo die Novembris, Anno Regni Regis
decimo quarto.
, and the next ensuing Year, when the Marriage was solemnized, the King his
Father in Law did by his Royal Deed discharge and make over dilecto filis suo
Jacobo Sandilands militi illas quadr^ginta solidas Sterling^rum nobis debit.
pro Castri war da bar^niae de Calder, tenend. and habend. eidem Jacobo and
Johannae sponsae suae filiae nostrae charissimae, and haeredibus inter ipsos
legi^ime procreat seu procreandis Datum apud Calder vicefimo quarto die Maii,
Anno Regni nostri decimo quarto.
in perpetuum. By the Lady Jean his Wife he had

James his Son and Heir, whom King Robert, in a Right to him of the Barony of
Cavers, designs dilecto nepoti suo Charta penes Dom. Torphichen.
. The same Sir James, designed Dominus de Calder, was one of the Barons who
attended King James the I. from Durham home to Scotland, when he was released
from his Captivity in England, and was after that one of the Hostages for the
King's Ransom Rymera Foedera Angliae.
, and dying in 1434, was succeeded by

Sir John Sandilands Lord of Calder his Son, who was infeft in the Lands of
Sandilands, upon his Superior the Earl of Douglass's Precept Charta penes D.
Torphichen.
. This noble Person was in great Favor with his Sovereign King James II. who
looked on him as a Man of great Honor and Integrity, and being superior to all
Temptation of Infidelity, he was by the dark Contrivance of the Earl of
Douglass, most barbarously assassinated by an obscure Fellow on Thor^toun,
within the Verge of the Court, Anno 1456 Drummond's History of King James II.
likewise Bucnanan.
, leaving Issue by.... Daughter of..... his Wife, John his Son and Heir, who in
the 1446. made over his Estate to Sir James his Son and Heir apparent who
married first Margaret Daughter and Heir of John Kinolch of Crovy Charta penes
D. Torphichen.
, by whom he had John his Son and Heir apparent, who died in the Lifetime of
his Father, leaving Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter and Coheir of Sir
James Scrimzeor of Duddop Charta in Pub. ^rch. ad Annum 1478, collected by
Scotstarvet, MS. penes me, when he was Director, of the Chancery.
, a Son James, who was his Grandfather's Successor in the hereditary Estate of
the Family, who carried on the Line of this noble House. Sir James the old Man
married to his 2d Wife, Margaret Daughter of..... K^r of.... by whom he had Sir
James Sandilands, the First of the Saint M^nans Branch, the Ancestor of the
Family of Abercromby Charta penes D. Torphichen ad Annum 1506.
in the County of Fife.

To Sir James Sandilands of Calder succeeded Sir James his Grandson, who was a
Person of great Wisdom and of the most exemplary Piety and Virtue. He married
Marion Daughter of Archibald Forrester of Corstorphin Charta in Pub. Arch.
etiam penes D. Torphichen.
, by whom he had John his Successor in the Barony of Calder, and Sir James
Sandilands Lord St. John; also several Daughters.

Alison married to Sir John Cockburn of Ormistoun, Knight. Ibidem.
and had Issue.

Margaret, to William Wauchop of Niddery Ibidem.
, and had Issue:

Of these Sons Sir James the younger being the Person who was first raised to
this Honor, I shall for that Reason be a little more particular in my Memoirs
of him.

Sir James Sandilands being a young Man of good Parts, and bred a Scholar, was
by Sir Walter Lindsay Lord St. John recommended to the Great Master of the
Order of the Knights of Malta, as a Person well qualified to be his Successor
in the Preceptory of Torphichen; and Mr. Sandilands traveling into those
Parts, and having resided for some Years at the Isle of Malta, he gave such
Proofs of his Learning and Sufficiency for the Discharge of that Function, that
he was with all the necessary Forms received by the Grand P^io^ of the Hospital
and his Chapter, to be one of the Knights of that ancient military Order, and
inaugurate future Successor to Sir Walter Lindsay, by whose Death in the 1543.
he was fully invested in the Title, Power, and Jurisdiction of Lord St. John of
Jerusalem in Scotland, and entirely in the Possession of the Revenue thereof,
which was very great, and spread through the whole Kingdom. Sir James being
looked on as a Man of a wonderful Gravity and Wisdom was employed, both in the
Time of King James V. and Queen Mary, in several Embassies, as in England and
in France, in which Negotiations he behaved with great P^udence and Dexterity.

Upon the great Change which fell out at the Time of the Reformation, the Lord
St. John renounced Popery, and embraced the Protestant Religion; and having
resigned the Lordship of St. John in the Hands of Queen Mary, her Highness was
graciously pleased, in Consideration of Sir James's great Merit and Services,
to grant and dispone heritably to him, his Heirs and Assigneys, the foresaid
Lordship and hail Preceptory of Torphichen, for the Sum of Ten thousand Crowns
of the Sun, which he presently paid down, besides an yearly Annuity of Five
hundred Merks, which was then erected into the Lordship of Torphichen, by a
Charter under the Great Seal 24th of January 1563 Ibidem.
. He married Janet Daughter of..... Murray of Polmais Ibidem.
, but dying without Issue, his Estate and Honor of Lord Torphichen devolved to

James Sandilands of Calder his Great Nephew This noble Person so succeeding
was the Son o^ Sir James Sandilands of Calder, by Jean his Wife Daughter of
James Lord Ross, and he of Jo^n Sandilands of Calder, Elder Brother to James
Lord St. John the first Lord Torphichen, by Margaret his Wi^e, Daug^ter of Sir
Robert Barton of Over-barton, Lord High-Treasurer of Scotland in the Reign of
King James V. The same John, by Jean his 2d Wife, Daughter of John Lord
Fleeming, had Sir James Sandilands of Slamenen, one of the Gentlemen of the
Bedchamber to King James VI. of w^om frequent Mention is made in the History
of that Reign by Dr. John Spotsw^od Archbishop of St. Andrews.
, who married Elizabeth Daughter of James Heriot of Trabroun, and after that
Mary Daughter of Gilbert Lord Somervile Charta penes D. Torphichen.
. By the former he had James his Successor, and John afterward Lord Torphichen,
Walter Sandilands of Hilderstoun; likewise a Daughter Isobel, married to Hugh
Wallace of Ellerslie in Vic. de Renfrew, and had Issue; and departing thi^ Life
17. August 1617 Charta penes D. Torphichen.
, was succeeded by J^mes his Son, who dying unmarried in the Month of January
1622, his Estate and Honor fell to his Brother,

John Lord Torphichen, who married Isobel Daughter of Sir Walter D^nd^s^ of
That-Ilk Ibidem.
, and departing this Life 12th of July 1637 Ibidem.
, left Issue, John his Son and Heir, who died unmarried the 10th July 1649,
Walter his Brother's Successor in the Honor, also Two Daughters,.... married
to Sir Thomas Kilpatri^k of Closeburn in Vic. de Dumfrile, and had Issue, and
M^rgaret to Thomas M^^^rybanks o^ That Ilk in Vic. de Lithgow, and had Issue.

Which Walter married first Jean, only Daughter of Alexander L^ndsay of Edzle
by Ann his Wife, Daughter of John Earl of Weems, by whom he had no Issue; next,
Katharine Daughter of William Lord Alexander, Son and Heir of William 1st Earl
of Stirling, by whom he had two Daughters, Ann married to..... Menzies of Weem
in Vic. de Perth, and had Issue, and Katharine to David Dr^mmond of
Cul^malindie, sans Issue. His Third Wife was Ann Daughter of Alexander Lord
Elphingstoun; and last of all, Co^^stian Daughter and sole Heir of James
Prim^rose Esquire Brother to Sir Archibald Primerose of Dalmeny. Ancesto^ to the
present Viscount of Primerose, by whom he had James his Son and Heir, John
Sandilands Esquire likewise Two Daughters, Christian married to Robert Pringle Esquire
and had Issue, and Magdalene as yet unmarriried; and dying in May 1696, was
succeeded by

James the present Lord Torphichen his ^on, who married Jean Daughter of
Patrick Earl of Marchmount, Lord High Chancellor of Scotland, by whom he has
Issue, James Master of Torphichen, Walter, Andrew, Gr^ssil, and Christian.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th, parti per fess Azure and Or, an Imperial Crown on a
Thistle Sinople flowered Gules 2d and 3d. Quarterly, Quartered, 1st and 4th.
Argent. a bend Azure, 2d and 3d, a Heart, Gules Ensign'd with an Imperial
Crown, Or. on a Chief Azure, Three Stars of the First. Supporters, Two Lions
Rampant, Gules. Crest, an Eagle displayed, Or. Motto, Spero meliora.

STEWART, Earl of Traquair.
THE Paternal Ancestor of this most noble Family was James Earl of Buchan,
uterine Brother to King James II. and Lord high Chamberlain of Scotland in the
Reign of King James III. who had by the Bounty of that Prince, the Lands and
Barony of Traquair, then in the Crown by the Forfeiture of William de Moravia
Charta in Pub. Arch. ^d Annum 1478.
, which the Earl gave off as a Patrimony to James Steuart his Son, by Margaret
his 2d Wife, Daughter of.... Murray of Philliphaugh Charta in Pub. Arch. ad
Annum 1492. likewise Mr. Martine of Clearmont's Genealogical Collections.
, which was confirmed to him by a Charter under the Great Seal of King James
IV. May 18th 1492. He obtained the Baronies of Rutherfoord and Wells in the
County of Roxburgh, by the Marriage of Katharin^ Daughter, and at length sole
Heir of R^chara Rutherford of That-Ilk Charta penes me.
, whereupon he conjoined the Arms of his Wife with his own, which is still bore
in the At chievment of this illustrious Family. This noble Person waited on his
Sovereign King James IV. to the Battle of F^udoun, with whom he lost his Life
in the Service of his Country, on the dismal 9th of September 1513, leaving
Issue by Katha^ine his Wife aforesaid,

William his Son and Heir, who had a Charter under the B^oad Seal of King James
IV. erecting all his Lands into the Barony of Traqu^ir, Anno 1511 Charta in
Pub. Arch. ad Annum 1511.
, upon the Surrender of James Steuart of Traquatr his Father, and of Kathar^ne
R^therford his Mother. He married Christian Hay Daughter of John Lord Hay of
Yester Ibidem, etiam Charta penes March. de Tweddale.
, by whom he had William his Son and Heir, who by.... his Wife Daughter of....
had Robert his Successon, who dying with out Issue 9th September 1548 Charta
penes C. de Traquair.
, was succeeded by

John his Brother and Heir, who had the Honor of Knighthood conferred on him
at the Creation of Henry Duke of Aloany, and was constituted Captain of the
Guard to Queen Mary, Anno 1566 Ibidem.
, but he dying without Issue,

Sir William Steuart of Caverston his Brother was retoured Heir to him on the
14th of March 1594 Charta in Pub. Arch.
, he was by the Favor of the Duke of Lennox, made one of the Gentlemen of the
Bed chamber to King James VI. and Captain and Governor of Dumbartoan Castle
Ibidem.
Anno 1582, but he dying likewise unmarried 20th May 1605, was succeeded by

James his Brother, who dying an old Man 9th May 1606, was succeeded by John
his Grandson, Son of John Steuart of Caverston his eldest Son, who died in the
Lifetime of his Father, by Margaret his Wife, a Daughterof the Lord Ochiltree's
Family.

Which John being a Person of great Parts, and of an excellent Understanding,
was elected Knight of the Shire to the Parliament 1621 Sir James Dalrymple's
Cambden, Edit, 1694.
, for the County of Twedale, where his Parts were quickly taken Notice of, and
having behaved himself very well in all Things relating to the Crown, his
Majesty King James VI. was pleased to call him to his Council, and to confer
the Honor of Knighthood on him.

King Charles I. soon after his coming to the Crown, contracted an
extraordinary Opinion of Sir John Stewart, as a Man w^ll versed in all Parts of
Learning, and of great Experience in Affairs, insomuch as he pre^erred him to
the Honor of the Peerage, 19th of April 1628 Charta in Cancellaria S. D. N. R.
by the Title of Lord Steuart of Traqua^r, and made him Treasurer-Depute, at
the Time when the Earl of Mortoun was made Lord High-Treasurer; and his
Lordship having a near Relation to the Court, and much in it, he contracted a
great Friendship and Familiarity ^ith Dr. Laud then Bishop of London, and being
well able to spea^ in the Affairs of the Church, took Care to be thought by the
Bishop a very zealous Defender of it, and of the Episcopal O^der, which very
much endeared him to the Bishop, by whom he was recommended to the King as
fittest to be trusted, not only in the Administration of Civil Affairs, in
which indeed it cannot be denied but he had great Experience; but also in the
conferring of Ecclesiastical Preferments, in which he was not always very
fortunate.

When King Charles made a Journey into his Kingdom of Scotland, to be there
crowned, the Lord Traquair attended on his Majesty throughout that whole
Progress, and at the Solemnity of the Coronation was raised to the Honor of
Earl of Traquair, by Letters Patent bearing Date at Holyroodhouse, June 22.
1633 Charta in Cancellaria S. D. N. R.
, and growing every Day more in Credit with the King, and in Favor with Dr.
Laud, who by this Time was become Archbishop of Canterbury, his Majesty was
pleased to make him Lord High-Treasurer of Scotland in the 1635, upon the
Surrender of that Office by the Earl of Mortoun. The Earl being thus invested
in the greatest Office of Benefit in the Kingdom, and his Majesty believing he
had provided a strong Support to his Government both in Church and State, and
having exceedingly set his Heart upon the uniting of his Three Kingdoms in one
Form of GOD's Worship, and public Devotions, by a public Liturgy, he
committed entirely the bringing about of that Business, so far as related to
the Civil Part of it, to the Lord Treasurer; and though his Lordship was very
well affected to the Work in Hand, in his own Judgment, yet he did not think
the Season was ripe for it is being published, when it was by the King's
Proclamation appointed to be first read at Easter 1637; and therefore the Lord
Treasurer persuaded his Majesty to defer it for a Time, till some good
Preparation might be made for the more favorable Reception of it: And as this
Pause gave the discontented Party more Time for their Negotiations, so the
Consequence of it made him suspected to be secretly an Enemy to the Liturgy and
the Bishops. Of this the Lord Clarendon clears him, and says, That there was
never any Ground, either then, or in all the after Part of his Life, for that
Suspicion; but that if the Lord Treasurer had been as much depended upon to
advise the Bishops in the Prosecution of the Liturgy, and for the Conduct of
it, as he was to assist them in the carrying on whatsoever they proposed, it is
very probable either so much would not have been undertaken together, or that
it would have succeeded better. But whatever Suspicion some of the Bishops
might entertain of the Lord Treasurer's not being devoted to some of them, it is
certain the King had no Jealousy of the Earl, as if he had been in any Degree
corrupted or disaffected to the Government as it was established by Law;
insomuch as when his Majesty was pleased in the 1639. to call a Parliament and
an Assembly of the Clergy, in order to appease the Commotions, and to
extinguish the Fire that the Endeavor of bringing in the Liturgy and the Book
of Canons had kindled, he pitched on the Lord Treasurer, whom he knew to be as
wise a Man as the Nation then had, and very equal to the Work to represent his
Royal Person, both in the Parliament and the Assembly; in that great and
difficult Trust he acquitted himself to his Majesty's great Satisfaction, and
did with the outmost Vigor and Fidelity assert the Royal Prerogative, as
established by Law or ancient Custom; and when he thought that was invaded
either in the Parliament, or in the Assembly of the Church, he opposed it with
all his Power, and gave them all the Trouble he could.

As the faithful Discharge of his great Trust did very much establish and
confirm the Treasurer in his Majesty's good Opinion, so it drew upon him the
implacable Resentment of the other Party, who pursued him with so extraordinary
Animosity, that in the next Parliament of 1641, they prevailed with his Majesty
to take the White-Staff from him, and impeached him of High Treason, of which
they likewise found him guilty; but having referred his Punishment to the King,
his Majesty was so far from conceiving the Earl had merited such a severe
Prosecution, that he gave Orders, that in all Events a Pardon might be prepared
under the Great Seal The Remission I have seen and perused in the Hands of the
Earl of Traquair.
, wherein his Majesty does not only very fully absolve him from the Crimes
objected against him in the Impeachment, but annexes to the Remission an ample
Testimony of his great Abilities and singular Integrity in the Discharge of all
the great Employments he had been entrusted with under the Crown:

But this Testimony of the King's gracious Affection to the Earl did him very
little Service; for during the Civil War, by Virtue of the Judgments that had
formerly passed on him, his Estate was sequestrated and taken from him; and for
the greater Security of his Person, he was forced to flee out of the Country;
and though they allowed him to return Home, and live at his own House, yet he
continued under Restraint till the 1647, that he was enlarged and suffered to
sit in the Parliament, where he endeavored all he could to bring the Nation to
a thorough Engagement to redeem and relieve the King, who was then a Prisoner
in the Isle of Wight; and the Parliament having raised an Army, the Earl of
Traquair upon his own Charges levied a Regiment of Horse, and ma^ched ^^ the
Head of them to the Battle of Prestoun, where both his Lordship and the Lord
Linton his Son were taken Prisoners, and by Order of the English Parliament
sent to Warwick Castle, where the old Earl continued for the Space of Four
Years; and though he was set at Liberty, yet the Sequestration of his Estate was
continued: Nor did the Malice of the Usurpers abate toward him, till they had
reduced him to the lowest Penury and Want that can be imagined, and in that
disconsolate low Condition of Fortune he spent the after Part of his Life, till
the End of September Anno 1659, Death put an End to his Days.

This noble Lord married Katharine Daughter of David the first Earl of
Southesk, by whom he had Charles his Son and Heir, and Four Daughters.

Lady Margaret married to James Earl of Queensberry.

Lady Elizabeth to Sir Patrick Murray 1st Lord Elibank.

Lady Ann to Sir John Hamilton of Reidhouse in Vic. de Edinburgh, and had Issue.

Lady Katharine to John Stewart Esquire and had Issue.

Which Charles did likewise during the Civil War adhere to the Royal Interest
with very signal Fidelity; for albeit all the Pressures his Father lay under,
yet he still preserved a very good Reputation and a very great Interest in his
Country, as appeared by the Supplies he brought to the King's Army at
Philiphaugh, many Gentlemen of Twedale-shire engaging themselves in the
Service, out of their personal Affection to him, as well as Conscience of the
Cause: And though he survived those Times of Usurpation and Anarchy, and saw the
King restored, yet it cannot be denied he was not recompensed according to his
Merit, or considered as his Sufferings deserved: But in this his Lordship was
not singular; for the current Doctrine of that Time was, That it was no Matter
how the King used his old Friends; f^r they would be so still. He married first
Henrietta Daughter of George Marquis of H^ntly, Widow of George Lord Seton, by
whom he had no Issue; and again, Ann Daughter of George Earl of Wintoun; and
departing this Life in April 1666, was succeeded by William his Son, who dying
unmarried, Charles his Brother became his Heir. He married Mary Daughter of
Robert Earl of Nithsdale, by whom he has Issue, Charles Lord Linto^, and Master
John Steuart; likewise six Daughters.

Lady Lucie.

Lady Ann.

Lady Mary.

Lady Katharine.

Lady Barbara.

Lady Margaret.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st. Or, a Fess Checkie, Azure and Argent. 2d. Azure, Three Garbs,
Or. 3d. Argent. an Orle, Gules in Chief, Three Martlets Sable, 4 Argent. a
Mollet Sable. Supporters, Two Bears Proper. Crest, a Raven on the Top of a
Garb. Motto, Judge noucht.

HAY, Marquis of Tweddale.
THIS noble and most illustrious Family of the Hays is of very ancient
Extraction in the Shire of Edinburgh, even from the Time of King William the
Lion, that John de Haya miles, filius Willielm i de Haya In a Donation by
Willielmus de Haya to the Monks of Cowpar, Joannes de Haya frater ejus is a
Witness.
, and Brother to William de Haya Dominus de Errol, transplanted himself out of
the North, and fixed his Residence in the County foresaid, by Reason of his
Marriage with the Heir Female of Robert de Line, with whom he obtained the
Barony of Locherret. He left a Son William de Haya, designed Dominus de
Locheru^rna, who is a frequent Witness in the Grants of King Alexander II.
Charta penes Ducem de Athole, etiam penes Mar^^. de Tweddale.
. He gave in pure and perpetual Alms to the Monks of Newbottle, the Liberty of
a Moss called Woolnstrocher, in which Deed he is designed Willielmus de Haya
filius Joannis de Haya miles, Dominus de Lochusworwood Chartulary of Newbottle
penes M. de Lothian.
.

Sir William de Haya de Locheret was very signal in his Fidelity to and Service
of the Crown, during the Commotions about the Succession betwixt the Bruce and
Baliol; and Sir Gilbert Hay of Locherrt was no less faithful to King Robert the
Bruce, and very assisting to him both before and after his Accession to the
Crown. He married Mary, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of Sir Simon Frazer
Lord of Oliver-Castle, with whom he obtained a fair Estate in Selkirk-shire,
and had by her

Sir Thomas his Son and Heir, who was a Person of great Courage and
Magnanimity, which he manifested in several Encounters against the English,
under the Conduct of the heroic King Robert I.

Sir William de ^aya de Locheret made a very bright Figure under King David II.
for when that Prince had the Misfortune to be taken a Prisoner at the Battle of
Durham, he was one of the great Barons who were appointed to treat about the
Ransom of the King, and his Son and Heir, Thomas Fitz and Haeres Will. de la Hay
de Locherword, was given one of the Hostages for the Ransom, Anno 1357.

Another Sir William Hay of Locherret being a Man of Parts and Courage, was
employed in diverse Embassies to England, both in the Time of King Robert III.
and during the Regency of the Duke of Albany Rymers Foedera Angliae.
, which he performed with Honor and Fidelity. In the Commission he is styled
Willielmus de Haya de Locherwood, Vicecomes de Peebles. He married Jean eldest
of the Four Daughters and Coheirs of Sir John Gifford Lord of Yester Charta
penes March. de Tweddale, ad Annum 14^0, in the Foundation of the Church of
Bothans. (...) is designed Sir William Hay Knight, Sheriff of Peebles.
, and again Dame Alicia de Hay, and left Issue,

Sir William his Son and Heir apparent Charta penes M. de Tweddale, in an
Indenture betwixt nobilem vi^urr W. de Haya Vic^comi^em de Peebles, cum
consensu D. Williem^ fil^i sui and ^aeredis, and William Bishop of G^asgow, ^d
Annum 1418.
, who died without Issue, Sir Thomas his Successor, Sir David Hay of Yester,
Edmund Hay of Talla, the First of that Branch of the Hays of Linplum Ibidem ad
Annum 1444, by Alicia Hay Relict of Sir William Hay of Yester, to the
College-Church of Yester, Test. Edmond. Hay of Linplum her Son.
, likewise a Daughter Margaret, married to William Earl of Angus Ibidem ad
Annum 1425.
, and had Issue.

Which Sir Thomas was one of those Barons who were appointed to wait on King
James I. when he was released from his Captivity, out of England, and was
likewise one of the Hostages for the Ransom Rymer's Foedera Angliae ad ^^nnum
1423, and is designed Tho. Hay D. de Yester.
, but he dying without Issue, was succeeded by

Sir David Hay Lord of Yester his Brother, who was retoured to him 6th April
1434 Ibidem.
, he, with Consent of the other Heirs Portioners of the Lordship of Yester, did
enla^ge and augment the Revenue of the Collegiate Church of St. Cuthbert of
Yester, adding several Prebends thereto for the Health of his Soul, and of his
Ancesto^s and Successors for ever Ibidem ad Annum 1441.
, and dying Anno 1462, left Issue, John his Son and Heir, and a Daughter
married to William Cuninghame of Beltoun.

Which John married first Marion Daughter of... Lindsay of... Ibidem ad Annum
1462.
, and again Elizabeth Daughter; and at length sole Heir of George Cuningha^^e
of Beltoun Ibidem ad Annum 1468, the Contract betwixt John Hay, Son and Heir
apparent of Sir David Hay of Yester, and Eliz. Cuninghame Daughter of George
Cuninghame, Son and Heir apparent of Sir William Cuninghame of Beltoun.
, by whom he had John his Son and Heir, George Hay of Menzien; likewise several
Daughters, Margaret married to William Lord Borthwick Ibidem ad Annum 1491.
, and I^obel to Robers Louder of Boss Ibidem 2d Annum 1496.
, and had Issue, and giving Way to Fate in the 1509 Ibidem.
, was succeeded by

John Lord Yester his Son and Heir, who married Elizabeth Daughter of....
Crichtoun of.... Ibidem and Annum 1519, in a Grant of Lands by John Lord
Yester, with Consent of Elizabeth Crichton his Mother, etc.
, by whom he had John his Successor, George Hay of Oliver Castle, William of
whom the Branch of the Hays of Monktoun is descended, and a Daughter,
Elizabeth, married to Jomes Twee^ ie of Drumlezer in Vic. de Selkirk, and had
Issue^ He was slain at the Battle of Floudon with King James IV. the 9th of
September 1513.

John Lord Yester his Son married Elizabeth Daughter of George Master of Angus,
Son of Archibald Earl of Angus Charta in Pub. Arch.
, by whom he had John his Son and Heir, and a Daughter Elizabeth, married first
to George Lord Scton C^arta penes M. de Tweddale ad Annum 1527.
, and again to William Lord Saltoun. He married to his 2d Wife.... Daughter
and Coheir of John Dickson of Smithfield, by whom he had John, of whom the
Hays of Smithfield are de scended, and a Daughter Jean married to.... Brown of
Col^oun, and dying Anno 1543, was succeeded by

John his Son, who signalized his Courage and Valor at the Battle of Pinky
cleugh, where he was taken Prisoner, and sent to the Tower of London, where he
continued till the Pacification was concluded betwixt the Two Nations, and
dying Anno 1557 Ibidem.
, left Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of William Lord Livingston Charta
in Pub. Archivis.
, William his Successor, and Christian married to William Stewart of Traquair
Ibidem.
, and had Issue.

Which William was one of those Peers who concurred with the outmost Zeal in
the Reformation of Religion, and was withal a most faithful Friend to Queen
Mary, when the Troubles broke out in that Reign; and thereafter when King James
took the Administration upon himself, the Lord Tester was one of the Lords who
joined in the Attempt at Ruthven, whereby they seized on the King's Person, put
such of his Council from about him, as they conceived had not used their Power
for the Interest of the Country, or the Honor of the Crown; but that Action
being declared Treasonable, he was forced to flee beyond Sea, and remained
abroad, till his Majesty of his a Royal Clemency was pleased to pass most
Gracious Act of Indemnity 1585. He married Margaret Daughter of Sir John Ker of
Far^harst Charta penes March. de Tweddale.
, by whom he had William his Son and Heir, James thereafter Lord Yester,
Margaret married to William Lord Borthwick, Katharine to Sir John Swinton of
That-Ilk, and Jean to Mr. James Hay of Barra.

Which William, married Elizabeth Daughter of John Lord Harris, by whom he had
only Four Daughters, Elizabeth married to James Tweedi^ of Drumelzer, Christian
to Archibald Newton of That-Ilk Ibidem.
, Grissil to George Hay of Adderstoun, and Jean to Alexander Horsebrugh of
That-Ilk Ibidem.
, and had Issue; and departing this Life 16th of March 1591 Dr. Anderson's
History of Scotland MS. in Bibl. Juridica Edinb.
, his Estate and Honor devolved on

James his Brother and Heir, who married Margaret Daughter of Mark 1st Earl of
Lothian, a Lady eminent for her Piety and Charity; by her he had Issue, John
his Successor, Sir William Hay of Linplum; likewise a Daughter Margaret,
married first to Alexander Earl of Dumsermling, and again to James Earl of
Calendar.

John Lord Yester his Son was a Man of Parts, and of great Industry and
Sagacity in Business; in the Parliament of 1633. he opposed all he could the
Act anent the King's appointing the Apparel of Churchmen, and with the outmost
Vigor, the Introduction of the Liturgy in the 1637, and when the first
Troubles began, he had the Command of a Regiment in the Army, but after the
Pacification he would never meddle any further in the great Alterations that
ensued, which endeared him exceedingly to the King; insomuch as his Majesty was
graciously pleased to raise him to be an Earl, by the Style and Title of Earl
of Tweddale, December 1st. 1646. He married first Jean Daughter of Alexander
Earl of Dunfermling; by her he had only one Son John his Successor, thereafter
Marquis of Tweddale, and next, Margaret Daughter of Alexander Earl of
Eglingtoun, by whom he had William Hay of Drumiezer; and dying in the 1654
Memoirs of the House of Yester, M.S. penes me.
, was succeeded by

John his Son, who being a Nobleman of very good Parts, and of great Experience
in Affairs, his Majesty King Charles II. upon the Restoration, was pleased to
call him to his Privy Council, and make him one of the Commissioners of the
Treasury, and afterward one of the Extraordina-Lords of the Session; but was
soon after that, by the Power of the Duke of Lauderdale, removed from all
public Trust, for no other Reason, but that he declared his Dislike of the
high Courses that were taken during the Administration of that great Favorite,
but the Duke was no sooner dead, than he was again brought into the Council,
and was one of the Lords of the Treasury in the Reign of K. James VII. in which
Office he continued even till the Revolution; and the Earl of Tweddale having
complied with the Government under King William and Queen Mary, their Majesty's
had so great an Esteem of his Wisdom and Parts, and whose Councils and
Assistance would be of great Use for their Service, that they were pleased to
make him one of the Lords of the Treasury; and after he had served a Year or
Two in that Capacity, preferred him to be Lord High-Chancellor of Scotland in
the Beginning of the 1692; and having forther Regard to the unblemished
Reputation and approved Fidelity of the Lord Chancellor, their Majesty's were
pleased to honor him with the Splendor of a higher Title; and therefore by
Letters Patent, 26 December 1694, his Lordship was raised to be Marquis of
Tweddale Charta in Pub. Arch.
, after which he continued in the Chancellor's Place, and discharged the Duties
of his Function with great Application and Fidelity till May 1696, upon a
Disgust about the Affair of Darien, he was removed, and the Lord Polwarth was
made Chancellor in his Room. He died 11th of August 1697.

This noble Lord married Jean, Daughter of Walter Earl of Bucleugh, by whom he
had

John his Successor in the Honor;

Lord David Hay,

Lord Alexander Hay.

Lady Margaret married to Robert Earl of Roxburgh.

Lady Jean to William first Earl of March.

Which John was of the Privy Council to King Charles II. and Colonel of the
East-Lothian Regiment, upon the Earl of Argyle's Invasion in 1685. He was
likewise of the Privy Council to King William and Queen Anne, by whom he was in
the 1704, promoted to be Lord High Chancellor of Scotland, and appointed Lord
High Commissioner to represent her Majesty's Royal Person in that Session of
Parliament, when the Act of Security did receive the Royal Assent, and pass
into a Law.

He married Anne, only Daughter of John Duke of Lauderdale, by whom he had
Charles his Successor, Lord John Hay, who was Colonel of the Royal Regiment of
Scots Dragoons, and a Brigadier General of the Army, Lord William Hay; and two
Daughters, Anne married to William Lord Ross, and Jean to John Earl of Rothes;
and departing this Life May 20th, 1713, was succeeded by

Charles his Son and Heir, who was a Nobleman of great Abilities and most
consummate Experience in Civil Affairs, upon the Accession of King George to
the Crown, the Marquis of T^eddale was elected one of the Peers to the first
Parliament summoned by his said Majesty, and soon thereafter named Lord
President of the Court of Police, and Lord Lieutenant of East Lothian Shire;
but shortly after falling sick, he died the 15th of December 1715, leaving
Issue by the Lady Susanna his Wife, Daughter of William and Anne, Duke and
Duchess of Hamilton, Widow of John Earl of Dundonald, John the present
Marquis, a young Nobleman of fair Expectations, Lord James, Lord Charles, Lord
George; also Three Daughters,

Lady Susanna,

Lady Catharine,

Lady Anne.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Azure, Three Frazes Argent, 2d and 3d Gules, Three Bars
Ermine over all in a Surtout Argent, Three Escutcheons Gules. Supporters, Two
Staggs. Crest, a Stagg's Head crazed Argent. Motto, Spare Naught.

WEEMS, Earl of Weems.
THE ancient and noble Family of Weems is descended origiginally from John,
Lord of the Barony of the Weems, a younger Son of the Earls of Fife Sir Robert
Sibbald's History of Fife-Shire.
, from whence his Descendants assumed their Surname, though I have not found any
Mention of them till the Reign of K. Alexander II. that Sir Michael de Weymis
miles, is to be met with in the Archivis of that Time Charta penes Ducem de
Athole.
, and Sir David de Weems, Knight of the Weems, was in the 1290, together with
Sir Michael Scot sent over to Norway, by the Lords of the Regency of Scotland,
to bring over their young Queen Margaret, who, to the universal Grief and
Regrete of the whole Nation, died at the Orkneys; whereupon happened the fatal
Competition about the Right of Succession, which was at length settled upon
John de Baliol.

Sir David de Weems in the Time of King Robert I. was one of the great Men of
the Kingdom, who wrote that noble Letter to the Pope, so often mentioned, so
rare a Piece of Antiquity, that it deserves to be set in Characters of Gold,
and preserved to all Posterity. This Sir David obtained from the said Prince a
Charter of the Lands of Glasnock in tenemento de Kinghorn, erected to him in
lib^ram baroniam Charta penes Co^ite^ de Weems, ad Annum 1529.
. By Marjory his Wife, he had Sir Michael his Successor, and Sir John Weems,
Lord of Kincaldrum.

Which Sir Michael had a Grant from Duncan Earl of Eife, of the Lands of
Monickie and Easter-Dron, in which Deed he is designed Filius quondam Domini
David de Weems Militis Ibidem ad Annum 1333.
. By.... Daughter of.... his Wife, he had

Sir David his Son and Heir, in whom the principal Male Line failed. This Sir
David I have found designed Filius and Hares Domini Michaelis de Weems Militis,
in a Deed whereby he makes over the Lands of Borch in Baronia de Lochhor,
Domine Johanni de Weems, avunculo suo Ibidem.
, and afterward resigns in manibus nobilis Domini Roberti Styward, Comitis de
Fyfe and de Menteth, omnes Terras quas idem Dom^nus David de Weems tenet de
praedicto suo Comite Charta penes Comitem de Weems, Test, Roberto de Norvyle,
Alano de Myrton, Allan^ Macmorin, and Michaeli de Comray.
, in Favors of Sir John Weems Knight. who was his Heir Male. The same Sir John
obtained a Charter from King Robert III. ratifying and confirming the Grant
which Robert Earl of Fife made Johanni de Weems Militi de Terris de Rires,
Myrcatrny, Markinch, and Nether-Cambrun; and likewise the Concession and
Donation, which Sir Alexander Abernethy Knight. made heritably quondam Domino
Joanni de Weems Militi, avo dicti Joannis, de Terr^s de Kincaldrnm. He obtained
also a fair Estate by the Marriage of Isobel, one of the Daughters and Coheirs
of Sir Allan Erskine of Inchmartine, Knight. Ibidem. ad Annum 1401.
. And of Isobell de Inchmartine his Wife, one of the Heirs Female of the
Baronies of Inchmartine and of Weems, by whom he had Issue David his Successor,
and Two Daughters. Elizabeth married to Sir Andrew Gray Lord of Foulis Charta
pene^ Dominum Gray, ad Annum 1418.
, and Eupham to Sir William Livingston, Lord of Drumray Ibidem. ad Annum 1428.
and Easter-Weems.

Which David married Christian, Daughter of.... Douglass of.... Ibidem ad Annum
1431.
, by whom he had

Sir John his Son and Heir, who married Margaret Daughter of Sir Robert
Livingston Lord Drumrey Ibidem. ad Annum 1446.
. By her he had John his Son and Heir, designed of Strath^rdel, vita patris,
and a Daughter Grisel, married to David Boswell of Balmutto.

Which John married Christian, Daughter of.... Abernethy of.... Ibidem. ad
Annum 1468.
, and had David his Heir, and a Daughter Agnes married to Andrew Kininmunt of
That-Ilk Ibibem ad Annum 1482.
, and dying in 1508, was succeeded by

Sir David his Son and Heir, who obtained a Charter from King James IV.
erecting all his Lands into the Barony of Weems, the 28th of August 1511 Ibidem.
. He married first Elizabeth, Daughter of..... Lundy of That Ilk, by whom he
had David his Successor; and next, Janet Daughter of Andrew Lord Gray, by whom
he had no Issue. He was killed at the Battle of Flowdoun.

Sir David his Son, married Katharine Daughter of Henry Lord Sinclair C^arta in
Pub. Archivis.
, by whom he had John his Successor, James the first of the Family of
Caskeberry, the Paternal Ancestor of the present Earl of Weems, and of several
other illustrious Persons abroad in Foreign Parts; and dying in May 1544 Charta
penes Comitem de Weems.
, was succeeded by

John his Son and Heir, who married Margaret, Daughter of Sir Adam Otterburn of
Reid-hall, Lord Advocate in the Reign of King James V. Ibidem.
, by whom he had David his Son and Heir, likewise several Daughters,

1 Margaret married to David Barclay of Colearny Ibidem.
, in Vic. de Fif^, and had Issue.

2 Elizabeth to David Balfour of Montquhany Ibidem.
, in Vic. de Fife.

3 Agnes to John Aitoun of Denmure Ibidem.
, and had Issue.

4 Eupham to Mr. David Carnagy of Coluthy, Ancestor to the Earl of Southesk.

He married to his second Wife Janet, Daughter of Alexander Trail of Blebo
Ibidem.
, but by her he had no Issue; and dying in January 1572, was succeeded by

Sir David his Son and Heir, who married Cicil, Daughter of William Lord
Ruthven Ibidem.
, and dying in 1582, left Issue by his Wife aforesaid, John his Son and Heir,
James Weems, first of the Family of Bog^e Ibidem ad Annum 1582.
, David Weems of Finzies, Henry of whom the Branch of Foodie Charta penes
Comitem de Weems.
, Patrick Weems of Rumgay; likewise several Daughters,

Margaret married to James Beatoun of Cricht, and had Issue,

Jean to Mr. James Macgill of Rankillour, and had Issue.

... to... Fotheringhame of Powrie.

Janet to Sir David Auchmutie of That-Ilk, and again to James Learmont of
Dairsie.

Which Sir John married Mary, Daughter of James Stewart Lord Down Ibidem.
, by whom he had David his eldest Son, who married Elizabeth, Daughter to
Andrew Earl of Rothes Ibidem.
, but died without Issue, 7th of August 1608, Sir John his Successor, the first
Earl of Weems; also Two Daughters, Janet married to Robert Lord Colvil, and
Isobel to Hugh Lord Lovat.

Which Sir John was by the Favor of King Charles I. first made a Baronet
Ibidem 29th May 1625.
also by Letters Patent, bearing Date 1st of April 1628, raised to the Honor
of the Peerage by the Title of Lord Weems of Elcho C^arta in Pub. Arch.
, and finally created Earl of Weems 25th of May 1633 Ibidem.
. He dying Anno 1653 Ibidem.
, left Issue by Jean his Wife, Daughter of Patrick Lord Gray, David his
Successor; and five Daughters,

Mary married to John Lord Sinclair, and had Issue,

Anne to Alexander Lindsay of Ed^le, and again to M^ngo Viscount of Stormoint.

Jean to Sir John Tours of Innerleth, and nixt to Colonel Hary Maule of
Balmakelly, and had Issue.

Elizabeth to Sir John Aiton of That-Ilk, and had Issue.

Catharine to Sir David Carnaigie of Craig Knight, but had no Issue.

Which David married first Jean Daughter of Robert Lord Burleigh, by whom he
had one Daughter, Jean, married first to Archbald Earl of Angus; and next, to
George Earl of Sutherland: His second Wife was Eleanor, Daughter of John Earl
of Wigtoun, by whom he had no Issue; and his Third and last Wife was Margaret,
Daughter of John Earl of Rothes, Widow both of Alexander Lord Balgony, and of
Francis Earl of Bucleugh, by whom he had only one Daughter, Lady Margaret
Weems, on whom her Father, during his own Lifetime, settled the Honors of his
Family, with Consent and Approbation of the Crown, with the Precedence of her
Grand-Father's Creation Charta in Cancellaria, S. D. N. R. ad Annum 1672.
, to which she succeeded on his Demise An. 1679 Ibidem.
. The Countess married Sir James Weems Knight. descended from the Caskeberry Branch
of the Weemses Borbriefe James Lord Burntisland.
, who thereupon was by the Favor of King Charles II. honored with the Title
of Lord Burntisland for his Lifetime Ibidem, of the Date 15th of April 1672.
, and dying in 1685, left Issue by the Countess, David Lord Elcho, the present
Earl of Weems, who succeed his Mother in her Honors, and Two Daughters,

Anne married to David Earl of Leven and Earl of Melvil.

Margaret to David the present Earl of Northesk.

Which David was one of the Lords of the Privy Council in the Reign of Queen
Anne, by whom he was constituted Lord High Admiral of Scotland, upon the
Surrender of that Office by the Marquis of Montrose in the 1706; and the same
Year his Lordship was one of the Commissioners on the Treaty of Union with
England; upon the Commencement of which, he was declared Vice Admiral of
Scotland, and he held the Office till the Accession of King George to the
Crown, that his Lordship was removed, and the Earl of Rothes put in his Room,
Anno 1714.

He married Anne, Daughter of William Duke of Queensberry, by whom he had Two
Sons,

David Lord Elcho, a noble Youth of fine Parts, and of very promising Hopes,
who took great Care from his very Childhood to inform and qualify himself with
the Knowledge of such Things as might be necessary and useful to him when he
should come to act his Part in a public Station, suitable to his High and
Illustrious Extraction; but alas he was untimely snacht away by a malignant
Fever, which brought his Life to an End, on the 16th of December 1715, when he
had not fully attained to the Age of Seventeen; whose Loss was not only
lamented by his own noble Relations, but very universally throughout the
Kingdom, as a young Nobleman, who in Time was like to prove an Honor to the
noble Family of Weems, and an Ornament and Support to his Country.

James Lord Elcho.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Or, a Lion Rampant, Gules, 2d and 3d Argent. a Lion
Rampant Sable. Supporters, Two Swans. Crest, a Swan all proper. Motto, Je Pense.

FLEMING, Earl of Wigtoun.
THE Surname of this illustrious Family, according to the Sentiments of the
most approven Historians and Antiquaries, was at first assumed from a Person of
Distinction, who in the Days of King D^vid I. a Fleming by Nation, transplanted
himself into this Realm, and took his Surname Flandrensis or Le Fleming, from
the Country of his Origin. Baldwin le Flamang in that Reign is mentioned a
Witness in the Grant which Robertus Episcopus St. Andreae made Herbert.
Episcopo Glasgu. de Ecclesia de Locherworna, with Consent of King David and
Prince Henry his Son, and per Librum Saisiisse Excerpt from the Registers of
the Episcopal See of Glasgow, which has been at Paris since the 1560, that
Bishop Beatoun carried them over at the Reformation, The Charter of Bishop
Robert is without Date, but he was consecrate Bis^op of St. Andrews about the
1126.
, by the Symbol of a Book.

Jordanus le Flamang is likewise a Witness in a Charter which Adda Comitissa,
the Wife of Henry Earl of Northumberland, made to the Abbacy of Dunfermling for
the Welfare of her Soul Charta in Regis. de Dunfermling ad Annum 1178.
, and is the same Person who was taken Prisoner at the Battle of Anwick Rymer's
Foedera Ang^ae, Roger Hovendu, and other English Historians.
with King William, An. 1174.

William Flandrensis or le Flamang is a Witness in a Deed which King William
made to the Monks of Kels^, and is joined with Hugo Cancellarius, Comes
Patricius Justiciarius, and Robertus de Lundoniis, filius Regis Charta in
Regis. Calch, Folio 42.
. He as a Person of Quality and of eminent Knowledge in Antiquities judiciously
observed before me, is the same William Flandrensis, who is Witness to that
King's Confirmation of the Lands of Monisbrook in Strathgrief, which Allan,
Filius Walteri Dapifer, made to the Monks of Paisly, and seems to be the first
of this noble Family, who fixed his Residence in the Western Parts.

Dom. Duncan Flandrensii in the Time of King Alexander II. is a Witness in the
Donation of the Lands of Haldinstoun to the Convent of Paisly Chartulary of
Pa^s^ey, which I had the Us^ of by the Favor of the Earl of Dundonald.
, which that Prince did by his Charter ratify and confirm; like as in the
Reign of Alexander III. Dom. Simon Flandrensis is mentioned in the Resignation
which Johannes Fi^^us Rogert made to the Monks of Paisly, of the Lands of
Aldhouse, for the Health of his Soul.

Robert le Fleming, the direct and immediate Ancestor of the Earls of Wig^oun,
was one of the great Barons of Scotland, to whom King Edward I. of England in
the 1290, wrote that memorable Letter anent the settling of the Succession of
the Crown upon the Demise of Queen Margaret Mr. Rymers Foedera Angliae.
, the Decision whereof had been by all the different Competitors referred to him
as a Neighbor Prince, in whose Judgment and Integrity they reposed the fullest
Confidence.

Whatever Sentiments Sir Robert had of King Edward's Decision in Favors of
J^^n Baliol I cannot say, but as soon as the Heroic Robert the Bruce took the
Field, and declared his Resolution to shake off the Yoke of Thraldom and
Tyranny, under which the Nation gr^an'd by the English Usurpation. Sir Robert
le Fleming repaired to his Standart, and with a few trusty Friends, all brave
Men, accompanied him whom they thought their lawful Sovereign, in the Adventure
at Dumfries, where they killed that perjured Traitor Sir J^^n Cumming In all
this our Historians concur.
, and never rested till they set the Crown upon the He^d of that immortal
Monarch, on the Feast of the Annunciation, Anno 1306.

Sir Robert Fleming having in this Manner highly merited of his Royal Master,
his Majesty was graciously pleased to bestow upon him the Lordship of L^^z^e,
and Barony of C^mber^ald, then in the Crown by the Forfaulture of John Cumming
Earl of Buchan There are Writs and Char^ers in the Earl of Wigtoun's Hands
making this clear, that the Barony of Cumbernald belonged (...) Cummings from
the Time of King William.
, besides other Donations of a less Value. By.... Daughter of..... his Wife, he
had Issue, Sir Malcolm his Successor, and Sir Patrick Fleming Knight. Sheriff of
Peebles Charta penes Marchionem de Tweddale. T^^ Writ is a Charter by King
David II. Patric^o F^eeming M^^^ti, of the Sheriff, ip of Peeble^, dated (...)
September, the 18th Year of the King's Reign.
, who got the Barony of Biggar, by the Marriage of one of the Daughters and
Coheirs of Sir Simon Frazer, Lord of Oliver-Castle, which gave his Descendants
a Title to assume the Coat of Frazer into the A^chievements of their own
Family, and which they still wear even to this Time.

Which Sir Malcolm Fleming, Lord of Fulwood and Cumbernald, was in great Favor
with King Robert I. who in Memory of his Father's Services and his own Merit,
made him a Grant of the Lands of Achindenan and of Pontoun in Wigtoun-Shire
Inventar of the Registers of the Chancery pene Ha^^^ton de Wi^haw.
; but King Robert his Favors to Sir Malcolm did not stop here, for he did
afterward make him Sheriff of the County, and Governor of Dun^^rtoun Castle;
both which Offices he discharged with singular Fidelity. The same great Man
obtained from Walter Lord High-Steward of Scotland, in Consideration of
Services done and to be done by him, an Annuity payable to him from the Abbot
and Convent of Holy-rood-house, out of the Barony of the Carse, dated on the
Feast of St. Dunstan, Anno Domini 1321 Charta penes Comitem de Wigtoun.
. He was succeeded in his Estate by

Sir Malcolm his Son and Heir, who seems to have been a forward Asser^er of the
Right and Title of King David II. and of the Bruc^an Line, to whose Interest
faithfully adhering, he was, I think, on the Demise of his own Father,
constituted Governor of Dunbartoun-Castle B^e^^^s's History of King David the
Bruce.
, and he discharged the Trust with the outmost Fidelity; for after the fatal
Overthrow of Duplin, whereby the Royal Interest was much weakened. The Governor
having an entire Confidence in Sir Malcolm's Loyalty, committed the Tuition of
the young King David and his Royal Consort to his Care: and Things growing
every Day worse on the King's Side, after the Loss of the Battle of
Hall^downhill, when it was resolved, that for the Security of his Majesty's
Royal Person, that he might not fall into the Enemies Hands, to send him over
to France, Sir Malcolm Fleming was pitched on to wait on his young Master,
which he did, and performed the whole of that Service with Honor and
Approbation. Having left the young King in France in full Security, ^e returned
to his Command of Dunbertoun-Castle, and tho most other Places of Strength
submitted to Edward Bal^o^ after the Battle of Hallydownhill, yet Sir Malcolm
keept out his Fo^^^ess for his lawful Sovereign; and during the whole of the
Usurpation of Bali^l, this Castle was a Place to which the Royalists did
freely, and with great Security resort to: And it would not be forgot that Sir
Malc^lm Fleming had the Honor to shelter and protect in that evil Time, that
i^lustrious and magnanimous Prince, Robert Lord High-Steward of Scotland,
afterward King Robert II. the King's Nephew, whose Blood Baliol did in a very
particular Manner thirst after; but afterward when the King's Affairs took a
more favorable Turn, and that his own Presence at Home was judged necessary,
the brave and generous Sir Malcolm Fleming was again sent over to France to
attend and wait on the King home who happily arriving on the 2^ of July 1342,
on the 9th of November thereafter, his Highness was graciously pleased, in
Reward of Sir M^^^^^m's signal Loyalty and Fidelity in his Service, to create
him Earl of Wigtoun, by his Royal Charter, which, for the Singularity of the
Style, and the illustrating the Gentleman's great Merit. I shall here insert it
in the very original Words. DAVID, DEI gratia, Rex Scotorum, omnibus probis
Hominibus totius Terrae suae, Clericis and Laicis, Salutem. Sciatis Nos
dedisse, concessisse, and hac praesenti Charta Nostra confirmasse Malcolmo
Fleming Militi dilecto and Fideli nostro, pro homagio and laudabili servitio
suo nobis impenso and impendendo, omnes terras meas de Faryes and del Rynnes,
and totum Burgum Nostrum de Wigtoun, cum omnimodis pertinentiis suis, ac omnes
terras Meas totius Vicecomitatus de Wigtoun, per metas and divisas suas
subscriptas a Capite, viz. Aquae de Creech, and sic sequendo illam aquam
quousque perveniatur, ad mare ^bi aqua de Creech currit in mare, and sic per
mare usque Molerennysuage, and de Molerennysuage per mare usque ad antiquas
metas Comitatus de Carrick, and sic per easdemmetas de Carrick, quousque
perveniatur adpraedictum caput aquae de Creech, tenendas and habendas omnes
terras praedictas, una cum Burgo praedicto, eidem Malcolmo, and haeredibus suis
legitime procreatis seu procreandis de corpore suo, per lineam Masculinam
descendentibus, de Nobis and Haeredibus nostris in Feudo and hereditate, per
omnes rectas metas and divisas suprascriptas, in liberum Comitatum, cum
homagiis and servitiis libere tenentium omnium terrarum praedictarum, cum
feodis and forisfacturis, cum c^r^^s and eschetis, cum furca and fossa, sok and
sak, Thol and Theme, and Infangthief, cum multuris, molendinis and eorum
sequelis, cum ^^^^pationibus, piscati^nibus and venationibus, and cum omnimodis
aliis libertatibus, commadita^^^us, assiamentis, and just is (...) in omnibus
and per omnia tam non nominatis Juam nominatis, ad liber^m Comitat^^
spectantibus, se^ jus^e spec^are valentibus in futur^m, ^na cum advocation^bus
Ec^lesiarum, and cum jare ac Patronatus Monastertorum and Abachiarum, infra
praedictum Comitatum existentium, reservata Nobis and Haeredibus Nostris ^ure
Patronatus sedis Episcopalis candidae Casae, vacant dicta^eae, cum omni modis
pertinentiis and libertatibus suis quibuscunque volumus and concedimus pro
Nobis and H^redibus nostr^s, quod Burgenses sui de Wigtoun, easdem libertates
in omnibus habeant, quas just babuerint temporibus Predec^ssorum Nostrorum
Regum Scotiae: Et cum dictus locus de Wigtoun, pro principali Manerio totius
Vicecomitatus de Wigtoun habebatur, ordinamus and perpetuo confirmanous, ut
ipse Malcolmus and haeredes sui praedicti ab ^nde, nomen Co^itis accipiant, and
Comites de Wigtoun de Caeteronuncupentur; quia veroidem Malcolmus Alum^^s
Noster extitit, and erga Nos se semper fideliter and laudabiliter habuit in
canctis Prosperis and Adversis, ad perpetuam Rei Memoriam adjec^mus concessioni
nostrae sibi factae de Comitatu praedicto, quod ^pse and haeredes su^ praedict^
habeant, teneant and possideant ^o^um Comita^^m praedictum, cum Pertinentiis in
adeo liberam Regalitatem, sicu^ aliqua Regalitas per totum Reg^um Nostrum
possidetur liberius seutenetur. Et quod dictus Malcolmus and Haerede^ su^
praedicti libere cognofcere valiant in C^ria sui Comi^atus praedicti super
quatuor articul^^ spectantibus, ad Coronam; faciendo Nobis and Haeredibus
Nostris praedictus Malcolmus and haeredes sui praedicti Comites de Wigtoun,
servitium quinque Mili^um in Exercitu nostro. In cujus Rei Testimonium
praesents Char^ae Nostrae Sigillum Nostrum praecepimus ^pponi. Testibus Roberto
Senes^allo Scotiae Nepote Nostre, Johanne Ranulphi Comite Moraviae, Domino
vallis Annandiae and Manniae Consanguineo Nostro, Patricio de Dumbar Comite
Marchiae, Mauricio de Moravia, Thoma de Carnoco Cancellario Nostro, and
Philippo de Meldrum, Militibus. Apud Villam de Air, nono die Novembris, Anno
Regni Nostri, Tertio decimo.

This noble Earl continuing in great Favor with his Prince, did, with the Bulk
of the Nation, accompany him to the Battle of Durham, where he had the
Misfortune to be taken Prisoner with the King Rymer's Acta publica, ad An. 1357.
; but being released in order to accelerate, as I take it, the Redemption of
his Royal Master, he was one of the great Men who in 1351, gave a Commission to
Sir Robert Erskine Sir William Livingston and others, to treat with the English
about the King's Relief Ibid.
; and when the Terms were happily concerted, Thomas le Fleming his Grandson and
Heir was named an Hostage for the Ransom: Soon after which the good old Earl
fell sick, and died, and left his Estate and Title to

Thomas Earl of Wigtoun his Grandson, who upon the Return of King David, had a
new Charter of the Earldom with its Pertinents, as freely as it was enjoyed by
his Grandfather Charta penes Comitem de Wigtoun, 36th of King David the Second.
, suspending nevertheless, for some Reasons of State, the Regality, probably at
the Instance of Archb^ld Douglas, Lord of Galloway, whose Power and Interest at
that Time was very great, both in the Court and in the Country, and who had a
great Estate within the Regality of Wi^^oun; but the Earl having no Issue Male
of his Body, on the 6th of February 1371 Charta penes Comitem de Wigtoun, after
this Earl had sold the Earldom of Wig^oun to Sir Archbald Douglass Lord of
Galloway, ^e designs himself Dudum Comes de Wigtoun, and Dominus de Fulwood, as
in several Charters both in the public Records, and in the Hands of the Earl
of Wigtoun.
, he first sold and made over for the Sum of Five Hundred Pound Sterling, totum
and integrum Comitatum de Wigtoun, nobili vero Archibaldo de Douglass militi,
Domino Galvidiae, ex orientali Part Aquae de Creech, and maxim propter magnam
atque gravem inimicitiam inter me and majores indigenos dicti Comitatus. And
then in his old Age he resigned dilecto Consanguineo suo Malcolmo Fleming de
Biggar, Baroniam de Leinzy, which King Robert II. ratified by his Charter under
the Great Seal, 20th September 1383 Charta penes Comitem de Wigtoun.
.

This Sir Malcolm, as he was a Person of very great Fortune, so he made no
small Figure throughout the whole of the Reign of King Robert II. and that of
his Successor Robert III. even till his own Death, leaving Issue by Christian
his Wife, Sir David his Successor, and Sir Patrick, of whom the Branch of the
Flemings of Board Ibidem.
descended.

Which Sir David seems to have been a Person of very eminent Parts and Courage;
he signalized his Valor in a very distinguishing Manner at the Battle of
Otterburn, where the brave General the Earl of Douglass, and many other gallant
Men were slain.

In the 1405 Sir David was employed in an Embassy to England, when he concluded
a Truce betwixt the Two Realms Rymer.
; and upon his Return he had, in Consideration of his acceptable Services, a
Grant of the Lands of Barbeth, Castles and Henrule, in Comitatu de Carrick
Charta penes Comitem de Wigtoun.
, and of the Barony of Cavers, together with the Sheriffship of Roxburgh-Shire
By Recognition Isobel Countess of Mar having dispon'd these Lands and that
Office without the King's Consent.
, which was ratified by the Countess's Husband Sir Alexander Stewart, Knight. As to
his Works of Piety I find this memorable, viz. That he gave to the Abbacy of
Cambuskenneth the Lands of Muretoun for the Health of his Soul, and to the
Convent of Holy-rood-house, he gave in pure and perpetual Alms, an Annuity of
Twenty Five Merks out of his Estate, which he made redeemable from the Monks
for a hundred Pounds, when he or his Heirs should offer the Redemption in any
Time thereafter. As Sir David was a very wise and devout Man, so he seems to
have been a Person of great Generosity, for our Historians tell us, that it was
he who gave the exiled Earl of Northumberland Notice of his being to be given
up to his Sovereign the King of England, by an Article in a Treaty which was
then concluded betwixt the Two Nations; whereupon the Earl shifted for himself;
and this Act of Generosity was so highly resented by Sir James Douglass, who
had some Pretense that the Earl was his Prisoner, that he set upon Sir David at
Langhermistoun, as he was returning home after having conducted Prince James to
the Bass, whence he embarked for France, and most cruelly murdered him Winton's
History.
, with many Circumstances of Barbarity. He married first Margaret, Daughter of
Sir David Barclay Lord of Brichen, by whom he had one Daughter Marion, married
to William Maule of Panmure; next, Isobel, Heiress of the Barony of Monycabo,
by whom he had Sir Malcolm the Heir of the Family, and Sir David of whom sprung
the Flemings of Boghall.

Which Malcolm had the Honor of Knighthood conferred on him by King Robert III.
by whose Favor he obtained the Lady Elizabeth Stewart, Daughter of Robert Duke
of Albany, in Marriage Charta penes Comitem de Wigtoun, of the Barony of
Biggar, which is finely engraven by Mr. Anderson in his Book de Rebus Diplom.
. During the Government of Duke Murdo his Brother in Law, Sir Malcolm Fleming
was frequently employed in managing Treaties with England, particularly with
Relation to the Redemption of King James I. which being happily brought about,
he was one of the Hostages for the Ransom; but all this signal Loyalty did not
secure him upon the King's Return from being suspected of having concurred in
the Duke's illegal Administration; and therefore when the Duke of Albany was
first arrested and made Prisoner, so was Sir Malcolm Fleming Drummond's History
of King James I.
, and others who had been in the Duke's greatest Confidence; but as his
greatest Crime seems to have been his near Alliance with the late Regent, so
the Court were soon so sensible of his Innocence, that he was shortly
thereafter released without ever being charged with any particular Crime. It Is
plain Sir Malcolm Fleming lived retired, and did not meddle in any Faction
during the Reign of King James I. probably he was disgusted with the Treatment
the Duke of Albany's Family had met with, yet he stuck close to his Friends the
Douglasses, which cost him dear, for he was, together with the Earl of Douglass
and his younger Brother, by the Contrivance of the Lord Crichton the
Chancellor, all Three executed on the Mote of the Castle-Hill of Edinburgh, the
20th of November 1441 Charta penes Comitem de Wigtoun.
. By the Lady Elizabeth Stewart his Wife aforesaid, he left Issue Robert his
Son and Heir, and a Daughter Marion married to Sir Patrick Gray Lord of F^ulis.

Which Robert soon after the Death of his Father took Instruments, that the
Sentence pronounced against him was unwarrantable and illegal, in Regard he had
not that Time allowed him for clearing himself that the Law allows the greatest
Criminal Ibidem.
; and protested that it should not be prejudicial to him; likeas there was
another Instrument taken by Sir Alexander Livingston of Calendar, who was in
the Ministry, in Presence of the Bishops of St. Andrews, Glasgow, Dunkeld, and
Dunblain, and of the Earl of Douglass Justice-General besouth the River of
Forth, whereby he declared upon Oath, That he had given no Counsel, Assistance
or Consent to the Death and Slaughter of Sir Malcolm Fleming this Lord's Father.

Moreover, it would appear, that when King James II. himself came to Age, he
was so much satisfied with the Injustice Sir Mal^^lm Fleming had met with, that
he gave Order to direct Precepts to the Sheriffs of the several Counties where
Sir Robert Fleming's Estate lay, to inseft him as Heir to his Father, who by
several Inquests of Persons of great Honor, is found and declared to have died
at the Faith and Peace of his Sovereign Lord King James II. then reigning
Ibidem.
, notwithstanding of his pretended Forfaulture.

But it seems the King did not think the Justice of restoring Sir Robert,
enough to atone for the Sufferings of his Father, wherefore he was graciously
pleased to raise and establish him in the Rank of those Barons who were
henceforth fixed heredetary Peers Ibidem. ad Annum 1465.
. This noble Lord married Janet, Daughter of James Earl of Douglass; and again
M^rgaret, Daughter of John Lindsay of Covingtoun Ibid.
. By the first Lady he had a Son Sir Malcolm his Heir apparent; and Two
Daughters, Beatrix married to James Lord Livingstoun, and Elizabeth to Sir
William Stirling of Kier, Knight.

Sir Malcolm Fleming of Monycab^, whom we shall call Master of Fleming in the
Lifetime of his Father, married Elizabeth, Daughter of James Lord Livingstoun,
by whom he had Sir David, who died after he was contracted to the Lord
Drummond's Daughter, and John, who came to be the Head of the Family on the
Demise of his Grandfather, whom Death overtook in the Spring of the Year 1500:

Which John being a Gentleman of most accomplished Parts, was in the End of the
Reign of King James V. sent upon a solemn Embassy to France Charta penes
Comitem de Wigtoun.
; and upon his Return, was in the 1515 constituted Lord High Chamberlain of
Scotland; likeas in the 1518, he was again sent Ambassador to France, to treat
with that State about the maintaining the ancient Alliance betwixt the Two
Crowns Ibidem.
; but not long after his Return, to the universal Regrete of the whole Nation,
he was most barbarously assassinated by Twedie of Drumelzer, in the Month of
November, of the Year 1523 Ibidem.
. He married first E^pham, Daughter of John Lord Drummond, by whom he had
Malcolm his Successor, and another younger Son, who was Prior of Whitern; also
a Daughter Margaret, married to John Cunningham of Glengarnock.

Which Malcolm was in great Favor with King James V. by whom he was
constituted Lord High Chamberlain of Scotland; and he held the Office even till
his Death, that he was slain in the Service of his Country at the Battle of
Pinky, 10th September 1545 Ibidem. This noble Lord in ^he 1545 did make a noble
Foundation of a Collegiate Church at Biggar, and richly endowed it with Lands
and Tithes for a Provost, Eight Prebends, Four Singing Boys, and Six poor Men,
which was ratified both by the Bishop of St. Andrews the Cardinal, and the
Pope's Bull; wherein his Zeal to the Church is highly extolled.
. By Janet his Wife, natural Daughter of King James IV. he had James Lord
Fleming his Heir, and John his Brother's Successor in the Honor; also Five
Daughters,

Janet married to John Master of Livingstoun,

Margaret to Robert Master of Montrose; next to Thomas Master of Erskine; and
after that to John Earl of Athole.

Mary to Sir William Maitland of Lidingtoun,

Elizabeth to Robert Lord Crichtoun of Sanquhar,

Jean to John Sandilands of Calder, and again to David Crawfurd of Kerse.

Which James being a Nobleman of very fine and polite Parts, was by the special
Favor of Queen Mary made Lord High Chamberlain during Life, Anno 1553 Ibidem.
, and soon thereafter named Guardian of the East and Middle Marches toward
England; but that was not all, for in the Commission he is likewise invested
with a Power of Justiciary within the Limits of his Jurisdiction; all which
Offices he discharged to the general Satisfaction of the whole Nation.

When the Marriage was to be solemnized betwixt Queen Mary and the Dauphine,
the Lord Chamberlain being one of wisest Men the Nation had, and very
universally esteemed, was one of the Peers whom the Parliament sent over to
France upon that solemn Occasion: Soon after which he died at Paris, on the 1st
of December 1558 Ibidem.
, not without Suspicion of being poisoned. He married Barbara, Daughter of
James Duke of Chattlerault, by whom he had only one Daughter, Jean, married
first to John Lord Thirlstane, and thereafter to Gilbert Earl of Cossils. This
noble Lord dying without Male Issue, his Estate and Honor devolved on

John his Brother, who being likewise a Person of great Parts, was by Queen
Mary preferred to be Lord Chamberlain of Scotland for Life, the 10th June 1565
Charta penes Comitem de Wigtoun.
, likewise Governor of Dunbartoun-Castle, which he held out several Years for
the Interest of the Queen, to whom he adhered with very signal Fidelity till it
was by the singular Courage and Dexterity of Captain Thomas Crawfurd of
Jordanhi^^ surprised Anno 1571: But the Governor having found Means to make
his Escape, got over to France, where he negociate the Affairs of his
distressed Sovereign; and returning the next Year with new Supplies to the
Queen's Party, was accidentally killed on the Street of Edinburgh by the Shot
of a Musket-Bullet a little above the Knee, of which he died the 6th of
September 1572 Bishop Spotiswood's History.
. By Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter and sole Heir of Robert Master of Ross Charta
penes C. de Wigtoun.
, he had John his Son and Heir; likewise Three Daughters,

Mary married to Sir James Douglass of Drumlan^^g.

Elizabeth to Sir Alexander Bruce of Airth, Knight.

Margaret to Sir James Forrester of Garden. Knight.

John Lord Fleming was served Heir to his Father, notwithstanding he had been
forfaulted in the Time of the Troubles during the Minority of King James VI.
The Lord Fleming is restored by virtue of an Act of Parliament, giving him the
Benefit of the Pacification at Perth in 1572.
, for his being of the Queen's Party. He was afterward by the special Favor
of King James VI. created Earl of Wigtoun, March 19th 1606 Charta penes Comitem
de Wigtoun.
. He married first Lil^as, Daughter of John Earl of Montrose; by her he had
John his Successor, James Fleming of B^ghall; also Five Daughters, 1st Jean,
married to George Master of Loudoun. 2d Ann^ to William Livingston of Kilsyth,
and had Issue. 3d Margaret, to Sir John Charters of Aimesfield. 4th L^l^as, to
Sir David Murray of Stenhope, and had Issue. 5th Mary to Sir Archbald Stewart
of Castlemilk, and had Issue. His second Wife was Sarah, Daughter of William
Lord Herries, by whom he had a Daughter Rachael married to John Lindsay of
Covingtoun; and departing this Life in May 1619 Ibid.
, was succeeded by

John his Son, who married Margaret, Daughter of Alexander Earl of Linlithgow.
By her he had John his Heir, Sir William, who was Gentleman Usher to King
Charles I. and Chamberlain of the Household to King Charles II. in Scotland;
also several Daughters, Elean^r married to David Earl of Weems, Anne to Robert
Lord Boyd, and thereafter to George Earl of Dalhousy, and Jean to Sir John
Grierson of Lag, and had Issue. He died the 7th May 1650, and was succeeded by

John his Son, who was a Person of entire Loyalty to King Charles I. when the
War broke out he joined the Marquis of Montrose, and was at the unfortunate
Adventure of Philiphaugh; after which he was obliged to fly to the Highlands,
where he lay concealed till his Friends compounded for his Delinquency: And
living to see the King restored, he died in the 1663, leaving Issue by Jean his
Wife, Daughter of John Earl of Perth, John his Successor, Sir Robert, Henry and
James, who all three died unmarried, William who succeeded to his Brother in
the Honors, and Charles, and Two Daughters, Lady Margaret and Lady Jean, who
both died unmarried.

Which John married Anne, Daughter of Henry Lord Kerr, by whom he had only one
Daughter, Jean, married to George Earl of Panmure; and dying Anno 1668, his
Estate and Honor devolved to

William his Brother and Heir, who upon his Accession to the Honor was named
one of the Lords of the Privy Council to King Charles II. and thereafter
constituted Sheriff of the Shire, and Governor of the Castle of Dunbartoun; in
which Offices he continued till his Death, 8th of April 1681. By Henrietta his
Wife. Daughter of Charles Earl of Dunfermling he had John his Son and Heir, and
Master Charles Fleming; likewise a Daughter Lady Mary, married to Master Harry
Maule of Kelly.

Which John was one of the Pee^s who in the Parliament of 1706, opposed the
Union of the Kingdoms upon the Foot of the Treaty then before the House; and
though his Lordship did not formally protest against it himself, yet be joined in
all the Protestations which were made against it, as appears by the Records of
that Session both in the printed Minutes and Registers of Parliament. His
Lordship married first a Daughter of the Earl of Balcarras, (by whom he had one
Daughter) against whom he obtained a Divorce; and married next Lady Mary Keith,
Daughter of William Earl Marischal.

ARMS.
Quarterly 1st and 4th Argent, a Cheveron within a double Tressure, flowered
and counterflower'd, Gules. 2d and 3d Azure, Three Frases Argent. Supporters,
Two Staggs proper. Crest, a Goat's Head erazed Argent. Motto, Let the Deid shaw.

SEATON, Earl of Winton.
THE first of this noble Family I have found upon Record, was Alexander de
Seaton, who is one of the Witnesses in a Charter granted by King David I. to
Walter de Ridel, of the Lands of Ridel, in the County of Roxburgh Dalrymple's
Collections.
. He left a Son Philip, who was the Father of Alexander de Seaton, who had a
Grant from King William, Alexandro fil^o Philippi de Seaton, terras quae fuere
patris sui, sciz. Seaton, Winton, and Winshburgh, per servitium unius militis
Charta pene^ Comitem de Winton.
.

All our Historians show the Valor and Fidelity of Sir Christopher of Seaton
to King Robert I. in whose Service he lost his Life, fighting gallantly in a
Conflict with the English, near the Town of Drumfrise; in Commemoration whereof
King Robert did erect a Chapel, and provided certain Priests to say Mass for
his Soul. In the Preamble of the Erection-Charter the King declares the Grant
to be made, Quia Christopherus de Seaton, Miles Gener noster dilect^^, mortuus
est in servitio nostro; and therefore founds the Chaplanry in loco quo mortem
subiit prope Drumfrise Haddingtoun's Go^^ lections in Bib. Jurid.
. He left Issue by the Lady Christion Bruce his Wife, Sister to King Robert I.
Sir Alexander Seaton his Son and Heir, who made a great Figure during the Reign
of his Uncle, from whom he obtained sundry Grants of Lands, and particularly of
the Barns juxta Haddingtoun infra vicecomit. de Edinburgh, as the Charter
bears; likeas be obtained a Charter under the Great Seal, erecting his Village
of Seaton in liberum Burgum, and his Lands of Seaton into a free Barony Charta
penes Comitem de Winton.
. He was a strenuous Assertor of the Title of King David Bruce, in Defense of
which he performed many Actions of Honor and Courage during the Minority of
that Prince. In the 1332, he was made Governor of the Town of Ber^ick
Abercromby.
, which he defended with great Courage and Resolution, for to his immortal
Honor, when King Edward of England, contrary to Capitulation, desired him to
surrender the Town, threatening in case of a Refusal, to hang his Two Sons who
were in his Hands among the Hostages for a Truce, and Sir Alexander persisting
in his Resolution to keep the Town, King Edward put the innocent young Men to
Death with many Circumstances of Barbarity, on which O^casion Sir Alexander
gave such Proofs of his Magnanimity, as will for ever ennoble his Memory, and
render him dear to all Scotsmen. By his Wife a Lady of the C^ey^s History of
the House of Seaton.
, besides the Two eldest Sons who were murdered by the English, he had William
his Successor, and Sir John, who by the Marriage of an Heir Female of the
R^msars Ibidem.
, became the Root of the Se^t^^s of Parbroath, and Lathriesh.

Which Sir William married Catharine, Daughter of Sir William Si^clair of
Hermies^oun: By her he had John his Heir, Alexander, who by Marriage of
Elizabeth, Daughter and Heir of Adam Gordon of Gordon, was not only the common
Ancestor of the Family of Gordon, and all the Seaton-Gordons, but also of the
Seatons of Touch, and M^ldrum Writs in the Hands of Captain Robert Seaton, the
Heir and Representative o^ the Seatons of M^ldrum.
, who retained their Father's Surname, being provided to Estates, which they
did not derive from the Family of Gordon, but came to them by Marriage;
likewise several Daughters, Isobel married to Sir Allan Stewart of Darnly, and
again to Sir Herbert Maxwell of C^l^vrock Charta in Pub. Archivis.
, Marion to John Ogilvy of Linrethan, Knight. Jean to Bernard Halden of Glen^agles
Hist. of the Seatons. M.S.
.

John Lord of Seaton was one of the Hostages for the Ransom of King James I.
Rymer.
. He married J^net, Daughter of George Earl of March Hist. of the Seatons.
; and had by her George his Successor, and a Daughter..... married to Sir
Robert Keith Marischal of Scotland.

Which George married the Lady Jean Stewart, only Daughter and Heir of John
Earl of Buchan Ibidem.
, by whom he had John his eldest Son, who died in the Lifetime of his Father,
leaving Issue by Marion his Wife, Daughter of.... Lord Lindsay Ibidem.
, George, who succeeded his Grandfather in his Estate and Honou; and a
Daughter.... married to Robert Lord Lyle.

Which George married Isobel, Daughter of Colin, first Earl of Argyle Ibidem.
, by whom he had George his Successor, John, the Root of that Branch of the
Sinclairs of Northrig, and a Daughter M^rgaret married to William M^itland of
Lidingtoun Ibidem.
; and dying Anno 1508, was succeeded by

George his Son and Heir, who was sl^in at the Battle of Flowdoun Ibidem.
, leaving Issue by Jean his Wife, Daughter of Patrick first Earl of Bothwell
Ibidem.
, George his Successor, and a Daughter Marion married to Hugh Earl of
Eglingtoun.

Which George married Elizabeth, Daughter of John Lord Yester Ibidem.
, and dying the 17th Ju^y 1545, left Issue by the Lady aforesaid, George the
succeeding Lord, John, who by Marriage of an Heiress of the Balfours, became
possessed of the Barony of Cariestoun, and was the first of that Branch of the
Seatons Hist. of the Seaton^.
; likewise Four Daughters,

Marion married to William Earl of Menreth,

Margaret to Sir Robert Logan of Restalrig

Helen to Hugh Lord Somervell.

Beatrix to Sir Walter Ogilvy of Dunlugus.

Which George was Provost of Edinburgh during the Regency of Queen Mary of
Lorrain, and in the 1558, was one of the Commissioners sent to France to the
Marriage of Queen Mary with the Dauphine King Francis II. and had much better
Fortune in that Negotiation than his Colleagues had, for most of them died in
France by Poison, as was suspected, but his Lordship not only returned in
Safety, but had likewise, by the Bounty of King Henry II. a Pension of 2000
Franks, for his good Services to that Crown. He was a most faithful and loyal
Subject to Queen Mary, by whom he was named one of the Lords of her Privy
Council, and made one of the Knights of the most noble Order of the Thistle Mr.
Nisbet's Historical Remarks upon the Family of Sea^on.
. When the Troubles broke out in that Reign, he adhered to that unfortunate
Princess with inviolable Fidelity, and never made the least false Step in her
Service, and many others did but remained firm in his Loyalty.

King James VI. had a great Value for this noble Lord, insomuch as he was
pleased in the 1583, to send him Ambassador Extraordinary to the Court of
France, and he performed the Negotiation with Reputation and Success, and died
soon after his Return on the 8th of January 1584 Hist: of the Family of Seaton
in the Hands of Capt. Robert Seaton of Meldrum, who civily allowed me the Use
of the Manuscript.
. By Isobel his Wife, Daughter of Sir William Hamilton of Sorne Ibidem.
, he had Issue, Robert his Successor, Sir John Seaton, of whom are descended
the Seatons of Ba^ns Ibidem.
, Alexander first Earl of Dunsermling, Sir William Seaton, Knight. and a Daughter
Margaret, married to Claud Lord Pa^sley, Ancestor to the Earl of Abercorn.

Which Robert being a Nobleman of great Honor and Fortune, and much favored
and esteemed by King James VI. was by his Majesty'e special Favor raised to
the Honor of Earl of Wintoun, by Letters Patent, 5th of November 1600; and
departing this Life in the Spring of the Year 1603 Ibidem.
, left Issue by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Hugh Earl of Eglingtoun, Robert
Lord Seaton, who died without Issue, George his Successor, Sir Alexander Seaton
Knight. afterward Earl of Eglingtoun, Sir Thomas Seaton, and Sir John Seaton of St.
Germains, also a Daughter Isobel married to James Earl of Perth, and again to
Francis Stewart Esquire Son of Francis Earl of Bothwell.

Which George was of the Privy Council to King James VI. and King Charles I
whom he had the Honor to entertain in his Progress to Scotland in 1633, at his
House of Seaton, at his own Charge, with the highest Splendour and Magnificence;
and was very eminent in his Fidelity to that Prince during the Time of the
Civil War.

He married first Anne, Daughter of Francis Earl of Errol, by whom he had
George Lord Seaton, who dyed before his Father on the 4th of June 1648 Ibidem.
, leaving a Son by Henrietta his Wife, Daughter of George Marquis of Huntly,
George who was his Grandfather's Successor in the Honor, Sir Alexander Seaton
the Earl's second Son was the first Viscount of Kingstoun; likewise a Daughter
Lady Elizabeth, married to William Earl Marischal. His second Wife was
Elizabeth, Eaughter of J^hn Lord Harries. By her he had Sir J^hn Seato^^ of
Gairltoun; likewise Three Daughters, Isobel married to Francis Lord S^^ple,
Anne to John Earl of Traqua^^, and Mary to James Earl of Carnwath; and dying on
the 17th of December 1650, was succeeded by

George his Grandson and Heir, who married first M^ry, Daughter of Hugh Earl of
Eglingtoun, by whom he had no Issue that survived him; and again Christian,
Daughter and Heir of John Hep^^rn of Add^esto^n; and departing this Life 6th
March 1704, left Issue, George the present Earl of Wintoun. his Son and Heir.

GIFFARD, Lord of Yester.
IN the Reign of King William, Hugh de Giffard, had by the Grant of that Prince
the Lands of Yes^red, i. e. Yester, (...) Ri^. de Morvile Co^stabul. and
Philip. de V^llo^, Camerarius Regis. He gave in pure Alms Convent^i de (...),
and Manachis ibidem, Deo ser (...), ^^um Tostum in Villa sua de Yestred, and
duas B^v^t^s Terrae in villa pradicta pro salute Anima suae. He left a Son

William de Giffard, who had a G^ant of his own Lands from the Crown, which is
witnessed by Floren^. ^lecto Glasguens^ Cancellarto. He was succeeded by Si^
John de Giffard his Son, who ratified to the Conventual Brethren of Melross,
the Grant which Hugh de G^ffard, avus suus, made to that Abbey, in puram and
perpetuam El^emo^ynam. He marri^d Eupham, the Daughter and Heir of Sir Thomas
de M^rham, Knight. by whom he had Hugh his Son and Heir, who is designed Hugo
G^ff^rd Dominus de Yester, ^il^us and Haeres Dominae Euphamiae Giffard, Domina
de M^ram and de Baru, sponsa quondam Domini Joannis de Giffard, in a Charter
whereby he confi^ms the Donation which Thomas de Morham his Grandfather made to
the Monks of Holy-rood-house at Eainburgh, super jure patronatus Ecclesiae d^
B^rn. But the Issue Male of both Sir John, and Hugh his Son failing, his Four
Daughter^ were his Co^heirs.

Jean married to Sir William Hay of Locherret, Ancestor to the Marquis of
Tweddale.

Alice to Sir Thomas Boyd, Knight. Lord of Kilmarnock.

Mary to Eustache Maxwell of Tyling,

Eupham to Dougall Mackdougall of Mackerstoun.

FINIS.
INDEX.
A. ABercorn Page 1 Abercromby 2 Aberdeen 3 Abernethy ibid. Aboyn 4 Airly ibid.
Albany 6 Ancrum 8 Angus ibid. Angus Earl 9 Annandale Earl ibid. Annandale
Marquis 10 Argyle 13 Athole Earl 23 Athole Duke 25 Arbuthnet 29
B. BAdenoch 30 Balcarrass ibid. Ballenden 32 Balmerino ibid. Bamff 33 Bargeny
34 Belhaven Viscount 35 Belhaven Lord 36 Blantyre ibid. Borthwick 38 Bothwel
Murray ibid. Bothwel Ramsay 44 Bothwel Hepburn ibid. Bothwel Stewart 45 Brechin
ibid. Brechin Barclay ibid. Broadalbin ibid. Buchan 46 Buchan Stewart 47 Buchan
Erskine ibid. Buckclengh 50 Burligh 53 Bute 55
C. CAithness 57 Caithness Crichton 58 Caithness Sinclair ibid. Calendar 59
Cameron 60 Cardross 64 Carlyle 66 Carlyle Douglas 67 Carnwath ibid. Carrick 69
Carrick Bruce 70 Carrick Stewart 72 Cassils 73 Cathcart 76 Coupar 79 Crichton
ibid. Colvil of Culross 80 Colvil of Ochiltree 81 Cramond ibid. Cranston 82
Crawfurd Lord ibid. Crawfurd Earl 83 Crawfurd Lindsay 85 Cromarty 87
D. DAlhousie 89 Delorain 91 Denniston ^^ Dingwal Keith ^^ Dingwal Preston ^^
Douglas ^^ Dirlton ^^^ Duffus ^^^ Dunblain ^^^ Dunfermling ^^^ Dunbar Earl 113
Dunbar Viscount ibid. Dunbarton 114 Dundee Earl 115 Dundee Viscount 116
Dundonald 118 Dunkeld 122 Dunmore ibid. Drumfries 123 Dysart 125
E. EGlinton 126 Elgin 132 Eliebank 134 Elphinston 135 Errol 137 Eymouth 141
Eythen 142
F. FInlater 142 Forbes 145 Forrester 148 (...) Lord 150 (...) Earl ibid. ^^^th
151 (...) ibid. ^^^^land 152 Fy^^ 153
G. GAloway Lord 155 Galoway Earl 156 ^^^^^ock 159 (...) 164 Glasfurd 166
^^^^cairn 167 ^^^^^ow 170 (...) 173 (...) 178
H. ^ton ^^^count 181 ^ton Earl ibid. ^ton 182 (...) 183 (...)-(...)-^^^se 184
Hamilton 186 Harries 218 Hopeton ibid. Hume 220 Hyndford 223
I. JEdburgh 227 Islay 228 Irvine Earl 229 Irvine Viscount ibid. Isles ibid.
K. KElly 235 Kirkcudbright 237 Kenmure 239 Kilsyth 240 Kilmarnock 242
Kincairdin 245 Kingston 246 Kintore 247 Kinnaird ibid. Kinnoul 248
L. LAwderdale 250 Lennox Earl 256 Lennox Duke 258 Leven 264 Lothian 268 Lovat
270 Lorn 273 Lindores 274 Lithgow ibid. London 282 Lyle 290
M. MAderty 293 Mar 294 Mar Erskine 297 March Dunbar 307 March Stewart 309
March Douglas 310 Marchmont ibid. McDonald 318 Marishal ibid. Melvil 323
Melfort 327 Methven 328 Menteith 329 Menteith Graham 330 Middleton 333 Montrose
336 Monypenny 349 Mordington 350 Morton ibid. Murray Randolph 355 Murray Dunbar
ibid. Murray Stewart 356
N. NAirn 361 Napier 363 Newburgh Lord 366 Newburgh Earl ibid. Newhaven 367
Newark ibid. Nithsdale 368 Northesk 373
O. OChiltree 374 Oliphant 376 Orkney Sinclair 381 Orkney Hepburn Duke 382
Orkney Stewart 383 Orkney Hamilton ibid. Oxenford 385
P. PAnmure Lord 386 Panmure Earl 387 Perth 403 Pittenweem 406 Pitsligo 407
Portmore ibid. Preston ibid. Primrose 408
Q. QUeensberry 413
R. RAe 421 Rollo 422 Roseberry 424 Ross Earl 425 Ross Lord 426 Rothes 427
Rothsay 431 Roxburgh ibid. Ruglen 433 Rutherford ibid. Ruthven 434
S. SAlton Abernethy 435 Salton Frazer ibid. Seaforth ibid. Selkirk Douglas 438
Selkirk Hamilton ibid. Semple 439 Sinclair 443 Somerwell 445 Southesk 446
Spainzie 450 St. Colme ibid. Stair 451 Stirling 462 Stormont 464 Strathallan
466 Strathern ibid. Strathern Stewart 468 Strathmore ibid. Sutherland 471
T. TAras 475 Teviot Earl ibid. Teviot Viscount ibid. Tillybardin 476
Torphichen 477 Traquair 480 Tweddale 484
W. WEems 488 Wigton 491 Winton 499
Y. YEster 502

FINIS.

